
Viewed from the sunny hills of the Kaunertal valley, the outcome of Sunday’s 
Austrian presidential election rerun is a foregone conclusion. In May,85.1% 
<http://tirolatlas.uibk.ac.at/topics/elections/data.py/results?unit=170611&lang=de&year=364&region=17&n=all&fgroup=100000&sort=DESC>
 of voters there supported the Green-backed candidate, Alexander Van der 
Bellen, who had grown up in the valley as the son of Estonian refugees. It was 
his best result anywhere in Austria.

Year of electoral tests may end European Union as we know it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/year-of-electoral-tests-may-end-european-union-as-we-know-it>
 But in the Tyrolian Alps, echo chambers are a pre-digital, geological 
reality. One valley to the west, in Spiss, Van der Bellen’s opponent, the 
far-right populist Norbert Hofer, scored his best result. In the village 
perched on the Swiss border,87.5% 
<http://tirolatlas.uibk.ac.at/topics/elections/data.py/results?unit=170625&lang=de&year=364&region=17&n=all&fgroup=100000&sort=DESC>
 of voters rooted for a candidate who has said he would have dissolved the 
parliament that presided over last year’s refugee crisis, vowed to call a 
referendum on EU membership if the bloc of states takes further steps towards 
integration and hinted he could imagine a plebiscite on reintroducing the death 
penalty.

 The divide between Kaunertal and Spiss reflects a wider split across a 
country in which one half is increasingly struggling to understand the other. 
In May’s runoff election, the two candidates were separated only by a few 
thousand votes, with Van der Bellen narrowly ahead. In July the constitutional 
courtoverturned the result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/austrian-presidential-election-result-overturned-and-must-be-held-again-hofer-van-der-bellen>
 due to “irregularities” in the processing of the postal vote.

On Sunday the outcome is expected to be similarly tight. Officials are under 
instructions not to cut corners, to avoid a repeat of the May fiasco, so some 
pollsters say they don’t expect the presidency to be called until Tuesday.

Norbert Hofer: is Austria's presidential hopeful a 'wolf in sheep's clothing'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/norbert-hofer-austria-presidential-hopeful-rightwing>
 When Hofer’s Freedom party (FPÖ) succeeded in its bid to force a rerun, 
frustration with a divisive and costly election campaign was running high and 
many expected it to backfire.

 But recent surveys suggest Hofer may be able to swing the contest in his 
favour this time around: of the last nine polls, seven showed him in the lead 
and only one pointed to a win for Van der Bellen. “The more accustomed people 
have become to seeing Hofer’s smile on TV, the less they think of him as a 
rightwing extremist,” said Benedikt Narodoslawsky, of Falter magazine.

Britain’s vote to leave the European Union and Donald Trump’s triumph in the 
US have emboldened the Freedom party, which governedAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> in a coalition with the 
conservative ÖVP between 2000 and 2005. Some senior FPÖ politicians were 
invited to an election-night party at Trump Tower in New York.

 As in the US, Austrian supporters of the far-right candidate have used social 
media to spread rumours about their opponent’s health. The FPÖ leader, 
Heinz-Christian Strache, who has 400,000 followers on Facebook, recently shared 
a badly lit screenshot of Van der Bellen suggesting the 72-year old had 
forgotten to shave half his face. “What else does he forget?” Strache asked.

 In Unzensuriert.at, the Austrian far-right has its own equivalent of 
Breitbart News, railing against Muslims, the EU and biased mainstream media. 
And if you type “presidential vote Austria” into German-language Google, two of 
the top three results are official-looking websites that turn out to be run by 
the head of Austria’s Eurosceptic EU Exit party, dismissing both candidates as 
“cheats”.

In an attempt to improve on May’s results, both candidates have tried to fire 
up those who did not vote last time, leading them back to the regions where 
mood is already most polarised. Landeck, where both the villages of Kaunertal 
and Spiss are located, had the lowest turnout last time, at 62.1%.

Tyrol used to be a relatively poor, agricultural region until the 1960s, when 
it began to benefit from a tourism boom. The EU’s eastward expansion provided a 
further boost. These days tourists from not just Britain and Germany but also 
Poland and the Czech Republic come to explore the Tyrolian valleys. In 2014, 
more tourists visited the region than Greece.

Kaunertal, where posters bearing Van der Bellen’s face and slogan (“Sanity 
instead of extremism”) vastly outnumber those of Hofer (“With heart and soul 
for Austria: so help me God”), has become the standout example of Tyrol’s 
economic upswing.

Since the former mayor Eugen Larcher managed to convince authorities to open 
up the nearby glacier to skiers and hikers in the 1960s, the valley has become 
an upmarket slow-travel destination: close to nearby skiing pistes but not 
overrun by tourists, with high-speed broadband and a newly built spa.

“People often tell us we live at the arse-end of the world,” said the 
ex-mayor’s son Martin Larcher, 46, who runs a smart hotel in the centre of the 
village. “That used to be a negative, but now people seem to like it.”

Austrian presidential candidate criticised for God slogans on posters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/austrian-presidential-elections-candidate-norbert-hofer-criticised-god-slogans-posters>
Van der Bellen’s personal connection to the area may be the key factor behind 
his overwhelming support here, even if the visible effects of climate change on 
Kaunertal’s glacier have opened up the traditionally conservative-voting region 
to green ideas. “People appreciate Sascha,” said Josef Raich, the current 
mayor, using an informal contraction of Van der Bellen’s first name. “He’s 
calm, unassuming, completely normal. He’s never tried to force his ideology on 
me, and he accepts that people around here are deeply religious even though he 
is an agnostic.”

Hofer, on the other hand, “comes across as someone who is driven by his party, 
and the Freedom party thrives on fear and populist rhetoric,” said Raich. 
Specifically, he was concerned about Hofer’s previous comments on relations 
with South Tyrol. In 2015, Hofer called for the independent province in 
northern Italy – once part of the Austro-Hungarian empire – to be integrated 
into the Austrian state, and he has since proposed offering dual nationality to 
citizens of the autonomous province.

Those comments on South Tyrol showed that “he doesn’t think like a European”, 
Raich said. “There’s no economic advantage in joining Austria for South Tyrol – 
the borders are already open anyway. And ideologically we are all Europeans 
here.”

In Spiss, half an hour’s drive away, the same comments have won Hofer support. 
“South Tyrol belongs to Austria, it’s the same culture, shaped by the Alps,” 
said Doris Nandin, who lets out two of the floors of her home to tourists and 
works in a hotel in nearby skiing resort of Samnaun. Her husband, she said, had 
recently bought a T-shirt that read: “Let’s swap South Tyrol for Vienna.”

But the main reason she supported Hofer was the refugees. “I don’t think it’s 
fair that the refugees are being inundated with money while we are cutting 
pensions for our grandparents,” Nandin said.

She acknowledged there were no refugees in Spiss, a community of no more than 
133 inhabitants. Last year the community voted against accepting the 
government’s quota, but two families volunteered to take in a family each. By 
then the numbers coming into Austria had dropped and the offer was rejected.

Yet reports of the handling of last year’s crisis had shaken Nandin’s faith in 
the government. “It’s complete chaos here in Austria. Isn’t it shocking that 
women can no longer walk home on their own at night unless they carry a can of 
pepper spray?”

To describe Spiss as one of the losers of globalisation would be inaccurate. 
Like the area as a whole, the village has benefited from free movement to and 
from neighbouring states. But the tourism boom of the second half of the 20th 
century looks less sustainable here than in Kaunertal.

Whereas hotels are already up and running in the valley down the road, the 
skiing season in Spiss has yet to start. Restaurants are shut, hotels are 
empty, and government red tape such as the smoking ban and allergen labelling 
requirements are frequently cited as reasons for poor returns.

While Kaunertal plans to join up skiing areas with South Tyrol in 2018, Spiss 
is burdened with the harder Swiss border, where customs officers go as far as 
controlling the piste between Samnauen and Ischgl on skis. Some of the locals 
have to continue running small sheep farms on the icy hills.

Alois Jäger, the mayor of Spiss, rejected the idea that the local economy had 
driven support for Hofer, pointing to the refugee crisis and Van der Bellen’s 
age as key factors instead. He didn’t think the outcome of the election would 
change much for his village. Next week Hofer may become Europe’s first 
far-right president of the post-war era, but Jäger believed protests from other 
EU member states would prevent him from doing anything too extreme.

He may have been trying to be diplomatic. In May, Jäger confided, he was one 
of the five people in Spiss who cast their vote for Van der Bellen instead.
 