
In the end it was perhaps all for the best, as England lost a low-scoring and 
ultimately gripping fifth one-day international by five runs at the Adelaide 
Oval, thereby passing up on the chance of a little dead-rubber gloss at the end 
of a series that was lost a week ago in Sydney. Never mind finding a way to win 
games, here England found a way to lose one, throwing away a winning position 
having restricted Australia to 217 on a low, slow pitch before moving to 154 
for three in their reply with 13 overs left.

Sparked by some unwise shots in the powerplay, wickets fell in clusters as 
Australia's seam attack bowled with control and penetration and Ravi Bopara 
produced a bizarrely static innings, never at any stage taking on the bowling 
with any intent as the game slipped away. Albeit Bopara was a little 
unfortunate to be given out stumped, with eight runs required, by the TV 
umpire, Kumar Dharmasena, who ruled on little obvious evidence that Bopara's 
foot was raised as the ball bounced back on to the bails from Matthew Wade's 
chest.

The final over arrived with England needing eight runs and the last pair, 
Chris Jordan and James Tredwell, at the crease. They mustered two scampered 
singles before Tredwell edged Shane Watson's fourth ball to Wade and that was 
that. A Test and one-day tour notable for so many traumatically one-sided 
defeats ended with a traumatically last-ditch defeat as Australia's players 
took off on a jubilant charge across the square having taken the series 4-1.

Australia had earlier won the toss and made 217 batting first on a hot, sunny 
Adelaide day that saw Michael Clarke and Watson return while England recalled 
Joe Root in favour of Gary Ballance.

There has been the odd sigh of regret at the redevelopment of the old ground, 
but this new Oval is a beautiful structure too with its wide stands and 
faux-country-fete undulating white roof, albeit this Adelaide Oval pitch had a 
little less youthful zing about it.

At the halfway stage Australia's total had looked tricky but still eminently 
gettable as Ian Bell skewed England's first boundary over point in the third 
over and then sent Nathan Coulter-Nile over midwicket with a disdainful cuff 
before driving him in a maddeningly gentle arc to mid-off. Without ever looking 
out of form Bell has had a quietly dismal tour.

Ben Stokes went for a duck as Australia's seamers hit a testing, nibbling 
length. Root came in at No4 and looked more positive in his footwork from the 
start, manoeuvring Glenn Maxwell's off-breaks around and reverse-lapping 
impishly for four as England's 50 came up at the start of the 14th over.

Alastair Cook had batted without any particular sense of urgency for his 39 
off 62 balls before spooning Coulter-Nile to short cover to leave England 90-3 
and the match still finely balanced as the lights began to kick in. Eoin Morgan 
lofted Watson for a deliciously easy straight six before Root went to his 50 
off 79 balls with a lovely clean smite over long-on off Maxwell and England 
looked to be taking this home.

At which point the powerplay struck again, as it always must. First Morgan 
holed out to mid-off for 39 and Root followed shortly after, paddling James 
Faulkner to short fine leg after a neat, recuperative but still insufficient 
innings of 55. The run rate had now climbed to six an over from the last 10 
with Bopara prodding his way to two from 20 balls. When Jos Buttler went for 
five to leave England 174-5, Australia were favourites for the first time in 
the match to win.

England's hopes hung on Bopara, not always the sturdiest place for them. Tim 
Bresnan launched Coulter-Nile delightfully over midwicket for six to bring the 
runs required below 30 with every dot ball drawing gasps and cheers. Bresnan 
was run out by a fine direct hit by the livewire Maxwell: enter Stuart Broad to 
slightly sozzled boos from a half-full stadium. When he was bowled playing a 
wide-open waft England needed 14 off 18 and it was time for the becalmed Bopara 
to make his move. There was some misfortune in his dismissal, but the ball from 
Clint McKay that got him was a beauty. And that, effectively, was that for a 
match that saw England stay true to themselves on this tour by crumpling at the 
crucial moment.

Earlier Australia had begun with a stutter as Broad produced a superb opening 
spell of two for eight from four overs, nipping the ball off the seam at a 
teasing length and splattering Aaron Finch's stumps with a ball that nipped 
back past an unworthy forward prod. George Bailey and Maxwell rebuilt, bringing 
up the hundred in the 28th over before Maxwell was out driving at Stokes, 
caught by a tumbling Buttler, who held every chance offered in this series and 
let just two byes through in five matches. Bailey got to 50 off 60 balls before 
he departed, trying to hit Stokes down the ground. Jordan was trusted with the 
death overs and went for just three runs in the 50th, also dismissing Faulkner 
and Coulter-Nile in successive balls.
 