
This match was hardly a fitting memorial to Andy Flower's time with England, 
albeit there was a pointer to his departure even here in the limpest of defeats 
at the MelbourneCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground, 
where England's total of 130 batting first was never likely to be enough. To 
lose one series in Australia by a humiliating margin may be regarded as a 
misfortune. To lose two looks like carelessness. To lose three with an 
aggregate score of 11-1 to the opposition looks like the most wretched of 
sporting implosions, and England's head coach has now duly paid the price.

An overwhelming eight-wicket victory for Australia means they have won the 
Twenty20 series 2-0, with the just deadest of dead rubbers in Sydney to end the 
tour. ATwenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> international can 
often blur in the memory, disappearing down the hatch like a bite of fast food, 
but defeat here will now be remembered as an end note on some traumatic times, 
but also on many more good ones before that.

For all that the headline facts are impossible to avoid. England have now been 
overwhelmed at the earliest opportunity in three successive series by a team 
they were previously ranked above in two of those formats. It is safe to say it 
now: this is surely the worst England touring performance of all time.

In the event they found a fresh angle on losing here, outgunned in the field 
by the 39-year-old Brad Hodge, a venerable warrior of the Twenty20 universe 
recalled by Australia 2,075 days after his last appearance, who took a 
brilliant catch at cover and produced a fine piece of work to run out Eoin 
Morgan as England's batsmen got in and then got out in a blizzard of slogging 
with little effort made to asses pitch or conditions. In the middle of which 
England also managed the worst of both worlds, going 20 frantic overs without 
hitting a six.

England had won the toss and batted first on a delicious Melbourne evening 
with the MCG's cavernous stands well-filled by a basking early evening crowd. 
With more than 60,000 present by the end Australia now has a new season's 
record for combined international attendances. It seems for Australian cricket 
fans some stories really don't get old, even when you already know the ending. 
Australia recalled Hodge and Mitchell Starc. England replaced Danny Briggs with 
James Tredwell. They came out firing too, Michael Lumb clubbing wildly before 
he was out skying Josh Hazlewood to Nathan Coulter-Nile at mid-on, a fearless, 
verging on brainless innings. When Luke Wright was brilliantly caught by Hodge 
diving forward at cover off Starc in the next over for a two-ball ball duck 
England's innings began to subside in a rash of macho shot-making with little 
effort at rotating the strike on a huge MCG outfield.

Joe Root began in adrenal fashion, driving his first two balls through the 
covers for four, but there was desperation in the air as Hales was dismissed in 
exactly the way George Bailey had predicted he would be back in December after 
Adelaide Strikers had visited Hobart, caught skying Hazlewood to third man. 
Good plans, George.

Moments later fresh calamity as Morgan was run out by the oldest swinger in 
town, Hodge producing a direct hit from side on to beat the dive, Morgan's 
outstretched bat jarring up at just the wrong moment having been grounded a 
millisecond before, an unfortunate but correct decision. Nine balls later Root 
was run out superbly by Maxwell from midwicket and England were 64 for five in 
the ninth over. With Australia bowling leg-spin at both ends in the shape of 
Cameron White and James Muirhead England were struggling as Bopara swept 
Muirhead straight into Maxwell's hands to depart for an unconvincing six.

No sooner had Muirhead finished an excellent spell of 4-17-1 than Jos Buttler 
was lbw to Coulter-Nile for 22, bringing Stuart Broad to the crease to huge and 
by now deeply tedious boos. England scored a combined total of six runs from 
the 14th, 15th and 16th overs and looked well short on 130 for nine. Australia 
had bowled well and fielded brilliantly in the ring and on the boundary. But 
they were helped by some callow batting.

In reply Aaron Finch and Cameron White began with all the bounding confidence 
of a team on a giddy winning run as White smashed Broad's second ball high over 
cover for a one-bounce four and 13 came from the opening over. Australia moved 
to 35 in three overs as Bopara missed the chance to run out White (as he had 
missed the chance to run out David Warner in the ODI series decider in Sydney). 
White then battered Jade Dernbach dismissively over point and with frightening 
power past long-off, before Bresnan removed Finch lbw and Maxwell was caught 
swinging wildly in Tredwell's first over to leave Australia 54 for two off 
seven. White and Bailey toddled along nicely after that.

Dernbach's first ball of a chastening one-over spell was sent whistling past 
the sightscreen by Australia's captain, who took 18 off the over before White 
got to his fifty off 38 balls and Bailey to his off just 24, an unbroken 
White-Bailey partnership of 78 taking Australia home with 31 balls to spare. 
"Watch it go boom" is the tagline to this Twenty20 series. It might make a 
pretty decent summary of England's entire tour.
 