
Australia's men's 4x100m freestyle relay team could lose their funding from 
the Australian Olympic Committeeafter they used the controversial sleeping pill 
Stilnox following a late-night bonding session at last year's London Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/19/australia-olympic-swimming-review-toxic>
. All six members of the squad are due to face a newly formed Swimming 
Australia integrity panel.

Those in question – James Magnussen, Eamon Sullivan, James Roberts, Matt 
Targett, Tommaso D'Orsogna and Cameron McEvoy – appeared at a fiery media 
conference in Sydney on Friday. They admitted acting like children in their 
hotel room but deny their use of the sleeping aid Stilnox – banned by the AOC 
before the Games – was behind their underwhelming fourth-place finish in London.

The AOC secretary general, Craig Phillips, said each member of the relay team 
faces a withdrawal of funding as the governing body weighs up possible 
sanctions. "The AOC will consider what action it will take in the light of 
these admissions," Phillips said in a statement. "Possible sanctions for a 
breach of the team agreement might include withdrawing funding from the 
athletes concerned."

Magnussen entered the Olympics talking himself up as the overwhelming 
favourite to win 100m freestyle gold but had to settle for silver. The 
21-year-old said he deeply regrets his role in what has been described as a 
"bonding session" as well as the hurt it caused other squad members, who had 
complained about being disturbed late at night.

"I think one of the reasons that I agreed to go along with this night was I 
was feeling under so much pressure and it had been building for the best part 
of a year," Magnussen said. "The chance to sort of bond with these guys and be 
normal for one night were my intentions of the night.

"Obviously in hindsight it was a ridiculous choice and a ridiculous method to 
do that by and for that, I have a lot of regrets. But I don't feel it affected 
my performance."

Stilnox is a prescription drug used to treat insomnia and some brain disorders 
and it is sometimes prescribed to athletes who are having trouble sleeping 
before major events. Prescribing it to Australian Olympians was banned just 
before the London Games. But the relay team said their prescriptions were 
issued before the ban was announced.

Sullivan, the team's elder statesmen, said the Stilnox use was purely a matter 
of bonding, which continued a tradition within the Australia team. "Hindsight 
is a wonderful thing," the 28-year-old said. "Of course I regret our decisions 
and my decision.

"As a senior member of the team I should've stood up and shown more leadership 
at the time. For that, I'm truly sorry. If I thought for one moment that these 
actions and our communal decision to take Stilnox would affect our performance 
in no way I would've done it."
 