
Australia have conceded that the hamstring injury suffered by Ryan Harris 
duringthe dramatic closing stages of the Ashes series  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/25/england-australia-fifth-test-match-report>
at The Oval on Sunday evening is more serious than first suggested.

Harris, the fragile 33-year-old, had played four consecutive Tests for the 
first time in his career and excelled with 24 wickets at an average of less 
than 20 each, until he was forced to leave the field late in England's 
second-innings run chase.

He described the problem as "a little twinge in the hammy" when receiving his 
award as Australia's man of the series during the presentation ceremony and 
expressed his hope when arriving back in Queensland on Wednesday that he would 
be fit to play for Brisbane Heat in the Champions League Twenty20 competition 
next month.

But Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia ruled out 
any possibility of that in an official medical bulletin issued less than 24 
hours later, stating that Harris "is expected to be unavailable to play for the 
next six to eight weeks".

An eight-week absence would leave Harris with a month to prepare for the first 
Test of the return series at his home state ground of the Gabba, which starts 
on 21 November.

Australia's captain, Michael Clarke, and coach, Darren Lehmann, stressed in 
the immediate aftermath of the series at The Oval that form in the early weeks 
of the Sheffield Shield season will be crucial in determining their selection 
plans for the return series, and both will now be keeping an especially close 
eye on Queensland's fixtures in October and November.

Harris is the latest of several Australia bowlers to succumb to injury 
problems.James Pattinson flew home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/24/james-pattinson-injury-ashes-australia>
 after the second Test at Lord's with a back problem – and admitted overnight 
that he is "touch and go" to be fit for the first Test – and Jackson Bird 
followed after making his only appearance of the series in the fourth Test in 
Durham.

Pat Cummins, the exciting young fast bowling talent, would already seem to 
have been ruled out of the return series with further back problems.

Chris Tremlett, who hopes to be a member of the England pace attack in 
Australia, has joined the Nottinghamshire opener Michael Lumb in signing to 
play in the Big Bash Twenty20 tournament for the Sydney Sixers.

The tournament will begin on 20 December, between the fourth and fifth Ashes 
Tests, but does not conclude until February – and the Sixers would seem to have 
assumed that neither Tremlett nor Lumb will feature in the England squad for 
the five-match 50-over series that follows the end of the Test series in Sydney 
in early January.

Lumb had some success with the Sixers last winter and is regarded as a t20 
specialist, having been an England regular for several years – and retaining 
his place for the two-match t20 series against Australia that starts in 
Southampton on Thursday.
 