
England did not just lose the Carlton Mid ODI series in Sydney. They may have 
also lost a captain as Alastair Cook, cutting an increasingly hangdog and 
resigned figure, admitted he would now be considering his future in both forms 
of the game.

"A lot has happened in two weeks," Cook said after a comprehensive 
seven-wicket defeat at the SCG. "We've kept losing games of cricket and I 
haven't been able to turn it round." Cook will at least stay in place for the 
final two matches of a chastening series that has left England one match away 
from equalling their worst losing streak of 10 successive defeats, with the 
chance to set a new personal worst in Adelaide in the final match.

For now it was a case of another week, another ground, another series lost at 
the SydneyCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground. England 
have already been out-batted and out-bowled by Australia on this tour. Here, by 
way of variation, they were comprehensively and aggressively out-fielded. In 
the end Australia's batsmen made laughably light work of their run chase, 
reeling in England's 243 with 10 overs to spare.

But in a way Australia's victory was most notable for their performance in the 
field, with Michael Clarke and Dan Christian taking spectacular one-handed 
catches to get rid of Ben Stokes and Eoin Morgan respectively. Perhaps the most 
telling moment came in the first over of Australia's reply. David Warner, who 
had earlier run out Ian Bell with a kind of one-stump miracle-throw from deep 
point, had given up on making his ground as Ravi Bopara prepared to hurl down 
the stumps. Bopara did not even get close. England's shoulders sagged. Warner 
went on to clout a gleefully dismissive 71.

Cook had won the toss and batted first on a pitch that has tended to favour 
defending a total. It was a more balanced England team with Boyd Rankin, who 
has suffered from cramp and/or hamstring problems every time he has played on 
this tour, replaced by Stuart Broad and Joe Root dropped having looked in 
Melbourne and Brisbane like a man trying to repair his game in the middle.

Australia made three changes, Mitchell Johnson's absence opening the door for 
the return of James Pattinson for his first match since the Lord's Test six 
months, a whole cricketing era ago.

England did build a platform here, moving to 50 without loss in the ninth 
over, sped along by a slightly fretful attempt to force the pace at the top of 
the order. They just did not build anything on top of it as the rest of the 
batting came teetering down in unremarkable instalments like an ill-fated Jenga 
tower. Cook produced two beautiful punches through the covers in Pattinson's 
second over and even England's first six of the opening powerplay overs in this 
series, easing Nathan Coulter-Nile over square leg with a lovely free swing.

It was, though, a false start as Coulter-Nile still managed to bowl his 
opening five overs for 16 runs and England's puppyish aggression fizzled out on 
a slow pitch. If winning is an acquired habit so too is losing, and no batsman 
at any stage looked like going on, batting through, or taking the game away 
from Australia's bowlers, who retained a steady hand on the scruff throughout.

Cook was eventually well caught by Glenn Maxwell at cover for 35 to bring 
Stokes to the crease. Earlier in the week the coach Ashley Giles had scoffed at 
suggestions England's sole Ashes Test centurion might add purpose up the order. 
And yet, here he was at No3.

It was a decision with some logic behind it, notwithstanding a scratchy, 
half-speed innings from Stokes here. Bell was run out for 25 as Warner hit the 
target with the batsman short coming back. Stokes swept hard at Xavier Doherty 
but saw Clarke dive at full horizontal stretch to his right to take the ball 
and send him on his way for a slightly painful 15 off 39 balls.

Morgan hit a pair of thrilling straight sixes en route to 54 from 58 balls, 
another beautifully frictionless innings from a man who has looked like the 
only grown-up on the pitch when England are batting. But England prodded though 
the middle overs as Doherty was allowed to bowl his 10 overs for just 28 runs.

Morgan was out in slightly unsavoury circumstances, Christian diving full 
length off his own bowling to take another catch at grasshopper-kneecap height 
only for Morgan to stand his ground. Clarke took the matter up angrily with Jos 
Buttler and after a TV referral Morgan walked off to some boos. When Chris 
Jordan was caught skying a pull England had lost five wickets for 48 runs in 
nine overs, and were saved from total collapse only by some lusty short-arm 
biffing from Tim Bresnan.

In Australia's reply Warner and Aaron Finch were never likely to approach 
England's total by stealth and Broad was immediately whumped through midwicket 
and punched past cover as Australia's openers were able to score comfortably 
without seeming to take a chance.

Jordan has been England's feistiest player in the field during this series and 
he made the breakthrough again as Finch was caught by Bopara at cover.

Bresnan entered the attack and was promptly driven straight for an effortless 
six by Warner as a routine Australia 50 came up in eight overs, followed by 
Warner's 50 off 56 balls and Australia's 100 in the 18th over. Less than 
halfway through what was less a run chase, more a light evening stroll, 
Australia were cruising. Warner was caught at short cover by Bell driving at 
Stokes and Bopara bowled Clarke with a lovely ball that nipped back.

But an elegant innings of 71 from Shaun Marsh and some dismissive biffs from 
Brad Haddin took Australia to the series victory with plenty in reserve.
 