
Michael Hussey, whose hundred at the Oval may have revived his Test career, 
has admitted feeling "absolutely shattered" by losing the Ashes to England.

While Hussey's second-innings 121 did much for his own flagging reputation as 
a middle-order cornerstone, he was unable to help Australia bat even into the 
final day before admitting defeat by 197 runs. "I was shattered really, 
absolutely shattered, pretty emotional at the end of it all," he says. "It was 
pretty hard to take."

There is, however, at least a little personal consolation at going on to a 
three-figure score, at a time when he admits beginning to fear for his Test 
future. "You definitely have doubts. You obviously like to be contributing to 
the team as much as possible – and I haven't been contributing as much as I 
would have liked to.

"But I do know my game and just wanted to be true to my game. You have to have 
belief in that and I got a lot of close support around the world. For me, it 
almost felt like it was meant to be really. I had a fair bit of luck on the 
way. For the whole series, I have actually felt like I am batting quite well – 
but it hasn't seemed to go right. This time it did, for whatever reason; it's 
in the lap of the gods really."

For Hussey and the rest of Ricky Ponting's squad – the captain has returned 
home for a few days until the closing stages of the NatWest Series – 
preparation must now turn to 50 and 20-over cricket.

The left-hander's studied approach has often made him appear especially 
well-suited to five-day cricket – but he is not about to start restricting his 
opportunities. "I still want to play every form of the game," he said. "It took 
me 10 years to play one game. I don't want to start saying goodbye to any part 
of the game."

Australia, meanwhile, need to react to this summer's setbacks in England, 
having also gone out of the ICC World Twenty20 at an early stage. "I guess we 
have to bounce back pretty quickly," Hussey said. "We have the one-day series 
to concentrate on now. I don't think we need to take a deep breath just now. 
This has been the climax of the summer. But we have to quickly get over it. It 
is probably a good thing that we can get stuck straight back into cricket."

Australia must also come to terms with the fact their Ashes defeat has seen 
them fall off their perch at the top of the InternationalCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council's world Test rankings, down 
to fourth. "I think [the players in] this team have a lot of improvement in 
them," said Hussey. "I think, in the cold light of day, we are probably not the 
best team in the world – and we have to be honest about that. But we are a 
pretty young team and we have lost a lot of great players.

"It has been a really great series and we will learn a lot from it. I think we 
have the making of another great Australian team."
 