
This is the end. No, really. This time it is – honestly, truly – all over. If 
there was something a little Heart of Darkness about the final dead rubber of a 
final dead series of a thoroughly zombified tour then England again contributed 
their share of cricketing horror in the cavernous and oddly dispiriting 
surrounds of Sydney's Olympic Stadium. A large late evening crowd cheered and 
roared in a sated kind of way as Australia won this unloved and overlooked 13th 
summer meeting of these teams by a massive 84 runs to take the short-form score 
to 8-1 in their favour over four weeks of total white ball domination.

No doubt there will still be plenty of positives to be taken at the end of a 
tour that has demanded a relentless rummaging around in the debris of defeat. 
The end-of-term report may make for grisly reading, but with a World Twenty20 
imminent and a 50-over World Cup in Australia next year, it is still a matter 
of some significance.

In England's favour, Australia are a very good 50-over team and a better 
Twenty20 team than their world ranking – seventh – suggests. In clement 
Australian conditions and with large outfields everywhere bar the gorgeously 
dinky Bellerive Oval, Australia's batting – punchy up front; punchy in the 
middle; punchy at the end – has the right balance, while their seamers have 
been accurate and their spin bowling good enough (simply by virtue of being 
spin bowling) for England.

Against this, England have been overwhelmed in almost every match that 
mattered, and beaten in dismal circumstances in the one close contest in 
Brisbane. The batting and bowling have looked callow and at times witless, 
while the fielding has been dismal, with three more catches dropped here. If 
fielding is a barometer of team morale, England's chin has been on the turf for 
some time now.

From the 50-over series there are two obvious plus points. Jos Buttler's 
batting and Jos Buttler's wicketkeeping. England may have their flaws but 
they're top class at No7, where Buttler possesses both a lovely, loose natural 
violence in those fast-twitch wrists and a calm cricketing brain. Eoin Morgan 
played England's short form innings of the winter in Brisbane and looks 
refreshed and uncluttered at the crease.

The retrograde building-a-platform tactic was effectively abandoned, with 
Ashley Giles instructing Ian Bell and Alastair Cook to bat – in the event a 
little awkwardly – with more verve at the top. There were also signs of 
flexibility bordering on indecisiveness: 24 hours after Giles had scoffed at 
the suggestion that Ben Stokes might bat at No3, Stokes duly moved up to bat at 
No3, before being dropped for the start of the Twenty20 series. Stuart Broad 
was by far the best of the bowlers in the short-form cricket, as he was again 
here. In the middle of the innings England took four wickets in 15 balls to peg 
Australia back before George Bailey and Matthew Wade took 56 off the final four 
overs, Jade Dernbach's last going for 4, 6, 6, 4, 4, 2 to bump the total up to 
an always-out-of-reach 195-6.

If it was a spectacularly ragged end to the tour in the field, England's 
problem is simply that they fall slightly short in slightly too many areas. But 
they have at least been given a comprehensive preview of where they will fall 
down against strong opponents in these conditions next year. Given that England 
have little chance of making the late stages as they are, why not simply rejig 
the parts that are lacking? Cook is a poor captain. He should be replaced by 
Eoin Morgan, who is brilliantly shrewd, reads the game and might percolate a 
little aggression around the place. Cook could bat at No3 in the Jonathan Trott 
role, while (here's a thought) Kevin Pietersen should open with another, as yet 
unidentified, batsman who can play with natural aggression on flat pitches. 
Ideally England would devote the next year to identifying who this might be, to 
finding a convincing spin option, and to hoping Steven Finn can be voodoo'ed 
back into bowling health.

As for the Twenty20 team the danger is that England will head to Bangladesh 
demoralised by three heavy defeats here, and with an obvious slow-bowling 
deficiency already exposed. More than this, they look like a team who have 
fallen behind the rest of the world, ranked eighth with good reason and lacking 
the fine pointskills and basic boldness to actually win matches.

It is hard not to think slightly sadly of the domestic Twenty20 competition, a 
soft-pedalled affair played in English after-dark conditions, and probably 
deprived now of world-class overseas players due to its extended scheduling. If 
England really wanted to take this form of the game seriously – or short form 
cricket generally – then at least a few of the players should be encouraged to 
play in the Indian Premier League (IPL). Plus there is a coaching skills-lag. 
Giles has only ever played in two Twenty20 matches (for Warwickshire). David 
Saker and Graham Thorpe have almost no experience of the shortest form. Against 
this most of Australia's best players are IPL regulars and Darren Lehmann 
played for and also coached the Rajasthan Royals. As a result England are not 
just lagging behind, they're heading in the opposite direction.

Here they set about chasing 195 with a combination of fecklessness and 
timidity, reaching 31-3 in the opening powerplay and then progressively picking 
out the fielders in the deep. The bowling was a rag-bag, with Broad head and 
shoulders above the rest. Bowling in this form is often patchy, but Dernbach's 
three games here have yielded 1-141 off 11 overs. It is often pointed out that 
he bowls at the most frantic times. And this is true: he bowls when Dernbach is 
bowling.
 