
While it may not be entirely surprising that Australia's selectors have 
decided to stage what effectively amounts to a bowling shootout in their only 
warm-up match for the third Test, the identity of some of those participating 
is likely to raise more than the odd eyebrow.

Including the all-rounder James Faulkner, six bowlers have been named in the 
11 to take on Sussex at Hove in a three-day game starting on Friday.

As expected, fast bowlers Mitchell Starc, James Faulkner and Jackson Bird all 
start and will be hoping to impress sufficiently to be called in to the Test 
side to replace the injured James Pattinson.

Less expectedly, the tourists include not just one but two desperately 
inexperienced young spinners called Ashton. While 19-year-old left-armerAshton 
Agar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashton-agar>, who made his Test debut 
at Trent Bridge, had at least played a handful of games of first-class cricket 
before representing his country at senior level, Ashton Turner will be making 
his first-class debut.

Turner, who like Agar hails from Western Australia, has recently been bowling 
his right-arm off-spin forChichester Priory Park 
<http://chichesterpriorypark.play-cricket.com/home/home.asp?> as part of a 
development programme run by Cricket Australia and Hampshire.

The 20-year-old has taken 18 wickets at an average of 40.78 this season 
<http://chichesterpriorypark.play-cricket.com/profile/statistics.asp?id=12318421>
, but like Agar is also considered a more than useful batsman. In fact, with 
521 runs to his name, he is the Sussex Premier League club's highest run-scorer 
this season.

With the pitch at Old Trafford expected to be a dry turner, the mischievous 
might wonder what will happen if Turner takes a hatful of wickets against 
Sussex, while the relatively grizzled Nathan Lyon – already smarting at being 
left out for Agar – comes up with a handful of dust.

In the circumstances it was perhaps a little cruel of Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia to put Lyon – who has 
taken 76 wickets in his 22 Tests – up for questions on Wednesday, but the 
25-year-old came out fighting.

"It was disappointing to miss out on the first two [Tests] but you have to 
move past that," said Lyon. "Ash [Agar] is an extremely talented bowler, 
there's no doubt about that, and hopefully I was able to give him a little 
advice and help, but I couldn't really do much from the boundary. All I can do 
is control what I'm doing, I feel I'm bowling well in the nets and I'll keep 
putting my hand up for selection.

"Ash [Turner] is a very talented player, and he can whack the ball quite well 
too – it's good to see him making a debut for Australia before Western 
Australia."

Asked whether Australia would use James Anderson's statement that England 
would be aiming to win the series 5-0 as motivation – though the Lancashire 
fast bowler could hardly have been expected to say anything else – Lyon 
concurred.

"Definitely. Five-nil is still a long way to go as far as we're concerned, 
we're looking at a 3-2 victory to us right now, and that's what we're planning 
on doing.

"We have a good mood here in Brighton right now, and with the boys up in 
London, we're sticking together and we can definitely bounce back and win the 
Ashes."

Like Australia's former vice-captain, Shane Watson, who along with the seamer 
Ryan Harris is training separately in London, the captain, Michael Clarke, will 
miss the game, in Clarke's case to avoid any chance of aggravating his 
long-standing back problem.

The fact that James Taylor is to guest in the Sussex team, meanwhile, appears 
to indicate the Nottinghamshire and former Leicestershire batsman is currently 
just ahead of Yorkshire's Gary Ballance in England's selectorial pecking order.

Those who watch him regularly on the county circuit will confirm the 
23-year-old Taylor is in good if not dominant form (he has scored 824 
championship runs at an average of 58.86) but question-marks remain regarding 
both aspects of his technique and also his ability to impose himself on quality 
bowling.

"I'm hopeful that KP will be fit to play and, as it stands, I'm preparing to 
play in the three-day game for Sussex and nothing more," said Taylor. "I'm 
disappointed to have to miss two big Notts [one-day] matches but the Sussex 
fixture will give me an opportunity to get some red-ball practice and then I'll 
wait and see.

"I'm not back in the Test side yet but I'm pleased to be a step closer to it 
and I've always dealt with situations like this by concentrating on the game in 
hand and refusing to look too far ahead."
 