
By the time the final wicket fell, the grey clouds that had swept up from the 
south and across the ground were long gone. The sun was out again, shining on
Michael Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke> as he led his 
team from the field for the final time. One last Test match victory, and one 
last series defeat. Not the perfect finish, but satisfying in its way.

After the Australians broke from their celebratory huddle, Clarke led his 
players across the outfield to applaud the gaggle of travelling fans in the OCS 
Stand. He returned alone later on to thank them again. “This is not about me,” 
Clarke said afterwards. “What I wanted was for people, the Australian public in 
particular, to see the fight inside this dressing room and how much they wanted 
to come and play really good cricket in this last Test, to show that while we 
have let ourselves down in this series there is still talent and hunger in that 
dressing room.”

The Ashes 2015: England clinch series but Australia win fifth Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2014-england-win-series-australia-fifth-test>
In his last press conference, Clarke was calm and reflective. “It hasn’t hit 
me yet,” he said. He had thought in the morning that he “might feel it a bit 
more” at some point during his final day’s play but “fortunately, and it is 
very rare for me, I have been able to hold my emotions in”. He refused to talk 
about the black armband he was wearing in memory of Phil Hughes, because he was 
worried it would upset him.

There was one topic, though, which Clarke did want to chat about, and that was 
pitches. He stopped short of accusing the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board of ordering groundsmen to fix 
the playing surfaces to suit England’s needs – “I don’t know what influence the 
ECB had, and I don’t know what influence the Board has in Australia, either, to 
be honest” – but he was clear that he thought the pitches in the last three 
Tests had been substandard. So was Chris Rogers, also playing in his last Test, 
who said: “For the sake of Test cricket, it would have been nice to play on 
better wickets.”

Clarke said: “I think Test cricket is a five-day battle. I want to see 
good and fair cricket for both batters and bowlers, I think that’s the way the 
game should be played.” At Trent Bridge, Edgbaston and here at the Oval, he 
felt that the balance had been skewed too far towards the bowlers, and that the 
public had been cheated as a result.

Clarke thought that the first two Tests, at Cardiff and Lord’s, were the best 
of the series, because they had lasted until the fourth day. “We saw in the 
first two Test matches a lot of talk from the media and the commentators about 
how flat the wickets were, and yet those two Test matches were over in four 
days,” he said. “The next three were over in two-and-a-half and three days.

“People have tickets to watch a whole day’s play today, tomorrow, and the same 
at Edgbaston and Nottingham. I think the fans of the game deserve to see a 
really good contest for five days.” He has a point too. But you might say 
anyone looking for a reason why these last three games have ended so quickly 
would do well to look at the standard of the batting, on both sides.

But Clarke suggested instead that the English groundsmen had been got at. 
“I’ve got a feeling from a few of the conversations I’ve been having with 
groundsmen around the country that they’re a little bit disappointed that they 
haven’t been able to do as they have wanted to do.

“The thing I will say is that I would like to see around the world, not just 
here, groundsmen have the courage to go with what they think is a good cricket 
wicket. If a groundsman knows how to produce a good wicket that will make for a 
great battle of Test match cricket I would like to see them go with that and 
not be persuaded by what is said in the media.”

Most likely he will soon be part of that media himself. “If I’m even lucky 
enough, maybe even commentate,” he said.

Clarke also said, and again it seemed there was just a touch of self-interest 
in his remarks, that his biggest concern with Test cricket right now was that 
it had become so hard for teams to win series away from home.

“I have tried to work out in my head if that is a good thing for the game or 
not. I have always loved that challenge as a player,” he said. “I still don’t 
have the answer, I am still unsure whether it is great for cricket that it is 
so tough to win away from home, or whether I would like it to be a little bit 
closer. I am unsure.

“I mean when I say it is an honour and a privilege to captain Australian 
cricket,” Clarke finished. “There has been some tough times, no doubt about it, 
but I have loved and cherished every second of it.”
 