
Despite a year of often bitter campaigning, Austrians turned out in 
significant numbersto reject the far-right candidate Norbert Hofer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 in a rerun of the country’s presidential elections. For those worried about 
Europe’s turn towards populist rightwing forces, Austria’s election outcome was 
heartening.

Alexander van der Bellen, the left-leaning, pro-Europe moderate, won by about 
3% more of the vote than he did in May’s annulled election. But according to 
Austrian voters who responded to a Guardian callout, despite Van der Bellen 
sweeping to victory, the outcome does not signal an end to the threat from 
far-right forces.

Victory for Van der Bellen and the left is a sigh of relief for Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/victory-for-van-der-bellen-and-the-left-is-a-sigh-of-relief-for-europe>
“It’s just like the Trump phenomenon in the US. Non-urban, less educated, male 
voters go for Hofer’s Freedom party (FPÖ). Hofer is in fact even worse than his 
image. His ideas are racist, sexist and fascist,” says 46-year-old Florian, who 
owns an advertising agency and lives in Vienna.

Florian hopes Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> can remain 
openminded, cosmopolitan and tolerant, but says far-right sentiments exist just 
below the surface. “There is a latent sympathy for fascist ideas in the 
population, especially among older people. The FPÖ has a very powerful and 
efficient network of various rightwing online media supporting them, in 
combination with their own extremely successful social media work,” he says.

Markus, 30, an engineer who lives in Vienna, is a strong supporter of Van der 
Bellen, but fears that this is just the first of many political battles within 
the country. “I hope that after a year of political shifts to the right, there 
are still more people who are not driven by fear and hate, fear of the future 
and hate against minorities.

“But according to opinion polls, the FPÖ would lead if there were 
parliamentary elections soon, which is very likely the case. I would vote for 
SPÖ [the Social Democratic party of Austria], mainly because of the new 
chancellor … It seems possible that there is still a chance of modern leftwing 
politics despite all the hate and xenophobia in our country. Even though he too 
has his populist moments, I see him as way less dangerous than rightwing 
populism,” he says.

In May, Van der Bellen defeated Hofer by 50.3% to 49.7%, only narrowly 
preventingAustria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> from becoming the 
first EU country to elect a far-right head of state. This time, although the 
results swung in greater numbers for the left-leaning candidate, the election 
reveals a great rift running through Austrian society.

Kate, 27, an occupational therapist from Vienna, is concerned that a similar 
show of unity against the far right may not play out in parliamentary 
elections. “It is a great relief; the first good election results this year I 
know of. It is especially nice to live in a city were Van der Bellen won in all 
districts. However, this election is different as it only had two candidates, 
none of them from the established formerly big parties, and people from all 
different political parties had to choose. Next time it will be the choice 
between different parties rather than two persons,” she says.

Although the role is mainly ceremonial, a win for Hofer would have boosted FPÖ 
hopes for the next presidential elections, despite the party’s recent history 
of praising the “proper labour policies” of Adolf Hitler.

Sascha, 30, a teacher who was born in Vienna but now lives in Warsaw, feels 
let down by the mainstream parties. “Given the events of the past six months – 
Brexit, the US election and gains by the AfD in Germany – I feel even more 
convinced that Van der Bellen, and a temperate voice, is necessary for the 
current climate inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and 
the world.

“The main parties have failed and perhaps the entire establishment must be 
renewed. The mainstream parties don’t reflect the realities of many voters, 
myself included,” she says.

Sascha says an overhaul of the political system is needed before more people 
turn towards extreme parties.

The SPÖ and the ÖVP [Austrian People’s party] have governed Austria for more 
than 60 years, and voters who responded to our callout said they were 
frustrated and unsatisfied with the work of this coalition. It is this 
frustration that led some to vote in favour of Hofer, as a warning to the 
country’s mainstream parties.

Austria defeated the far-right Norbert Hofer – finally, some hope for Europe | 
Julia Ebner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
“I’m a socialist, and believe in equal rights for all. But I want to give a 
sign to the parties of ÖVP [APP] and SPÖ that they must start working together 
again to stop the far right and the far left telling us how we have to to live 
and what we have to think,” says Stefan, 35, an architect who lives in Vienna. 
“The only way to show them is to let them realise that it is not in 10 years 
they will lose their power in parliament – it could be next year. It’s the last 
opportunity to do that with the smallest consequences,” he says.

Van der Bellen’s second campaign was passionately pro-European, with posters 
proclaiming that a vote for him meant “no to Öxit”. Analysts have suggested 
thatthis key issue swung the election for Van der Bellen.

“I believe that the conservative ÖVP will enforce its role as a pro-EU party 
in the coming [parliamentary] elections. So far the conservatives’ strategy was 
to take over rightwing issues … This election has proven that Öxit is not very 
popular,” says Florian.

“Just like in many other European countries, nationalism is extremely en vogue 
as a consequence of globalism and the refugee issue, as well as an answer to 
the supposed liberal political-correctness generation. Nevertheless, the 
success of the FPÖ is quite surprising in a country that is one of the safest 
and wealthiest in Europe,” he says. “Maybe people are a bit bored after 70 
years of peace.”
 