
On Sunday it will be decided whether the first Test of the 2013 Ashes series 
goes down in the annals as Agar's match. If Australia can muster another 137 
runs then that will undoubtedly be the case. It does not take a degree in 
mathematics or even a Level 4 coaching certificate to recognise the importance 
of thatglorious 163 last-wicket partnership 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2013/jul/11/ashton-agar-australia-england-first-test>
, which decorated the second day of a terrific Test match.

But the odds are against that happening. Ashton Agar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashton-agar>, promoted to No8 in the second 
innings, is still there, but Australia have just four wickets remaining. After 
they had set off confidently in pursuit of 311, the loss of three wickets for 
as many runs in the last hour tempered burgeoning Antipodean optimism. But 
after the melodrama of the last four days it would be foolish to take anything 
for granted.

So far, even without the presence on the field of Shane Warne and Glenn 
McGrath or Michael Vaughan and Freddie Flintoff we have been transported back 
to 2005.

Even the dull moments of this Test have been gripping. There have been touches 
of true class from familiar figures such as Ian Bell and Jimmy Anderson, and 
from the unknowns or unrated of Australia, Agar and his anonymous partner in 
their first innings, Phillip Hughes.

Sunday could still provide a wonderful spectacle. There will be sweaty palms 
everywhere – in the dressing rooms, the stands and, no doubt, in the third 
umpire's room. This might yet be Edgbaston 2005 revisited (and who knows what a 
third umpire would have made of that dismissal of Mike Kasprowicz eight years 
ago?).

A target of 311 was always going to be stiff for the Australians, but there 
has been no doubting their resolve in this Test match. Their pursuit was 
bolstered by a fine opening partnership of 84 in 24 overs. Not for the first 
time Shane Watson almost played a great innings. He set the ideal tone. On to 
the front foot he rocked and several times he drove Anderson with massive 
authority. Likewise Watson cut, drove and swept Graeme Swann for boundaries. 
These were Alastair Cook's banker bowlers and he was brushing them away with 
apparent ease.

At the other end Chris Rogers was busy, ugly and effective while justifying 
why the Australian selectors were attracted to him for this mission. There were 
plenty of furrowed brows as England took drinks in the middle of the afternoon. 
Cook was obviously reticent about Steven Finn bowling but none of his more 
trusted bowlers were making much of an impression.

Anxieties were eased with the first ball after the break as Watson 
demonstrated why he also infuriates. He played across an in-swinger from Stuart 
Broad, who bowled superbly throughout, and Umpire Dar sent him on his way – 
after review. Watson was disgruntled – apparently not with himself – but this 
time there was no evidence that the bat had touched the ball. England are right 
to regard Watson as an lbw candidate, for this has been his mode of dismissal 
in eight of his 17 innings in Ashes cricket. So far he promises so much more 
than he delivers.

In the next over Rogers successfully reviewed a caught behind "dismissal" off 
Swann but now the runs dried up. Cook felt confident enough to bowl Finn, 
albeit for three overs, and then he turned to Joe Root just before tea. Soon 
the young Tyke was gambolling around like a lamb as he celebrated his first 
Test wicket, that of Ed Cowan caught at slip by Jonathan Trott. There has 
seldom been a dismissal on the scorecard so redolent of the West Country with 
all those OOs, RRs and TTs.

Now the Australians were feeling the pressure. After tea Anderson, bowling 
around the wicket, had Rogers chipping the ball to short mid-wicket and the 
celebrations, which included a glance to the balcony, suggested that this was 
all part of a very cunning plan.

Michael Clarke and Steve Smith scraped together another 37 runs before the 
roof fell in on the Australian innings. Inevitably the third umpire was heavily 
involved again. First Umpire Dar checked whether a catch from Clarke had 
carried to Matt Prior. It had. But then Clarke asked for a review presumably on 
the basis that he had not hit the ball in the first place only to be sent on 
his way. It seems as if Clarke likes to get the reviews out of the system as 
soon as possible.

Next ball and a new over from Swann saw Smith back on his stumps and lbw. 
Suddenly Swann was making the ball spit and in his next over Hughes, also on 
the back foot, was lbw (after a review from England, who are currently using 
the system rather better than the Australians). Three wickets for three runs 
and at the end of another sapping, enthralling day the pendulum had swung.

In the morning Australia had disposed of the last four English batsmen for 49 
runs, which was a bit of a bonus given how ropily they started. Mitchell 
Starc's first ball was a head-high wide. Then James Pattinson was less than 
amused when Clarke at second slip and Watson at first stared at one another as 
a Broad edge sailed between them.

Broad and Bell reached their landmarks. No token clapping of hands was visible 
from the fielding side as Broad passed fifty, though there was some slightly 
surreptitious applause (from Cowan and Rogers) when Bell reached his 18th and, 
perhaps, his best Test century.

Then Broad "walked" when nicking a Pattinson delivery to the keeper. The 
chances are that he anticipated Umpire Dharmasena's finger rising rather than 
that he experienced a Damascus-style revelation overnight. It has yet to be 
confirmed whether captain Cook gave Broad a dressing down upon his return to 
the pavilion for leaving the crease prematurely.

Now Trent Bridge was briefly in shade and the ball started to dart around. 
Bell was caught behind off Starc and neither Swann nor Anderson could linger 
long against Peter Siddle. The target had been set.
 