
With the strains of Land of Hope and Glory ringing in her ears, the Australian 
sports minister, Kate Lundy – in a bright red GB T-shirt and cap – set off in a 
single scull around the Eton Dorney regatta course.

An unlikely activity for the patriot, but it was the price she was forced to 
pay afterlosing a bet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/video/2012/sep/02/australian-minister-gb-medals-bet-video>
 that Australia would come above Great Britain in the Olympic medal table. The 
bet – made with the Olympic minister Hugh Robertson before the Games – required 
the keen oarswoman to row in full kit around the course after her country's 
disappointing showing.
 The British Olympic minister, Hugh Robertson, with Lundy. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/PA 
No wonder Robertson looked so pleased, ready to welcome his counterpart back 
to land with a glass of champagne. If he had lost he would have had to dribble 
a hockey ball around Australia House on the Strand in full Kookaburra regalia. 
"I am relieved, and I suspect anyone living around the Strand area is too," he 
said. Robertson denied there had been any traditional "sledging" of the 
minister as she made her way round. "Not at all, she is a terrific sport," he 
said. "She really looks like she knows what she's doing."

Rather disappointingly, there was very little crowing of any description going 
on on Sunday. After a mixed day for the British team in the Paralympic rowing, 
Lundy seemed to be rather enjoying herself.

"We've got plenty of pride in the Australian team but this bet was part of a 
friendship and traditional rivalry, and I can't think of a better way to settle 
my end of the bet than going around this beautiful course," she said.

The games maker volunteers who had been at Eton Dorney for the rowing finals 
stayed on to watch the bet played out – but it was the Australian team who 
cheered their own over the finish line.

As she went past, Nick Dean, vice-president of the Australian Paralympic 
Committee, demonstrated the competitiveness that his countrymen are famed for, 
despite the lack of any competitors here. "Go on Kate," he yelled from the 
banks. "Dig in! Go for the big finish!"

Asked if Lundy had restored some battered Aussie pride, he waved away 
references to the Olympics, preferring to concentrate on the current medal 
battle being played out. "I think if you look at the Paralympic medal table, 
you will see we are ahead," he said.
 