
The leading constitutional lawyer George Williams has warned Australia’s 
campaign finance system is “broken” – and he has proposed a major overhaul to 
ensure the federal system of donations and disclosure is no longer vulnerable 
to “exploitation”.

In a submission to a parliamentary inquiry into the conduct of the last 
federal election, and the adequacy of Australia’s donations and disclosure 
regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/turnbull-government-launches-sweeping-inquiry-into-donations>
, Williams proposed a “holistic” overhaul, including imposing caps of $5,000 on 
political donations, real-time disclosure, banning foreign donations when the 
source is “exclusively foreign”, caps on campaign expenditure, and a boost to 
public funding.

Williams, the dean of the faculty of law at the University of New South Wales, 
warned it was “widely accepted among experts and others that Australia’s system 
of political finance law is broken and open to exploitation and undue 
influence”.

Truth in politics: calling out 'cold-blooded lies' isn't nearly enough | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/23/truth-in-politics-stamping-your-foot-about-cold-blooded-lies-isnt-enough>
“This can give rise to a form of soft corruption in which money may be given 
in return for access and the potential to bring about undue influence on 
decision-making and policy development,” he said.

“Such a system is clearly not in the interests of the Australian community.”

Williams references the two high court cases that are most commonly cited to 
make the case that it’s constitutionally difficult to limit donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/10/australian-political-donations-how-hard-would-it-really-be-to-clean-up>
, and he suggests reform can proceed along the lines he proposes, “taking into 
account the legal constraints”.

He also used his submission to recommended lowering the voting age to 16, and 
urged the Turnbull government to resist calls to legislate a truth in political 
advertising provision.

Truth in advertising has been added to the terms of reference for the 
donations inquiry because that change is being sought by Nick Xenophon. 
Xenophon was unhappy with some of the advertising directed at his NXT party in 
South Australia during the 2016 federal election.

The Coalition has also complained volubly about Labor’s Medicare 
anti-privatisation campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/mediscare-campaign-didnt-worry-my-electorate-says-christopher-pyne>
 during the campaign.

Williams argued there were two main problems with truth in political 
advertising laws – the first was the law might prove unworkable in practice and 
the second was the law could easily infringe the implied freedom of political 
communication.

He acknowledged truth in advertising provisions existed in South Australia, 
the Northern Territory and in some countries overseas, but he said the regimes 
were very narrowly based.

Williams noted the SA electoral commission wanted the regime repealed on the 
basis it undermined the independence of the state agency by necessitating 
decisions about who was right and who was wrong.

“While it may be possible to frame truth in political advertising laws that 
are both constitutionally valid and enforceable, any such provisions would have 
to be cast in very narrow terms with only a small scope for application,” 
Williams said.

“Provisions of this nature would likely serve little more than a symbolic 
purpose.”

He also argued in favour of two changes widening eligibility to vote.

The first involved lowering the voting age, which would lower some of the 
barriers to persuading distracted 18-year-olds to enrol to vote at a time when 
they are leaving school, and leaving home.

“People under 18 can leave school, get a job, drive a car and pay taxes. They 
can also enlist in the Australian defence forces, become a parent, and, in 
exceptional circumstances, get permission to marry. If the law permits them to 
undertake these activities, it is hard to see why they cannot also vote.”

“It is often argued that 16-year-olds lack the knowledge about how government 
works to enable them to vote ... this can be true, but these problems are not 
limited to this age group.”

Williams said lowering the voting age would not mean imposing a compulsory 
vote on teenagers. He suggested participation should be voluntary.

He also said Australians should be allowed to vote even if they live overseas 
on a long-term basis. Electoral law prevents people voting if they have resided 
overseas for six years.

“Australia’s electoral system should recognise the reality that Australia is 
increasingly integrated into global systems, including by way of movement of 
its citizens,” he said.

“It is desirable that these people have the opportunity to remain strongly 
connected to Australia, including by voting.”
 