
There is a blindingly obvious reason why Australians are so good at cricket 
and why the Ashes have been plucked back from England's nervous grasp so 
emphatically and might remain under the Southern Cross until Justin Langer 
loses the will to sing.

There are more of them - from politicians to children in the street, from 
mothers and sisters to fathers and sons, from cabbies to billionaires - who 
love it with a passion not always apparent in the land where the game was born.

An unpalatable view? There is no walking away from evidence that has been 
accumulating for decades. There is no ignoring the mood that has descended on 
the game over the past seven weeks.

Whatever noise the Barmy Army make, however much the British tabloids salivate 
in victory and snarl in defeat, too many in England embrace cricket with all 
the enthusiasm of kissing their sister.

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> at club level is still 
largely something pleasant to do on a summer's day; in Australia, it resembles 
a rumbling war, physically and mentally ratcheted up to health-threatening 
levels. From that point on, all the way to Test matches, it gets more intense.

If you want a vivid example, when Brett Lee felled Andrew Strauss (a friend, 
with whom he played club cricket in Sydney) with a sickening 92mph bouncer 
behind the ear on Thursday, he expressed due concern as the player lay on the 
ground. Then he went back to his mark, roared in and slung it down at 94mph, 
appealing wildly for caught behind when a shaken Strauss got a hip to it. That 
is close enough to sport as war.

The hysteria that accompanied England's recovery of the Ashes in 2005 
disguised the fact that cricket for the English/British remains a beast 
occasionally stirred. Down Under, it roams the land year after year, applauded 
from Sydney to Perth and back.

And now the campaign is on for the symbol of cricket's oldest rivalry, the 
fragile, ancient little urn, to be kept in Australia until England prove worthy 
of taking it 'home'. Sadly, it looks as if it will soon be on the plane back to 
its case at Lord's - and the old codgers there will be content again, musing 
over a gin that nothing should disturb the past.

As long as this attitude persists, that is where England cricket teams will 
reside. They will be robbed of the very incentive that drives their Australian 
opponents. The best thing that could happen to English cricket is to have the 
urn removed from the gnarled grip of Marylebone Cricket Club and placed 12,000 
miles away, where, for the time being at least, it belongs.

Australians 'own' the Ashes because they care. The challenge for England, as a 
cricketing entity, is to match their wholehearted and virtually nationwide 
thirst for success. As it stands, that commitment falls short of the necessary.

In a country generally blessed with sunshine, sport dominates nearly 
everything: news bulletins, pub discussions, the timing of weddings and 
holidays, the standing of politicians. And the pecking order is gambling, 
cricket, then, depending on where you grow up, take your pick of the rugby 
codes and their own invention, Aussie rules. Layered across those are the other 
mainstream sports - football, tennis, golf, swimming, athletics - most of which 
they are very good at and are supported in healthy numbers. A club football 
match in Melbourne recently drew more than 50,000, bigger than most crowds in 
the Premiership that weekend.

But cricket is king. As Ricky Ponting's old men girded their loins one last 
time to see off a young and rattled England team and complete a humiliating 
whitewash in the fifth Test on Friday - only the second in the history of Ashes 
contests - reality set in.

An estimated 40,000 England fans are lugging themselves home to midwinter 
contemplation of another chastening collision with their cricketing betters. 
And they will ask: will it ever end, this serial bashing?

What the Australia teams have done over the past 20 years (in replication of 
other golden eras) is give the country a touchstone of certainty. The 
confidence of leaders such as Allan Border, Mark Taylor, Steve Waugh and 
Ponting, as well as that of all the great cricketers who have played under 
them, notably Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath, filters through not only to young 
cricketers in the park but to all 21 million citizens. It gives them pride. And 
from there, that confidence rises again to the Test team. Commentators talk 
about cycles in sport; in Australian cricket, the cycle is driven by a 
self-sustaining ethic that results in continued excellence at elite level and 
fire in the belly down below.

Australia and England have played each other 316 times in Test matches. Only 
15 of those were not for the Ashes, which started in 1882. Australia have won 
131 times, England 97, with 88 draws. They are almost level pegging in England, 
Australia leading 46 to 43 with 62 draws. On their home turf, though, the 
Australians are much tougher to beat. They have won 85 of 165 Tests, losing 54 
and drawing 26.

The difference in attachment to cricket between the old rivals was 
embarrassingly underlined last week, when Australian Prime Minister John Howard 
talked with considerably more authority about the treasured urn than did 
Richard Branson. The smiling beard from the Home Counties put in a bumbling 
performance at a press conference that made him look like a cricketing virgin.

Branson, Ian Botham and Border had gathered in Sydney during the fifth Test to 
announce their support for keeping the mini-goblet in Australia, given the that 
national team seem in near-permanent possession of the trophy.

While Branson was happy to attach his name and that of his airline to the 
campaign but could not get the most fundamental details of the Ashes history 
right, Howard's much trumpeted love of cricket - whatever the appearances of 
political opportunism - is deep-rooted. He knows its history and goes to a lot 
of matches.

Key to the sport's continued development is a top-down strategy started by the 
Australian Institute of Sport and supplemented by a co-ordinated programme in 
schools.

In 2005, Cricket Australia took on board a recommendation from an appointed 
think tank to 'promote cricket as the sport of choice for young Australians'. 
You get a flavour of where the sport is going from the tag they put on their 
latest medium-term blueprint: 'From Backyard to Baggy Green, 2005-2009'. 
Cricket Australia lay down an unapologetic objective: 'We want cricket to be 
the most played, most watched, most enjoyed sport in the country.'

The game's custodians want 550,000 Australians registered as participants when 
the Ashes are contested again, in 2009 (up from 478,326 at the end of the 
2004-05 season), with four million fans a year attending internationals, 1.4 
million to other first-class games and revenue growth of $30million (£12m).

After 15 years, Cricket Australia have replaced the famed academy in Adelaide 
with a centre of excellence in Brisbane. They had their first intake in April 
2004. You would not bet against a graduate figuring in the next Ashes series.

None of it comes cheap. The 25 contracted players earn a minimum of $150,000 
(£60,000) a year; State players are on a maximum of $100,000 (£40,000), rookies 
$23,500 (£9,500). On top of that, international players earn $12,250 (£5,000) a 
Test (as does each twelfth man), $4,900 (£2,000) for one-day matches.

The media contribute 65 per cent of revenues, sponsorship 20 per cent. The 
coverage of cricket is embroidered or blighted, according to taste, by 
relentless marketing. Television commentators see no conflict of interest in 
flogging Warne's shirt and then deliberating on his role as a player. Poster 
boys abound in ads for breakfast cereals and all manner of cricket-related tat. 
It comes at you as a package that you have little choice but to absorb.

More than half a million young Australians a year take part in Cricket 
Australia's Milo development programmes, which began in 1982. They teach 
children of all ages the fundamentals, before working on their skills. Cricket 
is played in most schools, state or independent - a stark contrast with Britain 
- and public nets are available in far greater numbers.

In the UK, where the England and Wales Cricket Board are also striving to grow 
the sport, the Cricket Foundation, based at Lord's, launched Chance to Shine in 
May 2005, on the eve of that unforgettable Ashes summer. Nick Gandon, the 
director, saw a grassroots game seriously off the pace.

'Fewer than 10 per cent of state schools offered regular competitive cricket,' 
Gandon says. 'While eight [members] of the current England team come from the 
state sector, their progress has had arguably nothing to do with their schools. 
Rather they've been nurtured in clubs and through family interest.'

Four out of 10 professional cricketers in England have been educated privately 
and, Gandon says, Chance to Shine hopes to take the sport to 'more than two 
million children in one third of all state schools by 2015. We plan to engage 
7,200 state schools over 10 years with properly costed, high-quality cricket 
programmes delivered through good cricket clubs. We plan to generate £50m - 
half from private funding - the other half in Government-matched funding. To 
date, £10.4m of the £25m target for private funding is committed.'

The old ethos of cricket as mere recreation will change, too, he says; Chance 
to Shine schools will have five competitive matches a year. Crucially, teachers 
will be brought back in to coaching - and the new immigrant communities will be 
encouraged to take up the sport.

Gandon is honest enough to admit that 'years of neglect won't be put right 
overnight, nor will it be solved by marketing gimmicks'. But it is a decent 
start at least.

As it stands, however, the striking difference between the north and south of 
cricket can best be appreciated where it matters most, on the pitch.

I played a game recently on a bumpy patch of ground, on an artificial pitch, 
in the shadows of the Sydney Cricket Ground for a team of friends competing in 
a Saturday morning league. Opposition in these two-day games played over two 
weekends include works sides and pub teams. You would have thought we were 
playing on the nearby sacred strip of the SCG in a Test match.

The sledging was relentless. Players of limited but maximised talent threw 
themselves around with admirable energy under a burning sun. Bats were swung 
like broadswords. The bowling was straight and quickish, if unsubtle. One of 
our number, a human rights lawyer, expressed mock horror when he saw who the 
umpire was. 'He sent me off a month ago for swearing at him and I got a 
three-week ban,' he said.

Later, the teams went their separate ways. There seemed no inclination to mix. 
This was fun, but not as we know it in Surrey.

There is another image that remains seared to the eyeball. It is from a 
country match in the Hunter Valley of New South Wales on Saturday 19 October 
2002 and it is memorialised as a giant mural on the wall of the Station Hotel 
in Kurri Kurri, a former coal-mining town about a hundred miles north of 
Sydney. That day, as 55 bushfires raged throughout the state, many of them in 
the tinderbox scrub around the small town of Kearsley, a man trapped in his car 
burnt to death. Homes were evacuated as the flames grew. But, on the local 
cricket field, with the wind blowing the bails off and fire licking the 
boundary, the visiting team from the Station Hotel voted to bat on - because 
they thought they could win. The game was abandoned only when firemen insisted. 
Now that's playing for the ashes.

At a slightly higher level, players must train twice a week, usually Tuesdays 
and Thursdays, to be considered for selection on Saturday. And such is the 
depth of membership at most clubs, players do not risk being dropped. Even in 
the lower grades there is a high turnout at practice.

At most clubs in the UK, not only is there little or no practice during the 
season, club membership secretaries are tearing their hair out trying to 
fielding sides after the August holidays. Many older players will make 
themselves available for the occasional Sunday friendly but are not bothered 
with league cricket. In Australia, there is virtually no social cricket; if you 
want a game, you join a team and you sign up for the fully committed, 
two-day-a-week practice regime.

Tom Moody, who is rumoured to be a candidate for the England coaching job and 
has seen the English game first hand for several years at Worcestershire, says 
that it is at club level where the sport's softness lies. Rod Marsh, who did 
wonders as director of coaching, agrees.

And that is not going to change quickly. Attempts to introduce two-day cricket 
in England have met a lukewarm response. Not many club players want to make 
that commitment, weekend to weekend. They would rather get it over and done 
with in an afternoon.

And that is where the difference in attitude starts. When Warne strove for a 
maiden Test century in his final Test at the SCG on Thursday, he hit a stirring 
71 before being stumped. He did not leave the field happy with that achievement 
but shook his head disappointed with what he would consider a failure.

And then, briefly acknowledging the crowd's applause, he and McGrath, who was 
also playing his last Test, ran up the steps to the dressing room to get ready 
to bowl at England in their second innings. As much as they have enjoyed the 
emotional farewells given them, they remained focused on the job. Cricket might 
be fun for them - Warne calls it his hobby - but there is always a job to be 
done. And nothing, not even the roar of the crowd, was going to blind them to 
the gravity of the task.

By its nature, cricket is a difficult game to play with total intensity. It is 
almost impossible to stay wired during the down time. But England players, 
while committed to the cause, sometimes give the impression that they are 
resigned to their lot. Australians are more disposed to force the fates by 
sheer willpower. Warne and McGrath, more than any players in recent times, have 
done it throughout their careers.

It is in Australians' blood to go flat out. They know no other way to win. And 
they deserve all that comes their way - including the little urn.

Kevin Mitchell is the Observer's chief sports writer. For more content from 
the Observer, clickhere <http://observer.theguardian.com/sport/>.
 