
The rot has stopped and normal service has resumed. After thorough defeat at 
the hands of South Africa, Australia trounced Pakistan 3-0 to relieve and 
remind that home bullying of opposition still exists here. It arrived not a 
moment too soon, because when it comes to Test cricket, what are you if you 
don’t dominate at home?

The answer is: in crisis. Which is where Australia broadly were before a 
consolation, dead-rubber victory over South Africa eased the tension somewhat. 
Even so, Steve Smith’s side embarked on this Pakistan quest on the back of two 
consecutive Test series defeats – three in all formats, all unexpected. It was 
enough to provoke reasonable doubt over the outcome of this one, particularly 
given Misbah Ul-Haq’s outfit had recently occupied Test cricket’s No1 ranking. 
For all the talk of home comforts, his side had achieved it without being there 
once in nine years.

Steve Smith hails Australia's resurgence after four straight Test victories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/steve-smith-hails-australias-resurgence-after-four-straight-test-victories>
It’s said a week is a long time in politics; try three in Test cricket. After 
the dying embers of Pakistan’s sometimes-casual resistance finally faded in 
Sydney, the Australian side could reflect upon a crisis forgotten, pride 
restored and, perhaps more significantly, an era commenced.

For this, Darren Lehmann, the selectors and co deserve credit. Nobody, not 
even they, are suggesting that Australia is now a fully actualised side, but 
here they could not do much more. The core quartet of Steve Smith, David 
Warner, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc each took turns to decide contests. 
Warner and Smith in particular produced the glut of activity befitting players 
of their status.

If nothing else, this series underlined how irrepressible both can be in 
favourable conditions. The two entered Australia’s batting ranks through a 
side-door of sorts but now sit firmly as the nation’s premier batsmen at the 
peak of their powers. It looks likely they will amass a quantity of runs to 
rival modern luminaries, but it’s the context of those innings that will truly 
define their standing. For now, however, it would be cynical to explain their 
latest output through the prism of home conditions and inconsistent opposition 
alone. Pakistan did disappoint with the ball, but both batsmen managed to 
provide moments of astonishment and entertainment worth savouring in their own 
right.

Where Smith and Warner re-consolidated their standing after an underwhelming 
start to the home summer, Hazlewood enhanced his throughout. His bowling was as 
unerring as the use of the words “miserly” and “metronomic” to describe it. 
While so much conventional wisdom flipped on its head in 2016, Hazlewood 
continued to profit from one of cricket’s unshifting truths: bowl fast enough, 
hit the seam enough, at the top of off stump enough, and enjoy your wickets.

Australia’s tribute to convention didn’t stop there. As the summer ploughed 
on, everything old was new. Matthew Renshaw, whose age may actually render his 
approach non-conformist, added runs to his evident resilience. After multiple 
capitulations and growing concern about Australia’s devotion to defence, the 
20-year-old’s outlook provided a wonderful counterbalance to his opening 
partner and Australia’s batting generally.

However where Australia seem to produce opening batsmen as prolific as Wahab 
Riaz does no-balls, their travails in the middle order have until this series 
been markedly substandard. To that end, Peter Handscomb’s emergence as a player 
capable of both absorbing and attacking looms as a major moment in the 
maturation of what is now Smith’s side. This, next to Usman Khawaja’s rise, 
leaves home supporters daring to contemplate the possibility of a batting group 
that remains together for some time.

But, as ever, questions remain. Australia’s mathematical middle – No6 – seems 
further away than it did at the start of the summer. Four players were tried, 
policies were uprooted then reversed, and then, to underscore the confusion of 
it all, Hilton Cartwright bowled four overs and no more. Selectors continue to 
search for the player who can score hundreds and bowl 15 overs. It’s an 
ambitious pursuit, though in the absence of picking Glenn Maxwell, the answer 
may lie in something altogether less elegant – a good old-fashioned workaround. 
Ever passionate to experiment, selectors could always go full mad scientist: 
some overs from Smith, some keeping in Handscomb, and – if five overs is all 
you need –some 130km/hr seamers from Matthew Wade 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z8kxSEmP0A0>. 

It’s head-scratching stuff, but trying to win in India will do that to you. 
Australia’s biggest selection quandary this summer came from the intersection 
between Nathan Lyon’s bowling, Wade’s contribution and Smith’s belief, as 
captain, in both. In Lyon and Wade are two players whose fortunes are critical 
to the balance of the remaining 11. Smith’s sparing use of Lyon in turn 
impacted the workload of his quicks. That workload in turn heaps pressure on a 
fifth bowler. A fifth bowler, however, is meant to also score runs. Wade, whose 
superior batting is designed to counter that pressure, did not deliver runs. 
Moreover, his keeping still appears inferior to the perpetually neat Peter 
Nevill. He does talk a lot in the field though, but maybe Smith should just let 
Lyon bowl.

To that end, it’s hard to see Australia’s home success flowing to India. 
Conditions there are so foreign, so seemingly anathema to the style and values 
that underpin the Australian method so adroit at home, that drawing inferences 
from this series ahead of the next would be ill-advised.

Because as it stands, to think of India is to think of Kohli hundreds and 
Ashwin unplayables. When Australia last went to Asia, their players could 
barely pick which way the ball was spinning. In that context, all this 
tinkering around the edges feels a little superfluous. There’s not much point 
lighting a candle when you need a fire.
 