
Controversial all-rounder Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> has been selected in 
Australia's 15-man squad for the World Twenty20 in England next month.

Symonds, who has just returned to the national set-up following a spell out of 
the squad due to disciplinary problems, joins Brett Lee in the party, with the 
paceman's recent injury problems not counting against him. Ricky Ponting 
captains the side, while young opener David Warner and in-form Queenslander 
Shane Watson also included.

National Selection Panel chairman Andrew Hilditch said both Symonds and Lee 
deserved to be selected for the tournament.

"At his best Andrew Symonds is one of the best Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> players in the world," Hilditch 
said. "In limited opportunities in the UAE [against Pakistan] he showed, during 
game two, his ability to win games for Australia. He also adds versatility to 
our squad.

"Brett Lee is progressing well and will return to international cricket in 
Thursday's T20 game against Pakistan. We expect it will take him a few games to 
regain his rhythm after the extended break but the medical and coaching staff 
are very confident Brett will be back to his best for this tournament."

Hilditch said there was an excellent balance in the squad and believes there 
is enough quality for Australia to win the tournament.

"Building up to this selection, Shane Watson has returned to the one-day side 
and performed extra well with the bat in the series in the UAE. He'll return to 
bowling in Thursday's T20 game there and adds strength and versatility to the 
side," Hilditch said.

"Nathan Hauritz is the specialist spinner in the side. Nathan has made great 
progress in limited-overs cricket to become a regular member of the side during 
series in South Africa and the UAE. Spin is having a significant impact on T20 
cricket worldwide and Nathan is well placed to play a significant role in this 
tournament."

"Mitchell Johnson and Peter Siddle have both had their workloads managed in 
advance of upcoming international cricket. They are both very important members 
of the Australian bowling group and their return will add significant strength 
to the side."

"We've picked a strong batting group with a mix of stroke players and players 
capable of being very destructive. David Hussey is an important part of our 
plans and displayed his credentials in the first international T20 against 
South Africa in South Africa recently. His fielding is sharp and he gives us 
good overs in T20 cricket. And David Warner is an example of a player added for 
his specific skills in T20 cricket and has the ability to give us an explosive 
start at the top of the order."

Australia's 15-man squad: 

Ricky Ponting (c)

Michael Clarke (vc)

Nathan Bracken

Brad Haddin

Nathan Hauritz

Ben Hilfenhaus

James Hopes

David Hussey

Mike Hussey

Mitchell Johnson

Brett Lee

Peter Siddle

Andrew Symonds

David Warner

Shane Watson
 