
The president of Australia's Olympic Committee, John Coates, blames his 
athletes' failure to achieve the expected gold-medal success from the London 
Games on a shortage of government funding and a lack of compulsory sport in 
schools. The failure of Australia's swimmers to provide the impetus for a gold 
medal rush led Coates on Monday to downgrade his London medal expectations from 
46 to between 30 and 36 – ruling out a predicted top-five finish.

Australia found itself 24th on the games medals tally at the end of the ninth 
day of competition, with only one gold medal, 12 silver and seven bronze. 
Neighbouring New Zealand, with less than a fifth of Australia's population, was 
14th with three gold medals.

Australian swimmers won only one gold medal – in a relay – six silvers and 
three bronzes for the country's lowest Olympic medal tally in swimming since 
Barcelona in 1992. It is a failure that has led the country's swimming 
officials to order an independent review, withSwimming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/swimming> Australia's president, David 
Urquhart, saying: "It is clear the world has lifted the bar when it comes to 
swimming and so must we."

Coates said with strong performances in sailing and cycling, Australia might 
still finish as high as eighth on the medal tally, but a top-five finish was no 
longer realistic.

"If you analyse it, it is only in swimming that we are disappointed in the 
number of medals," he said. "In Beijing we got 46 medals of which 20 were in 
swimming.

"We have 10 here, so realistically we are not going to get 46 medals – 30 to 
36 is more likely."

The most senior Australian member of the International Olympic Committee, the 
former Olympian Kevin Gosper, told ABC the failure to win gold medals resulted 
directly from cuts to government funding of Olympic sports in 2009.

The Australian government allocated nearly $325m (£220m) to sports programs in 
its 2010 budget but the $52m earmarked for Olympics-focused high performance 
sports was only half what the AOC had lobbied for.

Gosper said more had to be spent on top coaches and on international 
competition to ensure Australian athletes were competitive at the Olympic 
games. "Now that really cost us," he said. "You've got to put money in there. 
That pays for coaches, it pays for international competition. The money is the 
difference between silver and gold."

Coates also laid blame at the feet of the government, saying it needed to 
change policy and priorities to ensure funding was available for sport in 
schools.

"Perhaps the area that needs a lot of attention … and government intention in 
terms of policy is getting sport back into the school curricula," he said. "The 
British are making a big thing of that being one of the legacies they're 
looking towards and they've been achieving that, a greater emphasis on sport in 
schools. We need that because we've got to make sure we have a talent pool."

The Federal Sports Minister Kate Lundy said Australian athletes were still up 
with the best in the world, but that the difference between gold and silver was 
miniscule and Australia was coming "so close so many times."

"It's a millimetre or a millisecond and it's just not going our way," she 
said. "I don't think that diminishes the achievements of our silver medallists. 
They're on the podium. We're still up there with the best of the best."

Lunday said the success of Australia's high performance sports programs would 
likely be examined after the games but "there's no one piece of our sports 
system that's broken".

While Australia's lean medal count has led to national soul-searching, New 
Zealand has been able to celebrate three early medals in rowing. On a medal 
table based on national population New Zealand, with just over four million 
citizens, would be in first place ahead of Slovenia.
 