
Australia’s athletes have put in strong performances but have not added to the 
medal tally overnight, as Max Esposito tried to emulate his sister’s remarkable 
achievements in the modern pentathlon, Emma Moffatt led the charge in the 
triathlon and the men’s K4 looked to defend their London kayak crown.

In the modern pentathlon Max Esposito, brother of surprise gold medallist 
Chloe finished strongly in the final run and shoot event, posting the fourth 
best score for the discipline, adding to his fourth place finish in the swim 
and his third in the show jumping.

Australian athletes released after questioning by Rio police over credentials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/australian-athletes-questioned-by-police-in-rio-over-basketball-accreditation>
Fencing proved more difficult and a 29th placing left the teenager just 
outside the medal placings in seventh, with a score of 1462, six points off 
bronze. Russia’s Alexander Lesun took gold ahead of Ukrainian Pavlo 
Tymoshchenko with Mexico’s Ismael Hernandez Uscanga in a sprint race for bronze.

In the men’s K4 1000m final veteran Jacob Clear was unable to defend his 
London 2012 gold medal, as he, multi-medallist Ken Wallace, Jordan Wood and 
Riley Fitzsimmons finished fourth in a fiercely contested final.

Germany grabbed its fourth gold medal in men’s kayaking of the Games, as their 
quartet finished in a time of 3:02.143, nearly three full seconds ahead of 
Slovakia, who edged out former colleagues the Czech Republic, with Australia a 
second off the medals.

At the triathlon, Beijing bronze medallist Emma Moffatt put in another 
sterling effort, following the disappointment of London 2012 where she crashed 
out during the cycling leg, finishing in sixth place overall.

Moffatt was positioned well after the swim and cycle legs but faded slightly 
on the run leg to finish 54 seconds off a medal. London bronze medallist Erin 
Densham finished 12th with debutant Ashleigh Gentle crossing in 26th position, 
with USA’s Gwen Jorgensen, defending champion Nicola Spirig of Switzerland and 
Great Britain’s Vicky Holland taking the medals.

It’s the first time since the triathlon’s introduction at Sydney 2000 that an 
Australian woman has not finished among the medals.

And at the golf, Australia’s duo of Minjee Lee and Su Oh finished seventh and 
12th overall, with former world No1, South Korea’s Inbee Park, and reigning 
world No1, New Zealand’s Lydia Ko, duking it out for gold and silver.

Ko had put herself right in contention with a blistering score of 65 during 
the third round, but it was Park who tamed nerves and difficult course 
conditions better, posting a 66 to streak away with a finishing score of 
16-under-par – five shots ahead of the New Zealander.

China’s Shanshan Feng held her nerve and bronze, with Australia’s Lee just two 
shots outside the medals.

On the track, Ryan Gregson became the first Australian man to race in a 1500m 
final in 40 years, finishing ninth after a rough and tight last few laps.

Beijing gold medallist Kenyan Asbel Kiprop was just half a second ahead of 
Gregson in sixth, with New Zealand’s Nicholas Willis grabbing a surprise 
bronze, another half second further ahead.

Defending champion, Algeria’s Taoufik Makhloufi finished with silver behind 
Matthew Centrowitz of the United States who pipped the London 2012 champion by 
0.11.
 