
Akram Aylisli, the persecuted Azerbaijani writer who was prevented from 
travelling to a literary festival in Italy last week, has said that airport 
police detained him on the “absurd” accusation of hooliganism.

Azerbaijan detains writer Akram Aylisli at airport on way to festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/30/azerbaijan-akram-aylisli-airport-incroci-di-civilta-festival>
The 78-year-old writer was a popular author in Azerbaijan until the release of 
his 2012 novella Stone Dreams. He had been due to speak at theIncroci di 
Civilta festival <http://www.incrocidicivilta.org/> in Venice on Thursday but 
was prevented from boarding his plane. Stone Dreams, which told of the 
massacres of Armenians by Azeris, provoked widespread protests in Azerbaijan 
four years ago. Aylisli’s books were burned, his title of “People’s Writer” 
revoked, and a reward was offered to anyone who cut off his ear.

In a statement released to Index on Censorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship>, Aylisli said that he had been 
stopped from travelling by border police when he arrived at Baku airport.

“My bags, which had already been checked in, were taken off the plane and 
searched. At around 9.30am I was transferred into the custody of airport police 
and falsely accused of creating a public disturbance, hindering the work of 
border guards and harassing other passengers. I was held in police custody for 
over 10 hours and interrogated,” said Aylisli.

“Later in the evening, the head of shift of the border service, an 
athletically built young man, made a new absurd accusation that I, a 
78-year-old writer in poor health and suffering from a heart condition, punched 
him in the chest with such great strength that it caused a hematoma. This 
supposedly happened in a small room with no surveillance cameras during a 
personal search … Absurdly and illogically, this alleged incident of punching a 
border guard happened well after the plane departed and was later used by the 
border service as an explanation for denying the border crossing before the 
plane had left.”

He was released from police custody at 8pm local time, after arriving at the 
airport for his flight at 4am that morning. “My foreign passport was retained 
by police and only returned on the next day,” he said.

Index on Censorship, which has just published a new short story from Aylisli 
in its latest magazine, has nowreleased part of the speech he had been due to 
make at the Venice festival 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/04/akram-aylisli-the-mind-of-the-regime-does-not-tolerate-the-individual-views-of-writers/>
. In it, Aylisli writes: “I was a hero for some and a traitor for others. I 
never for a moment felt I was a hero or traitor, just a regular writer and 
humanitarian who is able to feel the pain of others.”

“I found myself in the same position as Galileo, who never doubted the truth 
he knew and yet could not use this indisputable truth to break through the 
rusted hearts of the keepers of dogma … I was deprived of peace and prosperity 
for taking a small step in bringing people closer, people who are already 
related and bound not only by geography, but by the fate of a centuries-old 
history.”

The editor of Index on Censorship Rachael Jolley said that the magazine 
translated and published extracts from the speech because “Index felt it was 
important for the public to be able to read what he was planning to say about 
the role of the writer and the right to criticism”.

A group of international writers attending the festival, including Aleksandar 
Hemon and Catherine Chanter, also expressed their solidarity with Aylisli in a 
statement issued this weekend. “We hope our most felt solidarity may reach him 
and alleviate his situation,” said the authors, who also included Garth Risk 
Hallberg and Ann-Marie MacDonald.
 