
The Colorado Avalanche extended their winning start to the season to four 
games by beating theBoston Bruins 2-0 on Thursday, with goaltender 
Jean-Sebastien Giguere making 39 saves in his 37thNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> shutout.

Among other results, the Anaheim Ducks routed the New York Rangers to 
celebrate their home opener, theColumbus Blue Jackets kept the Buffalo Sabres 
winless and theTampa Bay Lightning put seven goals past their state rivals, the 
Florida Panthers.

The Avalanches' 4-0 start under new coach Patrick Roy is their best mark since 
the franchise relocated from Quebec for the 1995-96 season. Giguere, making his 
first start of the season, made several sparkling saves. His best came midway 
through the second period when he stopped Patrice Bergeron on a two-on-one 
rush. Ryan O'Reilly gave the Avalanche the lead in the final minute of the 
first period and Matt Duchene sealed the win with an empty-net goal in the 
closing seconds.

Anaheim's Jakob Silfverberg scored twice and Jonas Hiller made 34 saves for 
his 17th NHL shutout, as the Ducks downed theNew York Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-rangers> 6-0. Teemu Selanne and 
Mathieu Perreault assisted on both goals by linemate Silfverberg, who had the 
second two-goal game of his career. He has scored four goals in his first four 
games with the team. Dustin Penner and Daniel Winnik each added a goal and an 
assist. New York has been outscored 15-2 over its past two games.

The Carolina Hurricanes' Nathan Gerbe scored the tiebreaking goal at 6:59 of 
the third period to lift the Hurricanes to a 3-2 win over theWashington Capitals
. Anton Khudobin stopped 30 shots while Elias Lindholm and former Capitals 
forward Alexander Semin also scored for the Hurricanes. Jason Chimera and Alex 
Ovechkin had goals for the Capitals.

Columbus' Marian Gaborik had a goal and two assists in the Blue Jackets' 4-1 
victory over Buffalo. Cam Atkinson, Nick Foligno and Brandon Dubinsky also 
scored for Columbus. The Sabres have one point from five games; their worst 
start to a season since they went were winless in their first seven games of 
the 1999-2000 season.

Michael Stone scored with 4:47 left, breaking a tie and leading the Phoenix 
Coyotes to a 4-2 win over the Detroit Red Wings. Derek Morris and Antoine 
Vermette both had a goal and an assist, and Mikkel Boedker also scored for 
Phoenix. Joakim Andersson and Jonathan Ericsson scored for Detroit.

Tampa Bay's Steven Stamkos had three goals and an assist while Valtteri 
Filppula added two goals as the Lightning cruised to a 7-2 win over Florida.

Martin St Louis added a goal and an assist for the Lightning, who have won 
three in a row. Florida, who lost three of four on a season-opening road trip, 
got goals from Brad Boyes and Jonathan Huberdeau. Stamkos, second in the NHL 
with 29 goals during the abbreviated 2012-13 season, stopped a five-game 
scoring drought, dating to last season. The center completed his sixth NHL hat 
trick with a one-timer from the top of the left circle during a power play at 
12:25 of the third.

The Minnesota Wild's Matt Cooke gave the Wild the lead in the second period 
and they hung on for a 2-1 win over theWinnipeg Jets. Jonathan Bernier made 36 
saves, and Phil Kessel had a goal and two assists to lead theToronto Maple Leafs
 past the theNashville Predators 4-0. The San Jose Sharks goalie Antti Niemi 
made 25 saves, and Matt Pelech scored his first NHL goal as the Sharks improved 
to a 4-0 record by beating theVancouver Canucks 4-1. The Montreal Canadiens' 
Brendan Gallagher and Alex Galchenyuk each had a goal and an assist in a 4-1 
win over theEdmonton Oilers.
 