
The growing commercial value of car sharing operations was underlined on 
Wednesday when global hire giant Avis Budget, bought Zipcar for $500m (£307m) – 
a near 50% premium to its share value.

Zipcar, which itself acquired Britain's Streetcar less than three years ago, 
has 767,000 members, or Zipsters, who pay an annual joining fee and are then 
charged by the hour to use its vehicles.

The Zipcar business is seen by many as a "greener" alternative to traditional 
ownership models because it encourages less road use. But it is still 
struggling to turn in a full year of profits.

Avis believes it can turn green to gold. "We see car sharing as highly 
complementary to traditional car rental, with rapid growth potential and 
representing a scalable opportunity for us as a combined company," said Ronald 
Nelson, chairman and chief executive of Avis.

The world's number three car hire firm, founded in 1946 with three cars at 
Willow Run airport in Detroit, has been trying to bulk up after being overtaken 
in overall scale by Hertz and already trailing well behind Enterprise.

Avis recently lost out to Hertz, which bought Dollar Thrifty – the world's 
number four car hire company – for $2.6bn, and now says it want to speed up the 
growth of Zipcar by putting more cars in more locations.

"By combining Zipcar's expertise in on-demand mobility with Avis Budget 
Group's expertise in global fleet operations and vast global network, we will 
be able to accelerate the revolution we began in personal mobility," said Scott 
Griffith, chairman and chief executive of Zipcar.

Car sharing originates in Europe and Zipcar was founded 12 years ago in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, specifically to take the concept to the US.

It has become popular in cities as individual cars are kept in residential 
streets, outside workplaces or on student campuses, and many believe it is 
cheaper than owning your own vehicle.

Car sharing clubs give members a smartcard which they use to open the car, 
eliminating the need to go to an office to collect and return keys. Hertz and 
Enterprise have launched their own car sharing operations in the past few 
years, while Zipcar will become an Avis subsidiary and have headquarters in 
Boston.

Avis anticipates that putting the two businesses together will enable it to 
extract between $50m to $70m in annual savings. The New Jersey-based firm also 
expects the acquisition will add to its adjusted earnings per share in the 
second year after it is complete.

Avis said it expected certain members of Zipcar management, including Griffith 
and president and chief operating officer Mark Norman, to help run its 
day-to-day operations. If Zipcar shareholders approve the deal worth $12.25 per 
share it is expected to complete later this spring. The boards of both 
companies – holding 32% of the shares – have already agreed to support the 
takeover.

In Zipcar's most recent quarter net income reached $4.3m while revenues were 
up to $78m – but much of the profit came from the sale of vehicle emission 
credits in the US.

Griffith said in November that the business, which saw membership grow by 18% 
in the third quarter, was on track for 2012 to be Zipcar's "first full year of 
profitability".

In recent weeks Zipcar has acquired or completed the integration of two of 
Europe's largest competitors, Austria's Carsharing and Barcelona-based Avancar, 
as well as launching the new Zipvan service in Los Angeles and Philadelphia.

When Zipcar bought Streetcar in April 2010 it paid $50m, of which almost a 
third went to Andrew Valentine and Brett Akker, two university friends who had 
established the business.

Avis said it was also on track with its expected financial results for the 
current year. The company has forecast earnings of $2.35 to $2.45 per share on 
revenue of $7.3bn. Analysts are expecting earnings per share of $2.42 on the 
same revenue.
 