
As an atheist Ayn Rand <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ayn-rand> did not 
approve of shrines but the hushed, air-conditioned headquarters which bears her 
name acts as a secular version. Her walnut desk occupies a position of honour. 
She smiles from a gallery of black and white photos, young in some, old in 
others. A bronze bust, larger than life, tilts her head upward, jaw clenched, 
expression resolute.

The Ayn Rand Institute in Irvine, California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, venerates the late 
philosopher as a prophet of unfettered capitalism who showed America the way. A 
decade ago it struggled to have its voice heard. Today its message booms all 
the way to Washington DC.

It was a transformation which counted Paul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/paul-ryan>, chairman of the House budget 
committee, as a devotee. He gave Rand's novel, Atlas Shrugged, as Christmas 
presents and hailed her as "the reason I got into public service".

Then, last week, he was selected as the Republican vice-presidential nominee 
and his enthusiasm seemed to evaporate. In fact, the backtracking began earlier 
this year whenRyan said as a Catholic his inspiration was not Rand's 
"objectivism" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/15/opinion/ayn-rand-wouldnt-approve-of-paul-ryan.html>
 philosophy but Thomas Aquinas'.

The flap has illustrated an acute dilemma for the institute. Once peripheral, 
it has veered close to mainstream, garnering unprecedented influence. The Tea 
Party has adopted Rand as a seer and waves placards saying "We should shrug" 
and "Going Galt", a reference to an Atlas Shrugged character named John Galt.

Prominent Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
channel Rand's arguments in promises to slash taxes and spending and to roll 
back government. But, like Ryan, many publicly renounce the controversial 
Russian emigre as a serious influence. Where, then, does that leave the 
institute, the keeper of her flame?

Given Rand's association with plutocrats – she depicted captains of industry 
as "producers" besieged by parasitic "moochers" – the headquarters are 
unexpectedly modest. Founded in 1985 three years after Rand's death, the 
institution moved in 2002 from Marina del Rey, west of Los Angeles, to a drab 
industrial park in Irvine, 90 minutes south, largely to save money. It shares a 
nondescript two-storey building with financial services and engineering 
companies.

There is little hint of Galt, the character who symbolises the power and glory 
of the human mind, in the bland corporate furnishings. But the quotations and 
excerpts adorning the walls echo a mission which drove Rand and continues to 
inspire followers as an urgent injunction.

"The demonstration of a new moral philosophy: the morality of rational 
self-interest."

These, said Onkar Ghate, the institute's vice-president, are relatively good 
times for Randians. "Our primary mission is to advance awareness of her ideas 
and promote her philosophy. I must say, it's going very well."

On that point, if none other, conservatives and progressives may agree. Thirty 
years after her death Rand, as a radical intellectual and political force, is 
going very well indeed. Her novel Atlas Shrugged, a 1,000 page assault on big 
government, social welfare and altruism first published in 1957, is reportedly 
selling more than 400,000 copies per year and is being made into a movie 
trilogy. Its radical author, who also penned The Fountainhead and other novels 
and essays, is the subject of a recent documentary and spate of books.

To critics who consider Rand's philosophy that "of the psychopath, a 
misanthropic fantasy of cruelty, revenge and greed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/mar/05/new-right-ayn-rand-marx>", 
her posthumous success is alarming.

Relatively little attention however has been paid to the institute which bears 
her name <http://www.aynrand.org/site/PageServer?pagename=index> and works, 
often behind the scenes, to direct her legacy and shape right-wing debate.
 Onkar Ghate, the institute's vice-president, in Irvine, California. 
Photograph: Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
"We are providing the intellectual ammunition," said Ghate, 42. "We are 
helping the Tea Party and others to understand what is going on in America, and 
to understand what the alternatives are. This is an exciting time. A tremendous 
opportunity."

Intellectuals and policymakers largely scorned or ignored Rand in the 1950s. 
In the 1960s she was discovered by university students drawn to her radicalism 
and emphasis on self-reliance. Ayn, they learned, rhymed with mine. Her books 
became best-sellers and filtered down to high schools.

However, politicians continued to shun her economic and social libertarianism. 
Democrats resented her attacks on government activism. Republicans chafed at 
her attacks on Christianity, the Vietnam war and Ronald Reagan, whom she 
considered a medieval throwback for mixing religion and politics.

A decade ago, said Ghate, the institute struggled for attention. "We were 
knocking on doors and people were not answering." In the aftermath of 9/11 that 
began to change. Rand had warned of "Islamist totalitarianism" after the 1979 
Iranian embassy crisis, a warning which seemed prescient to the 
neo-conservatives who cheered the Bush administration's wars in Afghanistan and 
Iraq.

The institute, in fact, turned against the wars on the grounds attempted 
nation-building and democracy-spreading were "misguided altruism" which did not 
advance US interests. This iconoclastic critique from the right did not change 
US policy but gained the keepers of Rand's flame respect and credibility, said 
Ghate, a Canadian of German and Indian parentage with a PhD in philosophy.

With annual revenue of around $8m and 40 staff the institute burrowed deeper 
into national consciousness, running an undergraduate degree course, sending 
hundreds of thousands of Rand's books to schools and drawing 20,000 entrants to 
essay contests with $10,000 prizes. (Last year's entries surged to 29,000.)

And then, in February 2009, came Rick Santelli's televised rant against the 
Obama administration's mortgage bailout plan, a tirade which endorsed Rand and 
galvanised scattered anti-government protests into the Tea Party movement. The 
institute took off along with it.
 Ayn Rand testified against 'pro-Russian' Hollywood films. Photograph: Leonard 
McCombe/Time Life Pictures 
"There is no formal relationship between us and the Tea Party but we view them 
as a good phenomenon, a healthy reaction on the part of Americans," said Ghate. 
Tea Partyers were not the backward dimwits caricatured in the media. "They read 
and explore ideas. And they think America is headed in the wrong direction. 
This is a market for us."

The institute supplied intellectual rigour in the form of speakers, 
commentators and publications to the Tea Party's legitimate "emotional 
response", said Ghate, whose office has portraits of Rand and Aristotle.

"Obama is taking us further away from capitalism: look at the controls over 
the financial system, or Obamacare. Instead of freeing the economy he is 
distorting the market."

He rejected the mainstream view that lax financial regulation fuelled the 
economic crisis and blamed excessive regulation and spending. This message has 
found echo in Paul Ryan, a Tea Party favourite who as the senior Republican on 
the House budget committee proposes sweeping cuts which could be enacted under 
a Romney administration.

"His budget proposals are better than what anyone else is proposing but I 
don't think they're good," said Ghate, who wished Ryan would go even further to 
end the "legalised theft" that is the social welfare system. "Taking money from 
someone who has earned it and giving it someone who hasn't."

A trickier problem for both sides is Ayn Rand's vocal support for abortion 
rights and hostility to religion – she considered faith in God a psychological 
disorder.

Liberal foes, said Ghate, tried to use that as wedge between the institute and 
Tea Party social conservatives. Some in the movement recoiled upon discovering 
Rand's Godlessness, he said, but the de facto alliance would survive. "The Tea 
Party has tried to keep its focus on economic issues. The Republicans and 
Democrats pander more to religion."

Rather than assail Ryan as a sellout who had abandoned Rand the institute's 
vice-president struck a conciliatory tone. "It's tempting for any politician to 
backtrack. His enthusiasm [for Rand] might be a bit more muted than before … 
but he is still influenced by her."

The institute, said Jennifer Burns <http://www.jenniferburns.org/>, author of 
Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American Right, was proving more 
pragmatic than its late prophet.

"It has evolved very rapidly in the past 10 years and has made efforts to 
become part of the broader dialogue. It recognises, as Ayn Rand did not, that 
if you don't compromise you limit yourself to a very limited audience."

In the same vein politicians like Ryan shunned her electorally toxic strands. 
"In her pure form she'll never be that powerful. Her most successful followers 
are those who have taken her ideas and blended them with others."
 