
Prosecutors are to examine new evidence unearthed by the official inquiry into 
thepolice shooting of Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>, the Guardian has learned.

Forensic and ballistic tests suggest several bullets hit Rodney as he was 
falling down, appearing to contradict the police marksman's account that he 
continued to fire because the suspect remained upright and posed a threat. 
Other evidence commissioned by the inquiry identifies alleged errors in 
decisions made by senior officers.

Azelle Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> was killed in 
Edgware, north London, in April 2005 after police forced a car he was 
travelling in to stop. The official inquiry into his death was delayed because 
police did not want to reveal the intercept evidence that led them to believe 
he and others were planning an armed robbery.

The inquiry has commissioned a new ballistic report and expert evidence, which 
call into question the official explanation of why Rodney was shot six times.

The officer who shot Rodney, known only as E7, said he opened fire without 
warning because the suspect made movements consistent with reaching for a gun. 
The officer told the inquiry he continued to fire because Rodney remained 
upright and showed no obvious effect from the shots.

Tests commissioned by the inquiry say Rodney could not have been upright. The 
first shot to hit Rodney, which was in the arm, was not fatal. The next five 
bullet wounds were all determined to have had a "steeply downwards" trajectory, 
according to Anthony Miller, a ballistics expert who has worked for the Met's 
forensic firearms unit.

Thus when the fatal bullets were fired Rodney was falling and then slumped 
horizontally as a result of earlier shots, and not upright, according to the 
opinion of experts commissioned by the inquiry. The second shot to strike him 
was in the back, the inquiry heard, the next two around the right ear, and the 
final two to the top of his head. In law, each shot has to be justified.

Other new expert testimony commissioned by the inquiry highlights alleged 
failings in the Met's planning and tactics, which meant an earlier chance to 
arrest Rodney was missed.

Oral evidence in the public inquiry finished this month, and the report from 
the chair, Sir Christopher Holland, is expected early next year.

The authorities had claimed that an inquiry into the death could not be held 
in public because some of the material was too sensitive, plunging the family 
into a seven-year battle just to get a hearing.

Firearms officers were briefed by their bosses that the suspects were armed, 
possibly with automatic weapons able to fire 1,000 bullets a minute. Weapons 
were recovered from the vehicle, but not a machine gun.

A senior lawyer from the Crown Prosecution Service is to examine the new 
material. It is much more questioning of the police than an original 
investigation into the shooting conducted by the IndependentPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission. The CPS lawyer 
has experience in health and safety law, corporate negligence cases and 
prosecuting the police.

One possibility is the Met being prosecuted for allowing armed suspects they 
deemed dangerous to travel for several miles acrossLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> when they could have been arrested much 
earlier. This would almost certainly be under health and safety legislation and 
be similar to the conviction the Met received for blunders in the Jean Charles 
de Menezes case. He was an innocent man mistaken by officers for a suicide 
bomber in July 2005, whom police pinned down and shot in the head.

Rodney's family alleged at the inquiry that E7 was trigger-happy, based in 
part on his career history. He killed two suspects in a previous incident, and 
shot and injured two others. He has also shot and killed a dangerous dog. In 
his evidence, E7 said he had been commended in another incident for showing 
restraint and not firing when faced by a suspect who started to point a weapon 
at him.

Informed sources believe that a murder prosecution of the firearms officer is 
unlikely. The law and its interpretation means the officer is unlikely to be 
successfully convicted just for having a mistaken perception that the suspect 
was about to open fire, as long as it cannot be disproved that he had an 
honestly held belief.

E7 was in an unmarked car that pulled up alongside the VW Golf with Rodney 
sitting in the back seat. The officer opened fire six-hundredths of a second 
after the car he was in stopped, firing off eight shots in just over a second. 
Two missed Rodney.

The dead man's family fought plans for an inquest to be held with secret 
evidence that would have been withheld from them and their lawyers.

The inquiry resumes next month with closing arguments.
 