
Scotland Yard has announced it will support a legal challenge by one of its 
firearms officers attempting to overturn an official ruling that he unlawfully 
shot and killed a suspect.

The challenge follows a finding by an inquiry that the police marksman, known 
as E7, had no lawful justification for shootingAzelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>.

Rodney was killed in Edgware, north London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, in April 2005 after police forced a 
car he was travelling in to stop. He was hit by six bullets. Officer E7 fired 
eight shots in total, in just over a second.

On Tuesday, the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> commissioner, Sir Bernard 
Hogan-Howe, said the force would back an attempt by E7 to seek a judicial 
review of the findings.

The report by Sir Christopher Holland in July was devastating for the Met and 
its elite firearms unit. Prosecutors are reviewing new evidence dug up by the 
inquiry that contradicted E7's account of why he opened fire and kept firing.

Hogan-Howe, Britain's most senior police officer, said he would back the 
marksman who has now retired. The commissioner said: "I believe it necessary to 
test that [the ruling] in judicial review."

He said E7 and the Met wanted to challenge the way the conclusions were 
reached and Holland's findings. Hogan-Howe said the force did not support all 
of E7's objections, but would broadly support him.

Forensic and ballistic tests suggest several bullets hit Rodney as he was 
falling down, appearing to contradict the marksman's account that he continued 
to fire because the suspect remained upright and posed a threat.

The report by Holland followed months of hearings and found:

• E7's accounts of what he saw are "not to be accepted".

• E7's claim that he fired fearing Rodney would pick up a gun and was about to 
fire was untrue. The inquiry added: "He could not rationally have believed 
that."

• That it was "not proportionate" for the officer to open fire with a lethal 
weapon.

• The report said even if E7 had held a mistaken belief that Rodney had an 
automatic weapon "there would have been no basis for firing the fatal fifth to 
eight shots". Those struck him in the head.

Rodney, 24, was not holding a weapon when shot, although weapons were later 
recovered from the car. Officers say they had intelligence that Rodney was part 
of a gang on its way, possibly armed with automatic weapons, to attack a 
Colombian drugs gang.

Holland, a retired high court judge, said he did not find that E7 was 
deliberately lying. The marksman should not have opened fire the inquiry ruled.

The report says Rodney did not have a gun in his hand. A deactivated weapon 
found on the back seat he was sitting on had not been picked up by him.
 