
An inquiry into a police shooting in which a man was shot at close range six 
times in aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> street will this week 
see British intelligence officials questioned in public for the first time.

Azelle Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>, 24, was shot by 
an officer – identified in preceedings only as E7 – as he sat in the rear of a 
Volkswagen Golf in Edgware, north London in 2005. A public inquiry will open on 
Monday to establish the circumstances that led to his death and address 
questions from his mother, Susan Alexander, who says she still does not know 
why the officer considered her son such a risk as to shoot him dead.

It is expected to lead to recommendations that could determine the future of 
police operations that are based on long-term surveillance and the use of 
intelligence resources.

The police shooting of another man, Mark Duggan, 29, in north London triggered 
last year's riots. Inquest, a campaigning charity, also draws parallels to the 
death of Jean Charles de Menezes, 27, who was shot dead by police at Stockwell 
tube station in July 2005, also as the result of a pre‑planned police 
operation. The Rodney inquiry, expected to last eight weeks, will this week see 
two intelligence officers from HM Revenue and Customs and three from Scotland 
Yard cross-examined over the information that led to the car being intercepted 
by firearms officers. It is understood the customs intelligence officers were 
monitoring a gang importing cocaine when they picked up information about a 
planned armed robbery, which they passed to intelligence officials at Scotland 
Yard.

The officers have agreed to be questioned in public on the quality of the 
intelligence, its content and reliability, and how it led to the operation. The 
only restriction is that they must not reveal how it was obtained. They will 
speak to the court behind a screen to protect their anonymity.

Intelligence desk operatives rather than intelligence officers usually appear 
in court, and almost always in closed court – as is the case with the Special 
Immigration Appeals Commission (Siac), the most secret court within English 
law, which has the power to detain foreign terrorism suspects without trial. 
Siac's hearings and rulings are never fully revealed to the public because they 
involve testimony from members of the secret security services. The counsel to 
the inquiry, Ashley Underwood QC who has considerable experience of Siac 
hearings, told theObserver: "This is the first time actual intelligence 
officers will appear in court.

"Normally you have second-hand evidence from a desk operative; here, the 
officers will be appearing in person to be cross-examined, the raw intelligence 
itself will be open to scrutiny." The officer fired eight shots of which a 
number struck Rodney in the head. Guns were subsequently found in the car and 
the two men in the front, Wesley Lovell and Frank Graham, were jailed in 2006 
for possession of firearms and ammunition.

Previous inquiries into the shooting include one by the Independent Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission, which found no 
evidence of misconduct and by the Crown Prosecution Service, which concluded 
that there was "insufficient evidence" to offer a realistic prospect of 
convicting any officer.
 