
An official inquiry is expected to criticise the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> over the shooting dead of 
a man by an elite firearms officer.

Azelle Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> was killed in 
Edgware, north London, in April 2005 after police forced a car he was 
travelling in to stop. He was hit by a total of six bullets fired by an officer 
known as E7. Rodney, 24, was not holding a weapon when shot, although weapons 
were later recovered from the car.

Officers say they had intelligence that Rodney was part of a group of men on 
their way, possibly armed with automatic weapons, to attack a Colombian drugs 
gang, intending to rob them.

Evidence heard by the inquiry clashed with E7's account of why he opened fire. 
Forensic and ballistic tests suggest several bullets hit Rodney as he was 
falling down, appearing to contradict the police marksman's account that he 
continued to fire because the suspect remained upright and posed a threat.

Other evidence commissioned by the inquiry identifies alleged errors in 
decisions made by senior officers. Prosecutors are to examine evidence 
unearthed by the official inquiry, chaired by Sir Christopher Holland.

New expert testimony highlighted alleged failings in the Met's planning and 
tactics, which meant an earlier chance to arrest Rodney was missed. The inquiry 
also heard from two firearms experts who concluded that the police operation 
that ended in Rodney's death was marred by errors, some of which made it 
"almost inevitable" that someone would be shot. They said police could have 
arrested Rodney and others they suspected of planning an armed robbery hours 
before the confrontation.

The inquiry into Rodney's death was delayed for years because police did not 
want to reveal the intercept evidence that led them to believe he and others 
were planning an armed robbery. The authorities had claimed that an inquiry 
into the death could not be held in public because some of the material was too 
sensitive, plunging the family into a seven-year battle to get a proper hearing.

Firearms officers were briefed by their bosses that the suspects were armed, 
possibly with automatic weapons able to fire 1,000 bullets a minute. Weapons 
were recovered from the vehicle, but there were no machine guns.

A senior lawyer from the Crown Prosecution Service is to examine the new 
evidence. The lawyer has experience in health and safety law, corporate 
negligence cases and prosecuting the police.

An original investigation by the Independent Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission led the CPS to 
decide there was no criminal case for police to answer. The officer who shot 
Rodney had shot two suspects dead in his career as an elite firearms officer, 
and wounded two others. At the inquiry he denied being "trigger happy", 
insisting he fired fearing an imminent threat to the life of himself and others.
 