
A police marksman who shot dead an unarmed man six times after he was stopped 
in a car faces possible prosecution after an official inquiry found he had "no 
lawful justification" for firing the shots.

Azelle Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> was killed in 
Edgware, north London, in April 2005 after police forced the car he was 
travelling in to halt. He was hit by six bullets fired by an officer identified 
at the inquiry only as E7. The officer discharged eight shots in just over a 
second.

The report, by the retired high court judge Sir Christopher Holland, disputed 
E7's claim that he feared Rodney had picked up a gun, and said that he had no 
reason to fire the shots that killed the 24-year-old.

Officers had said they had intelligence that Rodney was part of a gang that 
was possibly armed with automatic weapons and thought to be en route to attack 
a Colombian drugs gang, with the intention of robbing them. Weapons were found 
in the car but the report found Rodney was not holding any of them.

The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
commissioner, Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, said the report was "a significant 
finding" for the force and he accepted Holland's recommendations.

In a statement issued immediately after the report was released, he said: "As 
a result of the finding that the firearms officer known to the inquiry as E7 
had no lawful justification for killing Mr Rodney, the IndependentPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission [IPCC] has 
informed the MPS [Metropolitan police service] it will refer this case to the 
Crown Prosecution Service [CPS]."

Hogan-Howe said the force could not comment further on the case in light of 
the possible prosecution. But he added: "The personal accountability of 
firearms officers is unparalleled."

While Hogan-Howe expressed sympathy to Rodney's family, the dead man's mother 
said she wanted a personal apology from the commissioner.

Susan Alexander said she did not seek to justify her son's actions on the day 
of the shooting, but that he should have been arrested, not "summarily killed".

"The police owe me an apology for the unlawful killing of my son, but they 
also owe me, and everyone who was in Hale Lane, Edgware, when police carried 
out the hard stop, an apology for the way tactics were decided that day. I 
await an apology from the commissioner himself."

Holland's conclusions are devastating for the Metropolitan police and its 
elite firearms unit. The report found:

• The officer's "accounts of what he saw are not to be accepted".

• E7's claim that he fired in fear that Rodney had picked up a gun and was 
about to fire was not credible, and "he could not rationally have believed 
that".

• It was not proportionate for the officer to "open fire with a lethal weapon".

• Even if E7 had held a mistaken belief that Rodney had an automatic weapon, 
"there would have been no basis for firing the fatal fifth to eight shots", 
which struck him in the head.

Holland said he did not find that E7 was deliberately lying, although the 
inquiry ruled the marksman should not have opened fire.

The report said Rodney did not have a gun in his hand. A deactivated weapon 
found on the back seat where he was sitting had not been picked up by him. 
Other weapons were later recovered from the car.

Evidence heard by the inquiry clashed with E7's account as to why he opened 
fire. Forensic and ballistic tests suggest several bullets hit Rodney as he was 
falling down, appearing to contradict the marksman's account that he continued 
to fire because the suspect remained upright and posed a threat.

E7's first shot lodged in a car door. A second shot, discharged 0.22 secs 
later, struck Rodney in the right arm. Holland said that from this point, the 
"threat is plainly now neutralised and shooting should be at an end".

However, 0.2 secs later shots three and four were fired. Another 0.2 secs 
afterwards, shots five and six, a "double tap" shot, struck Rodney in the right 
ear. "These could only result in fatality and did so", the report found.

Holland added that E7 "saw Azelle Rodney collapsing before he fired these 
shots and I do not accept his account that he fired these shots because he saw 
Azelle Rodney upright and apparently not affected by the earlier shots".

The report says E7 paused for 0.72 secs then fired "again well-aimed double 
tap shots into … a dead or dying man – and then after, the first and only 
pause. Obviously there is no justification."

E7's lawyers, who saw the findings a fortnight ago, dispute them. They have 
written to the inquiry saying the conclusions are irrational and they may seek 
a judicial review.

The report also criticises police for leaving Rodney's body at the scene for 
16 hours. When the family visited the scene, his blood was still visible.

Holland concludes: "I have to find that there was no lawful justification for 
shooting Azelle Rodney so as to kill him."

New expert testimony highlights alleged failings in the Met's planning and 
tactics, which meant an earlier chance to arrest Rodney was missed.

The inquiry also heard from two firearms experts who concluded that the police 
operation that ended in Rodney's death was marred by errors, some of which made 
it "almost inevitable" that someone would be shot.

The firearms experts said police could have arrested Rodney and the others 
hours before the confrontation.

The inquiry was delayed for years because police did not want to reveal the 
intercept evidence that led them to believe he and others were planning an 
armed robbery. The authorities said an inquiry could not be held in public 
because some of the material was too sensitive, plunging the family into a 
seven-year battle to get a proper hearing.

Firearms officers were briefed by their bosses that the suspects were armed, 
possibly with automatic weapons able to fire 1,000 bullets a minute. Weapons 
were recovered from the vehicle, but no machine guns.

An original investigation by the IPCC decided there was no criminal case for 
police to answer.

The officer who shot Rodney had shot two suspects dead earlier in his career 
as an elite firearms officer, and wounded two others. At the inquiry he denied 
being "trigger happy", insisting he fired fearing an imminent threat to the 
life of himself and others.
 