
The police and government's five-year attempt to keep secret evidence relating 
to a man shot dead by police is wrong, an inquiry today heard.

A police officer shot Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> six times from point blank range 
in a street in Edgware, north London, in April 2005.

Since then police and the government have said the information that led 
officers to follow Rodney, and for one to shoot him, had to be kept secret. It 
is believed to have come from electronic intercepts.

The dead man's family fought plans for an inquest into the death to be held in 
which secret evidence would be withheld from them and their lawyers. 
Consequently, there has been no inquest and the family said their right under 
article two of the European Convention on Human Rights to an independent 
inquiry into the state killing of their loved one could not be met.

Today an inquiry into the death began in London, chaired by a former high 
court judge, Sir Christopher Holland.

Counsel to the inquiry, Ashley Underwood QC, rejected the government's central 
premise that the crucial evidence covering why police opened fire would have to 
be kept secret from the family of the deceased, their legal team and the public.

"It will be my submission throughout that it will be entirely possible to hear 
this matter sufficiently in public with sufficient engagement of the family so 
as to discharge the state's article two obligations by way of this inquiry," he 
said.

The Guardian understands the evidence relates to intercepted communications, 
such as phone intercepts.

The government and police believed the laws covering this, contained in the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers act (Ripa), meant it could not be disclosed 
to an inquest or inquiry.

Holland will now decide whether to rule that the evidence can be revealed, and 
if he does so, it is expected the government will consider a legal challenge.

The Rodney case was one reason the last government tried to change the law to 
allow "secret" inquests to be held. The attempt eventually failed.

The police belief that Ripa meant they could not share material from 
intercepts with unauthorised persons also meant that officers were told by 
their bosses to give incomplete statements to an investigation into the death 
conducted by the IndependentPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Complaints Commission.

The officers are now expected to give complete statements, over five years 
after the shooting, before the inquiry resumes next year.

Rodney, from Hounslow, west London, was in a silver Golf car outside the 
Railway Tavern in Burnt Oak in April 2005 when he was confronted and shot by 
armed police six times in the face, head, neck and chest. Weapons were later 
found in the car.

The car had been under police surveillance before officers stopped the vehicle 
at about 8pm on 30 April 2005.

Two men in the front, both aged in their 20s, escaped uninjured and were later 
jailed for firearms offences.

Rodney's mother, Susan Alexander, has fought a five-year battle for answers as 
to why one officer, known only by the codename E7, believed it was necessary to 
open fire.

Her barrister Tim Owen QC said: "Susan Alexander is not a fool and she is sick 
and tired of being patronised, of being marginalised, of being treated as an 
irrelevant nuisance by what is to her a bewildering legal obstacle course with 
no apparent end.

"She simply wants to know in unsanitised, unedited form why police officer E7 
believed it was necessary to shoot her son six times at point blank range in a 
car on a busy London street."

The Crown Prosecution Service later decided that no officer should face 
criminal charges.

The public inquiry was announced in March after an inquest stalled in 2007 
over the Metropolitan police's refusal to disclose secret evidence to the 
coroner.

Today's ruling by the inquiry chair saying evidence the government wants kept 
secret can in fact be made public, and other legal arguments, means it is not 
expected to start hearing evidence from witnesses until March next year.
 