
The mother of a suspected criminal shot dead by police said that her son was 
"executed", as the officer who killed him told an inquiry that he opened fire 
fearing his life and those of his colleagues was in imminent danger.

The opposing accounts came on Tuesday at the inquiry into the death of Azelle 
Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> who was shot six times by 
police in north London in April 2005 as he travelled in a car. Police believed 
he was part of an armed gang who were about to attempt a drugs heist.

On Tuesday night video footage of the incident recorded by one officer was 
released by the inquiry, despite the objections of the Metropolitan police.

Audio captures one officer saying "sweet as" three times, followed by what 
appear to be the dull thuds of police gunshots ringing out across a surburban 
street. The video does not capture the actual shooting.

Rodney, 24, was shot without an armed officer shouting an oral warning, the 
inquiry has been told.

The inquiry heard from Rodney's mother, Susan Alexander, who believes her son 
was "summarily killed".

In a statement during which she broke down, Alexander contrasted her son's 
death seven years ago to the fate of two other men in the car, Wesley Lovell 
and Frank Graham, who were later convicted of firearms offences. Alexander 
said: "To state the obvious they were at least able to walk away alive on 30 
April, and have long since served their prison sentences, while it seems to be 
that Azelle was executed that day and as a result never got to see his baby 
daughter."

Her barrister, Leslie Thomas, said that his client's case accepted that Rodney 
was not wholly innocent: "We do not seek to justify what Azelle was doing on 
the day he died. Nor do we seek to portray him as an angel. But he was entitled 
to be apprehended, if there was evidence he was entitled to be charged.

"He was entitled to be brought before a court of law to face a trial before a 
jury of his peers and if convicted, rightly and properly punished with the 
deprivation of his liberty.

"The fact that he was strongly suspected of being involved in criminal 
wrongdoing does not justify him or anyone else being summarily killed."

The intelligence in the Rodney case was passed to the Met by Customs. It is 
understood to have been developed through intercepts. Police believe it 
suggested that a gang would stage an armed heist against Colombian drug pushers 
on the streets of London, and steal their class A drugs.

Samantha Leek QC, barrister for the firearms officer who killed Rodney, known 
as E7, said: "He believed that Mr Rodney had picked up and was preparing to 
shoot a fully automatic weapon, and he fired at Mr Rodney until he believed 
that there was no longer a threat. He fully understands that Mr Rodney's family 
hold him responsible for Mr Rodney's death. He believed that he had no 
alternative but to fire."

The Rodney case was one of the reasons that the last Labour government and 
then the current Conservative-led coalition considered introducing so called 
"secret inquests".

An investigation by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) 
exonerated the police, and the Crown Prosecution Service decided there was no 
criminal case for police to answer.
 