
A man suspected of being part of a plot to rip off a Colombian drug gang at 
gunpoint was killed by an armed police officer who shot him six times in 
seconds without issuing an oral warning, an inquiry has heard.

The officer known only as E7 opened fire less than one second after pulling 
alongside a car carryingAzelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>, 24, who was in a rear seat.

A public inquiry chaired by a former high court judge, Sir Christopher 
Holland, began on Monday into the shooting which took place on 20 April 2005 in 
Mill Hill, north London.

Rodney's family have fought a seven-year battle for a public and full inquiry 
into his death. The authorities had previously said this would not be possible 
because the intelligence used by law enforcement came from intercepts, whose 
disclosure to lawyers and the family was claimed to be unlawful.

The police operation followed intelligence from Customs and Excise that a gang 
would stage an armed heist against Colombian drug pushers on the streets of 
London, and steal their class A drugs.

The sensitive intelligence in this case, was one of the reasons that the last 
Labour government and then the current Conservative-led coalition considered 
introducing so called "secret inquests".

The intelligence in the Rodney case was passed to the Metropolitan police, 
which decided against arresting the men before they were in possession of 
firearms because they would not have sufficient evidence to prosecute them. 
Internal police documents made public on Monday show senior officers believed 
they needed to confront the gang once they were in possession of weapons to 
best reduce the danger to the public and to officers.

The case raises several issues about police use of deadly force, including 
whether police can open fire without seeing a suspect threatening them with a 
weapon, and the role of intelligence in a firearms officer's mind when 
assessing the level of threat posed by a suspect.

An investigation by the Independent Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission exonerated the 
police, and the Crown Prosecution Service decided there was no criminal case 
for police to answer.

Opening the inquiry, Ashley Underwood QC, said officer E7 pulled alongside 
side Rodney as part of a hard stop by police, forcing the Volkswagen Golf he 
was travelling to halt as officers in three cars boxed the suspect's vehicle in.

Underwood said: "Within less than a second of the car containing the officer 
coming to a halt, he opened fire with a carbine. He fired eight shots rapidly. 
Of these, six shots hit Mr Rodney. He was killed more or less instantly."

Underwood said weapons were recovered from the silver Golf. One could not fire 
and was located under some yellow plastic on the rear seat. A pistol was 
recovered from the vehicle's rear footwell, wrapped inside a scarf inside a 
rucksack containing four rounds, and thirdly, in the same rucksack was a gun 
that looked like a key fob which contained two rounds of ammunition.

Internal police documents about the operation say it was possible the gang 
that police believed Rodney was part of might have been armed with a machine 
gun.

Tests carried out for the inquiry show that E7 had sight of Rodney for 0.88 
seconds before starting to fire.

Two men in the car were later convicted for firearms offences.

Rodney's mother, Susan Alexander, was in court to hear the evidence, with 
family members leaving briefly when gruesome photographs of the aftermath of 
the shooting were shown.

The dead man's family fought plans for an inquest into the death to be held, 
in which secret evidence would be withheld from them and their lawyers.

Underwood praised Ms Alexander's "dignity" and her "reasonable and positive 
approach" which helped the inquiry navigate complex legal obstacles to get 
started.

Underwood also praised the Met for their assistance and help in providing 
documents to explain the planning of the operation and its tactics.

Firearms officers will testify in coming weeks, as will intelligence officers. 
Their evidence will be open to the public but their identities will be 
protected.

The inquiry heard that one option considered was arresting those suspected of 
planning the heist for lesser offences. Rodney was a suspect in an earlier 
serious assault but this was not known to officers trying to stop what they 
considered was an imminent armed robbery.

The inquiry continues, and is expected to last 10 weeks.
 