
The public inquiry into the fatal shooting by Metropolitan police of Azelle 
Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/sep/03/azelle-rodney-shot-six-times>
 opened on Monday. This is the first time a public inquiry under the 2005 
Inquiries Act has been commissioned to examine a death involving police use of 
lethal force – such deaths are normally scrutinised at an inquest in front of a 
jury.

Susan Alexander, Rodney's mother, together with the other members of his 
family, have already waited more than seven years for answers to their 
questions. Rodney was shot six times at point blank range while sitting in a 
car that had been stopped by officers. After his death, the Independent Police 
Complaints Commission (IPCC) conducted an investigation and a file was passed 
to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). In July 2006 the CPS announced that 
there was "insufficient evidence" for a realistic prospect of convicting an 
over the shooting. After this decision, the family was told by the coroner that 
a full inquest could not be held because large portions of the police officers' 
statements had been crossed out, probably under the law which excludes 
information obtained by intercept from being used as evidence or even being 
seen by coroners. After years of parliamentary wrangling it wasfinally 
announced in March 2010 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.com/pa/ld200910/ldhansrd/text/100330-wms0006.htm>
 that the public inquiry would be held.

There is no dispute that deliberate and lethal force was used, but Susan 
Alexander needs to know why – as do the public. It is important that all the 
essential facts are scrutinised regardless of what they might reveal about 
Rodney's actions on that day. Ms Alexander wants to hear unsanitised and 
unedited evidence in order to know why the officer believed it was necessary to 
shoot her son six times at point blank range on a busy London street.

We hope the inquiry will provide answers to specific questions about the 
reason for the decision to make the arrests, whether the operation was planned 
and conducted so as to minimise risk of life to all concerned, whether Rodney 
could have been arrested earlier than the "hard stop" that evening – and if he 
could have been, why did this not happen?

Other fatal shootings by police have raised questions about possible 
operational and intelligence failings; we hope that this inquiry, with its 
wider remit and greater resources than is usual at an inquest, will examine 
some of these issues. These include the practice of police officers "pooling 
their recollections" and what, if any, internal investigation was conducted by 
the MetropolitanPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Service.

The inquiry is due to conclude in December with the chairman's report 
delivered to ministers early next year. In his opening statement, counsel to 
the inquiry, Ashley Underwood QC, described how the inquiry team hoped that 
they have found a solution to protect the source of sensitive evidence of 
central relevance to the question of how Rodney met his death that will enable 
the inquiry to be fully in public. There is a lot depending on this hope, as 
Alexander has lost out on the important role played by inquest juries, who act 
as a proper check and balance on the powers of state agents. It is vitally 
important that this inquiry provides robust, far-reaching scrutiny of the 
circumstances of Rodney's death and ensures those responsible are held to 
account.
 