
A police marksman has lost his high court bid to challenge a public inquiry 
finding that he used excessive force when he killed robbery suspectAzelle Rodney
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>.

The officer, known only as E7, argued the finding was "irrational and 
unsustainable".

He asked two judges for permission to seek judicial review of conclusions 
reached by the inquiry chairman, Sir Christopher Holland, that Rodney was 
unlawfully killed – a finding the officer's lawyers describe as "tantamount to 
murder".

Sir Brian Leveson, president of the Queen's bench division, sitting with Mr 
Justice Irwin at the high court inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
, ruled on Thursday, there was "no value in granting permission" and refused 
the application.

E7 shot 24-year-old Rodney in Edgware, north London, in April 2005 when 
officers stopped the car in which he was travelling with two other men.

The officer opened fire within a second of coming to a halt beside the trio's 
Golf, hitting Rodney six times, once each in the arm and back, and fatally four 
times in the head.

Samantha Leek QC, representing E7, told the high court at a hearing earlier 
this month that theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> was in possession of 
reliable intelligence that the men in the car were in possession of machine 
guns and were on their way to rob Colombian drug dealers. Firearms officers 
were tasked to intercept them.

E7's justification for firing was that he "honestly believed" Rodney had 
picked up and was preparing to use a machine gun capable of firing 1,000 rounds 
a minute.

Holland, a high court judge, rejected the claim and found in a report last 
July that E7 used excessive force.

The marksman's key ground for seeking judicial review was that it was 
irrational for Holland to find that E7 did not have an honest belief that 
Rodney had "picked up the weapon and was about to use it".

Dismissing the point as "unarguable", Leveson said: "The hurdle of proving 
that Sir Christopher reached irrational conclusions on the facts is incapable 
of being surmounted."

E7 could face a criminal trial over Rodney's death. Scotland Yard backed his 
application for judicial review.

Following a three-month public inquiry into the death, Holland found: "There 
was no lawful justification for shooting Azelle Rodney so as to kill him.

"E7's accounts of what he saw are not to be accepted. Prior to firing he did 
not believe that the man who turned out to be Azelle Rodney had picked up a gun 
and was about to use it. Further, on the basis of what he was able to see, he 
could not rationally have believed that."

Susan Alexander, Rodney's mother, has called for the Crown Prosecution Service 
to make an urgent decision on bringing criminal charges against E7.

Her solicitor Daniel Machover said she welcomed "today's clear decision by the 
high court to reject E7's legal challenge as without merit".

Machover said: "E7, who retired from the Metropolitan police service just a 
few months after killing Azelle Rodney, has used valuable court time and 
taxpayers' money on his 'unarguable' legal challenge. A line must be drawn 
under this."

Helen Shaw, co-director of campaign group Inquest, said: "We welcome this 
ruling which re-confirms the inquiry's unequivocal finding that the killing of 
Azelle Rodney was unlawful.

"The CPS must now come to a decision regarding a prosecution as a matter of 
priority – Susan Alexander cannot be expected to endure further delays in a 
legal process that has already lasted nine years."
 