
A "distinguished" police marksman is challenging a public inquiry ruling that 
he used excessive force when he killed robbery suspectAzelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>.

Lawyers for the officer, known only as E7, say the finding is "irrational and 
unsustainable".

The marksman is asking two judges at the high court in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> for permission to seek judicial review 
of conclusions reached by the inquiry chairman, former judge Sir Christopher 
Holland, that Rodney was unlawfully killed – a finding E7's lawyers described 
as "tantamount to murder".

E7 shot 24-year-old Rodney in Edgware, north London, in April 2005, when 
officers stopped the car in which the suspect was travelling with two other men.

The officer opened fire within a second of coming to a halt beside the trio's 
Golf, hitting Rodney six times in the arm, back and head.

Samantha Leek QC, representing E7, told the high court the Met was in 
possession of reliable intelligence that the men in the car were in possession 
of machine guns and were on their way to rob Colombian drug dealers. The task 
of the firearms officers was to intercept them.

E7's justification for firing was that he honestly believed Rodney had picked 
up and was preparing to fire a machine gun capable of firing 1,000 rounds per 
minute.

Holland rejected the claim and found in a report last July that E7 used 
excessive force.

Leek said: "We say it is not a logical conclusion, either on the forensic or 
eyewitness evidence, that E7 did not honestly believe there was an imminent 
threat to his colleagues' lives."

She said E7's case "has serious implications not only for E7 but also for 
firearms officers around the country".

She told Sir Brian Leveson, president of the Queen's bench division, and Mr 
Justice Irwin that such cases involved "split-second, life-or-death decisions".

Leveson replied he was not sure the case had the serious implications Leek 
suggested as "the ground rules" for police officers opening fire seemed clear.

But Leek said: "There are, in the circumstances of this case, conclusions 
which the chairman reached that will have implications for training and the way 
in which other police officers approach their task.

"This was a distinguished firearms officer three months from retirement who 
had received commendations for previous actions in which he had discharged a 
firearm."

There had been "poor analysis" of the evidence, which led to unsustainable 
conclusions by Holland, she said.

A single judge, Mr Justice Wyn Williams, has already refused E7 permission for 
a review.

E7 could face criminal trial over Rodney's death and prosecutors are 
considering whether to bring charges.

Scotland Yard has backed his application for a judicial review, which is being 
opposed by a legal team acting for Holland.

Following a three-month public inquiry into Rodney's death, Holland found: 
"There was no lawful justification for shooting Azelle Rodney so as to kill 
him. Granted that E7 had an honest belief that Azelle Rodney posed a threat to 
himself or to other officers, this threat was then not such as to make it 
reasonably necessary to shoot at him."

He went on: "E7's accounts of what he saw are not to be accepted. Prior to 
firing he did not believe that the man who turned out to be Azelle Rodney had 
picked up a gun and was about to use it. Further, on the basis of what he was 
able to see, he could not rationally have believed that."

Ashley Underwood QC is arguing on behalf of Holland that E7's legal challenge 
is "untenable", and there is evidence that contradicts every stage of his claim 
that he opened fire because he believed – because of movements he saw Rodney 
make – that his target had picked up and was preparing to shoot a firearm.
 