
The veteran firearms officer who shot and killed Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> in April 2005 denied that he was 
"trigger happy" after it emerged he had shot two men dead in the 1980s and 
injured two others while on duty.

Amid angry scenes at an inquiry into the death of Rodney the officer, known 
only as E7, said claims a gun had been planted in Rodney's car were outrageous. 
But he accepted that forensic evidence contradicted a key part of his 
justification for firing shots at a man he killed.

Rodney was struck by six bullets, fired by E7, after a car he was travelling 
in was forced by police to stop in Edgware, north London. Officers had 
intelligence that Rodney was part of a gang on its way, possibly armed with 
automatic weapons, to attack and rip off a rival drugs gang. Weapons were 
recovered from the vehicle.

Officers in unmarked cars followed the Volkswagen Golf Rodney, 24, and two 
others were in, before deciding to force it to stop. E7 was in a car that 
pulled up alongside the VW Golf with Mr Rodney sat in the back seat. E7 said 
Rodney's movements and body language, including ducking down and coming back up 
again, left him convinced he had to open fire.

He told the inquiry he believed Rodney had ducked down to grab a weapon. The 
officer said he could not wait or shout a warning because the weapon he feared 
the suspect may have could fire 18 shots in a second: "In half a second he 
could have nine rounds in the air."

E7's first shot to strike Rodney, in the arm, was not fatal. He said he 
continued to fire, as the suspect remained upright and there was no obvious 
sign the shot had had any effect. But under questioning from Leslie Thomas for 
Rodney's family, E7 accepted forensic evidence that the suspect was falling 
when shot again. Video of the shooting shows E7 firing eight shots in just over 
a second. Two missed, one almost hitting another officer.

E7 said he accepted he had to justify in law every shot he fired. Pressed on 
why he continued to fire, E7 said the suspect posed a threat because he was 
still upright.

Thomas said forensic evidence showed the shot had been fired at a downwards 
angle, meaning E7's account was not correct: "He could not have been upright 
when you fired shot number two."

E7 said his "perception" was that Rodney was upright and added: "I am prepared 
to accept, in the light of the forensics, he was falling into my shots." That 
second shot to strike the suspect was in the back, the third and fourth to the 
right ear region. The final two shots were to the top of Rodney's head.

E7 denied firing indiscriminately. In an interview with the Independent Police 
Complaints Commission he refused to answer 149 questions, but denied at the 
inquiry believing he was above the law.

E7 described as "outrageous" and "insulting" claims that E7's colleagues had 
planted a gun when it turned out the officers belief that Rodney had been 
holding a gun was mistaken.

Thomas said: "We say that the gun that was found subsequently on the back seat 
of the car was put there, removed from one of the bags in the car, it was not 
next to Mr Rodney."

"No sir it's not true," E7 replied.

E7 said he opened fire fearing the suspect had a machine gun capable of firing 
one thousand rounds a minute and that the lives of his fellow officers were in 
danger.

The mother of the dead man, Susan Alexander, interrupted E7's evidence. As the 
officer detailed the shooting he stopped and appeared to need to compose 
himself and Alexander called out: "How many lies are you going to tell?" She 
then left the inquiry chamber.

E7 was inches from Rodney when he opened fire: "His posture was one of someone 
preparing to fire a weapon," the officer said.

E7 said he did not see a weapon in Rodney's hands before opening fire but 
still believes he had one.

The inquiry heard that E7 had over two decades' experience as a firearms 
expert receiving commendations for his bravery, but he had been recommended for 
disciplinary action once for leaving his vehicle while on duty and arrested 
after a drunken fracas in a central London nightclub. He was not charged. In 
the 1980s he had shot two men dead in an operation and had wounded two other 
suspects.

The hearing continues.
 