
The mother of a man unlawfully shot dead by police says her suffering has been 
made worse by prosecutors who waited six months before beginning work on 
deciding whether criminal charges should be brought.

The Crown Prosecution Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> is studying 
evidence over the shooting dead of Azelle Rodney by a Metropolitan police 
marksman nine years ago. It follows an official inquiry finding in July 2013 
that the officer had unlawfully killed Azelle Rodney, whom he shot six times.

The marksman, known as E7, shot dead Rodney, 24, in April 2005 without warning 
when he was a passenger in a car that police were following, believing its 
three occupants were planning a serious armed crime.

The official inquiry into the death said it did not accept the officer's 
account of why he opened fire, killing Rodney with four bullets to his head. 
The dead man's mother, Susan Alexander, said the verdict meant her son had been 
"executed". The officer has retired from the police service.

The shooting happened nine years ago and Rodney's mother, Susan Alexander has 
said the delays in deciding if criminal charges should be brought are 
"intolerable".

In a letter to her, the CPS said it did not start work on considering the case 
until January 2014, some six months after the official inquiry's verdict. The 
CPS said this was because the lawyer tasked with studying the case was busy 
with other work.

Campaigners point to the fact that prosecutors on average take seven days to 
decide on charges where the case is put to them by the police.

Before the inquiry's critical findings, the CPS had decided there was 
insufficient evidence for any charges following an investigation by the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission.

The inquiry chaired by Sir Christopher Holland found new evidence and 
testimony, which challenged the police marksman's account of why he opened fire.

The CPS letter to the family stated: "As you will be aware this is a very 
substantial case with a significant quantity of third-party material in 
addition to the IPCC case file and the enquiry report. "Due to other 
professional commitments I was not properly able to commence my review of this 
case until the early part of January this year."

In a statement, the CPS added: "Death in custody cases are among the most 
complicated dealt with by the CPS as they often involve allegations of gross 
negligence manslaughter and corporate offences.

"In January the reviewing lawyer explained to the lawyer for the family that 
due to other professional commitments he was not properly able to commence his 
review of this case until the early part of January this year. He estimated 
that a decision was not likely to have been made before the end of May 2014."

"We fully recognise that the wait for a resolution can be frustrating for 
families and others concerned with the outcome, but it is very important that 
the evidence is reviewed thoroughly by prosecutors with the appropriate 
expertise. This review is underway and will be completed as soon as 
practicable."

Alexander said: "It seems as if only one reviewing lawyer is working on this 
at the CPS instead of a whole team of people. This wait is intolerable and no 
mother should have to go through this. Nine years after Azelle's untimely death 
it's plainly wrong that the CPS can simply take as long as it wants, with zero 
accountability to me or the public."

She added: "Living day to day without knowing when a decision is likely, 
causes stress and anxiety."

Seema Malhotra, the MP for Feltham and Heston, where Alexander lives, said: 
"It is also a matter of concern that Susan and her family have been waiting so 
many months for the CPS to move forward on this case especially when we know 
the average time for the CPS to provide the Met police with advice on criminal 
charges against members of the public suspected of serious crimes is less than 
seven days.

"We know this is a complex case, but it's important to now make progress so 
that the family are able to move on with their lives, and that they are kept 
informed."

The authorities had claimed that an inquiry into the death could not be held 
in public because some of the material was too sensitive, plunging the family 
into a seven-year battle to get a hearing.

Firearms officers were briefed by their bosses that the suspects including 
Rodney were armed, possibly with automatic weapons able to fire 1,000 bullets a 
minute. Weapons were recovered from the vehicle, but not a single machine gun.

Officer E7 challenged the inquiry's findings in the high court, but lost his 
case.

Explaining his decision to open fire, E7 said that, as the unmarked police car 
he was travelling in pulled alongside Rodney's vehicle, the suspect ducked down 
and came back up, leaving the marksman to fear he had a gun and was about to 
fire.

Sir Christopher Holland concluded: "He could not rationally have believed 
that," the report found, finding it was not proportionate for the officer to 
"open fire with a lethal weapon".

E7 had shot and killed two other people in the late 1980s and wounded two 
others while serving as a firearms officer. He won compensation from police 
after a senior officer joked that he was "the Met's very own serial killer" at 
a drinks function.
 