
As unbeaten runs go, Nigeria's record of 19 years without losing at home is 
impressive, yet tomorrow it will come under severe pressure as Cameroon travel 
to Lagos for the African Nations Cup final.

Algeria, in a World Cup qualifier in 1981, were the last side to beat the 
Super Eagles in the Surulere Stadium and the size of Cameroon's task was 
illustrated when Nigeria swept aside the tournament favourites South Africa 2-0 
in Thursday's semi-final.

Nigeria's players are already claiming to be Africa's best and have been 
lauded as such by the defeated South Africans. Yet Cameroon can at least claim 
that history is on their side.

Twice in the 1980s Cameroon beat Nigeria in the final of the Nations Cup, 3-1 
in 1984 and 1-0 four years later. The teams have not met in a competitive match 
since Nigeria's 2-0 win in the third-place play-off in 1992.

Should Cameroon upset the odds and take the lead then Nigeria's volatile 
supporters could turn on their team yet. Though Cameroon's coach Pierre 
Lechantre would welcome such an outcome, he was concerned yesterday to take the 
heat out of the potentially explosive clash.

"I want it to be limited to a match of soccer," Lechantre said. "It should be 
a confrontation between players and no more. There is tension between the two 
countries and if it reaches the limit of a soccer match I might get worried."

Like Cameroon, Nigeria are seeking a third African title, having won the cup 
at the Surulere Stadium in 1980 and in Tunisia in 1994. They are rightful 
favourites having come through a tough group ahead of Morocco and Tunisia, and 
coming from behind to beat Senegal in the quarter-final.

Their players have certainly decided that any victory would be justified. "You 
can't dispute the fact that we've got better-quality players and the best team 
in Africa," said the midfielder Mutiu Adepoju.

"If people say we have the best team in Africa then we accept, and it's true 
anyway," said Tijani Babangida after scoring both goals in the semi-final. 
"This victory and others we've achieved in this tournament show we can beat any 
team."

It was a view shared by the South Africans, the defender Pierre Issa declaring 
Nigeria "truly African champions in every respect".

But Nigeria's captain Sunday Oliseh was concerned about premature elation. "I 
don't know about our being African champions right now," he said. "We'll see 
after the final against Cameroon."

• South Africa's coach Trott Moloto is expected to lose his job once his 
contract expires at the end of the African Nations Cup following their defeat 
in the semi-final. The president of the South African FA Molefi Oliphant said a 
decision would be taken after South Africa's third-place play-off match against 
Tunisia tomorrow.

Nigeria  (probable):Sharunmu; Babayaro, Okpara, Iyenemi, West; George, 
Adepoju, Babangida, Oliseh; Kanu, Ndukwe.

Cameroon  (probable): Alioum; Song, Njanka, Kalla, Olembe; Foé, Wome, Mayer, 
Njitap; Mboma, Eto'o.
 