
Tijani Babangida scored two spectacular first-half goals in Lagos yesterday to 
steer Nigeria into the final of the African Nations Cup with a 2-0 victory over 
South Africa.

They will meet Cameroon, who beat Tunisia 3-0 in Accra with two goals from the 
Cagliari striker Patrick Mboma, in the final in Lagos on Sunday.

Urged on by a jubilant crowd at the Surulere Stadium, Nigeria took the lead 
after only 40 seconds, added a second in the 34th minute and resisted sec 
ond-half pressure from the 1996 African champions to move a big step closer to 
a third title of their own.

Nigeria's greater desire was decisive, said their coach Jo Bonfrere. "When one 
team has 11 players that will do anything to win and the other has seven or 
eight it is obvious who will win," the Dutchman said. "We created more chances 
and took them."

Babangida got the Super Eagles off to a perfect start with a first-minute 
strike that delighted the 42,000 crowd.

When South Africa's Thamo Mngomeni lost possession near the halfway line on 
the right, a long corridor opened up in front of the Ajax winger. He ran a long 
way towards the edge of the area, then cut in from the left and unleashed a 
superb right-footed shot from 20 yards.

South Africa's rearguard, so impressive in the quarter-final triumph over 
Ghana, suddenly looked harried and unsteady.

In the 16th minute Andre Arendse had to make a brave block at the feet of 
Chukwu Ndukwe from an incisive pass from Babangida. But Bafana Bafana had no 
answer in the 34th-minute when Babangida completed a glorious Nigerian passing 
move with a first-time shot at the far post.

"Those early goals really changed the match," said Nigeria's captain Sunday 
Oliseh. "Things became easier for us and South Africa had a mountain to climb."

Nigeria, unbeaten in the African Nations Cup since 1992, slowed the game down 
and lost some of their impetus, but remained a threat on the counter-attack.

Finidi George had two chances to finish the South Africans off in the second 
half, but he shaved the crossbar with his first and messed up his second after 
a penetrative run from Julius Aghahowa.

As South Africa's cup hopes slipped away, Siyabonga Nomvete looked to emulate 
Babangida with a determined run down the left, but Ike Sharunmu held on to his 
shot at the second attempt.
 