
If Sir Alan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> ever felt 
the urge to shoot a Horatio Alger story, charting the hero's journey from 
working-class upstart to establishment lion, then the rough draft is sitting 
right under his nose.

The protagonist starts out as a chippy young hooligan, purple-faced beneath a 
pageboy haircut. He winds up white-haired and well-upholstered, a pillar of 
whatever passes for the British film industry these days. To misquote John 
Huston in Chinatown: "Politicians, whores and Alan Parker. They all get 
respectable if they stick around long enough."

Parker has directed some decent, clamorous pictures (Bugsy Malone, Mississippi 
Burning, The Commitments) and some dodgy, clamorous pictures (Evita, Midnight 
Express, Angela's Ashes). He is a knight of the realm and a former chairman of 
the now defunct UK Film Council.

And yet the CV tells us only half the story. Because Parker, in his pomp, was 
a vandal, an agitator, a necessary evil. On balance I think I love him more for 
what he tore down than what he built in its place; for what he represents as 
opposed to what he achieved.

The director burst on to the scene in the late 1970s, the closest thing the 
industry had to a punk-rock gobshite, even if his aesthetic was ultimately more 
Sham 69 than Sex Pistols.

He came trailing what he has referred to as "an impure past" as a 
council-estate kid, shut out of the traditional Oxbridge/BBC route, who learned 
his craft in advertising instead.

Parker hated pretty much everything: critics, the British Film Institute and 
Merchant-Ivory movies, which he dismissed as "the Laura Ashley school of 
film-making". He wanted to gatecrash the system and do things differently. 
Against the odds, his dreams came true.

Who cares if the Alan Parker story ended up generating more heat than light? 
Today, perhaps more than ever, he stands as an inspiration for every ambitious 
young British film-maker of limited means. He is an object lesson in how 
bullish self-confidence and a loud voice can overturn applecarts and shatter 
glass ceilings. For that, and that alone, he deserves whatever award Bafta 
cares to throw his way.
 