
The cobbled streets of old Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>, have been tarmacked in 
preparation for the European Grand Prix, the latest ploy the country’s rulers 
hope will distract from their corruption.

As symbolism goes, the Formula One race through Baku is pretty blunt: the 
Aliyevs, made rich from oil and gas, flatten the city in preparation for an 
influx of petrolheads and celebrities, including Pharrell Williams, Enrique 
Iglesias and Chris Brown, who will sing for the race crowds. TheSport for Rights
 <https://www.facebook.com/sport4rights/> campaign, of which I am a member, 
believes superstars such as Lewis Hamilton and Williams should speak out, not 
be complicit in the propaganda that attempts to gloss over human-rights abuses.

In spite of the recent release of renowned journalist Khadija Ismayilova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/investigative-journalist-khadija-ismayilova-freed-azerbaijan-radio-free-europe>
, Azerbaijan’s prisons are populated by dissenters and activists, 
awkward-shaped cobbles that could upset the smooth running of the autocrats’ 
propaganda machine.

Opposition politician Ilgar Mammadov has been in jail for more than three 
years, imprisoned because President Aliyev saw him as a political threat. 
Mammadov had the temerity to want to stand against Aliyev in 2013’s 
presidential election. He found himself convicted on a ludicrous charge of 
inciting riots. The Council of Europe has demanded that Azerbaijan comply with 
the European Court of Human Rights judgment in Mammadov’s case by releasing him 
immediately.

Youth activist Ilkin Rustemzade has also been jailed for more than three 
years, in connection with a series of pro-democracy protests held in 2013. 
Journalist Seymur Hezi has been in prison for a year and a half, on the old 
Soviet catch-all charge of “hooliganism”. The list goes on.

Meanwhile, criminal investigations have been launched against Meydan TV, which 
provides rare critical news coverage of Azerbaijan, with 15 journalists 
specifically named. No one believes the case is anything but political.

In the past year, the manat, the local currency, has been devalued twice. As 
oil and gas prices collapse worldwide, Azerbaijanis find themselves twice as 
poor as they were. Protests have erupted across 12 regions in the country. 
People struggle to keep up with repayments to the bank, or even to eat. No 
matter: on to the next spectacle. After the abysmal failure of the inaugural 
European Games held in Baku in 2015 (so poorly received that not a single 
country has stepped forward to host the next tournament), Ilham Aliyev 
continues his attempts to “sportswash” his corruption, most recently revealed 
in thePanama papers <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, 
with a grand prix.

It was as a response to this “sportswashing” tactic that we Azerbaijani 
human-rights defenders set up the Sport for Rights campaign. If Aliyev wants to 
use international sporting events to polish his image, then we’ll use the same 
events to draw attention to the many who are jailed for speaking out. Just last 
month, two young activists found themselves imprisoned on absurd charges. On 10 
May, Bayram Mammadov and Giyas Ibrahim were arrested after they decided to mark 
Flowers Day, a national celebration, by graffiting a statue of former president 
Heydar Aliyev, Ilham’s father, with the words “Fuck the system” and “Happy 
Slave Day!”. (A pun. In Azeri, “gul” means “flower”, “qul” means “slave”). As 
so often happens with Azerbaijani activists, they were arrested not for their 
dissent, but on fake criminal charges, in this case drug possession. Laughably, 
the authorities claimed that a search of their homes revealed two kilograms of 
heroin.

In custody, the two were whipped on the soles of their feet and tortured 
“Saddam Hussein style”, as one fellow activist put it. Their injuries were 
confirmed by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. Mammadov and Ibrahim 
will, of course, be locked up for the duration of the grand prix.

But even in prison, they, and dozens like them, will appreciate the irony 
after the race, when Pharrell Williams takes the stage to sing his hit Freedom: 
“Who cares what they see? Who cares what they know?” Indeed. And who cares for 
the Azerbaijanis languishing in prison for daring to sing for democracy?

Emin Huseynov is an Azerbaijani journalist and human-rights activist
 