
Balfour Beatty has three main aims in cutting carbon – helping customers cut 
their emissions, reducing its own footprint, and winning new work.

This approach has led to a number of important firsts, including the first 
zero-carbon school in the US, and using nearly half a million recycled car 
tyres to build a major UK road.

The construction group aims to cut its own greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 
2020. More than 30 businesses – employing 50,000 people globally – report on 
their direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions.

It is using a range of measures to hit this target. It has joined the WWF's 
One in Five campaign to reduce business air travel by 20% over five years. It 
uses energy efficient site accommodation, construction equipment and plants, 
green building certification on its estate and fuel efficient vehicle 
monitoring software.

Balfour Beatty's energy forum is also exploring commercial low-carbon 
opportunities in offshore wind generation, carbon capture and storage, waste 
from energy facilities and nuclear power, and in developing the transmission 
network.

Carbon efficient technology is helping the group's customers cut emissions 
too, from high-speed rail projects in Italy to street, road and school schemes 
across the world.

For example, use of a new technology that automatically dims Coventry's street 
lights at off-peak times, will cut energy use by 38% over five years, saving 
900 tonnes of carbon and £700,000 in costs.

The group's civil engineers, calculating that 60-80% of the A421's carbon 
footprint was down to building materials, pioneered the first major use of old 
car tyres for lightweight structural fill. Using 400,000 recycled tyres, plus 
375,000 tonnes of power station ash and 60% recycled aggregates, saved 50,000 
tonnes of carbon.

Meanwhile, the first zero-carbon school in Texas will generate all its own 
energy from non-fossil fuel sources – such as geothermal heating and cooling, 
solar panels and wind turbines – with surplus electricity sold back to the grid.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 