Thrill rating 5/10 
Danger rating 3/10

Fitness rating 3/10

In a nutshell ...

"It's a thrilling, magic flight, with a beautiful picture below, pure elegance 
in the sky," says poetic pilot Eric Appollodorus. "It's not all about height 
either - when you are just 3 metres off the ground, skimming the trees can be 
very excting." Accompanied, very often, by an oh-so-decadent glass of 
champagne, you can reach heights of 1,200 metres, travelling at a racy 10mph 
over the stunning landscape below (on a clear day in Kent, for example, you can 
see the coast of France).

What's the buzz?

"For the pilot, the journey is about planning and engineering the flight, then 
landing and feeling like you've achieved something, having meandered through 
the trees and safely over rivers," says Appollodorous. More and more balloon 
operators, such as Go-Ballooning, offer a pilot taster lesson or a course of 
lessons to help you secure a private pilot's licence.

Thrill a minute?

Ballooning at great heights is surprisingly peaceful - apart from those big 
burners, of course, unleashed every 20 seconds with a gassy roar to keep you up 
in the air (you soon get used to the sound).

Adrenaline peak

To get off the ground, the pilot arranges for propane tanks to be connected to 
the burners, then he turns the valve on to create a huge flame with which to 
get the balloon airborne. At night, this display can be especially spectacular 
- particularly if you are part of a multi-balloon launch, such as at one of 
Britain's big balloon fiestas.

Where to do it

The people at Irish Balloon Flights are adamant that, on a clear day, Ireland 
is the most beautiful place to balloon. They fly in a range of locations in 
Northern Ireland and the Republic from April to September, offering flights for 
groups of 12 or smaller, customised trips for families and couples (1,000 
metres in the air is, after all, a fine place to propose).

Other especially popular ballooning spots include (of course) the Lake 
District (High Adventure Ballooning flies there from April to October). And 
Adventure Balloons operates throughout London and the Home Counties, heading 
for the dreamy spires of Oxford and Winchester.

Who can do it

Kids really should be tall enough to see outside the balloon (ie probably at 
least 10 years old), although Irish Balloon Flights takes passengers aged seven 
and up.

What to take

Whatever the temperature down here, it's distinctly colder up there, so bring 
clothing reinforcements. Binoculars are great for spying on the little people 
below.

Typical prices 

One flight might cost anything from £145 to £185 per passenger (€240 in 
Ireland). Make sure there's champagne thrown in!

Impress your pals 

The very first cross-Channel flight was made in 1785 by French inventor Jean 
Pierre Blanchard and American Dr John Jeffries. They flew from Dover to Calais 
in a hot-air balloon of Blanchard's design. The Frenchman also initiated the 
first successful parachute jump that year - placing a dog in a basket attached 
to a parachute and dropping it from said balloon.

YouTube searchwords 'flying my balloon one morning'

Good links

balloons.ie <http://www.balloons.ie>

hotair.co.uk <http://www.hotair.co.uk>

high-adventure.co.uk <http://www.high-adventure.co.uk>

adventureballoons.co.uk <http://www.adventureballoons.co.uk>

goballooning.co.uk <http://www.goballooning.co.uk>
 