
The late British historian Tony Judt once delivered an emphatic case for 
making the railways a moral example for British society. He wrote: "The 
railways were and remain the necessary and natural accompaniment to the 
emergence of civil society. They are a collective project for individual 
benefit. They cannot exist without common accord (and, in recent times, common 
expenditure), and by design they offer a practical benefit to individual and 
collectivity alike."

If last week didn't see the return to public ownership that Judt hankered for, 
it at least saw Network Rail take a stand that puts UK plc to shame and should 
be replicated in every boardroom across the country.

The owner of Britain's railtracks, signals and stations said that it will 
restrain executive pay by cutting the maximum bonus award from 160% of salary 
to 20%. While Network Rail is ultimately government controlled, in recent years 
it has behaved like a private business unfettered by public opinion, or a moral 
compass, on pay – announcing awards of £2.25m for top-level management in 2010, 
for instance.

But as of last week, that has changed. Announcing the cuts, Network Rail's 
chairman, Richard Parry-Jones, used an argument whose simplicity should be 
heard alongside Judt. "We are confident that the unique challenge of having the 
executive responsibility to decide how to most effectively run Britain's 
railway infrastructure is a huge motivation in itself for the kind of leaders 
that we need."

Or in other words, accept being paid a decent executive salary for doing your 
job properly – particularly one that has a public service element like running 
the rail network or, say, lending to small businesses around the UK.

The inevitable juxtaposition comes with the banking industry, which continues 
to behave with the belief that it operates outside social and ethical norms. 
This was rammed home last week ina letter to the Financial Times  
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/74c31a78-cbc0-11e3-8ccf-00144feabdc0.html#axzz30aVMX4kO>
from Robert Pickering, who used to run Cazenove – the blue-chip City merchant 
bank that is now JP Morgan Cazenove. Pickering wrote that he was "regularly 
held up at gunpoint" by employees who demanded higher pay, in the form of 
bonuses, to prevent them being lured elsewhere.

This was alluded to last month by the boss of Barclays, Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, when he warned that 
Barclays had to pay bonuses worth £2.4bn last year – despite a 32% fall in 
profits – in order to avoid a "death spiral" at its investment bank division. 
Last week, of course, the head of Barclays's US investment bank quit anyway and 
senior colleagues are following suit.

In the FT, Pickering wrote: "In the febrile days of 2000, my predecessor was 
told that the very survival of our 200-year-old firm was dependent on the 
continued employment of a twentysomething individual who had been in the 
industry for about 18 months. We offered him a partnership but he left anyway. 
A few years later I reminded my senior management team of this incident and 
none of us, myself included, could remember his name."

Front and bluster. Compare the logic of those nameless bankers with the 
arguments of Judt or Parry-Jones, which are underpinned with a sense of 
responsibility that goes beyond self-interest and dissembling. Banks need to 
not only understand this argument, but start believing it and amend pay 
accordingly. It is not disingenuous to invert Judt's words and say that banks 
are a necessary accompaniment to the emergence and maintenance of civil society 
– businesses need lending and advice offered on a transparent basis – and that 
they offer a practical benefit to individual and collectivity alike. If banks 
believe that, and take pride in that, changes to pay should follow. And 
behaviour will be transformed, too. Find that common accord, Mr Jenkins.

King ducks out as supermarket price war looms

Justin King will present his final set of annual results on Wednesday after a 
decade at Sainsbury's helm. Few would describe his tenure as anything other 
than successful, considering the basket-case he inherited, and profits are 
expected to be up from £756m to around £780m.

Like-for-like sales advanced every quarter under his leadership until the last 
one, when the revolution currently under way in the grocery business – 
shoppers' sudden switch to convenience stores, online services and discounters 
like Aldi – finally caught up with him. King's successor, Mike Coupe, is now 
facing what all supermarket bosses most fear – a full-scale price war.

The King years had their challenges, but they were also a decade of benign 
pricing. All that is now changing. Last week Morrisons, which has pledged to 
slash prices by £1bn over the next three years – an action which will halve the 
group's profits and was described by one leading City analyst as "the big 
bazooka" – unveiled its first £300m of reductions. The price of 1,200 branded 
and own label goods will be cut by an average of 17%. To be honest, many of 
those cuts will only bring Morrisons prices down to the levels of their main 
rivals. But there will be much more to follow because Morrisons is in real 
trouble. It suffered a 3% fall in like-for-like sales last year, and when it 
unveils new trading numbers on Thursday some retail experts believe that 
decline could have advanced to more than 5%.

Sainsbury is next week expected to outline plans to cut back its planned 
capital expenditure by about £200m, which would provide a useful kitty for its 
own price cuts.

The known unknown though, is Tesco. The UK's biggest, but struggling, retailer 
has so far chosen to focus on rather marginal activities to bring back its 
customers – new bakeries, Giraffe restaurants, Hudl computers.

But the fear – among rivals and shareholders, if not shoppers – is that chief 
executive Phil Clarke will eventually bring out the heavy ordnance. Make no 
mistake, Tesco may be ailing, but Clarke could yet blow its rivals out of the 
water. And there will come a time when Tesco cannot stand by any longer and 
watch its shoppers walk away.

Wisdom before the event at Co-op

Sir Christopher Kelly's report into what went wrong at the Co‑operative Bank 
is worth a read, if only for its curious asides.

One is a suggestion that the Bank of England's Andrew Bailey – then a top City 
regulator – made to the Co-op Bank when it was trying to buy 631 LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group branches. Bailey told the 
bank board that it was not clear that the deal "was within [the bank's] grasp".

"He presented an opinion that [the bank] would be better off targeting an 
alliance with a player such as Rabobank if it was serious such about pursuing 
such a major acquisition," Kelly wrote.

How different things might have been. Rabobank, set up in the Netherlands in 
the early 20th century to finance farmers, bills itself as a co-operative bank.

Another report into the Co-op is due this week: Lord Myners's report into 
governance reforms. No doubt it too will contain more hidden gems.
 