
For wonks who obsess about the inner workings of the Bank of England’s 
monetary policy committee,soon to meet eight times a year instead of monthly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/11/mark-carney-bank-of-england-change>
, this counts as a droll joke: “It is good to see the MPC taking direct action 
to address the UK’s productivity puzzle!” observed Samuel Tombs of thinktank 
Capital Economics.

Yes, indeed, too many unproductive meetings are the bane of many people’s 
working lives. As it happens, Tombs doubts that there is any merit in meeting 
less often. It’s a point of view, but the justification given in the review by 
Kevin Warsh, former US Federal Reserve official, seems solid: “Rarely would a 
single four-week period be sufficient to change economic assessments.”

Quite. Less time watching every flicker in the economic data sounds a better 
use of time. Eight meetings a year is how the US Fed operates already, and how 
the European Central Bank will from next year.

Tombs’ bigger worry is that the market could be overwhelmed by information 
under a new regime that will end the “drip feed” of data. Minutes of MPC 
meetings will be published simultaneously with policy decisions; thus, on four 
days a year, the markets will be bombarded with the Bank’s quarterly Inflation 
Report, a rate decision and the MPC minutes.

True, it’s a lot. But, the argument for the new arrangement again looks sound: 
it makes it easier for the Bank to communicate its thinking. Indeed, the 
current two-week delay between a rate decision, and the minutes that explain 
the decision, looks to belong to a gentler era. The justification, apparently, 
was that a fortnight was required for preparation, scrutiny and approval of the 
minutes. Too leisurely. If the job can be done in 24 hours, do it. Life is 
cleaner that way. One suspects markets will be able to handle the flood of 
data: processing information quickly is what they do.

Transcripts of MPC will follow with an eight-year lag. That’s a small blow for 
transparency, and a reasonable fudge between full disclosure and encouragement 
of robust debate.

In another reform, the Court of the Bank – the governing body – will become a 
so-called unitary board, with executives and non-executive working together 
like a board of a public company. That is long overdue. Accountability, at 
least in theory, works better when governor is not set up to be a benign 
dictator.

Finally, the minutes of the Court’s meetings from 2007-09 will be published, 
albeit in “appropriately redacted” form, in January. The Treasury select 
committee has been arguing for this for ages, rightly. How much real challenge 
was there to then-governor Lord King? It remains a topic of fierce debate. By 
way of a bonus, we may also learn how much members of the court really knew 
about collateralised debt obligations and all other exotic derivatives. If 
there are red faces, so be it.

As a package of reforms to boost transparency and accountability, it looks 
sensible.

Grexit redux

Greek prime minister Antonis Samaras’ gamble is looking more dangerous by the 
day. The local stock market has now fallen almost 20% since Monday when he 
called a snap presidential election. Greek three-year debt now yields 10%. In 
London, the talk is of “Grexit,” or Greece’s exit from the euro, being a real 
possibility next year.

The Grexit theory runs like this: Samaras will fail to get his candidate for 
head of state, former EU commissioner Stavros Dimas, elected. In the general 
election that would follow, the anti-austerity Syriza party will win on a 
platform of negotiating a further debt write-off. Furious eurozone powerhouses, 
especially Germany, will refuse to play ball. Default and exit from the euro 
will be on the agenda, if Syriza turns out not be less radical than its 
reputation.

That plotline is clearly not inevitable. Dimas might crawl over the line in 
the critical presidential vote on 29 December. But the worrying thought for 
some observers is that Samaras may have judged that the best way to deal with 
Syriza is to let it take office and let it fail for six months. The idea may 
make sense in terms of narrow Greek politics; but it would guarantee a fresh 
eurozone crisis in the new year.

Boots on the ground

You’ve got hand it to Stefano Pessina, master of negotiation. Having agreed to 
merge Alliance Boots with US firm Walgreens, the 73 year-old will be top man 
once again. Pessina will be interim chief executive, not just head of strategy. 
Since he owns almost 20% of the combined group, he’s a natural pick. But the 
deal is starting to look like a reverse takeover byAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>, the smaller company. 
Aside from Pessina himself, Boots operatives will lead all four divisions. For 
this, Walgreens paid a premium.
 