
As arrivals go, it was pretty spectacular. The eight-seater plane flew low 
over water so clear we could easily make out the sandy seabed. Fifteen minutes 
later we touched down next to the "airport", a mint green shed with a partition 
dividing arrivals and departures. We crossed the village by jeep before 
boarding a motor boat that whisked us across the wide expanse of a lagoon, then 
headed into the shallows of a mangrove swamp, disturbing flocks of frigate 
birds. From the mangroves we emerged onto the open sea, rounded a headland and 
there it was: a mile-long stretch of gorgeous, empty white beach.

North Beach. A simple name for a simple resort in an extraordinarily beautiful 
location on the tip of the little-visited island of Barbuda. Apart from five 
bungalows we could see nothing but sand, sea, sky and palm trees.

Relative remoteness (it's 30 miles north of Antigua, the larger of two islands 
which make up this country), a tiny population, and rules forbidding foreign 
ownership of land mean Barbuda is a rare thing indeed: gobsmackingly 
picturesque yet utterly unspoilt. Apart from two exclusive hotels which are so 
expensive they are not promoted by mainstream tour operators, there's just a 
handful of privately-owned cottages, mostly in Codrington, the only town on the 
island. There's little money to be made from just a few hundred tourists, so 
unlike almost every other island in the Caribbean, Barbuda is free of discos, 
water sports centres, markets selling tat, and day-trip operators. The only 
business I spotted, a bike hire place, was closed, and lack of passing trade 
means bars and restaurants tend to open only if you phone ahead. This all adds 
up to a friendly, sleepy, uncommercial island, where life seems pretty close to 
the cheesy local slogan – "too blessed to be stressed".

No one exemplifies the pace of life here better than Reuben James, the 
Barbudan owner of North Beach, who in 28 years has built just five bungalows. 
James has had offers from several foreign companies to buy and develop the 
resort but has no intention of selling this little patch of paradise.
 Isabel and son with the eight-seater plane that took them from Antigua to 
Barbuda. Photograph: Rory Brogan 
In addition to the bungalows, there is a dining room – though that's too grand 
a word for the simple, concrete-floored hut where all meals are served – and 
that is it. There is no pool, bar or spa; there's no activity centre, no shop, 
no internet. Beyond the bath-like calm of the turquoise shallows, waves break 
on the reef, sending up plumes of white spray, their distant roar providing the 
only soundtrack.

Once you jump off the boat at North Beach you are marooned – in the best 
possible way. Being a neurotic city-dweller I'd worried that I'd be bored by 
the end of day one. But the laid-back vibe infected me almost immediately; it 
seeped into my bones, and slowed my mind. The trainers I packed, thinking I'd 
go for runs along the beach, remained in my suitcase unused. I tried doing yoga 
but gave up after a few feeble stretches. Attempting any kind of exercise here 
seemed faintly ridiculous. North Beach doesn't so much scream "relax!" as 
whisper it repeatedly in your ear until you're hypnotised into doing nothing, 
forced into a catatonic state of relaxation.

My boyfriend, our two-year old son and I spent hours lost in very simple 
pleasures: collecting the conch shells that litter the sand, swimming, and 
inspecting animal prints in the sand. Thirty metres or so out to sea, rays, 
lobsters and hundreds of little tropical fish were waiting to be discovered 
along the reef. Barbuda is almost entirely surrounded by reefs, providing 
swimmable shallows in shades of blue I thought only existed in brochures, and, 
in the past, treacherous territory for passing ships. According to a map at 
North Beach, 120 vessels were wrecked on the island between 1813 and 1927.

No such danger lay in wait for us as we kayaked close to the shore, admiring 
the view of our stilted white bungalow from the water. More adventurous guests 
can kayak to the nearby bird sanctuary but we hitched a ride in Reuben's launch 
instead. Barbuda may not attract many tourists but it's a major destination in 
the avian world: the island's bird sanctuary is one of the most important 
breeding sites in the world for the magnificent frigate bird. An estimated 
5,000 come every year, their two-metre wingspans and forked tails forming 
slightly sinister silhouettes against the brilliant blue sky. We were there 
during the mating season, when males puff up their red throats like balloons to 
attract a mate. Reuben cut the engine and we drifted past the mangroves, so 
close I could see the black flecks on the inflated throats and the fluff of the 
babies' heads poking out of nests.

Even outside the sanctuary, wildlife was a constant presence. At night I lay 
awake listening to the screechy chatter of bats and the tip-tapping of geckos 
on the roof of our bungalow. At sunrise the cool sand was crisscrossed with 
tracks of birds, hermit crabs and the small deer that roam the island. One 
morning there were new tracks in the sand. A batch of turtles had hatched and 
been drawn to the light of the kitchen rather than the water's edge. We found 
others – one hidden in a conch shell, another that had to be prised from 
between two planks of wood with tweezers. The turtle season runs from 
June-October, so we were particularly lucky to see these late-hatchers in 
January. We transferred them to a trough of sea water before releasing them 
into the sea, where the waves swept them back on to the sand until they found 
the strength to power themselves out into the ocean.

Aside from the obvious natural attractions, there are a few places of interest 
in North Beach, so Reuben took us on a tour of the island. From Codrington we 
headed north on one of the island's two paved roads, passing more donkeys and 
goats than houses. The first stop was Highland House which is thought to have 
been occupied in the mid 1700s by one William Byam, who leased Barbuda from 
William Codrington, one of the Caribbean's wealthiest sugar plantation owners.

There is barely anything left of the original five dwellings and no word on 
the significance of the place or the undoubtedly grim stories behind it. 
Barbuda was used to provide supplies – including slaves – to plantations on 
Antigua. It's not so much that this dark chapter in the history of the island 
has been glossed over, more that it's disappearing altogether. "We are losing 
our history," said Reuben.
 North Beach owner Reuben James prepares a coconut. Photograph: Vanessa Hall 
We headed back to Codrington, stopping at the only street stall in town to buy 
jerk chicken and rice, which we ate at the island's Martello tower, a former 
lookout post on the opposite coast which, unlike Highland House, is still 
intact. We clambered around the tower but as with everywhere else on the island 
the beach is a constant and distracting backdrop. I was lured away from the 
tower by a wooden sign pointing to yet another stretch of unspoilt sand and the 
(sadly closed) Pink Sand Beach Bar.

Back in Codrington I popped into the depot in Madison Square which could 
hardly be more different from its Manhattan namesake, and got chatting to the 
owner, Kelcina Burton-George, whose dad owns Uncle Roddy's restaurant, a 
perfect Caribbean beach bar and restaurant just along the coast from the 
now-derelict K-Club, the hotel that put Barbuda on the map by hosting Princess 
Diana.

Apart from the depot, Codrington has one or two sparsely stocked shops. 
Barbuda once grew and even exported melons and peanuts, as well as sugar, 
cotton and ginger. These days the only exports are lobster and sand; all other 
provisions are imported on the twice-weekly cargo boat, which explains the high 
cost of everything, and why at North Beach food is, if not scarce, not exactly 
plentiful. The only other guests staying there complained about the lack of 
choice at dinner, the lack of fresh fruit, the paper towel "napkins", and the 
fact that their room wasn't cleaned daily. Reuben promised to address their 
concerns. In the meantime, a stay here is not for those who expect any frills.

The luxury of North Beach is its location. We had the beach to ourselves for 
days – along with every other beach we visited, from the famous eight miles of 
pink sand to the more rugged, driftwood strewn one at Two Foot Bay. The other 
luxury is lobster, lots of it. We ate it five times – barbecued, in salads, 
grilled … washed down with Wadadli beers, or gin and tonics that were only 
slightly less potent than Reuben's "special, not-for-the-fainthearted" rum 
punch with lime, grenadine, angostura bitters and a sprinkling of nutmeg.

We spent our last day of the holiday on Antigua, eating a late breakfast close 
to a huge Sandals resort. Jet skis zoomed across the bay, a line of buoys 
preventing people from swimming out and being decapitated. There was also a 
bizarre, cartoon-like contraption which shot riders up into the air on water 
jets so they hovered in mid-air. It made me pine for the simplicity and beauty 
of North Beach, and brought home all the more vividly exactly what an 
extraordinary place it is.
 