
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> most senior banker in 
the US is to leave, triggering fears of an exodus of staff as the business 
prepares for another restructuring of its controversial investment banking arm.

Skip McGee – who received £8.8m of shares in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/18/barclays-bank-pays-top-managers-shares-bonuses>
 – was the most senior banker remaining from Barclays' takeover of the Wall 
Street operations of Lehman Brothers when the latter collapsed in September 
2008.

McGee took the top job in the US only 12 months ago, following a reshuffle in 
the wake of the Libor-rigging scandal that led to the departure of the bank's 
boss, Bob Diamond, and the eventual departure of the previous global investment 
banking boss, Rich Ricci. McGee is regarded as the last individual who was part 
of the team responsible for the growth of the US arm of the investment bank 
after the 2008 crisis.

The announcement of McGee's immediate departure comes a week before the bank's 
embattled chief executive,Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, is due to unveil a fresh 
strategy for the investment bank in an attempt to head off criticism over low 
returns for shareholders and big bonuses for bankers.

Jenkins has been forced to defend the pay packets of the investment bankers 
after raising the bonus pot by 10% during 2013, when profits fell by 32% and 
shareholders were asked to back a £5.8bn cash-call.

Appointed in the wake of Diamond's departure after the Libor scandal, Jenkins 
has been under pressure to rein in the investment bank but he justified the 
bonus increases by saying the bank faced a "death spiral" if bankers carried 
out their threats to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/05/barclays-jenkins-defends-bonus-payouts>
.

At the annual shareholder meeting last week, Jenkins said the bank was going 
to become "simpler, much more balanced, and much more focused" – words taken to 
mean the investment bank would be subjected to sweeping job cuts as part of 
next week's overhaul.

Jenkins told the bank's shareholders a week ago that his review on 8 May would 
examine four areas: regulatory changes, organising the group to make cost 
savings, focusing on sustainable returns and achieving the "right shape and 
size of the investment bank". McGee said he was looking forward to his next 
challenge: "After 21 years with Lehman Brothers and Barclays, I have made the 
difficult decision to leave.Banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> is a team sport, and I am 
incredibly proud of the team we assembled here."

One of the reasons cited by the bank for last year's bonus rises was a 
doubling in the rate of departures in the investment bank, particularly in the 
US, following an attempt to clamp down on bonuses after the Libor crisis. The 
two co-heads of the US treasury bond desk left and many of their colleagues had 
threatened to leave, too.McGee's successor was named as Joe Gold, head of 
client capital management, whose role will not be as senior, as he will not 
have a seat on Jenkins' executive management board. He starts his new role on 
Thursday.

The bank said Gold was being appointed as it prepared to make the changes 
required by new US rules – known as Dodd-Frank – that in effect require banks 
to ringfence their investment banking activities across the Atlantic in a 
holding company. Jenkins said Gold had been selected because he understood "the 
rapidly changing regulatory landscape" and would help to improve returns for 
shareholders in the "evolving market environment".

McGee is said to have resigned because of the complexities associated with 
complying with the Dodd-Frank rules, which would require a focus over the next 
two years on relations with regulators, compliance and legal issues.

His pay deals have only been disclosed by Barclays once – in March this year – 
because of his promotion to the executive committee. Information about any pay 
in shares to the members of this committee must be disclosed.

Jenkins said "he will leave us with the good wishes of colleagues here".

Shifting bonuses


February 2013

Antony Jenkins, boss of Barclays (below), unveils his new strategy for the 
bank: "There will be no going back to the old ways of doing things … We never 
want to be in a position again of rewarding people for activity that's 
inconsistent with our values."

March 2014

Jenkins defends increasing bonuses by 10% after a 32% fall in profits. "I have 
made it clear to my colleagues in the investment bank that I see this as a 
one-year re-basing. If we continue to see a decline in profits in the 
investment bank, they should not expect the same treatment this year." Staff 
could start to leave: "You get into something of a death spiral. Your brand 
deteriorates and you can move very quickly from being a first-tier player to 
one in the second or third tier if you don't protect the franchise."
 