
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> is cutting 19,000 jobs 
in a radical overhaul of its business, including a dramatic scaling back of its 
investment bank that the chief executive said would avoid a rerun of last 
year's rows over bonuses.

Antony Jenkins said there would be no repeat of his decision to increase 
bonuses by 10% when profits had fallen sharply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/11/barclays-hikes-bonuses-profits-slide>
, as he set out his strategy to partly unravel the work of his predecessor Bob 
Diamond who had aimed to run a major investment bank.

"What I did last year was a one time initiative ... I do not expect to repeat 
that", said Jenkins, who had faced criticism for defending the bonus rises as 
necessary to avoid a "death spiral" of top bankers leaving.

Jenkins would not say how many fewer staff would receive £1m – after 481 
received more than that last year – as a result of the scaling back of the 
investment banking arm. Until recently known as Barclays Capital, the arm was 
built up by Diamond before he quit following the 2012 Libor rigging scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
.

More than half of the 19,000 job cuts will fall in the UK and Jenkins said the 
coming months would be "challenging for colleagues" as the jobs were shed and a 
separate division – dubbed a "bad bank" – created to hold unwanted parts of the 
investment bank and operations in continental Europe together worth £115bn.

The shares were the biggest risers in the FTSE 100 jumping almost 8% despite 
concerns from analysts that the bank would lose revenue as a result of the cuts 
in its investment banking division, traditionally the group's powerhouse that 
generates more than 50% of the profits.

The investment bank is to lose 7,000 jobs from a workforce of about 24,000 as 
it shifts away from its traditional area of expertise in fixed income, 
currencies and commodities (FICC) and move towards advising customers and 
equities.

The 19,000 jobs going over the next three years include 12,000 cuts announced 
in February that were earmarked for this year. This year's total is now being 
raised to 14,000 as 2,000 jobs will go in the investment bank. That leaves 
5,000 investment bankers facing redundancy by 2016. At least 4,000 of the 
19,000 jobs have already gone.

Jenkins described the newly merged retail and corporate bank as the new 
"powerhouse" for Barclays, to shift the focus from the investment bank. Higher 
bonuses had been paid last year to those Barclays wanted to keep, Jenkins said, 
referring to a "bench" of top staff to run the shrunken investment bank. "The 
bench is protected … It is secure, it's deep and talented."

A number of investment bankers have left, including the American Skip McGee 
who joined when Barclays bought the Wall Street operations of Lehman Brothers 
after it went bankrupt in 2008. Jenkins said this was "generational change".

Regulatory demands that the bank hold more capital and a structural change in 
the FICC operations, were cited by Barclays for the changes to the investment 
bank. Jenkins said he intended to reduce the proportion of the bank's assets 
used for investment banking from 50% to 30% by 2016.

While much of the focus was on the investment bank, unions expressed concerned 
about the impact on the high street bank, where there are expectations that 
Barclays will close more branches as technological advances reduce the need for 
staff.

"The bank needs to recognise their tireless work to put customers first while 
jobs have been lost, and give reassurances over their futures," said Dominic 
Hook, a Unite national officer.

The "bad bank", which will include the high street operations in continental 
Europe which employ almost 6,000, was described by Ian Gordon, an analyst at 
Investec, as "presentational nonsense". Sandy Chen, an analyst at Cenkos, said 
he was concerned about the "uncertainties involved with the next two to three 
years of hacking back the brambles… and the income-generating capacity of the 
severely pruned investment bank that will emerge".

Jenkins – who has set himself the target of making Barclays the "go to" bank – 
said the cuts would cost another £800m on top of the existing £2.7bn already 
announced to turn around the group.

Jenkins said the whole global banking arena was changing because of regulatory 
moves and he was embarking on a "bold simplification of Barclays".

"We will be a focused international bank, operating only in areas where we 
have capability, scale and competitive advantage," he said.

With the last British bank with ambitions to be a global investment bank 
stepping back, chancellor George Osborne told the BBC the job cuts were 
"regrettable".

"Part of our long-term economic plan is having British banks that aren't 
bailed out by the taxpayer, but instead support the British economy, lend to 
small businesses, and lend to families," Osborne said.
 