
Little wonder that Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, the boss of Barclays, 
declared his "deep disappointment" and "frustration" at the latest allegations 
of wrongdoing facing the troubled bank.

Evoking memories of the Libor scandal – which, coincidentally, hit the bank 
exactly two years ago – New York attorney general Eric Schneiderman published 
chats betweenBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> staff 
appearing to show disrespect to their customers using its "dark pools" (more of 
which later). Schneiderman duly accused the bank of fraud and gave Jenkins 20 
days to respond.

If the allegations prove to be true it is a disaster for Jenkins. It is 
because of him that anyone entering the cavernous foyer of Barclays's Canary 
Wharf headquarters needs to watch their step – one false move can lead to a 
painful collision with one of the five huge perspex blocks positioned across 
the hall, each emblazoned with one of the values he recites at every 
opportunity: respect, integrity, service, excellence and stewardship.

As it was, Jenkins – dubbed St Antony in some quarters of the City for his 
management talk about culture and values – was already struggling to improve 
the reputation of the bank.

When Barclays was slapped with a £290m fine for rigging Libor, the lid was 
raised on the unsavoury culture inside the high-street bank's investment 
banking arm. It was this scandal that led to Jenkins being promoted from 
running the retail bank to the top job, replacing Bob Diamond (who has since 
reinvented himself as an investor in African banking). Jenkins's promise was to 
win back the support of politicians, the public and customers for the bank. And 
get better returns for shareholders.

On New Year's Eve he appeared to be winning his reputational battle. 
Guest-editing theToday programme, Jenkins won the public endorsement of the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby. But in the early weeks of 2014, it all 
began to unravel. A row over pay and Jenkins's warning that the bank faced a 
"death spiral" unless some large bonuses were paid was then followed by a 
decision to dramatically scale down the investment bank. The logic appeared 
confused.

And then came another regulatory setback. One of its former traders was banned 
for rigging the gold price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/23/barclays-fined-26m-gold-fix-failings>
 – on the very same day that Barclays was being hit with the Libor fine.

On that matter, Jenkins, to a certain extent, could breathe easy. It happened 
before his watch. A "legacy issue". But that is why this latest scandal is such 
a major headache. The New York attorney general's complaints run up to the 
present day. Schneiderman says Barclays's dark pool – a private trading 
platform that allows investors to remain anonymous until they have completed 
trades – was used to favour high-frequency traders, who trade at tremendous 
speed to take advantage of tiny changes in the price of shares.

"Barclays grew its dark pool by telling investors they were diving into safe 
waters. According to the lawsuit, Barclays's dark pool was full of predators – 
there at Barclays's invitation," is how the AG puts it.

The allegations – while still not proven – are also hindering Jenkins's pledge 
to bolster returns to shareholders, who had to back a £5.8bn cash call last 
year: one which some feel might not have been needed if the decision to scale 
down the investment bank had been taken sooner. The shares are languishing and 
on Thursday, the day after Schneiderman spoke, Barclays's stock market value 
went down by £2.4bn. Scaling down the investment bank earlier might also have 
avoided the row in the spring over bonuses – which were up more 30% despite a 
10% drop in profits.

So, two years after the Libor scandal, Jenkins risks being back at square one 
in his battle to win the public's confidence if Schneiderman proves his case. 
The chief executive has set the bank a target to be more trusted than not in 
surveys by 2018. At this rate, Barclays risks being deeper into the untrusted 
category in those all-important surveys.

A true smart watch would make the kids tidy their rooms


Google hopes to have the watches with touchscreens unveiled at its developer 
conference last week on our wrists this summer. They are a little easier to 
wear than the computer-aided spectacles it is still tinkering with, and 
enthusiasts will no doubt put the hi-tech timepieces on their wish lists.

The average consumer will be harder to persuade. Thanks to the smartphone, 
many of us have given up wearing watches, so how will Google get us to strap 
them on again? What are the life-enhancing functions that will compel us to pay 
for these new playthings?

Google has clearly given these questions some thought. To make the format 
accessible, the watches are operated by voice or swipes – typing on a screen 
not much bigger than a postage stamp being rather impractical. The watch will 
not replace the smartphone but it will tune into it, using apps already loaded 
onto the phone.

But watches are not the right place to pore over densely packed web pages or 
browse through apps. Instead, Google will use them as a platform to serve up 
prompts. Live scores from Wimbledon or your favourite football team. Nearby 
restaurants with tables that can be booked at the touch of a button. A map with 
an alternative route to work if the roads are congested.

Some of the uses suggested to developers last week verged on creepy. The Eat24 
app knows that you normally order a pizza on a Friday. Come supper time, it 
will serve up a page with the menu of your favourite takeaway, which you can 
tap to order.

None of this information has to be consciously supplied by the user. Google 
builds a profile by reading our emails and text messages, logging our searches, 
checking our calendars and mapping our movements. How many will consider these 
prompts worth surrendering so much privacy for? Now, if smart watches could 
remind children to tidy their rooms, or tell spouses when to take the bins out, 
with smartphones disabled until the task is complete, Google might just have a 
killer app.

Few crying for Argentina in US


Argentina has cash in the bank, but maybe not for much longer. US hedge funds 
that bought its debt for a song a few years ago aredemanding that 100 cents on 
the dollar be repaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/18/supreme-court-orders-vulture-investors-repaid-argentina>
. They have run to the US courts to enforce their claim – to the dismay of 
Argentinians – and won. Now the clock is ticking. From Monday, there are 30 
days to resolve the dispute, or a deal signed with 92% of creditors, who 
accepted losses several years ago, is void. The hedge funds, described by debt 
campaigners as vultures, will be in prime position to call in the $1.6bn owed. 
Other debtors, seeing this victory, will no doubt want the same.

A deal is likely. Without one, Buenos Aires will default again – which would 
set back years of progress and lockArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> out of the global financial 
markets. The US government needs to set some clear rules to guide the courts 
and put the interests of the majority first – but there are no votes in 
Washington in rescuing leftist South American countries.
 