
Barclays' chief executive, Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, was under renewed 
pressure on Tuesday night to devise a clear strategy for Barclays after its 
investment banking division reported an almost 50% fall in profits in the first 
three months of the year.

The revenues nose-dive at the division built up under Jenkins' predecessor Bob 
Diamond triggered a 5% fall in Barclays' share price before Thursday's 
publication of a strategy review.

Jenkins, named as Diamond's replacement in the wake of the 2012 Libor rigging 
scandal, is reportedly considering pulling out of loss-making high street 
operations in continental Europe, scaling back the bond trading division and 
setting up a noncore division. Jobs are likely to be under threat.

The first quarter trading updating showed that pre-tax profit at the 
investment banking division – the traditional powerhouse of the bank – fell by 
49% to £668m largely because of a downturn in the part of the business that 
trades commodities, bonds and currencies. That performance dragged the total 
group's profits down by 5% to £1.7bn, despite a 20% rise in the high street 
bank.

The retail arm did not take a new provision for payment protection insurance – 
which has dented profits in the past – although there was a spike in claims in 
March.

Sandy Chen, analyst at Cenkos Securities, said: "Barclays' management 
challenge is this: the investment bank generated 37% of group income in the 
first quarter, but it accounted for 42% of operating expenses. The investment 
bank reported a 75% cost-income ratio in the first quarter versus 63%[the same 
time a year ago], and a 46% compensation: income ratio – even amongst 
investment banking peers,Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>
 is carrying a higher cost structure."

Jenkins was criticised for the bank's policies at last month's annual general 
meeting, particularly after he defended a decision to increase bonuses in 2013 
even though profits fell. He warned the bank risked a "death spiral" of staff 
leaving without the higher bonuses.

He said his strategy review "will address issues underlying the performance 
challenges we have recently experienced, including positioning the investment 
bank for the new operating and regulatory environment".

Barclays' new finance director, Tushar Morzaria, would not elaborate on the 
strategy review before Thursday's announcement but said plans already under way 
to pull out of businessessuch as commodities trading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/21/barclays-sells-commodities-trading-unit>
 had already reduced revenue.

The investment bank's pay bill fell 20% to £1.1bn in the first quarter but 
rose as a percentage of income owing to falling revenues.

Morzaria said pay had fallen less than income because bonuses for previous 
years were included in the figures. He said Barclays was getting a grip on 
investment bankers' pay in the current financial year.

"Our fixed compensation was down 8% year on year in the investment bank. It 
gives you a sense of how we are managing our cost base there."

Morzaria said Barclays had made 450 directors and managing directors redundant 
in the first quarter. He added that cuts at the business "may or may not have 
prompted some people to move on" but that the investment bank still had a 
strong "bench" of top bankers.

The investment bank – known as Barclays Capital until recently – had 
traditionally focused on the bond markets but after taking over the Wall Street 
operations of Lehman Brothers following the latter's collapse in 2008 had 
expanded rapidly into other areas of investment banking such as advising on 
mergers and acquisitions and equities.

Last week, Skip McGee, the most senior banker left from the Lehman takeover, 
quit the bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/29/barclays-most-senior-banker-us-to-leave-skip-mcgee>
. Its head of mergers and acquisitions, Paul Parker, is also reported to have 
departed.

The bond market area is now under pressure because of reduced volatility in 
the markets and demands from regulators for banks to hold more capital against 
these businesses, reducing the profitability.

The bank said cost reductions helped most of its businesses increase their 
profits "with the principal exception of the investment bank".

Its outlook statement indicated cutting costs of the business – a potential 
indication of job cuts – was likely to continue. "We continue to be cautious 
about the trading environment in which we operate and as a consequence we 
remain focused on structurally reducing the cost base in order to improve 
returns," the bank said.
 