
Real Betis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> stopped 
Barcelona's club record unbeaten run at 28 matches with a 3-1 victory in the 
Copa del Rey but the Spanish champions still reached the semi-finals after 
winning 6-3 on aggregate.

Jorge Molina scored twice within seven minutes of the start of the return leg 
at the Benito Villamarin Stadium. Betis managed to keepLionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> and Xavi Hernandez from 
linking until the 38th minute when the Argentina forward held off two defenders 
to gather Xavi's pass and slip a shot through the goalkeeper Casto Espinosa's 
legs. It was Messi's 32nd goal of the season in all competitions.

Messi failed to make it 33 after firing a penalty over the bar in the 54th 
minute and Arturo "Arzu" Garcia re-established the two-goal lead after 
volleying a poor clearance past theBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> goalkeeper, José Manuel Pinto.

The second division leaders avenged a heavy defeat at the Camp Nou where 
Barcelona had suffered their last defeat – a 2-0 league loss to Hércules on 11 
September.

Almeria await Barcelona in the final four after beating Deportivo La Coruna 
3-2 away to reach the semi-finals for the first time.Almeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/almeria> won 4-2 on aggregate. The last 
time the two clubs played Barcelona scored a record 8-0 victory in November 
with Messi scoring a hat-trick.

While Barcelona the coach, Pep Guardiola, fielded many regulars despite the 
5-0 first-leg lead, Betis took the game to the champions. Molina gave the hosts 
a perfect start after slipping behind the defence to turn home a free-kick 
inside the near post. Ezequiel Calvente's through-ball found Molina alone 
inside the area and the Betis striker poked the ball past Pinto for 2-0. Molina 
nearly had a third in the 15th minute but Gerard Piqué took the ball off his 
toes.

While Betis smoothly strung together their attacks, Barcelona struggled to 
unlock the hosts' defence until Messi struck. But another Barcelona defensive 
error allowed Betis to re-establish their lead as Diego Milito, given the 
starting nod after deciding to stay with the Catalan club, headed into the path 
of Arzu.

Messi missed his penalty after Iriney Santos da Silva handled inside the area, 
and Betis were unlucky in the 67th minute when Nacho Perez's swirling drive hit 
the post with Pinto beaten.

In Coruna, Miguel Angel "Corona" Garcia latched on to Michel Macedo's pass to 
fire Almeria into a 19th-minute lead at El Riazor Stadium. A minute later, 
Albert Crusat made it 2-0 when his shot took a deflection and went over the 
goalkeeper Manuel Fernandez.

Pablo Alverez scored a penalty in the 43rd minute after Crusat was booked for 
handling, and Deportivo equalised through Adrian Lopez's powerful header in the 
52nd. But Rubén Pérez was harshly booked for handling two minutes later and 
Henok Goitom's ensuing penalty gave Almeria a third goal.

Real Madrid hold a 3-1 lead heading for Atletico Madrid today, with the 
winners meeting defending champions Sevilla after they eliminated Villarreal.
 