
"I don't suppose you know the dates of the Chechnyan close season?" asks the 
Sky Sports <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> managing director, 
Barney Francis, only half in jest, as he ponders whether he might be able to 
tempt Ruud Gullit back from Grozny for a few punditry slots.

It is an altogether happier dilemma than the one he faced during a wild week 
in January. Then, he was at the centre of a media maelstrom that spiralled from 
off-colour, off-camera comments about a female linesman into a furious row 
about sexism in sport that ended in the departure of the broadcaster's two 
biggest names.

More than that, it came as Sky Sports was gearing up to celebrate 20 years 
during which all agree it has changed the face of sport and the way we watch 
it. That backslapping exercise was rather undermined by the fact thatRichard 
Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray – those 
self-confessed "boorish and bullish guys" – personified that success.

Looking back now, from the third floor of an expensive new Sky Sports studio 
complex that towers over the tatty sprawl of warehouses that have housed it to 
date, Francis is happy with the way he handled the issue.

"For us, we had a problem and we had to deal with it and crack on. The 
football season wasn't going to wait," says Francis, giving his side of the 
story for the first time. He says it was "a tough time" and "no one enjoyed the 
week less than I did."

It was said that on his appointment Francis had tried to challenge the laddish 
culture that existed at Sky Sports, particularly within the football department 
and most insidiously around Keys and Gray.

"That's giving me far too much credit. If you stand in the pub with a group of 
football fans and a group of cricket fans, the football fans are going to be 
more boisterous," he says.

"The football department is naturally a more boisterous area. But once it 
became clear a mark had been overstepped, we had to take clear and decisive 
action."

And he insists there is no residue of bullying or sexism at the broadcaster. 
"It didn't run as deeply as some of the people who were asked the question 
[claimed]. Over 20 years, if it had been such a major problem a lot of people 
would have walked out and that wasn't the case. People love working here and 
continue to."

The departure of Keys and Gray became inevitable amid the continued emergence 
of new tapes from inside the building showing ever more shocking examples of 
off-camera misogyny. Francis claims they never got to the bottom of who was 
leaking them.

"In these days of computer files and generic logins, it became impossible to 
take it beyond a certain point. I'll confess that wasn't the focus."

And as the old football cliche goes, no player is bigger than the team. 
Ratings have actually gone up since Keys and Gray left, with five of Sky's 10 
best ever rating matches screened this season.

Graeme Souness in particular has appeared to thrive, while Jamie Redknapp has 
grown in stature and Jeff Stelling and Ben Shepherd, among others, have taken 
their chance in the presenter's chair. "Football punditry is an absolute art 
form and I'm not sure people give it enough credit. I've been impressed with 
everyone we've tried."

Next year, Gary Neville will join the team and is sure to divide opinion. 
Francis says he knows he'll have to put his loyalties to one side. "He's not 
going to be shy of passing comment on his team-mates. We know he's got great 
insight and we're pretty sure that over time he'll flourish," he says.

The likeable but ambitious 39-year-old is keen to emphasise how Sky Sports has 
changed, but in common with most of his colleagues also exhibits a pride – 
bordering on defensiveness – in working there.

Francis returned to Sky from the BBC in 1999 and made his reputation producing 
its cricket coverage and then moving on to its footballing crown jewels of 
Premier League and Champions League. He got the top job in 2009 when the 
long-serving Vic Wakeling retired.

Francis has paid his dues on the road and won plaudits for overseeing the 
introduction of domestic Test cricket to the schedules at a time when the 
England and Wales Cricket Board's decision to sell its rights exclusively to 
Sky was under extreme scrutiny.

An enthusiastic club cricketer himself, he points to the balance between 
Nasser Hussain, David Gower, Ian Botham, Bumble and co to demonstrate the 
importance of chemistry between the on-screen talent and the viewer.

"There's a warmth and a humour. The individual parts are strong and the 
collective absolutely flourishes. At the key moments, they're not shy of 
calling it as they see it."

But as important as the presentation is, in sport content is king. A glance at 
the Sky Sports schedule from 20 years ago – highlights included a repeat of the 
Leyland DAF final – is enough to confirm that. It was securing exclusive rights 
to top-flight football in 1992 that transformed Sky's fortunes and while the 
range has broadened to fill four HD channels and a 24-hour news service, 
retaining its top draws is key.

Francis toes the company line in refusing to be drawn into speculating whether 
the BBC's cost-cutting might make the Six Nations rugby or Formula One an 
appealing prospect.

Nor will he admit to any conversations about Formula One's ownership, should 
News Corp's embryonic bid pick up pace. "All I know is what you write about it. 
And from what I read, CVC aren't selling," he says, not entirely convincingly.

Instead, he prefers to reel off a list of recent renewals – Champions League, 
Football League, US PGA golf, ATP Tour tennis, Euro 2012 qualifiers – to 
underline the breadth and depth of its appeal.

That Football League deal, a significant reduction on the previous one, 
renewed fears that Sky's dominance might lead to a dip in revenues for sport. 
Industry theories abound that the relationship between Sky and ESPN is a bit 
too cosy to engender real competition, but Francis is having none of it.

"Everyone is rival. It's an open bidding process and you all go for whatever 
you think is good for your business," he insists.

The Premier League deal is up in 2013 and Francis says Sky is keeping a close 
eye on the regulatory issues surrounding it, from the Portsmouth landlady case 
that could blow apart the way rights are sold to Ofcom's oversight of the pay 
TV market. But he returns to cricket to demonstrate the extent to which he 
believes Sky acts as a force for good for sport.

"My club up in Hertfordshire has seven teams on a Saturday. I can't get my kid 
into our Sunday morning coaching, I'm on the waiting list," he says. "When I 
drive past my club and see all these kids out there and see how successful the 
elite England men's team is, how successful the women's team is – they're all 
centrally contracted, they no longer have to wash their own kits – it backs up 
our decision all those years ago to invest in Test cricket."

That argument is less easy to sustain in football, where Sky's billions have 
flowed into the pockets of players, agents and luxury car dealers. But that 
does not stop him trying, arguing facilities have also improved and citing the 
inspirational effect of so much televised football on young players.

One sport he believes needs to take a long look at itself is boxing, after he 
recently pulled an Amir Khan pay-per-view fight from the schedule because the 
undercard was too weak.

"Boxing needs to sort itself out and the best fighters need to fight the best 
fighters. The punters and the broadcasters are sick of seeing some of the guys 
that are appearing on the right side of the bill," he says.

As Sky has grown into a behemoth on course for an annual operating profit of 
over £1bn, it has sought to soften its image and broaden its appeal. This has 
extended to sport as well, where it has been intimately involved in the British 
cycling success story of marrying elite success with increased participation.

That is one way in which Sky Sports will try and grab a piece of the Olympics 
action, despite not holding any broadcast rights. Sky Sports News will 
broadcast extensively from the site and Francis argues that a successful Games 
will be good for the broadcaster.

"As we sit here looking to 2012, we've got a fantastic sporting year ahead and 
we're a sports channel so we can't be anything other than excited about it," he 
says. And he will confess that Sky would "of course" look at the possibility of 
acquiring rights to the Olympics if the opportunity came up.

Touring the new digital studios, he enthuses about the expansion in its 3D 
coverage and shows off the hi-tech new Sky Sports News set. The Ashes in 
Australia also demonstrated the way in which viewing is changing, he says, with 
a huge spike in viewing on laptops, iPads and mobile phones during the series. 
Chelsea v Manchester United in March was watched by 20,000 viewers live on 
their mobiles and 100,000 on laptops or iPads.

The new five-floor studio symbolises for Francis a broadcaster that has come 
of age in its 21st year. But he insists some things won't change, that it will 
retain the restless energy that has fuelled a growth that has made it – for 
good or ill – perhaps the most powerful company in modern British sport.

"As you walk around the Sky Sports offices, everyone is a huge sports fan. If 
they weren't working here they'd be sitting at home watching it," he says.

"The people who make the shows would never allow us to become the 
establishment. It's a rotten job for your social life. But I wouldn't want it 
any other way, because it's such a fabulous place to work."
 