
Bath got their Heineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> 
campaign back on track with a bonus-point win in Pool 4 over the Italian 
strugglers Aironi. The victory at the Stadio Luigi Zaffanella ended their worst 
ever run of losses – four – on the road in Europe.

First-half tries from Matt Carraro, man-of-the-match Nick Abendanon and the 
eye-catching Tom Biggs, followed by a second-half touchdown from their captain, 
Luke Watson, gaveBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> the spoils. Olly 
Barkley slotted a solitary conversion. The former Gloucester fly-half Ludovic 
Mercier kicked two penalties for the home side, who enjoyed more ball and 
territory then the scoreline suggested.

It was first blood to Bath in the 11th minute as they executed a glorious 
first-phase move. Quick ball off the top of a lineout on the halfway line was 
followed by a missed pass to Abendanon who drew his man and popped the ball to 
Biggs. The wing then collected his own perfectly weighted chip to touch down in 
the corner.

Barkley missed the touchline conversion and Mercier was quick to pull three 
points back when Bath were caught failing to roll away in the tackle.

The Italian side enjoyed the bulk of ball and possession, but a mix-up on 
their own 22 by Danwel Demas and Giulio Rubini gifted possession to Bath with a 
little over a quarter of the game gone. Bath kept things tight and blasted away 
around the fringes, wing Carraro eventually burrowing over.

Aironi's man mountain of a No8, Nick Williams, burst through the Bath midfield 
soon after the restart, and only a thumping tackle from Abendanon stopped him 
from scoring. Indeed, it briefly stopped Williams from playing a part in 
proceedings, with medics escorting him off the pitch.

Bath grabbed their third try five minutes before the break. Abendanon was the 
recipient of another missed pass from Barkley, and a poor challenge by Mercier 
allowed him to surge into the Italians' half. Neat handling among the backs 
ensued and Abendanon finished off what he had started, touching down beneath 
the posts. Barkley made no mistake this time and Bath were 17-3 to the good.

The Aironi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aironi> pack set up camp inches 
from the Bath tryline shortly after the resumption but with the forwards having 
done all the hard work their backs botched the job at the first attempt, a pass 
from Mercier drifting aimlessly between his centres.

The Italians finally turned their second half pressure into points in the 55th 
minute. Bath infringed at a ruck and Mercier stepped up to chip over an easy 
penalty goal.

Barkley surged through a chink in the Aironi midfield in the 65th minute as 
Bath chased the bonus point, but the supporting Biggs was penalised for not 
releasing but the try that clinched the extra point came with 10 minutes to go.

Aironi's winger Giulio Toniolatti was forced to take the ball into touch on 
his own five-metre line and the Bath pack then engineered an unstoppable 
driving maul from the resulting lineout, with Watson emerging from the heap of 
bodies with the ball.
 