
The Baton Rouge Metro Council approved a settlement on Tuesday paying activist 
DeRay Mckesson and other protesters arrested during summer demonstrations over 
the shooting death of Alton Sterling.

 The Advocate reports <http://bit.ly/2gffQXQ> that under the terms of the 
deal, the city government, the Louisiana state police, the East Baton Rouge 
sheriff’s office and the district attorney’s office will pay no more than 
$25,000 each for a total of about $100,000.

 Mckesson was among nearly 200 protesters arrested after Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alton-sterling-shooting>, a black man, was 
shot on 5 July during a struggle with two white police officers. His shooting 
death sparked widespread protests in the city about the treatment of black 
people at the hands of police.

 The federal class action suit accuses police of excessive force and violating 
their constitutional rights to freedom of speech and assembly.

 The 4 August lawsuit says police advanced against protesters while wearing 
military gear and gas masks and brandishing assault weapons alongside armored 
vehicles. Officers threatened peaceful protesters by pointing weapons directly 
at them, the suit says.

 Louisiana’s governor, John Bel Edwards, has said the officers’ use of riot 
gear and weaponry was an appropriate response. The governor, a Democrat who 
comes from a family of sheriffs, also noted that a police officer had teeth 
knocked out by a rock during the protests.

 Two of the 12-member council voted against the settlement, including John 
Delgado, who was furious at the payout.

 “To me, this encourages that type of behavior to happen in the future,” 
Delgado said. “I have no interest in paying $100,000 in taxpayer dollars to 
people who are coming into our city to protest.”

 But parish attorney Lea Anne Batson said the price is much smaller than what 
the city might have had to pay if only one of the 92 plaintiffs had been able 
to prove they had been wrongfully arrested.

 This does not end the legal drama surrounding the Sterling shooting and 
ensuing protests. The Department of Justice is still investigating Sterling’s 
death. And an unnamed Baton Rouge police officer who claims he was injured 
during one of the protests is suing Mckesson as well as Black Lives Matter.

 