
Here is a group of players: Chris Rogers, Ian Bell, Michael Clarke, Alastair 
Cook, David Warner.

And another: Jonny Bairstow, Phil Hughes, Joe Root, Jonathan Trott.

And a third: Kevin Pietersen, Chris Gayle, Virender Sehwag.

And finally: Sachin Tendulkar, Kumar Sangakkara, Shivnarine Chanderpaul, 
Mahala Jayawardene.

There is a humming undercurrent to the critique of modern batting, that 
increasingly idiosyncratic and macho pursuit. You hear it on commentary and in 
analysis, and while it's hazily defined, it's usually expressed in one of two 
ways: 'He wasn't sure how to bat' or 'He didn't know how to play'.

They're phrases that need a little context, because they're obviously not 
literal. Any batsman who has made it as far as the international game clearly 
knows how to bat. Any player playing at the top level evidently knows how to 
play.

Instead, it's to do with circumstance, the demands of format, the ebb and flow 
of the red-ball game. The longer the batsman is asked to bat, the more nuanced 
his batting must become. The task in 50-over cricket is almost rote now, its 
formula exhausted by repetition, while the blunt challenge of T20 remains 
brutally simple to compute. By contrast the challenge of the five-day game 
shifts under the batsman's feet even as he is at the crease.

Not knowing how to bat, in context, is not knowing how to tune yourself into 
the fluid set of circumstances that the game produces. Here, self-knowledge is 
everything.

The first two groups of players above competed with varying levels of success 
in the Ashes series. The difference between them is that group one essentially 
batted the way that they always bat. They lived or died by the quotidian 
fluctuations of form and luck, the natural run of good days and bad.

Chris Rogers, for example, with the benefit of 20,000 first class runs behind 
him, battered a quick 80-odd at Old Trafford and accumulated a careful hundred 
in Durham. Both innings fitted with the rhythm of the match they were played 
in. Aside from the pressure of Test cricket, there was nothing new about any of 
it for Rogers. Both were innings of a type regularly required of an opening 
batsman, and he responded with the touch of a craftsman.

Bell had the series of his life and Warner one that he'll never forget, but 
both did what they always do. Clarke fought his stiff back and Cook battled a 
technical fault but neither panicked nor changed their method. They stuck it 
out, because experience tells them that they will come good again soon.

The second group are (pretty obviously) the batsmen that didn't know how to 
bat, the players who weren't sure how to play. Phil Hughes, the Australian 
among them, is a talent betrayed, first dropped from the side when his Test 
average was above 50, then thrown up and down the order, his method questioned 
and ridiculed. No wonder the light has gone from his eyes.

Joe Root and Jonathan Trott demonstrate how delicate the equilibrium of a 
batting order can be. Sometimes absence becomes a player like nothing else, and 
Andrew Strauss already has a post-retirement glow about him. At his best, 
Strauss was the most bullish of the triumverate he formed with Cook and Trott. 
His solidity and tempo let the others be themselves.

Root allowed himself to be lulled into periods of stasis, an understandable 
reaction to the match stretching out before him, and yet also the response of a 
young man who felt that his natural game may equal irresponsibility (here he 
can be contrasted with Rogers, a less talented player, but one who has spent 
years doing the job).

The knock-on effect on Jonathan Trott was less predictable. He had built his 
reputation on being impervious to external forces, yet his crease rituals 
always hinted at his need for certainty. With Cook and Root at sea, Trott 
played a series of uncharacteristic innings, quick forties studded with 
boundaries that built a discomforting momentum he didn't seem able to halt.

Jonny Bairstow didn't know whether to stick or twist and it showed. Playing 
his natural game kept getting him out, and yet he didn't seem to have another 
beyond the same glacial slowness that descended on Root.

The third and fourth groups are rarely unsure how to play, of course. 
Pietersen, Gayle and Sehwag have controlled every format with the same 
unorthodox force. They are outliers blessed with a freakish talent that can be 
expressed any way – devastating in a single over or a day and a half of 
batting. Their method is uncompromising.

And the final group are the last generation to have grown up without T20 
cricket, whose path to the Test game was always clear and rising before them. 
It was their ultimate aim, their career peak, and they spent their early lives 
preparing for it. The way they bat actually reflects that: their skill sets 
were honed for Test match play, their mental strength built by its adversity.

Last week Aaron Finch played an extraordinary innings at the Ageas Bowl. Could 
he be a Test match batsman? That's a well-intentioned question anyone who 
doesn't really follow the game may ask. Well he's 26 years old and has played 
33 first-class matches.

In those, he averages 29. He debuted in 2007, and in 2009-10 had his best 
season in the Shield, with 416 runs at 37.81. That same year, he became a star 
in the Big Bash and that is where he has stayed, typecast as a talented 
slugger. He doesn't have to worry about "how to bat". In fact, he doesn't 
really have to worry about first-class cricket at all, unless Australia decide 
he's worth a punt.

In Finch's brutality, in Bairstow and Root's uncertainty, in Australia's bare 
cupboard and England's wavering second string (what awaits Buttler and Hales 
and Ballance and Morgan and the rest?) lays the conundrum facing the modern 
batsman. How do you play?

It's interesting to note that some of India's finest young blades – Kohli, 
Pujara, Dhawan – are less afflicted. What is different about their thinking? 
Now there's a question.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This article first appeared on The Old Batsman 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/>

• Follow The Old Batsman <https://twitter.com/theoldbatsman> on Twitter
 