
Bauer Media has stolen a march on its radio rivals with 12 nominations for 
next month'sArqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> Commercial Radio 
Awards.

Global Radio had nine nods, TalkSport's parent UTV five, and there were three 
each for Lincs FM Group and UKRD at a ceremony to announce the Arqiva 
Commercial Radio Awards nominations in central London last night.

Heart 106.2 breakfast presenters Jamie Theakston and Harriet Scott will do 
battle with Key 103's Mike Toolan and Boogie and Arlene & Dingo on Edinburgh's 
97.3 Forth One for the presenter of the year prize.

UTV-owned TalkSport, Manchester's Key 103 and Sheffield-based Hallam FM, both 
owned by Bauer Media, are nominated for the station of the year broadcasting to 
a population of more than 1 million listeners.

The station of the year prize for stations broadcasting to fewer than 300,000 
people will be contested by Rother FM and Rutland Radio, both owned by the 
Lincs FM Group, and UKRD's Star Radio in Cambridge.

And the intermediate station of the year award, for stations broadcasting to 
between 300,000 and 1 million people, will go to either 104.7 Minster FM, owned 
by the Local Radio Company, Global Radio's Heart 96.3 (formerly GWR Bristol) 
and Lincs FM, owned by the Lincs FM Group.

Bauer Media's Q Radio is nominated for digital station of the year, along with 
Planet Rock, rescued from closure by entrepreneur Malcolm Bluemel last year, 
and Fun Kids, owned by Folder Media.

Global Radio's iPhone application and Absolute Radio's online MiniAmp are both 
nominated for the technical innovation prize, along with TalkSport's online 
magazine.

Classic FM's Darren Henley is nominated for programmer of the year, alongside 
Gary Stein of Bauer's Key 103 and Planet Rock's Trevor White, while UTV's Peak 
FM in Derby, UKRD-owned Pirate FM in Cownwall and Bauer's TFM Radio on Teeside 
will contest the news award.

The Arqiva Commercial Radio Awards will take place at the Royal Lancaster 
Hotel in central London on Friday 5 June.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 