
Russ Abbot, Alison Steadman and June Whitfield will star in new BBC1 sitcom 
Grey Mates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2013/sep/25/stephanie-beacham-russ-abbot-bbc-sitcom>
, one of three new shows on the channel including a five-part sequel to 
Afghanistan war drama Our Girl and a docusoap about high street food chain, KFC.

BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> controller Charlotte Moore also 
announced new series of David Walliams comedy Big School and Adil Ray's Citizen 
Khan, and confirmed a new 90-minute drama about Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy, 
written by Jeff Pope.

Grey Mates, written by Richard Pinto and made by Have I Got News for You 
producer Hat Trick, will follow the ups and downs of three recently retired 
couples whose children have just left home and will also star Stephanie 
Beacham, Philip Jackson and James Smith.

Moore said it was a "fabulously witty portrayal of suburbia" but said it would 
be "cynical" to suggest it was aimed at the same audience who enjoyed another 
BBC1 series about the over-60s, Sally Wainwright's award-winning drama, Last 
Tango In Halifax.

"It's not about trying to appeal to a particular audience. We are a big broad 
audience of all ages," she said at a Bafta event in London on Monday.

"I commissioned Grey Mates because it was very funny and makes me laugh a lot. 
It will have great broad appeal. I think Last Tango in Halifax doesn't feel 
like anything else on TV at the moment. It's a very layered form of 
storytelling that is really quite edgy and provocative as well."

The BBC has been criticised for not putting more older people on screen, and 
when Last Tango star Anne Reid won a Bafta last year she said she was "so glad 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has decided at last to do love 
stories about people who are over 35".

Moore added "If you want an audience that is diverse you have got to make sure 
the people making the programmes on screen and off are broad and diverse."

She said the three-part fly on the wall series about KFC, made by independent 
producer Wild Pictures, would be a "warts and all" portrayal of the fast food 
giant which had "unprecedented access".

Like BBC1's recently announced documentary series going behind the scenes at 
the Metropolitan police, Moore said: "We are not doing an investigative 
documentary, that's not our mission.

"Investigative documentaries would never uncover the stories we are uncovering 
which is about the people who work there, what it's like to be a policeman, or 
work behind the counter. We don't make [these documentaris] if we don't get 
proper access. You absolutely have to sign up that editorial control remains 
with the BBC, it's warts and all, top to bottom."

She added: "The Met have been very brave to realise you can't continue to be a 
closed institution. There's a real appetite in this country for letting people 
in, if you are closing the doors that can have an adverse effect."

Our Girl, the acclaimed one-off made by the BBC's in-house drama department 
featuring former EastEnders star Lacey Turner, will return for a new five-part 
series.

Moore, whose channel will show BBC2 hit The Great British Bake Off next year 
after this year's final was watched by more than 8 million viewers, defended 
the decision that it should switch channels.

"Moving it to BBC1 is not about changing the integrity of the show or the 
authenticity of the experience," she said. "It's done so well on BBC2 and 
become this national talking point, the national conversation is what BBC1 is 
about.

"It would be very strange not to put it at the very front of your shop window."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 