
BBC strategy chief James Purnell has defended its two biggest music networks, 
Radio 1 andRadio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2>, as “highly 
distinctive”, saying Radio 1 plays nearly 10 times as many different tracks in 
a month as its commercial rival, Capital.

Purnell warned there was a “tsunami happening with audience tastes around 
radio”, with a sharp fall in the amount of time young people spent listening, 
and said if the industry failed to react it would die out.

Purnell said Radio 1 played 3,868 different tracks every month, compared with 
Global Radio-owned Capital, which he said played 398 different tracks. He said 
Radio 1 shared 3% of its playlist with Capital, whereas Capital shared 32% of 
its tracks withRadio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1>.

He also flagged up Radio 2, which he said played 4,423 different songs in a 
month, nearly three times the 1,598 tracks played by Absolute Radio, owned by 
Bauer Media. Radio 2 shared 13% of its tracks withAbsolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio>, against the 37% of songs 
Absolute shared with Radio 2, he added.

He spoke out at the Radio Festival on Tuesday after the two stations were 
singled out for possible cuts in the government’s green paper on the future of 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

The green paper, published in July, said Radios 1 and 2 were “arguably less 
distinctive” than sister station 6 Music, saved from the axe five years ago, 
and said there was a “sizeable crossover in audiences” between the two 
stations, which the BBC has also disputed.

Purnell said the BBC was trying to persuade the government that “if you want 
to be distinctive, if you want to make the hits of tomorrow, that has to be on 
a station with lots of listeners.


“There’s no point introducing four people to a new song, much better to 
introduce 4 million people to a new song.”

He said there was a “tsunami happening with audience tastes around radio … if 
we collectively don’t respond to it, in 20, 30, or 40 years’ time there will be 
an irreversible trend as the older audience who grew up with radio dies out”.

A spokesperson for Radiocentre said: “The BBC appears to be in denial about 
the need for its music radio services to change. The fact is 60% of the music 
played on Radio 1 and Radio 2 in daytime is also available on commercial radio, 
so it is perfectly reasonable for government to ask whether this is distinctive 
enough.”

Purnell admitted to “sleepless nights” at the prospect that the budget deal 
with the government, in which the BBC took on the £700m burden of paying for 
free licence fees for the over-75s, was not the end to the cuts faced by the 
corporation.

But he said he was now reassured by what the government had said that “the 
deal was the deal” an it would not face another reduction in funding as part of 
the on-going discussions about the renewal of its royal charter.

He said the BBC would have a “real problem” if its charter period was halved 
to five years, as one report suggested.


“We have not heard that from government,” said Purnell. “We would have a real 
problem with that. One of the great things about a 10-year charter is it allows 
you to change and plan and do things like the iPlayer.


“Secondly, from the point of view of independence we need to know that we are 
not always under the cosh of, well, if you have a nasty story about the 
government they might take money off you.”

 