
Sunshine mopped her brow. It was 90F and humid. Then she got busy with comb, 
water and beads and began to plait Anna's hair into perfect corn braids. 
Sunshine had learnt by watching her mother and cousins and now she earns a 
living braiding hair and selling jewellery and sarongs on the beach This is no 
ordinary beach, though. This is Antigua - or Paradise, according to Sunshine.

Difficult to disagree. The island has 365 beaches and, just when you've found 
the perfect place to unwrap your Bounty bar, an even more beautiful one appears 
round the corner. It would be nice to check that there are 365, for accuracy, 
but I had to settle for just a few.

Sunshine was busy braiding at Galley Bay on the north-west coast, which, as 
beaches go, would be difficult to better. You know the sort of thing: white 
sand twinkles down to a sea of so many blues and greens you lose count. The 
water is so clear you barely need a snorkel to see the brightly-coloured fish. 
Cottages nestle on the beach and tranquility is a way of life. When you've 
rested, you can sail, windsurf and canoe before your first rum punch at the 
beach bar. But this is Paradise rebuilt. In September 1995, Hurricane Luis 
pulverised Antigua. Galley Bay's cottages were thrown into the air and blown 
into the village of Five Islands, half a mile away. Nothing was left, two 
people were dead and thousands homeless.

Now you would hardly know Luis had blown by. Galley Bay has been rebuilt and 
the 40 acres of tropical gardens look as if they have always been there. This 
year, they seem to have been lucky. September, the most wicked month, has come 
and gone and Antigua has been let off. The thing about Galley Bay, if you've 
never been to the Caribbean - and we hadn't - is that it's just how you dream 
it will be. The palm trees really do grow at those funny angles. It's also hot. 
Very hot in our summer, and there's a chance - but just a chance - of rain, 
which makes it cheaper. So that's a bonus. There's hibiscus everywhere, 
pineapples growing in the soil, banana trees they call fig trees and a few fig 
trees that they call fig trees.

Antiguans are the best bit about Antigua. When you arrive at the smart, new V 
C Bird airport, broadly smiling women try to decant a plane-load of people into 
a few taxis. Best advice here is to lie back and think of rum punch - they'll 
get it sorted and you'll get the rum punch as soon as you set foot through the 
door of your hotel.

The island got its name from Columbus in 1493. He was too busy to set foot on 
the island, though, having gold, spices and silk on his mind. In 1632, English 
settlers moved in and grew a bit of tobacco, cotton and indigo before settling 
on sugar, which was to guarantee the island its future wealth. The success of 
the sugar industry and the wealth of the planters was, of course, built on the 
appalling inhumanity of slavery. The estates required a huge workforce and, 
with no indigenous population, the planters sought slaves from Africa.

Guns and other manufactured goods were shipped from Europe to the west coast 
of Africa and exchanged for slaves who were then shipped across the Atlantic to 
work the plantations. Sugar, molasses, rum, cotton, tobacco and coffee were 
then brought back to Europe.

This lucrative but terrible triangle of trade flourished for 200 years. In 
1807, Britain abolished the slave trade, and in 1834 all 29,000 slaves became 
free men and women. But for another century island life was tough. Slowly the 
economy began to move forward helped by tourism, which now employs a third of 
the working population and accounts for about 60% of foreign exchange earnings. 
Around 540,000 tourists visit Antigua each year - 340,000 of them on cruise 
ships.

At times, the docks in the capital, St John's, have five cruises depositing 
around 10,000 people on an island with a population of 60,000. Our family was 
staying in the land-based equivalent of a cruise, the all-inclusive resort. The 
attraction is simple: you can leave your wallet at home. The problem with this 
is that local cafés and restaurants lose custom because, naturally, people 
don't want to pay "twice" for food and drink. It's okay for Sunshine, who can 
braid and sell on the beach, but not so good for fishermen selling lobster and 
villagers selling fruit and vegetables.

Molwyn Joseph, Antigua's minister of tourism, says all-inclusives are the 
choice of the industry, so Antigua doesn't have a choice. He's determined to 
find a way of getting people to step outside the resorts and it's true that, 
after resting up by the pool and beach and fortified by the food, many do.

Take St John's, where the waterfront and its colonial buildings have been 
restored and you can cool off at Hemingway's, an early 19th-century 
green-and-white wooden building with a cool veranda and even cooler fruit 
drinks overlooking the street and Heritage Quay. There's a great fruit and veg 
market on Market Street - best days Fridays and Saturdays.

You can live the city's history from the headstones of the twin-towered 
cathedral perched on top of Newgate Street and at the tiny, but 
enthusiastically put together National Museum. It occupies just one room but 
oozes love and pride in its exhibits. The most prized exhibit is Viv Richards' 
cricket bat - you know the one with which, in 1986, he scored the fastest Test 
Match century, taking just 56 balls to knock up 100 runs against England on his 
home turf. For this tiny island (108 sq miles) to have produced the finest 
batsman of his generation (dare you to disagree) was an enormous boost. The 
street where he was born in St John's now bears his name but, no matter how 
many times I walked past the Antigua Recreation Ground - the country's main 
cricket venue - and by his present house in a smart suburb of the capital, I 
couldn't catch sight of him.

It's impossible to avoid the subject of cricket. Most of the cabbies have had 
that Viv Richards in the back and Richie Richardson, who comes from Five 
Islands, and Curtley Ambrose, who's from Swetes on the west coast. If you're 
there when he's in action, Mrs Ambrose tolls the church bell to let villagers 
know when her boy has taken a wicket.

Over in the south-east of the island, Piper is getting ready for a day's 
business. The more stressed out the arriving tourists, the better for Piper. 
Reflexology is his trade - learnt by correspondence course and then extra 
training in Barbados - and he can just see the stress slipping away as he 
pummels and presses those feet. He's a fine masseur - $25 well-spent, I 
thought, as he washed my feet, then massaged them with cocoa butter.

Piper has lots of "regulars" who return each year to Mamora Bay and the St 
James's Club, which sits pretty between two white sand beaches. There's a hotel 
there, all-inclusive or room-only, private holiday homes and timeshares. There 
are three restaurants and two beach bars, three swimming pools, tennis courts, 
water sports and excellent kids' clubs.

Piper loves tourists - "without them, Antigua would have nothing". Most of 
all, though, Piper is a typical Antiguan and just loves people.

Along the winding road from the St James's Club is Nelson's Dockyard, the only 
surviving Georgian dockyard in the world. It was developed as a careening 
station - where British ships were brought to have barnacles scraped away and 
generally made ship-shape. It was begun in 1743 but, with the new steam-powered 
ships needing less attention, the dockyard fell into disuse and closed in 1889. 
Mind you, the link between the dockyard and Nelson is a tad tenuous. He 
commanded the Northern Division of the Leeward Island Station between 1784 and 
1787, but referred to Antigua, in correspondence, as "a vile spot" and "this 
infernal hole".

Sportingly, after the restoration of the dockyard in the 50s, the Antigua 
tourist board decided a famous title was needed and Nelson's Dockyard was born.

Nelson may have known a thing or to about sailing, but he got it wrong about 
Antigua. It's lovely.

 The practicals


Jeannette Page and family travelled to Antigua with Tropical Places (0800 
0185256). A two-centre holiday with seven nights' accommodation at the St 
James's Club and seven at Galley Bay, both on an all-inclusive basis, costs 
from £2,236pp, based on two sharing. At St James's, children aged 3-11, sharing 
with two adults, go from £1,049. At Galley Bay, children must be over 16. The 
price includes return flights from Gatwick. Tropical Places' publishes special 
offers onwww.tropical.co.uk <>.
 