 Land yachting ... hmmm. I've found something wrong with this so-called sport 
and I've only got as far as its name. A yacht, as far as I'm concerned, is 
something that goes on the water; that's what makes it a yacht. Land yachting 
is a nonsense - like air swimming, or water football.
And another problem: I'm looking at this so-called land yacht - a funny, frail 
little metal and fibreglass contraption with three wheels and a sail - and, to 
be honest, there's very little yacht-like about it. Where is the white leather 
lounge area? Where will I be sipping my gin-and-tonic when the sun dips below 
the yard arm? Where's the yard arm, in fact? And where's the yachty totty, the 
bevy of bikini-clad beauties, bronzing themselves on the bow deck? Would Roman 
Abramovich be interested in this thing? I don't believe he would.

We don't appear to be in St Tropez either, but on Romney Sands, which is on 
the Kent Riviera. It's bleak as hell, Dungeness power station looms out of the 
gloom ahead, and Hurricane Higgins is howling in off the English Channel, 
turning the whole beach into the world's biggest sandblaster. There's so much 
sand in the air, in fact, that it's hard to tell what's beach and what's sky.

"We'd better put a reef in," says Mark Serejko from the Varne Boat Club, who's 
kindly showing me the ropes - well, the rope, because a land yacht has just the 
one, a mainsheet. Putting a reef in means making the sail smaller, so it 
catches less wind. Too bloody right we better put a reef in.

There is some evidence that ancient Egyptians dabbled in land yachting way 
back in the days when ancient Egyptians were around. Then, in the 16th century, 
a Flemish scientist invented a wind-powered vehicle for transporting troops 
(whole wars had to be cancelled on windless days, obviously). Land yachting was 
developed as a sport at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, 
when crazy Frenchmen and Belgians raced their crazy machines on the beaches.

A modern land yacht is light and beautifully simple. It works in exactly the 
same way as a sea yacht does, but because wheel bearings produce much less 
resistance than a hull being dragged through water, they go a lot faster - up 
to about three times the speed of the wind, says Mark.

Crikey, that means I'll be topping a ton today, doesn't it? One of these ones 
- a class 3 - can get up to about 70 miles an hour, says Mark, but he advises a 
bit of caution for my maiden voyage. The record for a land yacht is 116mph.

Mark holds her steady against the gale while I climb in. It's a strange 
position - you're lying on your back, with your head up, more of a 
watching-TV-in-bed position than one for extreme sport. Still, here we go then, 
sheet in, and we're off ...

Shitting heck! I'm tearing off down the beach towards Dungeness at what feels 
like extraordinary speed. I wouldn't say I was totally in control, either, but 
by easing off the sheet, or turning into the wind (you turn the wheels with 
your feet, like a go-kart), I begin to find out what makes it do what. I do a 
bit of sailing, so it's easy to pick it up, though these possibly aren't ideal 
learning conditions. That lack of resistance which makes these things go faster 
also means they take longer to stop (there are no brakes), and land yachts can 
be dangerous. In 2002 a woman died after being hit by one in Lancashire (though 
that is the only instance in Britain in 80-odd years).

Luckily the fearsome weather today means there's no one else around, so I've 
got the whole beach to play with. And play is the right word - flying along, 
skidding round turns, splashing through the puddles. There can't be many ways 
of going this fast that don't involve an internal combustion engine, noise, 
pollution etc. Certainly none that don't involve gravity.

I won't give up sailing for land yachting. It may be faster but water - the 
sea - is a huge part of the attraction of a boat. Spray and all that. Land 
yachts aren't expensive, though, and it would be a fun toy. Maybe the answer is 
to build a slighty bigger one - with a bit of white leather about the place, 
and that sun deck I was on about. Whatever, it is definitely worth giving a go. 
Land yachting is, quite literally, a blast.

varneboatclub.co.uk/ly.html <http://www.varneboatclub.co.uk/ly.html>


Blokarting

Thrill rating 7/10

Danger rating 5/10

Fitness rating 4/10

In a nutshell ...

Take one already not-very-traditional sport (land yachting) and give it a 
further modernising twist. The result is "blokarting" - aka windsurfing on 
wheels or go-karting with a sail; or, basically, "desperately clinging on while 
this mad little three-wheeled buggy hurtles across the sand at speeds of up to 
60mph".

This relatively new adventure (it landed on UK soil in 1999 from New Zealand) 
uses wind-powered go-karts to propel you along the beach. There's a steering 
arm to control your direction while the sheet rope, attached to the sail, 
controls your speed. Of course, it's a very green activity, but you do need a 
bit of people-free space - blokarts (a patented design) run best on very flat 
surfaces, particularly beaches like the popular five miles of golden sand at 
Jersey's St Ouen's Bay.

What's the buzz?

"Blokarting is very in vogue right now," explains Graham Bobin from Speedsail 
UK. "It's great because anyone can do it, you don't have to be super-fit; it's 
easy, fun and as fast as you want. It's all about pitting your ability and 
strength against the weather, and a good starting block for children to learn 
basic sailing techniques."

Thrill a minute?

Take things at your own pace. Beginners' sessions are typically two hours long 
with an introductory preamble, where you learn how to assemble a kite 
successfully, have a safety briefing and a practice run, followed by a bit of 
free running. The safety aspect also incorporates learning about the beach 
environment and, importantly, bystanders who may be around. Experienced 
blokarters, meanwhile, can turn the adrenaline levels up a notch by practising 
tricks like how to sail along on two wheels ...

Adrenaline peak

Done right, the "360" spin is a spectacular move which can be done at 60mph 
without the blokart losing much momentum. It's like the ubiquitous hand-brake 
turn in any self-respecting Hollywood car chase - only without the squealing, 
smoking tyres and dodgy soundtrack.

Where to do it

Pure Adventure offers blokarting on St Ouen's Bay beach in Jersey, while 
Speedsail UK is based in Penzance and runs lessons on a number of Cornwall's 
beautiful beaches. (Clearly, this sport is easier to organise outside those 
precious four days a year when people actually want to lie on a British beach.)

Who can do it

Blokarting is suitable for all ages and abilities, although children must be 
accompanied by an adult.

What to wear

A waterproof/windproof top and, otherwise, just what you'd wear to the beach 
(so it can get covered in wet sand). But no flip-flops!

Typical prices

A two-hour group lesson with Pure Adventure costs £35 per adult. A one-to-one 
session with Speedsail UK costs £70, or £50 each for groups of two to four.

Impress your pals 

The land yachting (blokarting's older and faster brother) world speed record 
of 117mph was by a speedy Schumacher - the American, Bob - in 2001. Other land 
yacht models are used for endurance races such as the Gobi Desert Kite Buggy 
Challenge.

YouTube searchwords 'blokart showoff'

Good links

blokart.co.uk <http://www.blokart.co.uk>

bfslyc.org.uk <http://www.bfslyc.org.uk>

speedsailuk.com <http://www.speedsailuk.com>

wsyc.org.uk <http://www.wsyc.org.uk>

purejersey.com <http://www.purejersey.com>

landyachting.co.uk/home.htm <http://www.landyachting.co.uk/home.htm>
 