
A man who teaches classes on the outdoors was mauled by a bear during a 
mountaineering class in theAlaska <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> 
Panhandle, according to a university spokeswoman.

How do you survive a grizzly bear attack (or any other wild animal)?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/07/grizzly-bear-survive-attack-wild-animal>
Forest Wagner, 35, of Fairbanks, was with a group of 12 students on Mt 
Emmerich near Haines, Alaska, when he was attacked, according to University of 
Alaska Southeast spokeswoman Kate Bausler. A student hiked down the mountain to 
get cell reception and call for help.

Wagner was taken to Providence hospital in Anchorage, according to a statement 
from the university.

His condition was not immediately available, but the university said he was 
stable.

Wagner had been leading a group of 11 students and two teaching assistants 
when Wagner was attacked by a bear with cubs, the statement said. No students 
were hurt.

According to Wagner’s teaching schedule, he was scheduled to come down off of 
the mountain by Tuesday. He has been co-ordinating and teaching in the outdoor 
studies program at the university since 2006, according to his biography. He 
teaches rock and ice climbing, backcountry navigation, glacier travel and 
mountaineering.

Alaska state troopers got a call from the Haines police department about noon 
Monday. According to their report they removed Wagner from the mountain by 
helicopter and met up with a medical helicopter that took him to a hospital.

The bear was sighted again after the mauling, Bausler said. The students in 
the mountaineering class were taken down from the mountain and were spending 
the night in Haines with another professor. Haines is about 90 miles north of 
Juneau and accessible only by air or sea.

Students were scheduled to take a ferry back to Juneau on Tuesday, Bausler 
said.

Wagner was the second man attacked by a bear in Alaska within days.

Troopers said bear hunter Glenn Bohn, 77, of Wasilla was attacked by a grizzly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/07/grizzly-bear-survive-attack-wild-animal>
 near Mile 68 of the Denali Highway just after 1.30pm on Friday.


The 135-mile road runs east to west and connects the Richardson and Parks 
highways east of Denali national park.

Bohn’s hunting partner killed the bear. Bohn was driven by snowmobile to the 
Denali highway where a medical helicopter flew him to an Anchorage hospital 
where he was recovering.

Wildlife troopers, employees of the Alaska department of fish and game and 
friends of Bohn removed the bear from the field on Saturday.
 