
It was all going swimmingly until Piers Morgan got involved: “Shame on any 
male member of Muirfield who doesn’t immediately resign. You’re as sexist as 
your ghastly, dinosaur-ridden golf club,” said the former editor of theNews of 
the World. For a moment I was almost about to cheer the Honourable Company of 
Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> Golfers for standing up 
for their principles. Happily, the moment soon passed.

Muirfield in East Lothian says it is home to the world’s oldest golf club, 
although Royal Burgess just down the road has also laid claim to that title.
Muirfield’s decision last Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/muirfield-golf-club-votes-to-continue-excluding-women>
 not to amend the constitution of the club to permit women members was the 
result of a secret ballot of 616 members in which 397 of them voted for change 
and 219 opted for the status quo. The pro-women lobby had required a two-thirds 
majority but had fallen 14 votes short.

Universal condemnation ensued and reprisals were swift. The Royal & Ancient 
Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club of St Andrews, which 
administers the game throughout most of the world, immediately removed 
Muirfield from its roster of courses deemed good enough to host the Open 
championship. Royal Troon, another male-only club is expected to suffer a 
similar fate if it too denies women the right to full membership.

Much of the condemnation throughout Scotland has been a long time coming. 
Until very recently a pattern of discrimination underpinned membership of 
Scotland’s finest golf clubs and was accepted with a sigh and a shrug. “Oh 
well, you know, what can we do it’s just a bunch of pish-stained old buffers 
and blazered buffoons hanging on to a passing way of life.” The R&A itself only 
accepted women as equal members just under two years ago after being 
embarrassed into action byAlex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>. Scotland’s former first 
minister, a keen golfer, publicly rejected an invitation to attend the Open the 
last time it was held at Muirfield in 2013.

For many golfers, social exclusion founded on an almost comical sense of 
elitism, are important reasons for wanting to join a golf club. What would be 
the point of waiting for years to have your membership accepted and then 
discovering that the sods let anyone join? Glasgow’s Jewish community had to 
build its own course on the south of the city because few of them were ever 
accepted as members. Until recently, some of these same clubs also 
discriminated against Catholics.

In these places a certain type of chap, perhaps not getting things all his own 
way at work or feeling inadequate in his relationships with women, feels that 
by putting on a silly blazer and sitting in leather armchairs with other chaps 
he can restore his lost manliness.

Muirfield loses right to hold Open after voting to remain men-only
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/muirfield-golf-club-votes-to-continue-excluding-women>
There has been some sympathy for the Muirfield members. It’s a private club, 
built on its own land and not in receipt of public money. Many of those members 
who voted to exclude women are probably not sexist and do not treat women as 
second-class citizens. A degree of resentment at the influence of outsiders 
with a dubious agenda will have partly informed their decision. And what do we 
have to say about the existence of some all-women golf clubs and all-women gyms?

It’s not really the same, though. Golf has become one of the cornerstones of 
tourism inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and our 
championship golf courses are not simply vital to the economy; they are sources 
of national pride. That several of them didn’t just exclude women but took 
pride in doing so made a mockery of successive Scottish governments’ messages 
of fairness and equality in their cultural and social agendas. If it was known 
that Muirfield’s constitution also included clauses discriminating against 
black people, gay people, Muslims or Catholics a way would have been found long 
before now to have it shut down.

There has been a sharp increase in the numbers of women seeking to play golf 
as a pastime and as professionals. What do we say to them?Melissa Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/20/england-melissa-reid-wins-turkish-open>
, the British golfer who plays on the European Women’s Tour, expressed this 
eloquently in theTimes on Friday: “The history of women’s golf is one of 
overcoming challenges in so many circumstances, but just when you think you are 
becoming equal you are faced with something like this. An opportunity has been 
lost.”

The membership of Muirfield is made up of some of the most influential members 
of Scottish society. You’ll find judges, lawyers, police chiefs, senior 
physicians and entrepreneurs among its membership. The extent to which they 
carry their attitudes about women into their places of work ought to trouble us 
all. In time, Muirfield will probably have another vote and by then the passing 
of another few years will have diluted opposition to women and lead to change. 
In the meantime, the Scottish government and local authorities could make life 
uncomfortable for the members of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers. 
Companies which bid for public sector contracts are penalised if they don’t pay 
the Living Wage and are also expected to have signed up to minimum standards of 
fairness, equality and inclusiveness. Those deemed to have discriminatory 
practices are marked down. If any of their directors were known to be members 
of Muirfield or Royal Troon or any other club which discriminates against women 
they could be similarly sanctioned. I wouldn’t hold my breath.

Elitism, unearned privilege and discrimination are still rampant in Scottish 
society from land ownership to the tiny favoured few with the right sort of 
education and family connections who run our judiciary and our civil service. 
Women in Scotland are still paid significantly less than their male 
counterparts and find it much more difficult to gain directorships in business. 
They are still woefully under-represented in parliament. On average women in 
Scotland earn £175.30 per week less than men. TheAnnual Survey of Hours and 
Earnings 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2015provisionalresults>
 which compiled these statistics says “there are a few extremely high earning 
staff, most of whom are men, and many women are clustered in the lowest paid 
professions”.

Giving the Muirfield members a right good kicking won’t significantly alter 
this. In permitting such anti-women attitudes in these clubs to exist for 
generations though, it’s not difficult to see why gross inequality in the 
workplace still exists.
 