
I wake up at 6:15am and take my dog Otis out for a walk. I live in the 
countryside so rarely see a soul at that time. I usually check my work emails 
before I’ve even left the house. I’m sure this eagerness is counterproductive 
and will probably contribute to burnout by the time I’m 35! Breakfast is always 
something on the go. I’m vegetarian so preparing Otis’ food always puts me off 
eating first thing in the morning!

A typical day starts with a team meeting. We discuss all those in crisis and 
people who are inpatients in hospital. I work in a great, multi-disciplinary 
team where we really respect each other’s views. I believe multi-disciplinary 
teams are only effective if you don’t discount the model your colleagues are 
working from. A combination of social interventions combined with medication 
and psychological input all seem relevant to helping people in their recovery.

Self care for social workers: how mindfulness can help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/11/self-care-social-workers-mindfulness>
Today one of my clients is appealing her section so I go to the hospital to 
interview her for the social circumstances report, which takes two hours. I 
will present this to a tribunal panel within the next couple of weeks. It’s a 
big piece of work and can take several hours to complete. I’ll chip away at the 
report over the next few days, trying not to take it home with me as I don’t 
find that sustainable.

Before I head back to the office I see three more clients. All have long and 
enduring mental health difficulties. Most of the people I work with have been 
through significant trauma and are at high risk of attempting suicide. I see 
people from all walks of life, and on the surface it is not always apparent 
they are struggling.

Lunch is usually a snack on the go. I often find a pile of banana skins in my 
car at the end of the week. Or, if it’s been a stressful one, a pile of KitKat 
wrappers!

I love my job and strive to be a better practitioner every day

Qualifying as a social worker was hard work. I came in through an access 
course and then Bath University. Prior to that I had been living in London and 
not looking after myself. I racked up a massive debt and was suffering with 
depression. I left London, moved back to Bristol, and impulsively enrolled in 
college. I needed to do something, I just wasn’t sure what. The more I learned 
about social work the more I wanted to be part of it.

Within the next couple of years I would like to complete my approved mental 
health professional training. Longer term, I would love to be involved with 
opening a crisis house, somewhere safe for people to go when home treatment 
isn’t an option and hospital could be avoided with some short-term intervention.

We face many challenges, caseloads are high and expectations from some clients 
are higher. We want desperately to offer an individual, tailored service to the 
people we work with, which is hard when you are so time-limited. I don’t want 
people to feel like a number and I think most people are unaware of how 
stretched we are. We genuinely care about the overall wellbeing of the people 
we work with. We frequently get positive feedback from clients about our 
practice. Negative comments tend to be about waiting times, which is a wider 
issue.

Social work isn't just a career, it's a lesson in relentless optimism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/may/13/social-work-isnt-just-a-career-its-a-lesson-in-relentless-optimism>
My afternoon usually involves writing notes, making calls to other agencies, 
care planning. It’s taken me a couple of weeks to complete panel funding for a 
gym membership, which sounds ridiculous but dealing with high-risk situations 
must take priority. The last thing I do before leaving work is check my to do 
list. I feel pleased to have crossed out 10 things today, then realise I’ve 
added 15 items to my list so my elation is shortlived!

In the evening I cook to wind down. I spend some time skyping my sister and 
nephews in Canada. Occasionally my mind is consumed by work worries, but I love 
my job and strive to be a better practitioner every day.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 