
My day starts at 7am when my travel alarm clock starts vibrating under my 
pillow. As I am profoundly deaf, I rely on the vibrations to ensure I get out 
of bed, check emails and plan for the day ahead. After breakfast I am ready to 
hit the road and travel to the school we are scheduled to visit.

I manage the National Deaf Children’s Society <http://www.ndcs.org.uk/> (NDCS) 
roadshow. We have an eight tonne lorry which converts into a classroom and we 
use it to travel the UK, delivering deaf awareness in schools. Without the 
right support, many deaf children and young people can feel isolated and are at 
risk of bullying and falling behind at school. The roadshow takes us to the 
heart of the community and means we can challenge some common misconceptions 
about deafness.

We arrive at the school by 9am, but every day is different and dependent on 
the needs of the school and their pupils. I start to prepare for the first 
workshop of the day, which focuses on the latest technology available to deaf 
children and young people, including alarm clocks, radio aids and apps.

I hold various sessions for deaf pupils and their hearing peers as the day 
goes on, and many parents and professionals visit too. One such workshop is My 
Future, which gives deaf young people the chance to learn about their options 
after school, and the support available to them. Before I know it lunch has 
come and gone and the school day is drawing to a close.

Many families face a wide range of issues, and use the roadshow as an 
opportunity to talk these through with me. A lack of deaf awareness – for 
example from sports clubs, music and dance groups – means their deaf children 
can miss out. Another issue that parents are naturally anxious about is 
choosing the best primary school for their child, with the right specialist 
teaching support and assistive technology in place. From listening to these 
experiences I can ensure our workshops and resources are based on their needs 
and tailored to provide solutions to the problems they are facing.

I thoroughly enjoy my job but on completion of a business management degree, I 
didn’t plan on becoming the manager of an information roadshow. Voluntary work 
at a deaf school in Peru made me realise that working with deaf children would 
be central to my chosen career. I joined NDCS in 2007 and never looked back.

I help deafblind people go on the holidays they've always wanted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/26/i-help-deafblind-people-go-on-the-holidays-theyve-always-wanted>
I remember one family who visited the roadshow feeling quite disheartened 
because their young daughter was struggling in school, couldn’t participate in 
swimming lessons and found it hard to listen to music. We talked it through and 
when they returned a year later, the change was remarkable. She had a radio aid 
in school to hear the teacher more clearly, was listening to her favourite 
music with a Bluetooth neckloop and was swimming confidently.

Another school we visited recently had only one deaf pupil who was struggling 
with his new hearing aids. Since then, his confidence has really grown, and his 
friends are so much better at communicating with him now they understand more 
about deafness.

These examples remind me what I love about this job and why it is so 
worthwhile. I’ve always been very positive about my deafness, which has given 
me the desire to succeed, so it is very rewarding to know that you have 
inspired others as a deaf role model.

I enjoy seeing the value of the roadshow in the local communities, and like to 
think that in five years time the NDCS roadshow team will be delivering a 
greater variety of workshops to deaf and hearing children. There are currently 
48,000 deaf children and young people living in the UK today and I’d love to 
see them all get the support they need to thrive in education and participate 
fully in school life.

If had an extra hour in the day, I’d have more fun with my three kids, doing 
things like taking them to explore National Trust properties – and I’d also 
squeeze in planning my next snowboarding adventure.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 