
A young Northern Irish woman who broke the law by taking medically tested 
abortion pills bought online has challenged the Police Service ofNorthern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to arrest her and the 
Public Prosecution Service in the region to prosecute her.

Suzanne Lee from Belfast, who took the pills in August 2012 during her third 
year at university, said: “Either you arrest me and charge me, or you change 
this law.”

Lee said that as a student she could not afford around £1,000 to go to England 
for a termination.

“I didn’t really want to go to England anyway as I wanted to be around people 
who knew what I was going through. I didn’t want it in this kind of clinical 
setting where no one knew me – where I was just another number – so the best 
plan of action was to order the abortion pills off the net.”

Other women who bought the pills online have told the Guardian they have wiped 
out their internet search histories and deleted their text messages in case the 
data is used as evidence against them in court.

Illegal pills and trauma: how Northern Ireland's abortion ban affects women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/05/abortion-in-northern-ireland-women-share-their-experiences>
Northern Ireland is the only part of the UK where the 1967 Abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act does not apply. Under a 
19th-century law – the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 – anyone carrying 
out an abortion except under some extremely limited circumstances can be jailed 
for life.

The climate of fear among women who have procured pills from the Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> on the Web NGO and 
WomenHelp.org has intensified due to the recent prosecution of a Northern Irish 
mother. She faces trial for procuring abortion pills for her underage daughter. 
Pro-choice activists believe someone reported her to the PSNI after she visited 
a local hospital for post-termination care.

The woman has been charged with procuring a poison or other noxious substance, 
in this case mifepristone and misoprostol, in the knowledge that they were to 
be used to cause a miscarriage.

In response to this case, several young women have spoken to the Guardian 
about the measures they resorted to in order to avoid having to pay for a 
private termination in an English hospital, which can cost several thousand 
pounds. All used the Women on the Web service to procure abortion pills.

Joanne (not her real name) became pregnant two years ago; she learned about 
the abortion pills service online.

“I got the pills because I didn’t like the idea of sneaking away to England 
and wanted it over with quickly,” Joanne said. “Besides, going to England would 
have raised questions from my parents whom I didn’t want to know what had 
happened to me. I never told them what I did, nor did I think I had to.”

 Joanne said she was “paranoid” about her internet history and the text 
messages she used to procure the pills. All texts, emails and searches to Women 
on the Web had to be deleted after the pills arrived, she said.

“Cara” from Derry said she did not want to use her real name for fear of 
losing her job in the city. She said he had a termination in a Manchester 
hospital when she was a student aged 18 and didn’t want to repeat the 
experience when she fell pregnant again three years ago.

Like Joanne, Cara has also erased all her internet history about buying the 
pills. “I’m speaking about taking the medically tested pills to persuade other 
women to go down that route. But I can’t give out my own name because I work in 
a public place in Derry and there would people out there who would make your 
working life very unpleasant if they found out I had taken abortion pills. That 
is why I have been very, very careful even with my texts and internet searches.”

Taking a different approach, and issuing an open challenge to prosecutors, Lee 
said: “I have taunted the police to arrest me but I really don’t think they 
have the backbone to do that.”

She condemned the continued refusal of politicians at the Northern Ireland 
assembly to legislate for abortion even in limited circumstances, such as women 
made pregnant through rape and incest, or fatal foetal abnormality.

Of her experience ordering and taking the pills, Lee said: “The second day, as 
soon as I took them, I immediately started to bleed. It was strange because it 
was such a relief to start bleeding, to know that they were working, to know 
that soon it was going to be all over.”

She said she paid €90, which covers the price of somebody else’s abortion. 
“Somebody else pays for yours to kind of create this network of solidarity,” 
she said.


I needed an abortion but my consultant told me: 'I'm not going to prison'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/northern-ireland-abortion-ban-sarah-ewart-interview>
She added: “No political party here is explicitly pro-choice [see footnote]. 
No party here supports what I do. So the only way I can think of changing 
things, and hopefully making sure other women go into their decisions educated, 
is by making this law unworkable and providing them with abortion pills.”

Lee said that after revealing that she taken abortion pills on social media 
her Facebook page was engulfed in abuse from anti-abortion activists.

“My favourite one calls me ‘the bride of Satan’. She said she hoped I would be 
burned to death because then I would also know what it would be like when I 
would burn in hell.”

Goretti Horgan, a veteran pro-choice campaigner and University of Ulster 
academic, said: “We know that, in a survey carried in the 1990s by Professor 
Colin Francome of Middlesex University, 11% of local GPs here said they had 
seen the effects of ‘attempts at amateur abortions’.

“We are very lucky here in Northern Ireland not to have had a woman die from a 
backstreet abortion since 1981, and there is no doubt that we have the 
proximity of England to thank for that.”

• Footnote (added 7 January 2016): the Green party in Northern Ireland is 
pro-choice – it supports extending the Abortion Act 1967 to Northern Ireland.
 