
England were soundly defeated again by Australia by 64 runs. The numbers 
suggest a carbon copy ofthat routine first encounter at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/03/australia-shane-watson-england-first-odi-report>
, but they are misleading. For perhaps the first time during this Ashes summer 
there was additional spice given to proceedings by the controversial dismissal 
of Ben Stokes, who has a habit of finding odd ways of getting out. England were 
141 for three in their 25th over in pursuit of 310 for victory when Stokes was 
given out for obstructing the field.

Boos echoed around Lord’s when the decision of the third umpire, Joel Wilson, 
was relayed to the middle. Stokes left the field shaking his head furiously. He 
had driven the ball back firmly to the bowler, Mitchell Starc, and his momentum 
had taken him out of his crease. Starc picked up the ball and threw at the 
stumps, as he was perfectly entitled to do. Stokes, scrambling backwards, 
instinctively – or was it wilfully? – stuck out his hand, which made contact 
with the ball.

Starc appealed – half-heartedly by modern standards. The on-field umpires, who 
had a fine view of the incident, nonetheless asked for help, whereupon Wilson 
up in the pavilion obviously decided that Stokes’s reaction had been wilful – 
it had to be to justify his decision. An obvious flaw in the process is that 
the only replays viewed by the third umpire were in slow motion, which distorts 
the action. This was a freak incident and it felt like the wrong decision.

Perhaps Australia should have withdrawn their appeal – Eoin Morgan said that 
he would have done so in Steve Smith’s shoes. More obviously, Wilson, with the 
benefit of a real-time replay, might have decreed not out. The umpires out in 
the middle probably had a better idea whether Stokes’s intervention was 
“wilful” or not.

Thereafter, the England run-chase petered out rather as it did in the first 
match. There had been another cameo from Jason Roy; James Taylor, shunning any 
of those darts down the wicket, again promised a major innings. Yet despite a 
spirited effort from Morgan, the last man out for 85 from 87 balls, England, no 
doubt stunned by what they perceived as the injustice of the Stokes dismissal, 
fell away tamely.

England and Australia captains lock horns over Ben Stokes’ dismissal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/england-ben-stokes-dismissal-australia>
Jos Buttler, himself dismissed in controversial circumstances at Edgbaston 
last year when he wasrun out backing up against Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/03/england-fury-sri-lanka-mankad-run-out-jos-buttler>
, was a horribly meek lbw victim to Glenn Maxwell without scoring and the rest 
of a handsome tail on paper could offer very little to their captain.

Morgan rarely betrays his emotions but was there a touch of anger in the sixes 
he swatted off Mitchell Marsh as he sought to reignite the run-chase alongside 
Liam Plunkett. This pair added a defiant 55 from 22 balls but the fireworks 
could not last.

The Australian innings started with a bang but did not end with a whimper. 
David Warner was hit on the thumb by the first ball he received from Steven 
Finn and after examination by the physio he was not seen again. It was later 
confirmed that his thumb was fractured, an injury that takes more than four 
weeks to heal. So Warner will be flying home on Monday after a successful, yet 
surprisingly anonymous tour of England. Aaron Finch is in the country and fit 
again and therefore his likely replacement.

Warner had been the recipient of a rare venomous delivery in the first hour of 
the innings when there was encouragement for the bowlers under a grim, grey 
sky. There was some swing for Chris Woakes but it tended to be early swing 
rather than the devious late variety that Jimmy Anderson can produce. Finn 
occasionally beat the bat but was more inconsistent. He certainly beat the bat 
of Joe Burns in his fifth over and the stumps were shattered.

There followed a measured 99-run partnership between Steve Smith and George 
Bailey. There were not many extravagances from them. Theirs was almost an 
old-fashioned approach to batting in the knowledge that there was plenty of 
firepower down below. Bailey was not greatly tested by the pacemen even though 
he has looked suspect against them in his brief Test career.

Smith had Woakes looking aghast as he whipped off-stump deliveries through 
midwicket. Both fell to spin. Bailey was bowled by Moeen Ali’s second delivery, 
which spun past his inside edge. Soon after Smith sliced a drive to backward 
point off Adil Rashid. Perhaps these successes enticed Morgan to put too much 
faith in his spinners. He asked Moeen to bowl late in the innings and, as we 
know, he never shirks a challenge. However, this proved a misguided decision; 
those cute, counter-intuitive hunches do not always work.

Moeen bowled perfectly well but in his last three overs he was hit for five 
sixes, one of which endangered those sitting comfortably in the upper tier of 
the pavilion. One thing that Messrs Maxwell, Marsh and Watson have in common is 
the capacity to hit off-breaks an awfully long way.

And that is what they did.

On another day the magnitude of those sixes might have been the lingering 
memory of the day. Instead, this contest will be remembered for another chapter 
in the diverting life and times ofBen Stokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes>. He kept his cool rather well 
after his dismissal. That ridiculous cameraman who encroaches on to the field 
to film departing batsmen remained unscathed. It was also unusual to see and 
hear the victorious Australian side being booed by MCC members as they returned 
to the pavilion.
 