
The actor Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> is to narrate the 
first ever unabridged recording of William Golding's vision of an immense spire 
erected on a cathedral.

The story of Dean Jocelin and his belief that God has chosen him to construct 
a spire on his cathedral, despite the fact the old cathedral was built without 
foundations, Golding's novel The Spire was first published in 1964 but there 
has never been an unabridged audio recording of the book before. It was 
announced on Wednesday that Cumberbatch, known for roles including that of 
Sherlock Holmes in the current BBC series, would narrate a new edition to mark 
the 60th anniversary of Golding's most famous novel, Lord of the Flies. The 
audio edition will be published on 7 September. It will precedehis 
much-anticipated performance as Hamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/mar/26/benedict-cumberbatch-barbican-hamlet>
 in London next summer.

In a statement, the Golding family said it was "delighted" at the news. "We 
look forward to enjoying the novel through the medium of his agile and 
expressive voice, and we are sure that his interpretation will be fascinating," 
said the Nobel laureate's family.

Despite warnings from Dean Jocelin's mason against putting up the spire, it 
"rises octagon upon octagon, pinnacle by pinnacle, until the stone pillars 
shriek and the ground beneath it swims. Its shadow falls ever darker on the 
world below, and on Dean Jocelin in particular," said the new edition's 
publisher, Canongate Faber Audio.

Golding won the Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nobel-prize-literature> in 1983, cited for 
novels which "with the perspicuity of realistic narrative art and the diversity 
and universality of myth, illuminate the human condition in the world of 
today", after taking the Booker prize in 1980 for Rites of Passage. The 
novelist, who died in 1993, lived in Salisbury, with a view of the city's 
cathedral spire from where he worked for 15 years.

John Mullan writes in his introduction to The Spire that the novelist 
"apparently took little interest in architectural research for the novel, but 
he knew Salisbury Cathedral intimately". "Like the cathedral in the book, it 
'floated' on the marshy ground on which it was built. He knew that the spire's 
weight caused its supporting pillars visibly to bend, and that it might well 
have eventually collapsed under its own mass if Sir Christopher Wren had not 
added reinforcing beams in the seventeenth century," writes Mullan. "The 
cathedral in The Spire is likewise a near-impossible building … the spire is 
also beyond reason – a glorification of God that leaves the earthly behind."

Frank Kermode described The Spire as "quite simply, a marvel" in the New York 
Review of Books, and Mullan writes that it "could only have been written by a 
man who himself felt viscerally the dark powers of religious feeling", and that 
"like the spire itself, it is a testimony to the irresistible power of the 
imagination".
 