
With his contract at Sligo Rovers coming to an end, Rommy Boco was looking to 
make an impression at thisAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>. He has, but 
unfortunately, his one memorable act was to concede the penalty from which 
Nigeria scored the only goal of the game against Benin, and so kept their coach 
Shaibu Amodu in his job for at least another four days.

The 24-year-old could hardly be blamed for the handball, and seemed simply 
unlucky to be in the way of Peter Odemwingie's header. "At the end of the day 
it's a penalty, but it's tough," Boco said. "The ball came that quick at my 
face, and I don't know what happened after. So it hit my head and hit my arm, 
but it's not like I wanted to do that. But the referee knew what he wanted."

Boco certainly wasn't the only Benin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benin> player complaining about the 
performance of the Angolan referee Helder Martins de Carvalho, who seemed to 
give every key decision Nigeria's way. When Razak Omotoyossi looked as though 
he might have been impeded as he challenged for a high ball on the edge of the 
Nigeria box late on, he not only didn't get the penalty for which he was 
appealing, but mystifyingly found himself penalised and then booked.

"We changed three players and our goalkeeper was on the floor for five 
minutes, and he gave only three minutes added time," Boco went on.

His frustration is understandable, for Benin also hit the woodwork twice and, 
had they secured the draw they probably deserved, they would go into the game 
against a weakened Egypt side knowing a win would guarantee progress to the 
quarter-final. As it is, if the Squirrels are to go through, they must beat 
Egypt and hope that Nigeria neither beat Mozambique nor lose by two goals.

"We've progressed," he said, "but in this tournament we've been unlucky." That 
is true up to a point, and given Benin had never reached the finals of a Cup of 
Nations until 2004, it is a measure of their development that they can trouble 
giants such as Nigeria, but they will surely reflect on the 2-0 lead they let 
slip against Mozambique in their opening game, something that was down less to 
bad luck than more of the appalling goalkeeping that has blighted the 
tournament.

Boco, himself, meanwhile, is looking for progress of his own. Born in France 
of a Beninois father and a French mother, he left Niort in 2005 and came to 
England "with just a bag over my shoulder," as he put it, and not a word of 
English. "I was searching everywhere for trials, and Accrington took me on," he 
said, in what is now fairly fluent English. "I was very grateful to them 
because it was so hard for me."

And so it was that, after helping them to promotion from the Conference, a 
Benin right-back scored Accrington Stanley's first two goals on their return to 
league football, away at Barnet. "That was good," he said. "I'll always be in 
the record books for that."

He found life in Accrington difficult, though. "I thought it was the same 
level as mine: Division 2 in France," he said. "And also I had no idea where 
Accrington was. But I was so desperate to play football I signed. I don't 
regret that, because it was good for me and my career. And the people were very 
friendly, but for me it was too small. I prefer a big city." So he moved to 
Warrington.

By the time of the last Cup of Nations in Ghana, though, Boco was growing 
dissatisfied with life in Lancashire. He had lost his place in the team a few 
months earlier following a back injury and when I met him in Sekondi he spoke 
elliptically of "bad things" happening at the club. On his return, his contract 
was terminated by mutual consent, and he soon joined the former Accrington 
manager Paul Cook at Sligo.

"It was a month after the African Nations that I left Accrington for Ireland," 
he said. "I decided to move on, to try something new. It's different. You know 
in England it's harder, tougher; there is more quality. But playing regularly 
in Ireland helped me progress."
 