
The centenary of the birth of composer and conductor Benjamin Britten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/benjamin-britten> will be marked tomorrow by 
the issue of a new 50p coin, the first of Britain's decimalised currency to 
feature a line of poetry.

Instead of an image of Britten himself, the designer of the new coin, the 
artistTom Phillips, <http://www.tomphillips.co.uk/> has taken a line from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson's poemThe Splendour Falls on Castle Walls 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174652>, which was set to music by 
Britten in his Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings. "Blow Bugle Blow, set the 
wild echoes flying" is written around Britten's name. Phillips joked that he 
wanted to preserve the nation's ability to toss a coin and cry "heads or tails".

"We couldn't have two heads – the Queen's being on the other side – on a coin. 
How on earth would the country start its cricket matches with such a thing?" 
said Phillips, who previously designed a £5 Royal Jubilee coin and a souvenir 
Olympics coin, which weighed a kilogram. In 2005 he produced another 50p, 
struck to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Samuel Johnson's dictionary. 
That, too, featured words rather than an image.

"Who wants to look at a dull picture of an uninteresting old man, even if they 
are wonderful composers or talents?" said Phillips. "What I like about this 
design is the very modern fact that you can read the lines on the coin and then 
go and look them up. If you do, you can go straight away to hear a recording of 
Peter Pears [Britten's partner in both his personal and professional lives] 
singing those very words in ascratchy old recording 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ziyLQmq59cg> on YouTube. I thought that was a 
new approach to a coin in a world like today's."

There's not just the one new coin on the block tomorrow, with two new versions 
of the 50p coming into circulation. The second commemorates the 100th 
anniversary of the birth of Christopher Ironside, one of the earlier designers 
of the first British decimal coins.

That coin will feature Ironside's own design, a royal crest, which lost out in 
1969 to the more popular image of Britannia, which was chosen amid much public 
interest by the Royal Mint Advisory Committee after being labelled "sexy" by the
Sun.

Phillips thinks our currency and the Royal Mint are both a little staid and 
stuffy. "But as an artist you are used to perhaps producing a few prints and 
being delighted if they sell, so when 18 million bits of your work go out 
there, you have to be quite pleased.

"I don't know who approved my design this time round – it used to be a 
committee with the Duke of Edinburgh in charge. I rather liked that. He had two 
responses. One was 'bloody awful' and the other 'jolly good'. Luckily I got a 
'jolly good' for the Samuel Johnson."

It was in 1969 when the first 50p coin appeared, the world's first coin to be 
struck in the shape of an equilateral curve heptagon. By 1997 it had shrunk to 
its present size.

The new coins will be struck for collector's editions in gold and in silver 
and for everyday use in cupro-nickel.

British coins have traditionally been heraldic in theme and for 1,000 years 
have been produced by the Royal Mint in London. There were estimated to be 
28.9bn UK coins in circulation on 31 March 2013, with a total face value of 
£3.9bn. In total, 1.4bn UK coins were issued during 2012-13.

The Royal Mint also makes currency for other countries. It serves more than 
100 issuing authorities around the world and meets around 15% of global demand, 
making the UK the world's biggest coin maker.

Tom Phillips's latest show 
<http://www.flowersgallery.com/exhibitions/flowers/2013/tom-phillips-fc-show/> 
opens this week at the Flowers Gallery, Cork Street, London W1
 