
The problems at troubled Saudi group Saad have prompted the firm to begin a 
sale of its quoted investments, with a stake in housebuilderBerkeley first on 
the block.

Citigroup has placed 16.1m shares in Berkeley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/berkeleygroupholdings> on behalf of Saad 
at 701p each, representing a 15% shareholding in the company. The shares are 
believed to have gone to existing investors in the company.

Traders heard that another 4.4m shares had been sold in a separate deal at 
around 715p each. In all Saad - which has been forced into restructuring its 
debt after the Saudi central bank froze the accounts of its billionaire founder 
Maan Al-Sanea - had built up a stake of nearly 29% of Berkeley.

A spokesman for Berkeley, which closed down 43p at 782p, said the company 
understood that Saad was the seller of the shares, although the Saudi group 
refused to comment on individual transactions. Earlier this year Saad supported 
a £50m placing at 840p a share designed to help Berkeley buy more land when it 
became available.

Meanwhile HSBC, where Saad is believed to have a stake of just below 3%, fell 
5.75p to 517.75p. Other companies where Saad has invested includePetra Diamonds
, down 1p at 38p, and chip designerImagination Technologies, 3.75p lower at 
86.5p.

Berkeley was not the only builder to slip back, with Redrow down 11p to 198p 
andTaylor Wimpey 1.75p lower at 36.5p after a report from the Royal Institution 
of Chartered Surveyors indicated the housing market may still face further 
obstacles to recovery.

Overall the FTSE 100 lacked direction in what one trader called "mid-summer 
malaise", finally closing just 0.43 points lower at 4404.79 after an early dip 
on Wall Street. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, said:

"The market continues to oscillate without making any commitment in either 
direction. It's hard to see any reasons for bulls to push the market to new 
highs, whilst at the same time the recent signs of a recovery have prevented 
any large scale selling, so at the moment sideways is only path to take."

Three companies which lost their place in the leading index at the last 
quarterly reshuffle are set to return to the top rank. Based on tonight's 
closing prices and due to be ratified by index complier FTSE Group tomorrow, 
the three areLondon Stock Exchange, up 7.5p to 778.5p, building materials group 
Wolseley, 20p better at £11.03 and private equity group 3i, off 3p at 257p.

The LSE was helped by a positive note from Bernstein Research, which said:

"We are upgrading LSE to outperform from market-perform with a target price of 
950p. We expect potential for cost savings, a low interest rate environment and 
a strong post-trade environment to drive stock outperformance."

The three newcomers are expected to replace insurer Amlin, down 3.75p at 332p, 
Whitbread, 12.5p lower at 877p, and Drax, down 8p to 460p.

Meanwhile retailer Yell, up 0.5p to 37p, and Punch Taverns, down 1.75p to 
155p, are among those set for promotion to the FTSE 250.

Elsewhere Lloyds Banking Group added 1.9p to 63p as it confirmed plans to shut 
its Cheltenham & Gloucester branches and cut 1,660 jobs.Barclays rose 6.25p to 
290p ahead of an expected sale of its asset management businessBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> Global Investors to New York 
based Blackrock, with a deal coming as soon as tomorrow.

But Panmure Gordon's notable bear on the sector Sandy Chen is still negative, 
although he began his latest note by saying sorry:

"A belated apology: remaining a seller of the UK banks has been a terrible 
call since mid-March. And with the exception of Lloyds, all the UK banks should 
book strong first half results for 2009, fuelled by trading income, debt swaps 
and disposal gains. But… we remain unconvinced that a V-shaped macro recovery 
is taking shape.

"Proponents of [such a recovery] are underestimating how much rising 
unemployment and an unstable structure of indebtedness can lengthen and deepen 
this recession. And there is growing tension between the private and government 
segments of the economy. Post-crisis, we think the UK banks will be far less 
profitable than what current valuations are implying.

"We remain firmly underweight on the UK banks, and since our valuations and 
price targets remain well below current share prices, we retain sells on them 
all."

Oil companies were boosted by the crude price rising by more than $1 on demand 
hopes and the recent dollar weakness.

In addition Tullow Oil has been helped by a buy note from Deutsche Bank, which 
has raised its price target from £10.10 to £11.65. The bank said:

"Tullow is differentiated from its peers by having the best exploration track 
record; around 30 wells drilled in Ghana and Uganda, just one dry hole, opening 
two, one billion barrel plus, frontier basins. However, Tullow's next well, 
Ngassa-2, is undoubtedly the most binary it has drilled for some time. It tests 
deep potential below Lake Albert (Uganda), where reservoir 
development/hydrocarbon charge remain key risks. However, the upside is also 
material. Ngassa could double the discovered gross resource in Uganda, tripling 
Tullow's net exposure.

"In recent months, strengthening oil prices/markets, and a renewed appetite 
for exploration risk has thrown exploration and production back into the 
spotlight. Tullow is one of the standout performers due to its peer-group 
leading levels of historic success, and the materiality of upcoming wells. 
Tullow remains our top pick within our UK E&P peer group."

Tullow has climbed 38p to 998p while Heritage Oil - which has partnered Tullow 
is some projects - is 18p higher at 603p after a reverse takeover by Turkey's 
Genel Energy International.

Evolution Securities issued a buy note on Heritage with a 900p target, saying:

"Heritage is set to merger with Genel Energy, a privately held Turkish 
company, that should see consolidate its position in Kurdistan and have 
sufficient cash flows from production to fund its Ugandan project."

Spread betting group IG rose 24.25p to 242p after it said in a trading update 
it expected full year profits to rise from £97m to around £125m, while 
engineering groupGKN jumped 9.5p to 132.25p as Merrill Lynch upgraded from 
neutral to buy and raised its price target from 110p to 155p. Merrill said the 
company's major market, automotive, was showing signs of stabilisation. The 
company's shares have been hit by concerns on financing, and Merrill suggests a 
rights issue might be on the way.

Lower down the market taxi cab company Manganese Bronze has accelerated 32p to 
238.5p. The company is raising £9.4m with a placing of 5.35m shares at 187p 
each, and traders said the fundraising had gone well. In a hold note Collins 
Stewart said:

"We estimate the placing to be around 15% dilutive to earnings per share in 
the short term, as clearly the proceeds are being used to facilitate the longer 
term growth of the business. In the short-term, the fundraising dissipates any 
uncertainty about the financial future of Manganese, although much of this has 
effectively been taken into account by the recent rally in the share price."

Finally technology group Wolfson Microelectronics slipped 2.25p to 111.25p as 
it revealed its socket was not in the new iPhone. François Meunier at Cazenove 
said:

"Wolfson was notified overnight by Apple it has not been retained in the new 
3GS, and hence our assumption [it would be] was wrong. Tear downs will probably 
confirm that Wolfson has either been replaced by Cirrus Logic (as in the Touch) 
or been integrated.

"According to the company, 'current trading is consistent with the outlook 
provided at the time of the first quarter results'. However, the potential for 
upside is more limited. In our view, increased volumes at LG and Samsung and in 
analog in general could offset lost business at Apple but the potential for 
upside is more limited now in our view as Wolfson will only remain in the 
iPhone 3G (not the more expensive 3GS). Our 2009 and 2010 estimates remain 
unchanged.

"Wolfson remains attractively valued, but we are disappointed by the negative 
news on the iPhone 3GS."
 