
After last year’s horror budget, which mired the government in poor opinion 
polls, this year’s budget sought to address that issue. Whilerecent research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/24/low-income-families-the-biggest-losers-from-coalitions-budget-research-finds>
 suggests low income earners remain the hardest hit, a report by the 
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) argues that 
lowering inequality improves economic growth and measures, such as the 
government’s increased spending on childcare, is the best way to both lower 
inequality while fostering economic growth.


The standard canard by those who argue that all the fuss about economic 
inequality is overrated, is that it is better to have economic growth rather 
than sacrifice growth for equality. They argue that a rising tide lifts all 
boats and thus it is better to focus on economic growth rather than inequality.

But the OECD report, In it together: Why less inequality benefits us all 
<http://www.oecd.org/social/reducing-gender-gaps-and-poor-job-quality-essential-to-tackle-growing-inequality.htm>
, released last week, confirms the International Monetary Fund study fromlast 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/26/imf-inequality-economic-growth>
 that inequality is actually harmful to economic growth.

The OECD <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> study goes even further 
and suggests that “when income inequality rises, economic growth falls”.

It also found that the real negative impact of income equality came not so 
much from when average income earners fell well below the richest, but when the 
bottom 40% of income earners lag well behind the average earners.

The good news for Australia is that compared to the rest of the OECD we are 
doing quite well on equality. Unlike a majority of nations in the OECD, 
Australia’s inequality during the global financial crisis (GFC) actually 
decreased.

During the 1990s, inequality in Australia rose in line with the average of the 
OED, but the mining boom from 2004 to 2008 it increased faster than the rest of 
the OECD.

As I have noted previously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2013/aug/06/income-wealth-gfc-equality>
, Australia came out of the GFC more equal than when it entered. Among the 
reasons for this were our comparative small rise in unemployment, the large 
increase in pensions in 2009, as well as the decline in income of the 
wealthiest partly due to falls in the share market:

While this might suggest that improved equality assisted economic growth, 
equality also improved in the UK at the same time it suffered dreadfully during 
the GFC and the recession which followed.

But the differences behind Australia and the UK’s improvements in equality 
since 2007 is rather telling.

From 2007 to 2011, the income of the poorest 10% of households in Australia 
<http://www.oecd.org/australia/OECD2015-In-It-Together-Highlights-Australia.pdf>
 increased by 2%, while incomes of the top 10% declined by 1%. But in theUK 
<http://www.oecd.org/unitedkingdom/OECD2015-In-It-Together-Highlights-UnitedKingdom-Embargo-21May11amPArisTime.pdf>
, the average household disposable income for the poorest 10% fell by 6%, 
compared with the top tenth falling by 11%.

In the UK, the receding tide dropped all boats.

While income equality improved for the UK during the GFC, wealth equality 
regressed.

The OECD notes that in the UK the GFC “exacerbated the concentration of wealth 
at the top”. It found “while on average net wealth has declined since 2007, the 
net wealth of the top percentiles has increased”.

In Australia, the wealth inequality is less than the average in the OECD, and 
certainly well below the US. In the US the top 10% hold 75% of the total wealth 
in the nation, in Australia, the richest 10% hold only 44.9% – below the OECD 
average of 50%:

That Australia is doing better than the OECD average is worth celebrating but 
also requires vigilance. The OECD found that rising inequality has flow-on 
effects that become a perpetuating circle. For example, it noted that the wider 
the income inequality, “the lower is the chance that low-income households 
invest in education”.

This matters because lower educated people are found to be employed in 
“non-standard” employment such as part-time or full-time contract work. 
Standard employment is defined a full-time permanent work, which despite 
increases in part-time work, remains the most common form of employment here in 
Australia and around the OECD.

The OECD found that, on average, non-standard work tends to pay lower wages 
than standard jobs, especially at the bottom of the earnings distribution. The 
incidence of non-standard work can thus be a major driver of income inequality.

Australia does have a higher incidence of non-standard work than most of the 
OECD, but unlike other nations there is almost no “wage penalty” compared with 
full-time permanent workers. Whereas in other countries part-time and casual 
workers can receive significantly lower rates than full-time workers in the 
same jobs, the OECD found in Australia there is little difference between the 
hourly pay rates of standard and non-standard workers when taking into account 
the experience of workers with similar job characteristics.

But while this would suggest there is no problem working in non-standard jobs, 
because such work involves fewer hours, it means the total income of part-time 
or casual workers is much less – and the risks of being in poverty are much 
higher.

In Australia 2.1% of standard workers live in poverty compared to 14% of 
“non-standard workers”.

Both levels, however, are much better than the OECD average:

But where Australia does fall down in a great heap is jobless poverty rates – 
at 53.5% it is the second worst nation recorded by the OECD.

It certainly supports the notion that both major parties in this country 
believe, as Tony Abbott said on Monday in parliament, “the best form of welfare 
is work” . Certainly, under former ALP and current Coalition governments since 
2007, there has been little joy for those forced onto Newstart.

The report also knocked on the head the notion that redistribution of national 
income through income taxes and cash benefits harms growth.

In the case of the US 
<http://www.oecd.org/unitedstates/OECD2015-In-It-Together-Highlights-UnitedStates-Embargo-21May11amPArisTime.pdf>
, it actually recommended that tax rates on “top earners” are raised, tax 
compliance improved and “regressive tax deductions” eliminated or scaled back.

Such advice would sit well with those arguing Australia superannuation tax 
concessions should also be wound back.

But the report also suggests economic growth benefits more from improving 
inequality by increasing the income of the lowest 10% relative to average 
income, rather than attempting to reduce the gap between average earners and 
the wealthiest 10%.

The report estimates that if inequality in the UK was improved to the level 
that exists in France, or if inequality in the United States was improved to 
the level that exists in Australia, their annual GDP growth would increase by 
nearly 0.3 percentage points over 25 years. This would mean in 25 years their 
economy would be 7% bigger than it otherwise would have been.

But how should we improve this “bottom inequality”, to use the OECD’s term.

Rather than just use cash transfers through increasing welfare payments – even 
though this is necessary when the jobless in Australia are so firmly entrenched 
in poverty – the OECD recommends spending on longer-term social investment that 
fosters “upward mobility and creates greater equality of opportunity in the 
long run”.

Among such programs are people who have access to “high-quality childcare and 
education or access to health or housing.”

Thus the budget’s focus on childcare certainly gets a tick, though the 
government’s cuts to education and health that remain from last year’s budget 
rather negate any benefit.

And benefit it is. The OECD report highlights that improving the poorest 
incomes boosts economic growth of all. It shows that inequality is, not just 
the political problem Joe Hockey found last year, but an economic one as well, 
and one that should be at the forefront of the treasurer’s mind.
 