
Uncapped middle-order batsman Chris Lynn has been rewarded for his Big Bash 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> pyrotechnics with a 
place in the Australia squad for the five-match one-day international series 
against Pakistan.

The 26-year-old has been in impressive form in the domestic Twenty20 
competition andhit a stunning 11 sixes in an unbeaten 49-ball 98 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/big-bash-chris-lynn-thumps-11-sixes-to-lift-brisbane-heat-past-scorchers>
 for the Brisbane Heat against the Perth Scorchers earlier this week.

Australia ease to clean sweep as spinners turn screw on Pakistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/australia-ease-to-clean-sweep-as-spinners-turn-screw-on-pakistan>
Pace bowler Billy Stanlake, who stands 2.04 metres tall and has been in fine 
form in the BBL for the Adelaide Strikers, also earned a call-up to the one-day 
squad for the first time.

Opener Aaron Finch and former skipper George Bailey have been dropped from the 
squad that beat New Zealand 3-0 at the back end of last year, along with 
all-rounder Hilton Cartwright, who made his Test debut against Pakistan this 
week.

Test top-order batsman Usman Khawaja is the third addition to the 14-man squad 
and could open with David Warner when the series opens in Brisbane on Friday.

“Chris Lynn is in superb form for the Brisbane Heat and although that is a 
different form of the game, we believe it is right that we give him the chance 
to show whether he can convert his wonderful ball-striking ability to ODIs,” 
head selector Trevor Hohns said.

“Usman Khawaja has been in excellent touch throughout this Test summer, is 
able to bat anywhere in the top order and deserves another chance to 
demonstrate his ODI credentials.

“Billy Stanlake is an exciting prospect who bowls with genuine pace and is a 
player who has made a terrific return to action for the Adelaide Strikers in 
the Big Bash League after a lengthy time out through injury.”

Stanlake looks to have a good chance of winning a first cap with Josh 
Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc, who played all six Tests in the home summer, set 
to be rested for some of the matches as they start preparations for four Tests 
in India.

“I guess we’ll probably pick our times to have a rest here or there, whether 
it’s one game or two in the series,” Hazlewood said on Friday. “Depending on 
how we’re feeling and how much we’ve bowled.”

After Brisbane, the series continues with matches in Melbourne, Perth, Sydney 
and Adelaide.

Australia’s 14-man ODI squad: David Warner, Usman Khawaja, Steve Smith 
(captain), Mitch Marsh, Travis Head, Chris Lynn, James Faulkner, Glenn Maxwell, 
Matthew Wade, Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood, Pat Cummins, Adam Zampa, Billy 
Stanlake.
 