
Letter from America No 2585, August 28 1998 

Last Wednesday evening, just when those of us whose job is to keep one eye 
peeled for the news feel free to close it and listen in relief to what EB White 
called "the most beautiful sound in America: the tinkle of ice at twilight," a 
bulletin came in. President Clinton would make a public speech on Thursday 
August 27, in Worcester, Massachusetts. Let me put you in the mood - the very 
wary, watchful, the almost morbidly suspenseful mood in which we heard about 
that coming speech.

Only eight days before, a very chastened president had made what everybody 
hoped would be a full, liberating confession about the squalid Lewinsky affair 
[concerning his liaison with a young White House intern]. Yet, it was, to all 
but a handful of politicians and the media and other public figures, deeply 
disappointing - tricky, legalistic, evasive.

So - came Thursday noon - and heaven alone knows how many people skipped the 
lunch hour, how many oldsters delayed the golf game, how many journalists in 
how many states sat with pen and paper or tape recorder to hear a confession.

The speech, the occasion - a Massachusetts town, the joyous, stunning 
reception by a small audience of parents - was the shock. Mr Clinton did not 
deign to mention Whitewater, the FBI, Ms Monica Lewinsky, or any other 
inappropriate houri. A young news editor, coming on the tape of this speech 20 
years from now, could have dated it 1993; or, since it gave a breath-takingly 
impressive recital of all the splendid things the Clinton administration had 
done, maybe it was a triumphant speech at the end of his first term. And that 
same editor, would have said, "No wonder they re-elected him. What bounce, what 
confidence, what intelligence, what a range of knowledge."

Then he'd see the date: Thursday August 27 1998. Impossible. This a marooned, 
a besieged president. Where? How?

In a totally non-clinical way, Mr Clinton gives the impression of having two 
characters, the tricky, sly, deceptive, engaging con man, and the public, 
conscientious, truly concerned, engaging, eloquent, sympathetic statesman.

So, the unreal spectacle on Thursday, which for an hour or more made me think 
we were living on two planets at once: there was this ruddy-faced, engaging, 
cheerful, funny, eloquent president - reeling off impressive stuff about a 
balanced budget, lowest unemployment ever, more home ownership, smaller 
government bureaucracy, determination to make every school in the country safe 
for children, to free every parent from the haunting menace of guns, robbers, 
drugs. The small audience gave the cue to all of us and rose with a collective 
shout of praise and wonder.

Meanwhile, Russia was stumbling into bankruptcy, Islam was starting protest 
marches against the outrage of American [cruise missile] attacks on their soil 
[in the Sudan and Afghanistan], Saddam Hussein was chucklingly telling the 
United Nations inspectors to get lost - and Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright was almost saying, "Yes, sir." The stock market, as Mr Clinton spoke 
so rapturously, so cheerfully, was plunging down 300 points, as deep a drop as 
any since the Black Monday of 1987. Surely, in the hour we need him, he
will survive.
 