
Bill Shorten is demanding Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> set up a joint police 
taskforce to act immediately on “extremely serious” claims about unions in the 
construction industry, as the Coalition prepares to launch a royal commission 
into allegations involving crime figures, kickbacks, slush funds and death 
threats.

The government is set to expand its promised judicial inquiry into a full 
blown royal commission afterthe recent revelations 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-01-28/union-accused-of-ties-to-crime-figures-kickbacks-for-jobs/5221234>
 about union officials forming corrupt relationships with organised crime 
figures and has demanded the Labor leader, a former union official, support the 
investigation.

The Sunday Telegraph is reporting  
<http://www.news.com.au/national/nsw-act/former-high-court-judge-to-head-probe-into-slush-funds-bribes/story-fnii5s3x-1226821417045>
a former high court judge has agreed to lead the inquiry, and that it will have 
the power to subpoena witnesses and force unions to open their books to the 
investigation.

It says the investigation will include the allegations surrounding the Health 
Services Union and former Labor MP Craig Thomson and the more recent 
allegations about construction unions, but will also extend much further to 
include any “off the books” transactions by unions.

With the issue certain to loom large as the parliamentary year resumes, 
Shorten has called on the government to set up a joint police inquiry straight 
away, describing anyone involved in corruption as “a low-life.”

“Labor condemns corruption and bribery in all its forms – it’s vile. We have 
absolute zero tolerance for it. Some of these allegations are sickening and if 
they’re true, the perpetrators should be locked up – no question,” he said.

“These allegations must be investigated and they must be investigated right 
now by the police.”

He is proposing an inquiry, led by the Australian Federal Police and including 
state police forces, to investigate allegations of corruption in the building 
construction sector, including both union representatives and employers.

He says that unlike a royal commission, a police inquiry could act quickly and 
would have the power to make arrests and lay charges.

After the new allegations emerged, Abbott said Shorten and the Labor party 
needed to decide which side they were on.

“Are they on the side of law-abiding citizens ... (or) on the side of people 
with a tendency to break the law? Are they on the side of getting to the bottom 
of this or do they want to support a culture of cover-up?,” he said.

During the election campaign last year, Abbott promised a judicial inquiry 
into slush fund at the Australian Workers Union and the misappropriation of 
hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Federal cabinet has discussed terms of reference for the inquiry but after the 
new allegations were aired many in theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> have been pressing for 
the inquiry to be broadened into a royal commission.
 