
Columbus, Chicago and Dallas all capitalized on home-ice advantage to win 
series-squaring games in theNHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> 
playoffs on Wednesday.

Both Columbus and Chicago had 4-3 overtime wins over Pittsburgh and St. Louis 
respectively, while Dallas defeated top-seeded Anaheim 4-2, with all three 
series now level at 2-2.

Columbus came from three goals down to beat the Penguins. Brandon Dubinsky 
scored with 22.5 seconds left in regulation to force overtime before Nick 
Foligno's wrist shot just inside the blue line 2:49 into the extra session.

The Blue Jackets recorded their first home playoff victory in the franchise's 
13 seasons, sending the series back to Pittsburgh for Game 5 on Saturday.

Craig Adams, Chris Kunitz, James Neal scored in a 5:01 span in the first 
period to stake the Penguins to a 3-0 lead. But Ryan Johansen and Dubinsky each 
had a goal and an assist and Boone Jenner also scored for Columbus.

Chicago's Patrick Kane scored his second goal of the game at 11:17 of overtime 
to secure the win over St. Louis.

Kane carried the puck down the left side as teammates Ben Smith and Brandon 
Saad rushed toward the net, and beat Ryan Miller with a well-placed wrist shot.

Bryan Bickell had tied it for defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago with 3:52 
left in regulaton after the Blackhawks blew a 2-0 second-period lead. Andrew 
Shaw also scored, Jonathan Toews had two assists and Corey Crawford made 30 
saves.

Vladimir Tarasenko scored twice for St. Louis, and Maxim Lapierre added a goal.

Dallas' Cody Eakin and Alex Goligoski scored 1:22 apart with the Stars' first 
two shots in the third period, and the hosts went on to beat Anaheim.

The Ducks, even without captain Ryan Getzlaf who was a surprise late 
withdrawal with an upper-body injury and Teemu Selane, jumped out to a 2-0 lead 
in the first period through goals by Bryan Allen and Patrick Maroon.

Dallas captain Jaime Benn scored off a faceoff only 27 seconds into the second 
period for his third goal in the series and Vernon Fiddler tied it at 6:33 of 
the second.

 