
There seems to be a lot of zeal in the atmosphere this week. Not just over 
Tony Blair's appearance before the Chilcot inquiry today 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2010/jan/29/iraq-war-inquiry-tonyblair>
, but Scott Roeder, that righteous born-againChristian doctor-killer in Kansas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/jan/28/scott-roeder-abortion-doctor-killer>
 and, of course, the case of Dr Andrew Wakefield, the MMR researcher.

As overnight media has been reporting, Wakefield and two colleagues were 
condemned by the General Medical Council's disciplinary panel in ferocious 
terms yesterday. Wakefield was accused of "dishonesty and irresponsibility" as 
well as a "callous disregard" for the suffering of children whom he tested 
without appropriate consents or safeguards.

Yet when the verdict was announced there were cries of "bastards", "it's a 
set-up" and "disgusting" from the doctor's passionate supporters at the 
hearing, many of them parents of children with degrees of autism – "the Lancet 
families" – who saw Wakefield as the only doctor who "ever really listened".

Powerful feelings bordering on hysteria, charges of illegitimacy levelled 
against each other by rival camps, an atmosphere which smacks of a witch-hunt 
... it all sounds a bit like the Chilcot hearings, and ought to trouble 
sensible people.

When does a very proper quest for the truth – scientific, legal, political – 
tip over into a blame game, a search for scapegoats which – as scapegoats are 
meant to do – enable the rest of us to feel better and move on? Egged on by 
neocon zealots (and supported by T Blair), George Bush scapegoated Saddam 
Hussein, a very bad man. Plenty are now seeking to return the favour.

In Wakefield's case his published 1998 findings – never replicated by other 
researchers – stopped short of blaming the triple measles, mumps and rubella 
(MMR) jab for later development of bowel and autism problems in small children. 
But at a press conference he went further, suggesting that the jabs should 
prudently be given separately.

Thanks to generous publicity in scaremongering newspapers, rates of MMR 
vaccination fell from 91% to 80% by 2003 – well below the "herd immunity" rate 
of 95% – and 50% in some parts of London, probably the poorer parts, though you 
can never be sure. The take-up of cancer screening tests are lower in the 
capital, but almost equal among all classes, a top medic told me recently.

As that admirable scourge of humbug and quackery, Ben Goldacre, points out in 
today's Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2010/jan/28/mmr-vaccine-ben-goldacre>, the 
media has a lot to answer for by spreading the scare story rather than 
demanding better evidence.

Tony and Cherie Blair added to the confusion by refusing to say whether their 
fourth child, Leo, born in 2001, had been given the MMR jab. They invoked 
privacy when they should have shown leadership, as the Queen did in the 50s by 
letting it be known that her children had been given the polio shot we all had 
during that fearsome epidemic.

In fairness – let's be fair; that's the point – Cherie Blair combines high 
lawyerly intelligence with a new age daffiness in some matters. So it is always 
possible that she gave little Leo a few sacred crystals in his cornflakes and 
hoped for the best.

In which case, silence was the best policy.

Wakefield's prosecutors at the GMC were not passing judgment on his research, 
which now takes place in Texas, where he cannot practice medicine but can raise 
money for his autism centre – the Thoughtful House – in Austin, and does.

Its condemnation – after a record hearing of 148 days, the longest in the 
council's 148-year history – was on process and probity. He paid children at 
his son's birthday party a fiver apiece to give blood, and failed to declare 
conflicting financial interests – including £55,000 from the legal aid board – 
even to the Lancet, which published his findings.

The Lancet was the same magazine that published the Johns Hopkins mortality 
survey which reported there had been 600,000 excess deaths inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> between 2003-06 because of the US-UK 
invasion. It is a figure that has also been hard to replicate, even by the 
Shia-dominated Malaki government in Baghdad. This is a week where many zealous 
paths cross.

I'm even less qualified to judge Wakefield's work than I am statistical 
fieldwork methodology in a war zone. There were professional whispers about him 
from the start, as there were about Johns Hopkins. Butthe Times reports today 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/health/article7006525.ece> 
that "with a handful of honourable exceptions many vaccine experts ran the 
other way when the story broke in 1998". It may help explain the severity of 
their censure today. Sound familiar, does it?

In 1998 that failure left opponents of vaccines (which have after all been 
around for over 200 years, when George III and Catherine the Great showed good 
family examples) to fill the vacuum along with media hucksters, some of them 
the same outlets now throwing stones at Wakefield. It's a familiar pattern: 
think the McCanns, think Baghdad.

Such people skillfully deployed parents with damaged children – understandably 
eager to blame something or someone for a tragedy in the family. It's human 
instinct, one encouraged in our own slightly hysterical times where running hot 
and cold zeal is available on demand 24/7.

The medical response may be better now. As a result of the MMR shambles, a 
Science Media Centre has been established – manned by independent press staff – 
to advise scientists how best to get the facts (as we know them) over to a 
puzzled public.

My own instinct has been to mistrust Wakefield, not least because of the media 
company he kept. But I don't like witch-hunts, even of people I mistrust, 
especially when science is involved, because minds are best kept open against 
the pressures of conformity.

This week the government's chief scientific adviser, Professor John Beddington 
(he has a beard to show he's a real scientist) called for such openness. He had 
in mind climate change scientists, who should be less hostile to sceptics.

"I don't think it's right to dismiss proper scepticism. Science grows and 
improves in the light of criticism," Beddington told the Times in the wake of 
assorted problems which have beset those melting Himalayan glaciers, UEA 
temperature data and other global warming evidence.

Quite right too. The reaction to challenge of the climate change priesthood – 
which is how too many sound as if they see themselves – was sneaky and 
defensive. Most of their critics may be charlatans, but not all are.

Indeed, the history of science is full of wrong roads taken, stifling 
orthodoxy and petty spite among great men fighting to deny each other credit. 
Science is not always good at admitting its mistakes as wrong-science, not 
non-science.

The worst of it is that – across all endeavours, scientific or not – excess 
zeal leads us to deny the very legitimacy of our opponents. Not just the 
legitimacy of their opinions, actions or their research, but their legitimacy 
as fellow human beings.

Blair, Wakefield (both sides), Scott Roeder, the Kansas zealot who tried 
persuade that judge it was right to save lives by shooting dead an abortion 
doctor (he lost); even the BNP's more zealous opponents rush to delegitimise 
all their complaints as glibly as the BNP itself condemns ethnic minorities and 
other perceived enemies.

The most conspicuous target of this process in the world today is actually 
Barack Obama, whose enemies accuse him not just of being an anti-American 
socialist (a Nazi too), but of not even being an American because he was 
"really" born in Kenya.

That's what they say and they mean it, lots and lots of them. That's what the 
man's up against. Scary stuff. I wonder what Scott Roeder thinks.
 