
Whoops and yells ring out through the atrium of the headquarters of the 
National Association of the Blind, the echo making it hard to hear. It is 
General Electric's corporate social responsibility day, and they are loudly 
painting the walls of the organisation.

Next door, a group of children in a workshop read braille instructions on a 
loom, trying to communicate above the din. At the end of the day, a young boy 
sings at a short ceremony, the company congratulate themselves on sterling team 
work and go home. Not once interacting with their hosts.

This is the dual face of modern India, centred here in Bangalore, the economic 
powerhouse of one of the world's fastest growing economies. The increasingly 
visible IT crowd, a burgeoning middle class benefiting from India's booming 
economy; and then, those who routinely remain invisible, overlooked, hidden 
away even in the spaces dedicated to them.

Access to education is a basic human right, but one not enjoyed by over 75 
million children across the world. Many factors hamper children's school 
attendance in the developing world, but for children with disabilities the 
barriers are much higher. Ninety per cent of blind or severely visually 
impaired children in India do not attend school.

Disability carries a heavy stigma in India. Fatalistic attitudes towards 
disability understand it as "divine justice". A recent survey found that 50% of 
Indian households saw the cause of disability as a "curse of God". Blindness in 
particular is tainted by the Hindu myth of the blind King Dhritarashtra who 
sides with the forces of evil.

Many families with blind members share such attitudes. Not knowing how to care 
for their child and with fear of social retribution, parents hide their child 
away from the world. Abandoned in their own homes, the child falls beneath the 
radar of the state. Mr Das Suryawanshi, Karnataka state commissioner for 
disabilities, admits that the government "simply do not know how many blind 
children remain outside the school system", but new cases are discovered daily.

Opinions differ over the best approach in providing education for blind 
children or those with other disabilities. Many advocate special schools in 
which specific services can be provided. However, inclusive education, in which 
the blind are educated alongside sighted peers, is increasingly usual.

Paramesh is an itinerant teacher. He travels around the province of Gundulpet, 
visiting blind children in their classrooms and homes up to three times a week. 
Employed by National Association for the Blind (NAB) Karnataka with support 
from Sightsavers International, Paramesh has helped Yshodra Pouramaika to 
achieve the top grade in the high school graduation exam and full marks in 
Kannada, her native tongue. Yshodra is from a street-cleaning Dalit family - 
formerly the untouchable caste.

Itinerant teaching enables access to remote areas, bringing the classroom to 
the child. Ninety per cent of Indian people live in rural and deprived 
villages. Rates of disability are higher, stigma is stronger and special 
schools are far away. You can drive for hours between small clusters of 
hamlets, over bumpy unkempt roads, only stopping every now and then for the odd 
intransigent cow.

This distance means rural children placed in special schools must become 
residential pupils, removed from their families for months or years at a time. 
Having been in both types of education, Ketan Kothari from Sightsavers South 
India is keen to emphasise the importance of inclusive forms of education. 
"Itinerant models of education mean that you can keep the blind child with his 
or her family."

Cross-legged on a mud floor Arvinda's hand shoots up in class to beat his 
sighted friends to answer the teacher's maths puzzle. Meanwhile, five-year-old 
Hemant tears around the garden path of his tiny pastoral primary school in a 
rush to get back to his classroom. Without itinerant teaching, each of these 
scenes is unimaginable.

Despite his preference for inclusive education, Ketan is not wholly critical 
of special schools, as they "do offer some kind of advantage when it comes to 
the skills related to blindness, such as braille and other gadgets. Whereas 
social skills you learn much better in an integrated set-up."

But government commitment to inclusive education remains lukewarm. "Here in 
India," sighs Mrs Saroja Ramachandra, president of NAB-Karnataka , "government 
planning is one of the best in the world, but implementing it is another 
story." The system remains bureaucratic and slow, officials are divorced from 
the reality on the ground and money goes missing. Ramachandra suspects that 
quality education is sacrificed for positive statistics. "Everything goes by 
numbers. They say all the children have gone to school. Great. But who is 
teaching? How many are they teaching?"

Respect for the rights of blind citizens is part of the struggle for quality 
education. But this is India and resources are scarce. "Advocacy is too much," 
Ramachandra laments. "We cannot do that too." Ketan, however, is unequivocal. 
"Advocacy is so important," he enthuses, "because without rights and without 
knowledge of rights, service delivery is meaningless." Education itself is 
important in strengthening the political voice of the blind, giving them the 
tools to speak for and by themselves.

Ketan, Yshodra, Arvinda and Hemant are clear examples of the success of 
inclusive education. But this is not simply a steady march forward. As Ketan 
explains: "We need to educate both communities. We need to educate the blind 
about their rights, responsibilities and obligations. On the other hand, we 
need to train society with how to deal with the blind."

In India, a country dissected by religious and tribal divisions, disparities 
of wealth and talking across 46 languages, integrating the blind with the 
sighted, in school and in society, goes some way to making two worlds nearer to 
one.
 