
For Alex James <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james>, the bassist 
from Blur who turned cheesemaker, it was the dream that became a nightmare. For 
a weekend last September, he gave over his luscious farm in the Cotswolds to a 
festival celebrating his two great loves: food and music. KT Tunstall and the 
Feeling played, while chefs such as Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall and Yotam 
Ottolenghi gave cookery demonstrations.

More than 7,000 people attended each day, including the cream of the so-called 
Chipping Norton set. Jeremy Clarkson rolled up in his Range Rover, disgraced 
News International supremo Rebekah Brooks was there and even David Cameron, the 
prime minister, attended, baby Florence strapped to his chest in a harness as 
he browsed the street-food stalls.

Alex James Presents Harvest was deemed a success – until a couple of days 
later, when the company behind the festival, Big Wheel Promotions, announced 
that it was in difficulties, with creditors later reported to be owed close to 
£1m.

Since then, save for a terse statement, James has remained silent while abuse 
has been heaped upon him, both in the press and social media. Finally, this 
weekend he spoke about the financial collapse, which not only cost him money 
but left friends in both the music and food businesses, neighbours in the 
Cotswolds and even a local primary school out of pocket. "The fact that people 
didn't get paid really, really upset me," he said. "But I had to follow legal 
procedures and unfortunately that meant not talking about it."

The festival on James's farm was a sister event to Harvest at Jimmy's, a 
similar food and music festival that had been run for two years by Big Wheel on 
the Suffolk farm of broadcaster and farmer Jimmy Doherty. Many of those 
involved in that festival also remain unpaid.

"I had looked at the event at Jimmy's and they seemed to have a good 
business," said James. "Although I was simply giving my land for the festival, 
my major concern was making sure that, as I was seen as the host, everybody 
involved was paid on time."

Ticket sales were strong and the response positive. "It was the best party I'd 
ever been to." Within a week, however, the company announced that it was in 
trouble. "They told me sponsors hadn't paid up and that the losses were 
substantial. I was shocked."

While some staff and performers were paid in advance, many others were left 
with huge unpaid bills. Among them was Kingham primary school, which received 
only half of the £14,000 it had been promised for arranging a festival of local 
bands. The money was to go towards the salary of a music teacher at the school. 
After the collapse, Ed Read, the headteacher, said the school might not be able 
to fill that staff post.

However, in December, a concert was staged in Chipping Norton to settle the 
debt. "I pledged to match the funds raised from my own pocket," James says, 
'"and we managed to return most of the money. I was very happy to do that."

Others have not been so fortunate. Ottolenghi received just a few hundred 
pounds of the £2,000 he was owed. "I was surprised because it was a well-run 
event," he said. "The money was not such a big deal for me, but I was concerned 
about the many other people who worked on it and were relying on full payment." 
The catering company Blanch & Shock was £8,000 out of pocket.

"In business terms it's the worst thing that's ever happened to us," said the 
firm's Mike Knowlden. "Although I did think Alex could have been more 
supportive in his statements, I understood there were legal constraints. My 
anger is mostly directed at Big Wheel."

James acknowledges how furious many of those involved have been. Although he 
did receive part-payment upfront, it did not, he says, compensate for the work 
he put into the festival. '"It wasn't about the money I lost. It's just a mess. 
It was easily the worst business deal I've ever done. I'm gutted that some 
people didn't get paid."

A spokesman for Big Wheel said that, by going into a company voluntary 
arrangement, it was attempting to make sure creditors received at least 20% of 
the money they were owed.

"Big Wheel Promotions has been responsible in trying to ensure all the people 
involved are compensated as much as we can for all their hard work. We are 
trying to honour our commitments to both them and the local community. We have 
not just walked away."
 