
Blur look likely to end a quarter-century career this summer with their final 
concert and single release. In an exclusive interview, the band's singer and 
chief songwriterDamon Albarn has told the Guardian <http://gu.com/p/36jjh/tw> 
that he intends a new song titled Under the Westway to mark the end of their 
recording career, and that "in all likelihood", a huge gig on 12 August in Hyde 
Park, London, will be their last.

Albarn has also cast doubt on the other brand name that has defined his 
career, revealing that new activity under the banner ofGorillaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gorillaz>, the hugely successful pop project 
he created with the artist and illustrator Jamie Hewlett, is unlikely, after 
the pair ended up at "cross-purposes".

The Hyde Park event, which will also feature New Order and the Specials, is 
being staged as part of the closing festivities for the Olympics, and follows 
twoBlur <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur> shows at the same location 
three years ago. "I'll give it 100%, like I did last time," said Albarn. "And 
that's it.

"And I hope that's the truth: that that's how we end it."

Since Albarn reunited in 2009 with guitarist Graham Coxon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/graham-coxon>, bassist Alex James and 
drummer Dave Rowntree, there has been regular speculation about concerts and 
new music from Blur. In the past, Albarn himself said that the quartet could 
still "make a fantastic record together".

Hopes that a substantial amount of new material might be recorded were raised 
by a single titled Fool's Day, released to mark the annual Record Store Day in 
2010, and Blur's appearance at this year's Brit awards, where they were given 
the show-closing honour for outstanding contribution to music.

But Albarn intends Under the Westway, whose London-centred subject matter 
harks back to Blur's 1990s period, to mark a full stop.

With Oasis having split in 2009, the news arguably marks the final falling of 
the curtain on Britpop, the cultural wave that reached its peak when the two 
groups fought for the No 1 position on the singles chart in August 1995.

Under the Westway is to be released around the time of the Hyde Park concert, 
and included in the band's performance.

"We recorded it live," Albarn said. "One take. It's the first Blur song where 
it's been one take, because previously I never finished the lyrics before we 
recorded.

"This time, I'd done that, so we were actually able to perform it. Which is 
quite nice, because I don't really see any more recordings after this. So it's 
nice to have finally done one song where we did it properly."

Albarn and Coxon remain working musicians. Coxon has just released his eighth 
solo album, and before the Hyde Park concert, Albarn is staging his musical 
production Dr Dee – based on the life of the Elizabethan courtier and alchemist 
John Dee — at the Coliseum in London as part of the Cultural Olympiad.

James splits his time between the production of cheese on his Cotswolds farm 
and a writing career that has included two memoirs, a column in the Spectator, 
and his current food writing in the Sun.

Rowntree is a solicitor and Labour party activist who stood as a candidate in 
the general election of 2010.

"I find it very easy to record with Graham," Albarn said. "He's a daily 
musician. With the other two, it's harder for them to reconnect … It's fine 
when we play live: it's really magical still. But actually recording new stuff, 
and swapping musical influences … it's quite difficult."

Revealing that Gorillaz are also unlikely to be revived, Albarn said that he 
and Hewlett – who created the four fictional characters that represented the 
project's public face – had serious creative disagreements during the making of 
the 2010 album Plastic Beach and the concerts that followed it. Until "a time 
comes when that knot has been untied", he said, the enterprise would be dormant.

Since being unveiled in 2000, Gorillaz have sold more than 20m albums 
worldwide. When asked if he and Hewlett had fallen out, Albarn said: "That 
sounds very juvenile, doesn't it? But being juvenile about it, it happens. It's 
a shame."

Albarn's Guardian interview also touched on his past use of heroin, and the 
effect the drug had on his music. He acknowledged that the 1997 Blur single 
Beetlebum and the band's 1999 album 13 betrayed the drug's influence on him, 
although no critics or interviewers had mentioned it.

"I thought everyone was just being really nice, and not making too much of a 
deal of it," he said, and sounded a cautionary note about the drug's dangers.

"The reality of any experimentation is that it can become habitual, and it can 
take over your life. I would never, ever disagree with the enlightening 
abilities of drugs. I also respect their potency … even the best intentions in 
the world can go awry."

Classic bands who have, and haven't, reunited


The Stone Roses Playing three huge gigs in Heaton Park, Manchester, on 29 
June, 30 June and 1 July, with festival dates to follow. Understood to be 
intensively rehearsing in preparation, and working on new material. "The new 
songs are way more important than the shows," said singer Ian Brown last year.

Happy Mondays Have reformed in the past, but never with their original six-man 
line-up, plus singer Rowetta Satchell, seen on the X Factor in 2004. Playing 
British arenas in May. Onstage dancer/mascot Mark "Bez" Berry will be present, 
but confined to a DJ-ing role. "It's me whole pelvic-leg region that's given up 
the chase," he told Mojo magazine.

Pulp Reunited last year for concerts that included Glastonbury, Hyde Park, and 
the Reading Festival. Playing four shows in the US this month, ending with the 
Coachella Festival in California. Singer Jarvis Cocker is now 48. "I still want 
to move about a bit so I've been to the gym a couple of times," he said.

Oasis Finally split in 2009. Last year, Liam Gallagher mooted a 2015 reunion 
around the 20th anniversary of their second album, a suggestion squashed by his 
elder brother Noel. By way of consolation, Noel plays Oasis songs live, and 
after initially spurning Oasis material, Liam is to follow suit with his band 
Beady Eye, who are supporting The Stone Roses at Heaton Park on 30 June.

The Smiths The subject of regular speculation about a reunion, which remains 
unlikely. Guitarist and co-songwriter Johnny Marr recently pinned their chances 
of reforming to UK politics: "If this government stepped down, I'd reform the 
band. How's that?"

Queen Guitarist Brian May and drummer Roger Taylor did not deem the death of 
Freddie Mercury an obstacle to reviving the Queen brand. In 2005, they teamed 
up with former Free and Bad Company singer Paul Rodgers, and have recruited 
Adam Lambert, runner-up in the 2009 series of American Idol. The trio were set 
to perform at the Sonisphere Festival at Knebworth Park on 7 July, but the 
event has now been cancelled; an official statement says that Queen (or rather 
"Queen") are "working to see if we can redress the situation at some other 
venue".
 