
This is a blog about the media in its widest sense but, just occasionally, I 
indulge myself with more personal material. Indulgence is not the right word to 
describe this posting, however.

It concerns the death of a schoolfriend who I first met almost 50 years ago, 
although it would be truer to say I heard him well before I met him because he 
had a loud, rasping voice that carried across playground, football pitch and 
cricket field.

Bob Miller was a remarkable man who lived a dozen lives by squeezing into his 
66 years an astonishing record of public service, which was lovingly recounted 
in tributes at his funeral in Chelmsford cathedral yesterday.

His start was hardly promising. Born in Dagenham and from a Traveller 
background, he was not only the first of his family to go a grammar school but, 
as his friend, Steve Mason, told the packed congregation, the first to go to 
any school of any kind.

He was, and this is an understatement, an inattentive pupil at Dagenham County 
High School. Bob was good on the sports field and bad everywhere else. He 
didn't obey rules, flagrantly ignoring school uniform requirements. But he got 
away with it.

Ever-smiling and always talking, he charmed teachers, including our 
notoriously tough headmaster. He was, for other pupils and staff, fun to be 
around.

With his booming voice and cheery self-confidence, an English master 
recognised his talent for drama and secured him an audition for the National 
Youth Theatre.

He told me he performed a speech from Shakespeare's Henry V for a group of 
people who included SirAlec Guinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-guinness>. Maybe. What was certainly 
true was that he was offered a place and his father ripped up the letter, 
telling him he wouldn't allow him to "hang out with a load of poofs."

He left school without passing an exam (or reading a book) and here's the 
irony: the rest of his life was to be dominated by a respect for, and love of, 
education.

I remember my sense of astonishment when we heard that soon after leaving 
school Bob had become a cadet with the Essex constabulary. The ill-dressed 
rule-breaker as a policeman - surely not!

In fact, he became a model officer, noted for the smartness of his uniform, 
and rose through the ranks to become Detective Chief Inspector Robert Miller, 
known to his colleagues as "Dusty."

He investigated major cases, such as the multiple murders perpetrated by 
Jeremy Bamber <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/jeremy-bamber> and crimes related 
to the "George Davis is innocent campaign". When the south Pacific archipelago 
of New Hebrides gained independence and a new name, Vanuatu, he was selected to 
set up its police force, spending 18 months there with his wife and two young 
daughters.

During his 30 years as a policeman, there were stints in the regional crime 
squad and the special branch. When he quit the force in 1993 he became a very 
different kind of inspector, and one that would have amazed the County High's 
teachers, by joiningOfsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>.

The naughty schoolboy held teachers and headmasters to account for the best 
part of 15 years and went on to train other Ofsted inspectors.

Bob had a legion of other interests and proved to be a tireless and 
enthusiastic organiser of all manner of clubs and events. He helped to run 
Chelmsford's amateur boxing club. He set up a bizarre range of regular cricket 
matches in memory of writers such as PG Wodehouse andSiegfried Sassoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/siegfried-sassoon>.

He arranged annual school reunions and, in 2001, he founded an annual Old 
Dagonians cricket match in memory of the school's most famous old boy,Dudley 
Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/dudley-moore>.

It was, like so many of his activities, a charity event. He raised many 
thousands over the years, notably in recent times for the Helen Rollason cancer 
charity. He obtained a degree in humanities through the Open University degree 
and attended Wolfson College Cambridge.

As a Winston Churchill travelling fellow, he visited the US in 2006 to 
consider the modern relevance of TS Eliot's spiritual poetry and, on his 
return, helped to found the TS Eliot Society.

A Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> supporter and a 
passionate champion of human rights, he organised talks for the Fabian Society 
and lured me into giving one of them. He championed better education in 
prisons. He was awarded the freedom of the City of London. He worked in the 
cabinet office for a period.

He became a government adviser on Romany, gypsy and Traveller affairs, 
especially about education. That, and his life-long support for Dagenham 
football club, were just two examples of the way in which he stayed true to his 
roots.

And, as his wife, Maureen, and their daughters, Candice and Claudia-Jane, can 
happily testify, he was proudest of all of his family. And especially proud 
also that both daughters went on to become teachers.

Truly, in the words of the Reverend Canon Ivor Moody, Bob's friend, who 
conducted his funeral: "His life was his message."

* Robert Edward Miller, born 25 October 1947; died 16 August 2014
 