
Director: Arthur Penn
Entertainment grade: B–
History grade: D+

Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow were members of the Barrow Gang, whose exploits 
terrorised and thrilled the US during the Depression.

Romance
 Auto love … Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Bonnie (Faye Dunaway) is lounging around naked when she spots Clyde (Warren 
Beatty) attempting to steal her mother's car. Throwing on minimal clothing, she 
runs out and stops him. Then he robs a grocery store to impress her. It works: 
as they drive away, she launches herself at him planting kisses, in the manner 
of Miss Piggy molesting the helpless Kermit. Panic-stricken, Clyde attempts to 
flee. "Ain't nothing wrong with me! I don't like boys!" he squeaks, banging his 
head on the car door.
 You sexy thing … Bonnie and Clyde really met over a mug of hot chocolate. 
Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
This is fanciful stuff. According to Bonnie's mother, the two met over a mug 
of hot chocolate, not during a stick-up. FBI files say Bonnie was still married 
to Roy Thornton, then serving time for murder. Clyde's supposed impotence 
(Beatty, clearly, was playing against type) was invented for the movie. The 
original script instead cast him as a stud, shoving in a swinging 60s sequence 
in which he invited a male gang member to join in a threesome. Those that knew 
him in real life insisted that, indeed, he did not like boys.

People
 Spot the horse's ass. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
The rest of the gang includes a moderately realistic take on Clyde's brother, 
Buck; a magnificently irritating version of Buck's prissy wife, Blanche 
(Estelle Parsons' Oscar-winning performance was memorably described by the real 
Blanche as "a screaming horse's ass"); and the fictional C W Moss, a composite 
of gang members W D Jones and Henry Methvin. Jones sued Warner Bros for 
$175,000 (about £72,500 at 1968 prices) claiming that the film invaded his 
privacy and "brought shame and disrepute" upon his character. This is the 
definition of chutzpah, especially after he invaded his own privacy the same 
year by writing a lengthy article for Playboy magazine detailing his shameful 
and disreputable exploits. He didn't see a penny.

Crime
 A hat, but no hood. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
The gang are depicted going soft on local folk, even though there's no 
suggestion these supposed Robin Hoods did the giving-to-the-poor bit after 
they'd done the robbing from the rich. Those they robbed weren't exactly rich, 
either: mostly small-town stores and farmers' savings banks. So, they robbed 
from ordinary hard-working people during the Depression to give to … 
themselves. What a couple of heroes. Here, their exploits are portrayed as one 
long, daring spree. In real life, first Clyde and then Bonnie were captured and 
imprisoned for stints during their career together. The film also misses out a 
near-fatal car accident in which Bonnie was so badly burned down one leg that 
she was left permanently disabled.

Culture
 The pen is mightier … Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Bonnie and Clyde created their own image, staging photoshoots, sending stories 
to magazines and, in Bonnie's case, writing poetry. The film has her read out 
selections from her compositions, Suicide Sal and The Trail's End: "Some day 
they'll go down together/They'll bury them side by side/To few it'll be 
grief/To the law a relief/But it's death forBonnie and Clyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bonnie-and-clyde>." Clyde is so impressed he 
finally manages to have sex with her. The rest of us may conclude it's probably 
best she stuck to the armed robbery.

Death
 Bagsie me the elbow … Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
The police ambush Bonnie and Clyde, riddling both the suspects and their car 
with bullets. There has been controversy over the shooting of Bonnie, who in 
real life may never even have fired a gun, and seems not to have been charged 
with a capital offence. The Texas Ranger responsible argued that "if it 
wouldn't have been her, it would have been us". Fortunately, the film spares 
its audience the disgusting scene after the ambush, when locals turned up to 
cut bits off the dead gangsters as mementos, the most sought-after prizes being 
bits of bloody clothing, hair and ears. Good grief.

Verdict
 Anyone got a comb? Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
The last word goes to W D Jones: "I've seen that Clyde and Bonnie movie. The 
only thing that ain't plumb silly the way they play it is the gun battles. Them 
was real enough to almost make me hurt."
 