
Bonnie and Clyde <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bonnie-and-clyde> famously 
bowed out in a hail of bullets, gunned down by police in what came billed as 
the bloodiest death scene in American movies. For the man who called the shots, 
behind the camera, the end was altogether more peaceful. Director Arthur Penn 
died quietly at home on Tuesday night, a day after his 88th birthday. His 
daughter said he died of congestive heart failure.

Born in Philadelphia, the younger brother of the photographer Irving Penn, the 
director galvanised the crime genre with his 1967 film starring Warren Beatty 
and Faye Dunaway as the lovers on the run. It juggled the freewheeling flavour 
of the French New Wave with an explicit, stylised violence that was hitherto 
unknown in mainstream American cinema. Penn's playful, muscular style of 
directing would prove a major influence on the 70s generation of film-makers 
that followed.

Penn made his feature debut with the 1958 western The Left-Handed Gun, 
starring the young Paul Newman. He first worked with Warren Beatty on 1965's 
cult favourite Mickey One and directed Robert Redford and Marlon Brando on The 
Chase in 1966. Following the success of Bonnie and Clyde, he went on to make 
1969's Alice's Restaurant, a wry hippie comedy, and directed Dustin Hoffman in 
the acclaimed Little Big Man.

But Penn's boldest venture was doomed to end in failure. In 1976 he corralled 
Jack Nicholson and Marlon Brando on set to shoot a dark and mercurial western 
called The Missouri Breaks. But the production was famously disrupted by 
Brando's erratic behaviour and the result was a critical and commercial flop. 
Its director would later take some comfort from the fact that The Missouri 
Breaks has since been re-evaluated and is now widely judged to be an eccentric 
mini-masterpiece.

By the end of the 1970s, Penn's star was on the wane and he was finding 
himself outpaced by a new crop of directors. "The movies have changed," he said 
at the time. "There's this wonderful storyteller, Steven Spielberg, making 
benign movies that are enormously successful, while I'm mainly known for making 
movies about people shooting and cutting each other up. I love his work but I 
could never make films like that."

The director shot his last feature – Penn and Teller Get Killed – in 1989. 
After that, he settled into his new role as a respected elder statesman, a 
Hollywood lion with a rich history behind him. Most fans revered him for 
creating Bonnie and Clyde. A few others recalled his less publicised 
involvement in the televised presidential debates of 1960, when he coached JFK 
ahead of his standoff with Richard Nixon. Both events guaranteed his place in 
history. It could be argued, perhaps, thatArthur Penn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arthur-penn> changed America twice: once on 
the big screen and once on the small.
 