
In crime films, we have always known we are allowed to have illicit fun with 
criminals, so long as they get it in the end. What do they get? They get shot. 
But among the many novelties in Bonnie and Clyde was the realisation that the 
ending could be not just a spectacular addition to the "final shoot-out" 
sub-genre, but the film's sexual climax and the fulfilment of every romantic 
dream linking the names of the two desperadoes in the movie's title. The ending 
was orgasmic, yet it crept in under the tattered remnants of the old censorship 
system.Bonnie and Clyde <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bonnie-and-clyde> got 
their just reward, while Warren Beatty, producer and star, made a fortune.

So it's worth stressing that Warren Beatty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/warren-beatty> and Faye Dunaway scarcely 
resembled the real Clyde Barrow and Bonnie Parker, two mean-faced kids raised 
on poverty and bad food. The casting established the glamourisation in a 
storyline with two achingly available sexual animals unable to get it on.
The finale sees ambush, treachery and ugly people cutting the lovely couple to 
shreds. Director Arthur Penn, one of the few artists in violence, designed the 
shoot-out in slow motion with multiple coverage building up to a shatteringly 
edited montage of destruction (Dede Allen did the editing). Notice how the 
lovers know they're going to get it just before the fusillade begins. There are 
ravishing cross-cut close-ups and an instant of intimate communion that will 
last to posterity.

As the bodies writhe under the impact of the bullets, it was hard to avoid the 
thought (even in 1967) that those two people separated in space were enjoying 
one of the best sex scenes in movie history. Had there ever been a moment in 
which the equation of sex and violence was so emphatic or transporting?

The scene taught movie technicians that blood, puffs of smoke, and even 
fragments of clothing and flesh were part of the way bullets worked. More or 
less before 1967, getting shot was a tidy event. Now sachets of blood and small 
powder charges sewn into clothes would become part of a film's resources – Sam 
Peckinpah and The Wild Bunch were just a couple of years away.

The ending of Bonnie and Clyde also ushered in the ideas that criminals might 
be lovable, and that violence might be art. The film bewildered its studio, 
Warner Brothers, but it became a big hit because it spelled out within the 
formula of an old genre the seething lawlessness in a new young audience. A 
fresh myth was launched: that a few years of mayhem with a beautiful companion 
might be a bargain you could make with death. And it was a breakthrough to 
discover that death and disintegration were stunning metaphors for sex.

Watch it here: bit.ly/bonniecydeclimax 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5GDcs8i2ng>
 