
The news that Åsne Seierstad, Norwegian author of The Bookseller of Kabul, has 
beensuccessfully sued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/27/bookseller-kabul-author-lawsuit> 
by one of her book's characters will be greeted as either a blow to artistic 
freedom of expression or a victory for the world's misrepresented and powerless 
poor.

Seierstad was ordered to pay more than £26,000 in punitive damages to Suraia 
Rais, the second wife of Shah Muhammad Rais, with whose family she lived in
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> for five months in 
2002. Other family members have also announced that they will sue and the 
author and her publisher also face substantial legal costs. They have vowed to 
appeal the case all the way to the European court of human rights arguing that 
it sets a dangerous legal precedent.

The Bookseller of Kabul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/aug/31/travel.features> is written in 
the style of a novel, but it is clearly based on Shah Muhammad Rais whose 
bookshop was one of my regular haunts in the early days of my time living in 
Afghanistan.

I spent a year and a half in Afghanistan, between 2003 and 2004, and was 
working for a Norwegian refugee organisation at the time. Seierstad's book had 
already been published and was avidly read by many of my colleagues eager to 
obtain some insights into the society in which we were living.

Seierstad had set out to write a book about Afghan culture and the story of 
one family's experience of surviving the tragedy of civil war. She claims that 
the book was "based on true incidents I have participated in or stories I have 
been told". It includes "revelations" about the family's sex lives and 
"forbidden loves" – sometimes using their real names – which left the family 
feeling insulted demeaned and violated. They argue that the book is based on 
lies and misrepresentations, but even if it was all true was Seierstad 
justified in writing it?

A chapter of my own book 
<http://www.versobooks.com/books/cdef/ef-titles/foley_c_the_thin_blue_line.shtml>
 is based on the time I spent in Afghanistan and I drew mainly on the diary 
that I kept at the time. My book is not a novel and so I saw no need to 
dramatise. However, I did want to convey some of the frustrations and anguish 
of those of us who have worked in conflict zones since it is central to the 
book's main argument about humanitarian interventions.

Several of my friends were killed while I was working there and many of us 
were quite badly traumatised by our experiences. I consciously decided to 
exclude the names of all my national staff and to err on the side of caution 
when referring to expatriate friends and colleagues. Incidents I have since 
relived in nightmares are dispatched in single clinical sentences like "I 
narrowly missed being caught in a bomb blast leaving Jalalabad".

Seierstad presumably also wanted to give an "unvarnished account" of the 
society that she found and – like any writer – knows that personal anecdote and 
salacious details sell. The problem with her book, and maybe mine as well, is 
that they fall into a particular genre where people living in rich, safe 
countries get a vicarious kick out of reading about the lives of people in 
poor, dangerous ones.

There is nothing intrinsically wrong with such books, but they place an extra 
responsibility of care on the author and publisher, since what is being 
described is, by definition, beyond the experiences of the average reader. 
Linda Polman's description in War Games of civilian aircraft "climbing steeply 
to get beyond the range of Taliban rockets", for example,renders virtually 
everything else that she has to say on the subject suspect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/may/14/humanitarian-aid-linda-polman-war-games>
, since anyone who has been on such a plane knows that this is not what they do.

The biggest conceptual weakness of Seierstad's book is that she does not seem 
to have understood the absolute centrality of the concepts of "hospitality" and 
"namos" (literally the "status, chastity, purity, virtuousness, and nobleness 
of the female members of the family") to Afghan society. The idea that you 
could accept someone's hospitality and then spy on them to violate their namos 
is completely shocking and makes a mockery of all her other claims of insight 
into the society in which she was living.

Seierstad also seems to have been unaware of the wider ramifications of her 
actions in contemporary Afghan politics and her crass invasion of privacy of an 
individual family is symptomatic of a wider failure of the international 
community to understand the country that it claims it is trying to help. Under
Pashtunwali <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pashtunwali> – and through similar 
social norms in non-Pashtun parts of Afghanistan – it is the duty of all men to 
safeguard the namos of his wife, sister, mother and any other female members of 
his family. Violating this is treated as a violation of the family, clan or 
tribe's honour.

Namos can also be seen as an obligation to protect home, land and country from 
aggression and so is a key mobilising concept for the Taliban. After 9/11 they 
argued that Pashtunwali forbade them from handing over Osama bin Laden since he 
was an "invited guest". However, the Afghan government regularly counters that 
it is the international community who are now the "guests", while the "Arabs", 
Pakistanis and other "enemies of Afghanistan" are the foreign invaders. Opinion 
polls show that most Afghans tend towards the latter view, although their 
patience with their international "guests" is now wearing increasingly thin.

Some may argue that freedom of artistic expression should be completely 
divorced from such political considerations. However, a writer who chooses to 
use a conflict as the background for their work cannot plead cultural immunity 
when real life intrudes on the result.
 