
A version of the following correction is due to appear in the Guardian on 14 
August 2010

A story reported on the outcome of a lawsuit lodged in Oslo against Åsne 
Seierstad, author of The Bookseller of Kabul, by a member of the Afghan family 
portrayed in the book. The story said Seierstad was found guilty of defamation, 
but that was not so: the finding was invasion of privacy. The piece also said 
she was found guilty of "negligent journalistic practices". To clarify: the 
judge did cite negligence, but there was no guilty finding on a charge of 
negligence, as our phrasing might have implied. Contrary to the piece, legal 
fees were not awarded againstÅsne Seierstad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asne-seierstad> and her publisher Cappelen 
Damm; the judge is to rule on fees later. The article also said the book's 
revelations of personal details caused several members of the Afghan family to 
move to Pakistan and Canada. We should have made clear this was an allegation 
made by the plaintiff's side in a case document. Equally, the headling – 
Brought to book: Kabul author guilty of 'betraying' a nation – referred to an 
accusation by a family member, not a comment by the court (28 July, page 11).



In three weeks, Åsne Seierstad will give birth to her second child. 
Substantial rebuilding work is being done to her house in Oslo and her young 
son is driving her neighbours to despair every morning with his new drum kit. 
But all of this is nothing to the storm Norway's most successful author has 
gone through in the past few days.

Last week, Seierstad learned that she had lost the first legal stage of a 
literary tussle over her representation of the real-life subject of her 
bestseller The Bookseller of Kabul, which has fascinated her readers around the 
world for almost a decade. "Even though I'm in the middle of this and it's 
boiling right now, I can see that it's a fascinating situation and an important 
debate about who can and should, write what – and in what way," she says

Seierstad was a war correspondent before she exchanged the front lines to 
write the book that made her name, and which could now ruin it.

Provoking controversy almost from publication, The Bookseller of Kabul is 
a compelling portrait of an Afghan bookseller, a local hero who risked his life 
to save the literary heritage of his country and publicly argued for women's 
rights and liberal ideals. But, in the course of the book, the eponymous hero 
is revealed by Seierstad to be a tyrant who mercilessly oppressed his own 
family, enslaving his wives and refusing education to his sons.

It quickly became the bestselling nonfiction book in Norwegian history, and 
went on to be translated into 41 languages and top the international bestseller 
charts. Tim Judah, reviewing it in the Observer, called it "compulsive, 
repulsive and frightening". "If this is what life is like in the family of 
Afghanistan's answer to Tim Waterstone, there is clearly no hope forAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>," he added. Another reviewer 
said it was "an emotive indictment of a horrible society".

But then, the central character stepped out from its pages and repudiated the 
book. Instead of staying quietly put where she left him, in Kabul, Shah 
Muhammad Rais bought a business-class flight from the Afghan capital toNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>, hired a lawyer and launched a 
counter-publicity trail through the Norwegian media, appearing on television 
and the front pages of newspapers, accusing Seierstad of treachery.

He claimed that her depiction of his family was inaccurate and invasive; that 
she had humiliated and destroyed them, forcing his first wife to move to Canada 
to live with her brother. The book had also, he said, dishonoured Afghanistan. 
The man who had risked his life to prevent his library being burned by the 
communists, the mujahideen and the Taliban insisted that Seierstad's account of 
him and his family was so slanderous that every copy should be destroyed.

For almost eight years, the row has played itself out in public and last 
month, Seierstad found herself in the witness box for three days, defending her 
book and her journalistic integrity.

She was confident she would win. "It is hard as a journalist to be judged like 
this," she says. "I can insist to everyone that it is just three small, 
concrete points that the judge has found against me, but it will always be 
written about me now that I have been judged for breaking privacy and had my 
accuracy questioned, and that's not a good thing as a journalist." (Those 
points were that Rais's wife hadn't wanted to marry him; that she hadn't been 
terrified of wanting a girl; and that Seierstad didn't do enough to make sure 
the wife's thoughts were correctly presented.)

She and her publisher Cappelen Damm must now pay 250,000 Norwegian kroner 
(£26,000) to the second wife for invasion of privacy and for failing to ensure 
her quotes were accurate. He is claiming that seven other members of his family 
are poised to make similar claims against the author.

The second wave of litigation, however, will have to wait. Seierstad is 
appealing against the judgment. She plans to take it to Norway's supreme court 
and all the way to the European court of human rights if necessary.

"If I lose, then I have to accept that my way of writing books is not the way 
society says it's OK to write," she says. "I will get a loan and pay the money 
the court asks for. But I will not lay down my writing and I still say this was 
an important book to write. The family is the single most important institution 
in Afghan culture. It is described in the country's constitution as the 
'fundamental pillar of society'. Family law – decided by the men in the 
household – is more important than government legislation: [President Hamid] 
Karzai might insist that women can work but that doesn't mean anything if a 
father forbids his daughter from going to school. If we can't understand the 
Afghan family, we can't understand Afghanistan."

Born in Norway in 1970, Seierstad studied Russian, Spanish and the history of 
philosophy at Oslo University. After graduating, she spent a year in Russia, 
where her father was working as a political scientist. In 1993, she moved to 
Moscow full-time to study politics. Keen to gain access and speak to Russian 
government officials, she posed as a journalist and her career took off.

Seierstad asked Rais, whom she met during her time in Afghanistan, if she 
could come and live with his family and write an intimate portrait of their 
lives. For five months, she probed, delved and peeled back the secrets of the 
family. There was nothing she didn't ask and nowhere she didn't go: into the 
men's world of commerce and conversation; into the women's world of the hammam, 
where burqas and inhibitions are shed.

It is a fascinating portrait: a family's dirty linen hung out for public gaze. 
Seierstad absented herself from its pages: in the book, the omnipotent 
storyteller is never present. Having lived with the family for so long and 
questioned them so closely, she says she felt justified writing from inside the 
head of each character, attributing thoughts and feelings to them without the 
filter of her own voice – as if she were writing a novel. In previous 
interviews, Seierstad has made much of the fact that the most important lesson 
that her parents taught her was to care for others less fortunate than herself, 
and has cited the writer and traveller Ryszard Kapuscinski as a hero owing to 
the respect he always showed his subjects.

I ask whether it was kind of her to draw out these women's most intimate 
sexual secrets and private emotions, and reveal them to the world. "What's 
unkind in it?" Seierstad says, surprised. "My project, my only goal, was to 
understand what was going on inside one of these families. I was there as a 
journalist, invited into their home to find out about Afghanistan. Should I, 
when I know something is not right, like the way the bookseller treated his 
wives, say it's not important? Yes, it is important and I have to find out."

But was it right to accept Rais's hospitality for almost half a year and then 
tear him apart in public? She may have been invited into the family home by 
Rais, but did the women in the house – one of whom was 16 and had barely left 
the backyard of her father's home before marrying the aging Rais – truly 
understand what would happen to their secrets after they were scribbled down in 
a writer's notepad?

"They say now that they didn't say certain things or that they are humiliated 
by having them written about, but who is really saying that?" Seierstad says. 
"It is Rais who is leading this campaign against me for reasons of money or of 
honour, I have no idea, but because these women are dependent on him, they have 
no choice but to say what he says. It's important for us to know Afghanistan. 
It is a country where we waged a war and to understand people you have to dig 
deeper and there's nothing unkind in that."

Yet Seierstad admits that, at times, she did go too far. In the first edition 
of the book, published in a limited run in the UK and now out of print, there 
is an astonishingly intimate description of one of the women in the household 
at the hammam. In two passages, Seierstad writes about the breasts, belly and 
genitals of this woman – a woman who since reaching adulthood has never left 
her house without wearing a burqa.

"I removed that section because Rais asked me to," says Seierstad. "But this 
book went through several editors and we all overlooked that problematic word, 
genitals. We realised it was a mistake only after Rais focussed on it, and I 
apologised to him and to his mother for it."

That she put it in at all, is perhaps evidence of a lack of sympathy for her 
subjects' privacy. In the past, Seierstad has claimed that the book is not a 
criticism of the Islamic way of life – but that it "just reveals a lot about 
it". This, I suggest, is disingenuous – and dangerous. Her outrage at the way 
women are treated in the book crackles on every page, but because she has 
written herself out of the narrative, her highly subjective account could be 
accused as masquerading as an objective report.

There is a long pause. "I agree now that it is not possible to write a neutral 
story," she says. "I don't criticise the society with my words in the book but 
I agree, it's there in the text anyway. It's not an open critique but it is a 
critique."

Despite standing her ground, Seierstad says that she needs to be more 
rigorous: "If I write a book in future, I may decide to take the precaution of 
going back to every person I interview, reading their quotes back to them and 
asking them to sign a letter, saying it is accurate," she says. "Journalism is 
moving into a different world where we are held to almost impossible standards. 
In everything I write, ever again, I need to make sure I am 100% accurate. A 
journalist can get away with this sort of controversy once, but I can't survive 
it again."

• This article was amended on 31 July and 7 August 2010. The original said 
that Åsne Seierstad had been asked to make a payment to the bookseller's first 
wife. It also said that The Bookseller of Kabul had been translated into 29 
languages. This has been corrected.
 