
The wife of an Afghan bookseller depicted in an international bestseller is 
applying for asylum in Europe because she claims the book has endangered her 
life.

Suraya Rais is the wife of Shah Mohammed Rais, the title character in The 
Bookseller of Kabul by the Norwegian journalistÅsne Seierstad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asne-seierstad>. Since its publication in 
2002, the book - an account of an Afghan extended family after the fall of the 
Taliban - has become a hit around the world; in the UK, it was the bestselling 
non-English-language book of 2004.

Today, Mr and Mrs Rais claim that The Bookseller of Kabul has put their lives 
in jeopardy. At the weekend, it was revealed that Mrs Rais applied for asylum 
in Sweden in April. "Åsne Seierstad's book has made it difficult for the family 
to carry on living inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>
," says Mr Rais's lawyer, Per Danielsen.

"The book was recently published in Afghanistan. It contains dangerous 
information linking the family to named individuals in Kabul," he said.

It appears Mrs Rais applied for asylum in Sweden because she has family there, 
but Mr Rais has not done so and it is as yet unclear whether he will.

But even though she has applied to live in Sweden, Mrs Rais could end up 
living in the same country as Seierstad. As her visa for the Schengen zone was 
issued by Norway, rules state that her asylum application must be processed 
there. "I wish her welcome to live in Norway," says Seierstad.

Mrs Rais's asylum application is the latest development in a long-running and 
bitter saga. Ever since The Bookseller of Kabul was published, Mr Rais has 
repeatedly threatened to sue Seierstad for impugning his reputation: he claims 
the book portrays him as a tyrannical traditionalist bent on imprisoning women.

This spring, Mr Rais came to Norway to conclude two book deals with local 
publishing companies. Both books are billed as tell-all accounts about his life 
and the conflict with Seierstad. He has also initiated a claim for financial 
compensation against the writer and her publishing house.

"We have met several times and tried to find common ground, but we have not 
been able to do it," says Seierstad. "He is suing us, he is attacking us using 
the media. I feel like I am being attacked on all fronts."
 