
It headed the most controversial Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> longlist in years, but 
Christos Tsiolkas's The Slap has failed to make the final cut for the literary 
award, as has David Mitchell's much-tipped fifth novel, The Thousand Autumns of 
Jacob de Zoet.

Judges overlooked Australian novelist Tsiolkas's tale of the consequences when 
a child is slapped at a suburban barbecue – which is either "unbelievably 
misogynistic" or "riveting from beginning to end", depending on who's asked – 
and Mitchell, twice shortlisted for the prize in the past, to select a 
shortlist which ranges from two-time former winner Peter Carey's Parrot and 
Olivier in America toEmma Donoghue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/emma-donoghue>. The Irish writer has also 
stirred up debate with her Josel Fritzl-inspired Room, the story of a boy and 
his mother imprisoned in a tiny room for years.

Orange prize winner Andrea Levy's The Long Song, about the last years of 
slavery in Jamaica; Howard Jacobson's The Finkler Question, a cerebral comedy 
about grief and Anglo-Jewishness; experimental novelist Tom McCarthy's C, which 
tells the story of Serge Carrefax, a first world war radio operator who escapes 
from a German prison camp; and South African writer Damon Galgut's tale of a 
young man travelling through Greece, India and Africa, In a Strange Room, 
complete the six-strong shortlist for the £50,000 prize, announced this morning.

"It's been a great privilege and an exciting challenge for us to reduce our 
longlist of 13 to this shortlist of six outstandingly good novels," said chair 
of judges Andrew Motion, the former poet laureate. "In doing so, we feel sure 
we've chosen books which demonstrate a rich variety of styles and themes – 
while in every case providing deep individual pleasures."

The panel of judges had previously read 138 books to select the 13 titles for 
their longlist, with Martin Amis's new novel The Pregnant Widow and Ian 
McEwan's venture into comic fiction Solar both overlooked and Carey the only 
previous Booker winner on the longlist.

His inclusion on the shortlist today for Parrot and Olivier in America, a 
reimagining of Democracy in America author Alexis de Tocqueville's visit to the 
New World, gives him the chance of becoming the first ever writer to win the 
Booker three times, having previously taken it in 1988 for Oscar and Lucinda 
and 2001 for True History of the Kelly Gang.

"The omission of both David Mitchell and Christos Tsiolkas from the shortlist 
is a real shock. While both writers might rightly feel aggrieved at being 
overlooked, I imagine it took some wrangling amongst the judges to reduce one 
of the best longlists in years to six," said Jonathan Ruppin at independent 
book chain Foyles, who, while praising all six books for their "lightness of 
touch which means the reader doesn't get bogged down in something worthy or 
dull", predicted that Room was the most likely title to go on to win the award.

Waterstone's tipped C to take the prize, with fiction buying manager Simon 
Burke calling it "a challenging yet dazzling novel". "The news that David 
Mitchell has not made the shortlist will cause great wailing and gnashing of 
teeth across the bookworld, but perhaps is a useful reminder of the 
independence and unpredictability of the Booker," he said. "But this is still a 
hugely varied and exciting list, worthy of the Booker brand. Carey and Levy 
have to be strong contenders, but our money is onTom McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tom-mccarthy>. The more people that read [C] 
the better."

The bookies agreed, with William Hill immediately installing McCarthy as 2/1 
favourite to win the prize. "There has been a considerable media buzz around 
all of the books on the shortlist, and literary punters have staked more money 
in total on Tom McCarthy to win than any of the other authors, so he is a 
worthy favourite," said spokesman Graham Sharpe. Donoghue and Galgut came in 
second at the bookmaker, both at 3/1, with one customer so sure that In A 
Strange Room would win that they placed £400 on Galgut at 7/1, the largest 
single bet on the prize "for a few years", said Sharpe.

Carey came in fourth, at 5/1, with Levy at 7/1 and Jacobson the 8/1 outside to 
take the prize.

The opinion-splitting novels picked for this year's longlist have helped make 
it the most popular since 2001, with Tsiolkas's novel selling the most copies, 
followed by Donoghue's. The winner, who will join a roster of former winners 
including Margaret Atwood, Roddy Doyle and JM Coetzee, will be announced on 12 
October. Last year's winner Wolf Hall by Hilary Mantel is the fastest-selling 
Booker winner ever, with sales of around half-a-million copies to date.

The Man Booker shortlist in full:

Peter Carey's Parrot and Olivier in America

Emma Donoghue's Room

Damon Galgut's In a Strange Room

Howard Jacobson's The Finkler Question

Andrea Levy's The Long Song

Tom McCarthy's C

To buy all six Booker shortlisted titles for only £65 (save £37.94) with free 
UK p&p visit theGuardian Bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=5038495028280>
 or call 0330 333 6846.
 