
My story mirrors that of Tony (How Boots went rogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/how-boots-went-rogue>, The long 
read, 13 April). I have been broken by Boots despite being loyal. I too have 
had overwhelming pressure to perform services for pure profit over patient 
benefit. I was set targets by my manager at times expecting 30 Medicines Use 
Reviews (MURs) a week. My manager showed total disregard for ethics, saying: “I 
don’t care how you do them but I want them done.” For a period in this store 
I refused to do services as I felt patient safety issues in store needed to be 
addressed first or a patient would come to harm. These concerns were on more 
than one occasion dismissed and I was threatened that if I didn’t do the 
services I would face disciplinary action. The manager on a daily basis would 
assign me to the walk-in counter in an extremely busy store with trainee staff 
producing a high error rate. Scripts were never ready and done on a walk-in 
basis despite them being in store for up to a week. Towards the end of my time 
in that store I had no dispenser and was facing queues and complaints on my own 
despite asking for help and was self-checking. The pressure was extreme and bad 
practices led me to take time off for stress.

My health and confidence have been affected and in my experience Boots has put 
MURs and NMS before basic patient care. Self-checking is expected and relied 
upon substantially and the common practice in most stores open on a Sunday is 
for a pharmacist to work without a dispenser.

I have experienced fear, disciplinary threats and pressure to go beyond 
patient care and return a profit. They are a force unto themselves.
Name and address supplied

• I have an elderly mother requiring a lot of routine repeat medication on 
prescription from her GP in north-west England. She does not pay a prescription 
charge, but the NHS supplies the medication. It appals me that when she hands 
in her list of repeat drugs to Boots, with the items she needs ticked off, the 
pharmacist ignores the ticks and issues the whole lot. She does not require the 
eye drops each month, or the paracetamol, so she does not tick these items. Yet 
I find a stockpile of them in her kitchen cabinet rapidly nearing or past their 
use-by date. When I return them to the store I am told that they have been 
issued and so cannot be given to anybody else.

Our NHS is paid for by all of us, we should all play our part to ensure that 
medication is not wasted.
Lesley Foote
Brentford, Middlesex

• I have been a practising community pharmacist for 15 years. During my time I 
have seen the pressure build up. It has now reached an unsustainable level and 
many are leaving the profession as a result.

More and more of those in charge of running the healthcare services are 
non-pharmacist managers with little idea of what they are managing. They seem 
to only understand figures and targets. Anything else bypasses them, which 
ultimately creates a vicious cycle of lower patient care due to lack of support 
and trained staff.

My experience has been such that the pharmacist must make a stand on a regular 
basis to be heard. This creates an unnecessary distraction which shouldn’t be 
allowed to exist if the managers were doing their job properly.
Name and address supplied

• I left Boots back in 1997 to work in supermarket pharmacy for 15 years. I 
have been a self-employed locum since 2012. I would like to think I have always 
put the needs of the patient first but pressure to perform and hit targets is 
everywhere. At least I now have control over where I work. I think it is 
telling that I will not be encouraging either of my children into the 
profession. After completing a four-year degree then another year completing 
pre-registration, it seems they would be better off training and qualifying as 
a plumber or electrician.
Jayne Gleed
Hamble, Hampshire

• Pharmacists undergo five years of training to become medicines experts. They 
are trained to develop clinical relationships with patients, but are thwarted 
from doing so by the preference of many retail-oriented non-pharmacist 
employers intent on them merely supplying products and commoditised services 
measured only by quantitative targets. MURs are sadly treated this way.

The employer benefits from the MUR fee, not the pharmacist, and in many 
organisations demands have engendered a culture that pressurises and sometimes 
bullies pharmacists to deliver.

Your article describes pharmacists being demoralised by the erosion of their 
professional autonomy, and finding themselves working with staffing levels that 
border on dangerous at times.

Today’s community pharmacy service is therefore a mere shadow of its true 
potential. My union has calculated that the money available to “chain” 
pharmacies in MUR fees would fund a cohort of about 2,000 pharmacists who could 
contract directly with the NHS and concentrate on delivering a clinical rather 
than transactional pharmaceutical care service to patients who would benefit 
the most. These services could be provided in patients’ homes, care homes, GP 
surgeries and in consultation rooms of existing community pharmacies.

This would provide patients with a more focused service, the NHS better value 
for money and make better use of pharmacists’ unique skills. It would also 
allow hard-pressed community pharmacists to concentrate on delivering 
excellence in the wide range of services that they are renowned for providing, 
making them more accessible as the source of expert advice on medicines.
John Murphy
General secretary, the Pharmacists’ Defence Association Union

• The alleged abuse by Boots of NHS payments for MURs illustrates that a 
simplistic approach to resourcing care can be counterproductive where 
commercial imperatives are more powerful than professional conscience. In 
contrast, financial incentives for GPs have been effective in enhancing care of 
chronic illness. Despite its shortcomings, the overwhelming majority of GPs 
have engaged in the Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF) responsibly and 
professionally. I suggest that this is partly because the professionals and the 
business leads in general practice are one and the same, and wealth-seeking 
behaviour is tempered by their professionalism as doctors. Furthermore, the QOF 
scheme was carefully designed and constantly fine-tuned by collaborative 
negotiation between general practice and the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> to ensure both effectiveness and 
value.

In Boots’ case, however, there is a disconnect between business managers, who 
see the scheme merely as commercial opportunity, and their pharmacist 
employees, whose professionalism comes under huge pressure to play their 
employers’ game to maximise profit.

Having worked with pharmacists for years as a GP and a researcher, I know that 
in the right environment and with appropriate skills, pharmacists can transform 
the quality and safety of prescribing and medicines management. Perverse 
incentives such as in the current MUR scheme only serve to undermine the 
professionalism of pharmacists and in their present form contribute little to 
care. The scheme should not be abandoned, but should be restructured to promote 
quality and safety.
Dr Arnold Zermansky
Portfolio GP and visiting senior research fellow, Leeds 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 