
Boots faces the prospect of an investigation by the pharmacy watchdog, 
following aGuardian investigation into the multibillion pound chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/how-boots-went-rogue>.

The General Pharmaceutical Council (GPhC) is calling in evidence on the 
allegations made in the report, which revealed that managers at Britain’s 
biggest chain of chemists have been forcing staff to milkNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> schemes, in order to increase company 
profits.

The report also detailed a recent and yet to be published survey by the 
pharmacy trade union of its members, to which more than one in 10 of all Boots 
chemists responded. Asked “how often do you believe financial cutbacks imposed 
by your main employer have directly impacted upon patient safety?”, more than 
75% of those who responded to the Pharmacists’ Defence Association (PDA) said 
that was the case at least half the time.

Yours, a stressed pharmacist: Boots article prompts flood of letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/17/yours-a-stressed-pharmacist-boots-article-prompts-flood-of-letters>
The union has been asked to show the pharmacy regulator its survey and other 
relevant documents, in what are understood to be the first steps towards a 
possible full investigation of Boots.

The regulator said on Sunday night: “Our standards are clear that pharmacy 
owners have a responsibility to enable their staff to make the care of patients 
their first priority and to raise concerns with the relevant authority about 
any issue that may affect patient care or public safety.”

But it was attacked by the PDA for being far too slow to act on the business 
culture at Boots. “The GPhC must be aware of the extent to which the 
undermining of the professionalism of pharmacists is a significant problem, not 
least because we have repeatedly told them about it,” said Mark Pitt, the 
union’s assistant general secretary. He added that since the watchdog was 
established in 2010, its officials have been regularly updated by the PDA on 
the problems at Boots – but that no action taken.

The regulator has also approached the Guardian for information. 

The Royal Pharmaceutical Society, the professional members’ body for chemists, 
has also responded with alarm to the Guardian report, saying the paper’s 
allegations “will make difficult reading for many in the sector”.

The RPS is especially concerned by allegations that NHS schemes, such as the 
Medicine Use Reviews (MUR) and New Medicine Service, are being exploited by 
Boots managers for the public money the schemes pay out.

The NHS pays £28 for each MUR, which is intended to give sick patients 
professional advice on medicine and diet. But the Guardian discovered that 
Boots managers were pressuring pharmacists to carry them out on people who did 
not need or want them – and even to give them to other staff members. If the 
chain carries out the limit of 400 MURs at each of its pharmacies, it stands to 
make about £30m from the scheme.

Staff who have questioned or resisted the alleged misuse of the MUR system 
report that their pay and career prospects have suffered. All allegations were 
denied by Boots. It said: “We make it clear to our colleagues that these 
services should not be undertaken inappropriately.”

Sandra Gidley, who chairs the English pharmacy board of the RPS, said: “There 
is an urgent need to address the issue of target setting and unacceptable 
commercial pressures within large company settings. Individual pharmacists must 
have professional autonomy when providing patient care wherever they are 
working.”

She confirmed that the newspaper’s allegations that understaffing at Boots is 
threatening patient safety had also been raised with the RPS by its members.

Within hours of the Guardian publishing the investigation, Boots staff 
received two messages from senior managers. The newspaper has seen both. The 
first, from the director of retail pharmacy operations, Kevin Birch, attacked 
the Guardian for “a very specific and strong negative agenda”. He also directs 
staff that if asked by customers about the allegations, “please reassure them 
we take patient safety seriously” before putting them “in touch with the 
customer care team”.

In a second note, the chief pharmacist at Boots, Marc Donovan, advised the 
chain’s pharmacists: “Services must be for the benefit of patients, not the 
attainment of numerical targets.”

Boots’ pharmacists who contacted the Guardian about the note argued there was 
a wide gulf between company policy and their experience on the shop floor. One 
simply described Boots’ note as “complete nonsense”.
 