
The US drugstore chain Walgreens is pressing ahead with a full takeover of the 
group behind high-street retailer Boots the Chemist but is rowing back on a 
controversial plan to shift its headquarters to Europe to reduce its tax bill.

Walgreens bought a 45% stake in Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> for £4.3bn in a 2012 deal 
that included the option to buy the remainder within three years. Confirmation 
of the decision to proceed is expected to come on Wednesday. The terms of the 
transaction are expected to follow the same formula as the original, with the 
55% stake expected to be valued at around £5bn.

In recent months speculation surrounding the timing of the second stage of the 
deal has intensified after its emerged that Walgreens shareholders had lobbied 
the board to pursue a "tax inversion" and redomicile its tax base.

Private equity backed Alliance Boots is based in Switzerland, where its tax 
rate is 20% compared with Illinois-based Walgreens' 37.5%.

In the wake of Pfizer's unsuccessful move for UK drugs giant AstraZeneca, 
which was also motivated by a desire to lower its tax burden, tax inversions 
have faced political scrutiny, with the president, Barack Obama, stating that 
US companies which moved their headquarters overseas to save tax were damaging 
the country's economy.

It is thought the Walgreens board decided that the political row surrounding 
companies that move their domicile for tax purposes could damage the firm's 
reputation among US consumers. Even if it goes down well with its shoppers, the 
decision to abandon the tax move is likely to prove less popular with 
shareholders who argued that the freed-up cash could have been used to pay 
dividends or reinvest in Walgreens' US chain.

The leak of the impending deal went down badly, with Walgreens' shares falling 
more than 4%.

The deal will trigger big payouts for the private equity firm KKR and the 
Italian billionaire Stefano Pessina who bought Alliance Boots off the stock 
exchange in 2007 in a controversial £12.2bn takeover backed with £9bn of debt. 
The investors have already recouped their original investments of more than 
£1bn apiece, with ownership of the outstanding stake split between Pessina, KKR 
and "silent investors" affiliated to KKR.

In 2012 Pessina, who is based in Monaco, signalled his commitment to the 
business by collecting his initial £1.4bn payment in Walgreens shares while the 
rest took cash.

The full merger, which is not expected to be pushed through until next year, 
will create a global health and beauty giant with more than 11,000 stores. 
Walgreens, founded by the entrepreneur Charles Walgreen who opened his first 
store in Chicago in 1901, has more than 8,200 stores in the US. Boots, which 
traces its history back to 1849 when John Boot opened the first store selling 
herbal remedies in Goose Gate, Nottingham, is now part of a group with 3,150 
stores in more than 25 countries.

A spokesman for Alliance Boots declined to comment and Walgreens could not be 
reached for comment.
 