
The revelations (Watchdog steps in after allegations Boots is milking NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/boots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-union>
, 18 April) following the Guardian investigation into Boots are symptomatic of 
the dynamic between the NHS and private business, some of which could arguably 
be regarded as exploitation. In our case we have identified a conflict of 
interest around the private laboratories appointed to manage NHS microbiology 
contracts and the latter’s urgent need to make significant cost savings in all 
areas of clinical medicine and patient experience.

On approaching one of the largest of these private laboratory groups to 
promote improved urine specimen collection and dramatically reduce retesting, 
we were told that this “would knock about £500,000 off our bottom line”. Our 
entreaty that right-first-time analysis, diagnosis and treatment would benefit 
patients as well as theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> on a 
number of levels was dismissed in favour of shareholder interests.

Those in the NHS responsible for setting up volume-based compensation to 
private companies have singularly failed to protect their employer from what 
could arguably be viewed as exploitation. There are some NHS laboratories whose 
budgets also rely on the volume processing of specimens, without any reward or 
incentive for reduction in retesting.

This is a more serious issue than many will acknowledge given there are around 
65m urine tests delivered to the NHS annually. Our own FOI research points to a 
national average potential retest rate of about 20% with some trusts showing 
50% and in one case over 70%. That’s an awful lot of patients who cannot be 
accurately diagnosed at first test, which might also suggest a reason behind 
the wide prescribing of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Giovanna Forte
Founding director, Forte Medical, London

• As a doctor and an NHS patient, I am disgusted by the corporate behaviour of 
Boots. This is obviously harmful to its staff and to public health and finances.

On a personal note, I was recently asked to return to my local branch for a 
medicine use review (MUR) which I neither needed nor wanted. Being unaware that 
this waste of my time and that of the pharmacist was a rip-off designed to 
extort £28 (for three minutes of unnecessary and somewhat embarrassed advice), 
I complied. I regret colluding inadvertently with this.

Two years ago it was revealed that (as a result of takeover by the US giant 
Walgreens) Boots had arranged its tax affairs via Switzerlandto ensure it 
cheated the UK exchequer out of more than £1bn 
<http://www.medact.org/medact-blog/tax-abuse-public-heath-risk-time-pay-boots/>
. This resulted in protests outside Boots branches by UK Uncut. In view of the 
Guardian’s revelations, it is time to repeat those actions on a larger scale 
with an emphasis on solidarity with the staff.

It is also time for the General Pharmaceutical Council and the health select 
committee to find out what incentives are imposed on Boots’ local and regional 
managers to drive them and their staff to undertake unnecessary MURs to extract 
profits from the rest of us.
Dr Frank Arnold
Brighton

• This story reflects the modern nature of commerce, with the government 
encouraging the involvement of big business “for economies” of scale and then 
seeing vast tax revenue taken offshore. The pharmaceutical wholesale market is 
dominated by two players, is based outside the UK and could be classified 
ascalled “too big to fail”.

It is interesting to see the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> in its latest stance against 
community pharmacy, wanting to close 3,000 pharmacies. This would affect the 
smaller independent pharmacies in order to save £170m but does little to 
address the loss of billions of tax revenue.
Gursaran Singh Matharu
Mapex Pharmacy Consultancy

• Less obvious profiteering by Boots is instruction of their pharmacists on 
private prescriptions. I wrote one for a week’s amoxicillin, knowing it to be 
cheaper than the NHS cost of £8.40, and went to collect it for a patient. I was 
astonished to be told that all such items now cost the NHS price or higher. I 
went to Sainsbury’s pharmacy and found it for £4.45, which included the £2-plus 
dispensing fee.
JK Cruickshank
Professor of cardiovascular medicine and diabetes; Hon consultant physician, 
St Thomas’ & Guy’s hospitals, King’s College and King’s Health Partners, London

• I can testify to the truth of the allegations against Boots regarding the 
abuse of medicine use reviews. A few months ago I was subjected to one without 
being asked if I wanted it. Indeed, it was conducted in the manner of a test of 
mental capacity (I am of an age to receive free prescriptions) and was 
continued against my will, it being alleged that I was on the wrong medication. 
The frustration of the pharmacist when I refused to sign a document whose use 
and nature were unknown to me, and have remained so until I read your report, 
was very ill-concealed, and complaints both to Boots and to my local medical 
practice produced no satisfactory explanation. Dear old “Boots the chemist” is 
no more; the corporate machine that has taken it over is ripe for a full 
investigation.
Simon Nicholls
London

• The culture at Boots illustrates why the private sector, with its first duty 
to shareholders, has no place in the NHS.
Karen Fletcher
Sheffield 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 