
It is getting on for a year now since this column was commenting on the 
situation in which the young Kiwi talent Jesse Ryder found himself. Ryder had 
got himself into numerous scrapes, all related to his love affair with alcohol 
and culminating in him putting his hand through a toilet window, severing a 
tendon and keeping him out of the game for months. The thrust of my argument 
was that rather than criticise him and throw him on the scrap heap as some 
would have done, those in a position to do so should put all their resources 
into helping him overcome his problems. There have been glitches since but, by 
and large, it looks as if Ryder is getting somewhere.

So there was a certain irony in his arrival in Australia with New Zealand at a 
time when another troubled individual,Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds>, was beginning a battle to 
save his international career. By now Symonds – charged with a breach of the 
Australian players' code of behaviour – will have appeared before a 
disciplinary hearing of Cricket Australia, fronted by their senior 
code-of-conduct commissioner, Gordon Lewis, a retired judge, and will have gone 
some way to knowing where his immediate future lies. A heavy fine is the most 
lenient option but there are rumours that he could be facing omission from the 
forthcoming tour of South Africa or even have his board contract terminated, 
thereby ending his career.

His offence in this instance, which follows a string of incidents over the 
past few years, was to refer to the New Zealand whizz-bang batsman Brendon 
McCullum as a "lump of shit" during a radio interview last Friday. McCullum, 
due to play for New South Wales in a Twenty20 final, has diplomatically said 
that he was not offended by the remark, which is in itself generous. He says he 
has not listened to the interview but actually it might be no bad thing if he 
did. We listened to it online here in St Kitts and it was breathtaking in the 
way it unfolded.

The interview, with Roy & HG of Sydney Olympics fame, had been arranged to 
publicise Symonds' work for the Leukaemia Foundation and was conducted down the 
line from his Gold Coast home. He had been to the pub beforehand but denies 
being drunk, something at odds with the perception. Clearly he was shedded, 
despite the early hour, and even more clearly he walked into a trap from which 
he was unable to extricate himself.

The pair of cheekie chappies wound him up mercilessly and hung him out to dry. 
If the initial reaction listening to this was to guffaw at each stumbling, 
slurring faux pas, culminating in the McCullum remark, then it was quickly 
replaced by a feeling of nausea at hearing such a vicious deconstruction of a 
floundering man. If lumps of shit there were, they were not McCullum or for 
that matter Symonds. Roy & HG ought to be ashamed of themselves.

Perhaps Symonds or his manager should have seen this coming – the programme is 
not exactly obscure in Australia. Maybe Symonds, who has never impressed as one 
of the shinier Kookaburras in the box, knew the form, thought he could handle 
it and dish out as good as he got. Whichever, it looks as if he was badly 
advised on all fronts.

Now, once more, he has to face the wrath of his employers, his team-mates and 
an element of the public. But let us hope there is some understanding of what 
he might be going through. As with Ryder, he is said to appreciate the damaging 
extent of his relationship with alcohol, which is the starting point for all 
rehabilitation, and has been receiving counselling. That, though, is not an 
overnight job.

He has also been receiving help from a number of psychologists, one of whom, 
Deidre Anderson, has been pleading a case for leniency and understanding of the 
nature of the task she has, very much a work in progress that would not gain 
from interruption. Personally I hope thatCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia listens sympathetically, 
for this must be a complex issue, and not something to be tossed off as just 
another disruptive sportsman who has gone off the rails.

Symonds may not be the most pleasant of men (I have no way of knowing but 
anecdotal evidence suggests as much) but that should not be the criterion. He 
is a troubled individual who needs ongoing support and, judging by the words of 
Anderson, is already benefiting from it. A stitch-up by a pair of goading 
comedians should not see a man lose his career. The consequences of the 
alternative, dumping him, are too unedifying to consider.
 