
The Boston Bruins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boston-bruins> silenced 
Toronto with an overtime winner against the Maple Leafs to seal a 4-3 victory 
and take a 3-1 NHL playoff series lead.

Los Angeles' Slava Voynov scored in overtime to give the Kings a 3-2 win over 
St. Louis on Wednesday, completing their third straight win over the Blues to 
turn the series around and put the defending champions within one win of a 
first-round playoffs victory. The circumstances were mirrored in Anaheim, where 
the Ducks also won 3-2 in overtime and also took a 3-2 series lead, over 
Detroit. While theNew York Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-rangers> edged Washington by the 
same scoreline to square their series at 2-2.

Boston's David Krejci scored his third goal of the night in overtime 
Wednesday, giving the Bruins a 4-3 win over Toronto. Krejci beat James Reimer 
with a shot from the faceoff circle after coming down the left wing.

The Bruins are 15-2 when leading a best-of-seven series 3-1. And Toronto is 
2-12-1 in its past 15 games in Boston. Joffrey Lupul, Cody Franson and Clarke 
MacArthur scored for Toronto. Patrice Bergeron added a goal for Boston, with 
captain Zdeno Chara collecting four assists.

Goalies Tuukka Rask and Reimer were both busy in an end-to-end overtime, with 
Toronto's Matt Frattin hitting Rask's goalpost.

Los Angeles' overtime winner shook off the disappointment of conceding an 
equalizing goal with only 44.1 seconds left in regulation as Alex Pietrangelo 
scoring on a wrist shot from the point for the Blues, who had pulled their 
goalkeeper for an extra attacker.

Jeff Carter scored in the opening minute of the second and third periods for 
the Kings, who became the first road team to win in the series.

Anaheim's Nick Bonino scored in overtime to put the Ducks on the brink of the 
second round, beating Detroit 3-2.

Game 6 is Friday at Joe Louis Arena, where the Ducks will attempt to close out 
just their second playoff series victory since winning the Stanley Cup in 2007.

New York's Dan Girardi and Derek Stepan scored third-period goals for the 
Rangers, who squandered a two-goal lead and then held on to edge Washington 4-3.

Girardi ripped a shot from above the left circle, off a feed from Derick 
Brassard, to give the Rangers the lead again with a power-play goal 59 seconds 
into the third.

Stepan made it 4-2, scoring into a wide-open net at the end of a give-and-go 
play in front with Carl Hagelin, who had a goal and two assists.

Game 5 will be back in Washington on Friday before the series returns to 
Madison Square Garden on Sunday. The home team has won all four games in the 
first-round Eastern Conference matchup.

Five things we learned in the NHL playoffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/08/islanders-penguins-nhl-playoffs-la-kings>
 