
Kefentse drives a silver Toyota Corolla for a living, ferrying "rich white 
businessmen" and the occasional tourist between Gaborone's finest hotels and 
Sir Seretse Khama airport. On one such journey, having proudly pointed out the 
gleaming headquarters of Air Botswana, Kefentse waxes lyrical about the 
achievements of the airport's namesake: the visionary first Prime Minister of 
independent Botswana, who transformed the country of Kefentse's 1960s youth 
from one of the poorest countries in Africa – one of the poorest in the world – 
to the fastest growing economy in Africa. "He was a great man," Kefentse says 
of Seretse Khama. "There have been many bad leaders in the history of Africa, 
but he put the people first."

Kefentse cites strong leadership as the reason behind Botswana's economic 
successes; a zero tolerance policy towards corruption and the careful 
management of natural resources. He is proud of his country, hailed by the 
World Bank as the "success story" of Africa, and rightly so. It would've been 
easy for diamond-rich, landlocked Botswana to go the same way as Sierra Leone, 
described by the United Nations as the world's "least liveable" country, whose 
government's inability to control the mining and export of diamonds greatly 
contributed to the breakdown of society and the widespread poverty that 
characterises the country today.

While illegal diamond mines abound in the rainforest nation of Sierra Leone, 
Botswana's government has celebrated the fortieth anniversary of Debswana 
(formerly known as the De Beers Botswana Mining Company Ltd), its partnership 
with De Beers. With diamonds providing 76% of Botswana's export revenue, the 
government's half-share in this joint venture has fuelled the major growth in 
the country's economy. Botswana is now a leader in economic freedom; a middle 
income country with a standard of living roughly comparable to Turkey or 
Mexico. Between gaining independence in 1966 and 1980, Botswana had the fastest 
growing economy in the world, with an average growth rate of 9% per annum.

The root of the problem in many African countries clearly lies in its social 
institutions. The 32 year reign of Mobutu Sésé Seko, the President of Zaire 
(present day Democratic Republic of the Congo) is a prime example. By 
nationalising foreign companies and forcing European investors out of the 
country, he precipitated an economic slump which was further exacerbated by 
unrestrained siphoning of public money to fund his extravagant Concorde and 
Mercedes-Benz littered lifestyle. Rampant inflation ensued, creating the 
perfect conditions for civil war, yet another issue that has prevented many 
African countries from becoming economic powers in their own right. Years of 
corrupt governance, embezzlement and the misappropriation of foreign aid 
throughout the continent has shown that throwing money at African countries 
only serves to widen the gap between rich and poor.

The informal sector is the driving force behind the economy in many African 
countries. Professor George Ayittey, a professor of Economics at American 
University, claims that the "traditional" and "informal" sectors of African 
economies cannot be ignored; Africa must prosper through its "indigenous 
structures and traditions." One such tradition is apiculture (bee-keeping), 
which has deep-seated roots in African society but was often sidelined as a 
business opportunity due to a lack of equipment and experience. Hives Save 
Lives, a Uganda based organisation founded by businessman Richard Unwin with 
the aim of alleviating poverty through beekeeping, provides not only basic 
training for beekeepers but also creates local employment by manufacturing the 
hives and protective clothing in-country. Mentoring from Hives Save Lives and 
the income generated from honey and beeswax products engenders self-sufficiency 
in disadvantaged communities and promotes trade between small businesses 
throughout Africa.

When encouraging foreign investment in African businesses, a similarly 
concentrated approach is advised. At a recent power conference in Africa, 
financiers discussed the need for developers to explore smaller projects rather 
than ambitious, costly enterprises with little hope of return. Although the 
continent has extensive natural coal, uranium and hydro resources, foreign 
investors have been deterred by recent high profile failures, including the 
multi-billion Inga hydro dam project in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
David Donaldson, Senior Manager for Infrastructure at the International Finance 
Corporation, claims that the problem is not finance related. "If you have a 
decent, bankable project in the power sector in Africa, you will be able to get 
the finance," he claims, calling on African countries to reduce tariffs and 
trade barriers in order to encourage foreign investment.

In Botswana, Kefentse's children benefit from ten years of free primary 
education; a policy introduced by the government over twenty years ago in order 
to reduce the country's dependence on diamonds. Although tuition fees for 
secondary education were reintroduced in 2006, the government still provides 
full scholarships to its citizens, even overseas, if a particular programme is 
unavailable in Botswana. But therein lies another problem. The lack of options 
in many developing countries encourages the most capable students, as well as 
the elite, to seek higher education options overseas, while researchers flock 
to the UK and US to pursue doctorates.

Jeremy Hanshaw, International Development Manager for the University of East 
London, stresses that action is needed to prevent the "brain drain", the 
process by which countries lose skills as their trained professionals and 
entrepreneurs emigrate. It is no good, he claims, "for us to shake our heads 
and tut-tut when we see images of disarray in sub-Saharan Africa on the news, 
while we happily take the brightest students out of these countries." Instead, 
initiatives must be introduced by UK universities to involve universities in 
developing countries in the academic networks that we in 'the north' enjoy, 
involving them in collaborative research projects and setting up research 
centres in partnership with these institutions in country."

By working with colleagues in sub-Saharan Africa to develop world class 
centres of teaching and learning, these countries can benefit from recruiting 
their own international students, as well as keeping their brightest at home.

*David Donaldson quotation courtesy of Reuters 

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 