
In the interests of furthering our football education, Observer Sport 
occasionally has a midweek office outing to a non-League game.

In October 2000, some of us went to the FA Cup qualifying replay between 
Wembley FC and Woodbridge Town. Little did we think we'd be seeing an 
international player in action, a man who took the field here yesterday in 
front of a full house of more than 50,000, with thousands more locked out.

The Wembley goalkeeper 'plays for Malawi' we were told by one of the 90 or so 
fans present. We checked him out from behind the goal. 'Is this true - you are 
Malawi's number one?' we asked after he'd booted a goal kick upfield. 'Mali, 
not Malawi,' he said. 'I have played for them.' His name was Karamoko Keita and 
he explained that he wanted to be back in the team in time to be considered for 
the squad for the African Cup of Nations, which his home nation was hosting in 
15 months' time.

This seemed a tall order from Division Two of the Ryman League, especially as 
another goal went in and there was no prospect of a Wembley Cup run. So Keita 
moved up a notch or two, to Harrow Borough in the Ryman Premier. And, the 
standard of Malian goalkeeping being what it is, he was called up for training 
camps in France and back in West Africa.

There was no club-versus-country row, he kept his form for Harrow on his 
return and, after the 2-1 defeat at Grays Athletic in front of 220 spectators 
on 22 December, he flew to Bamako to prepare to take on, among others, George 
Weah, former world footballer of the year, in yesterday's opening game against 
Liberia. This almost unimaginable gulf between playing standards is not unusual 
in African international football.

The 16 teams here feature millionaires from Real Madrid, Arsenal, Manchester 
United, Deportivo, Ajax; and lesser names from Green Buffaloes, the army team 
who are not even in the top division of Zambian football, ASFA and USFA from 
Burkina Faso, and two with no club at all. Amazingly, one of the clubless two - 
a Congolese defender is the other - will be playing against England in the 
World Cup finals. Ike Shorunmu, Nigeria's first-choice goalkeeper, has not 
played a club game since being ditched last summer by Besiktas, his Turkish 
employers. They were fed up with all his international call-ups. After Mali, 
Shorunmu goes home to prepare for his next outing, against Argentina in Japan, 
by training with Shooting Stars, a Nigerian second-division team. He'll need as 
many matches as possible here, as will Tony Sylva, the Senegal keeper who can't 
even get on the bench at Monaco and is due to line up against France in the 
World Cup opener. 'He's not a good keeper at all,' says one of the strikers who 
played against him in qualifying, Ahmed Hossam of Egypt and Ajax. He has a 
chance to prove it when the teams meet this afternoon.

Hossam, a teenager known as Mido, shifts a lot of shirts at Ajax. He looks 
like Paolo Maldini, he scored 14 goals in half a season for Ghent in Belgium 
last season and he is a star in the making, perhaps destined to become the 
biggest football name in the Arab world. Two Premiership clubs and AC Milan 
have tried to sign him.

The more Africans in Europe, however, the greater the problems in deciding 
between club and country. There are more than 100 players from top European 
teams here, but the number of lesser players is one of the reasons why many, 
and the wealthier clubs in particular, see this tournament as a waste of time 
and talent.

It is as far removed from a big event in Europe as anything in the sporting 
world can be. The new road was still not finished on the route to the main 
stadium on Friday. A drive to the second venue in Bamako in a battered old 
taxi, on pot-holed, red-dirt roads and in among thousands of mopeds and dozens 
of whistle-happy traffic police, takes you past roadside goat herds, men 
hammering oil drums into bathroom furniture and women carrying baskets of 
bananas to market on their heads. You might even see a few locals wearing Osama 
bin Laden T-shirts.

The cheaper match tickets are called 'soleil' - sunburn - and cost £1.50, 
which is way beyond the pocket of most Malians. The cost of staging the Nations 
Cup, estimated at £40 million, has been the subject of much discussion here. 
It's another world, and the Europeans are changing it.

Those big clubs who complain loudest about sending players to African 
qualifiers had a significant victory last Thursday. At the Palais des Congrès 
on the banks of the Niger in Bamako, the Confederation of African Football 
agreed to cut the number of international call-ups by turning the Nations Cup 
into a World Cup qualifying tournament from 2006. Sepp Blatter, the Fifa 
president, described the move as 'a courageous decision... the way forward for 
Africa'.

The Nations Cup is held every two years, so it will apply every other 
tournament and will mean, for example, perhaps eight fewer trips to Africa for 
Kanu and the like over 15 months. It will also mean that the quarter-finals of 
the 2006 Nations Cup will be more important than the final, with all four 
winners going to the World Cup finals and the losers left to fight for one 
remaining place in a format yet to be decided.

A team could qualify for the World Cup on a 9-8 penalty shoot-out. It will 
raise the level of interest worldwide and maybe make the TV rights worth more. 
This time they were inexpensive and, for the first time, the BBC is televising 
the Nations Cup, with 13 highlights shows, and the final broadcast live on 10 
February. Too many matches in Africa were not a problem envisaged by the man 
who founded the African Cup of Nations, Dr Abdel Hamid.

The Sudanese gentleman vividly recalls the meeting with Jules Rimet in 1953 at 
which the Frenchman who founded the World Cup suggested Africa should have a 
continental football federation. Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia and South Africa were 
founder members, and the Nations Cup kicked off in 1957. All four entered, but 
then they were three: the South African government insisted on an all-white or 
all-black team.

'We said no,' says Dr Halim. 'It was the first instance of apartheid in 
sport.' He is justly proud of his initiative and feels the standard of football 
has improved every tournament. But Michel Platini, who is also in Mali for the 
competition, says that Pele's prediction about an African team becoming world 
champions was wrong last century and will continue to be so for the foreseeable 
future.

'In the next 50, 60 years.... No, they will not win it,' he said. 'Asia is 
improving, Europe will get better. African footballers will do better and 
better as individuals, but you can't have a team with one, two, three, four, 
five, six, seven players. You need not even 11. France are the best in the 
world because they have a strong 22. An African team cannot find a strong 22.' 
Not when they're looking at Harrow Borough.

African Nations Cup fixtures 

 Today 

 Group B:  South Africa v Burkina Faso 7.30 

 Group C:  Cameroon v Congo Dem Republic 5.30 

 Group D:  Egypt v Senegal 3.30 

 Monday 

 Group A:  Algeria v Nigeria 4.0 

 Group B:  Morocco v Ghana 4.0 

 Group C:  Togo v Ivory Coast 6.0 

 Group D:  Zambia v Tunisia 7.0 

 Thursday 

 Group A:  Mali v Nigeria 7.0 

 Group B:  South Africa v Ghana 4.0 

 Friday 

 Group A:  Liberia v Algeria 7.30 

 Group C:  Cameroon v Ivory Coast 5.30 

 Group D:  Egypt v Tunisia 3.30 

 Saturday 

 Group B:  Burkina Faso v Morocco 3.30 

 Group C:  Congo DR v Togo 5.30 

 Group D:  Senegal v Zambia 3.30 

 Key dates 

 Quarter-finals  3-4 February 

 Semi-finals  7 February 

 The final:  10 February 

Stadium of the 26 March *, Bamako, 4pm.


* Named after the date of Mali's military coup 

 Tournament coverage 

BBC television, World Service radio and BBC Online are covering the 
tournament; BBC2 will show the final live and is screening nightly highlights. 
Tonight's programme starts at 11.45pm. British Eurosport is providing extensive 
live coverage of matches.

· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, as sharp or 
as stupid as you like, to the <a 
href="mailto:football.editor@theguardian.com">football.editor@theguardian.com.
 