
Japanese Saiko mahi with pumpkin udon noodles served on rectangular plates in 
a dining room of polished dark wood furniture and fushia-pink chairs might not 
turn heads in London or New York. But it's a different story in the Caribbean.

Sure, you can find chi chi restaurants on some of the islands - Barbados's 
glitzy west coast is renowned for its foodie scene: there's The Cliff and 
Daphne's Bistro (a Caribbean outpost of the original in Chelsea), with London 
prices to match, but Asian fusion food, in Antigua?

Despite its high profile among the yachting fraternity, Antigua has always 
been a fairly low-key tourism destination, best known for its posh 
all-inclusives such as the exclusive Jumby Bay, set on its own private island.

The place with the pink chairs is East, one of two à la carte restaurants at 
Antigua's first style hotel, Carlisle Bay, named after its location on the 
south coast. It represents the latest project from Gordon Campbell Gray, the 
man behind One Aldwych in London. As well as East, there's Indigo On The Beach 
(sister restaurant to Indigo at One Aldwych) which offers a decidedly 
un-Caribbean menu: smoked salmon sandwiches for US$21, bruschetta ($10), lamb 
cutlets ($24); there's a funky library with fluorescent-lit Perspex shelves and 
artfully arranged glossy coffee-table books and beach reads recommended by 
Campbell Gray's chums in publishing. There are games, too, though not the tatty 
boxes of Scrabble usually found in hotel libraries - here, the chess sets are 
by Karim Rashid, the designer behind the Semiramis Hotel in Athens.

Got the urge to watch a movie? No problem, order a DVD from room service, or 
better still pop into the screening room, a replica of the one at One Aldwych 
with the same blue leather seats and fabric walls (a popcorn machine is on the 
way, too).

Photographer Jason Taylor was dispatched to the island to take arty 
black-and-white shots of plants that now hang on the white walls of the rooms 
and cover the sliding wardrobe doors, which on one side open to reveal a Gaggia 
espresso machine and stripey Paul Smith-style cups and saucers; every terrace 
and balcony has a double-sized day bed; and in the larger suites there are mini 
kid's loungers.

The hotel exteriors are painted white and, as the publicity material puts it, 
pickled grey - that's just plain grey to you and me. There's a lot of grey - 
the swimming pool is lined with grey mosaic tiles, the sun loungers are covered 
in silvery grey cotton, and the baths are set in grey stone.

It's all a very long way from the rattan furniture and brightly coloured 
bedspreads seen in most Caribbean hotels. Barefoot luxury is the buzz word.

Frette bed linen, fibre optic bed lights and Indonesian-style furniture are 
all very well, but the proof of the pudding will be in the occupancy rates. 
When someone commented on the deserted bar, general manager Alistair Forrest 
leapt in, saying guest numbers are deliberately being kept low until the hotel 
is up to speed; a spa, juice bar and yoga pavilion are all on the way, and the 
service doesn't quite live up to the three grand a week price tag. At breakfast 
one morning, six waitresses struggled to serve 10 couples efficiently. Yet it's 
the staff who are largely responsible for the relaxed atmosphere; there's none 
of the snobbery you get in some five-star resorts, none of the irritating 
American-style, "How may I help you?"

The other reason it's so easy to kick back is the location - the bay itself is 
bordered on three sides by lush forested hills and the sea is like a children's 
paddling pool - shallow, warm and calm. Apart from one British guy who spent 
his days hunched over his laptop in the pavilion - a vast reception/lounge area 
with white sofas and a central table the size of a small island covered in 
tropical flowers - guests seem to shift into go-slow the minute they take a sip 
of the cinnamon iced-tea welcome drink; they amble along shady footpaths like 
patients in rehab.

Windsurfing, sailing, kayaking are all on offer but the watersports 
supervisors stood around with no one to instruct. I wasn't immune to the 
soporific effects of the resort and had to change my in-room relaxing 
aromatherapy massage to an invigorating one for fear of being rooted to my bed, 
staring at the sea for the next 24 hours.

The antidote to this lethargy is to get out and explore the island. Though the 
locals joke about "Antigua time", there is something about it - the 
Technicolored landscape, the rhythmic Soca music, the sweet tropical air, 
perhaps - that makes you feel alive no matter how many rum punches you sank the 
night before.

Ten minutes round the coast from Carlisle Bay is OJ's, a beach bar where you 
sit with your feet in the sand and a Carib beer in your hand, watching the sun 
set - the kind of place you spend a week searching for and find on your last 
day. OJ gave me a rather withering look when I asked if there was a house 
cocktail. "I like to keep it simple - beer and rum." The week before, an 
American company had offered him $1.7m for the site but he was not interested. 
"What would I do with that kind of money?"

Everyone knows OJ's - we got chatting to Chickie, the best known DJ in the 
West Indies, whose posse play at everything from cricket matches to political 
rallies. They've been busy; the elections are coming up and for the first time 
in 37 years it looks like the government could be out.

I'd seen OJ's the day before on a speed-boat trip from Carlisle Bay. We bumped 
along the south coast passed empty beach after empty beach - there are 365 of 
them on the island but even so, you expect to see some people, especially on a 
Sunday afternoon.

The day before we had taken the Wadadli (Wadadli is the original African name 
given to Antigua) catamaran from Nelson's Dockyard, a popular tourist spot. The 
highlight is the museum that proudly displays Nelson's bed, a four-poster built 
50 years after his death. En route to Rendezvous Bay, another ridiculously 
picturesque beach, we picnicked on lobster salad, spicy chicken and Antiguan 
pineapple before mooring for a swim.

Three different boat trips around the south coast revealed green hills dotted 
with only the odd disused sugar mill and millionaire's home. The island seems 
to be attracting more of them; on Jumby Bay island, palatial villas - all 
marble floors and open living spaces - are being built and extended, and will 
soon be available to rent to anyone with $8,000 a night to spare.

After a night of liming (the local equivalent of a pub crawl) that had gone 
from sitting outside a tiny art gallery listening to a steel band, to the Grand 
Princess Casino, a mock Grecian building on Jolly Harbour where seedy men chat 
up bored looking women, we ended up at Hawaii Blue, a wooden shack with a bare 
concrete floor, two car seats for chairs and an ancient pool table.

It turned out the bar is run by the wife of one of the founding members of 
Burning Flames, the most famous Soca band on the island. That's the beauty of 
Antigua. In 24 hours, you can bump into two of the top musicians and drink rum 
10 minutes down the road from pampered celebrities.

I never drink it at home, but finding the perfect rum punch became a bit of a 
theme. Waiting for my flight back to London, I ordered one for the road at the 
airport bar. "This is our own special variety," said the barman. "Double 
strength. It's called the Antiguan smile."

Way to go

Getting there: British Airways (0870 8509850, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) 
flies Heathrow-Antigua from £565.40 including tax from the middle of April to 
the end of June, and the end of August to the end of November). Until the end 
of March prices start from £662.40 return. ITC Classics (01244 355300,
itcclassics.co.uk <http://www.itcclassics.co.uk>) offers seven nights at 
Carlisle Bay in March, with breakfast, from £2,737pp inc flights.

Further information: The Caribbean Tourism Organisation (020-7222 4335, 
caribbean.co.uk <http://www.caribbean.co.uk>). antigua-barbuda.org 
<http://www.antigua-barbuda.org>. 

Country code: 001 268. 
 Time difference: -4hrs. 
 Flight time London-Antigua: 9hrs.
 £1 = 4.88 East Caribbean dollars.

Out and about

Where to eat

Harmony Hall (268 460 4120) The terrace restaurant at this Italian-run 
six-room guest house offers some of the best food in Antigua. Dishes include 
tuna carpaccio, grilled aubergine and mozzarella with fresh tomato sauce, and 
perfectly grilled snapper. The original plantation house has been converted 
into an art gallery. Rooms from US$165 a night; open for lunch every day, 
dinner on Fridays and Saturdays.

Julian's (268 562 1545) is the new venture from Julian Waterer, who relocated 
his restaurant in St John's to Runaway Bay. The menu offers a mix of Asian, 
international and Caribbean cuisine.

Papa Zouk (268 562 1284), a local favourite, specialising in seafood. 

Where to drink 

OJ's is a beach bar with tables in the sand. Whole snapper is one speciality. 

18 Carat in St John's and Rush at Jolly Harbour are the two most popular 
nightclubs.

Shirley Heights, overlooking English Harbour. On Sunday afternoons, a steel 
band and barbecue turn the historical site into a big party.

What to do 

Stingray City (268 562 7297) takes visitors out to the reef to swim with and 
feed stingrays. $40pp.

Kite Antigua on Jabberwock beach, on the north coast (kiteantigua.com 
<http://www.kiteantigua.com>), offers tuition and equipment rental. 

Take a catamaran cruise to sister island Barbuda with Tropical Adventures (268 
480 1225,tropicaladventuresinc.com <http://www.tropicaladventuresinc.com>).
 