
1. Hi Marcel, what can you tell me about Bow Arts <http://bowarts.org/>?

Bow Arts’ mission is to provide affordable studios for practising artists and 
creatives. We currently house about 400 artists in seven studio buildings around
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. Our latest project is the Rum 
Warehouse in Wapping, formerly the News International offices where Rebekah 
Brooks was based. There’s a massive demand for affordable space in the capital, 
while crazy property prices drive artists out of town.


We run a digital platform called Artists Studio Finder 
<http://artiststudiofinder.org/>, which is like a dating service to match 
artists with available space across London and the southeast. It gets an 
average of 10,000 hits a month. We find economical properties not being used 
for a period, convert them to provide affordable spaces and create communities 
of artists.

We build links between artists and local neighbourhoods: we place artists in 
schools, bring skilled people and add excitement to changing places with our 
events and exhibitions. In return, artists become known as good neighbours and 
quite a few get work to support their practice.

How have you applied your experience as an artist to your role as chief 
executive?


I was an artist; now I am really an arts administrator – well, that’s what I 
say on my car insurance. My experience as an artist was really an education in 
how to survive. Like many artists, I did this by being adaptable to many 
different situations and by being able to turn these situations to my 
advantage. Many people now call this a portfolio career; others say it’s having 
a strong identity with a healthy diversification to reduce risk. Whatever it 
is, the ability to survive is the biggest achievement in my book – and if you 
do it long enough.


If there is anything else it’s probably my lack of time for prima donnas. 
Creativity is fantastic, but it is not magic and those who think they are, I 
find boring. Personality on the other hand is great!

How vital is it that senior leadership positions at charities or organisations 
that support artists are filled by ex or current artists?

It’s probably not important at all as long as you have empathy. What’s 
important is that arts organisations afford the best people for the right jobs, 
and to do that you have to offer those people proper career options and 
salaries. This is unfortunately very hard for many organisations to achieve as 
they think they can’t afford it.

My attitude is we can’t afford not to afford it. You must prioritise and 
invest in the right places if you are going to progress, and in my view that 
investment is in people. Bow Arts now has an excellent team with a really broad 
range of professional experience, as this is so valuable to the organisation. 
Our team’s specialisms include property management and development, education 
and learning, arts management, finance and law, planning and regeneration as 
well as artistic practice.

Why is subsidised accommodation and studio space so important for artists?

It comes down to the benefits artists get from interacting and sharing ideas 
with one another. It’s the same in most sectors – individuals make much faster 
progress when they work in a collective or collaborative environment. I also 
believe that a healthy creative sector is absolutely vital to a healthy London 
economy. This means we need to ensure sufficient affordable places for artists 
to work. London is growing, so we should be growing – not shrinking.

We must address both the property issue and that of the professional role of 
the artist within our communities. We need to look at ways to support and equip 
artists to survive theses early and hard years – and make them as short as 
possible. Bow Arts is always looking for new, inventive ways to deliver 
“affordable” spaces, but the pressure on us is massive. Where once we were 
routinely offered 20-years leases, we now get three years. This means we have 
to work harder and faster at a greater risk just to stand still.

I am not saying there’s no crisis or that these calls to arms are not 
important. What I’m saying is that the problem is a permanent challenge that 
gets more complex every year – and every year more talented young artists leave 
art school to start their careers. Somehow, we need to turn London’s investment 
in arts education into economic growth and recoup the investment.

To do so we must create an environment for creatives to stay in London, work 
and become successful. We also need agencies such as theGLA 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/mayor-assembly/gla> and Arts Council England 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/> to work together to address capital investment 
in London’s cultural workspaces. We also need to address artist’s ability to 
afford space that is becoming more expensive. At Bow Arts we have worked hard 
to avoid being an organisation dependent on grants. So we work equally hard to 
improve the professional standing of artists, investing in professional 
development and training, developing networks that deliver properly paid jobs 
and opportunities, improving visibility and creating platforms for artists to 
sell their work. All of which is as important as affordable rent.

What would happen if all the subsidised space dried up in London? 

Artists would find alternatives – they would work in bedrooms, hallways and on 
kitchen tables. Studios don’t make artists, but do we want London’s supply of 
innovative and creative talented artists to be restricted like that?

Are the economic challenges associated with being an artist putting off the 
next generation?


The next generation? Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
schools are becoming more middle class again, as the cost of education means 
that many students from poorer areas will perhaps think twice before entering 
into such a career path. We’re also seeing a migration by many artists out of 
London to places such as Margate and Hastings because they’re more affordable. 
It’s vital that organisations such as ours support young artists and keep 
artists in the heart of our cities and economy.


Housing is a massive issue long-term for artists and we can only provide a 
temporary fix with ourLive/Work spaces 
<http://bowarts.org/studios/livework-accommodation>, but one which is hopefully 
beneficial for a few years. If artists can’t afford to live in London they 
won’t be able to afford to travel to the capital to work. We’re always actively 
looking for new partners and new ways to provide affordable housing.


Finally, many artists have to take low paying jobs to sustain a basic living. 
One of the ways we help artists survive is by giving them access to freelance 
teaching work, but with the current administration putting so little emphasis 
on art in the curriculum, we’re having to work increasingly hard with schools 
to piggy-back on other subjects and come in through the back door.


What three top tips would you give to a budding artist reading this?

Always be active and resilient. The arts are a very competitive place. There 
are many artists and fewer opportunities, so don’t dwell on the rejections but 
move (without baggage) into the corners and gaps that open up.


Be generous; it comes back in droves. Most galleries say that personal 
recommendation by another artist is still by far the very best way for them to 
find new artists to represent.


Finally, be polite and friendly: every career and every business is built 
first on people liking and wanting to work together.

Marcel Baettig is chief executive of Bow Arts <http://bowarts.org/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 