
After a season of travelling to race circuits around the world, it's certainly 
good to be home again with the knowledge that there will be no more long-haul 
flights until A1GP's fourth season kicks off later this year. It's just a shame 
that we couldn't come home with a better result behind us.

The state-of-the-art Shanghai International circuit is probably one of the 
best in the world and the facilities are second to none, so it's a relatively 
easy venue at which to set up office for the week. However, I do feel that the 
vastness of the modern site means there's a real lack of atmosphere in 
comparison to many of the other more intimate circuits at which we hold events.

Each year it's amazing to see how much Shanghai changes as it continues its 
rapid development into one of the world's modern-day cities. But unfortunately, 
with the exception of the Ignition reception, this time I didn't get a chance 
to make the hour-long trip into the centre to experience the numerous 
world-class restaurants which keep opening each year or visit one of the 
fantastic markets (although there were plenty of bike, watch and hand-bag 
sellers happily wandering around theA1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> paddock selling their goods, which was 
an alternative lunch break activity).

Much of my week in Shanghai was actually spent preparing for our home race at 
Brands Hatch on May 3-4. There's been a lot of work going on behind the scenes 
to ensure the British round is once again a contender for the best A1GP event 
of the season - although Durban or Zandvoort always manage to beat us to this 
prize each year. But at least we're definitely in contention for the best A1 
team – you just need to get voting onwww.a1gp.com <http://www.a1gp.com> now!

Rather than the usual support race programme, A1GP held a Ferrari festival 
throughout the weekend to showcase the brand ahead of next season's 
partnership. In addition to demonstrating top-line models, Ferrari road cars 
and F1 cars, Ferrari also used the time to trial run some of the potential 
support events for 2008/09. It's really exciting to see the Ferrari/A1GP 
partnership starting to gain momentum. But credit must go to Lola and Zytek, 
who have delivered an extremely reliable package for A1GP from the start. You 
see so many other start-up series plagued by reliability issues and fortunately 
A1GP has managed to avoid this. It will certainly be the end of an era for A1GP 
when the original Lola-Zytek cars race for the last time at the Brands Hatch 
event but, with Ferrari waiting in the wings, the series is set to get even 
more exciting.

With expectations so high ahead of the race weekend, it was unfortunate that 
Shanghai turned out to be one of our more disappointing weekends. With France 
bringing in a new driver, albeit an ex-F1 driver in the form of Franck 
Montagny, we knew we had a really good chance to take valuable points and move 
up to third in the Championship. For some reason, all our main rivals (France, 
South Africa, Germany and the Netherlands) didn't perform in qualifying. But 
unfortunately, having shown pace in practice, we didn't quite get it right 
either – qualifying 10th and 8th for the races respectively. This meant we were 
on the back foot throughout Sunday; despite defending well against the constant 
pressure from behind in both races, we didn't quite have the competitiveness to 
move up significantly.

But at least our sister team, Portugal, had a fantastic weekend, taking two 
podium finishes. Felipe Albuquerque is definitely one to watch and has played a 
big part in improving the teams' competitiveness since he joined the Portuguese 
squad in Durban, where he became one of a few drivers to achieve a podium in 
his first ever A1GP race weekend. It was also great to see USA become the 10th 
nation to win an A1GP race this season, but more importantly that the 
Championship will go all the way to the season finale, something that didn't 
happen in the previous two seasons when one nation dominated.

Great Britain has always been strong at Brands Hatch, and we haven't given up 
on our main focus of reclaiming bronze in the Championship – the position we 
have held for the previous two seasons of A1GP. I'm confident that we'll be up 
there and give the home crowd something to cheer about. But in motorsport, and 
in particular A1GP, you never know what's going to happen once the lights go 
out.
 