
Fifteen years ago, being a sherry lover was like being a member of a secret 
society. On the rare occasion I ran into a fellow enthusiast, we would speak in 
hushed voices, wary of public ridicule. Then a new wave of tapas bars with 
extensive sherry lists hit Britain’s major cities. For a time, the papers were 
full of articles about how sherry was well and truly back. From the trendy 
streets of Glasgow or Manchester, you’d think that was true, yet this new 
fashionability has done little to halt sherry’s inexorable decline.

British sales were down 11% last year. It’s a far cry from the 19th-century 
heyday when half the wine imported into Britain was sherry. Some of the biggest 
names were originally British: Williams & Humbert, Harveys and Osborne. You can 
see the British influence in the architecture of Jerez, Spain’s sherry capital. 
Patrick Matthews wrote in The Wild Bunch: “The sherry bodegas have something of 
the air of Oxbridge colleges, with their courtyards and immaculate displays of 
flowering plants (not to mention the all-pervasive smell of sherry).”

A buyer for a large wine merchant told me in confidence last month that “if it 
wasn’t for the brandy they make, the sherry business would be unsustainable”. 
More than 112m bottles ofBrandy de Jerez 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brandy_de_Jerez> are sold globally every year, 
compared with around 35m of sherry – and an average brandy sells for much more 
than an average sherry. Though relatively unknown in Britain, Brandy de Jerez 
is huge in Spain, Latin America, the Philippines and Germany.

The name is a bit misleading as it’s not actually made from sherry. Instead 
it’s distilled from Airen grapes grown in La Mancha, then matured in old sherry 
casks in the Jerez region, where it takes on their flavours. Apparently this 
came about because a British customer ordered some brandy but never paid for 
it, so it was stored in sherry barrels in Pedro Domecq’s cellars where it was 
forgotten. Years later, someone tried it and it was found to be delicious. It’s 
suspiciously similar to the creation myth of Worcestershire sauce where a sauce 
was made by two chemists, Messrs Lea and Perrins, to the specifications of a 
Lord Sandys who had discovered a tasty sauce in India. The Lord didn’t like the 
resulting sauce and it was forgotten about. The sauce was then rediscovered 18 
months later and had improved with maturity. In fact, there’s a lot of 
not-entirely-convincing history about Brandy de Jerez. The kitsch bottles with 
their fake wax seals look like holiday souvenirs.

So what’s it like to drink? It doesn’t have the sheer vinosity of a good 
Cognac or Armagnac, but theMendoza Gran Reserva made by Sanchez-Romate 
<http://www.romate.com/cardenal_mendoza_clasico> I tried recently did have the 
most wonderful finish, like a sweet Oloroso sherry. Perhaps Brandy de Jerez 
isn’t one of the world’s greatest spirits, but if it enables sherry companies 
to continue making one of the world’s finest wines, then it serves a valuable 
purpose.

Henry Jeffreys is a drinks writer based in London. His first book, Empire of 
Booze <http://unbound.co.uk/books/empire-of-booze>, will be published by 
Unbound in 2016. Twitter:@henrygjeffreys <https://twitter.com/henrygjeffreys>
 