
This month, Anna Friel is set to star as Holly Golightly in a West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> stage adaptation of the Hollywood 
version of Truman Capote's novella. This chain of revisions might seem 
excessive, but it is quite fitting for a story such asBreakfast at Tiffany's, 
which is, in every sense, a romance about reinvention.

It doesn't take much these days for a tale to be described as a "Cinderella 
story": anything resembling a makeover, however superficial, will usually 
suffice. ButBreakfast at Tiffany's really is a variation on the Cinderella 
theme, the tale of a young girl who escapes a dangerous adolescence and 
transforms herself through aspiration – a sheer act of will – but who may not 
live happily ever after. LikeCinderella, it is a story about struggling to 
escape. And it is a story about self-fashioning.Breakfast at Tiffany's suggests 
to every woman – and many of the men – in the audience that they could reinvent 
themselves, liberate the golden girl hidden beneath ordinary, even debased, 
trappings.

Much of the writing about the film of Breakfast at Tiffany's acknowledges that 
when Hollywood bought the rights to the story, Capote wanted Marilyn Monroe to 
play Holly Golightly. Most accounts treat this as yet another of Capote's many 
idiosyncracies, if they consider it at all – who could imagine Monroe instead of
Audrey Hepburn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn> in one of 
her most iconic roles? But for anyone familiar with either Monroe or the 
novella, it's not really that much of a stretch.

In fact, as many of the film's first critics observed, Hepburn is entirely 
wrong for Holly, a character who turns out to be a vagrant from west Texas 
whose real name is Lulamae Barnes. It is difficult to conceive of a woman less 
likely ever to have been called Lulamae, let alone "a hillbilly or an Okie or 
what" (as Holly's agent OJ Berman refers to Lulamae) than Audrey Hepburn. She 
could be aningénue, a naif, anything French you like. But a redneck? A hick 
from a Texas dirt-farm? That's even more implausible than Cary Grant as an 
Oregon lumberjack inTo Catch a Thief some five years earlier. Every inch of 
Audrey Hepburn exudes aristocratic chic.

Monroe, by contrast, whom Capote knew well, though raised in California rather 
than Texas, was originally named Norma Jeane (with an E, like Lulamae), and her 
parallels with Capote's Holly do not end there. She was a depression-era orphan 
who was both exploited and saved by older men. As an adult she would allude to 
childhood molestations (when reckoning how many lovers she's had, Capote's 
Holly dismisses "anything that happened before I was 13, because, after all, 
that just doesn't count"). She has an upturned nose, tousled, "somewhat 
self-induced" short, blonde hair ("strands of albino-blonde and yellow") and 
"large eyes, a little blue, a little green".

She is befriended by an extremely short, powerful Hollywood agent who 
recognises her potential and helps her reinvent herself, renaming her and 
providing her with access to education and a more sophisticated veneer. She 
runs away to New York just as success in Hollywood seems assured – although 
Holly, unlike Monroe, knows she doesn't have it in her to be a star, because 
she lacks the drive that precisely characterised Monroe (as Capote understood). 
Like Monroe, Holly is in it for the "self-improvement", as she tells the 
narrator. She's been around the block, for which she never apologises, and she 
ends as an icon, a fertility symbol (the narrator sees a picture of Holly 
carved as an African fetish). Most of all, Monroe, like Capote's Holly, "is a 
phony. But on the other hand . . . she isn't a phony because she's a real 
phony". The novella's Holly, her agent knows, is "strictly a girl you'll read 
where she ends up at the bottom of a bottle of Seconals". Mind you, the novella 
was published in 1958: four years before Monroe ended up at the bottom of a 
bottle of Nembutals. It's a fable about a Monroe manqué, who lacks her ambition 
– and may thus escape her fate.

Blake Edwards's film adaptation was released in 1961, a little less than a 
year before Monroe died. And much to her disappointment, she didn't win the 
part that had been written for, and about, her. Holly could have been the 
performance of a lifetime – as it would have been the performance of her 
lifetime. Moreover Holly, despite being blonde, is decidedly not dumb, and 
Monroe was desperate to escape being typecast.

But Hepburn won the part, and in retrospect it is easy to see why. Hepburn, 
far more than Monroe, had become indelibly associated with the transformative 
Cinderella makeover. Although Holly, like Monroe – and like Capote, in fact – 
all sprang from a Platonic conception of themselves (in F Scott Fitzgerald's 
famous phrase), for them the fissures between the earlier self and the public 
persona always showed, and threatened to split them apart. Hepburn was the only 
one whose stardom seemed to reflect her authentic self – as if she were not an 
actor but a true princess, an authentic queen.

In one way, Capote was certainly an authentic queen. But he was never able to 
shed his sense of belonging on the margins. The neglected child from Louisiana, 
the prodigy who transformed himself into a celebrity, never believed that he 
belonged in the castle. As he wrote of his own alter ego, the unnamed narrator 
ofTiffany's, he lived perpetually with "his nose pressed on the glass", wanting 
"awfully to be on the inside staring out". Capote, who was born Truman Parsons, 
was himself an aspiring Cinderella; like Holly he was renamed, reinvented, and 
left eternally waiting for the right fairy godmother.

Cinderella was not, originally, a poor child raised to the rank of princess. 
In the stories of Charles Perrault and the Brothers Grimm, Cinderella begins 
life in privilege and wealth – in earlier versions she's even a princess – who 
is wrongly deprived of her rightful status by those who envy her power and 
beauty. It is less a story of metamorphosis than of revelation: the 
transformation only reveals the original self. On screen, we never saw Norma 
Jeane become Monroe: we knew her only after the fall. But for Hepburn, every 
definitive role leading up toBreakfast at Tiffany's – and continuing to My Fair 
Lady – featured her being transformed, the butterfly emerging from the 
chrysalis. And unlike Monroe, who was always seen as having transformed into 
something artificial, Hepburn was only ever transformed back into her own 
luminous, immanent self.

The story of our culture's subsequent love affair with the film of Breakfast 
at Tiffany's– and not with the novella, which may be admired, and certainly has 
the cachet of its author, but is hardly well-beloved, much less well-read – is 
really about our love affair with Audrey Hepburn, the movie star. The persona 
she consistently projected was of authentic, intrinsic refinement, of chic 
sophistication that was never brittle or cold, of an instinctive stylishness 
that reached its epitome inBreakfast at Tiffany's. The moment when Hepburn 
first emerges in the film still ranks as one of the great screen makeovers of 
all time.

The title credits roll over a scene of condensed, symbolic wishing: Hollywood 
as dream factory. Hepburn is standing, very slim, in a long, black column dress 
with a glittering, enormous collar necklace and the trademark black sunglasses 
that Jackie O would adopt a few years later. (Jackie O's supposedly iconic 
looks markedly resemble Hepburn's from a few years earlier.) The camera 
encourages us to gaze longingly with her through the Tiffany's window at 
diamonds and other jewels; and then she strolls up the street, munching the 
doughnut that we know is probably the only doughnut Hepburn ever ate in her 
life. But it is precisely these little touches of normality, of the ordinary, 
that humanised Hepburn's image.

The next time we see her, she is asleep, wearing an absurd eye-mask and 
dangling ear-plugs with little blue tassels. She groggily awakes and pulls on a 
man's tuxedo shirt – one of the film's few insinuations that she may entertain 
"gentlemen callers" overnight – and, hair awry, opens the door to George 
Peppard, playing Capote's alter ego: straightened, masculinised and elongated 
(Capote was just 5ft 3in). Paul Varjak – as the film arbitrarily names the 
writer who will be cast as Holly's obligatory love interest – is locked out; 
Holly lets him in and realises that she has an appointment. A frantic rush to 
get dressed ensues, as Holly hunts for alligator pumps, brushes her teeth, puts 
on an enormous hat, and emerges from the bedroom as – voilà! – Audrey Hepburn. 
The camera lingers lovingly on a close-up of her dazzling smile as she asks, 
half-coyly, half-sweetly: "Surprised?" "Amazed," responds Varjak – and so are 
we, the transformation is so quick, so easy, so absolute. Or we would be 
amazed, if it weren't for the fact that we were always waiting for it.

One of the things that makes this transformation so effective is its apparent 
effortlessness. All she needs are the right hat and a little black dress (it 
was Hepburn who turned the LBD into the wardrobe staple it remains today) and 
there she is, like magic, with the wave of a fairy godmother's wand. FromNow, 
Voyager to Pretty Woman, Hollywood has sold stories that centre on 
metamorphosis, when ugly ducklings become beautiful swans or streetwalkers 
become homemakers. The appeal of transformation is the appeal of 
self-improvement: some women are born beautiful, some have beauty thrust upon 
them – but Hollywood promises that beauty can be achieved. The romance of
Breakfast at Tiffany's is not really with Peppard (in the only leading role 
he'll be remembered for) but with Hepburn herself, with the fantasy of artless 
sophistication she embodies. Hepburn (again, unlike Monroe) never appeared to 
try too hard.

Hepburn's iconic transfigurations extend back to her first, Oscar-winning, 
starring role inRoman Holiday in 1953 (the same year, incidentally, of Monroe's 
breakthrough role inNiagara). In a kind of inside-out Cinderella story, 
Hepburn, as Princess Ann, has one perfect day in Rome, riding around on the 
back of Gregory Peck's moped, before the clock strikes midnight and she returns 
to her duties, without Prince Charming, but secure in the knowledge of his 
love. And part of her metamorphosis comes when she crops her hair, trades a few 
accessories, including her shoes, rolls up her sleeves, unbuttons her collar, 
and instantly achieves the insouciant gamine look that would become her 
trademark.

Hepburn's next film, Sabrina, featured a more prolonged transformation, again 
from pony-tailed adolescent into pixie-cropped personification of soignée 
style. Sabrina added a fairy godfather in the form of a French baron so old 
that his intentions – and hence her morals – are never in question. Soon after 
cameFunny Face, and another makeover, the first that the story represents as 
requiring an army of fashionistas and photographers (but only because it takes 
that many to overcome her character's resistance to being objectified). 
Eventually, withMy Fair Lady, Hepburn would play the ultimate transformed 
object in Eliza Doolittle, a woman who is initially not at all the author of 
her own transformation. When Hepburn started playing Galatea, she stopped being 
Cinderella – for good. It was almost as if she didn't have to, because her 
definitive persona had been fixed. The princess had emerged.

The film of Breakfast at Tiffany's, like Capote's novella, sees Holly as 
half-Cinderella, half-Galatea. She has her Pygmalion figures – first Doc, who 
saves her, and begins to educate her, however primitively; then OJ Berman, who 
teaches her to speak correctly (by teaching her French in order to learn 
English) but doesn't quite succeed in teaching her how to behave. It is at this 
point that Capote's Galatea, like a female Huck Finn, lights out for the 
territories, escaping the confinements of "sivilization".

But Hollywood would never release Hepburn into the wild – not least because 
she so patently doesn't belong there. The film also has a romance with New 
York, which it doesn't want her to leave. So along comes the final Pygmalion, 
the writer Paul Varjak, who finishes domesticating Holly. Capote's Holly is too 
mobile and erratic for a Hollywood just emerging from the 1950s. She is a 
vagrant playgirl; her only permanent state, as she prints on her calling cards, 
is that she is "Miss Holiday Golightly, Travelling". And it means something 
very different for a woman to be a tramp than for a man.

This is why, for the story to work as a romance, Holly's indiscretions need to 
be cancelled out, as it were, by those of a lover who has also fallen prey to 
the lure of sexual economics, who has also sold himself. It is not just that 
Hollywood has to inject a love story wherever it finds a beautiful woman 
(although that is certainly the case) but that the man must ultimately redeem 
her, and himself, from a life of sexual opportunism that she describes in 
euphemistic terms as receiving money "for trips to the powder room", and he 
describes as "having a decorator".

Like Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby, Breakfast at Tiffany's is fundamentally a 
story of the American dream. Capote's novella, if not about nightmares, is 
certainly about the costs of the dream. The film – like most Hollywood movies – 
is determined to view dreams as wish-fulfilment. And by no coincidence it took 
a European movie star with aristocratic heritage to bring the American dream to 
life in all its sentimental romance, because the American dream is, in part, a 
dream about being the real thing, about belonging. Like Holly Golightly and 
Monroe, Jay Gatsby is a real phony. But Hepburn was a dream of authenticity 
rather than imitation, of success rather than failure, of security rather than 
escape.

You can call it sentimental, even cloying, cheap, manipulative. Capote 
certainly did, and many critics followed suit: an early review declared that 
Hepburn was "viciously, pathologically miscast" as Holly. This is undeniable – 
but it is also why the film works on its own terms, and has become so 
culturally distinct from the novella. Despite how much of the story and even of 
Capote's dialogue it keeps, it is a fundamentally different tale because its 
tone and mood is so at odds with Capote's. The film is, in a word, sunny; it is 
full of hope. The novella is full of shadows and terrors.

In the end, though, shadows are no truer than sunlight. Edwards's film is 
unquestionably escapist, and it eagerly encourages us not to think about how 
sordid and sad its characters and story actually are. That's what romance is. 
And in fact Capote's novella is rife with its own sentimentalities, in love 
with a romantic notion of loss and escape. Capote's Holly is essentially a 
variation on the hooker with a heart of gold, and the novella is dominated by a 
kind of willed cynicism, a veneer of sophisticated experience belied by the 
ending, in which the narrator sighs over his unconvincing hope that this "wild 
thing" has at last found a home. The filmBreakfast at Tiffany's is dominated by 
the obverse mood, a willed innocence, a romance with romance itself. But in 
fact the innocence of Capote's Holly is willed, too – which is what Hollywood 
gets right. As she tells the narrator in the novella: "I haven't anything 
against whores. Except this: some of them may have an honest tongue but they 
all have dishonest hearts. I mean, you can't bang the guy and cash his cheques 
and at least not try to love him." The morality lies in the effort to have an 
honest heart, genuinely to feel the emotion: and the film shares this moral 
code. Hollywood has always pandered to us, selling a vast, vulgar and 
meretricious beauty. The makers of the film are, metaphorically speaking, 
banging Holly; they're exploiting her story, selling her out, maybe even 
corrupting her – but they are also trying very hard to love her, and they want 
us to love her, too.

Breakfast at Tiffany's is at the Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal Haymarket, London SW1, from 9 
September. Box office: 0845 481 1870.
 