
I wouldn’t have been shocked if a spectator in the public gallery had produced 
a gun and shot him. If I’d had a gun, and thought I could have got away with 
it, I might have done it myself and claimed justifiable homicide. The Norwegian 
justice system can seem like a model of universal human rights in action, until 
you sit in anOslo courtroom and watch how it deals with Anders Breivik 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36094575>.

We say we believe in human rights. But say it too easily and you can duck the 
question: what do you mean by a human right? Specifically in the case of 
Breivik, what precisely do we mean by the human right not to be tortured?

When I was in Oslo in 2012, I was astonished by the deference with which the 
court treated the puffy-faced fascist. The “accused will always be given the 
opportunity to comment upon what the witnesseshave said 
<https://www.domstol.no/no/Enkelt-domstol/22-7/Presse/Facts-/The-criminaol-court-proceedings/>
,” Norway’s court rules read. The witness Breivik could barrack that day was 
Tonje Brenna, an organiser of the Norwegian Labour party’s youth league. She 
described how she hid and tried to save a wounded girl, while the bodies of her 
slain friends fell around her.

The geography of the island of Utøya, where the activists were having their 
summer camp, limited her movement as much as her determination to help her 
injured comrade. It’s a flat piece of land of little more than 25 acres in Lake 
Tyrifjorden, west of Oslo. She had no hills to run to, no caves to hide in. 
Brenna could only cower on the cliff side of a low escarpment, hoping that 
Breivik would not notice her and her bleeding friend, while suppressing the 
urge to scream as bodies toppled over the cliff edge above them.

She gave her evidence with remarkable dignity. And at the end of it, the lead 
judge turned to Breivik and invited him to say anything he wanted. He was free 
to jeer at her, humiliate her, gloat over the deaths of her comrades.

Jihadis, said Anders Breivik, have honoured their martyrs, and ‘we must do the 
same’

When I told Norwegians the British would not tolerate anything beyond the 
defendant questioning evidence, they were rather stern with me. This is our 
system. Terrorists had the same rights as everyone else. We cannot sink to 
their level. Which is what everyone is meant to believe. Which is what many 
right-thinking people said last week when judgeHelen Andenæs Sekulic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/anders-behring-breiviks-human-rights-violated-in-prison-norway-court-rules>
 and her colleagues decided that the Norwegian state was torturing Breivik, by 
holding him in solitary confinement. Their defence of basic principles played 
to our myth of Scandinavia as a land filled with rational liberals, better than 
and purer than the rest of fallen humanity.

If the stereotype were ever true, it is not true now. Before he shot 69 young 
social democrats and murdered another eight Norwegians with a car bomb, Breivik 
left a vast and vastly incomprehensible manifesto. Much of it reads like a
Telegraph commentator suffering from delirium tremens. Breivik gibbers about 
“cultural Marxism”, the “Frankfurt School” and, of course, the “EUSSR”. But in 
his description of how he wanted men like him to kill, Breivik was lucid.

He may not have known it, but he believed in the 19th-century anarchist 
philosophy of “propaganda of the deed”. The act of terror would spread his 
ideas and inspire converts to become “Justiciar Knights” just like him. The 
greatest believers in propaganda of the deed today are radical Islamists. And 
in common with more people on the far right than you would imagine, Breivik 
admired them. Jihadis, he said, have honoured and commemorated their martyrs 
and “we must do the same”.

If he was captured, the “European resistance fighter” must use the courtroom as
a stage <http://www.deism.com/images/breivik-manifesto-2011.pdf> “to help 
generate a maximum amount of sympathisers”. If he was imprisoned, Breivik 
promised that he would try to convert inmates or hold them and his guards 
hostage.

In these circumstances, Norwegians wondered what human rights the court was 
defending when it ruled that Breivik’s solitary confinement was inhuman and 
degrading. They were not making mobbish demands for vengeance, but worrying 
about heady judicial rhetoric taking judges far from the reality-based 
community.

They did not even mock the court for saying that Breivik had suffered 
“psychological damage” in jail, even though less genteel writers, such as your 
correspondent, would have pointed out that a man who slaughtered innocents in 
cold blood appeared “damaged” enough already.

Rather, they upheld the rule of law but looked askance at the judges who 
enforced it. Norway is not Syria. Skien prison on the Baltic coast is not 
Guantánamo Bay. Breivik has three cells at his disposal: a bedroom, study and 
gym. He can talk to officers, priests, health workers and lawyers. But he can’t 
meet the prisoners he had promised to either convert or take hostage and he 
can’t issue proclamations. To call that “torture”, as Oslo’s soberVG newspaper 
said, “trivialises” real suffering and lets real torturersoff the hook 
<http://www.vg.no/nyheter/meninger/anders-behring-breivik-soeksmaalet/en-gal-dom/a/23663458/>
 . True solitary confinement, where the prisoner never sees another face or 
hears another voice is naked cruelty. Breivik is not enduring it or anything 
like it.

There are still many Norwegians, including survivors of the attack, who are 
like the Norwegians who lectured me in 2012 for criticising court procedures. 
But Hanne Skartveit ofVG tells me that she is now seeing widespread disquiet at 
the behaviour of the judiciary.

People talk of human rights as if they were always present. But they were an 
invention of the Enlightenment and must coexist with that second great system 
the Enlightenment invented, or I suppose I should say revived, democracy. Human 
rights can be hard for societies to live with. We treat men, even men as brutal 
asAnders Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik>, 
with respect, when all our human instincts fly against it. And that is as it 
should be. But, and this is not said often enough, they are also hard for their 
supporters. They must be able to justify themselves. They must resist the urge 
to engage in judicial and rhetorical overreach. They must remember that, 
however they are dressed up, laws stand on public consent and the public always 
needs to be persuaded.

With the refugee crisis and the rise of the populist right threatening 
European liberalism, this is not just a lesson giddy Norwegian judges need to 
learn afresh.
 