
It might seem odd that the two best captains this correspondent has seen in 
international cricket this past three decades both happen to be Kiwis. Perhaps 
it has to do with the capacity to get the maximum performance out of a minimum 
of resource. Stephen Fleming was astute, calm (although Graeme Smith might well 
remember that he could be volcanic if he thought it helped the cause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/may/19/cricket.newzealandinengland2004>
), calculating and canny enough to come within an umpiring error of upsetting 
the Australians in their own backyard. And then there is Brendon McCullum, the 
Southlander, who is far and away the most creative, proactive, galvanic leader 
of a cricket team in the world today.

Sixteen years ago, Fleming led New Zealand to a series win in this country 
that left England cricket stunned, as if sandbagged. The memory still lingers, 
and a bad one at that, of Nasser Hussain, three matches into what was to become 
a distinguished career as the most significant England captain of recent times, 
standing bewildered on the balcony at the Oval and listening to the boos of the 
crowd who had just witnessed his side sink to an 83-run defeat by the team 
ranked bottom of the heap. But it kickstarted a revival: that winter, Hussain 
teamed up with Duncan Fletcher for the first time and a new era had begun.

The cyclical nature of sport means that England have been through peaks – four 
Ashes wins including one in Australia; a series win in India – and troughs, 
most notably the retaliatory Ashes whitewashes. And now here are England once 
more dragging themselves up by their Test match bootstraps, in the midst of a 
period of turmoil in which the coach and managing director of England cricket 
have both been given P45s, and a new role created forAndrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>.

New Zealand are, then, the opposition at the start of one of the most 
intensive, challenging spells of Test cricket any England side, perhaps any 
side in their position, has ever had to face – with each of the top three 
ranked teams to be played, as well as a Pakistan side in a familiar environment 
on the dustbowls of the Middle East.

The Kiwis are all assembled now, flown in from New Zealand and India, the lack 
of red-ball cricket for some of them less of an issue in this age of total 
adaptability than once it might have been.

The bowlers playing in the IPL have been practising in India with the Duke 
ball that is used in this country (the one manufactured for use in England 
rather than that specifically developed for the more abrasive surfaces 
elsewhere) and essentially the skills are the same in any case.

They are on a wave of confidence, swaggering without being arrogant, arguably 
the best side they have ever produced, with superb seamers, a high-class middle 
order (Martin Crowe, the finest New Zealand batsman of all, believes Kane 
Williamson to be heading inexorably towards that status), McCullum’s leadership 
allied to Mike Hesson’s understated management, and an ingrained freedom of 
expression that England never quite seem able to capture.

It may be the first time in a series between the two sides that England are 
viewed as the underdog, for history backs up their superiority overall. This 
will be the 100th Test between them of which England have won 47 and New 
Zealand eight. But history, as Henry Ford remarked, is bunk, meaningless. Those 
two wins in 1999 show what can happen: they may have lost seven and drawn one 
of their last eight Tests in this country, but the last encounter in New 
Zealand was a last-ball-of-the-series humdinger withMatt Prior and Monty 
Panesar hanging on for grim death to secure a draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/26/matt-prior-draw-new-zealand>.

England will enjoy home advantage now, something playing an increasing part in 
modern series condensed into a tight schedule, but New Zealand will feel the 
difference less than most sides. England have lost only two of their last 18 
matches at Lord’s. These promise to be close matches.

For England, it represents an opportunity to further develop a new side, a 
process that has been ongoing for a year and a half. If, at times, it appears 
to be greasy-pole cricket, then that is the nature of playing with a core of 
inexperienced players learning the vagaries of international competition.

The loss in Bridgetown was poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/west-indies-beat-england-five-wickets>
, and a less pragmatic, not to say dogmatic, approach to selection might have 
paid dividends, not least in the public eye. But there is a new coach in place, 
Paul Farbrace, albeit a temporary appointment, and he will have his own ideas. 
Of those who might reasonably have played in Barbados, Adam Lyth will get his 
first cap and the Durham paceman Mark Wood might well play as well.

Should this be the case (and Lord’s, where the pitch tends not to deteriorate 
as the match progresses but rather gets easier for batting, is a ground where 
his skiddy pace and, in particular, reverse swing could play a part) then it 
would most likely be at the expense of their current third seamer, Chris Jordan.

It would be unfortunate, for Jordan, a fine young talent who soaks up 
information, has made significant improvements to his bowling in terms of his 
run-up and nicely controlling high action, and his close catching is nothing 
short of remarkable. He needs to develop more lateral movement and will be a 
high-class cricketer. This being said, Stuart Broad was irritatingly 
inconsistent in the Caribbean and needs to turn up more often this summer.

One issue that will be debated is the order in which Ben Stokes, Moeen Ali and 
Jos Buttler bat. They are each capable of batting at six, and both Stokes and 
Moeen have Test match hundreds. There is little point in playing Stokes, a 
batsman first and foremost, as fourth seamer who bats at eight, so a practical 
solution would be him at six, Buttler reprising Matt Prior’s role at seven, and 
Moeen, a ubiquitous cricketer and batsman, given free rein at eight.
 