
Looking back over my career, there are many things I'd have done differently. 
But sometimes you're lucky – you get a part where everything comes together in 
a way that's completely unexpected. That happened for me in the late 70s [see 
footnote], when I played Titus Andronicus forthe Royal Shakespeare Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, in a production directed by Deborah 
Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/13/deborah-warner-director>
. It's really the most interesting thing I've ever done in the theatre. I was 
40; I'd just gone through a divorce, and moved back home after living in 
America and wanting a film career. I'd come to the RSC rather late, having 
never thought I'd ever work there. But thenTerry Hands, the then artistic 
director <http://theshakespeareblog.com/tag/terry-hands/>, asked me to play 
Titus. It was a play that everybody usually avoided – it's a very difficult 
play to do, a young man's play written when Shakespeare was in his late 30s; 
full of energy, joie de vivre, and laughter that often strikes people as 
ludicrous. I don't think anybody wanted to play Titus on this occasion, either; 
but I decided if I was going to do it, I might as well go for broke and not try 
to cover my ass. So I told Terry I'd only do it on the condition that he found 
somebody who was relatively little-known, but cutting-edge. And so he found 
Deborah. She was just about to leave the country – to go to Sweden, I think; as 
I recall, Terry hired her as she was just about to board the plane. But as soon 
as she stepped into the rehearsal room, the whole thing came alive. The show 
set a marker for a whole new way of working with theatre designers – the design 
was created as we went along. It went on to win all sorts of awards – in many 
ways, it's not been rivalled since. Above all, the show allowed me to use 
elements in myself as an actor that I'd never accessed before. Eight years 
earlier, I'd played Macbeth in a production that toured India. An Indian girl 
in the cast – she was a dancer; just 16 – had told me she was convinced that I 
was thwarted in some way; that I should be more expressive as a performer. 
Every night, she'd watch me on stage, and ask me why I didn't go further. In 
Titus, I did go further. I look at my performance now and ask myself whether I 
couldn't have been more decorous and contained – but that's not what the play 
was about. It's probably still the greatest stage performance I've ever given.

• This footnote was appended on 3 January 2013. Brian Cox misremembered the 
decade in which Deborah Warner directed Titus Andronicus for the RSC. It was 
the late 1980s rather than the late 1970s.
 