
More international tourists are visiting the seven museums run by Amgueddfa 
Cymru, National Museum Wales <http://www.museumwales.ac.uk/> than ever before. 
In fact we’ve seen a 26% increase in overseas visits in the past three years, 
accounting for one in four of all visitors toNational Museum Cardiff 
<http://www.museumwales.ac.uk/cardiff/>. Not only is it a great example of how 
museums can be drivers of tourism, it also begs the question: why?

As head of marketing for the museums body, here’s my take.

1. Strong brand saliency

Brand saliency defines your brand strength and can be improved through 
marketing activity to raise awareness. Done well, it develops a sense of 
familiarity even among irregular users. It means that your brand springs more 
readily to mind when a person is looking for places to visit, so that your 
museum makes it on to that person’s mental shortlist.

Outdoor advertising, for example, is great for catching the attention of 
people who only occasionally visit museums.

2. A well-defined core proposition for the tourism market

Tourists are a priority audience in our marketing strategy. It’s easy to get 
side-tracked into pouring all your efforts into promoting the public programme, 
neglecting the core offer.

Marketing is about understanding the needs of your customers. Tourists have a 
curiosity about the place they are visiting and a desire to understand its 
history and culture. The museums inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> 
tell those stories so well through their collections. We refocused our efforts 
on the core offer of the permanent collections in our marketing aimed at 
tourists.

Analysis of our visitors confirmed the need for mixed marketing activity. The 
website is crucial at the planning stage, so we translated the webpages of the 
permanent collections into French, Spanish, German and Chinese. Interestingly, 
we found that tourists are the biggest users of print materials, so we 
prioritised distribution at accommodation providers, motorway services and 
tourist information centres. We are now also regular advertisers in hotel 
bedroom web browsers.

3. Seizing opportunities


Tourism is a heterogeneous market that encompasses independent visitors 
through to organised groups. You need to consider different marketing channels 
to ensure the best reach of each tourism segment.

For example, we capitalised on opportunities available through the national 
tourism body and regional tourism consortia around Wales. We looked out for 
more opportunities to be included in their press, advertising and PR. This 
included familiarisation visits for travel companies seeking new products and 
packages.

We also now actively support travel trade events and we’re a key partner of 
Visit Wales at World Travel Market.

China Welcome <https://www.visitbritain.org/great-china-welcome>, an 
initiative led byVisit Britain <https://www.visitbritain.com/gb/en/visitbritain>
, was another opportunity. It forced us to evaluate our offer for the Chinese 
market. Drawing inspiration from the lucky number eight in Chinese culture, we 
created a video with Chinese captions of the top eight highlights at National 
Museum Cardiff, available on our Chinese web pages. We involved our 
Chinese-speaking keeper of art to gain a perspective of which objects would 
appeal most. The insight from running familiarisation visits with Chinese 
travel companies also helped to inform the video scenes.

4. Selling yourselves to your peers

Don’t be lulled into a false sense of security by assuming the sector has 
complete product knowledge of your visitor offer. They need reminding in the 
same way that the public does. The tourism sector is vast, so we courted 
tourism professionals by running more familiarisation visits especially for 
National Museum Cardiff, long considered a sleeping giant given the 
international quality of its collections.

5. Further insights

 * Questions to ask: Are tourists a viable visitor segment for you to actively 
target? Are these independent tourists or do they come in organised groups? Are 
you getting your fair share of tourists that visit the area? 
 * Concentrate on the must-sees in your collection that tell a distinct story 
and give an interesting insight into the region. 
June François is head of marketing at National Museum Wales 
<http://www.museumwales.ac.uk/>


Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 