
John, a convicted criminal at Kisii district prison, Kenya, might seem an 
unlikely candidate to be spearheading the fight against HIV.

But since being imprisoned for manslaughter two years ago, the former teacher 
has been trained to educate fellow inmates about how HIV is prevented, 
transmitted, and treated – in doing so helping to fill the gap between Kenya's 
severe disease burden and its shortage of skilled health staff.

He hopes that upon his release, he will find a job with an NGO and continue 
his work as a peer educator.

Prisoners were designated as a "most-at-risk population" by the government of 
Kenya in 2009, following a study by the National AIDS Council, UNAIDS and the 
World Bank which found that prison inmates and men who have sex with men 
account for 15 per cent of the country's new HIV infections.

Testing and treatment is freely available to HIV patients in Kenya at public 
health facilities, but the complex nature of initiating and sustaining care, 
particularly antiretroviral (ART) medication, requires well-trained health 
staff. Although over 330,000 HIV patients received ART treatment in 2009, 
UNAIDS estimates that the number of people needing it is much higher at 520,000 
to 710,000 - a situation which has earned its own nickname, "medicines without 
doctors."

Moreover, preventing the spread of HIV requires knowledgeable personnel who 
can dispel myths about transmission and encourage testing.

Misconceptions are particularly rife in a prison setting, says Peter Magati, 
the officer in charge of welfare at the prison: "Education levels are often low 
and the problem is compounded by practices such as sex in exchange for food, 
sharing of sharp objects and little access to condoms."

"People thought condoms weren't 100 per cent effective, so you should use more 
than one at the same time. Or that shaking hands, eating with someone who is 
HIV positive or any other close association could transmit the disease," says 
Didacus, another inmate-turned-peer educator.

"All I knew about HIV when I arrived here was that it was killing people."

With strong side effects, ART treatment requires monitoring and support - 
Didacus recalls that one of his fellow inmates defaulted on his medication 
simply because it was a different brand to what he had been prescribed 
previously.

Although Kenya has a functioning Ministry of Health, migration of qualified 
staff from the public to the better-paid private sector is common and the 
country is one of 57 considered by the World Health Organisation to have a 
critical shortage of health workers.

HIV prevention and treatment programmes tailored to vulnerable groups like 
prisoners are not currently supported by government expenditure.

John and Didacus were trained to be peer educators by the medical charity 
Merlin in February 2011. Human resource needs are particularly acute in Nyanza 
province, where Kisii is located, due to an HIV prevalence rate of 15 per cent 
– double the national average. At Kisii district prison – which is better 
served than most - there is only one government-employed nurse and one clinical 
officer for 1,200 inmates, 350 officers and 2,000 civilians from the local area.

The good news is that tasks such as education and counselling are increasingly 
being successfully allocated to non-specialists, relieving the burden on 
scarcer personnel such as nurses and ultimately allowing more people to be 
treated.

Indeed, prisoners' trust and acceptance of peer educators shows that there can 
even be advantages to task shifting. John says: "I stay with them, understand 
them, know how to approach them so they listen to me. I even use myself as an 
example, telling people I have been tested."

With close interaction on a daily basis, inmates are ideally placed to 
reinforce prevention messages and identify those living with HIV and in need of 
support.

Certification for this new type of health worker is dependent on completion of 
a three day course and submission of a report demonstrating that at least ten 
peers have been reached with key HIV messages. To date 33 inmates and 31 prison 
officers in Kisii have been trained to disseminate information about HIV 
transmission, testing and treatment, and act as peer counsellors.

Results were immediate. In February 2011, the prison health facility recorded 
88 male and female inmates coming forward for testing. By March, this number 
had more than doubled to 196.

Scroll forward to spring 2012 and over 71 are receiving ART treatment compared 
to 34 a year ago. Peer educators have also encouraged over 300 male prisoners 
to come forward for voluntary circumcision, which a study by UNAIDS and NACC 
has recently proved to reduce the chance of HIV transmission in men by 60 per 
cent.

In a country where it has been estimated that the nursing workforce needs to 
be doubled to attain its Millennium Development targets, task shifting is a 
cost effective alternative which can both stem the spread of HIV and improve 
efficiency in delivering treatment and care. HIV testing has been offered at 
Kisii prison since 2005, but nurses used to face resistance from inmates with 
little knowledge about HIV.

But it is the contrast between the empowerment of prisoners like John and 
Didacus and their status on paper as a vulnerable group that is perhaps the 
most compelling reason to continue bringing health services behind the bars.
 