
For many Congolese September brings bad memories. It was in September 16 years 
ago that RCD-ML – a rebel group for Uganda’s illegal occupation and 
exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s gold, coltan and 
diamonds – was launched in Kampala.

I always protected civilians, Congo's 'Terminator' tells war crimes trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/congo-terminator-bosco-ntaganda-war-crimes-trial-civilians>
In September a year later, Thomas Lubanga, the first person to be convicted by 
the international criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jul/10/icc-sentences-thomas-lubanga-14-years>
 (ICC) in The Hague, created the notorious UPC militia that devastated the 
Ituri region of the DRC; and again, in the same month in 2002, an estimated 
3,000 civilians were massacred in Ituri’s hospital town of Nyankunde – the 
single largest massacre of thesecond Congo war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/23/congo.international>.

So when the ICC prosecutor last week began reading the 18 counts of war crimes 
andcrimes against humanity that Bosco Ntaganda had allegedly committed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/congo-terminator-bosco-ntaganda-war-crimes-trial-civilians>
 against the Congolese people from September 2002 to September 2003, my heart 
cried.

Ituri is a small province in north-east Congo with rich deposits of gold, 
diamonds, coltan, timber and oil. During the second Congo war, from 1998 to 
2003, it became known as the bloodiest corner of the country. Rival political 
and military leaders in DRC, Uganda and Rwanda – vying for control of Congo’s 
highly valuable natural resources – had armed and trained rival ethnic groups 
in Ituri to ensure their access to the minerals, unleashing a spiralling 
conflict that engulfed their civilians. It was a genocidal slaughter in slow 
motion.

Massacre, rape, sexual slavery, the use of child soldiers and mass 
displacement were the hallmarks of his brutality

The world eventually responded and an EU and UN intervention stabilised Bunia, 
Ituri’s provincial capital. As a result, three of the leading war criminals – 
Thomas Lubanga, Mathieu Ngudjolo and Germain Katanga –found themselves in the 
dock at the ICC. Kigali and Kampala withdrew their armies from Congo – marking 
the end to what journalists had termed the first African war.

But the peace did not last – and Ntaganda, alongside his friends and 
supporters in Kinshasa, Kampala and Kigali, bears the greatest responsibility 
for this. Born in neighbouring Rwanda in 1973, Ntaganda had his first taste of 
fighting in Uganda, where he joined the Rwandan Patriotic Front and fought 
alongside Paul Kagame to overthrow the genocidal regime in Rwanda in 1994. It 
was in Ituri, though, where he co-led Thomas Lubanga’s UPC militias from 2002 
to 2005, that he made his name.

Ntaganda, known to locals as the Terminator, was ruthless: massacre, summary 
execution, rape, sexual slavery, the use of child soldiers and mass 
displacement were the hallmarks of his brutality. His victims ranged from 
anyone of Lendu, Bira, Nande or Ngiti ethnicity to children from his own 
militia group.

By 2008, more than 5.4 million Congolese of a pre-war population of 50 million 
had already been killed. Ntaganda was co–leading another newly established, 
Kigali-backed militia group, known by its French acronym CNDP – and leaving a 
trail of blood across North Kivu in eastern Congo. In Kiwanja, 55 miles north 
of Goma, North Kivu’s provincial capital, he slaughtered 150 civilians outside 
a UN peacekeeping compound.

Though I and others were campaigning to have him brought to The Hague, 
Ntaganda and his supporters were growing more powerful. He was so certain of 
his impunity that he lived and moved about openly in Goma – selling and 
smuggling conflict minerals, and playing tennis and eating in restaurants 
within sight of the world’s largest UN peacekeeping mission.

Traduire le Terminator en justice n’est que le début de l’instauration de la 
paix au Congo | Vava Tampa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/11/terminator-hague-icc-congo>
His crucial mistake came in April 2012, a few weeks after the ICC sentenced 
Lubanga to 14 years’ imprisonment, when he formed a new militia, the M23, and 
began committing new atrocities in eastern Congo.

In one brutal attack, in the village of Chengerero, his troops gang-raped a 
32-year-old woman then set her on fire; at least 46 women and girls were raped 
in other attacks, and 33 young men and boys who tried to escape his rebel group 
were summarily executed. 

This time, the international response was formidable. Within a month, a second 
international arrest warrant against Ntaganda had been issued. Britain, Germany 
and other nations suspended aid money to Kigali over its support to the M23 and 
the UN security council approved the creation of the first overtly offensive 
force to neutralise M23 and other foreign militia groups tyrannising Congo. And 
by March 2013Ntaganda had voluntarily surrendered himself to the ICC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/19/africa-congo>.

The 18 counts he is facing at The Hague are merely a snapshot of his many 
alleged crimes across Congo. But it’s a good starting point, a victory for his 
victims and rights groups.

But for me, as a Congolese man, the question that remains unanswered is: what 
about Ntaganda’s patrons and Lubanga’s supporters in Rwanda and Uganda? A 
permanent peace between Congo and its neighbours is unlikely until those who 
aided and abetted these two butchers’ crimes are held accountable.
 