
In September 2010 a rare black redstart began using the newly planted green 
roofs at Regent's Place, an office, retail and development in central London. 
The redstart is just one of the species benefiting from the 60,000 sq feet of 
green space created by British Land in the heart of the capital.

British Land has been incorporating biodiversity in its strategic decision 
making since 2005. Its particular contribution to local biodiversity is 
building green roofs, working with suppliers and building occupants to design, 
plant and maintain urban habitats that provide shelter and foraging areas for a 
range of birds, beetles and bees, and support native plant species.

In fact, British Land is setting the standard for biodiverse green roofs at 
many of its properties, which are one of the most effective ways to enhance 
biodiversity. Over the past few years the company has created green roofs on 
all 10 of its recent office developments in central London, as well as 
retrofitting them to some existing buildings.

Based on an award-winning two-year trial with Arup Ecology, the roofs are made 
up from a range of substrates, habitats, native wildflower seed mixes and 
shrubs, creating everything from rubble brown roofs to extensively planted 
terraces.

"Rather than adopting off-the-shelf solutions, British Land worked in 
partnership with Arup to design mosaic-style green roofs that provide a 
carefully considered array of habitats with real ecological integrity" – Dusty 
Gedge, president of the European Federation of Green Roof Associations

It's proved a winning mix. The black redstart – an endangered species – 
sighted at Regent's Place was, in Arup Associate Neil Harwood's words, 
"fantastic news", but only one part of a bigger story. A review carried out by 
independent ecologists in 2010 showed that the green roofs on four of the six 
buildings surveyed had made such a positive contribution to local biodiversity 
they could be used as templates for future developments.

More than 30 native urban plant species grow at 201 Bishopsgate and the 
Broadgate Tower in the City of London, for instance. Here British Land has 
created over 8,000 sq feet of green roofs but also 1,000 sq feet of green wall. 
Because these green roofs are fairly inaccessible they offer undisturbed areas 
for the bees, hoverflies and large white butterflies that have so far been 
sighted.

Although it's a relatively small space, the company's head office in York 
House is also enhancing biodiversity, its ecological value almost certain to 
grow as the 1,300 sq feet of retrofitted roof matures. Seeded with 30 plant 
species and fitted with bird and bug boxes, the roof currently attracts common 
urban birds, with species such as bats, black redstarts, house martins and 
swifts expected to start using the site soon.

An ambitious programme

The range of excellent projects submitted made this a difficult category for 
the judges but British Land's ambitious programme won them over: the judges 
felt the company was pushing the boundaries to meet the challenge of increasing 
biodiversity.

"British Land has gone beyond business as usual to create ground breaking 
initiatives that show how companies can make a real difference" – The Guardian 
judges said.

Whatever the project, British Land works in partnership with specialist 
consultants to make sure each roof is carefully and sensitively planned. At its 
own properties it works with management teams and occupiers, following a 
biodiversity action plan. On its developments, the company works with project 
teams, using its sustainability brief for developments to set biodiversity 
targets for every stage of the design and construction process.

It also sets challenging annual biodiversity targets, each of which has been 
met or exceeded in the past year.

But British Land's ambitions go beyond meeting its own internal targets. The 
company works hard to raise public awareness of biodiversity, encourage 
innovative thinking and let others benefit from their experience.

Take the 2010 review. As well as taking the opportunity to learn from its own 
projects in order to further enhance biodiversity, the company published a 
series of useful tips to help others.

These include considering biodiversity as early as possible in the property 
cycle; getting ecologists and landscape architects to work together on designs 
that not only encourage biodiversity but improve appearance and add value to 
the amenity, including varied habitats, native plant species and nesting boxes; 
and regular monitoring that uses findings to shape future actions.

Encouraging occupiers to get involved in biodiversity initiatives was one of 
the key learning points to come out of the review.

Working with its occupiers has led to plans to increase the existing 27,000 sq 
feet of green roof at Regent's Place by 10% while another occupier is looking 
into the feasibility of beehives on the green roofs on its building. At 
Ropemaker, where 60% of available roof space is given over to green roof, 
discussions with three occupiers are taking place with a view to replanting the 
roofs to make them even more attractive to wildlife.

Five star hotels for bugs

In 2010 British Land sponsored Beyond the Hive, an architectural competition 
to design five-star hotels that would attract beetles, bees, butterflies, 
spiders, lacewings and ladybirds.

The competition encouraged ecologists, landscape architects, property experts 
and members of the public to come up with innovative ways to boost insect life 
in the city. It also generated a lot of public interest with people voting for 
the winning entry and visiting models of the five shortlisted hotels, which 
were built in public gardens across the City of London.

The vote went to the Beevarian Antsel and Gretel chalet, a two-foot high hotel 
based on a traditional Bavarian mountain chalet. It was constructed entirely 
from scavenged material, using reclaimed bricks to attract bees, rotten logs 
for invertebrates, louvered boxes filled with bark for hibernating butterflies 
and eaves filled with bamboo for lacewings.

Ingeborg Warschke, of winners German Women in Property, said: "Our insect 
hotel was built at virtually no cost using simple tools, by fairly 
inexperienced people – a banker and two accountants … It has already proved to 
be an example to others, with the eight-year-old stepdaughter of one of our 
builders building Bugginham Palace at her school."

It's a fun way of raising awareness about the importance of biodiversity, and 
typical of British Land's creative approach to encouraging biodiversity in the 
urban environment, and getting as many other people involved as possible.

Lorna Thorpe is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 