
As Steve McQueen's film 12 Years a Slave captivates audiences on both sides of 
the Atlantic, Britain's own slaving past is to be given the Hollywood treatment.

A series of new books and projects have already been linked to a surge of 
interest in a subject that has often been overlooked. This spring, in what is 
already being spoken of as Britain's answer to McQueen's epic, Gugu Mbatha-Raw, 
Tom Wilkinson and Miranda Richardson will star inBelle, which will open in 
British cinemas having successfully premiered at last year's Toronto film 
festival.

Directed by Amma Asante <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amma-asante> who, 
like McQueen, was born in Britain but lives in the Netherlands, the film tells 
the story of Dido Elizabeth Belle, the daughter of an enslaved mother in the 
Caribbean, who went on to live at Kenwood House in north London under the 
protection of Lord Mansfield, the lord chief justice. While she was living 
there, in 1772, Mansfield ruled that a master could not carry a slave out of 
Britain by force, a judgment seen as a crucial step towards the abolition of 
slavery.

Misan Sagay, who wrote the screenplay, has said that understanding Belle is 
crucial to understanding Mansfield's motivation. "The abolition story is often 
told without a black person being there," she said recently. "But Belle, living 
with such a power whose judgments affected slavery, must have had some impact."

Belle's story is in some ways the reverse of that of Solomon Northup, the 
central character in McQueen's film, who was born in the US a free man but 
later kidnapped into slavery. By contrast, Belle achieved an unprecedented 
level of social status and was painted by the noted artist, Johann Zoffany. 
"The story is interesting in lots of ways," said historian Dr Miranda Kaufmann. 
"Hopefully her film will have as big a splash in Britain as12 Years a Slave." 
Briefly, in 2007, Belle was the subject of a temporary exhibition at Kenwood 
House in 2007. Now she has been awarded a prominent and permanent presence.

As with McQueen's movie, Asante's film will shine a light on the slave trade 
by telling its story through the eyes of individuals caught up in it. Many of 
the tensions that permeated late 18th century Britain can be understood through 
the character of Mansfield, says historian Dr Madge Dresser.

"One of the interesting contradictions is that in the name of freedom, 
merchants in the slave trade were campaigning for the right to trade in 
slaves," said Dresser. "On the one hand, Mansfield was probably against slavery 
personally, but he also had to grapple with the idea that an Englishman's 
property had to be protected from the absolutism of the state."

In the past year there has been a renewed examination of Britain's role in 
slavery. A book co-edited by Dresser and published by English Heritage,Slavery 
and the British Country House 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781848020641>
, has examined how much of Georgian society was funded by the slave industry, 
while Legacies of British Slave-ownership <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs/>, an 
online project launched by UCL, has revealed how many wealthy families 
benefited from plantations in the Americas.

Making Freedom <http://makingfreedom.co.uk/?page_id=58>, an exhibition at the 
Royal Geographical Society, has sought to counter the conventional slavery 
narrative. "The point powerfully presented in the Making Freedom exhibition is 
that Africans were not passive victims, but constantly resisted their 
enslavement and fought for their freedom," Kaufmann said. "They actively 
resisted, through uprisings on land and sea, by running away and establishing 
Maroon settlements, or even by committing suicide." Kaufmann said she hoped 
that, inspired by McQueen, other directors would now turn their attention to 
Britain's role in the slave economy.

"Telling the stories of individuals is a better way into this subject," 
Kaufmann said. "If you just use lots of numbers and statistics, people put up 
the shutters."

Separately, law firm Leigh Day is bringing a legal action against Britain over 
its role in the slave economy on behalf of 14 Caribbean countries grouped under 
the umbrella of the Caricom trade organisation. Senior partner Martyn Day said 
there had been a cultural shift in the slavery debate.

"We see the momentum building," said Day, who led a successful claim against 
the British government on behalf of the Mau Mau people of Kenya last year. "The 
power of the Caricom nations, both within the UN and in the wider political 
world, combined with developments like12 Years a Slave, is striking just at the 
right moment." Day added that the claim, which is being brought against France, 
the Netherlands and Britain, was different from that made on behalf of the Mau 
Mau people.

"The idea is to engage with the western powers in a more discursive manner, 
rather than saying, 'Here is a claim for a zillion pounds.' Instead, the point 
is to say, 'Look, here are the ongoing impacts of slavery. You western powers 
have committed to ensuring that the impact of race discrimination is not 
ongoing, but the Caribbean still suffers from the impact of slavery and this is 
what our clients feel can be done to resolve it'. I am optimistic that the 
western powers would engage in this discussion in a very positive way."

One possible solution, Day suggested, would be for the three countries to 
share expertise in matters such as health and education and to pay for a museum 
of slavery in the Caribbean.

"In the UK there are three or four museums on slavery, but there are none in 
the Caribbean," he said.
 