
An Anthony Gormley statue stares at its own reflection and a pavilion of light 
shimmers at passers-by come day or night. Children's plays are showcased in a 
purpose-built theatre and at last, an isolated inner city community is put back 
in touch with the park on its doorstep.

For two decades, property developer British Land has been working with one of 
London's most deprived communities to create a masterplan for 13 neglected 
inner-city areas that would satisfy commercial, community and environmental 
needs.

Public art, theatre and better access to open spaces in this busy commercial 
district have transformed local residents' quality of life to such an extent 
that British Land has won praise from a number of community leaders.

"This is an excellent partnership that will continue to grow" – Nasim Ali, 
leader of Camden council.

Ali, also a local councillor for Regent's Park ward, says, "British Land's 
genuine commitment is not just about the look and feel of Regent's Place, but 
the area as a whole. This has resulted in meaningful relationships, leading to 
real community benefits. This is an excellent partnership that will continue to 
grow and make a difference to the lives of local people."

Gormley's trademark human figures are arguably the most recognisable public 
art in this landmark redevelopment.

But the London-based architectural studio, Carmody Groarke, won a Royal 
Institute of British Architecture award for its commission – Regent's Place 
Pavilion – made of a field of steel rods that reflect sunlight and project 
light at night.

Art for a community

British Land has used the development to showcase other leading contemporary 
artists, including Julian Opie and Ben Langlands and Nikki Bell as well as Liam 
Gillick. In association with the Slade School of Fine Art it also ran a 
competition for students, won by Sion Parkinson, whose yellow wrought iron 
gates are on permanent display in Longford Street.

As well as a free open air gallery, west Euston residents also benefit from 
the state of the art 80-seatNew Diorama Theatre <http://www.newdiorama.com/> 
which won the Peter Brooke award in its first year; refurbishment of the Samuel 
Lithgow Youth Club; and 90 more affordable homes.

In the next phase of development, there will be another 15,000 sq ft of new 
community space, including accommodation for Diorama Arts, the West Euston 
Partnership and the One Stop Shop for employment and training.

The masterplan also included a new public space – Regent's Place – that is 
used for performances and markets. This plaza will be doubled in size in the 
next phase.

Better landscaping and pedestrian links have made a marked difference to local 
people – there is a new east-to-west pedestrian route through the estate 
linking Regent's Park to Euston Station and the first new pedestrian crossing 
over the Euston Road in 10 years, plus 66 new cycle spaces.

When architect and urban planner Terry Farrell was commissioned to draw up the 
masterplan in 2003, west Euston was one of the most deprived areas in Camden, 
with neighbourhoods amongst the 5% most deprived in England. British Land was a 
founding member of the West Euston Partnership – a group of community, 
voluntary, public and private sector organisations.

Affordable housing

The completed phase of the masterplan includes two new office buildings and a 
residential building with 62% affordable housing. In 2010, British Land began 
construction of the final phase, the north-east quadrant (NEQ), due to be 
completed in 2013.

As the relationship with Camden council shows, British Land takes its 
corporate responsibility seriously and this is reflected in the goals for 
Regent's Place. From design to construction, the project team has been expected 
to apply the highest standards of ISO 14001 certified sustainability brief for 
developments. As a consequence, all the new office buildings have Breeam 
"excellent" sustainability ratings.

From fit-out to property maintenance the developer has worked with occupiers 
and on-site teams to use natural resources efficiently, with a waste guide and 
sustainability brief for management – leading to 8% less like-for-like energy 
use since April 2010.

When the masterplan is complete, the Regent's Place estate will double in 
size, providing 2m sq ft of office, retail and residential space for 14,000 
workers and residents. What an opportunity, then, for a showcase site with 
sustainability at its core.

Environmental gains

In fact, the new buildings are up to 50% more carbon efficient than even 
current standards demand because of a range of measures: combined heat and 
power (CHP), enhanced air tightness, heat recovery, high-performance glazing, 
motion and daylight sensors, and electronic energy monitoring, as well as 
photovoltaic roof panels which will generate over 15,000 kWh of clean power 
each year.

The development is expected to use 2.4m litres less water through rainwater 
harvesting for landscaping, cutting mains water use in common parts by around 
9% annually and saving £5,000.

In 2009-10, energy use was cut by 17%, saving occupiers £112,000 – an 
emissions cut of nearly 800 tonnes. Between April and September 2010, 99% of 
demolition waste was reused or recycled. On top of that, 24.6% of construction 
materials in 2009-10 came from recycled sources.

"The new public realm in Regent's Place is amazing, and the new artworks all 
top quality. It has made a real difference to the area" – Jean Hurman, 
secretary of the Regent's Park Tenants Association.

Ecologists Arup have focused on how the development can positively improve air 
quality in this traffic-clogged part of the city. Arup's solution was to plant 
27,000 sq ft of green roof in 2010, with another 33,000 sq ft planned in the 
final phase. Re-landscaping included 182 mature trees.

Judges were impressed as much by the "measurable, positive community and 
environmental gains" made in Regent's Place as its impressive scale, breadth 
and potential for replication. They remarked: "It is a clear demonstration of 
British Land's commitment to embedding sustainability into its core business 
and we felt that this strategic integration marks the company out and underpins 
its proactive, sector leadership stance."

It is evident the scheme goes way beyond the basics. Consultation at every 
stage generated local support and there have been other prizes : the 
prestigious Royal Town Planning Institute's sustainable communities award in 
2010 and the Lord Mayor's dragon award in 2009.

British Land is the first UK property company to use a new energy optimisation 
system which cuts energy use at its head office by 37%. In 2010, 15 occupiers 
at Regent's Place signed up to the same system.

Nearly a quarter of head office staff volunteered in Camden last year, 
including senior managers who continued to support local community groups such 
as the West Euston Partnership and the Third Age Project. Ongoing volunteering 
projects include providing reading support for children at Netley Primary 
School.

"The new public realm in Regent's Place is amazing, and the new artworks all 
top quality. It has made a real difference to the area," Hurman says.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 