
I must admit I'm relieved that the Brits returned from Down Under with a 
podium finish - although it appeared our bad luck was set to continue when our 
engineer broke his leg in practice.

With Australia Day weekend falling one week before the sixth round race of the 
motor sport World Cup in Sydney - which I'd love to say was intentional 
scheduling from the series' decision-makers -A1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> took full advantage of the 
celebrations, joining in with an Australian team display and interactive tyre 
change challenge. Having had a go, I'm in no doubt that I need to leave the 
pit-stops to the experts in the British squad. But it was a great opportunity 
to take a few days off and enjoy the weekend's festivities before the race 
commitments commenced.

My first duty of the week was to speak on behalf of the team at a reception 
hosted by the British consul general at his wonderful 16th-floor glass-fronted 
reception room with spectacular views of Sydney Harbour. The event build-up 
continued the following evening with former formula one champion Alan Jones and 
the Australian team hosting a fantastic reception to launch the race weekend. 
Alan and the Aussies certainly know how to throw a party, which we've now been 
challenged to match when it's our turn to host a welcome reception ahead of the 
event at Brands Hatch in May.

When the on-track action finally started, everything seemed positive. The team 
arrived in Sydney fresh from a break in Byron Bay and got to work immediately. 
We proved to be one of the fastest nations in practice and there was a quiet 
confidence among the squad that we definitely had a chance to get back on the 
podium where we belonged - Brno was beginning to seem like a distant memory. 
But on Friday night our engineer James got hit by a wheel gun and broke his leg 
as the neighbouring Portuguese team practised their pit-stops.

Being without a race engineer is a massive disadvantage as the driver and he 
jointly make all the important decisions on qualifying and race set-ups, but I 
must give credit to the entire crew who dealt with the situation admirably to 
ensure we qualified eighth and third respectively. Our team manager, Paul 
Bellringer, who has been part of Britain's A1GP campaign since the beginning, 
kept up moral in the team and put together a quick solution. It certainly makes 
my job far easier with guys like Paul in the team.

I'm not sure how the team managed to focus on qualifying with the continuous 
sound of loud text messages going off all around the garage, which turned out 
to be from engineer James, who was desperate to know how the team was getting 
on from his hospital bed! So I don't know why I was surprised when I arrived at 
the track on Sunday morning to see James in a full leg cast with his foot taped 
up to resemble a shoe (so he would be allowed access to the pit-wall, which is 
a closed-toe shoe only zone), determined to get back to work.

Once we managed to drag our driver Robbie Kerr away from the guests on the 
grid - including Brazilian footballer Juninho, ex-Welsh rugby player Gareth 
Davies and MotoGP champion Mick Doohan - it was great to watch him get down to 
business and finish third place in a extremely wet race.

All things considered, Robbie and the team did a great job at Eastern Creek 
and it's good to come back from Australia with a trophy, albeit in the shape of 
a didgeridoo! Now we have to keep up the momentum and stay on the podium for 
the final eight races. But with a different winner in each feature race this 
season, it certainly says something about the level of competition that we face 
in A1GP.
 