
Tobacco leaf farming in Lombok, Indonesia, was not only contributing to 
deforestation but also to declining water supply on the island.

But a landmark restoration project is being developed which will benefit the 
whole rural community, thanks to a partnership between British American Tobacco 
(BAT), the Earthwatch Institute, Fauna & Flora International and the Tropical 
Biology Association.

This is one example of how the four-member British American Tobacco 
biodiversity partnership is working with stakeholders and communities across 
the world to study ecosystems and sustainability risks.

In 2007, the partnership developed a tool to identify, assess and address 
risks posed by BAT's leaf-growing operations.

Called Broa (Biodiversity Risk and Opportunity Assessment), the tool 
encourages BAT staff to work with local experts to look carefully at supply 
chain operations from a much wider perspective than a simple day-to-day 
business viewpoint.

Following trials in Indonesia and Uganda in 2008, it was decided to make Broa 
mandatory across BAT's global leaf-growing locations and by 2010 all 19 had 
completed assessments and agreed actions plans.

As far as the tobacco giant is aware, it is the only international company to 
have assessed biodiversity risks across all operations and so built a strategy 
to tackle key issues worldwide.

And those issues are wide-ranging – both business-specific in terms of the 
supply chain, and more generic in terms of agriculture and sustainability.

Tobacco is often grown alongside other crops and it soon became apparent that 
Broa would reveal just how dependent tobacco growing is on other systems – such 
as water supply.

Specific issues included reduced irrigation flow resulting from deforestation, 
reduced water quality, lower ground water tables, unsustainably-sourced fuel 
wood and problems of over-farming.

BAT describes Broa's aims as "open-ended", with an agenda for change and 
better engagement with a range of stakeholders, both global and local.

At a local level, working with stakeholders and conservation experts enables 
the company to carry out rigorous assessments. Equally, it helps build 
confidence among communities and encourages partnerships to work together on 
solutions.

In some cases, Broa is raising awareness of wider sustainability issues and 
stimulating projects that go far beyond the supply chain concerns of BAT.

Examples include a "green corridor" project in the Araucaria forest of 
southern Brazil; sustainable forest management and freshwater protection in 
Uganda; and research on returning eucalyptus plantations to native forests in 
Sri Lanka and Chile.

Another important outcome has been the raised awareness and understanding 
within BAT, involving Earthwatch employee fellowships and online training for 
managers.

The biodiversity partnership is working on a second version of Broa in 2011, 
having gained valuable feedback from external reviewers such as the World 
Wildlife Fund.

It has participated in the natural value initiative and was recognised in the 
Economics of ecosystems and biodiversity study in 2010. The next stage is to 
share Broa with all BAT tobacco suppliers and other agriculture-based 
businesses facing similar challenges.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 