
The head of British Athletics, Neil Black, insists that he is “really 
comfortable” with the fact that his organisation is still working closely with 
Mo Farah’s coach, Alberto Salazar, despite the controversial Americanbeing 
under investigation by the United States Anti-Doping Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
.

Justin Gatlin on track to be least popular 100m world champion of all time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/21/justin-gatlin-100m-world-champion>
Black revealed that Salazar still speaks to British coaches every couple of 
days and would be “completely welcome” in the team hotel at any time. “We 
communicate regularly but briefly with Alberto,” he said.

“Sometimes it’s every day, sometimes it’s every two or three days based around 
Mo’s training. We talk about where Mo is at and we feed information back to 
Alberto about what Mo’s done. He feeds in thoughts about what he should do and 
it keeps going round in a loop.”

Black believes the fall-out from a BBC documentary in June, which alleged that 
Salazar had violated a series of doping rules, has helped Farah become even 
more motivated to win the 10,000m at the world championships in Beijing on 
Saturday.

“It has been a distraction,” admitted Black. “We could have all done without 
it. But I honestly believe we dealt with it brilliantly, albeit that Mo is the 
person who’s dealt with it the best. He has consistently done things over the 
last few months that have demonstrated he’s in really good shape. Clearly he’s 
gained additional motivation from some of the challenges, and he’s turned a 
negative into a positive.”

Salazar, who strongly rejects all the allegations against him – including 
claims that he gave testosterone to the Olympic 10,000m silver medallist Galen 
Rupp – has had little direct contact with Farah since June. Shortly after the 
BBC’s Panorama programme aired, Farah moved from his home in Oregon to Font 
Romeu in France where he has been supervised on a day-to-day basis by the 
British Athletics head of endurance, Barry Fudge.There is no suggestion that 
Farah, who maintains he is a “100% clean athlete”, has done anything wrong and 
he has said he will stick with the American unless he sees clear evidence 
against him. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/mo-farah-angry-frustrated-allegations-alberto-salazar>

Black said he was not dwelling on Usada’s investigation into Salazar but 
admitted that the recent months had been challenging. “There was a lady 
supporting our training camp in Japan who told me that challenge is beautiful. 
We’ve been surrounded by beauty for the last few weeks,” he joked.

But when it was suggested to Black that there had been plenty of grubbiness 
and difficulties, he agreed. “Yes, at times it’s been a bag of shit,” he said. 
“But it’s just what it is.”

Black also agreed that it was vital that Farah got Great Britain off to a 
golden start by winning the 10,000m. “It’s massive,” he said. “I think if he 
doesn’t win, other athletes will go ‘Bloody hell, if Mo can’t even win, what 
the hell chance have we got?’ Thankfully he’s the type of personality that he 
doesn’t find that a burden. But early success is vital to driving the momentum 
which we really need. And it’s amazing how people spin off each other.”

While Black claimed he was confident that Britain would do well in Beijing, he 
once again refused to set a medal target for the event. “I’m not personally 
motivated, in any shape or form, by a numerical target in terms of medals,” he 
said. “That’s the honest answer. I’ve heard and seen people get shat on as a 
result of it, so I thought, ‘I don’t get anything from it, so I don’t want to 
set myself up to be beaten up necessarily. So why do it?’ We agree a target 
range with UK Sport but we genuinely don’t discuss that.”

How cheats cheat: why dopers have the edge in athletics’ war on drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/20/doping-world-athletics-championships-cheats>
Meanwhile Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee, has 
said that, while he personally supports lifetime bans for athletes who cheated, 
it is impossibly legally to make them work. “If you ask me about my emotions, I 
would say clearly yes I would support a lifetime ban,” he said. “But I had to 
learn from different courts and lawyers that it is legally not just possible 
and that a lifelong ban would not stand any kind of challenge.”

When asked about Justin Gatlin competing in the world championships despite 
having failed two tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/21/justin-gatlin-100m-world-champion>
, he said that it was only right that he was allowed to compete. “If you have 
an athlete who has served his suspension, then he has the right to participate 
in championships,” he said. “A suspension is there and afterwards we have to 
treat these athletes in the same way as the others.”

Bach also said it was “too early” to speculate on the outcome of the IAAF 
inquiry into the leak of suspicious blood values but said he supported the 
action athletics’ governing body had taken. “It’s very clear that until 2009, 
before the athlete blood passport was introduced, none of these test results 
contained in these data bases could be used as proof of doping,” said Bach. 
“They could only serve as an indication for target testing. The IAAF has 
explained to us in different ways that this is what the IAAF has done, 
following up with the target testing.

“Since the World Anti-Doping Agency said at the same time that it would be 
libellous to make allegations of doping at this point in time, I will not make 
such allegations. We are awaiting now, together with the IAAF, the results of 
the inquiry and the independent commission.”
 