
The A1GP championship returns to the circuit at which the series began in 
September 2005. Critics saidA1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> - a 
novel concept with each team representing a different country - would not see 
out its first season, never mind enjoy a gradual growth in credibility that the 
organisers hope will draw more than 70,000 fans to the Kent track this weekend. 
The attraction was further increased yesterday when Team Great Britain's Robbie 
Kerr qualified on pole for the first of two races today, the Englishman beating 
Germany and France despite sliding on to the grass during his out lap from the 
pits.

This will be the final round of a championship designed to run throughout the 
European winter months. The schedule makes it clear that A1GP does not intend 
to rival either Formula One or GP2, the junior formula that supports grand-prix 
meetings and spawned F1 drivers Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg.

GP2 is popular thanks to close racing among potential F1 stars and a plan by 
Bernie Ecclestone to consider a winter GP2 series is being seen as a threat to 
A1GP. It could also be interpreted as a sign that A1GP is worth worrying about.

In the past, Ecclestone has been accused of crushing any racing series that 
might erode the popularity of his F1 powerbase. Such a motive is unlikely in 
this instance. If anything, A1GP and F1 could work together by helping cover 
the drop in revenue in their respective closed seasons.

A GP2 winter championship would lose much of its attraction through not being 
part of a grand-prix weekend and, in any case, GP2 lacks the appeal unique to 
A1GP. The concept of country against country - there are 22 represented at 
Brands Hatch - has attracted sponsors new to motor racing.

'We've attracted support from companies that have previously shown no interest 
in motor racing,' said Mark Gallagher, joint owner of Team Ireland. 'LM 
Developments, for example, is an Irish property company that's never been 
involved before. They were not interested in sponsoring a driver - as you would 
in GP2 - but they are interested in any sporting event that has a sense of 
occasion and enjoys a strong Irish connection. A1GP fits the bill perfectly 
because it is about the country, each car being painted in national colours in 
what amounts to a world cup of motor sport.'

Such a theme has prompted the claim that A1GP does little to nurture drivers 
in preparation for F1. It is a debatable point since the first race at Brands 
Hatch was won by Nelson Piquet Junior (currently a driver in waiting with the 
Renault GP team) and this year's championshipwinning team, Germany, have 
highlighted the superb talent of Nico Hulkenberg, a 19-year-old who is already 
under the care of Willi Weber, the manager who shepherded Michael Schumacher 
through F1.

Hulkenberg won eight races as the championship moved through countries such as 
Holland, New Zealand, Czech Republic and South Africa, many of which do not 
support F1. By performing in Indonesia and China, A1GP could be doing F1 a 
favour and paving the way for a grand prix.

On the other hand, the return to Brands Hatch, with its swoops and blind 
fourth-gear corners, serves as a reminder of the type of traditional track that 
F1 is leaving behind in the pursuit of dollars on offer from emerging nations 
keen to promote their image on new but generally bland tracks.

Zandvoort in Holland is no longer used for F1, but the popularity of the Dutch 
track was emphasised tlast week when 15,000 tickets were sold on line during 
the first day of sale for September's opening round of the 2007-2008 A1GP 
championship, an indication of the formula's appeal and a confidence to be 
prepared for a new season before the old one has finished.

Today's pair of races will settle second place in the championship with 
Britain, very much the team on form, looking to close the 14-point gap to New 
Zealand. Kerr, who won and finished second in the last pair of races in 
Shanghai, is in line to make Britain the first team to win at home.

Counting the number of spectators who turn out to see if he does it will be as 
important to the A1GP organisers as the quality of racing that, so far, has 
been close and exciting enough to catch the attention of Ecclestone and other 
curious F1 personnel making the journey today to the former home of the British 
Grand Prix.
 