
Gordon Brown has invited Andrew Strauss and the rest the England cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> to a reception at 
Downing Street to mark their Ashes victory over Australia.

The prime minister made the offer in a letter to the England captain 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Politics/documents/2009/08/24/Strauss.pdf>
 released by No 10 this afternoon.

It promises to be a more sedate version of the ramshackle 2005 visit when a 
worse-for-wear England side popped in on Tony Blair after their open-top bus 
parade through central London.

Brown, very much a football man, is not noted for his love of cricket but said 
last month he wanted to use his summer break to watch the Ashes.

In his letter to Strauss, Brown said: "I wanted to write to congratulate you 
and the entire England squad on regaining the Ashes. The series has been yet 
another wonderful showcase for cricket and for all that is great about sport. 
It has provided high sporting drama throughout the summer that has yet again 
gripped the entire nation, and to win the Ashes with your magnificent display 
at the Oval – and coming back from the defeat at Headingley in the fourth test 
– shows great determination and commitment.

"There have been many outstanding performances this summer on both sides, but 
throughout the series you have led England from the front, with patience, 
resolution and courage. The country is extremely proud of what you have 
achieved this summer. I would like to invite the England squad in to Downing 
Street for a reception to celebrate your victory."

Ashley Giles, the England spinner in 2005, recounted how the side's South 
African-born batsman Kevin Pietersen "excelled himself" during the reception 
that year. "He was chatting away with Cherie Blair in his usual extrovert 
fashion as if he had known her for years. Then, when she moved on, he turned 
around and said: 'Who was she, then?'"

Brown may be more keen to talk to Strauss. He, as the captain did, has eight 
months to turn his faction-ridden, apparently defeated team into winners 
against the odds.
 