
In Arthur C Clarke’s July 20, 2019: Life in the 21st Century, his 1986 novel 
speculating what a day in the 21st century might look like, Clarke envisions a 
cinema listing of the future.

“Still Gone with the Wind: The sequel picks up several years after where the 
80-year-old original left off, with Rhett and Scarlett reuniting in their 
middle age, in 1880. Features the original cast (Clark Gable, Olivia de 
Havilland, and Vivien Leigh) and studio sets resurrected by computer graphic 
synthesis. Still Gone sets out to prove that they do make ‘em like they used 
to.”


Clarke’s book was pure science fiction, but almost 30 years later his 
predictions have proved prescient. Death, once the finite end to a celebrity 
career, is now only a marker for the next stage, and digitally resurrected 
celebrities – be they Paul Walker orAudrey Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn> – are now posthumously 
making their way back onto our screens.

Bruce Lee estate attacks plan to digitally recreate martial arts star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/bruce-lee-estate-attacks-plan-to-digitally-recreate-martial-arts-star-for-ip-man-3>
But such digital necromancy is raising concerns. It was announced at the end 
of March that plans are in the works to digitally insert Bruce Lee, 42 years 
after his death, into Ip Man 3, the third film in a series about his former 
teacher. It’s not the first time computer graphics (CG) technology have been 
used to bring the martial arts star back to life on screen – his digitally 
reanimated figure recentlystarred in an advert for Johnnie Walker Blue whisky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/10/bruce-lee-johnnie-walker-whisky-ad>
. However, the Bruce Lee estate is now seeking legal action to prevent his CG 
likeness appearing in the film, with their lawyer stating the family are 
“justifiably shocked” at the idea.

It is perhaps to stop such situations that Robin Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robin-williams>, it was revealed last week, 
signed a deed to prevent his image, or any likeness of him, being used at least 
25 years after his death. It restricts any posthumous exploitation of the 
actor, be it through the use of CG to digitally resurrect him in Mrs Doubtfire 
2 or as a live hologram performing comedy on stage – something that the 
advancement of technology has made an increasingly likely occurrence.

Indeed, recent figures have shown that the posthumous earnings made by 
celebrities from their image or likeness alone now exceeds £1bn, with some, 
such as Muhammad Ali, even selling their image rights before death so they can 
reap the profits while still alive.

While the practice has mainly been restricted to finishing off performances of 
actors who died midway through filming – such as Paul Walker in Fast and 
Furious 7 – it has also been utilised by advertisers, keen to attach famous 
faces to their brands. Most notable is the recent reanimation of Audrey Hepburn 
in an advert for Galaxy chocolate.

Mike McGee, the co-founder and creative director of Framestore, the special 
effects studio who won an Oscar for Gravity, was in the team responsible for 
the Audrey Hepburn reanimation and said it still required “vast” amounts of 
work to make the replicas appear alive. However, he predicted the phenomenon of 
reviving dead celebrities was only just beginning.

It took Framestore four months of work to create the lifelike Audrey Hepburn, 
for just 60 seconds of advert, and managed it by using a combination of old 
photographs and a body double to build an accurate CG digital form of 
everything from her skin to her eyelashes – even going on location to get the 
lifelike light and shadow.

Robin Williams went above and beyond to stop his image being used
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/31/robin-williams-restricted-use-image-despite-existing-us-laws>
“We found that we could create a realistic still image of Hepburn quite 
quickly but as soon as she has to move, turn her head or open her mouth, that’s 
when things can start to look uncanny, when things don’t look 100% real,” he 
said.

“The human eye can spot it because we’re so used to looking at our own 
reflection, so we subconsciously know all those tiny details and it’s that 
final 5% of realism that takes the most time to achieve. It’s all about getting 
the moisture in the eyes to look right, getting the eyelids to flutter 
correctly when someone blinks, the corner of someone’s lips to turn up a little 
just before they smile, because it’s those subtle signal and movements that 
make a great performance by any actor. And to ask an animator to copy that onto 
a computer model and capture a human performance is really challenging.”

He added: “I do think this will happen more and more. As the technology 
develops, I see no reason that in the future we wouldn’t see a CG performance 
by a dead actor up for a Bafta or an Oscar.”

McGee also predicted this technology trend would have serious implications in 
the image and ageing obsessed world of Hollywood, with it already increasingly 
common for actors to have their faces and bodies scanned while they are still 
young to “cryogenically preserve the digital image of their youth in case they 
are able to sell or lease it in the future.”

“If you are an ageing actress, and you want to take a role where you have to 
be 20 or 30 years younger, that can now be done digitally” he said. “It is very 
possible studios like ours could even become digital make up artists, where on 
screen actors have their hands, or nose or anything that gives away signs of 
ageing, replaced with a CG version of their younger self. It’s what the 
technology now allows, so it’s just a case of seeing whether the film industry 
and actors will go down that path.”

But the ethics around film and special effects studios playing God with 
deceased celebrities can be blurry. Dr Denver D’Rozario, who has written 
several academic papers on the post-mortem life of dead celebrities on screen, 
coined the term ‘Delebs’ to describe the digitally resurrected icons and said 
the practice still remained a moral minefield.
 Audrey Hepburn, as seen in an advert for Galaxy chocolate. Photograph: The 
Guardian 
“I see this as a disconcerting increasing trend, because there are many things 
about this that are ethically problematic” he said. “A good example is how in 
2013 Johnnie Walker Blue label whiskey used a digital recreation of Bruce Lee 
in an advert, which completely ignored the fact that Bruce Lee never drank in 
real life. So they are ultimately altering the persona of him after his death 
and associating him with a product that, in life, he stayed away from. He 
becomes a completely differentBruce Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bruce-lee>. So a key ethical issues here is 
honouring the memory and the legacy of the dead celebrity, and so particularly 
in adverts, there is a risk of cheapening the celebrity and disrespecting the 
original fans. ”

D’Rozario said the appeal in using digitally resurrected legendary stars also 
lay in the fact that, because they are dead, they had no way of getting into 
any scandal which could damage their reputation and the reputation of the film 
or advert.

“Ultimately this trend is being driven by money,” he added. “Up till now, most 
celebrities when they died did not leave clear instructions to their heirs and 
estates on what could be done with their image or likeness, so most have a free 
reign to make a real windfall from allowing the image of the celebrity to be 
resurrected through technology. And more celebrity estates, and even living 
celebrities, are getting in on the profits from a posthumous career. Everybody 
is selling out and I believe people like Robin Williams will remain the 
exception.”

How we resurrected Audrey HepburnTM for the Galaxy chocolate ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/oct/08/how-we-made-audrey-hepburn-galaxy-ad>
But Andy Dill, a lead creative at The Mill, the visual effects studio 
responsible for the Bruce Lee resurrection for the whisky advert, said the 
labour intensive nature of the process meant he believed it was still a long 
way off replacing real life performers.

“I think the appeal of resurrecting iconic celebrities comes from the fact 
that there is something about the familiar we are all drawn to,” said Dill. 
“But it takes a huge amount of time and effort – it took us over eight months 
to build the realistic model of Bruce Lee for a single commercial. Even though 
it was a really interesting challenge, it is fair to say it definitely is 
strange territory and raises some tough ethical questions.”

He added: “I think that, for the foreseeable future at least, most films are 
going to stick to using performers who are still alive.”

 