
Melbourne City have shown glimpses of title-winning swagger during their 2-1 
win overAdelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> 
at AAMI Park.

Bruno Fornaroli’s goals either side of halftime seized back the limelight from 
an absent Tim Cahill and improved City to second on theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> table.

A first A-League goal for Sergi Guardiola frayed City nerves but John van ’t 
Schip’s side held on to bounce back from last round’s home defeat.

Melbourne City v Adelaide United: A-League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/28/melbourne-city-v-adelaide-united-a-league-live>
Adelaide played their part in an entertaining game but took too long to click 
into gear, falling to a third-straight loss and their first away defeat of 2016.

When City purred into action, the champions couldn’t lay a glove on them.

City’s link-up play in attack – where Fornaroli and Fernando Brandan 
threatened at will – dazzled the 10,053-strong crowd and the Reds’ defence.

Brandan’s show-stopping backheel nutmeg of former City defender Ben Garuccio 
showed City’s intent.

Soon after, Luke Brattan – playing as a No10 and auditioning for a place in 
the Socceroos’ squad in front of coach Ange Postecoglou – sparked the first 
goal.

Brattan hassled Tarek Elrich out of the ball, allowing Brandan to feed 
Fornaroli on the edge of the box.

The Uruguayan bent his back and arched his shot inside the back post past 
Eugene Galekovic.

Fornaroli should have had two before halftime, sidefooting over the bar late 
in the half when a fiercer strike might have done the job.

With seconds left before halftime, United almost made City pay for their 
missed chances when Ryan Kitto rattled the crossbar from Isaias’ free kick.

City upped the ante after the break and United couldn’t go with them, earning 
successive yellow cards for late tackles and then conceding a second goal.

Brandan, the shortest man on the pitch, sent a header from Brattan’s corner 
into Guardiola’s outstretched arm. Fornaroli then converted the penalty in 
style with a flawless panenka.

City looked on track for a routine win but, in trademark style, gave their 
home fans some nervous moments by failing to close out the game.

On 64 minutes, Garuccio made amends for his earlier embarrassment by producing 
a perfect cross for Guardiola.

The Spaniard couldn’t miss from just a few metres out, and it was game on.

Iacopo La Rocca should have done better with his header from a free kick, 
while Elrich had Dean Bouzanis back-pedalling to tip a deflected cross over the 
crossbar.

And when Dylan McGowan spooned a loose ball over from close range, it became 
apparent that City would stand firm for a steadying win.
 