
Carlton star Bryce Gibbs could still play for Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> one day, his father says, after a 
proposed trade for the homesick midfielder fell through. The Crows finished the 
AFL trade period as arguably the biggest loser after failing to strike a deal 
for Gibbs, having gone public with their desire to bring home the contracted 
27-year-old.

Gibbs was keen to return to Adelaide so he and his partner could reconnect 
with family and receive help with their young son but the Blues played 
hardball, demanding two first-round draft picks or a first-round selection 
combined with a quality player.

His father Ross on Saturday said he was disappointed but hadn’t given up hope 
of a future trade for his son, who is contracted until the end of 2019. “The 
Crows have had a couple of cracks at Bryce before and haven’t quite got it 
right and they went harder this time so there was genuine hope that he would be 
able to come home,” he told the Adelaide Advertiser.

Adelaide and Carlton in war of words over failed Bryce Gibbs trade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/21/adelaide-carlton-war-of-words-bryce-gibbs-trade>
“But we’re a footballing family and know the rules. Obviously we’re 
disappointed that something couldn’t be done but Bryce is a contracted player 
and he’ll have to honour that contract.Carlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carlton> stuck to their guns and the Crows’ 
window of opportunity didn’t work out so we all move on. One day it might be a 
different story.”

Gibbs would have no problems returning to Carlton, who had been “fantastic” to 
him, his father added. Adelaide powerbroker Mark Ricciuto on Friday admitted 
the Crows thought Carlton were bluffing when they refused to accept an offer 
for Gibbs.

Ricciuto, who is chairman of the Crows’ list management committee, says it 
would have been irresponsible to give up what the Blues were demanding. “We 
thought that they might have been playing the game and then come back late and 
said ’okay, he wants to go home. He is probably not going to be in our next 
premiership side so we’ll take somewhere in between’,” he told Triple M radio. 
“If that happened, the deal would have been done yesterday. But it didn’t 
happen. We were surprised about that, we respect that (but) we are very, very 
disappointed.”

But Carlton football boss Andrew McKay said the Crows had simply 
underestimated the midfielder’s worth. “We obviously value Bryce more highly 
than they do,” McKay told SEN radio. “They weren’t close. We were very clear 
with them. It wasn’t a matter of us mucking them around at all.”

AFL trade winds blow favourably for ruthless Hawthorn and ominous Giants | 
Craig Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/21/afl-trade-winds-blow-favourably-for-ruthless-hawthorn-and-ominous-giants>
Meanwhile, former Sydney small forward Ben McGlynn will move into a coaching 
role with St Kilda, weeks after announcing hisAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> retirement. McGlynn will serve as an 
assistant to senior coach Alan Richardson as the Saints look to improve upon 
their 9th-placed finish this year.

“We are really excited to have Ben join the Saints,” St Kilda football boss 
Jamie Cox said on Saturday. “Obviously he was a highly skilled and experienced 
player, and he has a genuine love and interest in coaching and developing young 
talent. His AFL experience and knowledge of the modern game will be invaluable 
to the younger players under his tutelage.”

McGlynn, who is currently overseas, will commence the role next month. “I’ve 
had some exposure to coaching, so I feel like the development role is a great 
fit for me and I’m looking forward to working with the younger boys,” he said. 
“It’s going to be a big challenge, which I’m really excited to take on.”

The 31-year-old, who started his 171-game career at Hawthorn, called time 
after the Swans’ grand final loss to the Western Bulldogs. It was the latest in 
a string of finals disappointments for McGlynn, who never managed to play in a 
premiership side.

He missed out on Hawthorn’s 2008 premiership because of injury before moving 
to Sydney, where a torn hamstring prevented him from playing in the Swans’ 2012 
grand final triumph. The 172cm goal sneak went on to play in Sydney’s losing 
grand final sides in 2014 and 2016.



 