
BSkyB has signed a three-year deal to broadcast A1 Grand Prix, a new motor 
racing series bankrolled by a member of Dubai's ruling family that promises to 
tackle many of the problems that have dogged formula one in recent years.

Sky has become the first broadcaster to agree to broadcast the embryonic 
sport, which is being billed as the World Cup of motor racing with up to 20 
drivers from different countries competing in identical cars.

Vic Wakeling, the managing director of Sky Sports, confirmed the broadcaster 
had been persuaded to provide the championship, which won't launch until autumn 
2005, with early backing.

"We have been sold on the concept of a genuine test of driving skills which, 
of course, A1 Grand Prix is designed to provide - and we are delighted to be 
involved from the beginning," he said.

Sky will show practice sessions, qualifying and the races themselves 
exclusively live.

Although it still airs hours of motor sport, its previous dalliance with F1 
ended in failure when Bernie Ecclestone's dream of setting up an interactive 
pay-per-view joint venture foundered last season amid lack of interest from 
viewers. ITV recently renewed its deal to show formula live until 2009.

It is hoped that the races, which will take place during the formula one close 
season in rich Middle Eastern countries including Dubai, Qatar and Bahrain as 
well as emerging nations like China and the established motor racing 
strongholds of Australia, South Africa and Malaysia, will be rich in the drama 
that many have accused F1 of lacking in recent seasons.

The races will be quicker than formula one, with fewer laps and more 
overtaking. As all the cars will be equal in performance, it is hoped there 
will be more emphasis on the skills of the drivers rather than the technical 
ability of the engineers and the financial muscle of the teams.

All the cars will be developed by A1 Grand Prix with each team franchise, one 
from each country, recruiting a driver and negotiating sponsorship deals.

A spokesman for A1 Grand Prix said the cars, which have yet to be unveiled, 
looked very much like F1 cars but had been modified to enable close overtaking. 
They will also be stripped of the electronic gadgets that aid formula one 
drivers in an effort to maintain a level playing field.

Far from discouraging the introduction of a rival, F1 boss Mr Eccelstone has 
welcomed the introduction of the new championship as a way to keep fans 
interested during the off season.

It is also hoped that the races will groom new drivers for formula one and 
boost interest in motor racing, and the sponsors of the teams, in countries 
that don't currently host a top-level F1 race.

A1 Grand Prix plans to reveal the identities of the franchise holders next 
month and will make most of its money from TV deals around the world.

Sheikh Maktoum Hasher Maktoum Al Maktoum, the nephew of the crown prince of 
Dubai well known for his love of racehorses, said he was "pleased and extremely 
proud" to sign the three-year TV deal with Sky.

"Sky's innovative coverage and support will make A1 Grand Prix truly must-see 
viewing in the United Kingdom," he said.

The new series was the brainchild of the sheikh and is also being backed by 
South African entrepreneurs Brain Menell and Tony Teixera, who made their 
fortunes in diamonds and shipping.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 