
Old pallets and wooden packaging will help power BSkyB's new broadcasting 
centre in West London, when it opens this year.

Harlequin 1, home to sports and broadcast operations, will be the lowest 
energy consuming building of its type in Europe. It has won sustainable project 
of the year 2010, a Breeam "excellent" rating and an 'A' rated energy 
performance certificate.

For the first time, a broadcasting centre is using air cooling equipment rooms 
and naturally ventilating studios to reduce air conditioning, while a 
biomass-fuelled combined cooling heating and power plant and wind turbine will 
produce 40% of the building's energy.

The plant is also the first of its type and size in the UK using 
locally-sourced recycled wood, reducing carbon emissions by more than 20%.

A single 100Kw wind turbine will drive the annual office lighting; meters will 
show individual floors and departments their energy use.

In 2006 Sky became the first media company in the world and second FTSE100 
company to become carbon neutral. The building will help cut CO2 emissions by a 
quarter by 2020.

In October 2009, Sky's environment steering group set 10 new targets focusing 
on long-term improvements. A carbon and energy strategy covers four key areas: 
carbon measurement and reporting, carbon reduction, products and suppliers.

It is working to help customers cut personal emissions with a smaller HD box 
which uses 29% less power, less packaging and reduces the impact of shipping 
and transportation. Set top boxes are now programmed to switch to standby when 
inactive.

Performance against public targets and carbon neutral status are externally 
verified every year by the Environmental Resources Management company. BSkyB 
abides by the voluntary standard for energy used in complex set top boxes and 
reports emissions to the carbon disclosure project.

It is also part of the carbon disclosure supply chain project, which aims to 
encourage suppliers to report and reduce carbon emissions.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 