
BSkyB is one of the leading risers in a falling market after receiving a boost 
from analysts at Nomura.

Ahead of the satellite broadcaster's fourth quarter results due at the end of 
the month, the bank's analyst Matthew Walker issued a buy note despite 
forecasting a dip in quarterly revenues compared to last year. He pointed out 
there was an extra week in 2011 as well as a David Haye pay per view boxing 
match, which together added an extra £110m in sales. He said:
 Sky provides a good balance of organic growth and cash returns. We would 
expect the company to indicate it will commence another sizeable buyback when 
the current one is finished given leverage is still not far from 1 times. While 
the 40% increase in football rights cost was unexpected and influences thinking 
about future auctions, we are confident Sky can contain TV competition from BT, 
many of whose Vision customers don't have much more than Freeview (or for a few 
Youview). 
BSkyB is 7p higher at 691p as it announced it had bought another 30.000 shares 
for cancellation under its existing programme, whileITV is also in demand, up 
1.7p at 73.55p.

Media shares were already in focus after Japan's Dentsu agreed to buy UK 
marketing groupAegis - up 73.9p at 236.1p - for £3.2bn, with the news lifting 
advertising giantWPP 7p to 791.5p.

Overall, leading shares have fallen back on renewed worries about the global 
economy. There was some disappointment that the US Federal Reserve minutes 
released on Wednesday did not hint at more aggressive moves to boost the 
world's largest economy, while an interest rate cut in South Korea suggested 
the slowdown was having widespread effects. News that French car group Peugeot 
was cutting 8,000 jobs also knocked sentiment. TheFTSE 100 is currently 29.47 
points lower at 5635.01.

Security group G4S is among the main fallers, down 7.3p at 283.1p after the 
Guardian revealedit may not be able to deliver the number of staff it promised 
to guard the London Olympics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jul/11/army-reinforcements-olympics>.

Intercontinental Hotels has lost 32p to £15.18 following downbeat comments 
about international markets from US peer Marriott. Numis cut its recommendation 
on Intercontinental from buy to add, but Investec said the company should 
report good half year figures in August:
 Despite some recent concerns over the US economy wavering and continued 
European weakness, industry data supports our view that the global hotels 
industry is recovering strongly, with almost no exceptions by territory. 
Despite second half headwinds in the form of economic uncertainty and tough 
comps, we think upside pressure on our IHG forecasts is hardening and we 
reiterate our buy stance.  