
Harlequin 1 in Isleworth, Middlesex, is hailed by owner British Sky 
Broadcasting as Europe's most sustainable broadcast facility.

It will open its five high-definition studios, 45 edit suites, 14 voice-over 
studios and four audio suites in spring 2011, after two years of planning and 
build.

The company calls its approach "every watt counts". It has worked with 
architects Arup to ensure that all methods of reducing energy use and 
generating renewable energy were explored.

Designers took a "whole life sustainability" view, the company says, where 
green values were used right from the start of the build.

During demolition of existing buildings, 90% of on-site waste was diverted 
from landfill and the construction waste recycling targets reached were 97.2%.

All timber is from Forest Stewardship Council-certified sustainable sources, 
while concrete mixes are low-carbon.

Harlequin 1 has a calculated CO2 emissions rate of 26.3 Kg CO2/m2 per annum – 
the lowest achieved for a broadcasting centre in Europe, says BSkyB.

Central to this achievement is use of a biomass-fuelled combined cooling, 
heating and power (CCHP) plant, which will provide sufficient renewable energy 
to reduce carbon emissions by more than 20%.

Put into context, this is enough annual energy to power 2,000 homes and heat 
600 homes, while avoiding losses suffered if the energy had been transmitted 
over the National Grid.

BSkyB also hopes to offer renewably-generated energy to neighbours on adjacent 
sites and local homes in future.

In addition, a 100 kW wind turbine will provide enough energy to light the 
building all year round, and the infrastructure can support new technologies, 
such as hydrogen fuel cells, as they come along.

Water has been a key consideration: all toilets have dual-flush cisterns; taps 
have infrared sensors; and urinals have electronic controls.

A 45,000-litre tank collects rainwater from the roof and surroundings, 
providing 100% of all water needed – including 10% more extras such as tree 
irrigation. As well as rainwater harvesting, the building captures natural 
resources such as light and external air for cooling and ventilation.

By the very nature of its use, Harlequin 1 will still be a significant 
consumer of energy. But together, the wind turbine and CCHP will provide 40% of 
the building's energy from on-site renewable sources.

Their combined output will offset the same amount of CO2 that 9,500 trees 
absorb annually, says BSkyB, somewhere between 14 and 24 acres of forest.

CCHP will burn fuel in the form of recycled wood such as pallets and 
packaging, which is not only sustainable and locally-sourced but can also help 
avoid waste being sent to landfill.

The building achieved a Breeam "excellent" rating and joins an elite group of 
UK buildings –less than 2% – that have won an 'A'-rated energy performance 
certificate.

As well as programme-making facilities, Harlequin 1 will house 1,370 employees 
and a suite of "free-cooled" data rooms for more than 400 computer server racks.

The combination of the built environment and integral renewable energy means 
the broadcaster says it confidently expects to increase energy efficiency by 
20% in its owned buildings by 2020.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 