
It seems voters should not judge a budget by its glossy brochures. 


The first question most households ask at budget time is what does it mean for 
their own bottom line. This year it was very hard for them to get that 
information. Like last year, there were no comprehensive “what it means for 
you” tables. There were plenty of good news stories about extra help for 
childcare costs, but little definitive information about how it all added up. 
As that detail filters out it appears the “good news” budget had some bad news 
hidden in its detail.

Modelling by Natsem – the national centre for social and economic modelling at 
the University of Canberra – and analysis by the Australian Council of Social 
Service (Acoss), both released at the weekend, came to similar conclusions, 
although it is still hard to get the full picture because Labor, which 
commissioned the Natsem research, has not yet released all its detail and 
tables.

What we can see so far is that the extra money many low- and middle-income 
families get in childcare assistance is more than taken away, especially by the 
cuts to family tax benefits (first outlined in last year’s budget) which the 
government now says are the only way it can pay for its childcare plan.

For many single-income families that was the point – the government was quite 
up front that they would lose the payment targeted at families with one income 
(family tax benefit part B) once their youngest child turned six, because by 
that time both parents could be working. The childcare changes were structured 
the same way.

But Natsem quantifies the losses, taking into account the 2015 budget and the 
surviving measures from last year, and they come in at more than $20,000 over 
four years for a low-income, single-parent or single-income family with two 
kids – one in primary school and one in high school. For a single-income family 
on $75,000 with one child at school and one at preschool age, the four-year 
loss is $6,000.

(The budget documents provide different “cameos”, also carefully selected. 
They do not include a “before and after the budget” family income comparison, 
but they do include a calculation of “disposable income” after receiving 
government benefits and paying tax. For a sole parent with two children under 
six and an income of $30,000, it calculates $38,838 in “government assistance” 
and a “disposable income” of $66,304. Acoss says this is highly misleading 
because it includes childcare assistance – available only if the parent uses 
childcare – but not the costs of the childcare itself. Taking childcare costs 
into account would leave an actual disposable income of $49,994, Acoss says.)

More surprisingly, Natsem finds low- and middle-income families with both 
parents working would also be worse off, by $10,000 or more over four years, 
apparently due to the freeze in the general family tax benefit, among other 
policies.

Acoss explains it a different way, calculating that of the $9bn in cuts to 
family payments, $6bn hit poor families.

These calculations are likely to weigh heavily on the crossbench in the 
Senate. Most remain deeply sceptical of the family tax benefit cuts, which they 
have refused to pass for a year now, although the Victorian senator Ricky Muir 
has requested modelling from the government about the impact of a plan to 
maintain payments until the youngest child turns 12, and also to test the 
impact of gradually removing payments from the time a child turns six, rather 
than immediately cutting them off.

But with the childcare changes not due to start until July 2017 there is no 
need for the government to push legislation through. And with a generally 
positive reception to the main budget messages about small business tax breaks 
and extra money for childcare, theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> seems keen to bank its 
post-budget improvement in the opinion polls and push the public conversation 
back to national security and the citizenship rights afforded to foreign 
fighters.

If that succeeds, the glossy brochures may have successfully glossed over the 
details, and the highly political budget 2015 will have served its primary 
purpose.
 