
The Abbott government has given a two-year lifeline to a landmark research 
program but will fund it through cuts to another research scheme.

New education measures in the 2015 budget are less ambitious than last year’s, 
when the government surprised voters with plans to deregulate university fees, 
cut course subsidies and extend support to private colleges.

Savings from the higher education package remain factored in to the budget 
bottom line because the government says it will try a third time to legislate 
these changes, despite the Senate holding firm in opposition.

The budget reveals how the government will fund an extension of the national 
collaborative research infrastructure strategy (NCRIS), which emerged as a 
controversial bargaining chip in unsuccessful Senate negotiations.

About 1,700 highly skilled jobs were in placed in jeopardy this year when the 
education minister,Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>, warned 
crossbenchers the government would withhold a $150m NCRIS funding extension if 
the Senate did not pass the broader higher education package.

Pyne ultimately relented, agreeing to provide the previously budgeted $150m to 
continue NCRIS for another year after 30 June 2015. The budget papers show the 
government will also provide $150m to achieve a further one-year extension, 
providing certainty until mid-2017.

The lifeline will be offset by $263m in savings from the sustainable research 
excellence program between 2016 and 2019.

The budget papers said funding for the program would continue to increase each 
year, but would grow at a slower pace – thus producing savings compared with 
previous budget allocations.

Pyne, in a now-infamous Sky News interview about the standoff over the NCRIS, 
said he had “fixed it” but would not reveal how the extension would be funded 
before the budget was delivered because he wanted to “surprise” people.

On Tuesday Pyne said the NCRIS extension would allow the completion of a 
research infrastructure review due to report to the government in mid-2015, 
paving the way for further decisions on long-term funding.

Major new spending in the education budget includes $843m for preschool 
funding. The previously announced measure will extend payments to states and 
territories under the national partnership agreement on universal access to 
early childhood education to 2016 and 2017.

Scott Ryan, the parliamentary secretary to the minister for education, said 
this would ensure families continued to have access to a preschool program for 
600 hours of preschool education in the year before full-time school.

In a substantial savings measure, the government will garner $131m over five 
years by terminating or redesigning a number of programs administered by the 
Department of Education and Training.

This includes an overhaul of several programs focused on workforce training 
and development and teaching excellence, including the Endeavour Language 
Teacher Fellowships.

The budget shows the government’s policy to recover higher education loan 
program debts from Australians living overseas is predicted to recover just 
$26m over four years.

The new obligations will apply from July 2016 and ensure people who are 
overseas for more than six months will face the same repayment obligations as 
people who remain in Australia.

Graduates will not repay loans if their salary is below the minimum repayment 
threshold, which is about $53,000.

The government will provide an extra $16.9m to the Australian Institute for 
Teaching and School Leadership to implement improvements to teacher training 
and course accreditation. But the spending follows a government decision in the 
2014 budget to cut allocated funding for the same agency.

The budget still contains $4m in federal funding to establish the “Australian 
Consensus” centre headed by Bjørn Lomborg.

The centre was to be hosted by the University of Western Australia, but the 
university announced on Friday it would not proceed with the initiative after a 
backlash from academics. Pyne said the government was committed to the centre 
and would look for another site to host it.

The government will cut $5m from previously allocated funding for the higher 
education participation program, which provides grants to help disadvantaged 
students access further study.

Budget papers said the $5m would be redirected into preserving a range of 
documentary and audio-visual materials held in non-digital form by the 
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies.

The government has also shuffled $5m previously allocated to the advertising 
campaign for its higher education overhaul into a different campaign “to raise 
awareness of the positive effect parental engagement has on their children’s 
achievement in education”.

Pyne said federal funding to schools would be informed by nationally 
consistent data on students with disabilities “from 2016 for the first time 
ever”.

This would ensure “that all students with disability are funded on the same 
basis, regardless of the state or territory in which they live”, he said.

The government will also provide $5.4m for a further two years of funding to 
help non-government boarding schools with large numbers of Indigenous students 
from remote areas.

Long-term funding for schools remains uncertain given the Coalition’s decision 
to proceed with only the first four years of increases planned by the former 
Labor government under the needs-based Gonski reforms.

Last year’s budget revealed the government would switch to tie funding 
movements to the consumer price index after four years, fuelling a dispute with 
states and territories about pressures on their education budgets in the long 
term.

The prime minister, Tony Abbott, has agreed to discuss health and education 
funding with state premiers and territory chief ministers at a Council of 
Australian Governments “retreat” in July.

Other education-related budget measures in Tuesday’s budget include $18.2m to 
toughen compliance checks in the vocational education and training sector, 
after concerns about unscrupulous operators exploiting vulnerable students.

The government will also spend $14.5m to expand the adult migrant English 
program, which provides up to 510 hours of language tuition.

But the government will cut $4.6m from the Australian early development 
census, a population-based measure of how children have developed by the time 
they start their first year of full-time schooling. Budget papers said data 
collection under the census would continue despite the cut.
 