
Three months after the fourth high level forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/dec/02/busan-shifting-geopolitical-realities>
, held in Busan, much uncertainty still surrounds what the vaunted new Global 
Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation might look like. It was the 
major news item to emerge from the conference, so this is worrying, and – with 
the parties dwelling on process rather than substance – some remain cynical 
that anything concrete will emerge.

But one part of the world is already making headway on envisioning the 
post-Busan, post-aid landscape. As ever, Latin America is accentuating the 
positive and forging its own brand of development co-operation.

At a meeting organised by the government of El Salvador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/el-salvador> last week, 13 of the region's 
18 Spanish-speaking countries agreed a declaration setting out a joint agenda 
that would act as the basis of forthcoming negotiations, from the Busan process 
and the UN Development Co-operation Forum to the G20 and Rio+20.

The countries defined their task as building an agenda for efficient 
co-operation on sustainable development, thus explicitly linking the post-Busan 
framework with the Rio+20 summit, which will focus on sustainable development. 
Several important actors have already asked what sense there is in having a 
Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (but which isn't 
really global, as key players are still absent or only notionally engaged) 
emerging from Busan, and a separate global partnership for sustainable 
development at Rio.

Latin American countries have proved before how they can lead the agenda. It 
was a Colombian suggestion that sustainable development goals (SDGs) be defined 
at Rio, now a central plank of the negotiations. Who's to say this first 
explicit linkage of Busan with Rio will not herald broader agreements at 
international level, rationalising the two agendas a little further? Clearly 
the many challenges of sustainable development will demand an equally 
wide-ranging response from Rio, but effective development co-operation (ie, aid 
and aid-like activities) is one part of the mix.

Predictably, the agenda insists on the importance of middle income countries 
(MICs) in the development co-operation architecture. There is not an explicit 
statement that aid to MICs remains a priority, but most participants would 
agree with a senior academic colleague who commented: "I can see the arguments 
for and against aid to MICs, but you can't make a case that we should give aid 
to India and not to Peru that is not complete bullshit." He was referring to 
DfID's withdrawal from Latin America and its contrasting determination to 
remain active in India.

In this vein, and possibly of some material consequence, the gathered Latin 
countries called for discussions with the European Commission to renegotiate 
elements of its aid policy towards MICs, including financing instruments.

The meeting also suggested setting up a more formal platform of all those 
responsible for development co-operation in Latin America, inviting similar 
platforms in the Caribbean, Africa and Asia as observers. There was no mention 
of Europe and North America.

Such south-south collaboration is likely to become more common and should help 
to clarify the evolving role of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development's development assistance committee (OECD DAC). Rather than seeking 
to be a global broker of development co-operation, which was never going to 
work in a newly balanced world, the OECD should just be a club of particularly 
rich countries, and should meet with clubs comprising other countries to bash 
out agreements. Such debtors' or recipients' clubs have long been needed to 
balance the power of the DAC or the Paris Club (which manages sovereign debts), 
and may now emerge.

This proposed platform might also be the opportunity to bring in some 
important players who were notable by their absence in San Salvador and would 
significantly strengthen the group. Venezuela is an aid-giving giant in Latin 
America whose activities are seldom captured in official reports, but it is 
very wary of associating with what is still an OECD-led process. Brazil is less 
allergic to the OECD than Venezuela, but its getting there, and is keen to 
retain its independence as the major regional power with no need of a non-UN 
based aid process.

Cuba has been one of the intellectual leaders of south-south co-operation for 
a generation and, along with Brazil, is the major Latin provider of skills 
transfer, according to areport by the Ibero-American General Secretariat 
<http://segib.org/cooperacion/2012/02/informe-de-la-cooperacion-sur-sur-en-iberoamerica/>
. Rumour has it Venezuela and Cuba were not even invited to Busan, a serious 
diplomatic error that will have repercussions for any international partnership 
that emerges.

In its invitation to engage academia, civil society and the private sector in 
plans for more coherent co-operation, the meeting emphasised the importance of 
indicators and reports to generate synergies and, presumably, joint standards 
by which to be judged. These could be the kind of country-led monitoring 
schemes envisioned in Busan, but emerging at a regional level. Is that a clue 
that might help the apparently slow-moving negotiations in Paris?

In short, rather than harping on about the problems with process and content, 
which are often a consequence of history and intractable geopolitical power 
balances rather than aid officials' lack of vision, this group of countries is 
seeking to take advantage of new opportunities offered by Busan to build a 
healthier development co-operation system. Others should follow their lead.
 