
To the question of where African football is progressing, there are two 
answers. On the one hand, it has stagnated, perhaps even gone backwards: we are 
no closer to an African team winning the World Cup now than we were when 
Cameroon reached the quarter-finals in 1990 (yes, Ghana were within a Luis 
Suárez handball and an Asamoah Gyan missed penalty of becoming the first 
African side to reach a semi-final, but they would also have gone out in the 
first round had an Australian handball with two minutes of their final group 
game remaining been punished and Serbia converted the penalty; stuff happens).

And yet in an another way it has improved immeasurably: the top may not have 
progressed but the middle certainly has and Mali, Angola, Togo and Cape Verde – 
even Gabon and Sudan, although neither qualified for this Cup of Nations – are 
all teams worthy of respect, capable of taking on the best their continent has 
to offer. The pyramid of talent may not have got higher, but it has got broader.

"You can no longer differentiate so much between which teams are better," said 
theNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> coach, 
Stephen Keshi, earlier in the tournament. "In the old days you could predict 
how many goals one team was going to score against the other but now you don't 
know what is going to happen. You might think one side will win but you don't 
know. I think this is wonderful for African football. The competition is so 
tight: you look at the likes of Ethiopia and Cape Verde and some of the other 
countries. I am very impressed with their performances and the standard they 
are reaching."

Burkina Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>, the team 
Nigeria face in Sunday's final, are the latest example of that. Their story 
does not have the tragic dimensions of Zambia last year, returning to 
Libreville 19 years after the air crash there that killed 18 of their players 
to win with the 18th penalty in the shootout, but it is a fairytale nonetheless.

As a column by Le Fou in Le Pays <http://www.lepays.bf/?CAN-2013,9716>, the 
Ouagadougou-based national, put it: "Anyone who does not believe in miracles is 
not a realist." He went on to complain about how "wild" fans had been in their 
celebrations, keeping him up all night with their noise, which gives some 
indication of what the reaction has been back in Burkina Faso.

When the Stallions left Ouagadougou, their goal was to win one game, something 
they hadn't done since hosting the tournament in 1998, when victories over 
Algeria and Guinea took them through to a quarter-final against Tunisia. They 
won that on penalties before going out to the eventual champions Egypt in the 
semi-final. Burkina Faso then led DR Congo 4-1 in the third-placed play-off 
with four minutes remaining, only to concede three times and lose on penalties.

In fact, in 26 previous matches at the finals, Burkina Faso had won only two 
games, drawing six and losing 18. Away from home soil, they had gathered four 
points from a possible 60. Last year, in Equatorial Guinea, having been 
extremely fortunate to have been allowed to compete after fielding an 
ineligible player in a qualifier against Namibia, Burkina Faso were a shambles 
and lost all three matches.

Whether Paul Put can truly regain redemption in Africa for his involvement in 
the Ye Zheyun match-fixing scandal in Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/05/burkina-faso-match-fixing-paul-put>
 is debatable, but what cannot be doubted is the quality of the job he has done 
since leaving Europe, first with Gambia and then with Burkina Faso.

Their captain, Charles Kaboré, paid immediate tribute to Put after the 
semi-final victory over Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/feb/07/burkina-faso-joy-at-progress-to-africa-cup-of-nations-final-video?INTCMP=SRCH>
, while there was surely significance in the way Aristide Bancé raced to the 
touchline to hug his coach after Emmanuel Agyemang-Badu had seen the decisive 
penalty in the shootout saved.

There is a wonderful photograph of the two 
<http://www.ctpost.com/sports/article/Kabore-urges-CAF-to-rescind-Pitroipa-red-card-4257569.php>
, one peroxide blond, the other with his sandy hair bleached by the sun, both 
with mouths wide in triumph, arms outstretched like long-lost lovers, about to 
embrace on the painted sand of the Mbombela as the plague of moths that 
blighted the stadium flit around them, illuminated in the floodlights like an 
eddy of snow. ("Is it still mothing? I hadn't noticed …" as Andie MacDowell 
might say in the unlikely event she is called upon to play the Belgian in a 
biopic, Four Draws and A Single Win in Normal Time).

To quibble that Burkina Faso progressed thanks to draws is slightly to miss 
the point.They more than held their own against Nigeria in the opener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/21/burkina-faso-nigeria-africa-cup-nations?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and probably deserved the injury-time equaliser that Alain Traoré scored in 
the final moments. They overcame the dismissal of their goalkeeper Abdoulaye 
Soulama with the score at 1-0 to pick off Ethiopia on the break and win 4-0, 
becoming the only side in eight games to manage more than a single goal on the 
Mbombela pitch – the first sign that adversity becomes them. Needing a draw to 
progress, they played calm, containing football to forcea 0-0 in their final 
group game against Zambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/29/burkina-faso-zambia-africa-cup-nations?INTCMP=SRCH>
. "There was more pepper than salt in the soup today," said Put, meaningfully, 
after that game.

They lost Traoré to a thigh injury in that match but Bancé, while lacking 
Traoré's finishing, has stepped in and done an admirable job of leading the 
line, with Jonathan Pitroipa providing creativity from wide. It was Pitroipa 
who headed the winner in extra time aftera cagey quarter-final against Togo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/feb/04/burkina-faso-togo-africa-video?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and he was superb again in the thrilling semi against Ghana. Put had spoken of 
his side's growing maturity and there was something highly impressive about the 
way they overcame not merely the setback of going behind but also a string of 
baffling refereeing decisions going against them (although those who insist 
that the Tunisian referee Slim Jdidi was biased against Burkina Faso may like 
to consider why he showed a yellow rather than a red card to Keba Paul 
Koulibaly when he kicked out at Gyan). On another day they would have had two 
penalties, Ghana would not have had theirs, and Prejuce Nakoulma's late goal 
would not have been ruled out for some banal jostling with Kwadwo Asamoah.

And, most crucially of all, Pitroipa would not have been sent off with four 
minutes remaining after collecting a second yellow card for a supposed dive 
when he was clearly whacked across the knees by John Boye. To have been without 
him as well as the injured Traoré for Sunday's final would be a severe blow, 
but Jdidi admitted on Friday morning that he had made a mistake and, as 
expected, the Confederation of African Football overturned the forward's 
suspension at a meeting on Friday afternoon.

"If I had lost it or lost my temper I think all my team-mates would have 
followed me," said Kaboré. "It was my responsibility to keep calm." He did and 
so did his team-mates. It was Ghana who panicked in the penalty shootout, Isaac 
Vorsah and Emmanuel Clottey both dragging their shots wide of the target, 
opening the way for the Stallions to reach an entirely unexpected final.

Nigeria, riding a wave of new-found self-belief, are the most formidable test 
yet, but Burkina Faso have overcome every obstacle so far. Hervé Renard, the 
Zambia coach, suggested CAF did not want his side representing Africa at this 
summer's Confederations Cup, but presumably replacing them with Burkina Faso 
was not part of the plan. The broadening of the pyramid may be a positive for 
Africa in the long run, but anybody who ends up with tickets for Burkina Faso 
against Tahiti in Belo Horizonte on 17 June is unlikely to agree.

• This article was updated on 8 February 2013 to reflect the successful 
outcome of Burkina Faso's appeal against the red card shown to Jonathan Pitroipa
 