
6.59pm GMT 

Right-oh. That's all from me here, but you can follow my pithily titled 
Premier League Championship League One League Two and SPL Clockwatch on the 
Guardian football website in about 20 minutes time. Thanks for your time, 
tweets and emails, particularly if your name is Jonathan Wilson, a man I 
believe is currently being enveloped by a swarm of moths. 

6.56pm GMT 

Peep! Peep! Peeeeep! It's all over. The holders Zambia just weren't good 
enough and are out of the tournament.Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso> advance to the last eight as 
group winners and will find out their opponents - Togo or Tunisia - in the next 
round tomorrow. In Group C's other match this evening, Nigeria have beaten 
Ethiopia 2-0 and earned themselves a quarter-final against Ivory Coast.

6.53pm GMT 

89 min: Burkina Faso defender Bakary Kone ships a blow to his nose, which 
proceeds to start pumping blood. That's going to hurt like all hell later on. 
His side make another substitution, with midfielder Abdou Razack replacing 
striker Jonathan Pritroira. 

6.50pm GMT 

88 min: Apologies for the delay in transmission, but it;'s all going on in the 
other match between Nigeria and Ethiopa. The Ethiopian goalkeeper's been sent 
off and replaced by an outfield player. Victor Moses, who was hacked down, 
scores from the spot again to put Nigeria two up.Zambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zambia> the holders are going out.

6.48pm GMT 

81 min: "I wasn't upset because you'd mentioned it before," writes Moses 
Muchapirei. "I got the feeling that you're playing up the condition of the 
pitch in a patronising 'These Africans can't even get proper pitches for their 
flagship tournament' way. I live in South Africa and just for the record that 
pitch stands out as the only bad surface at this tournament. But I have seen 
worse at some top Premier League grounds in the winter months. I am just 
responding to how your tone came across."

How my tone came across? Apologising for repeatedly pointing out that the 
pitch is atrocious. In your desperation to be offended, you seem to have 
overlooked the fact that I also published an explanation, provided by Jonathan 
Wilson, that the reason it is in this poor state is because it has been ravaged 
by a fungal growth. The point being, there's really nothing that anyone could 
have done about it. Anyway, we won't fall out over it, but please don't blame 
your misinterpretation of my 'tone' for any persecution complex you might be 
suffering from.

6.40pm GMT 

79 min: Zambia substitution: Chiasamba Lungu off, Jonas Sakuwaha on. At the 
risk of boring certain readers, I feel compelled to let you know he's a winger 
who plays his club football for the Sudanese club Al-Merreikh.

6.37pm GMT 

78 min: Victor Moses scores from the spot to put Nigeria one up against 
Ethiopia. This is big news - unless Zambia win this match they'll be out of the 
tournament.

6.36pm GMT 

77 min: Burkina Faso win a corner, but the delivery is poor. Kennedy Mweene 
gathers comfortably. In the other Group C game,Nigeria have won a penalty on 
the back of a trip on Chelsea's Victor Moses ...

6.35pm GMT 

75 min: Zambia win a free-kick from deep, out by the right touchline for a 
cynical Saidou Panandetiguera tug on Chiasamba Lungu. The ball's sent into the 
mixer, where the excellent Bakary Kone once again heads clear.

6.34pm GMT 

73 min: Before taking the goal-kick, Burkina Faso goalkeeper Daouda Diakite 
has to get treatment for a thigh injury which he appeared to sustain after 
falling while unsuccessfully trying to claim the preceding high ball. After 
having his thigh sprayed, he takes his kick-out, which lands with a thunk in 
the middle of the pitch and[If your name's Moses Muchapirei look away now] 
stops dead in the sand.

6.31pm GMT 

69 min: I should really just pack up now, because heaven forbid that I should 
risk upsetting Moses Muchapirei by wasting his time by mentioning a player I've 
name-checked previously in this report. Zambia win a corner, which they take 
short. The ball's curled into the penalty area but it's too high for Collins 
Mbesuma and goes out for a goal-kick.

Updated at 6.43pm GMT

6.28pm GMT 

68 min: "We get it Barry," writes Moses Muchapirei. "There is no grass on the 
pitch. You made your point."

6.27pm GMT 
Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) 
Zambia just stepping it up, sense that a goal may be coming. Also, two quick 
yellows for Nigeria increase Zambia's lead on that score.
 <https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296322736106647552> January 29, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296322736106647552> 
6.26pm GMT 

66 min: Elsewhere in Group C, Nigeria have just had a decent headed effort 
from a corner, cleared off the line. As things stand, they are going out.

6.25pm GMT 

65 min: Emmanuel Mayuka finds himself the centre of attention again, trying to 
dribble and jink his way past three Burkina Faso defenders from the right-hand 
side. His efffort is foiled and Mbola hoofs clear.

6.23pm GMT 

62 min: For Zambia, Emmanuel Mayuka chases a through-ball down the inside 
right channel and frantically tries to get a cross in before the ball rolls out 
of play. He loses the chase and succeeds only in kicking up a mini-tsunami of 
sand. That's just downright dangerous - the poor sod could have broken his 
ankle. 

6.21pm GMT 

61 min: Zambia go forward again, down the left wing. Rainsford Kalaba sends in 
a cross that's cleared by Bakary Kone. 

6.19pm GMT 

58 min: Zambia squander another great chance. Emmanul Mayuka gets a powerful 
header on a Rainford Kalaba cross, but sends the ball over the cross-bar from 
about 10 yards out.

Updated at 6.23pm GMT

6.16pm GMT 

55 min: Zambia's Collins Mbesuma goes on a powerful run up the left flank, but 
is dispossessed. His team-mate, the substitute Mukaku Malenga, tries to pick up 
the pieces but the ball bobbles out of play as he attempts to take it around 
the right-back Mohamed Koffi. This is hideously bad, but it would be unfair to 
lay too much of the blame for that on the players. Zambia have been poor, 
though, even though they should be ahead considering the chances they've 
squandered.

6.14pm GMT 

Zambia substitution: Midfielder Isaac Chasa off, the more attacking Mukaku 
Mulenga on.

6.12pm GMT 

52 min: Zambia forward Mayuka plods through the deep sands of the left wing 
and sends in a low, hard cross, but Bakary Kone hacks clear. As things stand, 
Zambia definitely go through at Nigeria's expense, but should one of their 
players pick up a yellow card, the teams will draw lots.

6.10pm GMT 

Burkjina Faso substitution: Wilfrid Hamed Da-Hugues on for Wilfried Balima. 
Apologies for my tardiness, but he's wearing somebody else's name and number on 
his shirt. It is him, though. Jonathan Wilson told me, so it must be true. God 
bless whoever's in charge of admin at the Africa Cup of Nations.

6.07pm GMT 

Second half: We're back underway and Burkina Faso start as they left off, 
dominating: Aristide Bance rifles another free-kick into the wall, then one of 
his team-mates (sorry, I didn't see who) shoots high wide and handsome while 
trying to put his foot through a bouncing ball from distance. Wilfried Balima 
has been withdrawn at half-time and I'll bring you news of his replacement as 
soon as I know his identity.

6.00pm GMT 

Confirmation from somebody who knows his onions ...
Colin Udoh (@ColinUdoh) 
Zambia are just one yellow card behind Nigeria. If they get one more, and 
Nigeria doesn't, it will be drawing of lots if scores stand
 <https://twitter.com/ColinUdoh/status/296316697558781953> January 29, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ColinUdoh/status/296316697558781953> 
5.59pm GMT 

A patronising tweet from Jonathan Wilson
Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) 
@bglendenning <https://twitter.com/bglendenning> Presume you've checked 
qualifying criteria. Think Zam going through on disciplinary record at the 
moment.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2013_Afri… <http://t.co/TRzHLnwN>
 <https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296316080123691008> January 29, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296316080123691008> 
5.50pm GMT 

Half-time: After an incredibly scrappy first half, the teams go in all square, 
although Burkina Faso's congregate for a quick huddle or pray before sallying 
forth to the dressing room. Elsewhere in Group C, it's scoreless between 
Nigeria and Ethopia. As things stand, Burkina Faso would advance to the 
quarter-finals, where they would be joined by whoever has the better 
disciplinary record of Nigeria and Zambia.

5.48pm GMT 

45 min: Zambia winger Rainsford Kalaba steals in at the far post to head 
weakly into the breadbasket off goalkeeper Diakite. The cross had come in from 
the left, the Burkinabe defence ignored it and let it bounce and it seems like 
the Zambian was caught by surprise by the gilt-edged opportunity that came his 
way. They're being outplayed, but the defending champions have had the two best 
chances of the half. 

5.45pm GMT 

43 min: Burkina Faso goalkeeper Daouda Diakite is forced off his line to come 
and collect a Florent Rouamba cross into the penalty area from deep. 

5.44pm GMT 

41 min: Substitutions, bookings, one goal chance, a couple of throw-ins and no 
corners that I can remember on this awful pitch. Imagine lots of garishly 
dressed, good looking athletes gadding about in the middle third of a beach 
volleyball court (a beach volleyball match, in other words) but using their 
feet instead of their hands and you'll have a very good idea what's going on at 
this match.

5.39pm GMT 

37 min: Zambia's Joseph Musonda is very, very lucky to escape his second 
yellow card for a late challenge. Moments previously, his team-mate Emmanuel 
Mayuka was booked for simulation, somewhat harshly in my opinion, after being 
tripped by Burkina Faso's Paul Koulalibaly. This is really scrappy.

5.37pm GMT 

36 min: Burkina Faso have been the better team so far, without creating any 
chances of note. They're certainly not happy to sit back and play for the draw 
and go forward again with purpose.

5.36pm GMT 

35 min: "This match sounds as droll and unexciting as the other match in the 
group, Nigeria v Ethiopia, which I've chosen to watch instead," writes Mustapha 
Garba. "A lot of Arsenal-like play from the Super Eagles, lots of possession 
with few chances crafted. Personally worrying, as Nigeria have also exhibited 
that other great Arsenal cliche of tailing off towards the end of matches and 
conceding late goals."

5.34pm GMT 

33 min: Burkina Faso striker Jonathan Pitroipa tries a shot from distance, but 
is undone by another comedy bobble from the terrible pitch.

Updated at 5.35pm GMT

5.33pm GMT 

32 min: Zambia substitute Joseph Musonda, who was won over 100 caps playing 
for his country, picks up the first booking of the game for a wild leap into 
Florent Rouamba, who was in mid air.

5.32pm GMT 

29 min: Approaching the half-hour mark and the only decent chance of the game 
thus far has fallen to Zambia. Burkina Faso, for whom a draw will do just fine, 
are doing well. It's scoreless in the other Group C match between Nigeria and 
Ethiopia. We could really do with a goal in either game.

5.29pm GMT 

28 min: "The pitch is awful because of unusually heavy rain that has forced 
the closure of many of the roads in nearby Kruger national park (the black and 
white seats at the stadium reflect zebra stripes while the buttresses on the 
stands resemble giraffes)," writes Jonathan Wilson from the ground. "Apparently 
it caused a fungal growth that killed large patches of grass. Some fan has 
brought an air-raid siren. At least I hope it's a fan."

Updated at 5.30pm GMT

5.28pm GMT 

26 min: For Burkina Faso, an off balance Charles Kabore miscontrols a shot as 
he attempts to volley a dropping ball goalwards. His effort goes high and wide.

5.27pm GMT 

25 min: Burkina Faso win a free-kick, which the substitute Aristide Blance 
wastes by driving the ball into the wall.

5.25pm GMT 

23 min: It's difficult to stress just how terrible the pitch this match is 
being played on is, so I'll try to do it through the medium of modern dance. 
OK, I won't. It's more like a beach than a field, the ball is bobbling all over 
the place and its bounce is erratic to say the least. I expect that running 
around ankle deep in sand will sap the energy of the players sooner rather than 
later too. It's just not good enough for such an important competition, really.

5.22pm GMT 

21 min: "Can't beat a clockwatch double header," writes Ryan Dunne. "It's like 
having two hot dates in the one day (er, one would imagine). Re: hipsters v 
pundits - I'm not on Twitter, but the concept surely (in most cases) suggests a 
response of 'a plague on both their houses!' or, to quote the tagline from 
those dreadful Alien Vs Predators movies: 'whoever wins - we lose'." 

5.20pm GMT 

16 min: A poor clearance from the Burkinabe enables an as yet Chiasamba Lungu 
to square the ball low and hard across the edge of the Burkina Faso penalty 
area. Emmanuel Mayuka dummies and the ball bobbles its way towards Collins 
Mbesuma, who shoots straight at Daouda Diakite in the Burkinabe goal, when he 
really should have done a lot better.

Updated at 5.20pm GMT

5.17pm GMT 

13 min: There's another break in play as Zambia's Davies Nkagu goes down 
injured and signals to the bench. He looks utterly distraught and covers his 
face with his shirt; it seems his match is also over. I don't think it's the 
pitch that's causing these injuries, although it probably isn't helping. Nkausu 
took a knock on his instep earlier and may well have broken a metatarsal. He's 
replaced by the 35-year-old Joseph Musonda, who plays his club football for 
Lamontville Golden Arrows in South Africa.

5.13pm GMT 

11 min: As the unfortunate Traore is carried back to the dressing room on a 
stretcher with his hands over his face and an ice-pack over his left thigh, he 
is replaced by Aristide Bance, who plays for FC Augsburg.

5.11pm GMT 

8 min: Traore is loaded on to a stretcher and carried to the sideline for 
treatment and the match continues. He was already wearing Kinesio tape on the 
presumably already injured thigh he seems to have aggravated, but it doesn't 
seem to have worked.

5.09pm GMT 

6 min: Tournament top-scorer and Burkina Faso striker Alain Traore signals to 
the bench that he needs medical attention. He went down holding his thigh 
without anyone around him and it looks like his match and perhaps tournament 
might be over. This could be a huge blow for Burkina Faso. 

5.07pm GMT 
Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) 
Looks like a 4-3-3/4-5-1 for Burkina with Traore wide left and Pitroipa 
through the middle.
 <https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296302219593142273> January 29, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296302219593142273> 
5.06pm GMT 

4 min: The pitch here looks atrocious: covered in sand, which sprays 
everywhere whenever a player goes to ground.Emmanuel Mayuka sends in a cross 
from the right for Zambia, which is headed clear by Burkina Faso central 
defender Bakary Kone.

5.04pm GMT 

The tennis on Eurosport is over ...

So I'm cautiously optimistic that I may actually be able to bring you some 
coverage of the match any second now. Ah, here we go, with less than two 
minutes played, it's still scoreless. Zambia play in an all orange strip with 
green numbers in trim. Burkina Faso wear green shorts, shirts and socks with 
white numbers and flecks of red. Feel free to send in your emails about the 
Africa Cup of Nations or anything else, particularly the ongoing hipster v 
pundit war started on TalkSPORT radio by Stan Collymore last night (see Twitter 
for details).

4.51pm GMT 

While you're waiting for kick-off ...

You could do a lot worse than read this fresh-from-the-oven column written by 
Mr Wilson on howMali's Seydou Keita has hailed the 'priceless hope' brought to 
a crisis-torn land 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/29/mali-keita-africa-cup-nations>. 
And if you like Jonathan's way with words, you can by some of his fancy books 
about upside-down pyramids, goalkeepers, Brian Clough and other stuff by
clicking on this link and going on a virtual trolley dash 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Jonathan-Wilson/e/B0034PRCUO>.

4.43pm GMT 

Line-ups

Zambia: 16-Kennedy Mweene; 6-Davies Nkausu, 13-Stopilla Sunzu, 5-Hichani 
Himoonde, 18-Emmanuel Mbola; 3-Chisamba Lungu, 8-Isaac Chansa, 19-Nathan 
Sinkala, 17-Rainford Kalaba; 9-Collins Mbesuma, 20-Emmanuel Mayuka

Burkina Faso: 1-Daouda Diakite; 5-Mohamed Koffi, 4-Bakary Kone, 8-Paul 
Koulibaly, 12-Mady Panandetiguiri; 6-Djakaridja Kone, 18-Charles Kabore, 
7-Florent Rouamba, 11-Jonathan Pitroipa; 12-Alain Traore, 14-Wilfried Balima

Referee: Alioum (Cameroon)

4.25pm GMT 

Big news from Jonathan Wilson ...
Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) 
No Chris Katongo for Zambia v Burkina Faso: Mbesuma and Mayuka up front.
 <https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296289501020561409> January 29, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/296289501020561409> 
Although Wilson doesn't know whether the BBC's African Player of the Year is 
injured or not, he suspects that he may have been dropped due to a poor run of 
recent form. I'll bring you the rest of the team news and both line-ups just as 
soon as I have them.

Updated at 4.27pm GMT

3.21pm GMT 

Preamble

Good afternoon everybody and welcome to this afternoon's Group C Africa Cup of 
Nations ding-dong between table-toppers Burkina Faso and third place Zambia at 
the Mbombela Stadium in Nelspruit, on a pitch that's likely to be 
sand-saturated and largely grass free.

With second place Nigeria taking on Ethiopia at the at the Royal Bafokeng 
Stadium at the same time, needing a win to guarantee their progress to the 
quarter-finals, holders Zambia need to beat Burkino Faso if they are to join 
South Africa, Cape Verde, Ghana, Mali and Ivory Coast in the last eight and 
avoid the stress of having to worry about the result Rustenburg going their 
way. Ethiopa can also qualify, but will need to beat Nigeria by a hatful to 
maintain their cigarette paper-slim hopes of making the knockout stages.

The must-win(ish) nature of today's match is less than ideal for Zambia, whose 
recipe for success is a mixture of superstition (manager Herve Renard's lucky 
white shirt) and the calm pragmatism that served them so well last year. 
However,according to Jonathan Wilson <http://bit.ly/TRu8Oi>, who is at this 
match, while the shirt is still working its magic, Zambia have looked far less 
assured in defence this year, a state of affairs that may not improve in a game 
where they find themselves in the unfamiliar position of having to go on the 
front foot against a lightning fast, free-scoring side.

With the goals of tournament top-scorer Alain Traore having catapulted Burkina 
Faso into the box-seat of Group C,, a draw this afternoon will seal their 
passage to the quarter-finals. A drawmight also suffice for Zambia, but only if 
Nigeria and Ethiopia play out a lower scoring draw.

Should both games finish drawn with the same scoreline, fair play will dictate 
who proceeds. Zambia currently have the edge on that particular front, but it 
is obviously a situation that could change in the next couple of hours. 

Updated at 4.22pm GMT
 