
You would be hard pressed to find a Burt's Bees employee that doesn't have a 
solid grounding in sustainability issues. This is because, its maker says, it 
builds awareness into each member of staff from the very start of their career 
– every employee receives sustainability awareness in their induction training 
when they join the company.

The company markets it personal care products under a "greater good" model, 
and says it employs the same approach when it comes to staff engagement.

The company's goal is to achieve 100% employee engagement in sustainability by 
2020. To that end, it launched its live the greater good programme in 2010.

A mandatory scheme, it aims to give employees a broad view of global 
sustainability issues and to help them take that knowledge from the workplace 
into their homes and communities.

Employees spend up to 30 hours a year training in the areas of environmental 
stewardship, social outreach, natural wellness and leadership.

Lessons taken include the health properties of the honeybee, energy and water 
conservation, change management and sustainability for the workplace, the home 
and the planet.

Behind the programme is a set of business targets, under which the company is 
aiming to have zero waste, use 100% renewable energy and 100% biodegradable 
packaging by 2020, and to achieve a leadership in energy and environmental 
design certification for all of its buildings.

The programme is based on a set of work practices and incentives. For example, 
subsidies are available for staff who use alternative lower-carbon transport 
such as hybrid vehicles, and the company matches efforts to offset home energy 
use.

To underline the benefits of natural care, it also offers yoga sessions at 
work and provides starter credit for beekeeping enthusiasts.

Employee pay is based, in part, on sustainability metrics as well as 
traditional measures, such as profit. The company also matches employee 
donations to charity and supports volunteering by staff.

Burt's Bees says it wants all business decisions to be made with 
sustainability in mind, a triple bottom line approach that supports the 
corporate proposition: "to make people's lives better every day, naturally".

This is led by a small cross-functional sustainability committee and supported 
by company-wide monitoring of water, energy and waste, together with an annual 
employee survey.

Of all of its 2020 targets, Burt's Bees sees engaging people as the most 
critical and challenging measure. Not only is employee activity vital to a 
sustainable business model, it can also make a difference to customers and 
communities, the company says.

Initial feedback from the programme suggests that sustainability education is 
translating into more awareness and new ways of doing things, both at work and 
at home.

Employee feedback will continue to shape the programme and influence the 
content of training and development modules, all delivered during paid work 
hours.

As well as helping to create a more responsible and profitable business, the 
company hopes to achieve a big cultural shift.

One often overlooked impact of a sustainable business – beyond limiting 
environmental effects and operating responsibly – is the ability to help 
individual employees think in terms of lasting change, Burt's Bees says.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 