
Rail passengers, bus users and motorists have been warned that Britain's 
transport system will suffer "unwelcome consequences" from public spending cuts 
of up to 40%, according to the Liberal Democrat transport minister, Norman 
Baker.

The Department for Transport has been asked to find cuts of between 25% and 
40% to its £15.9bn budget before the autumn spending review, with the main 
candidates for the chop including the £5bn spent on the rail industry, followed 
by another £5bn a year forTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
for London and Crossrail, while environmental groups are calling for reductions 
in the £6bn road building programme.

Baker said achieving the cuts was "not impossible" despite strong protests 
from Network Rail and TfL that their cost savings programmes – launched long 
before the government was formed – are already cutting deep to the bone.

"I don't think it is asking the impossible," he said. But in a warning to 
commuters used to subsidized bus fares and motorists hoping for 
congestion-busting new roads schemes, he added that "nothing is safe".

He said: "I think it will be difficult and will have unwelcome consequences. 
It is our job to mitigate the unwelcome consequences. We can ask for deferrals 
and ask for genuine efficiencies at Network Rail."

Asked if Network Rail and TfL's argument that they are doing enough already 
was acceptable, Baker said: "I always expect people in the transport industry 
to argue that their particular part of it needs protection. People will, 
inevitably, argue for their corner."

In an indication that Network Rail's £4bn annual grant will be under pressure, 
he added: "The department is very seized with the need to make Network Rail 
more efficient."

Baker said the department's capital spending programme, which includes the 
£16bn Crossrail project and the £6bn roads scheme, would probably not survive 
unscathed. The DfT's capital spending plans have been limited to £7.4bn after a 
planned 1.25% annual increase in the budget was dropped – implying a cut in 
spending of £28.9bn this decade. Baker said: "I will be astonished if the 
entire capital spending programme we have got survives in its present shape. So 
there will be some disappointed people including, probably, ministers."

The Conservative transport secretary, Philip Hammond, has in effect written 
off one of the Liberal Democrats' key transport policies – reducing rail fares 
– by warning that the cap on ticket price increases might have to be lifted to 
lower the taxpayer's contribution to rail fares.

Baker said "no decision" had been taken on rail fares but would not rule out 
an increase by his department. "The coalition document talks about fair fares. 
Nobody wants to put rail fares up. But we have got to come up with a package of 
measures which meets the requirement on the department to play our part in the 
budget reduction process."

In an ominous reference to TfL's annual budget, Baker acknowledged local 
authority concerns over the level of subsidy devoted to the capital, including 
its extensive bus network. "There is a feeling, justified or otherwise, that 
London gets a very good deal. If we are all going to have to take difficult 
decisions they have to be fair and not be seen to advantage one part of the 
country over another."

Baker said the DfT was being forced to make unwelcome decisions because of a 
"fantasy" spending programme implemented by the previous government.

"It was callous electioneering. As someone who is regarded as being to the 
left [politically] I feel so angry. Labour's policy of promising things it 
could not deliver was dishonest."

Baker attempted to reassure bus operators that the department was not 
targeting the big five public transport groups – Stagecoach, FirstGroup, 
Go-Ahead,National Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalexpressgroup> and Arriva – 
despite intervening during a Competition Commission investigation by publishing 
a report that highlighted the sizeable profits generated by the groups from 
local bus networks.

Baker's main responsibility as under secretary of state for transport are 
buses and regional transport. According to the Campaign for Better Transport, 
the bus industry receives more than £2bn a year from the DfT and the 
Communities and Local government departments. Baker said: "We have not got it 
in for them. We are driven by the need to ensure that the taxpayer gets a very 
good deal."

Bus operators have been exercised by the threat of losing, or seeing a hefty 
reduction in, the £500m Bus Service Operators Grant. BSOG is under review and 
Baker has refused to guarantee its survival, although the transport secretary 
has expressed stronger words of support for the £1bn free bus scheme. "We are 
in favour of more people using buses." He added: "But the bus industry has to 
understand that we are looking at every budget line because there is a spending 
review underway. Nothing is safe."
 