
As world leaders, including the UK's international development secretary, 
Andrew Mitchell, meet in Busan for thefourth high-level forum on aid 
effectiveness 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/12/0,3746,en_2649_3236398_46057868_1_1_1_1,00.html>
, it is apparent that clear-minded coalitions and strong political leadership 
are essential if there is to be a global agreement that will drive meaningful 
change.

Citizens of developing countries have a right to expect maximum benefit, 
transparency and accountability. UK and other donor countries' taxpayers want 
to have confidence that their aid is getting to those who need it the most and 
is supporting sustainable poverty reduction.

Over the past decade, the UK can claim a proud record of being in the vanguard 
of progress on aid effectiveness. There is little doubt that without Douglas 
Alexander's leadership the2008 Accra conference <http://www.accrahlf.net/> 
would have concluded with a weak unambitious agreement. It is to be hoped that 
this will not be the story of Busan. The context for the summit is challenging. 
The failure of donor countries to honour their commitments in line with the 
Paris principles stands in stark contrast to the very real advances made by 
developing countries, and that sub-par performance unfolded before the global 
financial crisis hit. Against that backdrop, the preparations for the summit 
are tinged with a narrow focus on aid, which takes insufficient account of the 
wider development agenda. This places a special responsibility on political 
leaders to confound the sceptics and demonstrate a hard-headed ambition for 
change.

The draft declaration from Busan has been crafted with care, to satisfy all 
and especially to bring new donors like the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India and 
China) countries into the tent. There are some necessary commitments, for 
example on aid transparency, and a new deal on fragile states. But at the same 
time donors do not have a strong track record for living up to their own 
commitments. Only one of theParis Declaration 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/18/0,3343,en_2649_3236398_35401554_1_1_1_1,00.html#Paris>
's 13 reform targets has been met. Mitchell must be aware that a "Paris-lite" 
agreement based on the lowest common denominator will send the wrong message. 
Developed countries that have failed to deliver either the quantity or quality 
of aid they promised must not be allowed to use the desire to secure the 
support of new donors as an excuse to weaken their responsibilities.

On results, I strongly support defining the success of aid in terms of 
positive outcomes. But this will not be the same in fragile states as 
middle-income countries; it is much more complex to help build a health system 
than a hospital, and the key to meaningful development change is long-term 
sustainability. For example, any credible results framework should recognise, 
and therefore incentivise, support for programmes like the women's 
community-based organisations I met in Bangladesh recently. The empowerment of 
these women as community leaders, whether in developing a resilience plan to 
cope with any future cyclones or setting up co-operative businesses, is leading 
to transformational change for their families and communities. That's a 
sustainable result, but if not recognised or measured as such in the future it 
will be less attractive to donors and their service provider partners. If there 
is to be a global monitoring framework, it has to be put together in a way that 
focuses attention on the context-specific nature of the tasks and, accordingly, 
the appropriate means of measuring results.

In the recent past, global summits have served only to reinforce the 
disconnect between the public and their political leaders, as in the G20's 
inability to reach consensus on a global response to the financial crisis, and 
the EU summits struggling to find a response to the Eurozone crisis. Let us 
hope Busan and then Durban break this cycle of cynicism and pessimism. The 
rules of engagement that will govern aid effectiveness in the future may to 
some seem technical and dry. But in reality the stakes couldn't be higher. It's 
about those remarkable women I met in Bangladesh, the hundreds of thousands of 
children who die unnecessary deaths from conditions such as diarrhoea and 
pneumonia, and the kind of world we want to pass on to our children and 
grandchildren. We owe it to them to do better and recognise that in an 
interdependent world self-interest and mutual interests are inextricably linked.
 