
What does Busan seek to achieve?


As new players such as China, India and Brazil have emerged, the aid landscape 
has become more fragmented.In 1960 each developing country received aid from, 
on average, two donors. In 2006, it was from more than 28 
<http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/4497>. This places a heavy burden on 
developing countries, which have to bear the administrative costs of having to 
juggle competing demands on their time. Busan seeks to establish a common set 
of principles to cut through the noise. Sherpas – negotiators – have been 
holding talks on an outcome document that policymakers will agree on next week. 
They are now on a fifth draft.

What are the key issues?


The usual suspects: transparency, accountability, monitoring mechanisms, tied 
aid. Busan, of course, is not taking place in a vacuum. The first high-level 
forum in Rome 2002, followed by forums in Paris (2005) and Accra (2008). Paris 
was particularly important, marking the first time that donors and recipients 
agreed to commitments and to hold one another accountable for achieving these.

Five fundamental principles were set out to make aid more effective. 
Ownership: developing countries set their own strategies for poverty reduction, 
improve their institutions and tackle corruption. Alignment: donor countries 
align behind these objectives and use aid recipient systems, eg their own 
budget process. Harmonisation: donor countries co-ordinate, simplify procedures 
and share information to avoid duplication. Results: speaks for itself. Mutual 
accountability: donors and recipients are accountable for results. Accra 
brought civil society into the process and agreed to push ahead with the Paris 
declaration.

Will there be new issues from Busan?


The final draft will contain a commitment to promote sustainable development 
in fragile states. Busan will endorse a "new deal" that aid to fragile states 
should focus more explicitly on security, justice and "legitimate politics". 
Campaigners say Busan could be the first step towards ensuring conflict, 
security and justice issues – missing from the current MDG agenda – are brought 
into discussions about what follows the MDGs after 2015. The International 
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding (IDPS) – made up of governments 
from conflict-affected states (the G7+), donor governments and multilateral 
agencies – has been working on this new deal since it was established under 
Accra.

How much has been achieved since Paris?


Besides agreeing to a set of principles, Paris also set measurable targets to 
be met by 2010, covering the five pillars. The OECD's development assistance 
committee (Dac), which has the task of monitoring the targets, found that at 
the global levelonly one out of the 13 targets established for 2010 had been met
 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/1/0,3746,en_2649_3236398_48725569_1_1_1_1,00.html>
. The one success was co-ordinated technical co-operation (a measure of the 
extent to which donors co-ordinate their efforts to support countries' capacity 
development objectives). However, it noted that considerable progress had been 
made towards many of the remaining 12 targets. Busan will make a full 
assessment on the value and impact of Paris and Accra, with agreement on future 
directions.

What is at stake on transparency?


The UK is pushing for donor countries to adopt a high level of transparency in 
the form of the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI). The current 
system run by OECD-Dac, the creditor reporting system (CrS), does not 
adequately cover all aid flows, involves significant time lags, and does not 
meet the information needs of developing countries, say campaigners such as
Publish What You Fund <http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/>. IATI will consist 
of a registry that assembles all relevant aid information from governments, 
NGOs and foundations that will make it easier to track the movement of aid 
money around the globe and monitor its impact. Campaigners say a failure to 
endorse IATI at Busan will send deeply negative signals about the willingness 
of donors to be more transparent and accountable to their taxpayers. France and 
Japan are lukewarm about IATI and want to stick with CrS.

Is there a deadline to end tied aid?


Tied aid has long been a bugbear for aid recipients, who complain that the 
practice dilutes the benefits of aid as contracts go to companies from donor 
countries instead of local companies. At least 20% of bilateral aid 
($15bn-$20bn) is tied, most of it from the US, Germany, Italy and Japan. Tying 
reduces the purchasing power of aid by 15%-40%, says Gideon Rabinowitz of the UK
Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> Network, creates 
obstacles to donors pooling funds with governments, and heightens the risk of 
unsuitable goods and services being delivered. Countries such as Bangladesh 
favour a 2015 deadline for untying aid, but Japan, the EU and France all oppose 
a target date. Japan argues that untying aid would reduce public support for 
aid.

How strongly will Busan be monitored?


Paris included a strong monitoring mechanisms with clear targets. EU member 
states and other donors, however, want a lighter monitoring mechanism. The EU, 
France and Japan are cool on annual monitoring and publication of progress and 
indicators. France is arguing for a three-year cycle. The fifth draft outcome 
document states: "While there was broad consensus for a periodic process, no 
consensus was reached on this." The most likely outcome is that this hot potato 
will be kicked into touch.

What is the level of global aid?


OECD-Dac estimates official aid levels at $129bn. But that figure does not 
include money from private foundations such as the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation.Estimates of total foundation money run to $53bn in 2009 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/nov/09/philanthropic-giving-challenge-aid-debate>
. Nor does it include aid from China, estimated at between $20 and $30bn, or 
funds given by private Arab donors through foundations in the Gulf states. This 
takes us back to the fragmentation issue, which Busan wants to tackle. 
Fragmentation is linked to transparency though, as China has yet to come public 
on its aid figures – so everything is interconnected.
 