
As soon as you arrive on the Amalfi coast it's easy to see why high rollers, 
writers and film stars have been drawn to this idyllic stretch of coast for the 
past 200 years.

The southern slopes of the Lattari mountains descend so steeply into the sea 
between the villages of Positano and Vietri sul Mare that they often become 
cliffs. They are split by dizzying ravines, which are, in turn, often overhung 
with imposing bulwarks of rock. The place should be practically inaccessible. 
But the relative isolation this harsh landscape affords also means the fishing 
villages, hill villages and maritime towns built on and under these slopes have 
been able to hold on to their charm and beauty as stubbornly as they've clung 
on to the mountains on which they're so precariously built.

It is an undeniably beautiful part of the world; a seductive combination of 
sea, lemon groves, vineyards and towns imbued with the faded grandeur of a 
gracefully ageing ballerina. Sophia Loren lives here and were she to resemble a 
place, I guess, quite suitably, this would be it.

The downside of such a unique situation and character is, of course, the 
Riviera price tag, often as steep as the Lattari mountains themselves. But the 
Amalfi coast is small, no more than 20 miles from end to end. The astonishing 
coastal road, meanwhile, built by Ferdinand II in 1853, is fantastically well 
served by SITA buses. All of which means that it is still possible to 
experience the most famous parts of this coast without paying its famous prices.

Actually, I'd argue that the buses are the best way to travel the coastal 
road, even if you did have the cash to hire a Ferrari. At times, the road 
appears to defy physics just as the scooter riders somehow defy death as they 
hare round the 90-degree blind bends. The buses not only take away the strain 
of fearing for your life, therefore allowing you to take in the view, they are 
also higher, so the view is even more expansive and impressive.

If you really want to go budget, however, and your legs haven't yet been worn 
to shreds by the steps that substitute for streets round here, there are 
fantastic walking trails between all the towns. These are well marked, but 
still sufficiently rustic to allow you to forget the "Rodeo Drive on a hill" 
that is the increasingly Americanised Positano or the rarefied "Glyndbourne 
interval picnic" aura of Ravello. Don't get me wrong, both these well known 
Amalfi towns are stunning, but both, in their different ways, are so well 
groomed for tourists they can feel almost like pastiches of an Amalfi town.

Staying in either Ravello or Positano will also tend to break the bank, which 
is why we kicked off in nearby Maiori from which all the best spots on the 
coast can be easily reached by boat, bus or hire car. Being slightly off the 
Amalfi radar also means that for a third of the price of a hotel in Ravello, we 
got a room with a sea view and one of the largest beaches on the coast less 
than a minute's walk from the lobby. Up the road, meanwhile, the Torre Normanna 
restaurant, set in one of the many Norman and Saracen towers that dot the coast 
like massive up-turned-bucket sandcastles, provides a stunning setting for 
dinner with the waves crashing on the rocks beneath you. The same setting, 
incidentally, comes at half the price if you eat in the pizzeria below, rather 
than in the restaurant itself.

For all these plus points, Maiori does have a spot of the Blackpools about it. 
At night, some of the hotels aren't shy with their sound systems while the rows 
of gaming machines along the beach can leave you feeling you've taken your 
passeggiata along the North pier rather than one of Italy's most desirable 
coastlines.

Our search for something a little quieter took us to the beautifully calm 
Costa Diva, a hotel run by two brothers just outside Praiano, a perfect and 
well situated budget alternative to the better known towns either side of it. 
Stone pathways through lemon and lime scented grounds led us to simple rooms, 
all named after film divas with an Amalfi connection, and all with gorgeous 
views.

We fell in love with Praiano immediately. Its secluded beach is unpretentious 
but has great fresh seafood served at its edges. The town itself is, again, 
simple but beautiful. The balconies of the restaurants, meanwhile, provide more 
breathtaking settings for dinner, with the stilled firework blast of Positano 
rising up the hills in the distance.

Our most bizarre discovery, however, was left until last. The Africana 
nightclub, originally partly funded by Margot Fonteyn (Nureyev had an island 
nearby) is carved into the cliff below the coastal road beside the beach. 
Descending by lift into this cavern of disco balls and sweeping lights, where 
stars such as Frank Sinatra used to hang out, you can't help feeling you've 
arrived in the lair of an especially camp Bond villain. As a place for a late 
night drink, however, it is truly unique. Whether it comes under the "budget" 
category depends on your gender and when you go. It was ladies' night when we 
visited, so while my girlfriend waltzed in free of charge, I had to fork out 
€15 for the pleasure. Still, just like the beach at Praiano, the rooms of Costa 
Diva and even the €30 Italian leather shoes I bought in Amalfi, this was still 
cheap at the price.

· Locanda Costa Diva (0039 089 813 076, locandacostadiva.it 
<http://www.locandacostadiva.it>) doubles from €110 B&B. Hotel Panorama (+39 
089877202,htlpanorama.com <http://www.htlpanorama.com>) doubles €64 B&B. 
Packages available through Citalia (0870 9014013,citalia.com 
<http://www.citalia.com>).
 