
Her eyes closed and her expression dreamy, Audrey Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn> snuggles up to her pet 
fawn. His name is Ip, and he stares out at the camera lens with eyes like 
saucers. For a split second, you have to do a double take. Do those doe eyes 
belong to the fawn or Hepburn?

The picture is one of 140 images of the star, taken by the Hollywood 
photographer Bob Willoughby between 1953 and 1961, on show at the Proud Gallery 
in London's Camden Town. Willoughby's career in Hollywood began when Warner 
Brothers booked him to photograph Judy Garland on the set of A Star is Born. 
From then on, he took publicity photographs of everyone from James Dean and 
Marilyn Monroe to Frank Sinatra and Liz Taylor. He had already developed a 
certain style of cool with his photographs of jazz musicians, including, most 
famously, Chet Baker, looking wistfully into space, trumpet at the ready. In 
1953, Willoughby was commissioned to take shots of a new starlet, Audrey 
Hepburn. She was fresh off the set of Roman Holiday. Her runaway princess was 
to win her an Oscar for Best Actress, and she was touring on stage with Gigi. 
The photographer met her and fell in love.

For a photographer used to shooting the beautiful and glamorous - and 
inevitably spoilt - creatures that inhabit Hollywood, Hepburn was a breath of 
fresh air. According to Willoughby she was one of the few Hollywood stars 
(along with Jack Lemmon) he would form a relationship with beyond that of 
photographer and subject. Their sons shared a first birthday party. And to 
prove it, there is a photograph of Audrey feeding her young son, Sean, a 
mouthful of birthday cake at his high table. He has crumbs all around his 
mouth, but she is, as ever, immaculate in a crisply pressed blouse. Even if he 
had been sick on her, you can't imagine it would have stuck.

Willoughby's first portraits of Hepburn show the young gamine getting into her 
car and skipping along the Paramount studio lot after the formal portrait 
session is over. She looks fresh and natural. Already she had a style and 
elegance of her own. In many photographs, she is off duty, and in her own 
clothes. But in 1954 she was introduced to Hubert de Givenchy and became one of 
the first stars to develop a relationship with a fashion designer. Today, 
designers woo their elegant clothes horses with champagne, flowers and the odd 
six-figure contract. Penelope Cruz wears Ralph Lauren; Nicole Kidman wears 
Gaultier - with a bit of Galliano thrown in. But the relationship between 
Hepburn and Givenchy was one of the most famous and enduring in fashion 
history. With her petite, lean frame that didn't fluctuate an ounce throughout 
her life, her perfect bone structure, and her dancer's stance, she was a 
designer's dream. She became his muse.

Despite Willoughby's candid snaps of Hepburn at home, Hepburn with her pet 
Yorkie, Famous, and Hepburn looking tired on the set of My Fair Lady, fans 
might leave the exhibition feeling cheated. The photographer focuses on three 
movies: Green Mansions, My Fair Lady and Paris - When it Sizzles. But the 
Audrey that has inspired generations of women to wear black polo neck, narrow 
black Capri pants, flat pumps and a slick flick of eye liner, is that of her 
two classic movies, Funny Face and Breakfast at Tiffany's. The famous little 
black dress and dark bug-eyed sunglasses that immortalised Holly Golightly are 
frustratingly absent from this collection.

Nevertheless, picture after picture captures the very Audrey-ness of Audrey. 
There she is in 1962, posed for French Vogue, like a pixie princess on the 
camera boom on the set of Paris - When it Sizzles, dressed in cream satin dress 
and matching pyjama pants by Givenchy. There she is again, sitting in her 
chair, pretending to beg like Famous, a white bow in her hair like some 
ridiculously cute pooch. The sugar coating is just a little too sweet.

Although Willoughby insists you can't compare the star to anyone else, Gwyneth 
Paltrow shares the same squeaky clean perfection - and somehow lacks sex 
appeal. There's a shot of Hepburn in the bath, up to her neck in bubbles. 
Willoughby's caption describes her as 'delicious'. And it's true, she's like a 
fairy cake, or a bowl of strawberry ice cream. Even when she's a cowgirl in a 
borrowed stetson, white shirt tied at the midriff, she looks a bit too 
pristine. It brings to mind a similar image of Marilyn Monroe as cowgirl in The 
Misfits in the same period. While Monroe sizzles, Hepburn looks like Miss Goody 
Two Shoes. Another studio portrait has her trying to look a little come-hither, 
dressed in her nightie. In place of the prerequisite Hollywood lace babydoll, 
however, is a floor length nightie - presumably in winceyette. It makes you 
want to hand her a teddy bear and a mug of Ovaltine.

Through Willoughby's eyes, Audrey is the object of tender affection. When 
Willoughby heard that Hepburn was looking after a young fawn so that it would 
instinctively follow her animal-loving, bird girl character around the set of 
Green Mansions, he couldn't resist the opportunity of snapping them at home. 
Access was never a problem. The resulting pictures reveal more about Hepburn 
than the fact that she was good with animals. The fawn, with its big dark eyes, 
litheness and grace was her perfect mirror image.

 Audrey by Bob Willoughby runs until 31 March at Proud Camden Moss, London NW1 
(0207 482 3867)
 