
Ten years ago Alaa Al Aswany was about to give up writing and emigrate to New 
Zealand. A practising dentist in Cairo, he had toiled at fiction for a decade 
but had been rejected on three occasions by the General Egyptian Book 
Organisation (Gebo), the powerful state-run publishers, the last time on his 
41st birthday. "This man told me: 'I will never publish you', and hung up the 
phone," he says. "I had the most miserable birthday, feeling I'd never make it 
in literature. I'd given it everything."

He made one last push. A novel was accepted by a small, independent publishers 
in Cairo. The first edition of The Yacoubian Building (2002) sold out within 
four weeks, and the novel became the Arab world's No 1 bestseller for five 
successive years, selling more than 250,000 copies in a region where print-runs 
seldom exceed 3,000. It was made into a hit film in Arabic in 2006, directed by 
Marwan Hamed, and an Egyptian television serial last year. The book's success 
spread to 21 other languages; last year's UK edition sold 60,000 copies.

Inspired by a real art-deco block in downtown Cairo where the author had his 
first dental clinic, The Yacoubian Building is set at the time of the 1990 Gulf 
war. What were once luxury apartments in the colonial quarter have seen the 
flight of the rich since the 70s, and an influx of rooftop squatters from the 
countryside. The building unites residents from disparate milieux: from Zaki 
Bey, an ageing playboy and property owner, and Hatim Rasheed, a gay, 
aristocratic journalist, to Taha, a janitor's pious son who turns suicide 
bomber, and Busayna, a sexually harassed shop assistant. Al Aswany creates a 
microcosm of Egyptian society and the forces that plague it - ruthless 
profiteering, political corruption and prejudice, police torture, Islamic 
extremism.

The Egyptian novelist Gamal al-Ghitani praised the book as having "enriched 
the art of the Egyptian novel", while, for the Lebanese writer and journalist 
Elias Khoury, it "reinvented the popular Egyptian novel, which had died". 
According to its English translator, Humphrey Davies, who lives in Cairo, the 
novel "met a critical need for books to address sensitive issues in Egyptian 
society - political corruption and social oppression - head on. There was a 
sigh of relief in the Arab world: at last, a book that calls a spade a spade." 
Davies feels that, until now, acclaim for the 1988 Nobel literature laureate 
Naguib Mahfouz, who died in 2006, may have overshadowed other Egyptian writers.

Al Aswany, now 51, lives in Garden City, just south of downtown Cairo, with 
his wife, Iman Taymur, and their two daughters, May, 12, and Nada, 11. Speaking 
in a hotel beside the Nile, and later in London, he says he is unwilling to 
give up his clinic, despite being a rarity among Arabic novelists in being able 
to live from his writing (Mahfouz was a government bureaucrat). "Dentistry is 
my window on Egyptian society," he says. "Success can be dangerous - you get 
isolated. But if you block your contact with the street, you're in trouble. 
More than 60% of Egyptians are below the poverty line. I must keep loyal to 
them, or I'll lose everything."

For 15 years, Al Aswany has written newspaper columns critical of President 
Hosni Mubarak, who has been in power since 1981. He is a member of Writers and 
Artists for Change, and Doctors for Change, within the opposition movement 
known as Kifaya (Enough). Barred from the premiere of Hamed's film of his book 
at the insistence of the government, whose high-ups were there, he says: "I 
felt I had so much power. They were obliged to hear my ideas, but they couldn't 
tolerate my presence." Literature, he believes, "does not change the situation 
- for democracy you must engage in direct political action - but it changes the 
reader, teaches us to be less judgmental".

His latest novel, Chicago (2007), has sold more than 120,000 copies in Arabic, 
and an English translation is published on September 1. Set around a Chicago 
campus in the present, it draws on two years the author spent at the University 
of Illinois in the mid-1980s, on a scholarship to study dentistry. The focus is 
on Arab expatriates, including the poet and medical student Nagi, who is 
involved in a movement for democracy. Through characters such as Salah, an 
Egyptian intellectual in love with a Jewish-American woman, and Shaymaa, a 
veiled woman who questions the sexual constraints of her upbringing, the novel 
tackles issues such as extra-marital sex, abortion and antisemitism. It exposes 
a pervasive system of patronage in which mediocrity rises and rebellion has 
grave costs. Some readers have been disappointed by a failure of nerve on the 
part of one of the rebels. "When Salah was supposed to make a stand, I was 
hoping he'd make it," Al Aswany says. "But he lost his courage. This is 
happening every day. Giving a picture of people who are not very courageous is 
a way to push you to do something yourself."

One student in the novel is a spy for the Egyptian secret police in a post 
9/11 world of collaboration between US and Arab security services. An exiled 
dissident is seized by the FBI on charges fabricated by Egyptian intelligence. 
"I love America but hate American foreign policy, coming from a part of the 
world damaged for years by it," Al Aswany says. "The cooperation between the 
FBI, CIA and Arab dictators is documented, even in Congress. American detainees 
are exported to be tortured in Arab dictatorships, and they come back with 
confessions. Why do dirty work in my house if I can do it elsewhere?" While a 
shadowy political heavyweight named the "Big Man" is off-stage in The Yacoubian 
Building, in Chicago an unnamed Egyptian leader shows up. His demeanour is 
haughty, "as if he were a crowned king", and "his hair, dyed jet black, was 
rumoured to be one of the best hairpieces available in the world".

Al Aswany concedes that his success may have given him greater freedom as a 
writer. "A young blogger could be arrested easily." He cites Kareem Amer, 
serving four years in jail for a blog deemed insulting to religion and the 
president, and his own friend Ibrahim Issa, editor-in-chief of the oppositional 
daily Al-Dustour, who is facing a six-month prison sentence for speculating on 
the health of the elderly president. "It's a pretext - they wanted him in 
prison by any means."

Chicago was first a hit serial in Al-Dustour. "Some fanatics sent insults. One 
said he'd never accept that a veiled woman would have a relationship outside 
marriage. I said: 'It's a fiction; Shaymaa doesn't represent all veiled women. 
And if you don't like my novel, why do you read it every week?'"

Al Aswany was born in Cairo in 1957, an only child. His mother Zeinab, from 
Alexandria, was a "real fighter" and worked at the youth ministry. Her uncle 
was minister of education before the 1952 revolution that overthrew the 
monarchy and brought Gamal Abdel Nasser to power. Al Aswany's father, Abbas, 
was a "self-made man from the south", a novelist and lawyer who won the state 
award for literature in 1972, and died when Alaa was 19. "My father gave me 
space to evolve. He said, 'you must keep writing. The day it's not your first 
priority, you must quit.'"

He attended the French lycée before studying dentistry at Cairo university. "I 
had a liberal education. I was a child when Egypt was tolerant. At the lycée 
there were Jews, Copts, Catholics; we'd celebrate three or four religious 
feasts. This is the secret of Egyptian civilisation: we've been absorbing 
cultures for 60 centuries." That open, cosmopolitan society changed, in his 
view, only after Nasser's rule ended in 1970, in the late-70s and 80s - partly, 
he believes, thanks to the growing influence of Wahhabism, "the desert 
interpretation of Islam". Al Aswany considers Nasser a "great leader, who 
guaranteed free education for social mobility, but made one big mistake: he 
left the machinery of dictatorship. He was the No 1 enemy in the western media 
in the 50s and 60s, and was afraid of establishing political parties that could 
be used against him. But without democratic rule, even if you're not corrupt, 
you lose your vision."

As a dentist for 6,000 cement factory workers in southern Cairo, Al Aswany 
grasped at the "opportunity to keep contact with a world I'd never see 
elsewhere". His first wife, also a dentist, "didn't understand me, though she's 
still my friend. I could have stayed in America or worked in the Gulf and made 
a fortune, but I refused. I was learning how to write." He also declined to 
churn out screenplays for Egypt's Bollywood ("for me, it's a cerebral 
haemorrhage"). When Al Aswany remarried in 1993, into a family of 
Greek-speaking Egyptians from Alexandria, he told his wife his only dream was 
to be a novelist.

He reads four languages, including French and Spanish, but decided against 
emulating the nouveau roman, and was pushed towards realism by an encounter 
with Mahfouz in Alexandria. "For 20 years Arab novelists have thought that the 
way westerners write is best, so if you tell stories you're old-fashioned. I 
was strongly against this. I keep my own voice. The novel is like a love 
affair: if you plan everything you spoil the most beautiful part." He found a 
"language that's literary but not complicated - easy to read, but very 
difficult to write".

An early novella, The Papers of Essam Abdel Aaty (1990), and two short story 
collections were "printed not published". With friends, he paid for and 
distributed 500 copies himself. "I got good reviews, but I called myself a 
successful writer without readers." "Every time you have trouble with the 
corrupt system in Egypt," one mentor told him, "you must respond by writing 
more." In the novella, he says, "a young Egyptian hears government propaganda 
that we Egyptians taught the world how to write, and says: 'Where are the 
pharoahs? I don't see any.' I was accused of insulting my country - which is 
very dangerous."

But rather than be published abroad, in Lebanon, Al Aswany held out, since 
imported books are easier to ban. A daring press called Merit - founded in 1998 
and run by the writer and activist Mohamed Hashem - published The Yacoubian 
Building, before it was taken up by the largest commercial publishers in Egypt, 
Dar al-Shorouk. Merit also published Friendly Fire (2004), a selection of his 
earlier work, to be published in the UK next year. Yet even now, Al Aswany 
says: "I'm making money only because I'm a bestseller in the west."

In a new introduction to Friendly Fire, he takes his rejection by Gebo as a 
sign of the control exerted by state publishing. "The government doesn't want 
writers to survive from their writing, because, in any country without 
democracy, an independent writer or journalist is a threat," he says. "They 
want to keep any intellectual under pressure. You don't have the time or 
concentration to rebel." He encouraged Gebo to republish his father's work, but 
believes that he was punished for his own political outspokenness in the 
pittance they paid. He is suing Gebo to force disclosure of how it allocates 
public funds. "It's not the money, it's the principle," he says. "I said: 'It's 
the Egyptian people's money, not yours'. If I compromise, I'll betray my 
father."

There are, he believes, "two related struggles in Egypt: the one for democracy 
and justice; and the one between a tolerant culture and Wahhabism". The 
strength of the Muslim Brotherhood, which has a fifth of seats in the people's 
assembly, allows the government to pose as a bulwark against Islamism. "The 
fanatics are not real opponents of the regime, but a complication of it. If 
you're young and don't have hope, you're pushed to be a criminal or a fanatic."

For 10 years, Al Aswany has run weekly seminars for young writers and students 
in downtown cafés. "Last year the government threatened the owner of a café, 
but we continue to meet. I'm proud that we've had young fanatics there; some 
have become my friends. I feel a commitment towards these young people, who 
don't really have an education. To be fanatic is to categorise people, not to 
see the human being. Literature is the opposite, it's a very individual vision 
of life." At the seminar he met the model for Taha in The Yacoubian Building. 
The man on whom the character was based "was a very good student, but was 
passed over as a policeman because he was from the wrong class", says Al 
Aswany. "He said, 'I hate this country; this government is full of thieves', 
and he had a point. I felt that, faced with a certain injustice, anyone could 
become dangerous, a terrorist, because he had lost the dream of his life."

Yet Al Aswany remains optimistic. "Any ruler in history with strategic plans, 
from Alexander the Great to George Bush, has had to control Egypt. We've had 
terrible rulers, and been occupied many times. We're professors of compromise. 
But the moment Egyptians believe compromise is no longer working, they revolt. 
I believe we're at such a moment." Earlier this year, as rising food prices 
sparked riots, security forces were sent to break strikes that were spreading 
from the country's biggest textile factory, in Mahalla. Meanwhile, a crackdown 
on the country's media independence began last autumn. "You can't be an 
unelected regime and be liberal at the same time," Al Aswany says. "What we 
have is not freedom of expression as a tool of democracy, but freedom of talk 
as a decoration of the regime. For more than 10 years, you can say what you 
want, but the regime does what it wants. If you attack a minister, they might 
even be promoted."

Though there has been persecution of homosexuals, "there's a big difference 
between the culture and the regime", he says. "Arab culture was very tolerant. 
There's a category of Arabic poetry about homosexual feelings." He adds: "You 
can't defend the human rights of a group in society while everybody else is 
deprived of them. There are 60,000 Egyptians detained without charge - many are 
in prison for more than 10 years - and torture is a daily practice. What's 
happening to homosexuals is happening to all Egyptians."

Apart from lawsuits brought against Al Aswany by former residents of the 
Yacoubian building who claim he used them in his novel, fame has had other 
downsides. According to Davies, "The stink of sour grapes is all over the Arab 
world about Alaa's success." Yet in the view of Cairo novelist Ahmed Alaidy, 
The Yacoubian Building boosted independent publishing and began a "new era 
which can't be ignored, either by those who loved the novel or by those who 
hated it, as it disproved claims that Arabs aren't great readers".

For Al Aswany, who "waited 20 years to be read", his sales are a "reward from 
readers. They mean Egypt is still more tolerant than it appears."

Aaal Al Aswany on Aaal Al Aswany

"After all this time he still remembered Zeinab Radwan. In fact, he had never 
stopped thinking about her for a single day. The old pictures were appearing in 
his mind with amazing clarity. The foodgates of memory opened, came over and 
swept him away, as if the past were a gigantic genie let out of the bottle. 
There she was, standing before him, with her petite figure, her beautiful face, 
and her long black hair that she gathered in a ponytail. Her eyes were gleaming 
with enthusiasm as she talked to him in that dreamy voice of hers as if she 
were reciting a love poem. 'Our country is great, Salah, but it has been 
oppressed for a long time. Our people have tremendous abilities. If we have 
democracy, Egypt will become a strong, advanced country in less than 10 years.'"

From Chicago, translated by Farouk Abdel Wahab (Fourth Estate)

I see the novel as life on the page that is similar to our daily life, but 
more profound and more beautiful. What is essential in fiction is the writer's 
ability to draw vivid and true characters. Through them, readers will see 
everything in their own lives, including social, political and religious 
topics, but through the art. I try to create characters who, at a given moment, 
become independent and decide things for themselves. Sometimes I agree with 
their decisions and opinions, sometimes I disagree. But I do not have control 
over them.
 