 I don't camp! Anyone who knows me will vouch for the fact that I don't own a 
rucksack, tent or, god forbid, an "insulation mat". Which, since I'm about to 
embark on an extreme wilderness survival weekend, is even more hilarious. It 
also explains why, when the kit list arrives, I stare in confusion at the 
stream of supplies I'll need to find. What the hell is a "mess tin", anyway? 
Luckily, friends rally round to donate their camping goods. By Friday night I 
am sitting (with rucksack and tins) on a train to the Brecon Beacons.
"Where exactly are we sleeping this weekend?" I ask casually upon arrival. The 
UK Survival School's course leader, Ged Lawless (I never did find out if it's 
his real name), laughs off the question. The detailed itinerary says something 
about "making your own bed" on the second night. It also mentions skinning a 
rabbit.

Fourteen other survivalists have (voluntarily!) signed up for this adventure. 
Getting acquainted around the campfire with tea and powdered milk, we explain 
our reasons for being here. "I kept threatening to run off and live in the 
woods, so at Christmas my family clubbed together and bought me this gift," 
explains Andrew. Others reply with two words: "Ray Mears." "I just want to 
survive it, get home and have a hot shower," I say.

The school's Weekend Survival Essentials course has been running for more than 
10 years, and its popularity is a testament to Ged's ability, skill and very 
bad jokes. Tapping into the market of city slickers yearning to hit the great 
outdoors, live as their ancestors did and (of course) light a fire from 
scratch, Ged explains proudly: "In November 1996 we had one person on the 
course; now we run 35 a year with 15 people on each." It's so much more than 
camping; the course is skills-based, run on private land in the Brecon Beacons 
and the teaching is underpinned with real-life survival scenarios.

The toilet area is, as I feared, a hole in the ground, and no amount of 
brightly coloured tent is going to hide that fact. But at least we get to sleep 
under canvas tonight - after the obligatory bug check, of course. Tomorrow we 
must be up at seven sharp for porridge and "rab lab".

The unabashed aim of rab lab is to gut fish and skin rabbits, just as you 
would if you were lost in the forest with no Little Chef in the vicinity. The 
trout proves a little slippery, but as I stand gutting and prepping it in tin 
foil ready to go on the fire, it dawns on me that I might actually learn 
something valuable on this course, and shouldn't just keep closing my eyes and 
praying for rescue.

The rabbit is harder - (1) because I now have very smelly, slippery hands 
(Ged's advice: "We've got just the thing to get rid of the smell of fish ... 
rabbit"); and (2), having kept a rabbit as a child, I feel a little uneasy. 
Then again, at least these creatures are already dead. We just have to take the 
fur off.

The tasks never end. Right after lunch (really quite tasty), it's time to 
build our shelters for the night, using only nature's resources. Ged sees my 
face contort and whispers that I can always use the campsite as plan B. But, 
maybe because of the good weather or because everyone else is getting stuck in, 
I suddenly gain the urge to try and build my own home for the night.

Sadly, my shelter turns out to be a shambles, with gaping holes and not nearly 
enough ferns for bedding. As I look around at the competition, Ged's tips come 
back to haunt me: "You need lots of branches for the shelter ... Build the roof 
high and acute to keep out the rain, or with a low roof for warmth." To be 
honest, any roof at all would be a bonus just now.

The next survival skill harks back to caveman times. "It's like giving birth!" 
shouts Rachel, blowing on her embers. We're making fire by lighting a piece of 
fungi called Daldinia concentrica, wrapping it in dead grass and blowing on it 
with long deep breaths (hence the birthing comment) until a thick, white smoke 
appears. With the fire started it's time for dinner, before we go in search of 
our here's-one-I-built-earlier shelters and another (surprisingly) good night's 
sleep. Well, all except the poor guy who built his shelter on an ants' nest.

On Sunday we head to the summit of Fan-Y-Big with compasses, maps and 
rucksacks, to learn navigation and orienteering. Ged: "Compasses should not be 
worn as navigation bling; that's the first myth I want to dispel." We also 
learn the international distress whistle signal - I'm good at this one - and 
try out some fetching foil survival blankets. The last lesson of the day is how 
to distil water - did you know that sphagnum or peat moss (dubbed "nature's 
cleanser") is full of iodine to purify water? And so soft it can be used as 
substitute for toilet roll?

By Sunday afternoon, the course is over. I hadn't expected to like it, I'd 
half expected not to make it out alive, but something has happened over the 
weekend. So excuse me while I pull some moss out of my pockets, the twigs out 
of my hair, and crack a little smile.

Go to uksurvival school.co.uk or call 01432 376751 for details

Survival courses

Thrill rating 7/10 

Danger rating 5/10

Fitness rating6/10

In a nutshell...

Unleash your inner Robinson Crusoe (or Bear Grylls, without the made-up bits) 
by learning the world's oldest outdoor pursuit: wilderness bushcraft. A weekend 
in the wilderness will equip you with the hands-on experience you need to meet 
nature on its own terms, should you ever find yourself miles from civilisation 
sans SatNav. Basic survival courses will teach you how to build a shelter, how 
to make fire by friction, how to feed yourself from the wild and how to find, 
filter and purify water.

What's the buzz?

According to instructor Ged Lawless, survival training offers you total 
freedom from daily routine: "Nowadays, we're slaves to supermarkets and fast 
food. Everything is about speed. When you're in the wild, this doesn't apply. 
Once you understand how nature works and how it can provide, what you can and 
cannot eat, this knowledge dispels your fear. And the satisfaction of food, 
shelter, warmth and drink without having to queue in overcrowded aisles and 
checkouts ... it's total freedom."

Thrill a minute?

It's up to you how long you spend in the wilderness. Some survival courses 
last only a day, others for two weeks. Conditions can be unpredictable and 
demanding - 100% participation is expected at all times. On occasion you will 
be too cold/too hot, wet, muddy, tired and frustrated. But don't let that put 
you off.

Adrenaline peak

Whatever level you're at, you can't beat that gleeful sensation when your ball 
of dry grass finally bursts into flame. Similarly, your empty stomach will 
lurch when you spot a juicy cluster of berries, or eventually you spear that 
fish you've been patiently shadowing (some hope!).

Where to do it

In Scotland, you can spend a week on the island of Taransay in the wild and 
woolly Outer Hebrides. In Wales, courses are often held beneath the remote 
woodlands of the central Brecon Beacons. In England, the severe yet spectacular 
terrain of the Lake District is home to many a survivalist. Most courses take 
place on private estates so you needn't worry about bumping into hikers while 
foraging in your loincloth. Although secluded, many sites are not remote: Ray 
Mears' "wilderness" is in East Sussex.

Who can do it

Although previous camping experience can be an advantage, for basic courses 
you need never have left the suburbs. There's a minimum age requirement of 18 
for most courses and no upper age limit, provided you're in good physical 
health. Junior and family courses are also available.

What to take

Your kit list will depend on the level of course you've enrolled on. Some 
require basic equipment (sleeping bag, tent, insect repellent etc); others 
forbid you to bring anything other than the clothes on your back, a knife, a 
pot and a snare wire. Alcohol and axes don't mix, so booze is strictly 
forbidden. Some courses allow the use of mobile phones provided you are 
discreet. Any "HELLO?! I'M IN THE WILDERNESS!" episodes probably won't go down 
too well.

Typical prices

Two-day courses start from £250, seven-day courses from £550.

Impress your pals

Ray Mears (MySpace motto: "carry less by knowing more") was voted Britain's 
third most admired man by the readers of Esquire magazine in April - ahead of, 
entirely justifiably, David Beckham. Worryingly, the winner was Gordon "never 
off our screens" Ramsay, with Professor Stephen Hawking a surprisingly cerebral 
second.
Nell Card

YouTube searchwords 'bushcraft kit essentials'

Good links

raymears.com <http://www.raymears.com>

bushcraftuk.com <http://www.bushcraftuk.com>

woodsmoke.uk.com <http://www.woodsmoke.uk.com>

backwoodsurvival.co.uk <http://www.backwoodsurvival.co.uk>

uksurvivalschool.co.uk <http://www.uksurvivalschool.co.uk>
 