
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> "almost 
certainly" breached the ministerial code by failing to ask the independent 
adviser on ministers' interests to investigate allegations against the former 
defence secretary Liam Fox.

The prime minister should have invited Sir Philip Mawer to examine claims that 
Fox's relationship with his friendAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty> was in breach of parliamentary 
rules, according to the Whitehall watchdog Sir Christopher Kelly, chairman of 
the committee on standards in public life.

The claim follows concerns from MPs across the House that the prime minister 
let the government and civil service "off the hook". The subsequent inquiry by 
then-cabinet secretary Sir Gus O'Donnell was criticised for not coming down 
hard enough on Fox and Ministry of Defence officials.

Fox resigned last year after admitting he had misjudged his relationship with 
Werritty, who was best man at his wedding. Werritty was granted access to the 
MoD headquarters on 22 occasions over 16 months and had travelled to a number 
of official destinations to meet Fox and foreign government officials.

Mawer, the prime minister's former adviser on ministerial interests, quit the 
post shortly after Fox resigned and expressed his "frustration" that Cameron 
did not call him in to handle the case.

Kelly told the public administration select committee on Tuesday that Cameron 
had probably broken the rules and called for a change to allow the adviser on 
ministerial interests to launch inquiries on his own initiative, rather than 
having to wait for the prime minister to ask him to investigate.

"On this occasion, I think [Mawer] should have been employed. Indeed, I think 
it was almost certainly a breach of the ministerial code that he was not 
employed.

"The view of the committee [on standards in public life] is that there is 
advantage in this post existing and if it is going to exist, it has to be used 
in the way that was envisaged.

"Just like the parliamentary commissioner [on standards], the adviser should 
be able to initiate inquiries of their own where there is a prima facie case to 
investigate, whereas at the moment he is only able to do so at the request of 
the prime minister."

Mawer was the first holder of the post, created by former prime minister 
Gordon Brown in 2008. He was given a remit to conduct inquiries into possible 
breaches of the ministerial code, but could do so only when requested by the 
prime minister, who retained the power to decide whether a minister should keep 
his job if a breach was committed.

Mawer cleared former justice minister Shahid Malik of allegations relating to 
his office rental in 2009 but was not called upon to conduct any other 
investigations and resigned at the start of this year, to be replaced by Sir 
Alex Allan. Speaking to the same committee shortly after his departure, Mawer 
denied he had quit the post in anger at Cameron's failure to call him in but 
said he would have liked to have conducted a "quick and dirty" inquiry into the 
allegations against Fox.

"I believe that the adviser ought to have been brought in and ought to been 
brought in pretty well from the outset. That is my view," Mawer said in January.

"I was frustrated at the failure to call me in and I made clear to the Cabinet 
Office that the credibility of the role of the adviser had not been assisted. 
It was a missed opportunity and I regret it.

"I made my views very clear to the Cabinet Office and to the Cabinet 
Secretary," he said.

A senior Conservative source said the prime minister had taken the inquiry off 
Mawer because he wanted a quick and hard-hitting inquiry. "Mawer's inquiries 
tend to be quite slow, if thorough. It was the right decision," the source said.
 