
England have been nothing if not consistent this winter. Whitewashed in the 
Tests, swatted aside in the ODIs, they duly lost the firstTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> international in Hobart by 13 
runs. Chasing a daunting 213, the margin of victory was given a flattering 
gloss by Ravi Bopara's entertaining but futile lone hand of 65 not out from 27 
balls towards the end.

It would, of course, be wrong to chastise England for losing a Twenty20 match 
on this tiny little seaside gem of a ground batting second under lights on a 
chilly evening, not least when their 200 here was their equal second-best total 
batting second. Australia are fielding a near-second string with key players 
injured or already in South Africa for the Test series. They also bowled well, 
with Nathan Coulter-Nile taking four for 30 and the young leg-spinner James 
Muirhead looking entirely unfazed on his debut (it was only the second 
international match he has seen in the flesh). For all that, Stuart Broad's 
team face a huge task to win the series from here against ominously 
powerful-looking opponents

"Thirteen runs isn't a huge defeat," Broad said afterwards, taking the 
positives from a night that leaves the cumulative score on this tour at 10-1 to 
Australia. "We didn't get moving, we didn't get going as a batting unit, but to 
get 200 runs actually gives a bit of confidence The record shows we come back 
from disappointment and that's what we have to do."

At the halfway stage, chasing 214 to win – a score they passed only four times 
in 10 innings in the Tests – England were distant outsiders. Michael Lumb 
lasted six balls before driving Coulter-Nile to mid-off in the second over, 
bringing Luke Wright, the Big Bash's top boundary hitter, to the crease.

This was a match of maximums all round, with 22 sixes equalling the record for 
T20 internationals, though this was in part tribute to the dimensions of the 
outfield at the Bellerive Oval, with the pitch cut on the far left edge of the 
square cutting the legside boundary from the River End to 56 metres (the 
minimum allowed is 55) and the breeze across making it feel even shorter. 
England's best hopes of hauling in a huge total were for a top order, described 
by Broad as "scary" before this match, to attack that area from the start.

In the event the only really frightening thing about the first half of their 
chase was the jarring sense of over-familiarity as the top order crumpled. Alex 
Hales, an uncomplicated striker of the ball, hit five of his first nine balls 
for four, and Wright swiped with puppyish zeal before being bowled by Moisés 
Henriques playing a furious pull shot. Three balls later, Hales was lbw walking 
across his stumps for 22. With Josh Hazlewood and Enriques mustering up three 
overs for 13 runs in the Powerplay, by the time Eoin Morgan was bowled slogging 
at Glenn Maxwell England were well behind on 51 for four in the seventh over.

But where there's Jos there's hope, and Buttler was into his stride quickly, 
swatting Muirhead's third ball in international cricket for a six before 
carving Coulter-Nile out to deep cover where Muirhead held a swirling catch. 
Root played nicely for his 32 before holing out to long-off to leave England on 
100 for six and needing 13 runs an over. It was effectively game over even as 
Bopara set about yawning Hazlewood over midwicket for a pair of huge, 
effortless sixes and swinging productively to the end as England salvaged some 
dignity from a lost cause.

Australia had won the toss and opted to bat on a beautiful soft sunny evening. 
There was one surprise in England's team with Ben Stokes omitted for the first 
time since making his Test debut, and Danny Briggs got the nod ahead of James 
Tredwell. Not playing Stokes is perhaps a little baffling with a World Twenty20 
on the horizon. As is the reason given – continuity of selection from 
Chester-le-Street last September – given Stokes has since announced himself as 
an international player of explosive talent.

Australia's beefy-shouldered opening pair, Aaron Finch and Cameron White, 
began with menacing intent, White pulling Jade Dernbach's fifth ball hard and 
flat into the building site beyond the midwicket boundary. With the score on 
20, White was dropped by Root at slip off Broad. Finch celebrated by taking 21 
off his next five balls, torturing the yellow spandex-clad trampolinist who had 
unwisely signed up to perform a somersault routine every time Australia found 
the boundary.

Finch is a hitting machine in this format: his 50 came off 26 balls, with 
White following him there from 32 as Briggs in particular suffered, going for 
53 off his four overs. Broad had Finch caught at long-on by Hales, before 
Wright came on to bowl an eventful first six balls that went for six, four, 
four, no-ball (for height: White was caught by Briggs having skied the ball), a 
single and finally White lbw for 75 off 43 balls.

Broad was again England's best bowler, taking Finch's wicket and producing a 
fine spell of 4-0-25-1. The rest of England's attack needs to match his 
standards if they are to save the series in Melbourne on Friday.
 