
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is facing 
pressure to launch a new investigation into Liam Fox's self-styled adviser Adam 
Werritty after it was revealed that a second defence minister met one of 
Werritty's secretive funders.

Labour called on the prime minister to address "extremely serious" allegations 
that ministers may have been seeking to profit from their relationship with 
Werritty, Fox's best friend and former flatmate who has now been linked to 
three defence ministers.

Stephen Crouch, a defence industry lobbyist, said he paid Werritty a flat fee 
in the hope that Werritty, who posed as Fox's official adviser, would set up 
high-powered meetings for him.

Fox arranged for Crouch to meet Gerald Howarth, the arms sales minister, and 
Werritty at the Commons. No civil servants were present at the meeting – an 
apparent breach of the ministerial code. John Mann, the Labour MP who first 
raised questions about Werritty's role at the heart of government, has demanded 
an investigation into Howarth's apparent breach of ministerial rules.

No record of the 27 September meeting was kept, but the MoD said the three men 
talked about "the economic and political landscape in Iraq".

Crouch, who secretly donated £20,000 to support Werritty, runs an organisation 
called the Iraq Research Group and has extensive business interests in Iraq and 
Kurdistan. IRG Ltd has been identified as one of six organisations that paid 
money into Pargav Ltd, a company set up as a "slush fund" to pay for Werritty's 
first-class flights to meet up with Fox at exotic locations across the globe.

Police will widen a preliminary investigation into allegations that Werritty 
acted fraudulently by handing out business cards that described him as an 
"adviser to the Rt Hon DrLiam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox>
 MP".

Detectives from City of London police's economic crime unit will interview 
Harvey Boulter, the Dubai-based businessman who first raised concerns that 
Werritty was passing himself off as an official government adviser. The police 
have already interviewed Mann and another unnamed person.

Fox resigned as defence secretary earlier this month after a stream of 
revelations about his improper business relationship with Werritty.

The police's decision to question Boulter may cause some consternation among 
Fox's supporters. In Fox's resignation speech, he singled out Boulter, the 
businessman whom he and Werritty met in a Dubai hotel to discuss a military 
product without any civil servants present. Fox criticised the "unquestioning" 
coverage of Boulter's revelations, pointing out that he is the defendant in a 
blackmail trial.

The MP for North Somerset was later found to have breached the ministerial 
code, following an investigation by Sir Gus O'Donnell, the cabinet secretary. 
Boulter told the Guardian he was flying into London at the request of 
detectives. "I was asked if I could make myself available and I presume it is 
because they will want to know how Werritty claimed to be a representative of 
Fox and how he may have been making money through this," he said.

Kevan Jones, shadow defence minister, said revelations over Howarth's meeting 
with Crouch showed the PM had allowed wrongdoing to take place on his watch.

"The prime minister has for weeks said all questions would be answered but 
instead we have only had new allegations," Jones said.

"It appears another defence minister may have broken the ministerial code and 
has links toAdam Werritty <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>. We 
need a full explanation as to how this meeting was arranged and why no civil 
servants were present. If it was discovered that anyone was profiting from 
these connections this would be extremely serious."

Separately, Mann has written to Sir Philip Mawer, the independent adviser on 
ministerial interests, demanding he launch an investigation into Howarth's 
meeting with Crouch and Werritty, to establish whether there has been a breach 
of the ministerial code. "Your investigation should also seek to confirm once 
and for all that no other breaches have occurred in relation to the activities 
of Adam Werritty or other unofficial advisers within government."

An MoD spokesman said Howarth "did not believe an official was required" for 
his meeting with Crouch and Werritty. "Mr Howarth informed his office after the 
meeting had taken place. No substantive issues were raised, no confidential 
information was disclosed and there was no follow-up to the meeting," the 
spokesman said.

Werritty has also met Lord Astor, defence minister in the Lords, on "social 
occasions". Crouch told the Guardian that he paid Werritty a "flat fee" after 
the pair met socially, in the hope that Werritty could provide commercial 
introductions to British energy companies. He denied that he was acting on 
behalf of any defence companies in helping fund Werritty's Pargav company via 
his Iraq Research Group.

In the 1990s Crouch was part of British trade delegation calling on sanctions 
against Saddam Hussein to be eased.

Crouch, a Tory donor and activist, has links with former special services 
officer-turned businessmen, including Tony Buckingham.

Buckingham, who previously made money from mercenary operations in Africa, is 
now the boss of Heritage Oil, which operates in Kurdistan and recently sealed a 
deal in Libya.

• This article was amended on 27 October 2011. The original referred to Mann 
without further identification. This has been corrected.
 