
After much fanfare, we are still no closer to a mainstream uptake of wearable 
tech.

Research from the US 
<http://endeavourpartners.net/assets/Wearables-and-the-Science-of-Human-Behavior-Change-EP4.pdf>
 shows a third of consumers who bought a wearable product stopped using it 
after just six months and of the one in 10 Americans who own an activity 
tracker, half of them no longer use it.

There are mixed perceptions among the public about what wearable tech actually 
is and what it can do.

This is largely because of the way wearable technology and its associated 
gadgets are designed. There has been something of a gold rush, with several key 
players in the electronics industry racing to release their products ahead of 
the competition.

Many have either lacked the wow factor <> or been too expensive, too ugly or, 
because of the data they gather, too scary in terms of their implications for 
our privacy 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/connieguglielmo/2014/02/12/the-case-against-wearables/>
.

Manufacturers’ focus has tended to be on a technology push. They are trying to 
invent new user experiences and new areas of use or applications. But with 
limited user input.

Several products showcase science fiction-like features and so-called smart 
technology but fail in serving any user need.

Such gadgets should come with the disclaimer that smart technology does not 
necessarily imply smart products. Or a smart use, for that matter.

Take the range of products in the area of fitness, health and wellbeing, for 
instance. These are at the forefront of wearable tech gadgets on the market at 
the moment.

They are good at capturing and showering the user with lots of data on how 
well or not they are performing. But there are three big issues with this.

First of all, how does one make sense of the plethora of information? Even 
once those numbers have been successfully deciphered, how relevant and useful 
are they? In other words – what type of data actually matters to users?

Secondly, how wearable are they? For health or fitness related applications to 
work properly, wearable gadgets need to be worn all the time. For that to 
happen they must be designed to fit in well with the lifestyles of every wearer.

What is particularly important for health-related wearable products is that 
they are not seen as a health intervention (due to the stigma attached to that) 
but rather associated with leisure and fun.

Thirdly, assuming these gadgets are useful for users who are already into 
fitness, how can wearable products address the bigger market of non-physically 
active people? How can they trigger behavioural change and motivate people to 
become fitter or follow a healthier lifestyle in the first place?

So the big question is how do we design wearable tech products that everyone 
actually wants to wear?

Their design needs to be user-centric as opposed to technology-centric. A 
user-led approach will see designs drawn up with users rather than for them.

Co-design – where prospective users become designers themselves – could pave 
the way for new and exciting wearable products the public actually want, need 
and are more likely to use.

A co-design process typically incorporates a number of creative workshops 
where different groups, but mostly prospective end users, take part. The users 
become the designers while professional designers and developers simply 
facilitate the process.

These workshops start by exploring users’ values, aspirations, visions and 
ideas, which are then realised in products.

Co-designing with users has the potential to be truly transformative as they 
become shared owners of the innovation, having a much greater stake in its 
design, creation and eventual use.

The key message? That the needs of users come first and technology should then 
follow to fulfil those. This could be the key to creating the next range of 
successful wearable tech.

Emmanuel Tsekleves is a researcher at Lancaster University

Also read:

 * Wearable technology hasn’t taken off in the way it was expected to – why 
not? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/jul/31/wearable-technology-revolution-dead-cost>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 