
In the worst crises emerge the greatest heroes – or at least that's what 
Cameroon are hoping. On Sunday, they face Cape Verde in their play-off for
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
qualification, trailing 2-0 from the first leg. The Ahmadou Ahidjo in Yaounde 
will be packed. It'll be tense but, remarkably given the situation a month ago, 
it will be optimistic.

Denis Lavagne has been removed as national coach and replaced by the former 
centre-back Jean-Paul Akono, the man who led them to Olympic gold in 2000. He 
has persuaded Samuel Eto'o to return from his exile and, for once, all the talk 
is of unity – even if, in the case of the Cameroonian federation (Fecafoot), 
that is grudging.

"When Fifa learnt that the Cameroon government had appointed a coach without 
involving the federation, it asked questions," it said in a statement read by 
its by vice-president John B Ndeh. It had earlier revealed the decision to 
appoint Akono had been taken by theCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> sports minister Adoum Garoua 
while Fecafoot was meeting in the northern town of Garoua to discuss candidates 
for the national job.

"Cameroon could be sanctioned if the federation is not in support [of the 
appointment]. The executive committee drums support for the coach Jean Paul 
Akono and the technical staff. We invite Cameroonians to turn out massively to 
egg on the Indomitable Lions to victory and qualification."

The dismissal of Lavagne, who had replaced Javier Clemente following the 
failure to qualify for last year's Cup of Nations, was always likely after the 
defeat in Praia, particularly given the 2-1 reverse in Libya in June that has 
complicated World Cup qualification. The appointment of Akono is more of a 
surprise and is indicative of the increasing influence of the former African 
Footballer of the Year, Jean Manga-Onguene, who was appointed as the 
federation's technical director last year with Akono as his deputy.

I was in Yaounde last February, researching the rivalry between Thomas Nkono 
and Joseph-Antoine Bell 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Outsider-A-History-Goalkeeper/dp/1409123197/ref=sr\_1\_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1349676176&sr=8-1>
, who are probably the two greatest goalkeepers in African history but had the 
misfortune to be born in the same country at almost the same time. I arranged 
to interview Manga-Onguene and Akono, both of whom had played with Nkono at 
club level at Canon Yaounde and with both keepers at international level. We 
met at the headquarters of Fecafoot and went to a restaurant where lunch lasted 
most of the afternoon.

"For some time even when we were unable to win trophies, we were still 
performing," Akono said. "That was the time when we needed to be vigilant, when 
we should have been looking at the talent in the junior teams. The other thing 
is there was too much ego, each player trying to justify their role in the team 
and make money.

"The players are not to blame alone for our problems. The issue of ego was not 
restricted to players at all, but also to team officials, the federation. They 
have to take part of the blame for thinking the achievements of previous years 
were a natural phenomenon that would be hard to take away. The writing was on 
the wall from the bad run of results. We didn't look behind us to see others 
were making progress. Now they have caught up with us and we have only our eyes 
to cry with."

I ended up having dinner with the pair at Manga-Onguene's house a couple of 
days later, watching Sunderland beat Arsenal in the FA Cup on his television, 
and the next day had lunch there before heading off with Akono to Canon against 
Tiko United in the Cameroonian league.

Visitors kept arriving, documents were handed over, drinks were exchanged. The 
talk, constantly, was of football; of games they'd played, of players they 
rated and didn't rate, of how the Cameroonian game could be resurrected. When I 
left for the stadium on the Sunday afternoon, Manga-Onguene and two others were 
sat round a table on his veranda, huddled over a chart. Maybe he was just 
outlining his plan for a nationwide scouting network, but it did occur to me at 
the time that there seemed an unusual urgency about the discussions, a 
strangely conspiratorial air. I wonder now if what I was seeing was 
Manga-Onguene establishing his base, mobilising to take charge when crisis came.

In differing ways, both Akono and Manga-Onguene are excellent company. 
Manga-Onguene, a forward who was African Footballer of the Year in 1980, is 
slim and dapper, careful with his words and blessed with a wry humour. Akono, 
in his day a fearsome centre-back, has filled out since his playing career 
ended. The tight curls that flank his broad forehead are still there, but are 
grey these days – meaning that from certain angles he bears an odd resemblance 
to Frasier Crane, although he is mystifyingly nicknamed "Magnusson" after the 
former Marseille winger; he eats, drinks and laughs heartily, his conversation 
a torrent of anecdote and opinion.

As lunch came to an end that first day, Akono asked what I was doing that 
evening. I said I had an appointment with Roger Milla to which he insisted on 
driving me. With the windows down and James Brown blaring, we hurtled through 
the town to the house at the top of a hill where Milla lives. We were about 
half an hour early and Milla wasn't there, but he has an entourage that stays 
with him and they let us into a lounge. Akono promptly lay down on the sofa and 
went to sleep. He was still asleep when Milla arrived but we carried on with 
the interview regardless, the occasional snore clearly audible on the 
Dictaphone.

About halfway through, Akono woke and leapt from the sofa. He stamped on a 
cockroach, flicked it with the outside of his right foot and then, with a 
mighty swing, belted it through a small gap in the patio doors, before trotting 
back to the sofa and falling asleep again. "Even now," said Milla, "nothing 
ever gets past Magnusson."

Cameroon will be desperately hoping that's true. Akono, though, has made an 
impressive start by persuading Eto'o to return. The forward had been banned for 
eight months after leading what was effectively a strike over the non-payment 
of bonuses before a friendly against Algeria in 2011 and then refused a call-up 
when the suspension was lifted, citing the disorganised administration in 
Cameroon.

Whether Benoît Assou-Ekotto would have responded to Akono's appeals had he not 
been injured is unclear, but the former PSG and Marseille midfielder Modeste 
Mbami is back after a three-year absence and there are recalls for the forwards 
Mohamadou Idrissou and Pierre Webo. That has led to some criticism that the 
squad is too old (despite the inclusion of the 16-year-old Málaga forward 
Fabrice Olinga), but Akono is unconcerned. "Age does not count as long as the 
players are physically fit," he said. "Once they train and are competitive 
there is no problem."

Akono has spoken already of a short-term contract and of the difficulty of his 
position. Realistically, trying to overturn a two-goal deficit, no matter if 
Eto'o is back, no matter the atmosphere, is hugely difficult, particularly 
against a Cape Verde side that has improved steadily over the past few years. 
If the new mood of optimism is to endure, he must be allowed tooversee the 
World Cup qualifiers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2014\_FIFA\_World\_Cup\_qualification\_%E2%80%93\_CAF\_Second\_Round%C2%A3Group\_I>
 come what may. But if Cameroon could win on Sunday, if they could reassert 
themselves against all logic, suddenly all things would seem possible.

Akono has already achieved one glorious success with Cameroon; extricating 
them from the present mess might be an even greater achievement.
 