
I hire cars through Avis about every two months. A couple of weeks ago I 
booked one to visit my cousin in Boston in the US. When our plans changed, I 
checked the cancellation details and, seeing I would not have to pay a penalty, 
cancelled online. I received an email confirming this.

Ten days later, my card still hadn’t been refunded so I phoned to ask how much 
longer it would take.

A very helpful representative told me that refunds are not issued 
automatically when reservations are cancelled, and that they have to be 
requested, in addition to cancelling online.

This is not mentioned in the cancellation email or the booking email, or in 
the cancellation process online.

Given how unusual it is to not be refunded automatically when cancelling a 
booking, I think that to not even tell us is dishonest. MC, London W3 

Clearly travel plans can change at the last minute, and at least Avis will 
allow you to cancel the booking and get a full refund when rivals will give you 
little or nothing back.

We urge everyone to read the terms and conditions carefully so you know what 
to expect. This information is in Avis’s T&Cs,with an address to write to to 
claim your refund <http:// http://www.avis.co.uk/about-avis/booking-conditions>
. But you do have to plough through all the very small, small print to find it.

The firm said in a statement: “Avis can confirm that customers who book with 
us online and then cancel their rental do need to contact our customer services 
team to arrange their refund, either by phone, email or in writing.

“All customers are welcome to contact us at any point to discuss their rental 
or any other queries.”

The good news is that you have since received the full amount, £102.96, and 
Avis is reviewing its communications as a result of your feedback.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 