
IT operations – especially large data centres using high density computing 
power – are, perhaps, not the most likely places to find new approaches to 
sustainability.

Analysts Gartner reckon that IT is responsible for some 2% of global CO2 
emissions, not far behind aviation.

Moreover, a growing dependency on large-scale IT and the internet has 
generated strong growth in the number and size of data centres, despite the 
global recession.

But in Capgemini's new Merlin centre in Swindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swindon>, the company thinks it has found the 
way forward.

Capgemini has established a new approach for building energy efficient data 
centres. Rather than build from scratch, it has used an existing building 
'shell' and populated it with prefabricated modules, similar to those used as 
mobile hospitals by the British army in Afghanistan.

This in itself minimises the environmental impact that would come with a 
new-build project and cuts development time from 18 months to just 22 weeks.

But the company has gone much further. It claims that Merlin is its first 
facility to be designed with sustainability in mind and as part of a concerted 
strategy to drive down carbon emissions and power consumption.

Merlin aims to achieve a step-change in every aspect – from the smart 
engineering of the building to the use of many innovative features, such as 
fresh-air cooling, battery-free uninterruptible power supply (UPS) and use of 
recyclable or reusable materials.

The key feature is the cooling system, which combines fresh air and 
pre-evaporative cooling. It is set up to ensure the tightest possible real-time 
control of temperature, humidity and air-flow at minimum energy cost.

Merlin includes new "flywheel technology" in its UPS system, with kinetic 
energy replacing high-carbon batteries.

The centre was also built using sustainable materials. The modules themselves 
– which can be stacked to create more capacity in future – are 100% reusable 
and their components 95% recyclable.

Merlin also gives commercial as well as environmental benefits.

First, more clients are demanding firm evidence of sustainability action from 
data storage providers. Second, by minimising power use, Merlin achieves lower 
running costs that translate into attractive prices.

The centre has achieved immediate commercial success – with its earliest 
clients including Anglian Water, the Environment Agency and Schneider Electric.

The £30m project joins 27 other data centres operated by Capgemini worldwide 
and its design is already being replicated in America, Europe and the Far East.

The company believes it has proved that it can boost performance and customer 
service, even when it puts the environment first.

And with maximum power efficiency, lower emissions, minimum water usage and 
cuts in waste and pollution, it claims to have created "the world's most 
sustainable data centre".

Within its UK operations, data centres consume 75% of the electricity used by 
the company and are the largest contributor to carbon emissions.

Investment in Merlin is therefore a step towards achieving Capgemini's target 
of improving energy efficiency by 20% by 2014.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 