
If Vince Vaughn is currently the best-value star in Hollywood, who takes the 
all-time title?

 Simon Thomas, Redcar

Spangler Arlington Brugh signed to MGM on February 6 1934 on a seven-year 
contract at $35 per week. Unhappy at being the lowest paid contract actor in 
Hollywood, he sought an audience with studio chief Louis B Mayer, but emerged 
with nothing but a new name, Robert Taylor. Having been loaned out for his 
first two pictures, Taylor made such a poor impression in A Wicked Woman (1934) 
that he was demoted to feeding lines to actresses in screen tests. However, he 
clawed his way back into favour and received a pay rise to $50 a week in order 
to hire a secretary to answer his fan mail. But it was his success in 
Magnificent Obsession (1935) opposite Irene Dunne on loan to Universal that led 
to him being dubbed "The It Boy" by the press and he returned to MGM on a new 
$750 weekly salary.

Having helped earn the studio millions alongside Greta Garbo in Camille 
(1936), Taylor received a raise to $2,500. Yet even though he headlined such 
hits as A Yank at Oxford (1938), Waterloo Bridge (1940) and Johnny Eager 
(1942), he was easily out-earned by wife Barbara Stanwyck, who was then the 
highest paid woman in Hollywood. While she scooped $323,333 in 1943, Taylor was 
granted a mere $4,000 p/w in his May contract of the same year (although it did 
contain a clause making him the first star to be protected against inflation). 
Yet, Taylor struggled to relaunch his career after war service and he alienated 
many by naming names before the House Committee on Un-American Activities 
inquiry into communism in the film colony. Consequently, even though he 
headlined the fourth highest grossing film to date - Quo Vadis, which took over 
$12m in 1951 - he was only awarded a weekly $6,000 under his next MGM deal in 
January 1955.

Taylor finally left Culver City in 1958, as the longest-running single-studio 
contract player in Hollywood history. Unsurprisingly, he announced that he 
would now be charging $200,000 per picture, plus a percentage of the gross. 
"Maybe," he said, "I'll have something to show for my life."

I am trying to remember the name of Brazilian film about some lowlifes who 
take their dead friend on a last tour of his old drinking haunts. Have you any 
idea?

 Michael J Burt, Harlington

Sometimes it's not what you know, but who you know. Brazilian film expert Yma 
de Almeida identified Walter Avancini's 1978 tele-adaptation of Jorge Amado's 
novel, A Morte e a Morte de Quincas Berro D'Água/The Death and Death of Quincas 
Berro D'Água, which screened on Channel Four in 1986. Published in 1958, 
Amado's novel was a scathing assault on the Brazilian bourgeoisie that also 
combined pioneering elements of regionalism and magic realism. The TV movie 
starred Paulo Gracindo as the respectable family man and public employee who 
abandons his comfortable existence to live among the marginalised people of 
Bahia and it is the drunks and hookers who give him the raucously fond send-off 
that culminates in his body being lost at sea. Sérgio Machado, who debuted so 
impressively with Lower City in 2005, is currently completing a new version for 
the big screen.

Intrigued by Ronald Bergan's item on close-ups, I wondered who was the first 
female to be filmed up close and personal?

 Marianne Rankin, Leicester

The first movie close-up featured Fred Ott, who headlined the 81-frame Edison 
Kinetoscopic Record of a Sneeze 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VVkuEpIGYvY&feature=related>, which was 
recorded in the first week of January 1894 to illustrate an article in Harper's 
Weekly. Journalist Burton Phillips had actually requested a female subject, so 
the mustachioed joker of Thomas Edison's West Orange laboratory must have come 
as something of a surprise. The facial hair of John C Rice dominated another
Kinetoscope short photographed in the famous Black Maria studio, The Kiss (1896)
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zURTEs8C1lo&feature=related>. However, this 
22-second highlight from the saucy Broadway hit, The Widow Jones, co-starred 
Canadian actress May Irwin. Some viewed their embrace with distaste, however, 
and the film was banned in several towns, as such graphic displays of affection 
were deemed wholly inappropriate.

Got a question for Parky? Email ask.parky@theguardian.com
 