
Hi Carrie! You were raised on a farm. Did you have to help out with the 
animals?

When I was needed, but I wasn't waking up at 4am. We only had cows. They 
weren't milk cows, it was cattle. There were many times when the fence would be 
down and the cows always got out when Dad was gone. Mum and I would have to go 
and get them back in.

Is it true that cows get separation anxiety when they're alone?

The worst part of the year for me was when we took some off to sell, because 
they would cry for each other for a couple of days. That's why I don't eat meat.

Did you decide to be a vegetarian when you saw your parents castrating a bull?

No, well sort of, yes. That's when I stopped eating red meat. Growing up where 
I grew up it was hard to cut out meat altogether. It was really when I moved 
away and I was doing my own shopping that I could go vegetarian.

In 2007 you were voted the World's Sexiest Vegetarian by PETA (1 <> <>). In 
2005 you were the co-winner with Chris Martin. Is he sexy?

I mean, any guy on stage doing his thing is definitely sexy. He's a fit guy.

Eating a beefburger or never singing again: which would you chose?

[Looks horrified] Oh no. One beefburger? I don't know. I can't imagine myself 
ever being put in that situation. Can it just be a bite? Maybe I could do that. 
Maybe. But I'd feel really bad about it.

Is it true you have Scottish heritage?

That's on my Wikipedia and I don't know why. Someone keeps putting it up 
there. According to that page I'm also a member of a Native American tribe (2 <>
 <>). We keep changing it and they keep changing it back: they're adamant I'm 
Scottish.

How odd.

It is. I mean, I could be. My dad recently told me that my 
great-great-grandfather was born in Ireland. I don't know whereabouts though. I 
sent him a text asking him and he never texted back. I was like, I should know 
this, I'm playing there soon and I'm sure if I say "My great-great-grandpa 
Green was born here" the fans would want to know where and I'd have to say "Dad 
never texted me back".

You almost signed a deal aged 14 with Capitol Records (3 <> <>). Do you feel 
relieved that it never happened?

I do. I was way too young. I tried out for American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> in my last year at 
university and I was able to grow up and live on my own and balance a 
chequebook and have a job.

You're an alumnus of the Alpha Iota chapter of Sigma Sigma Sigma sorority. 
What does that mean? Did you have to drink each other's sick to get in or 
something?

[Looks horrified] No. No, no. No. Basically it's a group of girls on campus 
and we did a lot of philanthropy work and we're always raising money for 
something.

Can anyone join?

[Carefully] Yes, anyone can go to recruitment and you have to be a fit for 
them and they have to be a fit for you. Once you join one you can never join 
another. I see them at shows everywhere. I see my sorority sisters from other 
colleges, which is really cool. We always had a float in the parades and we 
always went to the football and basketball games together and that made college 
more bearable.

Why did you give up on singing when you finished college?

It's not a real job. I'm such a practical person and I've always been a 
thinker and a planner. It's not something you can go to school to do. It's not 
real.

What made you want to audition for American Idol in that case?

I thought "Why not?" I've always loved to sing and when I found out where the 
auditions were going to be held, my mum offered to take me. I was like, "It's 
stupid, what chance do I have?"

As early as week four, Simon Cowell said you were the clear winner (4 <> <>). 

I remember he went on Oprah or Ellen and was talking about a little blonde 
girl who tried out in Missouri and I assumed that was me, so he was always a 
big supporter of me. Then they started using me on the commercials. I was 
getting ready in my dorm room and I had the TV on and there I was.

Did you get to finish college?

There's a drop date. If you're going to drop a class you have to do it by a 
certain point and then you can get your money back. So I waited for that day 
because I didn't know if they were going to cut me or not [from the show]. I 
remember it was all a secret and I had to go to see them and they were like 
'Why are you dropping out now?' and I couldn't tell them.

Your fans christened themselves "Carrie's Care Bears" during the show. If you 
could come up with a different name for your fans what would it be?(5 <> <>)

They're an army, man. They're intense. They're the people calling radio 
stations and getting my songs played so they work just as hard as I do. They're 
much appreciated.

You've won six Grammy awards, 16 Billboard Music awards, seven American Music 
awards and 11 Academy ofCountry <https://www.theguardian.com/music/country> 
Music awards. Where do you keep them all?

I have a piano room in my house. That was one of the treats I got myself – I 
just wanted a fabulous piano. So I have plaques and things in there. I don't 
want them all over my house because that would be … People would be like, "Boy, 
she likes herself doesn't she?" My husband plays hockey professionally (6 <> <>)
so he's got jerseys and stuff in there too.

Your song Jesus, Take The Wheel is both a literal and metaphorical plea for 
Jesus to take over. Can you drive?

Erm, I, yes. Am I good driver? No. I've never had … knock on wood [searches 
for a bit of wood] … knock on something … I've never had a wreck but I kind of 
bump into things a lot. My husband has had backup cameras installed on my car. 
I had to get him to replace the bumper because I backed into a telephone pole. 
I'm that kind of driver.

What happens on Carrie Underwood Day in Oklahoma?

I don't know. I think everyone's forgotten about it. The reason they did that 
is because the Idol top three would go back to their home towns and they would 
declare a day your day and give you the keys to the city. I don't think 
anything happens though.

Is it true that as part of winning American Idol you got access to a private 
jet?

At the time, because even when you're on a show like that it's not like I had 
money all of a sudden, and a lot of times when someone gives you a gift of that 
magnitude you have to pay taxes on it. I didn't have the money to pay taxes on 
a jet, so I was like, "I'm good thanks."

Why do you think the press want to start a rivalry between you and Taylor 
Swift?

People love girl drama. You look at the show Nashville, which has just started 
airing here, and there's not that many females in the business. There are way 
more men. It's a lot harder to make it, so if anything we should all be really 
supportive. I don't know, it just makes for good headlines I guess.

She's obviously worked with Max Martin. Have you ever thought about ditching 
country and going pop?

I've worked with Max Martin as well, on my last album, and it's nice to branch 
out. You always want to grow as an artist and you don't want to make the same 
album again. I would never intentionally do anything that might leave country 
music. I love where I'm at. You do want to experiment. I write with random 
writers sometimes. I've worked with Ryan Tedder, I've worked with people who've 
worked with hardcore rap artists. You just never know what you're going to find.

You're performing at the C2C: Country to Country festival at the 02. Why do 
you think it's taken so long for the UK to fully embrace the genre?

I don't know. I mean, we definitely in the past have stuck to more rural-type 
songs. People would write about their lives and sing songs about their lives 
and that's why it's been so successful in the States, because a lot of people 
can identify. I feel like over the past decade country music has really 
expanded on subject matter, so it's probably a lot more relatable.

You recently turned 30, but claimed it wasn't your birthday but the "the first 
anniversary of my 29th birthday". That's not fooling anyone, is it?

[Laughs] It just sounds so weird to say I'm 30. I don't feel old or that I 
think being 30 is old, it's just weird to say. I don't like saying I'm in my 
30s. I'm 29 and 367 days old.

Did you have a massive party?

I did last year. My husband threw me a big surprise 80s birthday party. I 
didn't know it was happening so my friends had got me bright blue spandex 
tights and bright shorts and I had this cut-up MTV shirt and there was a beauty 
station and they crimped my hair. It was awesome. This year we were on the road 
until recently so I told my husband and my friends that I didn't want to do 
anything. I actually ended up taking care of my husband who wasn't feeling 
well. I spent my 30th birthday eating cake by myself.

• Carrie Underwood performs on Sunday at the C2C: Country to Country festival 
at the 02, London.

Footnotes

 <>(1) Leona Lewis won in 2008 and 2009.
 <>(2) The Muscogee Creek Nation of Oklahoma.
 <>(3) The contract was scrapped at the last minute when management changed 
hands.
 <>(4) Carrie won season' 4 of American Idol. 37 million votes were cast in 
the final alone.
 <>(5) Carrier Pigeons? The Carrie Underlings? Taylor Swift Fans' Older 
Sisters?
 <>(6) She's married to Mike Fisher who of course plays ice hockey for the 
Nashville Predators.

• This article was corrected on 15 March 2013. It originally said that 
Underwood saw her parents castrating a cow.
 