
He is credited with turning a school once routinely described as the worst in 
Britain into an institution that, in the words of Ofsted, "transforms the life 
chances of both students and their families", but for Sir William Atkinson, the 
headteacher at Phoenix high school, west London, such progress is still all too 
rare.

"There is a massive gap in terms of student outcome based on social class," he 
says. "Despite significant levels of funding and a tremendous amount of 
interest, generally the gap is no smaller than it was 10 years ago. This is the 
challenge for the next few years."

Atkinson is adamant that education – "the nation's future" – must not be 
shortchanged in the funding crisis. But he is willing to consider the more 
positive effects of the hunt for where to make cuts. "It does give us an 
opportunity to stand back and look critically at certain levels of expenditure, 
how it's being delivered and what we're actually getting for our money. That's 
absolutely critical. In periods of prosperity people can get a bit more 
complacent.

"There needs to be much more rigorous evaluation of value for money. Without 
that you might end up cutting the wrong things."

The secret to Phoenix's success is threefold, he suggests. "You always get 
really good, focused leadership, but that's not enough. You always have a 
committed group of teachers who believe that every child can succeed, 
irrespective of their background, and they are often supported by other 
individuals who are not teachers." These might include social workers, school 
counsellors, nurses and speech therapists, with such multi-agency working 
essential in the most deprived parts of the country.

"Given the challenges these schools face and the baggage that many of the 
pupils bring to school … it's absolutely vital that the social needs of the 
children are met by other individuals, so teachers can get on with their job 
and are not acting as untrained social workers.

"You can't manage without fantastic teachers and tremendous leadership but by 
itself it wouldn't give you the capacity to make the massive difference you 
need to make."

Atkinson sees collaboration and federation building between the best schools 
and others nearby performing less well as a key tactic for the future, 
particularly in light of the impending retirement of "significant" numbers of 
top headteachers.

"No longer can you afford to have the luxury of one outstanding head with just 
one school," he says. "The spread of collaborations and federations is a very 
healthy and welcome development. They're beginning to spread the very good 
practice across two or three schools. That's necessary to do that significant 
jacking up of achievement that we're all looking for."

As a general election looms, Atkinson wishes all political parties would 
consider the practicalities of running schools before their natural desire to 
make their mark on policy. "What's essential is a period of stability. All 
governments of all persuasions like to tinker. There's too much of a tendency 
to change things and to do so before things have had an opportunity to get 
embedded.

"It doesn't give us the stable environment we need to challenge young people 
and raise standards. We need greater certainty."
 