
How do you respond to people who ask: "Don't you have better things to spend 
your money on?"
Warcraft is a hobby. People spend a whole lot more on books, art, cars and 
other hobbies.

But what do you get out of it?
The reason people buy gold is the same reason people pay people to wash their 
car – they're lazy, and would rather spend money than doing it themselves.
You could spend time farming gold to use in the game, let's say, 20 real-life 
hours. Or, you could go to work for two hours and earn the money to buy the 
gold. You save yourself a hell of a lot of time. If I'm playing I want to play, 
not do monotonous, boring tasks. It just makes sense.

Have you ever made money from gold farming?
I was never a gold farmer myself, but I was involved in the business. Gold 
farmers are the people who do the grunt work – they're the labourers, the ones 
toiling in the virtual field. The people making the money are the peoplerunning 
the show. The people I know were all traders. It's what I used to do as well. 
Look for good deals, then sell on at profit.
I even did import/export across servers for Ultima Online players. Travel to 
an Asian server, where they value things differently, get some awesome stuff 
dirt cheap, travel back to a European or American server, and sell those things 
for a huge profit. One good trip could easily net you a few hundred pounds, and 
that was in a time of economic hardship.

Do many of your friends spend money on these virtual services?
Some do, some don't. It depends on their real-life situation. Gaming is no 
longer the redheaded stepchild of hobbies. It's not limited to nerds and 
teenagers. People with careers and well-paying jobs are more likely to use 
these services than kids. It really depends on the money/time balance. Those 
with money and no time are more likely to buy gold. Kids and students are more 
likely to just farm for it themselves.

Did you consider gold farming as a way of cheating the game?
Nope.

How do you make these purchases?
I used a website a friend recommended. There are plenty of big-name sites that 
can provide such services at low risk.

What do you think about the people who supply these services?
Supply and demand. It's the cornerstone of western economy. Gold farming is 
nothing new. Take a look at older games such a§s EverQuest and Ultima Online 
and you will see that their in-game economies have in turn affected the real 
world. But WoW brought this subculture into the spotlight with its huge 
subscribers.

Have you ever been cheated by gold-farming companies?
If you use a popular site the chances of getting cheated is very low. It 
simply doesn't make sense to cheat someone out of a small amount of cash and 
lose future business.

Do you think about the conditions of the workers who are supplying these 
virtual services?
I don't think about the workers. I think about the product. Do you think about 
factory workers when you put on your socks? I'm sure the wage gold farmers are 
paid is low. Manual labourers in third world countries probably earn a similar 
amount, but I doubt you would ask someone this kind of question if you saw them 
drinking some coffee. I think times are changing. Going back some years, a job 
involving a computer was a skilled job. Nowadays, keyboards and mice are the 
new ploughs and shears.
 