
One of the best-known stories by the Argentinian author Jorge Luis Borges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jorgeluisborges> takes the form of a fake 
literary essay about a Frenchman who rewrites a section of Don Quixote word for 
word and is showered with praise for his daring.

It is probably safe to say that Borges’s 79-year-old widow, María Kodama – 
sole heir and literary custodian of his oeuvre – takes a dimmer view of such 
rewrites.

The novelist and poet Pablo Katchadjian is facing trial for “intellectual 
property fraud” after publishing a reworking of Borges’s 1945 story The Aleph.
The Fattened Aleph 
<http://tallerdeexpresion1.sociales.uba.ar/files/2012/04/El-Aleph-Engordado.pdf>
 – originally published by a small press in 2009 – extended Borges’s work from 
its original 4,000 words to 9,600.

Most of the alterations consist of the addition of adjectives and descriptive 
passages and do not change the original plot, which revolves around a “a small 
iridescent sphere” in a Buenos Aires basement, through which a person can see 
the entirety of creation.

Nabokov, Neruda and Borges revealed as losers of 1965 Nobel prize
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/06/borges-auden-nabokov-neruda-nobel-prize-literature-1965>
Kodama launched her legal action in 2011, arguing that Katchadjian had used 
the story without seeking permission. “If you use something that isn’t yours, 
the least you can do is ask for permission,” she told the newspaper Clarín at 
the time.

After five years, a court hearing has finally been set for 14 February, and 
the judge in the case appears to be leaning in Kodama’s favour. “The alteration 
of the text of the work by Borges is evident,” Judge Guillermo Carvajal stated 
in his ruling for a trial.

Kodama’s lawyer Fernando Soto dismissed Katchadjian’s claims that the work was 
a literary experiment. “Only Katchadjian’s name appears on the cover. It 
doesn’t say ‘The Aleph by Borges, altered by Katchadjian’. Borges is not 
mentioned in the index or the copyright page either. The only place Borges 
appears is in a brief postscript at the end of the text,” Soto said.

Katchadjian’s many supporters argue that El Aleph is so well-known that its 
reworking did not require a Borges attribution and that, in any case, only a 
few hundreds copies of the reworked story were published. Legally, however, 
copyright infringement does not require evidence of profit.

Revered by many as a key figure in 20th-century Spanish-language literature, 
but abhorred by others for his elitism, Borges still towers over Argentina’s 
literary stage 30 years after his death.

Major contemporary novelists including César Árias and Ricardo Piglia have 
expressed their support for Katchadjian and demanded that Kodama drop her 
lawsuit.

A novel oasis: why Argentina is the bookshop capital of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/19/argentina-books-bookstores-reading>
Katchadjian has rarely spoken in public about the case (and did not respond to 
an interview request), but he did discuss it at at an event last year at the 
National Library in Buenos Aires.

“The Fattened Aleph is not plagiarism because no plagiarism is open about its 
source,”Katchadjian said <https://youtu.be/aKVnNAAWNcE>. “Neither is it a joke 
that went wrong, or one that went right. It is a book I wrote based on a 
previous text.”

This is not Katchadjian’s first reworking of an Argentinian classic. In 2009, 
he published a remix of Martín Fierro, an epic 19th-century poem about gauchos, 
Argentina’s cowboys. In that case, Katchadjian organised the poem’s lines in 
alphabetical order, creating new meanings from the same text.


Ironically, Borges delighted in literary pastiche and false attribution. At 
the start of his literary career, he published a series of what he later 
admitted had been “hoaxes and pseudo-essays” in Buenos Aires newspapers and 
magazines, passing off texts of his own as belonging to other writers and 
writing reviews of non-existent books.

PEN International, the world’s leading association of writers, has also come 
out strongly in Katchadjian’s defence, describing his prosecution as “a 
disproportionate reaction to a literary experiment 
<http://www.pen-international.org/newsitems/argentina-drop-charges-against-au 
thor-on-trial-for-plagiarising-borges-in-literary-experiment/>”.

Tim Youd reproducing classic novels is not original – Pierre Menard came first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/11/tim-youd-classic-novels-pierre-menard-don-quixote>
Katchadjian’s laywer, Ricardo Strafacce, said he was confident the lawsuit 
would not prosper. “Legal forensic experts have already established that The 
Fattened Aleph is a new work of art. Secondly, the court will also take into 
account that there was no intent by Katchadjian to deceive the reader as to 
Borges’s authorship of the original The Aleph, which is clearly stated in 
Katchadjian’s book.”

If found guilty, Katchadjian could theoretically face up to six years in 
prison, but Soto dismisses the idea that this could happen. “As a first-time 
offender he would receive only a suspended sentence. Even as a second-time 
offender he still wouldn’t actually see any real prison time,” says Kodama’s 
lawyer.

The trial will have to decide if Katchadjian’s work is a legitimate literary 
experiment or simply a case of intellectual property fraud. In a postscript to 
The Fattened Aleph, Katchadjian explains that he purposefully meant to erase 
the boundaries between his additions and the original Borges, writing: “The 
best moments, it seems to me, are those in which you can’t know for certain who 
wrote what.”
 