
Dr Agnelo Fernandes, 49, is a GP in Croydon, south London, and the leader of 
the Croydon GP Federation, an alliance of 16 practices – 90 family doctors 
covering 140,000 patients. It has improved patient care by making diagnostic 
services – ultrasound scans and echocardiograms – available quickly and easily 
at six surgeries in the borough, ending long waits for appointments at hospital.

When the federation this year won a prestigious Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service Journal award for 
improving patient access, the then health secretary Alan Johnson praised it as 
"really inspirational". The GPs now want to offer more services in their 
practices that have traditionally only been provided at hospitals.

"People with all sorts of conditions have benefited from our Diagnostics in 
the Community project: back, knee or joint pain, suspected heart trouble or 
gynaecological problems. We have cut the waiting time for ultrasound scanning 
from 20 to two weeks and for an echocardiogram from six months to a fortnight, 
made them available closer to people's homes and ensured earlier diagnosis.

"Under the old setup of long waiting times, patients' health was suffering, 
which was unacceptable. The service was driven by frustration at the way theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> does things. The primary care trust 
had been talking about tackling the waiting times problem for about four years. 
We decided to create the service in late 2007 and started just three months 
later. Lots of other areas are now copying what we've done.

"It's a shame that in years of annual real terms, annual increases the NHS 
didn't maximise the potential of innovation. But the imminent financial squeeze 
could force the NHS to redesign services radically, because if you don't do 
that you won't be able to afford them. Doing that could be popular, too.

"Redesigning services doesn't mean cutting them. It means transferring them 
from high-cost environments in hospitals to less expensive places in primary 
care. For example, the majority of people needing urgent care, in A&E and 
walk-in centres, could be dealt with that way."
 