
Building materials company Cemex UK has launched a biodiversity strategy for 
its 450 sites throughout the UK and is working with the RSPB to make it a 
reality.

The RSPB is in fact its official adviser – making Cemex the first private 
company to take such steps towards conservation.

The company is planning to identify 1,000 hectares of biodiversity habitats by 
2020 – 100 hectares a year – and establish regional flagship sites where land 
has been restored following quarrying. The first 100 hectares have already been 
earmarked.

The Cemex UK Biodiversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/biodiversity> Strategy 
2010-2020 pledges to promote biodiversity in a range of different ways. To 
identify habitats, it has trained 600 planners, estate and quarry managers so 
they are aware of biodiversity in day-to-day operations as well as when they 
are restoring or expanding sites. Each business region will have its own 
flagship site.

Biodiversity has become a core business principle in the company's 
environmental monitoring system and employees will be allowed to volunteer on 
nature reserves during work time. Cemex will implement its strategy with the 
RSPB and other organisations including The Wildlife Trust and Butterfly 
Conservation and will hold annual awareness days for local communities.

In addition to its partnership with the RSPB, Cemex is also the first private 
company to make a commitment to such detailed biodiversity targets, to focus 
primarily on delivering priority biodiversity habitats in Britain and to make 
detailed targets available to the public.

The company plays a key role in creating and maintaining Britain's built 
environment and its products, including aggregates, cement and concrete have 
consequences for people and the environment.

Cemex says protecting ecosystems is a fundamental aspect of this work and as 
climate change is posing new threats to nature, conserving biodiversity will 
play an increasingly important role.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 