
Leading shares have started the week on a fairly calm note, with a few notable 
exceptions.

Centrica has dropped 9.1p to 305.1p, a near 3% decline which makes the British 
Gas owner the biggest faller in the FTSE 100. The slide followsenergy secretary 
Ed Davey asking regulator Ofgem to investigate gas prices and the profits being 
made by the big six suppliers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/10/ed-davey-energy-companies-gas-profits-british-gas>
He suggested companies could be broken up if they were deemed to be too 
dominant, with British Gas singled out in particular. Fellow energy companySSE 
is down 20p at £13.37.

But a rise in the gold price has helped push up Mexican precious metal miner 
Fresnillo 28p to 820.5p, while African Barrick Gold has added 16.3p to 239.9p, 
helped by HSBC raising its recommendation from underweight to neutral and its 
target from 160p to 230p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 5.20 points at 6576.88, ahead of this week's 
testimony on central bank forward guidance from both new Federal Reserve chief 
Janet Yellen and the Bank of England's Mark Carney. Rebecca O'Keeffe of 
Interactive Investor said:
 Whilst the last few days have seen a slight shift in sentiment, investors 
remain cautious - however if markets continue to recover then we should see 
investor confidence return.

Forward guidance comes under the spotlight this week with testimony from Janet 
Yellen tomorrow followed by Mark Carney on Wednesday. Mixed US economic data 
means that many are hoping that the new Fed chair will press the pause button 
on tapering. On Wednesday, Mark Carney is due to set out his new guidance 
framework for UK monetary policy. Unemployment will no longer be the sole 
determinant of when the Bank of England might consider hiking rates, but 
questions remain as to what will he replace it with and whether the credibility 
of forward guidance can be rebuilt?

Elsewhere G4S is down 3.8p at 231.3p after rival Securitas reported lower than 
expected quarterly earnings and said signs of economic recovery in Europe and 
the US had not fed through to the security market.

At the same time Panmure Gordon issued a sell note ahead of the company's 
results next month. Analyst Mike Allen said:
 We have reviewed our forecast assumptions and are now 5-11% below consensus 
earnings per share from 2013 to 2015. Our target price also falls to 200p, 
which is based on a more realistic multiple of 12.5 times 2014 earnings per 
share with return on capital employed of 10% which appears more appropriate. 
With 17% potential downside we switch our recommendation from hold to sell.

G4S faces a number of headwinds across different fronts with concerns over 
slowing growth in developing markets and weaker foreign exchange, further 
margin pressure in the UK and US together with further disposals required to 
deleverage the balance sheet. 
Vodafone has dipped 1.15p to 220.85p after reports it had made a €7bn offer 
for Spanish cable company Ono. The fall has come despite Goldman Sachs resuming 
coverage with a buy rating and 275p price target. The bank said the mobile 
phone group was potentially both an acquirer and a target:
 We believe the current share price fails to reflect the opportunities for 
Vodafone to improve its structural position via accelerated investment (driving 
weaker competitors to consolidate) and via fixed line acquisitions, which in 
our view are a pre-requisite to restore industry pricing power.

Additionally, Vodafone is one of the only substantial assets available to 
potential industry acquirers seeking to build global scale, with the added 
attraction of £106bn of long-lasting agreed tax losses.

We identify $2bn-$7bn of potential annual synergies should Vodafone combine 
with a leading global operator.  