
For a game that can turn on such tiny moments it is remarkable how often 
football delivers the fitting result.


It’s no slight on Western Sydney Wanderers’ impressive season to state that in 
this year’sA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> grand final 
the better team won; and so for the seventh time in 11 years the team that 
finished premiers has added the descriptor “champions” as well.

Adelaide United crowned A-League champions after grand final win over Western 
Sydney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/adelaide-united-crowned-a-league-champions-after-grand-final-win-over-western-sydney>
The post-game cardboard standee and party popper celebrations may have been 
underwhelming, but there was nothing lacklustre about Adelaide United’s 
on-field performance.

It may not have been the tense, testy affair that so often characterises 
finals, but all four goals spoke volumes as to the calibre of this Adelaide 
team.

Marcelo Carrusca and Bruce Kamau’s combination for the opener was inspired; 
Isaias’s free-kick was inch-perfect; and Pablo Sanchez’s cool finish was 
ruthless in exposing a rare Wanderers defensive lapse.

Even Scott Neville’s belter seemed to highlight the quality it would require 
to breach Eugene Galekovic’s goal.

If the Wanderers appeared to fall short of the captivating semi-final showing 
against Brisbane, then the obverse side to this was the impressive strength of 
Adelaide defensively.

Whereas United dissected Western Sydney with the clinical precision of a 
scalpel, the Wanderers’ response was that of a tooth-worn hacksaw.

Romeo Castelen, for all his mercurial talent, is often guilty of 
inconsistency, but he was in good company as Mark Bridge delivered a quiet 
performance and Mitch Nichols suffered the ignominy of being withdrawn before 
even an hour had passed.

These are quality players – as Brisbane can attest – and they don’t lose their 
ability overnight. If Western Sydney’s attack was blunt, then it was the grit 
of Adelaide’s collective defensive structure that caused this.

How many times did Castelen find himself with two markers? How often did we 
see him receive the ball in dangerous central positions?

Much has been made of Guillermo Amor’s links to the fabled Barcelona school of 
attacking football, but it has been defensively that Adelaide has most improved.

Adelaide United's A-League grand final win – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/may/01/adelaide-uniteds-a-league-grand-final-win-in-pictures>
No coach in Reds’ history can boast a record of almost one goal conceded per 
game; and if you consider Adelaide shipped 17 in their first eight games, the 
turnaround thereafter is even more remarkable.

Seven clean sheets away from home, and 13 in all – just one shy of the 
all-time A-League record – mean that in almost half Adelaide’s games this 
season oppositions have gone home empty-handed.

To do so with world-class players is the sign of a decent manager; to do so 
with no better than decent players is the hallmark of a world-class coach.

Adelaide’s season has not been defined by a Diego Castro or a Bruno Fornaroli. 
It’s been defined by a striker maligned for his limited goal return, now in 
career best form; by a defensive-midfielder released by his old club, now 
reimagined as a reliable central defender; by two full-backs whose youthful 
promise threatened to dissipate into mediocrity, who are now commanding the 
attention once again of overseas clubs.

In addition to revitalising some of their more mature players, the Adelaide 
coaching staff has also led the league in developing young talent.

Isaias may have won the Joe Marston Medal for best on ground, but it was the 
20-year-old Stefan Mauk alongside him in Adelaide’s engine room who is emerging 
as one of the A-League’s best young talents.

When James Jeggo’s mid-season departure left a gaping hole in Adelaide’s 
midfield, Amor didn’t panic – he didn’t rush out and sign a veteran on a 
short-term contract, but instead showed faith in teenager George Mells, before 
Mauk made the role his own.

To back and to develop young players takes faith from a coach; but it also 
takes faith from a board.

Gone are the days when behind-the-scenes disarray prompted then coach Aurelio 
Vidmar to predictthe club would “never win anything” 
<https://www.facebook.com/SBSTheWorldGame/videos/10153543451907752/>; now in 
his captain’s acceptance speech, the very first people thanked by Galekovic 
were the members of the board.

There’s a sense of coherence surrounding Adelaide these days, in its 
footballing philosophy and in its identity as a club, that speaks to the 
patient long-term planning so often lacking in increasingly results-driven 
football.

Amor’s philosophies may have altered subtly from Josep Gombau’s but there’s an 
underlying continuity to the Adelaide project that enables the playing 
personnel to continue to adapt and to develop.

In Gombau and Amor are two coaches who place a premium on encouraging their 
players to think for themselves on the field.

Western Sydney facing points deduction after flares lit at A-League grand final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/western-sydney-facing-points-deduction-after-flare-lit-at-a-league-grand-final>
For A-League fans who have witnessed a production line of cookie-cutter 
replica full-backs; young wingers or strikers, coached within an inch of their 
lives in tactical formations, patterns of movement or passing, the Adelaide 
model is a much-needed breath of fresh air.

It was fitting that Kamau scored Adelaide’s opener – a goal that showcased not 
just his emerging talent, but also his increasing intelligence as a footballer.

Watching live, Wanderers fans may have questioned the defending from Scott 
Jamieson, allowing his winger to sneak inside him so easily. But seen in 
replay, it’s not a case of ball-watching – the left-back, selected in the PFA 
team of the year, is constantly scanning for the youngster’s run; but Kamau 
patiently waits and times his run for when the defender is wrong-footed, 
enabling him to gain a metre and attack the space in front of Jamieson.

It’s a minor detail, but just one of the many that combined to deliver an 
inaugural championship for Adelaide.

 It’s not quite Das Reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/oct/12/das-reboot-raphael-honigstein-germany-football-revival-video>
, but for any A-League club struggling to define its identity, it wouldn’t hurt 
to take notes from Adelaide’s patient revolution
 