
The never-ending scene of chaos at Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> has unquestionably cast a cloud 
over the Scottish season. It has also probably had a negative impact on wider 
perceptions of the Scottish Premier League. Yet the occasional whisper – 
thankfully it remains just that – suggesting Celtic's imminent championship win 
should have an asterisk alongside it, or be classed as tainted, is among the 
more ludicrous in what is seldom a sane environment.

It would be folly to claim Rangers' off-field problems had no impact on Ally 
McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> and his players. 
The manager continues to act admirably in what have regressed into shambolic 
circumstances. Still, there are elements of Rangers' support who believe 
McCoist's early-season failings have been all-too easily masked over. Even when 
Rangers established a league advantage, they seemed to toil for so many of 
their wins. There was a sense, even among their own fans, that a stumble would 
be forthcoming; the key was if and when Celtic could kickstart their own form.

Neil Lennon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neil-lennon> did not have to 
look far to find detractors during those opening exchanges of the campaign. 
Given the scale of the Rangers story is obvious across Britain, it is perfectly 
understandable that such narrative dominates Scottish football's news agenda.

As a quiet backdrop, Celtic face back-to-back cup ties that will determine the 
size of their end of season honours list. Lennon, who seemed in such a hopeless 
position with Celtic 3-0 down to Kilmarnock in October, is in close pursuit of 
a rare domestic treble. Lennon believesCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> haven't been handed due credit 
for their touch, a statement that has merit.

The scale of Celtic's achievements shouldn't be ignored, regardless of events 
at Ibrox. For Lennon, recovery from that half-time scenario at Rugby Park is as 
astonishing as it was unforeseen. Even before Rangers entered administration, 
Celtic had clawed back a 15-point deficit in the SPL to lead by four. At that 
stage, few onlookers believed Lennon's team would be halted. Had Celtic trailed 
at the juncture of Rangers' points deduction, the debate may have more value.

Celtic have played the best – routinely entertaining – football and have a 
clutch of increasingly courted players who are rightly regarded as the most 
superior in the country. Charlie Mulgrew has emerged so strongly in the Celtic 
defence that he has strong claims on Scotland's player of the year titles, with 
Gary Hooper's all-round game showing improvement almost beyond recognition.

Such matters highlight good management, as do the relative lack of funds spent 
by Celtic last summer and in January. The emergence of a consistent – and now 
highly valuable – James Forrest is just another of so many positive aspects of 
Celtic's season. To claim progress, which will now return tangible reward, 
should somehow be diminished by events elsewhere bears no resemblance to 
reality.

As Rangers cantered towards nine titles in a row from 1989, nobody thought 
about talking down that achievement or qualifying it in record books by looking 
at the financial picture elsewhere.

It was Falkirk who bundled Rangers out of the League Cup and Dundee United who 
handed them an early departure from the Scottish Cup. Celtic travel to 
Tannadice for what promises to be an enthralling Scottish Cup tie on Sunday, 
before meeting Kilmarnock at Hampden in the League Cup final a week later.

Celtic's statistics paint a picture. They have not lost a domestic match since 
2 October with the draw last Saturday in Aberdeen ending a 17-match winning SPL 
streak. In the Europa League, Celtic could consider themselves a tad 
unfortunate not to emerge from a strong group.

Too often, matters of the Old Firm are viewed in black and white, with 
"failure" too common a term. Celtic had a fine league season of 2010-11, 
claiming 92 points; Rangers clearly excelled in making it to 93.

Lennon's picking up of the mess inherited from Tony Mowbray has continued 
apace. That alone is worthy of appreciation, whether roundly offered or not.
 