 Charles Kennedy takes his politics seriously, if not himself. Disguised by his 
genial manner, he has emerged as the most realistic politician to have led the 
Liberal Democrats, if we accept politics as the art of the possible. Doubters 
in his party point out that he also takes this pragmatism to extremes, even to 
the point of seeming bland.
At prime minister's questions, Paddy Ashdown could bark out sharper questions 
at Tony Blair. But unlike Mr Ashdown, or party grandee Roy Jenkins, Mr Kennedy 
is not gullible about which private promises Mr Blair can deliver against the 
massed ranks of his cabinet, most Labour MPs and the party machine.

He knows that Labour's partial concessions on proportional representation in 
Scotland and Wales have provided as much as the Lib Dems can expect, much as he 
would like Mr Blair to fulfil Labour's manifesto promise of a referendum on 
voting reform.

Instead of chasing the Lib Dems' elusive holy grail, he prefers to identify 
with Labour in regenerating the NHS. Nick Harvey, his health spokesman, has 
collaborated with the health secretary, Alan Milburn. This illustrates Mr 
Kennedy's crucial strategy: the Lib Dems as friendly rivals of Labour, but 
deadly enemies of the Tories. "William Hague's Conservatives in government 
would be an absolute and unmitigated disaster," Mr Kennedy has stated.

He sticks to that message even when temptation to do otherwise crowds in. On 
the day in January 2001 that Peter Mandelson resigned, Mr Kennedy chose to use 
his first question at question time to attack the gloating attitude of the 
Conservative party, rather than champion Norman Baker, the Lib Dem backbencher 
whose written parliamentary question caused Mr Mandelson to quit.

It was this unstated strategy of anti-Conservatism which underlay the Lib 
Dems' escape from the minor party laager in May 1997 under Paddy Ashdown's 
guidance and remains the basis of the Labour-Lib Dem coalition in Scotland. It 
is only on this basis that Mr Kennedy hopes to persuade Labour-haters in his 
party that they can better defend their expanded bridgehead of 47 seats against 
the Tories.

His "friendly rivalry" with Labour does not prevent the occasional shin 
kicking in public (over benefit cuts for the disabled and the financing of 
London Underground) or in private (allowing his party to bring down Labour's 
Alun Michael as leader of the Welsh Assembly).

The Europhile Mr Kennedy knows he has no alternative to an alliance with 
Labour if he wants to achieve entry into the euro and closer EU ties. His 
critics claim he is tardy and indolent, taking a taxi rather than walking a 
quarter mile. But he has won two crucial contests - that of president of the 
party in 1990 and its leader in 1999 - with the most gruelling campaigns ever 
on the Lib Dems' "rubber-chicken circuit" stretching from Cornwall to Skye.

Mr Kennedy was born in Inverness, the son of Ian Kennedy, a crofter, 
engineering draughtsman and semi-professional fiddle player. A successful 
student, he made his way from Lochaber high school in Fort William - where at 
15 he joined the Labour party - to Glasgow University. There he joined the 
Social Democratic club, a debating society, and became president of the union 
in 1980. He won an honours degree and a Fulbright scholarship to Indiana 
University in the US. He seemed set for a career as an amusing lecturer in some 
obscure American or Scottish university.

But Roy Jenkins' first, failed attempt to win Glasgow Hillhead in 1982 ignited 
Mr Kennedy's enthusiasm for Europe and the new Social Democratic party. His 
first act for the SDP was to spend a very wet day outside a polling booth 
warning voters about a candidate who had changed his name by deed poll to "Roy 
Jenkins".

For his pains, he was selected by the SDP for the "hopeless" constituency of 
Ross, Cromarty and Skye where in previous years the Liberals had only won 9% of 
the vote. He thought victory was so unlikely that he flew off to the US 
immediately the polls closed. But, at 23, he had scored the most famous of the 
six seats the SDP won, ousting the Hamish Gray, the former Tory minister.

That September a standing ovation greeted him at the Salford conference of the 
SDP for a mature speech on poverty and welfare reform. Arriving at the Commons, 
he hit the ground running as the SDP spokesman on social security, Scotland and 
health.

Initially the only one of the five SDP MPs to favour a merger with the 
Liberals, he stood aside as a potential interim leader of the SDP's pro-merger 
faction to back Robert Maclennan - ruling himself out as well as a possible 
leader of the newly merged party. When the Liberal Democrats was formed he 
scorned the tendency of ex-Liberals to formulate detailed policies, as if on 
the eve of taking over the government.

He was unable to take seriously Mr Ashdown's sudden embrace of Tony Blair and 
his belief that the Lib Dems would score two cabinet seats if Labour won in 
1997. Mr Kennedy had long favoured working with a "healthy modern Labour 
party", but he objected to secret deals. This clash explains Mr Ashdown's 
demotion of him, after the Lib Dems had won 46 seats in 1997, to agriculture 
spokesman.

Although that yielded more time for television appearances and his perceptive 
columns in the Scotsman newspaper, it ignited an atypical smouldering 
resentment. This led him to renew his attack on the rubber-chicken circuit with 
the enthusiasm needed to beat the hyperactive Simon Hughes by 28,425 votes to 
21,833 to become leader of the Liberal Democrats at the age of 40.

Ask Aristotle about Charles Kennedy 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-2864,00.html>
 