
Hotel Enfrente Arte, Andalucía, Spain

When the friendly young staff check you in to this funky little 14-room hotel, 
they show you how to operate the espresso machine and pull yourself a San 
Miguel at the bar - because drinks are included in the already-bargain price. 
The buffet breakfast includes pancakes cooked to order and an orchard's worth 
of fruit, and the brightly painted, idiosyncratic rooms have real bohemian 
style. On the edge of handsome Ronda, famous for its gorges and general 
all-round historic loveliness, the hotel has a small pool and pretty garden 
overlooking the rolling mountains where you can hike. This is inland Andalucía 
- home of flamenco and bullfighting, with plenty of photogenic pueblos blancos 
(white villages) to visit.

· 00 34 952 87 90 88, enfrentearte.com <http://www.enfrentearte.com>. Doubles 
from €80 B&B. Flights from Gatwick to Malaga from around £75 return with
cheapflights.co.uk <http://www.cheapflights.co.uk>. 

Casa Sibarita, Valencia, Spain

This sensitively converted townhouse is a 45-minute drive inland from Valencia 
and half an hour from the beaches of Tavernes and Gandía. If you prefer two 
wheels, the owners will lend you bikes to explore the local countryside. The 
five bright, high-ceilinged rooms are tastefully furnished - try to book one 
with a terrace overlooking the 10-metre pool and courtyardgarden. Breakfast is 
fresh fruit, cured local meats and cheeses, home-baked breads and homemade 
preserves, yoghurt and cereals. Dinner is available too, with a Mediterranean 
menu that makes good use of fresh local ingredients - such good use, in fact, 
and at such a reasonable price, that booking is essential.

· 00 34 96 258 6337; casasibarita.es <http://www.casasibarita.es>. Double with 
private terrace €75 B&B. Flights to Valencia from Gatwick with Easyjet.

El Patio, Garachico, Tenerife

This 16th-century manor house is in the middle of a 60-acre banana plantation, 
overlooking the Atlantic in the unspoilt northwest of the island. It is the 
ancestral home of Tenerife's poshest family, and even has its own church (as 
well as a sheltered pool, tennis court and croquet pitch). Most rooms have some 
combination of iron bedsteads, terracotta floors and oak-beamed ceilings, and 
breakfast is a feast of Dionysian proportions. Stroll in the beautiful gardens, 
dine on local dishes in the restaurant and inspect family heirlooms in the 
homely honesty bar. There are more restaurants in Garachico, and excursions 
include the nearby cliffside village of Masca, and volcanic Mount Teide with 
its weird, lunar landscapes.

· 0117 942 8476, i-escape.com <http://www.i-escape.com>. Doubles from €75 B&B 
(four-night minimum stay, closed 11 May-10 July). Flights to Tenerife at
cheapflights.co.uk <http://www.cheapflights.co.uk>.

Hôtel l'Estirado des Adrets Côte d'Azur, France

The Côte d'Azur is pricey, so be cunning and stay inland, in the rolling Vars 
countryside, within 15km of the beaches of Fréjus. The 21 simple whitewashed 
rooms each have a small terrace or balcony overlooking the sheltered pool. Flop 
into it after a day exploring the Riviera beaches, or the inland villages of 
Provence, such as the picture-perfect hilltop settlement of Fayence. In the 
evenings, you can enjoy splendid dinners, either in the restaurant with its 
panoramic views, or in the bijou garden next to the pool - oh, and the chocolat 
moelleux is worth waiting the extra 10 minutes for ...

· 00 33 494 409064, estirado.com <http://www.estirado.com>. Doubles from €82 
B&B. Flights to Nice witheasyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>, bmibaby.com 
<http://www.bmibaby.com> and flybe.com <http://www.flybe.com>. 

La Corniche, Corsica

Views don't come much lovelier than the ones from this hotel, up in the 
village of San Martino di Lota near Bastia, where the loudest sound is of 
church and goat bells. Service is personal and friendly, overseen by the owner, 
Robert Anziani, whose grandparents built the place in the 30s. Many of the 20 
simply furnished rooms have their own small balcony where you can breakfast 
overlooking the village and sea. For dinner, choose from a menu that combines 
traditional recipes and modern takes on the classics (such as foie gras 
marinated in local muscat wine) and eat on the shaded terrace. It's an 
eight-mile drive to the nearest beach, and there are fantastic walks nearby. 
Further afield, visit dramatic Cap Corse, the Patrimonio vineyards and the 
chestnut forests of Balagne.

· 00 33 495 314 098, hotel-lacorniche.com <http://www.hotel-lacorniche.com>. 
Doubles from €77 B&B. Flights to Bastia withxl.com <http://www.xl.com> and 
EasyJet.

Villa Rena Hotel, Santorini, Greece

Santorini's volcanic crater, the caldera, is one of the Greek islands' iconic 
views, and it is a 10-minute walk from this quiet hotel. At the rim, you can 
watch the sun set from one of the cafes. A week spent at the Villa Rena is 
about simple pleasures: when you're not chilling by the pool, or sipping 
retsina at the small bar, shop for ceramics and jewellery in Fera, explore 
ancient ruins, and visit local wineries. For great authentic cooking, try 
Imerovigli Taverna, up the hill. The hotel's 11 air-conditioned, whitewashed 
rooms are small but comfortable - book early to grab one with a balcony.

· Book through i-escape (0117 942 8476, i-escape.com <http://www.i-escape.com>
). Doubles from €67 with small continental breakfast. Flights to Santorini with 
XL and Thompsonfly.

Eleónas Hotel, Evia, Greece

The dramatically beautiful island of Evia, with green mountains rising up from 
the coastline, is so close to central Greece that it's often assumed to be a 
peninsula. In northern Evia, a three-hour drive from Athens (the island is 
linked to the mainland by a bridge), the pretty Eleonas Hotel is set in a 
working olive grove, between sea and pine-clad hills - you can buy oil and 
olives from your hosts Stephanos and Maria to take home. The quiet pebble beach 
is a 500-metre walk, and you can drive to the nearby coastal town of Limni, or 
hike in the mountains. Each room has a terrace overlooking the sea. Breakfast 
comprises homemade breads, pastries and jams, with lots of fresh fruit and 
local duck eggs. There are wonderful fish restaurants within striking distance, 
too.

· The hotel will send someone to pick you up from the village of Rovies (00 30 
222 70 71619,eleonashotel.com <http://www.eleonashotel.com>). Doubles from €90 
B&B. Aegean Airlines (aegeanair.com <http://www.aegeanair.com>) flies to Athens 
from Stansted from around £100.

Hostaria di Bacco. Amalfi Coast, Italy

Up on the soaring cliffs of this dramatic coastline, the Hostaria opened more 
than 70 years ago as a simple tavern. Over the years it has grown into a small 
hotel, in the quiet village of Furore, between Positano and Amalfi. All but one 
of the 20 rooms overlook the Med from their geranium-fringed balconies. There's 
a little garden and sun-screened dining terrace, and a five-minute walk away 
are a swimming pool and tennis court. The food is locally renowned, especially 
the seafood, and the wine is excellent - ask the friendly owners for a tasting 
session in the cellar.

· 00 39 08 983 0360; baccofurore.it <http://www.baccofurore.it>. Doubles from 
€90 room-only (three-night minimum stay). Flights to Naples withflybmi.com 
<http://www.flybmi.com>, Thomsonfly and EasyJet.

Casa de Estoi, Algarve, Portugal

This century-old house in the historic village of Estoi, northeast of Faro, 
has high ceilings, wrought iron balustrades, stone archways and antique 
furniture. There are six rooms, each named after a local herb, an honesty bar 
with a billiards table, and out back you'll find a little pool and terrace, 
where breakfast is served until midday. Opposite the house is the town's pretty 
19th-century church, and nearby is the Palace of Estoi, where you can stroll in 
the lavish gardens. This is the lesser-visited Eastern Algarve, and the 
unspoiled beaches of the Rio Formosa national park are only a 15-minute drive 
away.

· 00 35 1 289 990130, casadeestoi.com <http://www.casadeestoi.com>. Doubles 
from €80 B&B. Charter flights to Faro from around £99 at cheapflights.co.uk.

The Mountain Lodge, Lycian Way, Turkey

Escape the coastal crowds at this welcoming, informal retreat, a 30km drive 
inland from Fethiye. You can hike to waterfalls, go birdwatching, visit Lycian 
and Roman sites, and take the one-hour drive to the beautiful beach at Patara. 
But you may prefer to loll by the pool, breathing in the scent of jasmine. 
Later, watch the sun set over the Xantos valley with a glass of wine, then 
enjoy the cooking of the hostess, Mel, who buys all her ingredients from the 
local village. Treat yourself to a spacious deluxe room with exposed stone 
walls and dark-wood furniture.

· 00 90 252 638 2515, themountainlodge.co.uk 
<http://www.themountainlodge.co.uk>. Deluxe room £46 B&B. Charter flights to 
Dalaman from around £180 at cheapflights.co.uk.
 