
The Chicago Blackhawks will join the Tampa Bay Lightning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tampa-bay-lightning> in the Stanley Cup 
final after defeating the Anaheim Ducks 5-3 in Game 7 of the Western Conference 
final.

It is the third time in six years that the Blackhawks have reached the final. 
They went on to hoist theStanley Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanley-cup> in 2010 and 2013.

While earlier games in the best-of-seven series had been characterized by 
close games that often went into overtime, Saturday’s winner-take-all finale 
was never really a nail-biter.

“We really had to earn every bit of success we got,” Blackhawks captain 
Jonathan Toews told NBC. “And I think tonight we had to be at our best game and 
it definitely was.”

The Ducks added some intrigue in the third period when they twice pulled 
within two goals, but the Blackhawks were able to ride out the win.

Chicago couldn’t have asked for a better start to a Game 7 on the road. The 
Ducks weren’t able to get the matchups they wanted and the Blackhawks’ star 
players made them pay for their mistakes.

Toews gave the Blackhawks the lead after just two minutes, 23 seconds when he 
was left completely alone in front to pick up a rebound from Ducks goaltender 
Frederik Andersen.

The last time the two teams met at the Honda Center, in Game 5, Toews scored 
two goals in the last two minutes of regulation in a game the Blackhawks would 
eventually lose in overtime.

The Blackhawks captain continued right where he left off when he doubled the 
lead with a power play goal midway through the period. This time Andersen was 
screened by Andrew Shaw and couldn’t get his glove up in time to stop the shot.

“It’s unbelievable,” Brandon Saad said about playing with Toews. “I’ve been 
fortunate to play with him for a few years now and just to learn from him and 
see the things he does on the ice. He’s a huge part of our team.”

It was a disappointing start for Anaheim who were knocked out in a Game 7 on 
home ice for the second year in a row. Leading up to the game, Boudreau 
challenged his team by telling reporters that season’s players were “nervous 
Nellies” in last year’s elimination game against the Los Angeles Kings, which 
they ended up losing 6-2.

Prior to Saturday, the Ducks led all teams in scoring in the playoffs with 
3.60 goals per game, but just like the New York Rangers on Friday night, the 
team’s normally potent offense chose the worst time to go cold.

Ryan Getzlaf, who told reporters Wednesday his performance in Game 6 was 
“terrible”, didn’t have a much better Game 7. He posted a minus-1, including 
failing to cover Toews on the opening goal and making the costly turnover that 
led to Saad’s 3-0 goal.

Anaheim made a push during the second period and opened up an 18-11 shot 
advantage at the halfway point, but this also gave Chicago plenty of odd-man 
rush opportunities.

After the Ducks had one of their best sequences of the game with a couple of 
scoring chances, the Blackhawks put the game further out of reach with a 
controversial goal. Andersen stopped Brad Richards’ shot on the fifth odd-man 
rush of the period, but couldn’t turn away Marian Hossa on the rebound. The 
goal was reviewed because it hit the skate of Hossa but the referees allowed it 
after ruling there was no deliberate kicking motion.

Ryan Kesler gave the Ducks a glimmer of hope when he scored from the goal line 
during a 4-on-4. However, Chicago took a 4-1 lead into the second intermission 
along with a perfect 31-0-0 record when leading after two periods so far in the 
season.

The Blackhawks didn’t let Corey Perry’s goal midway through the third rattle 
them, and they came back and scored a power play goal immediately after. Matt 
Beleskey made it another two-goal game, but with 42 seconds left it was too 
little too late for the home team.

Although the conference finals is the best result the Ducks have had under 
Boudreau’s tenure, it was yet another season where regular-season success 
didn’t translate to Stanley Cup triumph. To add insult to injury, Anaheim 
didn’t lose a single playoff game in regulation until Games 6 and 7 against 
Chicago.

The Blackhawks, on the other hand, will prepare for the Lightning and a chance 
at their third championship under head coach Joel Quenneville. The two teams 
met twice in the regular season. Chicago won 3-2 at home in a shootout in 
November while Tampa shut out the Blackhawks 4-0 on their home ice in February. 
Game 1 of the championship round is Wednesday in Tampa Bay.

“Another great test,” Toews said. “We’re going to remember the games we had 
against them this regular season. It’s going to be a tough one, but we’ll be 
ready for them.”
 