
Duncan Keith had a goal and three assists as the Chicago Blackhawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-blackhawks> used a four-goal third 
period to finish off the St. Louis Blues with a 5-1 victory in Game 6 of their 
first-round NHL playoff series on Sunday.

Chicago won four in a row after a slow start in St. Louis. The defending 
Stanley Cup champions will play the winner of the Minnesota-Colorado series in 
the Western Conference semifinals. The Avalanche lead the Wild 3-2 heading into 
Game 6 in Minnesota on Monday.

Jonathan Toews, Patrick Sharp, Andrew Shaw and Keith scored in the third 
period as the Blackhawks improved to 14-2 in home playoff games over the last 
two seasons. Corey Crawford made 35 saves, keeping Chicago in a tie game when 
St. Louis controlled the second period.

New York's Brad Richards and Dominic Moore scored second-period goals, and 
Henrik Lundqvist made 24 saves as the Rangers pushed the Flyers to the brink of 
elimination with a 4-2 win.

Defenseman Marc Staal gave the Rangers the lead in the first period and they 
extended it in the second in taking a 3-2 edge in the first-round series. Game 
6 is Tuesday in Philadelphia. If necessary, a deciding seventh game would be 
back at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday.

The teams have alternated wins the entire series. New York clinched this one 
with Brian Boyle's empty-net goal with 15 seconds remaining.

At Dallas, Nick Bonino scored 2:47 into overtime, after getting one of 
Anaheim's two goals late in regulation, as Ducks beat theDallas Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dallas-stars> 5-4 in Game 6 to clinch the 
first-round series

Bonino took a wrist shot from in front of the net after getting a pass from 
Andrew Cogliano, and made sure the Ducks didn't need a Game 7 to advance in the 
playoffs for only the second time since winning their lone Stanley Cup title 
seven years ago.

The Ducks scored twice in the final 2:10 of regulation to force overtime for 
the first time in the series.


NHL playoffs scores and schedule <http://www.nhl.com/ice/stanleycup.htm>
 