
Chicago's Jonathan Toews scored the overtime winner that gave the Blackhawks a 
3-2 victory at St Louis on Friday, taking a 3-2 lead in theirNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> first-round play-off series, while 
Anaheim also moved to the brink of progression in their best-of-seven clash. 
The Ducks won 6-2 at home against Dallas, revelling back on home ice after 
successive defeats away to the Stars.

In the day's other game Philadelphia edged the New York Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-rangers> 2-1 to square their series 
at 2-2.
Chicago lost the opening two games of the series against St Louis and the 
defending Stanley Cup champions looked to be on the way to early elimination 
from the postseason, but Friday's victory was their third in a row and now the 
Blackhawks can wrap up the series if they win at home on Sunday.

Three of the first four games of the series went to overtime and it was no 
surprise when the teams again could not be separated in regulation time.

Toews settled it as he got behind the Blues defence on a breakaway, made a 
couple of fakes before slipping the puck past goaltender Ryan Miller. Marian 
Hossa and Ben Smith also scored for Chicago while TJ Oshie and Alex Pietrangelo 
netted for the Blues.
Anaheim had a more comfortable victory, cruising past Dallas.

Ryan Getzlaf had a goal and two assists in his return from injury, and Anaheim 
set a franchise play-off record with four power-play goals.

Corey Perry also had a goal and two assists, while Nick Bonino, Mathieu 
Perreault, Jakob Silfverberg and Rickard Rakell also netted for the Western 
Conference top seeds.

The Ducks scored their first five goals from just 21 shots, prematurely ending 
the night for Dallas goaltender Kari Lehtonen.

Jamie Benn and Shawn Horcoff scored for the Stars, who failed to score on 
seven power-play chances. The Philadelphia goalie Steve Mason stopped 37 shots 
in his first start of the series, helping the Flyers preserve a series-squaring 
2-1 win over the Rangers.

Ray Emery started the first three games for Mason, who was out with an 
upper-body injury. Matt Read and Jakub Voracek scored while Dominic Moore 
scored for the Rangers.
 