
“Ranting entertainers” are hijacking the sensible debate on food production, 
chief scientist Ian Chubb has said, in a thinly-veiled reference to radio shock 
jocks.

Chubb on Wednesday released a report looking at the economic benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/24/science-and-mathematics-boost-australias-economy-by-145bn-a-year>
 of the physical sciences and mathematics. He said governments needed to take a 
longer view to protect the industry, worth $145bn to the economy each year.

“We tend to do things on a small scale and then through various financial 
arrangements terminating program grants and all that, then you stop-start too 
often,” Chubb said. “We have to take that more strategic and long-term run.”

He said people needed to be “well informed” about genetically modified food 
and listen to the voice of respected scientists.

“People need to understand the difference between an expert and a ranting 
entertainer. Those sorts of things are really important for us as a nation to 
address and have a mature, sophisticated debate about where some of these 
things will take us,” Chubb said. He would not be drawn on who exactly he was 
referring to.

“You have to get information from respectable, reasonable sources and have 
that debate properly and not just throw doubt in there because you have a 
particular view and, therefore, you do sow doubt. I think there is a lot of 
room to grow in the debate,” he said.

Broadcaster Alan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> has long 
campaigned against coal seam gas, and cited its effects on food growth and 
production. He spoke at a food security forum before Queensland’s 2012 state 
election.

The chief scientist has had his tenure extended until the end of 2015, despite 
being critical of prime minister Tony Abbott’s handling of the science 
portfolio.

He again criticised the government at the National Press Club on Wednesday.

“I don’t think we need as a group of scientists ever to go through the last 12 
months and the last few weeks,” he said

Abbott told parliament he would like to spend more on science, but was 
constrained by the budget.

“This is a government which takes science seriously. But ... this is also a 
government which takes budget responsibility seriously,” Abbott said. “The best 
thing we can do for all of our greatest institutions is to be in a position to 
make them sustainable, to give them sustainable long-term funding for the years 
and decades ahead.

“Above all else, this is a government which is absolutely committed to budget 
responsibility.”
 