
The question: I loved reading as a child, but my eight-year-old daughter 
doesn't seem so interested. Once she finds an author she likes, she just gets 
stuck on them. Although she is a very good reader who can read well above her 
age group, I find it hard to find the right books for her.

The answer: One of the difficulties of being a parent is that we always want 
our children to like the same things as we do. An even greater problem is that 
we tend to misremember some of the things we did as children. From your letter 
I sense that you set a high value on the fact that you were an enthusiastic 
reader as a child and that you want your daughter to be the same. I also get 
the impression that you want her to read well and that you are concerned that 
what she is reading isn't good enough. But maybe you weren't reading quite so 
much at eight as you think, and maybe the books you are suggesting are too 
challenging for her. Finding an author and reading through their whole output 
can seem boring to an adult, but is very helpful to a child and very 
satisfying. They know what to expect, which often accentuates their enjoyment 
rather than dampening it. If your daughter is currently enjoying a particular 
author, don't deter her. Try to find other authors who are doing a similar 
thing. 

Q: Ever since the success of the Harry ­Potter series, it seems to have been 
impossible to find any books that aren't fantasy. My 12-year-old son likes 
stories set in the real world. Can you help?

A: Your perception that the bulk of ­new books are fantasy is true. After the 
success of any title there are always a great many lookalikes. Fantasy has an 
additional attraction for authors as it allows them to write about children 
being unsupervised and taking risks. In real life, children are no longer able 
to do this, and authors are strongly warned away from showing children in 
potentially "risky" situations. Authors also need to avoid situations in which 
a child talks to a stranger. In other words, "real" stories ­reflect the very 
proscribed and watched state into which we have ­corralled children. To counter 
this, contemporary novels often begin with a child losing a mobile phone, 
freeing them from outside interference. In fantasy and ­historical fiction this 
isn't an issue and the child can be bold, brave, cowardly or sensible. But, of 
course, there are good stories set in the real world. Have you triedA Trick of 
the Dark (Bloomsbury) by BR Collins (below), which mixes the supernatural with 
family breakdown, or Jenny ­Valentine'sFinding Violet Park (HarperCollins), a 
detective trail which begins with a boy's chance discovery of the ashes of an 
old lady?

Q: John Christopher's Dom and Va and John Verney's Friday's Tunnel, my two 
favourite books from childhood, seem to have gone out of print. Why can't I 
find them?

A: Children's books can be timeless and universal, or immediate and particular.
Dom and Va, for instance, fell out of favour in the 1970s because of its 
perceived sexism. Attitudes to children, interactions between adults and 
children and especially wider social attitudes change swiftly, and books 
sometimes get left behind. The kind of holiday adventures thatArthur Ransome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome> described so well in 
Swallows and Amazons have a much smaller readership now because it seems such 
an old-fashioned existence – time has robbed them of their universality. 
Revisit your childhood favourites with a fresh eye and see how they look 
nowadays. You may find yourself cringeing at their racist or sexist attitudes, 
and understand why publishers feel it is no longer acceptable to promote them.

Email your questions to books@theguardian.com
 