
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has snubbed rich countries in 
their attempts to establish a worldwide partnership on aid effectiveness, 
saying it is not ready to endorse a partnership for global development.

The move put a dampener on an aid summit starting on Tuesday in South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/25/busan-explainer-aid-effectiveness>
 to be attended by 2,500 delegates, including Hillary Clinton, the US secretary 
of state, Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, and Andrew Mitchell, the 
international development secretary.

The fourth high-level forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/about/about-busan.html> was supposed 
to establish common principles in an increasingly cluttered marketplace for 
aid, where China, Brazil and India now give as well as receive aid.

China had been participating in pre-conference talks that have been going for 
months on a summit draft outcome document, and negotiators from OECD countries 
had been hoping - naively according to some observers - that it would sign off 
on a Busan agreement.

Those hopes were dashed when a Chinese official, Zhu Hong, arrived on Monday 
afternoon and told Talaat Abdel-Malek, chair of the working party on aid 
effectiveness that China was not ready to endorse a partnership for global 
development. Brazil and India have also decided to stay outside of the 
Paris-Accra-Busan framework in a blow to attempts to forge a common front on 
aid.

"It's important that China start looking at these events as opportunities to 
engage in the development process. They are increasingly a large player," said 
one aid expert. "They need to engage, my worry is that they're not taking a 
policy decision, but simply they don't have people who can make a decision. The 
South Koreans have been working hard on the Chinese but there has not been much 
receptivity on their part."

There is speculation that recent changes in personnel in China have left a 
policy vacuum on Chinese aid and development policy. Other aid experts said 
China is wary of coming on board a global partnership when it is not sure of 
what it is signing up to.

"They need to to undestand it better," said one western official. "It's 
disappointing, but maybe they do not want to be put in the same box as 
traditional donors."

China provided about $40bn in aid over the last six decades, much of it to 
African countries where Beijing has growing interest in oil, minerals and other 
natural resources. The African Development Bank says there is concern that 
China, India and Brazil are blurring the boundaries between aid and commercial 
investment, undermining the hard-won consensus that aid should be devoted 
exclusively to reducing poverty.

"China has clear positions on what it wants," said one AfDB official. "The 
onus is on African countries to establish what they want."

Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> campaigners said 
China's reluctance to adhere to a common framework should not be an excuse for 
countries such as France, Japan and the EU to backtrack on commitments for 
greater transparency, aid monitoring and for ending tied aid - the practice of 
tying aid to business contracts with companies from donor countries.

"China should not put off the European Union to stand up for transparency, 
rights based approaches and democratic ownership. Several EU member states have 
pushed for further weakening of aid commitments on aid transparency. EU member 
states are not effectively standing up for some of the basic commitments on 
untying aid," said Gideon Rabinowitz of Concord, an aid campaigning group.

The conference in Busan follows on from previous summits in Paris and Accra, 
that set out broad principles on aid effectiveness: ownership of aid programmes 
by recipient countries, transparency, predictability and mutual accountability. 
Busan is a stocktaking exercise but also an attempt to build on those 
principles and to bring in the new players into a common framework.

Fragmentation of the so-called aid architecture imposes costs on poor 
countries who find themselves dealing with multiple donors.

"Harmonising efforts among donors has been uneven, with overall little 
progress to adopt common arrangements and procedures," said Brian Atwood, chair 
of the development assistance committee at the OECD, the group of rich, 
countries that account for about 80% of foreign aid.

"This means developing countries continue to have to dedicate too much of 
their scarce capacity to managing their partners, catering to their diverse 
procedures and requirements."

Aid campaigners, however, welcomed progress on transparency at Busan.

"The decision by key donors to sign up to the International Aid Transparency 
Initiative sends a great signal," said Ben Phillips, Save the Children's 
campaign mobilisation director.

"Transparency from all major aid donors would be equivalent to an additional 
$3bn - that's enough to immunise 350 million children against deadly diseases 
such as pneumonia and meningitis."
 