
China and India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> have agreed to join 
a global partnership on aid effectiveness but on vague terms that cast doubt on 
their willingness to stick by principles set by traditional donors.

After negotiations that went late into Thursday night, the key parties signed 
off on a final outcome document that bridged what seemed to be irreconcilable 
approaches between emerging donors and traditional aid givers from the 
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).

Desperate to bring in China and India, the traditional donors bent over 
backwards to find a formula that would allow thefourth high-level forum on aid 
effectiveness <http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/> to end on a high 
note.

The key paragraph in the 12-page document says effectively the emerging donors 
will be held to a lower standard than traditional donors as they remain 
developing countries and still face poverty at home.

"The principles, commitments and actions agreed in the outcome document in 
Busan shall be the reference for south-south partnerships on a voluntary 
basis," said the final draft, agreed to just before 1am on Friday.

OECD officials rejected the perception that China, which seemed to have walked 
away from the Busan talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/29/china-pulls-out-aid-partnership-busan>
 on Monday, had been let off the hook.

"We have a broad partnership that has signed up, including China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>," said an OECD official who took part 
in the negotiations. "We have to recognise that they have to focus on their own 
poverty problems and it is precisely through dialogue that we will build 
bridges and they will need time to reach ownership of these principles."

The meeting in Busan, which brought together figures such as Hillary Clinton, 
the US secretary of state, President Paul Kagame of Rwanda and President Meles 
Zenawi of Ethiopia, differed from past summits on aid effectiveness in Paris 
and Accra in that the focus was heavily political. Paris set out common 
principles such as country ownership of aid programmes, transparency and 
accountability. Accra brought in civil society into the equation. Busan was all 
about bringing China into the fold, overshadowing everything else.

"There is palpable relief China was shoehorned into an agreement but from the 
perspective of the low income countries there is scant progress on Paris and 
Accra," said Lucia Fry of ActionAid, part of the BetterAid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> coalition of NGOs.

The response from Britain was more upbeat. "It just wouldn't have made sense 
for a global deal on aid effectiveness to go ahead without the involvement of 
China and other major players in international development," said Andrew 
Mitchell, the international development secretary.

"Not only has China got valuable experience to share – cutting the proportion 
of its people living below the poverty line from 84% to 16% in just 25 years – 
but it is also a major investor in Africa and the developing world. Their 
continued presence at the table, alongside other emerging economies, ensures 
this deal reflects the reality of today's development landscape."

Along with South Korea, which was understandably keen to claim Busan as a 
success, Mitchell can claim credit for salvaging what looked like a hopeless 
situation. The development secretary happened to be in Beijing for talks at a 
senior level on a new development partnership with China when he got the call 
from Busan that discussions with the Chinese had hit a brick wall. Mitchell 
coaxed the Chinese back into the talks through his discussions with Chen 
Deming, the Chinese minister of commerce.

"He said Busan was too much a conversation between traditional donors and poor 
countries and there was not enough room for emerging countries like us so we 
asked him what was the minimum to satisfy to them," said Mitchell. "I flew down 
here and chaired a meeting of like-minded groups. My feeling was that there was 
a less than 50% chance on an agreement, then during the night India and China 
said they liked the draft."

The draft outcome document takes into account that China, Brazil and India are 
newcomers to the development debate with their own approaches.

"The Paris declaration did not address the complexity of these new actors … At 
Busan, we now all form an integral part of a new and more inclusive development 
agenda, in which these actors participate on the basis of common goals, shared 
principles and differential commitments," said the document.

Mitchell said the importance of Busan lay in the acceptance of common goals 
and principles with "ships moving in the same direction albeit at different 
speeds."

Some countries, however, indicated their unhappiness at the kowtowing to China.

"True, there are important differences between north-south and south-south 
co-operation that we should keep in mind," Mexico said in a statement. "But 
this should not distract us from the fact that we are all in the same boat."

Asked whether China had the option not to abide those common principles, 
Michell said China was increasingly aware that its mercantile approach to aid – 
what Clinton referred toas its interest in exploiting resources rather than in 
promoting development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/nov/30/hillary-clinton-aid-initiative-busan?intcmp=239>
 – is meeting resistance.

"The Chinese are aware then unless their aid becomes more transparent someone 
is going to come along and have their lunch," he said.

Besides bringing China into the fold – and Busan sought to harmonise what has 
become a fragmented aid architecture – the conference saw an important 
commitment from the US to a transparency initiative and a "new deal" that will 
focus aid on building up security and justice systems in fragile states such as 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan.

But some of the key decisions – a common set of monitoring standards that 
apply to everyone, new and traditional donors, as well as poor countries 
receiving aid – will not be decided until June 2012.

"We'll know six months down the line whether there's any meat on the bones of 
this deal," said Oxfam's Greg Adams. "And we hope this is not going to be 
decided behind closed doors."
 