
Your choice of MBA course will be determined as much by where your career is 
now as where you want it to go in the future.

Business experience, age and current position all impact on whether full-time, 
part-time or distance learning is most appropriate.

"The average age of students on a full-time MBA is around 29 and they are in 
the early part of their career," says Dr John Colley, director of MBA 
programmes at Nottingham University Business School.

Full-time students are usually looking for a course to help them to move into 
a much better job, he says. "But on the executive (or part-time) MBA the 
average age is 39 to 40 and they are pretty senior people already who are 
moving from being specialists to generalists."

Learning alongside students of similar age and experience will help you 
maximise the return on your course, says Michael Shulver, an assistant dean at 
Warwick Business School: "You learn as much from your colleagues as from the 
tutors on a full-time MBA," Shulver says. This interaction is less frequent 
with distance learning programmes and some may find it a drawback. "On the 
upside it can fit around your working life," he says.

Specialist study

MBAs <https://www.theguardian.com/education/mbas> are further divided into the 
traditional general courses and those geared to a particular industry. You can 
study for a specialist MBA in luxury goods and brand management at ESSEC 
Business School in France, or specialise in global energy at Warwick. The 
International Space University in France has an executive MBA in space studies. 
The London School of Business and Finance offers an MBA in hospitality, sport 
and tourism management.

Business schools are increasingly reaching out to the public services and 
charities. Nottingham has executive programmes in corporate social 
responsibility and healthcare, popular with NHS consultants. The Brighton 
Business School has a part-time public service management MBA, which includes 
third-sector management modules.

"For people who have laser focus on a particular sector, the specialist MBA 
can make sense," says Andrew Mitchell, director of graduate programmes at 
Kaplan Test Prep and Admissions: "I don't think anyone with an MBA can afford 
to sell themselves as a complete generalist because effective teams are full of 
specialists."

Other considerations before making a commitment include the method of 
teaching, the size of the classes, the calibre and experience of the staff and, 
crucially, the school's link with the business world and opportunities to 
network and gain hands-on experience.

The MBA is a global management qualification, but one that comes in many 
different shapes and sizes; prospective students just have to find the right 
fit.

Find out more: 
theguardian.com/education/series/postgraduate-subject-tables-2012 
<http://theguardian.com/education/series/postgraduate-subject-tables-2012>

A recipe for business growth

Recruitment consultant Julian Anthoney found a new line of business during his 
MBA studies: he set up an artisan bakery.

During his three years of study Anthoney, 40, set up a French bakery with his 
wife Jelena as well as maintaining his recruitment consultancy matching 
bilingual engineers to jobs around the world.

"The course gives you real skills, which I have turned into a real business," 
says Anthoney, who has just graduated from a specialist executive MBA in 
entrepreneurship at Nottingham University Business School.
The MBA has reassured Anthoney that his recruitment business is on a solid 
footing. "The MBA theory has given me the confidence that the recruitment 
consultancy will continue to be successful."

The course included all of the same subjects as a general MBA but also had 
three specialist modules in creativity, innovation management and 
entrepreneurship in practice.

"It helped me to formalise ideas and look at them logically. There was also 
teaching on the day-to-day things that you must consider when setting up a 
business."

Anthoney said it helped him to go through the process of setting up a 
business. "Entrepreneurs have ideas all the time but sometimes they don't 
listen to logic and forge ahead with their concepts regardless. I was able to 
go through the process of putting them into action."
 