 One of Labour's most intelligent and least headline obsessed member of 
government, Chris Smith, minister of culture since the start of the 1997 
parliament, can seldom be faulted when making decisions on his own. But he has 
made less of a mark than was once expected due to the pressure brought to bear 
on him from the Treasury and other cabinet colleagues.
His most notable decision came long before he took high office when at a 
meeting in Rugby in 1984, he announced: "My name is Chris Smith, I'm the Labour 
MP for Islington South, and I'm gay", to a five-minute standing ovation. He 
later said: "I think more is achieved for the sense of self worth of lesbians 
and gays in society by one person who comes out voluntarily than by 100 who are 
forced out."

Because he does not like to land unnecessary partisan blows, he has no mass 
political fan club but is widely admired outside Labour as a modernising, 
caring Christian socialist.

A keen mountaineer, he was the first MP to conquer all 277 of the 3,000ft 
Munro mountains in Scotland; a success which encapsulates both his gentleness 
and his rigour.

Still, Mr Smith can be battered about more than some cabinet ministers because 
he is neither in the camp of Gordon Brown's or that of Tony Blair. He fell out 
with the chancellor while serving as social security spokesman in opposition, 
and relations with No 10 have declined since the Camelot "fat cats" debacle. As 
a result he often cannot secure extra Treasury funds for his pet causes - such 
as free museum access - or get the job he desires, probably in a large spending 
department.

Born to a civil servant and a teacher in Barnet in 1951, he went from George 
Watson's college, Edinburgh, to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he took a BA 
with first class honours, and a PhD on Coleridge and Wordsworth ballads. Like 
countless others who later entered the Commons he became president of the 
Cambridge union, and was chairman of the Fabians. At Cambridge he also struck 
up a friendship with John Smith, who was leader of the Labour party from 1992 
until his death in 1994.

Mr Smith earned his living initially as development secretary at the 
Shaftesbury Society, which provided sheltered housing for the elderly and 
disabled. He had a turbulent initiation into politics after being elected as an 
Islington councillor in 1978, losing his post as chief whip when rightwing 
Labour councillors defected to the SDP. He won his local seat, Islington South, 
in 1983, narrowly defeating SDP defector George Cunningham. In 1987 he held on 
to the seat by another tiny margin and must have been relieved in 1992 when his 
majority soared above 10,000 and remained the same in 1997.

In parliament he rose through the ranks, shining as shadow chief secretary to 
the Treasury before 1992 and damaging the Tories as shadow health secretary 
before 1997. He had good cause to expect to take on that job after New Labour's 
election triumph, but instead was unexpectedly handed the task of reforming the 
then Department of National Heritage.

Since 1997 his local council has gone Lib Dem, but there seems to be no reason 
why his seat should do so, too. Less certain is his ministerial future. After 
four quietly successful years at the Department of Culture, where he avoided 
becoming tainted with the calamity of the Millennium Dome (he opposed it), Mr 
Smith has neither fallen apart nor laid siege to the high offices of state. The 
prime minister may leave him in place for now, an easy sacrificial victim 
should a cabinet vacancy be required urgently in the years ahead.

Ask Aristotle about Chris Smith 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4833,00.html>
 