
Brumbies playmaker Christian Leali’ifano has won the 2016 Rupa Medal for 
Excellence, one of Australian rugby’s most prestigious awards.

Leali’ifano, who has leukaemia, was voted by his peers as the individual to 
have shown the best performance, leadership, consistency and discipline, both 
on and off the field, across the international and domestic seasons.

Perth to host Bledisloe Cup clash between Wallabies and All Blacks in 2019
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/perth-to-host-bledisloe-cup-clash-between-wallabies-and-all-blacks-in-2019>
Leali’ifano in September won the Brumbies’ players’ player of the year after 
co-captaining his side to AustralianSuper Rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-rugby> conference honours in 2016.

The 29-year-old, who has amassed 117 Super Rugby caps and more than 800 points 
since joining the Brumbies in 2007, missed just five minutes of the entire 
Super Rugby campaign.

Leali’ifano also completed a Certificate IV in New Small Business and was 
instrumental in the leadership of the Brumbies’ Pasifika players’ development 
program.

He is a “champion” for the Canberra Domestic Violence Crisis Service, and this 
year he won an ACT Government Violence Prevention Award.

Speaking via video from Melbourne, Leali’ifano thanked his peers and paid 
tribute to all of Australia’s professional rugby players. “I’m truly, truly 
humbled and honoured to receive such an award,” Leali’ifano said.

“Congratulations to all of the other nominees; I feel like this is probably an 
award for all of us, and the great work we do in the community to grow the game 
around the country.”

Leali’ifano, who has been undergoing cancer treatment in Melbourne since 
August, thanked the rugby community for their support since his illness was 
diagnosed.

“I want to thank everybody for all of their support through this journey this 
little man [his son] and I are on at the moment,” he said. “It definitely means 
a lot and we’re all so grateful for your thoughts and prayers.”

Melbourne Rebels and Wallabies backline utility back Reece Hodge capped an 
outstanding maiden season in professional rugby with the newcomer of the year 
award.

NSW Waratahs star and Wallabies vice-captain Michael Hooper backed up his John 
Eales Medal triumph by being named the people’s choice Wallaby of the year.

Olympic hero Charlotte Caslick edged out Chloe Dalton to win her second 
straight women’s rugby sevens players’ player of the year award.
 