
Earlier this year, I became a safeguarding adviser at an independent Christian 
child protection organisation. TheChurches’ Child Protection Advisory Service 
<http://www.ccpas.co.uk/> (CCPAS) focuses on providing support, training and 
advice to churches on matters concerning child protection. Over the years, this 
has grown to encompass the safeguarding of vulnerable adults too. Our training 
extends to all faith organisations, especially charities or groups that fall 
outside the statutory authorities.

Sport and safeguarding: keeping children safe on and off the pitch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/05/safeguarding-protecting-children-in-sport-cspu-nspcc>
I have a varied working week, but one of my key responsibilities is to work on 
our 24-hour helpline. The calls I receive are as diverse as our members and can 
come from anywhere in the UK, sometimes also from abroad. Calls often involve 
general advice regarding safeguarding policies. Common questions include “Can I 
be alone with a child” or “What’s the ratio of adults to children in youth 
groups?”. I answer the questions, sometimes referring callers to our website or 
the leaflets we provide.

I also receive a large number of calls regarding sex offenders. Churches and 
other faith organisations are especially vulnerable to unknown people joining 
them, as most places of worship encourage an open-door policy. We advise 
leaders on how to write contracts and make their places of worship safe.

The most important calls are those that involve the disclosure of abuse of a 
child by an adult. This might be revealed in a passing comment to a trusted 
youth leader, or by someone concerned by a young person’s self-harm marks or 
lack of self-worth. It is so important to support people in the right things to 
say and do. Many of our members are lay people who have been nominated as the 
safeguarding coordinator in their local church, mosque or charity, and may have 
no professional experience on what to do.

This is the gap I hope I fill, being there to talk them through the issues 
they face and the most appropriate action to take, so that opportunities to 
safeguard aren’t missed. I am aware that, historically, churches have covered 
up child abuse in their midst. Therecent reviews and public inquiries 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/crime/10951506/Theresa-May-launches-major-new-inquiry-into-child-sex-abuse-allegations.html>
 are a testament to how we have failed in the past.

I work on my own in the office with the buzz of others next door. I eat lunch 
by the phone between calls; cups of tea that are delivered are always welcome. 
Calls come in a steady stream and for each conversation I make a written record 
and email it to the person who rang.

The helpline stops ringing at 5pm and switches to the out-of-hours mobile. 
This week is my turn on the rota, so I take several calls at home until the 
following morning, when I am back in the office.

At the weekend I’m often giving training around London and the south-east. 
Those attending are ordinary people, eager to know about their responsibilities 
for the safeguarding of children and adults in their community. Most are 
volunteers and I always appreciate that they have given up a Saturday morning, 
especially if the sun is shining. My satnav is my most important tool as I 
travel to different locations, speaking to people from different backgrounds 
and faiths, as well as different churches. Venues have included a mosque, a 
university and a befriending service as well as Westminster council’s 
multi-faith forum.

The child protection volunteers bringing stability to vulnerable families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/nov/21/child-protection-volunteers-vulnerable-families>
I was previously a police officer for 30 years and had many roles working in 
the domestic violence unit, murder team and, for the last eight years, with the 
child abuse investigation teams. I am aware of how hard police officers and 
social services work to keep children safe, when allegations are on the rise 
and resources are stretched.

I hope that my understanding of how agencies work together is passed on in the 
training and advice I provide. I feel privileged to work in an organisation 
that has the safeguarding of children and the vulnerable at its heart, and to 
have the opportunity to share my experience.
 