Thrill rating 6/10 
Danger rating 2/10

Fitness rating 4/10

In a nutshell ...

Ever wanted to run off and join the circus? For those who longed to do just 
that as a child, special centres across the UK are helping rekindle the dream 
(and possibly your children's, too). You are encouraged to embrace your inner 
Zippos and learn how to clown, trapeze and high-wire around.

On a half- or full-day introductory course, you'll pick up skills such as 
juggling, miming, riding a unicycle, swinging on a trapeze, plate-spinning and 
more. But don't think this is one big he he! ha ha! Circus skills are a great 
way to learn concentration (juggling gets both sides of the brain working 
together, apparently); and you'll learn balance (tightrope walking), strength, 
agility, perseverance - and how to look good with a red nose and giant feet 
(possibly).

What's the buzz?

Hanging from a trapeze 5 metres up certainly gets the blood pumping; then for 
more of a kick, follow that with a spot of stilt walking (don't worry, there 
are crash mats if you fall). Learn a new word, too. The "diablo" is a rubber 
prop that looks like a giant eggcup holder: use control sticks to keep it 
spinning in the air, before progressing to tricks like "the elevator" and 
"walking the dog".

Thrill a minute?

They certainly pack a lot in to a day's course at Circus Space in London (to 
add another exhilarating edge, you could also mix a half-day of circus skills 
with a half-day's introduction to cowboy western skills: strike your best John 
Wayne pose and learn to lasso a stallion, or throw a knife at 10 paces - under 
expert guidance, of course).

At the Greentop Community Circus centre in Sheffield, assorted Big Top-related 
evening classes are put on for adults, from static trapeze on Mondays to 
unicycle, juggling and tightrope on Wednesday evenings. The centre also runs a 
12-week youth class in term-time (working toward an end-of-year show), and 
weekend workshops with guest teachers from the Chinese State Circus.

Adrenaline peak

The trapeze! Actually, there are three types.

The flying trapeze involves two trapezes in the air; the performer starts from 
a high platform, grabs the trapeze bar and swings, then lets go of the bar and 
is (hopefully) caught by a fellow artist on the second trapeze.

The swinging trapeze is like being on a swing; you sit on the bar and hold on 
to the rope either side, then you do tricks like standing up, spinning round 
and all those other things you injured yourself doing as a kid in the 
playground.

Finally, there's the static trapeze, in which the performer moves around the 
static bar; this is seriously hard work, so be prepared to ache afterwards (in 
return for the pain, this discipline tones all your core muscles).

With practice you'll master dramatic-sounding moves like "the mermaid", "the 
stag" and "the spider" - suffice to say, they all involve rapping yourself 
around the ropes and hanging upside down to some degree or other.

Where to do it

The Circus Project in Brighton specialises in trapeze skills. Based at the 
Hangleton Community Centre, it runs five-week evening courses with a maximum of 
eight people per class, as well as a youth circus.

London's Circus Space, based in an old electricity generating station in 
Hoxton, has been dubbed the UK's premier circus school. It was set up by a 
small group of circus artists keen to keep the trade alive and get people 
enthusiatic about this underestimated art form once again.

The Greentop Community Circus in Sheffield is the region's only circus school; 
a charity that aims to promote the joy of circus skills by providing affordable 
lessons for members and non-members alike.

Who can do it

For adults and older children this is a great alternative to the gym, giving 
you a highly exhilarating workout. With varying skills to test your mind as 
well as your body, everyone should find a circus skill that suits their 
personality and fitness level. Children aged eight and upwards can audition for 
the youth circus.

What to wear

Tracksuit bottoms or a leotard, (clean!) trainers and a T-shirt. Jeans and 
baggy clothing are a definite no-no, and all jewellery must be removed before 
the hilarities and acrobatics begin.

Typical prices

Evening sessions at Greentop are £6 for non-members, £4 for members. A 
half-day introductory course at Circus Space costs £49 per person (full day 
£95). The Circus Project's five-week evening course costs around £40.

Impress your pals 

The flying trapeze is clearly a celebrity "must do" activity - with everyone 
from Hollywood big-shots Burt Lancaster, Tony Curtis and Sarah Jessica Parker 
to, er, back garden big-shot Charlie Dimmock, all having tried their hands at 
it. For more information, track down a copy of the fascinating book on the 
trapeze by Sam Keen called Learning to Fly (not, perish the thought, to be 
confused with Victoria Beckham's autobiography of the same name).

YouTube searchwords 'circus space flying trapeze'

Good links

thecircusspace.co.uk <http://www.thecircusspace.co.uk>

greentop.org <http://www.greentop.org>

thecircusproject.co.uk <http://www.thecircusproject.co.uk>

mooncarrot.co.uk <http://www.mooncarrot.co.uk>

circusunlimited.com <http://www.circusunlimited.com>

circus-workshop.co.uk <http://www.circus-workshop.co.uk> (circus skills 
brought to your doorstep!)
 