
Former executives of Citigroup <https://www.theguardian.com/business/citigroup>
 could be in for some surprises when they appear before a panel investigating 
the roots of the financial crisis.

Commissioners and staffers for the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission are 
readying pointed questions for eight former and current Citigroup executives 
due to testify at hearings that begin today. Some questions are based on a 
review of about 2m pages of documents the commission has obtained, including 1m 
pages from Citigroup.

That means witnesses including the bank's former chief executive Chuck Prince 
and former chairman Robert Rubin may be confronted with their own words, as 
preserved in emails and memos provided to the commission.

The three days of hearings will feature testimony focused on high-risk 
mortgage lending and the way trillions of dollars in risky mortgage debt was 
spread through the financial system. The hearing is designed to provide a 
firsthand account of decisions that inflated a mortgage bubble and triggered 
the financial crisis.

The panel is using Citigroup as a case study because the bank was heavily 
involved in every stage of that process. The megabank was a major sub-prime 
lender through its subsidiary CitiFinancial. Other divisions of Citigroup 
pooled those loans and loans purchased from other mortgage companies and sold 
the income streams to investors.

As borrowers defaulted, Citigroup took losses on mortgage-related investments 
it held on and off its books. Mortgage troubles at Citi, defunct investment 
bank Bear Stearns and elsewhere exposed cracks in the financial system. In late 
2007 and throughout 2008, those fissures grew into a full-fledged credit crisis 
that crippled the global economy.

The FCIC aims to dissect the bank's structure and show how its functions 
interacted. Today's witness list includes current and former executives from 
CitiMortgage, parent company Citigroup, and the division of Citi Markets &
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> that created the most 
notorious mortgage-backed investments.

Rubin and Prince are due to appear tomorrow.

Today's first witness will be former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan>. Critics say the Fed's 
policy under Greenspan of keeping interest rates low encouraged lending to 
borrowers who had little or no chance of repaying.

As in recent interviews, Greenspan is expected to acknowledge some failings. 
The Fed failed to recognise the danger of the housing bubble, question the 
rapid growth of banks like Citigroup or exercise its authority to police risky 
consumer products like the sub-prime mortgages at the heart of the crisis.

The panel also will hear this week from a former risk officer with failed 
sub-prime lender New Century Financial, a current and a former comptroller of 
the currency and former executives and regulators from government-backed 
mortgage giant Fannie Mae.

Fannie Mae's close ties to some leading Democrats and its so-far $75.2bn 
(£49.3bn) bailout have made it a political lightning rod.

Congress created the FCIC last year to examine the causes of that crisis. It 
is structured like the panel that examined intelligence failures preceding the 
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.

Like that panel, the commission has authority to issue subpoenas to compel 
witnesses to testify or force companies to turn over documents. The commission 
is charged with examining 22 topics – from executive compensation to tax policy 
– in a report it must issue 15 December.
 