
The City of London Police have released a blacklist of illegal copyright 
infringing websites and have called for the rest of the advertising value chain 
to disrupt their advertising revenue. The collaboration has been welcomed by 
the advertising industry as a way to address brand safety concerns – the worry 
that ads served through exchanges will be placed on websites ill-suited to 
their brand.

The Police Intellectual Property Crime Unit's (PIPCU) Infringing Website List 
(IWL) is part of "Operation Creative", designed to protect intellectual 
property produced by the UK's creative industries. Detective Chief Inspector 
Andy Fyfe, head of PIPCU, explains the importance of the initiative to 
advertisers: "If an advert from an established brand appears on an infringing 
website not only does it lend the site a look of legitimacy, but inadvertently 
the brand and advertiser are funding online crime. Therefore the IWL also 
serves as a safety tool, ensuring the reputation of advertisers and brands are 
not discredited through association with illegal websites."

The introduction of the IWL follows a three-month pilot that took place last 
year in collaboration with the Operation Creative partners: the British 
Recorded Music Industry (BPI), the Federation Against Copyright Theft (FACT), 
the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), The 
Publishers Association, the Internet Advertising Bureau UK (IAB UK), the 
Incorporated Society of British Advertisers (ISBA), and the Institute of 
Practitioners inAdvertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/advertising> (IPA).

PIPCU will also introduce measures to stop other revenue-generating efforts 
such as electronic donations and payments on these blacklisted websites by 
notifying payment service providers to stop supplying that service to them.

The Digital Citizens' Alliance estimates $227m (£135m) a year in advertising 
revenue is made from copyright infringing websites, while endangering a sector 
worth £71.4bn a year to the UK economy. The creative industries minister, Ed 
Vaizey, says protecting the sector and disrupting copyright infringement is 
essential: "Disrupting the money unlawful websites make from advertising could 
make a real difference to the fight against copyright infringement. It is an 
excellent example of what can be achieved through industry, government and law 
enforcement working together."

Brand safety

Andy Muddimer, head of digital at Santander and one of the IWL pilot 
participants, says the damage to brand reputation when online ads appear on 
illegal websites is a real concern for advertisers. He adds: "Following a 
successful pilot involving Santander and six other ISBA members, we are pleased 
that the IWL is now available. This simple-to-use, online resource provides 
welcome reassurance which we would urge all online advertisers to pass on to 
the agencies they employ to serve their ads." The three-month trial period 
resulted in a 12% drop in the placement of ads from household brands on sites 
identified as illegal.

Ad-serving platforms will play a key role in preventing ads being shown on 
illegal sites. Sue Hunt, UK managing director of supply-side platform Improve 
Digital welcomes the IWL initiative:

"Guaranteeing brand safety in the digital environment has long been a 
challenge, and therefore a barrier to business for many advertisers if they do 
not have the confidence and assurances that their brand is appearing on legal 
and appropriate websites. Locating and capturing these sites in order to 
prevent advertising at source is also a difficult and somewhat subjective task. 
The IWL is effectively a legitimised universal blacklist, which is 
straightforward for ad-serving platforms such as Improve Digital to apply to 
their delivery methods, thereby blocking any ads from appearing.

"We hope this initiative is adopted swiftly right through the value chain – 
advertisers making their agencies aware of expectations and means of control, 
and platforms and networks preventing advertising appearing on the sites 
listed."

Advertisers can contact PIPCU about the Infringing Websites List by emailing 
PIPCUIWL@cityoflondon.police.uk <mailto:PIPCUIWL@cityoflondon.police.uk>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 