 The straightest talker in the cabinet, Clare Short's notoriously short fuse 
regularly gets her into trouble with the Millbank machine. But this reputation 
as a "loose cannon" gives her added appeal to the voters.
The strength of her convictions often overwhelm her when cool judgments are 
needed. She is the only cabinet minister who has never voted for the winning 
candidate in any election for Labour's leader, not even when Tony Benn 
challenged Neil Kinnock in 1988, after which she left the hard-left Campaign 
group in protest. Initially, she could not see Tony Blair as leader, but 
decided she "can work with this guy".

Of late she has been closer to Mr Blair because of her crucial 1999 loyalty to 
him over Kosovo. Her fierce attacks on pacifist "appeasers" of the Serbs had 
all the more impact because she had shown no such loyalty to Neil Kinnock in 
1990-91 when she strongly opposed military attacks on Saddam Hussein.

The granddaughter of an illiterate Irish peasant, she can only be understood 
as the Birmingham-born daughter of Frank Short, a Crossmaglen-born teacher and 
strong Irish republican. Her mother, Joan, a former bookkeeper, "goes to mass 
every morning - she does not believe in abortion". In a tribal way, Ms Short 
still sees herself as a Catholic, but detests the way its priests try to keep 
women as child-bearers and fight against the use of condoms even when needed to 
battle against the spread of Aids in Africa.

She has attracted a large following for her work to help the poor in Africa, 
especially by the way she organised help for flooded Mozambique, fighting off 
the ministry of defence's efforts to overcharge her for its helicopters. Long 
ago she earned the backing of feminists with her 1988 battle against page three 
pornography in the Sun and other tabloids. In the Commons, she also fought 
Sun-backing Tory male chauvinists who lewdly called attention to her female 
attributes.

Her human side was unveiled in 1996 when she rediscovered her son, City 
solicitor Toby Young, who had been given up for adoption during her first 
marriage at 18 to a fellow Keele student.

After his adoption she secured an honours degree at Leeds University. Her 
second marriage, to Alex Lyons, who lost York in 1983 just as she won her natal 
Birmingham-Ladywood, turned tragic. Suffering from Alzheimer's and spinal 
muscular atrophy, his behaviour became increasingly destructive until his death 
in 1993. They had met when she was a senior Home Office civil servant, 
including a stint of heading his ministerial office.

Ask Aristotle about Clare Short 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4749,00.html>
 