
Players from Nigeria and South Africa yesterday rushed to play down fears that 
there would be ill-feeling when the two sides meet here this afternoon in their 
eagerly anticipated African Nations Cup semi-final.

Millions of Africans are expected to make up a near-record television 
audience, thousands will be huddled around their transistor radios, while 
hordes of ticketless Nigerians will gather in the thatched huts situated at the 
entertainment village outside the sold-out 55,000 all-seat Surulere stadium to 
watch on big screens.

The bitter legacy of a political dispute between Nigeria and South Africa have 
raised the stakes although players from both teams, who are staying in the same 
hotel, are adamant there will be no bitterness.

"When [Mark] Fish and I met in the lobby we hugged with affection," said 
Sunday Oliseh of Juventus, the Nigeria captain, referring to the South Africa 
defender.

Lucas Radebe, the South Africa and Leeds United captain, added: "Most players 
on both sides are friends; like me and Kanu, Fish and Sunday Oliseh. So this 
game is a friendly affair."

Adding to the spice of the meeting, however, is the fact that this is only the 
third meeting between the teams, the first of which took place here in October 
1992, after South Africa had returned from its international isolation for its 
government's apartheid policies.

The Super Eagles won that World Cup qualifying match 4-0 while the second leg, 
in Johannesburg, finished 0-0.

Talk of grudges has been in the air since 1996, however, when a diplomatic row 
between former South Africa president Nelson Mandela and Nigeria's military 
ruler, the late general Sani Abacha.

Mandela had criticised Abacha, who defied international opinion in 1995 and 
ordered the execution of the Nigerian writer Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other 
Ogoni activists for the alleged murder of four pro-government Ogoni chiefs, the 
upshot of which was that Nigeria was suspended from the Commonwealth.

South Africa subsequently withdrew its invitation to Nigeria to contest a 
four-nation tournament before the 1996 Nations Cup, and Abacha retaliated by 
withdrawing the Super Eagles, then the defending champions, from the tournament.

The Dutchman Jo Bonfrere, Nigeria's coach at the time and once again in 
charge, said: "I felt sad we didn't play in that 1996 finals. Now we finally 
meet. I'm happy and I want to see a true game of sportsmanship."

The Confederation of African Football also banned Nigeria from the 1998 
tournament in Burkina Faso, where South Africa finished as runners-up, and all 
efforts to stage another match between the two teams have since failed.

Radebe, who played in both previous meetings, commented: "The Nigerians have 
always claimed we couldn't call ourselves champions in 1996 because they 
weren't at the tournament. So we'll like to make a point of beating them now."

Fish, his partner at the back, added: "The Nigerian defence is suspect. I was 
not that impressed with their [quarter- final] game against Senegal. They were 
fortunate to score late, which gave them their footing to fight back. I believe 
we can beat them."

Nigeria's 18-year-old Julius Aghahowa, who scored both goals in that 2-1 win 
against Senegal, replied: "It's going to be a tough game, but ask any layman 
and he'll tell you we'll win. We don't lose at home."

Indeed they don't, and boast a proud undefeated home record stretching back to 
1981, when Algeria beat them 2-0 in a World Cup qualifying match. They have not 
lost a Nations Cup match since their 2-1 loss to Ghana in 1992.

This afternoon the sides will be without key midfielders, however, Nigeria's 
Austin Okocha and South Africa's Eric Tinkler both sitting this one out after 
being sent off in the quarter-finals.

South Africa's coach Trott Moloto also has worries about both of his strikers, 
Shaun Bartlett of FC Zurich and Quinton Fortune, the Manchester United reserve. 
Bartlett, the tournament's top scorer with four goals, has flu while Fortune is 
nursing an injury.

Nigeria's forward Victor Ikpeba, scorer of two goals in their opening group 
game against Tunisia - who meet Cameroon this evening in the Accra semi-final - 
may also miss out after a row with Bonfrere for substituting him in the 0-0 
draw with Congo.

Ugly incidents during that Congo game, in which home fans hurled plastic 
bottles on to the pitch to protest against Nigeria's performance, and after the 
Senegal match, which sparked a pitch invasion, have further heightened security 
fears, although Nigeria were duly fined $10,000 for the latter incident.

A statement from the Nigerian organisers was issued yesterday, which simply 
said: "We appeal to the fans to be civilised in their support and we're 
providing maximum security for the game." Fingers will be crossed that it will 
not be needed.
 