 Earnest, fast-talking Clive Soley, the once confident chairman of the 
parliamentary Labour party, has become nervous since he came within seven votes 
of being ousted from his post in late 2000 by challenges from more rebellious 
backbenchers. The near defeat came as a shock to him and re-energised his 
efforts. The PLP chairman should be part of a two-way channel between Labour 
backbenchers and the leadership. In Mr Soley's case, there was resentment 
against his apparent eagerness to support to the Blairite top-down command 
structure. He is unlikely to repeat the mistake.
Many of those voting against him in the internal party ballot undoubtedly did 
so more in sorrow than anger. A former probation officer, Clive Soley had 
earned respect before 1997 as an assiduous, knowledgeable, witty and sensitive 
soft-left crusader for homes, civil liberties, prison reform, Northern Ireland 
solutions and a responsible press.

Under Neil Kinnock, even the Times rated him as "one of the stars of Labour's 
middle ranks". He won special kudos for his 1992-93 press freedom and 
responsibility bill, which tried to impose decent standards on wayward 
tabloids. Little sign, then, that he was later to be seen as a Blairite lapdog.

He comes from a family of active trade unionists who worked in a psychiatric 
hospital, a background which did not give him stability or educational success. 
On leaving Ilford's Downshall secondary modern school at 15 his report read "he 
could make use of his very limited abilities if only he would try a little 
harder".

The persistence soon arrived, if not the success. After years of rejection by 
academia, (including by Ruskin College, Oxford, John Prescott's old college) 
and by almost every other university in the Commonwealth and the USA, he 
finally made the grade in an adult education college in Dalkeith and received 
an honours BA from Strathclyde University. He calls himself a "classic late 
developer".

In politics he was quicker. At 16 he was in the Labour League of Youth, and he 
was elected to Hammersmith council at 35 in 1974. As a soft-leftie, he was 
selected to replace the crusty old far-right Labour MP, Frank Tomney, as 
candidate for Hammersmith North, defeating a leftwing candidate. Mr Soley 
entered the Commons in 1979, at the beginning of the Thatcher era.

As a former probation officer, he was quick off the mark in developing an 
agenda of his own, urging the creation of a minister for children, warning of 
the danger of prison riots, and opposing the jailing of prostitutes. He also 
established himself as a specialist on Ulster, backing a united Ireland. A 
Labour spokesman on Northern Ireland, he resigned briefly after voting against 
the Prevention of Terrorism Act.

During his 20-plus years in the Commons, Mr Soley has pioneered a number of 
policies later adopted by his party, including advocating gay rights in Ulster. 
He was sympathetic to Palestinian Arabs and Arthur Scargill's striking miners. 
When elected chairman of the PLP in 1997 a lot was expected of him.

He did warn Tony Blair against cuts in single parent benefits - his advice was 
ignored and the cuts became the centre of the prime minister's first Commons 
rebellion. He was also careful bordering on suspicious of Ken Livingstone's 
effort to become Labour's candidate for London mayor. Sound positions, but not 
enough to stop the cries from the backbenches of "sellout" or secure the 
prospect of a front rank ministerial career.

Ask Aristotle about Clive Soley 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4892,00.html>
 