
A few years ago I was asked if I would write a new version of the Oresteia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oresteia>, Aeschylus's fifth-century BCE trilogy. 
I didn't see the point, given thatTed Hughes's 1998 landmark version 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/oct/24/classics.costabookaward> was so 
recent. The story goes like this: following his return from the Trojan war, 
Agamemnon is murdered by his wife, Clytemnestra, for sacrificing their daughter 
Iphigenia to secure a fair wind for Troy. At the conclusion of the trilogy, the 
goddess Athena descends and pronounces that children belong more to their 
fathers than their mothers. The Athenian city-state is declared a place where 
killing your husband is unacceptable, no matter what the provocation.

This conclusion always seemed to me a fudge – and when the actor Fiona Shaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/fiona-shaw> pointed out that Clytemnestra 
is the only member of the family (the House of Atreus) whose death is never 
avenged, I had my subject. I decided to write a new play, for which there is no 
classical original. Greek theatre was a means of debating the pressing social 
issues of the day through the vehicle of myth: I thought I'd give Clytemnestra 
her day in court.

Imagine that your husband is away at war, and imagine hearing that he has 
allowed your daughter to be killed in order to further his strategic interests. 
Far from being the manic man-woman of the Oresteia, I wanted to show a 
Clytemnestra who was grieving and unable to cope. (In my play, she gives in to 
an impulse to eat some of her daughter's ashes.) I set the play in the near 
future, after the end of oil. The Trojan campaign is part of a war for food. A 
slaughterhouse stands at the centre of the Atreus family compound, feeding a 
community. Outside its perimeter, feral gangs roam the countryside. Securing 
food supply lines means the difference between death and survival.

I decided to unleash the Furies, goddesses of revenge, with their demands that 
Iphigenia be avenged. I imagined this vendetta impulse as something like a 
buzzing fly in the room, an interference in the mind, a constant pressure to 
behave in a certain way. The Furies are older gods, coming before relatively 
arriviste Olympians such as Athena; I wanted them to represent the primitive, 
pre-linguistic part of the brain.

Big decisions are rarely made in one go. Before Clytemnestra resolves to kill 
her husband, I wanted to show her responding to her Fury's campaign for 
domination. ("Who'll speak for the dead girls if I don't?" asks the Fury. "The 
teenagers with skinny shoulders,/ Out in party dresses, no coats,/ The bodies 
are found on waste ground later,/ Strangled with their own tights.") By means 
of a series of small steps, Clytemnestra becomes the woman who turns her 
bedroom into a killing chamber. Along the way, she takes a lover with a grudge 
against her family. All hell breaks loose.

I resisted including Electra and Cassandra, but found that they lobbied hard 
for parts and muscled their way in. Cassandra, the Trojan prisoner cursed by 
Zeus with the gift of foresight and the fate of never being believed, turned 
out to be a key that unlocked the whole play. She transforms every character 
she meets and offers an extreme model for moral behaviour: you go to your death 
with your eyes open. As for Electra, she's a difficult character to like 
(perhaps because she's right).

The first time I saw actors rehearsing the Furies, bellowing and bullying 
the other actors on the stage, I was terrified. As a poet, I am used to being 
uninhibited on the page; but the idea of staging my thoughts in a public space 
has created an anxiety of a whole different order. As a former television 
producer, I was determined that music, choreography and design should be part 
of the conversation, even as the play was being written. Consequently, our 
Furies sing and move in ways designed to compel – human eloquence expressed at 
its most basic, physical level. My young grandchildren have been very keen to 
watch rehearsals, and I've tried to write the story clearly enough for them to 
follow.

So have I avenged Clytemnestra? No, but I hope that after spending three and a 
half years in the company of an adultress and husband-killer – a woman who 
compares the feel of her husband's blood on her face to refreshing spring rain 
– I have made her a more human character. I expected nightmares when I began 
writing, but they never came. In fact, the whole experience has reinforced my 
faith in myth as a tool for thinking about contemporary issues, in this case 
honour killings and food scarcity.

And I have to say, it's a wonderful feeling, murdering people on stage. It 
became my sign-off to friends while writing: "Got to go. Have to kill two 
people by the end of the afternoon." The kids are particularly eager to see the 
blood. They're right, of course. It's when blood is spilled that a society's 
sense of justice is made or broken.
 