
Paul Stastny had a goal and an assist in the third period and Semyon Varlamov 
stopped 24 shots as theColorado Avalanche picked up a fourth straight win with 
a 3-2 victory over theWinnipeg Jets on Sunday night. Matt Duchene and Jan Hejda 
also scored and Gabriel Landeskog added two assists for the Avalanche. Under 
first-year coach Patrick Roy, they have won 10 of their 11 games.

"That was the first time we came from behind in the third period," Stastny 
said. "We got chances and we didn't stop. We just kept going."

Blake Wheeler and Bryan Little had a goal and assist each for the Jets. The 
Avalanche trailed 2-1 entering the third but came out strong at the start of 
the period. They put nine quick shots on goalie Al Montoya before Hejda 
equalized with 12:47 left off an assist by Stastny. Stastny netted the winner 
with 5:28 left to give Colorado its fourth straight victory.

"When [Alex Tanguay] brings two guys to him, you know something good is going 
to happen," Stastny said. "I was just going back door and trying to yell as 
loud as I can to Landy because he was looking to shoot. He changed his mind at 
the last second and just gave me a tap-in. He passed it between two sticks. 
That's something we practice."

The Los Angeles Kings and the Tampa Bay Lightning had shootout wins on Sunday, 
while theAnaheim Ducks ended the Columbus Blue Jackets' three-game winning 
streak with a 4-3 result at Columbus and theSan Jose Sharks beat the Ottawa 
Senators 5-2.

At Los Angeles, Anze Kopitar scored the deciding goal in a shootout as the 
Kings beat theEdmonton Oilers for a seventh victory in nine games. The Kings 
outshot the Oilers 48-18 in regulation and overtime. Nail Yakupov scored for 
Edmonton on a power play in the second period and Mike Richards tied it less 
than 14 minutes later. The Kings are 5-0 in games that have gone past 
regulation. Jonathan Quick improved to 4-0 in shootouts, having stopped 10 of 
11 shots he's faced in tiebreakers. In 2010-11, he led theNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> with 10 shootout wins and had an .818 
save percentage.

Corey Perry scored the clincher for the Ducks with 2:25 remaining, wristing a 
shot over sprawled goalie Sergei Bobrovsky. The Ducks lost Saku Koivu late in 
the second period on a hit that resulted in the ejection of Columbus' Brandon 
Dubinsky.

The Sharks were outshot for the first time this season but Alex Stalock 
stopped 38 shots in his first NHL start, helping San Jose to yet another win. 
The 26-year-old Stalock made 16 saves in the first period and helped the Sharks 
jump out to a 3-1 lead.

At Sunrise, Florida, Steven Stamkos and Valtteri Filppula both scored in the 
shootout to give Tampa Bay a 4-3 win over theFlorida Panthers. Stamkos made 
some nice moves and slipped the puck past Jacob Markstrom for the deciding goal.
 