
The Turnbull government is continuing to claim $1.3bn in Abbott-era savings 
from renewable energy grants even though the cuts have not been and may not be 
legislated, and in the meantime the agency responsible for them is required to 
continue spending the money.


The good, the bad and the shell game – what Turnbull's clean energy shift means
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/the-good-the-bad-and-the-shell-game-what-turnbulls-clean-energy-shift-means>
The clean energy industry has largely welcomed an announcement by the prime 
minister this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/the-good-the-bad-and-the-shell-game-what-turnbulls-clean-energy-shift-means>
 that he would keep the Clean Energy Finance Corporation – which the Abbott 
government had sought to close – and retain in name but change the role of the 
Australian Renewable Energy Agency (Arena).

The Abbott government had also sought to abolish Arena and cut $1.3bn from its 
spending – a “saving” it counted in the budget bottom line even though the 
legislation implementing those decisions did not pass the Senate. The Turnbull 
announcement retained that saving, giving Arena a new role as administrator of 
a subsidiary loans program for earlier stage clean energy projects, using some 
of the borrowed funds of the Cefc.

But the Arena chief executive, Ivor Frischknecht, told Guardian Australia that 
Arena’s legislation specifies its funding and its tasks and until it is amended 
or repealed Arena is required to continue considering and making clean energy 
grants with that money.

“It is a big step forward that the government recognises renewable energy and 
Arena as part of its agenda ... that is tremendously positive,” Frischknecht 
said.

“But any change to our funding is subject to parliament, the $1.3bn remains in 
our act and subject to board decisions. The legislation obliges us to carry out 
the functions of Arena and one of those is to provide financial assistance, so 
we would have to continue to do that to some level,” he said.

“Whether we will lose the $1.3bn will be up to the parliament, and just as 
with any other legislation, groups can try to influence the parliament one way 
or another about whether those cuts are passed.”

The chief executive of the Solar Council, John Grimes, said Arena had received 
legal advice confirming that it was obliged to continue considering and 
awarding grants until such time as the legislation was amended or repealed.

At the moment Arena has only one board member – the secretary of the 
environment department – with the government expected to appoint new board 
members in coming weeks.

Greg Bourne, the former oil industry executive who was chairman of Arena until 
January, said the new board would be in the same position as his board had been 
after the Abbott government made the policy decision to abolish the 
organisation and cut the funding, but had been unable to get it through the 
parliament.

“We had to work within the Arena act, which meant we had to continue to 
consider project ideas and fund them. The directors will have to continue to 
follow the purpose of the act and weigh up projects and fund those they 
consider worthy. To crystallise those savings the government needs the 
legislation to pass.”

Under the Turnbull government’s new policy Arena will co-manage a new Clean 
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Investment Fund set up 
underneath the CEFC, with a mandate to lend to earlier stage and slightly 
riskier projects, and generate a slightly lower rate of return.

It provides some certainty to both organisations which had been on “death row” 
for years, but means no grant funding will be available for very early stage 
projects that do not yet generate a return.

Bourne said he believed renewable energy development needed “grants, debts and 
equity”.

The government has said Arena will continue to manage its existing projects 
and will finalise the $100m in large-scale solar grants.

Turnbull said on Wednesday the decision to shift to debt and equity-based 
funding was a deliberate shift.

Wind power: senators want moratorium on turbines until health studies conclude
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/wind-power-senators-want-moratorium-on-turbines-until-health-studies-conclude>
“This reflects a very big change in the way the government ... is now 
approaching this type of investment,” he said. “Historically ... the federal 
government has been very much like an ATM, it’s been making grants ... without, 
frankly, a lot of follow-up as to whether it’s effective.

“We believe ... the government should seek to be a partner and investor, seek 
to get a return. It doesn’t have to get the same high return that a private 
venture capital firm or a private bank would seek to get. It can get a very 
long-term return but, in doing that, by ensuring that you take a more economic 
approach, you will ensure that you have a much more rigorous analysis and that 
you will get a better quality of investment and a better quality of project.”

The $1.3bn in “savings” remains available – despite Arena continuing to dole 
out grants in the two years since the Abbott government original tried to take 
the money back – because Arena also cancelled some earlier grants.
 