
Blame Paul Collingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-collingwood>. 
He started it yesterday morning when he stuck a big stick in a hornets' nest 
and England got stung. Until then, Shane Warne had ambled his way through his 
final Test, only one wicket in the first innings and by the looks of him intent 
on having a merry heave-ho with the bat, just for a bit of enjoyment.

Then, having hit his first two balls from Monty Panesar for a swept four and 
slogged six, he pushed forward and found something that turned, bounced and, to 
most people except the umpire Aleem Dar, brushed a batting glove on the way 
through to Chris Read. It may prove to have cost England any chance they 
entertained of winning the match. Collingwood, who had the best view of anyone, 
standing at slip as he was, said something to Warne and the game went 
pear-shaped.

From an unpromising position, Australia, through the means of the sort of 
counter-attacking charge postulated by Sun Tzu in The Art of War and advocated 
for his team by coach John Buchanan, established a lead of 102.

First Andrew Symonds and Adam Gilchrist and then Warne and Stuart Clark 
provided a bridgehead from which the hosts would have felt confident of pushing 
for their fifth and final victory. By the close only Kevin Pietersen, watchful 
and reticent for his 29, stood between England and defeat as they slumped to 
114 for five, a lead of a paltry dozen runs.

Wickets went to the deserving seamers, first Brett Lee, who took two through 
pace alone and rattled the brains of Andrew Strauss so severely that on 
completion of his innings he went to hospital to check that they were 
undamaged, and a couple for Clark, surely Australia's player of the series, who 
having nipped out Strauss then added Collingwood. Warne, of course, had the 
final word, coming on to bowl late in the day and spinning one past Andrew 
Flintoff so that Gilchrist was able to complete a stumping with the England 
captain's back foot anchored on but not behind the crease.

"You, mate," retorted Warne to Collingwood, somewhere among a treasure chest 
of insults and epithets during the couple of hours he was at the crease, "are 
making me concentrate." Indeed so well did he apply himself that by the time 
Panesar lured him down the pitch for Read to facilitate the stumping that 
brought the Australia innings to an end, Warne, in what he might have regarded 
as his final Test innings, had blasted 71 from 65 balls.

Yet when James Anderson, in his first over of the day, had nipped out Mike 
Hussey, Australia were 101 runs adrift of England with half the side gone. They 
were also behind when Panesar bowled Symonds for 48 to end a 58-run stand.

Warne, with Gilchrist, gave Australia the lead before the left-hander was 
deemed caught at the wicket chasing a wide delivery with the second new ball. 
That Gilchrist stood his ground was indication enough that he had been hard 
done by for he is an honourable fellow, a walker, one of the few. Umpires, 
though, cannot make decisions on reputation alone.

Even then, with a brisk finish to the innings, the game would have remained 
evenly poised. But Flintoff does not possess the attack given to Michael 
Vaughan. There came a point where he and Harmison had to hand over the bowling, 
and Warne tucked in. He found an ally in Clark, a black-and-white batsman who 
simply blocks or bashes, often by numbers it seems. There was much wafting at 
thin air but some good connections as well.

By the time England got Clark's measure, a steepling catch going up to 
Pietersen at midwicket, the pair had collected 68 runs for the ninth wicket, 
and Warne, the magician, was beginning to dream dreams of a maiden Test century 
in his final match. That he self-detonated rather than his partner going was 
perhaps right and proper.

Had this been an Adelaide featherbed, England might have entertained confident 
thoughts of a big second innings. But the pitch has offered assistance to the 
best seamers all match and it was still there for Australia.

Alastair Cook will return to England this weekend a wiser young man, knowing 
that for all his fine temperament there are flaws in his technique to address 
before the summer and that high pace is best left unhooked: he was later than 
the White Rabbit on his attempted pull from Lee's bouncer. Strauss batted 
manfully after the shocking blow to the right temple that felled him, but he 
has had a poor series overall and hit all around a full-length ball to be lbw 
for 24. Ian Bell played pleasantly enough, greeting Warne's exploratory pre-tea 
over by hitting three legside boundaries, sufficient to cast doubt on the 
leg-spinner's fitness to bowl. But he too could not restrain himself against 
Lee's pace and a wild slash ended up in Gilchrist's gloves.

Quote of the day "I was pretty pumped up when I first went out there. I'm 
normally a terrible starter, so I thought I'd try a few Red Bulls and I had a 
couple and I was buzzing when I went out."

Perhaps England should follow Shane Warne's lead and fuel the tail with 
odd-tasting caffeine drinks. Either that or teach them how to bat.

Another Aussie flop

The BDO World Darts Championship begins tomorrow without the 2002 winner, Tony 
David. The Australian thrower, known as The Deadly Boomerang, missed out in 
qualifying, which means antipodean hopes rest on the No6 seed, Simon Whitlock - 
alias The Wizard of Oz - although one of the 17 English lads in the draw should 
account for him. Surely.

Number of the day 

0: Number of Test centuries scored by Shane Warne. But we won't mention his 
career tally of wickets.

Also in Sydney 

If waking up to the prospect of another day's cricketing humiliation is 
getting you down, why not pop along to Sydney's Taronga Zoo for their "Roar and 
Snore" package. After your "Safari Supper", snuggle down for a good night's 
sleep in a tent under the stars. In the morning you'll be wrenched from the 
warm arms of Morphius by the blood-curdling roars of lions - surely a gentler 
way to start the day than another session at the SCG.
 