
There are too few women over 50 on TV. There are too few funny women on TV. 
There should be more old women and more funny women. More old, funny women. 
More decrepit, hilarious women. To cut a long story short, Joan Rivers should 
be on everything.

A huge campaign is gearing up against the dropping of Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips> from Strictly Come 
Dancing in favour of the younger and hotter Alesha Dixon. Typical sexist 
television, privileging juicy flesh over experience and wisdom. If TV were a 
person, it would be Peter Stringfellow.

And now there is a parallel debate, back and forth between Victoria Wood, Dara 
O'Briain and Michael Parkinson, about why TV is also short of funny women.

Arlene Phillips, God bless her, tries to tick both boxes. She does jokes. 
Unfortunately, they are the worst jokes ever made in the history of 
entertainment. That is the great unspoken problem, as we rise in fury against 
her sacking. It is the elephant in the room, trumpeting weak puns. Admit it, 
you who have joined the fight to save Arlene: only a few months ago, you were 
wincing as she cried: "Phew, that paso doble was so hot, you could cook a 
Spanish omelette on it! No bull about that performance, is it gettingchilli in 
here?"

Older women have been massively and stupidly underrepresented on screen for 
years. We stood by quietly as Moira Stuart – surely the calmest, most 
reassuring and authoritative presence on television – got squeezed out of 
reading the news. Yet we make a big fuss over Arlene Phillips.

When I was a kid, my dad would often be nightmarishly bad-tempered, 
impossible, ogreish, and my mum would never say a word. Then he would pick the 
wrong parking space outside a restaurant and she'd go mental. Is Arlene our 
wrong parking space?

But maybe it doesn't matter. There should be a fuss about the ubiquitous 
sidelining of older women, with television being the most visible place to 
start.

It does seem that the medium suffers from an exaggerated prejudice towards 
dewy youth and beauty, although I personally have never experienced it. I made 
two whole documentary series for BBC2; in every episode, I wore a duffel coat 
and did my own make-up. I looked like Ted Hughes. And nobody said a word.

My current job involves hosting a super-difficult quiz show (the producer will 
be sad if I don't mention that it is calledOnly Connect, BBC4, Monday nights). 
I did the first series in £20 trouser suits from C&A, squeezing my size 14 arse 
into crackly beige nylon. Nobody cared. I was too busy filming to wash my hair; 
the final appeared to be presented by a drowning weasel. Nobody mentioned it.

For the second series, inspired by gorgeous fat Joan from Mad Men, I decided 
to turn up with a new wardrobe of close-fitting dresses and show off my 
"womanly curves" as if they were a good thing. Nobody spotted the difference. I 
could present myself for a third series with a facelift, nose job, extravagant 
weight loss and full set of new teeth; the viewers and production team would 
glance up from their newspaper like a tired husband and say: "Where have you 
been? That kettle won't boil itself."

Nevertheless, most female presenters are rake-thin, perfect-skinned and under 
30, so there must be eugenics going on somewhere. I have paid to see only two 
live performers in the last year: Dolly Parton and Bette Midler. Both are 
charismatic, gutsy, funny, sexy and accessible. They share a dry, wry, "seen 
it, done it" humour that makes one think the older female generation might be 
the very best place to look for enjoyable entertainers. And yet, when we flick 
through the channels, where are they?

If I were trying to make a full-time TV career, I imagine I would worry about 
not being young enough or thin enough. As it is, I worry only about not being 
funny enough. I keep stubbornly trying to make jokes, even in the inappropriate 
and somewhat challenging context of quiz questions about 12th-century Viennese 
architecture. That's because jokes are the kneejerk defence mechanism of the 
insecure. A boyfriend once broke up with me on the grounds that: "We never have 
proper conversations. You're always saying things you don't mean, just because 
you think they're funny."

"What can I do?" I asked miserably. "If I stopped doing that, I would never 
say anything at all."

Joking is a counterintuitive, inadvisable social tic; jokes are really 
difficult. It's like trying to build a field radio out of matchsticks in the 
middle of every sentence. It is multitasking gone mad. I wish I had the 
confidence to stop doing it.

And Arlene Phillips really doesn't have to. She is a qualified dance expert, 
she has a lifetime's knowledge and experience. What is she frightened of, as 
she quips incessantly about rumba-ustious performances, better than a polka in 
the eye with a sharp stick?

Watching her – and listening to myself – I think we had better be careful 
about emphasising the need for more female jokers. It may be the great strength 
of most women that they are able to talk without this constant nervous effort 
to crack gags. Too much pressure and it will become as bad as the beauty myth: 
all conversation will be full of puns injected like Botox, quips sprayed on 
like fake tan, one-liners attached like hair extensions. For deeper beauty and 
better humour, keep it natural.

So let us use Arlene Phillips as our Rosa Parks, our Tiananmen Square, our 
moment to cry: "Enough is enough!" This is as good a time as any to start a 
committed attack on the disrespectful sidelining of older women, on TV and 
everywhere else.

But perhaps let's not have a simultaneous campaign to make women try to be 
funnier. They're funny enough already; a harder drive for laughs may end in 
tears.
 