
When actress Emma Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson> 
walked shoeless on to the stage at the Golden Globes, she confirmed what the 
rest of us have known for a while. Comfy shoes make sense. Clutching her 
Christian Louboutin heels in one hand – and a martini in the other – she joked 
that their trademark red soles were stained with her blood. "I've taken my 
heels off as a feminist statement really, because why do we wear them? They're 
so painful. And pointless, really."

With brogues and ballet shoes filling the fashion pages and shops, financial 
investors have started to take notice. Comfortable shoe brand Hotter, which 
started life as a slipper manufacturer, has just changed hands for £200m, while 
the Griggs family, which owned the Dr Martens brand for 50 years, has sold up 
to private equity giant Permira for £300m.

Flat shoes are selling well on the high street, with more than three-fifths of 
women polled on their shoe shopping habits by Mintel confessing to having 
bought a pair in the past 12 months.

"Under-35s are willing to sacrifice fit for fashion," said Mintel fashion 
analyst Tamara Sender. "By contrast, over-55s place the most importance on 
well-fitting shoes. Overall, three-quarters of consumers favoured fit over 
fashion."

Alexa Chung is credited with making flat shoes fashionable as, amid a sea of 
stoic women in skyscraper Jimmy Choos, she regularly pads up the red carpet in 
her Oxford lace-ups. But a change in attitude was signalled by the catwalk 
front rows last year when some of the industry's most influential players 
turned up to fashion week shod in flats. The signal that comfortable is OK was 
further affirmed last week, whenKarl Lagerfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld> sent models down the 
Chanel runway in sparkly couture trainers.

Lorna Hall, head of retail at trend consultancy WGSN, said that popular shoe 
styles are a reflection of the clothing that is in the shops. "The reason flat 
shoes are selling so well is that they go with the androgynous silhouette that 
is fashionable at the moment," she said. "Heels look good with dresses, but 
brogues and flats help you carry off slim-leg trousers and oversized jacket 
shapes."

Earlier this month, Dr Martens reported bumper Christmas sales, up nearly 70% 
in December. The brand, famous for its close ties to music and subculture, 
manages to hit both fashion and comfort buttons at the same time. It has 
benefited from the patronage of Miley Cyrus, who has made its rubber 
air-cushioned soles her boot of choice, while design collaborations with the 
likes of modelAgyness Deyn <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn> 
have helped it appeal to a new young audience.

With a goal to make "shoes as comfortable as slippers", Lancashire-based 
Hotter may sound like the antithesis of fashion, but the firm is now big 
business. Each year it sells more than two million pairs of shoes whose USP is 
a sole featuring thousands of air bubbles, and sales hit £75m in 2013.

"We want people to put our shoes on and have that 'aah' moment," said its 
chief executive, Peter Taylor.

Hotter's target market of over-45s is proving lucrative against a backdrop of 
ageing populations. "We are not in the sexiest area of the marketplace, but in 
demographic terms it is an area that is growing," said Taylor. "Once you get 
over 40, your feet do start changing shape. It's a balancing act, but there's 
no reason why you can't have comfort and style."

Independent footwear chain Shoon is also targeting growth in this specialist 
area. It has been bought by entrepreneurs Ken Bartle and Peter Phillips, who 
previously revived the fortunes of high street chain Jones the Bootmaker.

"It is very difficult to design a pointed three-inch heel that is really 
comfortable," said Bartle. "What is comfortable, though, is nice leather. 
Comfort doesn't have to be ugly."

In the past, Christian Louboutin, who has been dubbed the "king of painful 
shoes", was unapologetic about the grit required to wear his skyscraper heels, 
telling one interviewer it was "not my job to create something comfortable". 
But even he has relented, introducing brogues for spring. Maybe 2014 promises 
to be a good year for feet.
 