
Letter from America No 1, March 24 1946

After a sobering month or more in Britain, I came back to the United States 
with a couple of thousand GI brides. The first shock came shortly after the 
liner thundered its great horn as we slipped away from the dock at Southampton. 
All the mothers clung to the rail, and all the babies clung to their mothers 
and watched England slide away. Along the entire main deck of the ship the 
handkerchiefs fluttered in an unbroken line, like washing day in Manchester or 
Leeds; and then a small coastguard cutter came scuttering alongside the liner 
like a playful puppy. An American soldier stood at the cutter's bow, cupped his 
hands, and yelled, "You don't want to go back, do you?" And the young mothers 
and wives, weeping like mad, yelled, "No."

The ship turned about, we headed into the Channel, night began to fall, and we 
moved below deck. And then came the first surprise. There was a meal, with meat 
and a vegetable that was not easy to recognise right away. It was not, you see, 
Brussels sprouts ...

The fifth day out we sighted land, way off on our left. Away ahead there, 
rising like a rim of mist was the almost dewy coast of New Jersey. On the
right was the flat, twinkling line of the south shore of Long Island, and then 
for a half day, with the blue sky swooping all over us, we came slowly up New 
York Harbor.

And the captains of tugboats would look up and wave at the brides, and soon we 
saw great signs painted on the ends of docks, and on the roofs of pier 
buildings that said "Welcome Home" and "Well Done". A soldier friend of mine 
told me about the lump that came in his throat when he heard the bands and saw 
these signs. Full of pride and bounce, he came down the gangplank to meet New 
York and its grateful citizens, and then he started to look for a hotel room. 
Then just a room. He wound up begging a man who ran a Turkish bath to rig up a 
cot just for the night. That was the due of fame. That was his welcome home.

H-bomb test at Bikini atoll

Letter No 358, April 1 1954

With the promise of spring and the first warm wind from the west there came 
also, this last week, the shattering explosion from Bikini [in the south 
Pacific] ... an explosion 700 times as powerful as the one that devastated 
Hiroshima.

This is obviously a turning point in history that cannot be shrugged off or 
pacified with appeals to decent feeling. And it might seem at the moment that 
nothing is more useless than offhand optimism. But I know people who have had a 
good deal to do with the technical development and political management of 
atomic energy, who are inclined to think that the Bikini H-bomb could be one of 
the best things that ever happened to us. They argue from such simple analogy 
that, say, for instance, there was no way to stop reckless motorists from 
injuring one another inside big cities until there were enough cars on the 
streets to force the invention of traffic lights. This simple invention managed 
to discipline the hopeless variety of human character in the stated cause of 
convenience but actually in the service of safety.

Marilyn Monroe: 1926-1962

The Guardian, August 6 1962

To say that Marilyn Monroe was a charming, shrewd and pathetic woman of tragic 
integrity will sound as preposterous to the outsider as William Empson's 
Freudian analysis of Alice in Wonderland. It is nevertheless true. We restrict 
the word "integrity" to people either simple or complex, who have a strong 
sense of righteousness or, if they are public men, of self-righteousness. Yet 
it surely means no more than what it says: wholeness, being free to be 
spontaneous, without reck of consistency or moral appearances. It can be as 
true of forlorn and bewildered people as of the disciplined and the solemn. In 
this sense, Marilyn Monroe was all of a piece. She was confused, pathologically 
shy, a straw on the ocean of her compulsions (to pout, to wisecrack, to love a 
stranger, to be six hours late, or lock herself in a room). She was a sweet and 
humorous person increasingly terrified by the huge stereotype of herself she 
saw plastered all around her. The exploitation of this pneumatic, mocking, 
liquid-lipped goddess gave the world a simple picture of the Lorelei. She was 
about as much of a Lorelei as Bridget the housemaid. This orphan of the 
rootless City of the Angels at last could feel no other identity than the one 
she saw in the mirror; a baffled, honest girl forever haunted by the night-mare 
of herself, 60 feet tall and naked before a howling mob. She could never learn 
to acquire the lacquered shell of the prima donna or the armour of 
sophistication. So in the end she found the ultimate oblivion, of which her 
chronic latecomings and desperate retreats to her room were tokens.

The permissive society

The Guardian, October 26 1967


Who are the hippies? Lamentably little scientific work has been done on their 
genes and their social history, though a limited New York psychiatric study 
asserts that as many as 60% are seriously sick, mostly with schizophrenia. But 
we do know that they tend to come from better rather than worse educated 
families, that their parents are rarely impoverished but have a high incidence 
either of divorce or of rigid morality. We know also that the children of 
Catholics and religious Jews are very much in the minority among the new 
rebels. And - a saving statistic - that hippies and their vagabond variations 
account for less than 10% of the young. The mystery, which no mere 
perambulating journalist should try to solve, is how it comes about that the 
rebel young appear, in East Berlin and east St Louis, in the same international 
uniform, that they profess the same half-baked "philosophies" and rustle as 
indistinguishable as cockroaches over three or four continents.
 