
Letter No 799, December 29 1963 

The carols, wrote an old New York writer, have not drowned out the requiem. I 
guess that puts it about as simply and truly as it can be said. But they made a 
brave try, once the mournful 30 days was over and the flags were hoisted to the 
top of their masts.

On the last day [of official mourning for America's assassinated president], 
last Saturday, I went across the Potomac river, which separates Washington from 
the state of Virginia, and went up the hill into Arlington national cemetery.

All the leaves had gone from the trees, and it was possible to stand almost 
anywhere on the sloping ground and look around the crescent from the north and 
the west to the south and see the rows of simple white slabs running over the 
little hills as rhythmically as vines: these are the dead, the known and always 
one unknown, from all the wars since the civil war.

It was a brilliant winter day, cloudless and fogless, but as the sun burned 
out over the snowfields the temperature was down to a piercing 12 degrees: 20 
degrees of frost. On a little plateau you could see a white square, and in the 
middle of it a curious point of orange light. I suppose that from now on, as 
long as anyone can foresee, all the motorists who cross the bridge, either to 
go south or to go to work in the Pentagon, or to take an aeroplane at either of 
the Washington airports, will see this white rectangle and the light inside it. 
For this is the gravesite of John F Kennedy. That, of course, was where I was 
bound.

I must say I have always approved of the dispatch with which Americans bury 
their dead, usually within two days of the death. But one of the curious things 
about this event was its magnetic attraction for the young people. My son, in 
his early 20s and just graduated from college, is still living in the college 
town of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and on the Monday of the funeral he came into 
New York looking like a ghost. He came to tell me about his trip to Washington. 
He had flown down there from Cambridge the evening before and arrived outside 
the Capitol at about 7.30 in the evening. He lined up with the longest and 
quietest queue anyone could remember, about a quarter-million people who waited 
to go into the Capitol and see their president lying in state under the great 
Rotunda. He stood, in biting cold, and got in at six in the morning, into the 
warmth of the Rotunda and the overpowering scent of flowers. He walked around 
the bier and came out and went to the airport and flew to New York and slept 
through the afternoon. Like many of his generation, he is not overly 
sentimental. He said, though, that he felt he just had to do it, and that what 
he would never forget was the way the crowds stood and talked. "I'd guess," he 
said, "that half, maybe three-quarters, of the people in line were students or 
kids of college age."

Well, I don't know whether I inferred from this a rebuke that certainly was 
not intended. But finding myself in Washington last weekend, I thought I had 
better go and see the place where he was put to rest. A hundred, maybe 200 
people were lined up in single file along a narrow path that was covered with 
matting against the frost and snow.

While I was there, and afterwards, and as long as the last of the sun allowed 
you to look back and see them, there were always the same number, moving and 
halting in a snake line. They stood there, again very many young people, 
freezing in blue jeans or shivering in corduroys and burying their heads in 
short jackets. We stamped and crouched against the knifing wind, and went up 
the hill and came nearer to the white rectangle and its guard of soldiers. Now 
you could see on the left a flat standing stone inscribed with the name of the 
lost baby of the midsummer. On the right was a small cross bearing the 
inscription, "Baby Girl Kennedy", this one never came alive. In the middle was 
the mound with no stone or slab but at its head only a circle of flowers, with 
the seal of the United States described in purple flowers, and around the 
circle the words, "President of the United States".

Considering that Washington is a monumental city, with avenues as wide as 
Paris, laid out as it was by a Frenchman at the end of the 18th century, you 
would naturally expect something austere and very grand. With all respect, 
indeed with a curious kind of respect you never would have anticipated, this 
looked like the hasty grave of, say, the town clerk or selectman of a small New 
England village who had died in the night. So there it was, the earthly remains 
of the 35th president beneath a tumble of leaves and fronds and pine cones and 
a few caps thrown on top, and no name. It had a sort of rural pathos about it, 
as if all our pretensions to riches and a career and power had been swept aside 
in the impromptu energy of some poor village gardener wanting to do his best, 
by way of tribute, before the nightfall. The snake line of people paused on the 
hill side of the rectangle, and some people froze a stance and snapped 
pictures, and some just sauntered by, and a soldier or a marine would pull 
himself straight and salute, and people lifted their necks out of their collars 
and looked awhile, or lifted up their small children and put them down and 
mooched on ... John Kennedy might just as well have been the promising son of 
an Irish forebear who, like many another immigrant in Boston, was plucked 
untimely - by some swift epidemic - and buried in a bit of ground.

Then the Sunday came in, and then the Monday morning with a whirling 
snowstorm, and the flags, which, after all, are as neutral as clocks, flew high 
and angrily from the top of their staffs. This snowstorm, which blew in from, 
of all places, the Gulf of Mexico, chilled the usually warm southland and tore 
across the Ozarks and the plains, and blotted out the eastern seaboard and 
upstate New York and New England and blew itself out to sea.

So I think Tuesday was the dawn that we had been waiting for: a typical 
shining winter day, and now all the wreaths and photographs had gone from
the shop windows, and the newspapers burst out of their sobriety and started 
to berate the Congress for hedging the foreign-aid bill. Once you emerge from 
this wholly strange stupor, it is already as plain as can be that all the 
natural emotions of an energetic people were cowed but have not been tamed.

In Grand Central station, a Massachusetts housewife retorts, "I'm a 
Republican, but I think President Johnson has been wonderful." A negro redcap 
porter says, "If he follows Kennedy, he'll be a good man." A conductor says, 
"Well, it's too early to tell, I'll wait and see."' An attendant at the luggage 
room says, "I don't know, I still have to work. It doesn't make any difference 
to me who's president. They all make a lot of promises." "Take it easy, boy," 
says an onlooker.

And what does President Johnson say? He says, "I'm goin' home to Texas, and 
maybe I'll get in a day's hunting. Maybe I'll just go off into the hills and do 
a little communing with myself."

We have come through.
 