
You need motivation to learn any foreign language and the more foreign it is, 
the stronger the motivation must be. What initially nudged me in this direction 
grew in the small, square, plastic pots that covered every window sill of our 
small flat. At around 10 or 11 years old, I became seriously engrossed in the 
study of cacti and was most anxious to know the correct name of each variety. 
Thus, my first foreign language was botanical Latin. I did not use it much. 
Even among Kiev's cactus fanatics, there was a limit to what I could say with 
the 900 or so nouns at my disposal.

When only slightly older I began to learn modern foreign languages in order to 
discover the myriad unknowns which lay beyond the walls of the Socialist Camp. 
I got huge pleasure from finding ways to uncover the secrets of the outside 
world. I searched the airways for radio channels in English and French, and was 
overjoyed if I got hold of a foreign newspaper.

Around a 100 years ago, the wonderful and very revolutionary Russian poet 
Vladimir Mayakovski wrote in one of his poems: "I would learn Russian simply 
because it is the language spoken by Lenin."

I imagine Lenin was, indeed, for many years a major source of motivation for 
the study of Russian. Some students of the language were bent on supporting his 
cause. Others were determined to undermine it.

Today most Russian-speaking young people would have trouble explaining who 
Lenin was. Putin, however, they do know and it is easy to imagine Mayakovski's 
lines being edited to suit the new situation: "I would learn Russian simply 
because it is the language spoken by Putin."

I don't expect this polemic to persuade too many foreigners to learn Russian. 
However, if you travel to Moscow and accidently find yourself at a table with a 
group of locals (and believe me it would not be surprising, because most things 
in Russia happen by accident) you may well need to say as clearly as possible, 
ie in Russian: "Thank you, but no vodka for me today!".

What else will a grasp of basic Russian give you? You will have access to a 
treasure trove of Russian and Soviet anecdotes and jokes which, like tipsy 
dinnertime conversations, are at once ludicrous and moving and often 
practically impossible to translate into English.

You can travel in one-sixth of the Earth's territory a great deal more safely 
and cheaply than you could without the language. You might fall in love and be 
able to express your feelings. Mind you, love can be deaf as well as blind. I 
well remember being the Russian man trying to win the heart and hand of an 
English girl who had basic Russian. Her response to my earnest proposal of 
marriage was "Ti Durak!" (You're an idiot!). I understood the words, but didn't 
listen. We have been married for nearly 22 years.

Don't expect people in Russia and the Russian Federation to speak English. Of 
course many do, but some of them will not tell you what they think, but simply 
repeat phrases which they have managed to learn.

With only a few choice phrases you will find any contact with the local people 
more rewarding. You will elicit some genuine responses and glimpse the real 
character of your interlocutor.

If you are able to study more, there are wonderful treasures to be gained in 
the world of Russian literature and music. You may be able to find the songs of 
Leonid Utesov in translation, but then you lose the singer's voice, his 
intonation full of hidden text.

Secret messages are always encoded. Russian is the code which will allow you 
access to many Russian secrets, past, present and future.

Andrey Kurkov is the author of Death and the Penguin and, most recently, The 
Good Angel of Death (Harvill Secker)
 