
I tend to get up between 6.30am and 7am at the same time as my wife Erica, a 
cardiac specialist respiratory physiotherapist. We married in August 2013, and 
now I’m suddently 41 years old, working as a Nutricia nurse in Wales. Erica is 
a massive support and generally sends me off with a packed lunch which I have 
during my strategic admin stops, which are also a good opportunity to absorb 
the breathtaking views along the arterial routes of centralWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/wales>.

I start the day just south of Chester and work through north Powys. My first 
call is to support an older gentleman and his wife. He has been recently 
diagnosed with motor neurone disease and has been fitted with a feeding tube. 
Previously, he was struggling with swallowing food and medicines, meaning he 
had repeated chest infections and was losing weight rapidly.

Within Powys patient visits are challenging, as clients often live long 
distances from each other in beautiful but hostile environments – 4x4 cars are 
a necessity, not a luxury. Given the rural geography it’s important to plan 
stops to remotely document clinical visits. Answering phone and email messages 
is also high on the agenda, as it is important to balance the administrative 
workload and provide clear and timely patient notes which are immediately 
uploaded to support NHS dieticians.

My second call of the day, some 30 miles from the first, is to attend a school 
where a child with enteral feeding needs is to be supported by teaching 
assistants and teaching staff. A bespoke education package around care of 
enteral feeding tubes and the feeding pump is needed to allow the child to 
enter mainstream education.

Providing qualified nursing care services and continuing education to 
patients, families and other care teams allows the patients to be cared for at 
home and not need to visit hospitals for clinic appointments. This also reduces 
the burden on NHS teams.

My next call is to undertake a gastrostomy tube change, I meet with the 
district nursing team who are keen to learn the skills required to safely 
undertake this procedure in the community.

Outside of work, we’ve bought a new house so we (Erica) are busy deciding how 
we (myself) are going to decorate. This weekend we chose tiles for the kitchen, 
and I called on my tiling skills to try and fit them.

It’s a cliché, but no two days are alike at work. Similarly, no two cases or 
sets of needs are the same, which leads to individual care – and more 
importantly, care of the individual.

On reflection, I feel that my role supports mainstream NHS needs, going above 
and beyond the capacity of core community nursing teams while supporting 
ongoing education and providing the best care to patients and carers.

Some weekends, I also work for the Nutricia out-of-hours telephone support 
advice line, and have been a GP out of hours triage nurse for the last 10 
years. I work closely with GPs and either provide telephone advice, sort out 
home visits and GP appointments, and if needed I arrange ambulances to deal 
with life-threatening emergencies.

In my spare time, I like going to the gym – the spin room is my favourite 
place to be. My closest friend has a two-year-old girl who I adore spending 
time with, I can probably recite the script of Frozen as I watch it with her so 
often! My best friend and I also own a yacht moored in Penarth Marina, which is 
a long-term restoration project. And I’m a bit of a tech geek, so like reading 
up on new technology and how it supports modern life.

When I get home in the evening around 6pm, I check and send emails and do any 
last-minute calls. Bed time is usually about 10pm, dare I say – and we like 
watching Criminal Minds, and other whodunnits.
 