
A landmark review has called for stricter labelling and more rigorous testing 
of complementary medicines in Australia.


The independent Review of Medicines and Medical Devices Regulation report 
recommends that the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) step up its random 
testing of complementary medicines listed on the register of therapeutic goods 
amid high levels of non-compliance.


Edzard Ernst: outspoken professor of complementary medicine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/19/edzard-ernst-outspoken-professor-of-complementary-medicine>
It says the medicines regulator should be authorised to refuse to list 
complementary medicines and wants companies to be restricted in what claims 
they can make about their products, recommending a set list be devised to curb 
unsubstantiated claims.


The report, released by the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> on Friday, says one in four 
products selected for random review in 2014, and 61% subjected to targeted 
reviews, were in breach of regulatory requirements.


Compliance monitoring is low, penalties are insufficient and companies can 
just withdraw a product once notified of a review, forcing the review to be 
terminated.


The report recommends the TGA step up the number of reviews it conducts, 
publish the results for consumers and be allowed to complete reviews even if 
the product is subsequently withdrawn.


Australians are increasingly self-medicating and using complementary medicines 
including vitamins to manage their health, “predicated on the assumption that 
all therapeutic products on the Australian market have been assessed for 
safety, quality and efficacy”.


But low-risk medicines can obtain market approval without any pre-market 
assessment by the TGA, with sponsors allowed to self-declare that their product 
is compliant.


Vitamins take Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/11/vitamins-take-australia-hollywood-names>
The report recommends three new options for sponsors to have their medicines 
listed on the register: the existing self-declaration that the medicine is 
compliant; self-declaration and TGA assessment of the product’s efficacy; and 
registration by the TGA for higher risk complementary medicines.


Under option one, sponsors would need to put a prominent disclaimer on all 
promotional materials and online that their efficacy claims had not been 
independently assessed, or were based on traditional use.


The report recommends all sponsors be required to publish online any evidence 
to support claims about the complementary medicines they are selling.
 