 Neil Kinnock blows out of his Brussels office like a gale force. "I hear 
you've had a BLOODY AWFUL journey." The vice president of the European 
Commission shakes my hand with crushing warmth. An Old Labour grip if I ever 
felt one. He is still boyish - the ginger hair, the freckles, the exuberance. 
It has been suggested that the boyishness cost him the premiership - twice. 
That, and the clumsiness (falling in the sea was never going to help). And the 
bad timing (the victory rally at Sheffield in 1992). And those repetitive 
tautologies. And the fact that he had an impossible job uniting a Labour party 
divided as never before.
What people tend to forget is that he almost pulled it off. But nine years 
after he resigned asLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party 
leader Neil Kinnock is being rehabilitated. Strangely, it has taken the Tory 
implosion to bring it about. Commentators have said that if William Hague was 
the Michael Foot of the Conservative party, its next leader needs to be a 
Kinnock, capable of breathing life and respectability into the party. Meanwhile 
Kinnock is now doing a similar job at the European Commission for a whacking 
wage (£130,000) bringing into line an organisation famous for its incompetence 
and corruption.

His office is huge. He takes me round, gives me a formal introduction to all 
the paintings on the wall. Most are painted by Welsh artists. Even his Lowry 
print is of a Welsh landscape. Then we're off to his model collection - there's 
a Boeing 777 and a Mercedes bus, and an Eddie Stobart Ltd lorry. You get the 
impression that the former transport commissioner relaxes by pushing his toy 
cars along the floor at high speed. Vroooooooom!

Kinnock says that the other day his grandchildren were up at the office and 
they had a riot. Four-year-old Johanna asked him how his security bleeper 
worked. "I said, 'I think you use that little green button,' and she said, 'I 
just have, Pa.' And at that second, bloody security came through the door. It 
was wonderful. I've never used the bloody thing." He splutters with laughter, 
jiggles, tips on his chair edge. "Johanna thinks I'm about the same age as she 
is but I've got a driving licence."

Kinnock says it's amazing how life works out. Here he is, the archetypal 
Welshman, perfectly at home in the global village, surrounded by family. Not 
only is his wife, Glenys, an MEP, so is his daughter-in-law, Helle. "She's a 
very beautiful Danish woman." He stutters, and waves his hands in the air as if 
flagging himself down. "I mean she's also a terrific woman. She isn't just 
beautiful."

Perhaps, it's not so surprising that Kinnock seems so relaxed here. As Labour 
leader he became the victim of vicious tabloid bigotry. Most headlines were 
prefixed by "Welsh windbag". "There was all kind of speculation about what 
impact that had," Kinnock says. "Several people have made claims about the 
significance that the 'boyo' had. Apart from anything else, boyo is a word I've 
never used in my life. The stereotype of the all-singing, all-swearing, 
all-rugby-playing broth of a boyo who'd settle arguments with his fists is just 
silly."

So all the stuff about him punching his way out of trouble is nonsense? "I'm 
not saying I have never been hit, and I've never hit anybody in my life. But 
this stereotype of, you know, lashing at the merest hint of insult is just 
rubbish." Maybe it would have helped if he had hit more people. It did wonders 
for Prescott.

"I used to get fanmail, you know," he says. "Whenever they did polls on which 
political leader you would like as a neighbour I used to come top. People 
imagined that I'd be prepared to clip their roses and settle the hash of any 
burglars." He is rocking those shoulders again. Then he stops. "But when they 
asked who would make best prime minister they gave a different answer."

Kinnock is now 59. Although he says he works a 70-hour week you sense he is 
slowly unwinding. Unlike Glenys, who is just beginning to rev up. She's in 
Sudan today. "I will finish work quite a long time before Glenys. She is likely 
to go on campaigning forever."

No one straddles New and Old Labour quite like Kinnock. The architect of 
modernisation, he still refers passionately to socialism and comrades. We hear 
plenty about Blair babes, but virtually the whole cabinet is composed of 
Kinnock protégés. He calls them "love" and "kid"; they adore him. Yet he is 
banished to Europe. Whatever he has achieved for Labour, Kinnock will always be 
a reminder of the bad old days. He must look at the government and think all 
this should be mine - it would be inhuman not to? "Exactly. I wouldn't pretend 
that there weren't moments on May 2 1997, and come to that June 8 2001, where 
it didn't occur to me that I'd love to be walking through that black door. But 
just as in 1997 I could happily, very very quickly bring the curtain down on 
that and I did, I've been able to do it again." Maybe not quite as quickly as 
he thinks.

Does he dream of being PM? "No. Hohohohohonononohoho! Never. Absolutely never. 
I tell you why I laughed; it's never bloody occurred to me. I'll have to try 
and dream about it tonight, see what kind of show I make of it!"

When he resigned he was devastated, full of self-reproach. "Rightly so," he 
says. "You can't lose two elections and blame everyone else can you? If you're 
any kind of human being, you're bound to think to yourself, there must have 
been things I could have done differently."

He says his biggest weakness was changing too slowly. "The only thing I really 
agonise about is whether in those early years, if I'd really drawn my sword and 
charged as it were, we could have accelerated the change and put ourselves in a 
better position in '87 and '92." He stops himself, unsure. "What do I blame 
myself for? I guess publicly I didn't take myself as seriously from day one as 
I should have."

What does he mean? "Well, I fed the stuff about lack of gravitas and 
experience by acting naturally." He gives me an example and his face seems to 
redden with pain. But, as with so many Kinnock stories, it's very funny. "Early 
on, I went to an old-age pensioners rally with Bill Owen and Clive Dunn whose 
characters in sitcoms were pensioners. We were waiting outside to go in and it 
started to rain. We had umbrellas so Bill and Clive and I started doing Singin' 
in the Rain which, obviously, we enjoyed, the pensioners loved, no harm done. 
You ought to have seen the papers the next day. My God! You know, is this man 
fit to do this, that and the other."

He realised he had to stand back a bit, button his jacket, straighten his tie. 
"It's like swearing on a public platform, it's never going to win any support 
and there's always the danger you'll lose some."

If there was one quality he could take off Blair what would it be? "A full 
head of hair!" But it's not that funny; hair has been shown to be important in 
selecting PMs. "I said about Willy Hague: 'He'll never be prime minister 
because no one who's bald is ever prime minister.' " Was Kinnock the victim of 
an unfortunate set of physical features? There's the hair. "Yep, ginger's not 
good." And the freckles. "Yep, freckles, not good. Slightly overweight, not 
good. Welsh, probably not good. Sounding Welsh, that's what's not good." The 
tone turns serious. "The problem is determining how significant they are. I 
mean if they were a 1% determinant, well, so what. If they were a 5% 
determinant, then any party that chooses as its leader somebody who doesn't 
look and sound good on the telly really ought to consider its strategy. And I 
say that only with a hint of frivolity."

Does he think of himself as life's eternal stalking horse? "No, not stalking 
horse so much. Slogger, really. Just getting the shovel out and digging. Which 
is funny because metaphorically, I'm cavalry not infantry. But it's turned out 
that I'm a member of the engineering corps and not a flashing blade in sight." 
Has that frustrated him? "It can be frustrating. My parents would not recognise 
the extent of my patience. And sometimes I'm bloody astounded by it myself."

At least there is an end result. "There are people who say, with some force 
that it's my legacy. That's really kind; it makes me proud."

Does he ever look at the government, as Roy Hattersley has done, and conclude 
that is the not the party he fought for? "It most definitely is my party,' he 
says adamantly. I start talking about the health service, tell him about 
friends who for the first time have considered private policies because they 
are so desperate. Kinnock answers slowly, deliberately, each sentence 
punctuated by caveats and clauses. Suddenly, the man who was so warm and witty 
and engaging has become a crashing bore. About 20 minutes later he reaches his 
answer and, after all the jargon and waffle, it is precise and radical. He 
accepts that there is a crisis. "My own view - and certainly don't suggest this 
is how the government feels about it - is that support for the NHS is so so 
universal and unique that it justifies the establishment of a hypothecated 
system of finance. That is to say, some taxes are cut and replaced with a 
specific national health and community care tax so the British public know that 
every penny of that is going in the national health and community care 
services, and that if investment in those services prove deficient the 
consequence is that the nation pays a little bit more."

He says health and education are in such trouble that emergency action is 
needed. "There are activities of such undoubted and pre- eminent priority that 
it's got to be done almost as if we were in a war, and national survival 
depended on the means of financing the war."

He thinks that his children's generation has had it much tougher than he did. 
Nowadays, he might not have gone to university, I suggest. "It's conceivable, 
yeah. I've got problems with the fee charging. My own strong preference has 
long been to pay a very small graduate tax to fund higher education pretty 
generously. Because everybody knows that to become a graduate is to enlarge 
oppportunities and to increase lifetime income, I've never come across anybody 
who wouldn't be prepared to pay a quarter of 1% or half of 1% on their national 
insurance to directly fund the rising generations."

Amazingly, Kinnock manages to suggest this revamp without insulting the 
government. Over three hours, he never directly criticises his former 
colleagues. (Likewise, when I talk to people who know Kinnock, none utters a 
bad word about him.

He says there are so many good things the government has done - reduced 
unemployment and family poverty, introduced a minimum wage, restored some 
rights to trade unions - if only it would shout out about them. That's the 
problem, I say. They're terrified it will drive Middle England away. "Well if 
that's their appraisal I don't think it's realistic - I think people voted 
Labour because they wanted a Labour government. They voted against the Tories, 
certainly, and all elections are about being against as well as being for. But 
I'm the world expert on the fact that it's not enough for people to be against 
to secure election. You've got to have a lot of fors as well. And in 1997 and 
2001 they had a lot of fors. Which is great. I never got enough fors."
 