
Dan Kennedy made five saves and the new-look Los Angeles Galaxy held Santos 
Laguna to a 0-0 draw in the first leg of the Concacaf 
Champions League quarter-finals on Wednesday night.

After failing to defend the MLS title last season, the Galaxy underwent 
another overhaul heavy on star power. Five newcomers were in the starting 
lineup, including former England defenderAshley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole> and Dutch midfielder Nigel 
de Jong, and it didn’t take long for that added strength to show itself.

A brief guide to … LA Galaxy's Ashley Cole, once the world's finest left-back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/ashley-cole-la-galaxy-field-notes>
Jelle Van Damme’s header off a corner kick forced Santos Laguna goalkeeper 
Agustin Marchesin to make a dramatic one-handed save in the opening minute. The 
Galaxy continued to create chances early, with Robbie Keane slipping behind 
three defenders in the 17th minute but he was unable to head Steven Gerrard’s 
cross home.

“If we had scored a goal it would have been the perfect result, but it is 
still a good result,” Gerrard said. “We’ve been banging the drum all preseason 
about being solid defensively and keeping clean sheets, and that’s the basis we 
can be successful from.”

The tie will be settled in Torreon, Mexico on 1 March. It became particularly 
ill-tempered in the final minutes when Keane got into an animated discussion 
with Santos Laguna manager Luis Zubeldia before the two were separated.

“Could be worse,” Galaxy manager Bruce Arena said of the result. “For our 
first time out I thought we played well. We’re not going to change much between 
now and Tuesday. In a couple months, we’ll see what kind of team we have.”

The match opened up late in the second half, with chances developing at both 
ends of the pitch. Carlos Izquierdoz redirected a free kick just wide of goal 
in the 78th minute for Santos Laguna, while a subsequent clever one-two between 
Giovani Dos Santos and Robbie Rogers on the edge of the box failed to result in 
a Galaxy shot.

While Santos Laguna are nearly halfway through their Liga MX Clausura season, 
the Mexican side never really got into a flow offensively until the final 
minutes of the first half. One of its best looks came in the 67th minute, when 
Jesus Molina’s booming shot hit Giovani Dos Santos in the side, prompting 
unsuccessful appeals for a handball.
 