
Is this reading or “reading”? An app called Joosr <http://joosr.com/>, which 
aims to help users read a book in 20 minutes, has just been launched in the UK. 
Initially, this horrified me. I ranted that we had lost our ability to 
concentrate, that authors’ words are sacred. But then I looked at what the app 
was actually doing and realised it could be a good idea.

The app has more than 100 nonfiction books in a radically condensed format 
available on a subscription. Think self-help bestsellers likeHal Elrod’s The 
Miracle Morning <http://halelrod.com/books/> and dense science texts like A 
Brief History of Time (sorry Dr Hawking, I did try). With the first type of 
book, readers can pick out useful tips without wading through pages of case 
studies; with the latter, a briefer version might be the only way to get 
information to stick.

I wanted to see if an even briefer A Brief History of Time would help me to 
finally understand the underpinnings of the universe. As I’m an Android user 
and Joosr is iOS-only, I gave its rivalBlinkist <https://www.blinkist.com/en/> 
(more than 1,000 books in 15-minute reads for around 50 quid a year) a go.

Yes, it was well and truly simpler: it still includes the Big Bang and black 
holes, but there’s no mention of string theory, or the philosophical background 
to scientific discoveries, which I dimly remember from my attempt to read the 
original. But it packed a lot of physics into 14 “blinks” – phone-screen-sized 
summaries. And it wasn’t dumbed down; I could have done with even simpler 
explanations, preferably some diagrams. But I did learn that particles act like 
waves and that a twin who lived on a mountain would age more quickly than one 
who lived at sea level, which is more than I knew when I woke up. Who knows, 
maybe I will try the full-length book again one day.

Summarising novels in this way probably wouldn’t work, because they’re as much 
about voice as ideas, but there have been attempts to make fiction more easily 
absorbed. Since 1950, Reader’s Digest has published condensed editions of 
popular books, last year signing a deal to make them available as ebooks and 
paperbacks, as well as their standard hardbacks. This month, prolific 
bestseller James Patterson launched BookShots, a series of 150-page romances 
and thrillers. The first two novellas sold a combined 30,000 copies in the 
first week. “But is it reading?” panickedThe Paris Review 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2016/03/22/but-is-it-reading/>, “... is 
this form of reading the same thing as sustained reading? Does one lead to the 
other?”

It’s easy for literary journalists to forget that for many people, the choice 
isn’t between reading Gillian Flynn and Gustave Flaubert, but between reading 
and not. Life is hard, Orange is the New Black is back on Netflix, and 
according to Joosr’s research, six out of 10 of us complain about not reading 
as much as we’d like. With libraries closing and zero-hours contracts 
proliferating, £1.50 for a quick read is an affordable luxury; splashing out on 
a Booker prize-winning hardback isn’t always so easy.Considering that 5.2 
million people in the UK are functionally illiterate 
<http://www.literacytrust.org.uk/adult_literacy/illiterate_adults_in_england>, 
can we afford to look down on anyone for not reading the “right kind” of book?

I’ve been too ill to read in the past, so audiobooks were a lifesaver, just as 
they are for many disabled people. Stephen King recommends them in his book On 
Writing, but when I mentioned this to a friend she said: “It’s not really 
reading though, is it?” It was to me.

We have to get over the idea that spending hours in a mahogany chair, frowning 
over a leather-bound volume from 1623 is the best way to absorb information. 
And let’s be honest: some authors waffle on, whether because they were paid by 
the word or their agents were too polite to tell them to stop. Many more 
writers would benefit from being condensed – that’s the long and the short of 
it.
 