
Michael Vaughan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-vaughan> is 
preparing to open the batting for England during the one-day series in 
Australia in a bold statement that he will not make any concessions to the knee 
problems that forced him out of international cricket for a year.

Vaughan's decision, reached in consultation with England's coach, Duncan 
Fletcher, in part reflects his determination to lead from the front as he 
begins the comeback that will decide whether he still has a future at the 
game's top level.

It is also forced upon England, to some extent, by the recognition that Marcus 
Trescothick will play no part in the World Cup because of the stress-related 
illness that threatens his England career.

Vaughan's one-day record is mediocre - he averages only 28.36 in his 74 
one-day internationals - and his record as an opener is even less encouraging. 
He has fulfilled the role only nine times, bringing 157 runs, at an average of 
17.5.

There was a personal edge, therefore, to Vaughan's remark when he said: "A lot 
of our one-day problems are because of a reminder of past failures. As a team, 
we have to start afresh, and draw up some strategies. One of those strategies 
could involve me opening the batting."

Vaughan's willingness to take on the opener's role indicates his growing 
confidence that this time his knee, operated on four times already, will stand 
up to the rigours of international cricket.

Paul Nixon, at 36, is expected to begin the series as wicketkeeper ahead of 
Chris Read. Jamie Dalrymple will strengthen the middle order at No7, and Andrew 
Strauss is expected to open, with Ian Bell scheduled at No3. It is a careful 
strategy termed by Vaughan as "back to basics".

But the most eye-catching selection will be that of Monty Panesar, given a 
chance to prove he can produce restrictive spells. England will not be averse 
to having the off-spin of Dalrymple and slow left-arm of Panesar in harness - 
one way to counter the lack of economical seam bowlers being to field as few as 
possible.
 