
As a deadly opioid overdose epidemic sweeps across the US, the Senate passed 
an extensive anti-addiction bill aimed at fighting the crisis with prevention, 
treatment and recovery options – however, it is yet to be funded.

The opioids bill, known as Comprehensive Addiction & Recovery Act (Cara), 
passed the Senate 92-2 on Wednesday, in a strong show of bipartisanship. Cara 
calls for a pain management taskforce, funding into addiction research, better 
access to treatment options and drug rehabilitation rather than incarceration.


“This is a historic moment, the first time in decades that Congress has passed 
comprehensive addiction legislation, and the first time Congress has ever 
supported long-term addiction recovery,” said Ohio’s Republican senator, Rob 
Portman, one of the authors of the bill.


Opioid overdose deaths: can a bipartisan bill aimed at curbing crisis really 
work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/07/opioid-overdose-deaths-bipartisan-bill-curb-epidemic-house-democrats-republicans>
There were 130 deaths a day from drug overdoses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
 in the United States in 2014 (the most recent year data is available) and 80 
of those deaths involved at least one opioid, such as prescription painkillers 
or heroin. Testsconfirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/prince-died-opioid-overdose-tests>
 that singer Prince died of an opioid overdose in April.

Barack Obama is expected to sign the bill, but the White House expressed 
disappointment that it failed to provide significant money to deal with the 
epidemic.

“Some action is better than none,” the White House said, but the president 
“won’t stop fighting to secure the resources this public health crisis demands.

Congressional Republicans have not done their jobs until they provide the 
funding for treatment that communities need to combat this epidemic.”


Earlier this year Obama proposed $1bn in new funding from Congress to help 
treat the opioid problem. The Democrats attempted to push through $920m in 
funding last week. Both were rejected by the Republicans.

“The bill is better than nothing but without funding we believe it will have 
limited impact,” Dr Andrew Kolodny, a senior scientist at Brandeis University 
and the executive director of Physicians for Responsible Opioid Prescribing 
(Prop), told the Guardian. Kolodny called Obama’s $1bn funding call “the very 
bare minimum of what is needed”.

One new change Cara offers is the wider offering of buprenorphine, one of the 
most effective medicines for treating the addiction, since currently doctors 
can only prescribe 100 patients at a time and addicts are stuck on waiting 
lists in the worst-hit states. The bill allows nurses and other medical 
professionals to administer the drug.


“There are people truly dying of overdoses while on those waiting lists,” 
Kolodny said.

By delaying the funding of the opioid bill, Kolodny says he fears it will get 
ignored. “I’m worried that after the election, when they come back to end the 
session, they may not be willing to come up with the new money.”

However, advocates for the bill are at least glad that finally the opioid 
crisis is being addressed and acknowledged as a public health problem.

 “This is also the first time that we’ve treated addiction like the disease 
that it is, which will help put an end to the stigma that has surrounded 
addiction for too long,” added Portman in a statement.

Shawn Ryan, an assistant professor of emergency medicine at the University of 
Cincinnati and a founder of BrightView, a Cincinnati rehab center for opioid 
addiction, in a statement called the bill “the first piece of legislation to 
recognize that addiction is a public health crisis, not a moral failing”.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.
 