
 African Nations Cup

 Tunisia 3 Dos Santos 55 87, Braham 65  DR Congo 0

 Lomana Lua Lua's controversial sending-off yesterday led directly to the 
comprehensive defeat that knocked Mick Wadsworth's team out of the tournament.

Lua Lua's 36th-minute red card, for lashing out at Jawhar Mnari, sparked a 
five-minute melee, with the furious Newcastle striker having to be restrained 
from attacking Mnari and Congo's players threatening to walk off.

Lua Lua directed a petulant kick, but without real force, at Mnari, who 
tumbled theatrically. But the referee Jerome Damon issued the red card.

Lua Lua initially refused to leave, and then, with tears running down his 
face, he started to trudge off. But as he passed Mnari, now on a stretcher, 
several team-mates had to intervene to stop the Congo captain from attacking 
the prone figure.

Tunisia's coach Roger Lemerre then escorted Lua Lua down the tunnel. "I feel 
very sorry for him," said the former France coach. "His great distress is 
something I too have experienced at certain moments in my life."

Lua Lua, blaming himself for the defeat, threatened to quit international 
football. "I'm not sure if it's worth it," he said. "I'm putting mine and my 
family's life at risk. I've no idea what will happen to them back home."

Wadsworth said: "The antics and behaviour of the Tunisians were disgraceful. 
They were falling and diving. Lomana knows he's been stupid, but he was 
provoked. My staff tell me he was punched, and he reacted. Which is the worse 
offence? What happened was obviously a ploy."

Tunisia took full advantage. Silva Dos Santos opened the scoring after an 
error by the goalkeeper Papy Lukata. Then the striker's miscued scissors kick 
allowed Najeh Braham to head the second. Dos Santos completed the tally with 
his third goal of the tournament.

 Tunisia (4-2-3-1): Boumnijel; Hagui, Saidi, Badra, Ayari; Nafti (Trabelsi, 
h-t), Mnari; Jedidi (Dos Santos, 17), Ghodbane, Mhadhebi (Bouazizi, 77); Braham.

 Booked: Nafti, Mhadhebi, Braham.

 Democratic Republic of the Congo (4-4-2): Lukata; Kamudimba, Mubiala, 
Muzinga, Ilunga; Masudi (Nzuzi, 68), Luntala, Dinzey (Matingou, h-t), Mbayo 
(Ngoy, 59); Lua Lua, Kalulika.

 Booked: Mbayo.  Sent off: Lua Lua.

 Referee: J Damon (South Africa).
 