
Digital advertising spend within the automotive industry has historically been 
minimal. In fact, despite overall digital advertising spend increasing by17.5% 
<http://www.iabuk.net/about/press/archive/uk-digital-adspend-hits-record-6-month-high-of-3bn>
, the automotive sector, according to anInternet Advertising Bureau 
<http://www.iab.net/media/file/IABInternetAdvertisingRevenueReportHY2013FINALdoc.pdf>
 report, has been decreasing its level of investment. But this could be about 
to change as a result of connected cars, or vehicles that have connectivity to 
the internet.

Automotive branding campaigns span a variety of online and offline media 
including display ads, billboards and TV ads, but the same cannot be said for 
leads and conversions in the automotive market, which take place almost 
exclusively offline.

Dealerships have a degree of visibility over potential buyers through their 
test-drive bookings, but these still only account for between 2% and 5% of all 
sales. The vast majority of purchases are the result of walk-ins to dealerships 
and follow a long purchase cycle. This leaves automotive brands with little 
insight into their audiences, and more specifically how they respond to digital 
advertising.

A secondary factor, which is more specific to the industry, is the tiered 
structure of automotive marketing. Tier One is the automotive brand itself, and 
it often has little control over the advertising activities of Tier Two 
(regional dealerships) and Tier Three (local dealerships). Marketing in these 
dealerships can often be managed by individual media agencies, who may not 
collaborate or share data effectively.

Today, especially with digital, most automotive advertisers look at online 
test-drive requests and other similar online proxies as the key metrics against 
which they assess the performance of their advertising since these metrics are 
in their control and trackable at the user level. Yet given how poorly these 
proxies substitute for actual car sales, most automotive advertisers cannot 
quantify the exact contribution of their media touchpoints to actual car 
purchases.

So how will connected cars revolutionise automotive advertising? If a 
connected car interface acts like other devices – such as smartphones, tablets 
or PCs – brands will be able to incentivise consumers to identify themselves 
and share data through sign-on environments and branded apps, which will allow 
advertisers to directly connect their media touchpoints all the way to the 
actual point of purchase for 100% of their car sales (assuming every car is a 
connected car).

Combining the ability to measure all the way to the point of sale with 
cross-channel attribution technology will equip automotive advertisers with 
their holy grail – the ability to precisely quantify how their digital media is 
driving incremental vehicle purchases – and to finally move away from 
last-touch based measurement and inaccurate metrics. Connected cars will also 
offer automotive brand marketers a more accurate picture of the purchasing 
cycle, and the ability to gain an in-depth picture of the makeup and diversity 
of their audiences.

The potential for automotive marketers using connected cars is huge and if the 
manufacturers and dealers can begin to collaborate more openly, they stand to 
gain substantially. By understanding how the advertising efforts of each tier 
impact the conversion goals of other tiers, marketers can take a holistic view 
of their marketing campaigns. They can also gain a greater perspective on the 
media efforts that have the most effect, removing any unnecessary duplication.

Increased visibility and control over marketing channels together with an 
in-depth understanding of the automotive conversion path will revolutionise the 
digital media strategies of big brands such as Audi, BMW and Volkswagen. As 
connected cars provide brands with greater insight into their customers, and 
the way they interact online, we expect a shift in automotive advertising 
budget away from offline media, where it is currently heavily weighted, and a 
long overdue drive towards digital media.

By Adit Abhyankar executive director at Visual IQ <http://www.visualiq.com/>. 
Follow him on Twitter@itsadit <https://twitter.com/itsadit>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 