
The work print is the holy grail of film collecting. These are the vastly 
long, rough versions of a picture, containing much of the movie-making fat that 
is trimmed out by the editing process. For years, film collectors tap their 
keyboards until their fingers bleed in attempts to track down the bum-numbing 
versions of movies such as Dune and This Is Spinal Tap for the unseen gems they 
may or may not hold.

Of all the legendary work prints out there, the most persistently tantalising 
prospect is seeing the rumoured 289-minute version of Francis Ford Coppola's
Apocalypse Now <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now>. The 
theatrical release print runs a mere 153 minutes, and the Redux reissue 202 
minutes, so the work print offers almost an hour and a half of unseen footage. 
To a serious film geek, the prospect is unthinkably exciting - surely it 
couldn't be true?

Despite a lack of tangible proof that it even existed - including denials from 
the film's producers - the most dedicated collectors spent years searching for 
it, until something supposed to be this grail-like object found its way into 
the public domain. After exhaustive negotiations with an American film 
collector who had tracked down a copy, I found myself signing for an airmail 
package, booking the day off work and settling down for some serious viewing.

The first thing to point out is that to call this five-hour work print a 
"rough cut" is a mistake. It's an "everything-and-the-kitchen-sink" cut, which 
takes almost all the material from the 238-day shoot and tapes it together in a 
linear form. The work print moves at a snail's pace, with unfeasibly long 
scenes. The Ride of the Valkyries helicopter episode alone accounts for well 
over 30 minutes of footage. Scenes that, with expert editing, would become 
tense and compelling simply drift along aimlessly, interesting only to anoraks 
for the extra line of dialogue here and there.

There are, however, gems amid the mass of footage, which leave the viewer 
wondering how Coppola could have taken the scissors to them. Marlon Brando's 
Colonel Kurtz has three extra scenes, which more than quadruple the size of his 
part. In one, Brando reads from Time magazine to an imprisoned Martin Sheen. In 
another he delivers a monologue to Sheen about the "master liars" in Washington 
who "want to win, but can't stand to be thought of as cruel". In a third, he 
reads TS Eliot's The Hollow Men, whileDennis Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dennis-hopper> gets excited and says "man" a 
lot.

One of the things removed from the film for the cinematic release, along with 
the extra footage, is its political conscience. Scenes in which the characters 
question and criticise the US involvement in Vietnam and the conduct of 
American government are cut. Themes of politics give way to an exploration of 
the human nature and psychology.

Of all the cuts, the unkindest are dealt to Scott Glenn's character, Colby, 
Willard's predecessor, who was charged with killing Kurtz, but instead falls 
under his spell. In the work print, Colby is revealed to be a significant 
character who taunts an imprisoned Willard and, more importantly, shoots 
Hopper's character before being killed himself. Likewise, the character of 
Lance (played by Sam Bottoms) gets extra scenes designed to show his 
instability. In one, he inexplicably machine-guns a water buffalo, while 
screaming: "I control the destiny of every living thing which passes before my 
sights."

It took Coppola and his editors more than 700 days to turn a million feet of 
celluloid into a watchable film. What the work print makes clear are the 
choices editors are forced to make when faced with almost unlimited footage. 
Scenes that drove the crew to the brink of madness and Coppola to the edge of 
financial ruin were dropped without sentiment - simply because they didn't 
improve the story.
 