
Until recently, Black Friday was the “must do” shopping event for British 
retailers keen to cash in on the mass of frenzied shoppers looking for a 
bargain. But the Chinese version – Singles Day, held on 11 November (or 11.11) 
and created to celebrate single people – is gathering pace, potentially 
presenting a bigger opportunity for British retailers than its US counterpart. 
The sheer scale of the market –£11.28bn was spent on Singles Day in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/11/alibabas-singles-day-sales-up-60-to-94bn>
 –combined with the acute Chinese appetite for British goods, has opened up a 
significant new sales avenue.


Last year, Topshop saw its sales surge by over 900% compared to Singles Day in 
2014. “These results clearly indicate how impactful this online calendar moment 
has become, and as a key focus market for the brand we see 11.11 as a great way 
to raise brand awareness and conversion inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>,” says a Topshop spokesperson.

Topshop is not alone in seeing the annual event as a chance to gain a foothold 
in the Chinese market. More British retailers are cashing in on the world’s 
biggest online event, says Jason Yu, general manager of Kantar Worldpanel 
China. “Using e-commerce as a way to enter the market is relatively low-risk 
approach and they can understand better the appetite of the Chinese consumers 
and learn how to operate in China without substantial investment in opening 
stores.”


Alibaba Group, the e-commerce giant which trademarked the term 11.11 and made 
Singles Day synonymous with people treating themselves to gifts, last year 
recorded sales of £9.4bn during the 24-hour event. Meifang Chen, international 
business development atAlibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> 
Group, echoes Yu’s thoughts: “If a British retailer wants to enter the thriving 
Chinese market and engage with its consumers, 11:11 delivers both excellent 
product accessibility for consumers and massive exposure for brands.”


Cashing in on the shopping bonanza

It is an approach taken by Waitrose, which partnered with Chinese marketing 
and logistics specialist Avenue 51 to start exporting to China in April this 
year, selling through the Royal Mail shop on China’s Tmall. “Although we’ve had 
a modest introduction into the market, the potential for Waitrose in China is 
huge,” says Nigel Roberts, Waitrose B2B growth and development manager. 
“Singles Day is a big occasion for consumers and businesses in China and has 
the potential to give the products we offer more exposure and provide another 
opportunity to test demand for our brand.”


Waitrose has already expanded its product offering from 30 items to more than 
50 on Tmall, and its first Singles Day will doubtless provide more valuable 
insight into what tickles the fancy of Chinese consumers.


Chen says part of the success of Singles Day comes from the diversity of 
products on offer: “Last year’s 11.11 broke eight product-sale world records; 
these included selling 10.1m litres of milk, 3.1m mobile handsets, 1.1m watches 
and 643,964 televisions.”


It is certainly all-embracing. Consumer healthcare start-up Make A Dent 
Ventures (MAD Ventures) sells TINT, its teeth whitening product, to Chinese 
consumers via Tmall. Mark Curry, founder and director at MAD Ventures says 
Singles Day will act as “both a great launch pad to showcase TINT to the 
Chinese market and as an opportunity to drive trial” of the new product.


Curry was formerly a senior buyer at Boots, which participated in Black Friday 
with “huge success”, but he acknowledges the potential of Singles Day to 
eclipse the event in importance. “It is common knowledge thatBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> is now the highest grossing 
sales day in the UK, but this may get superseded by Singles Day [because the] 
concept of gifting feels a lot more meaningful than an arbitrary sales day.”


Building awareness

Yu also believes Singles Day will gain the edge on Black Friday, in part 
because more British retailers are beginning to sell their wares via Tmall. 
“According to Kantar Worldpanel, approximately 50% of Chinese consumers already 
shop in the e-commerce stores, and given that Singles Day presents an enormous 
opportunity for retailers to present their offers to the Chinese shopper, we 
believe eventually it will become a bigger opportunity, though it may take 
years for British retailers to build more online awareness.”

A key point is knowing what to discount and by how much during the event. 
Independent British jewellery brand Lily Charmed works with Avenue 51 and began 
trading in China over two years ago. It is also gearing up for its first 
Singles Day. Director Jonathan Lee says the company will “heavily discount” its 
range “to ensure a decent share of voice among all the other discounts 
available on that day.”

“Rightly or wrongly, consumers are not only searching for but expect deep 
discounts so you have to give them what they want,” says Lee. “Unlike any other 
country, it’s only because of the sheer scale of the Chinese market that we can 
offer such discounts.”


Others, such as multi-website retailer The Hut Group, which has been investing 
in the Asian market for over two years and has participated in Singles Day 
before, will be running offers including 40% off haircare and up to 30% off 
skincare. Wing Chan, group marketing director at The Hut Group says the company 
has previously seen “massive spikes” on Singles Day in China and expects to see 
“at least double” the sales on beauty products compared to last year.


The Holland & Barrett franchise is also confident. The company began trading 
on Tmall a few months before Singles Day last year, generating close to £0.5m 
in online and offline sales during the event. It is hoping to hit the £1m mark 
this year.


With Alibaba alone racking up sales of £9bn on Singles Day in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/11/alibabas-singles-day-sales-up-60-to-94bn>
, up 60% on 2014, it’s likely that revenues this year will rocket once again 
this year.

Attracting international brands 

The pickings could be rich for British retailers going forward. Chen points 
out that Singles Day is bigger than the entire Black Friday weekend, including 
Cyber Monday, and says the increase in the number of international brands 
joining has been “significant”, with Dyson coming on board in 2014 and Macy’s, 
Hugo Boss and United Biscuits joining the event in 2015. He attributes some of 
its success to the growth in technology. “In contrast, many Black Friday 
opportunities are concentrated on the high street, which is not always 
convenient for those just wanting to shop from home, on their mobile or from 
more rural areas.”

Indeed, figures from Worldpay have shown that the total value of transactions 
made on UK cards onSingles Day grew 251% year-on-year in 2015 
<http://www.essentialretail.com/ecommerce/article/5649b6ef96cad-china-singles-days-has-growing-impact-on-uk-shoppers>
, while the volume of transactions was up by 307%, suggesting that Singles Day 
is gaining traction among UK shoppers too.


Curry has high hopes: “This year and next year could be a real blue-touchpaper 
moment for 11.11 with UK brands and retailers who are China-focused. So watch 
out Black Friday …”

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 