
The job of England cricket coach is not officially vacant, but all the talk in 
Sydney last night was about who should replace Duncan Fletcher. Whether it 
arose in the discussions of the executive committee of the England and Wales
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board, as they entered 
emergency session in a Sydney hotel, or the sheer frustration of thousands of 
England fans with another empty Saturday to fill, the question was not whether 
Fletcher should go but when.

Fletcher has always preferred to work behind the scenes, but his lack of 
presence alongside his captain, Andrew Flintoff, during the Christmas and New 
Year Tests came close to abdication of responsibility in a gathering crisis. 
The announcement of an independent review, covering the last four years, into 
English cricket's structural failings - a structure largely championed by 
Fletcher himself - automatically implies that many of his own initiatives are 
now under question.

The long-held assumption that Peter Moores, head of the ECB academy and the 
former Sussex coach, would be the favourite to replace Fletcher is now also no 
longer clear-cut. A 5-0 whitewash decreases the justification for an orderly 
succession and will tempt the ECB once again to look overseas for the figure 
who could enable England to challenge Australia not just once every 20 years 
but on a regular basis.

Australians, not surprisingly, will dominate the initial shortlist. Tom Moody, 
in particular, and Greg Chappell will have their advocates. Both would be 
highly tempted by an England approach, but they are contracted to their 
countries - Sri Lanka and India respectively - until after the World Cup. The 
wildcard option, one which would undoubtedly thrill the England supporters in 
Sydney but which will petrify many in the ECB ranks, would be to make an 
audacious bid forShane Warne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>. 
That approach would also best be left until Warne had played a few rounds of 
golf, sunk a few beers and realised how much he misses the limelight.

If England sacked Fletcher before the World Cup in the Caribbean in March, 
Moores would be the only realistic option. That is not about to happen. 
England's one-day side is in disarray, with defeats piling up and each 
successive squad more of a desperate stab in the dark than the last. Even 
Michael Vaughan's anticipated return as captain, expected to be confirmed 
tomorrow, will not clear the pessimism surrounding England's chances in the 
triangular series against Australia and New Zealand. The obvious solution is to 
saddle Fletcher with the task of saving his coaching career in two one-day 
tournaments where England fear disaster.

Moody is being pressed to renegotiate a new contract with Sri Lanka, but he is 
stalling until after the World Cup. His family is settled in England and it is 
the England coaching job that most appeals to him. Chappell, having experienced 
the political shenanigans in Indian cricket, might also regard the pressures of 
England coach as relaxing by comparison. Chappell, however, like South Africa's 
coach, Bob Woolmer, may now be regarded as a generation too far.

Fletcher can claim, with justification, that he saw many of England's mistakes 
coming. Left to his own devices, it is doubtful whether he would have gambled 
on the mental well-being of Marcus Trescothick. He had qualms about Andrew 
Flintoff's appointment as captain, and suppressed the voice that told him that 
Andrew Strauss might be a better bet. He was dismayed by Steve Harmison's mood 
long before the infamous first ball in Brisbane and knew that the England tail 
was too long, but was pilloried for choosing Geraint Jones and Ashley Giles in 
a forlorn attempt to do something about it.

In other words, the as yet unspoken "mistakes" that he admitted to after the 
Melbourne Test might largely amount to the times when he did not demand his own 
way. Even England's Ashes failure will have convinced him that, on most things, 
he was right all along. He will say that he was not too intransigent, but that 
he was not intransigent enough.

Warne would be a brilliant England coach. As, arguably, the best captain 
Australia never had, he might just wonder about the challenge. For 15 years he 
has lived a celebrity lifestyle while maintain-ing an uplifting belief in team 
togetherness and the simple pleasure of playing cricket. It is a lesson that 
needs to be restated. The ECB would fear a rush of tab-loid headlines, but his 
zest for the game and charisma would promote cricket in England like no other 
coach could.

His joyful pay-off line, though, as he revelled in his final media conference, 
might kill the idea at birth. "I will probably have people following me with 
earpieces for a while, but hopefully that will die down eventually and I will 
be able to get my gear off and dance on the top of a bar somewhere."

Now that is a comment that you have never heard from Duncan Fletcher.
 