
App: Council Tax <http://www.counciltax.co/>

By: Henry Woodsend

Price: Free

Available on: iOS 4.0 or later

What is it?

An app to search for council tax bands and pricing information on individual 
properties and postcodes, sourced from theValuation Office Agency 
<http://www.voa.gov.uk/> and the government's Directgov 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/index.htm> website.

Is it easy to use?

Child's play. Tap in a postcode and the app will display all the relevant 
properties. Click on a listed address and you'll find more info on the local 
authority as well as how much council tax it will attract.

At this point you can save a property – useful if you are househunting and 
need to compare the cost of living in more than one potential home – or move on 
to look at how properties are banded in that particular authority and how the 
council tax compares to the national average, as well as links to the local 
authority's website and the government's Directgov information website.

Is it fun?

If you're titillated by every single aspect of property hunting, then knowing 
how much you'd have to pay in council tax on a potential purchase can be a 
pleasant diversion. It's the data equivalent of peeking through someone's 
window and seeing how big their living room is.

Is it pretty?

It won't win any design awards, but it's a triumph of substance over style: 
easy-to-navigate tabs and buttons make the user experience a comfortable one.

Should you download it?

First a couple of minor issues: it's advert-supported, meaning the bottom of 
the screen is occupied by irritating ads for Subway, online games and hotel 
booking websites – a pain, but the price you pay for free access to the data. 
Also, the app relies on the user's ability to know a property's postcode or at 
least the local authority, which is not always immediately obvious if they are 
visiting somewhere for the first time. But this is nothing a quick Google 
search wouldn't solve.

Quibbles aside, there is little to criticise here. Like some of the best apps 
this collates disparate but publicly available information in one place and 
presents it quickly and easily. The way the initial results screen contains 
most of the information you require – the band and annual council tax bill – 
means little effort is required to make the app do exactly what it says on the 
tin.

Three of us tested the app in the office and it displayed accurate information 
each time, much to the annoyance of a colleague who lives in a similar property 
to me just 1.5 miles away but pays £500 more a year in council tax.
 