
Making toys out of gloves is a great project for the novice sewer. Usually 
there is no cutting of the glove involved, which means no fraying if things are 
not sewn as neatly as they could be. Also, you can choose to glue on some of 
the details, making the sewing part a little bit easier. Try making this cute 
owl and pussycat fromthe famous poem by Edward Lear 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Owl_and_the_Pussycat>. 

What you need

Old gloves (one per toy) 
Buttons 
Scraps of felt 
Stuffing 
Needle and thread 
Ribbon (for the cat) 
Scissors 
PVA glue (optional) 

What to do

1. Both the owl and the pussycat start off in the same way. Turn your glove 
inside out and lay flat. Sew across the fingers and thumb so that the little 
and index fingers become the ears.

2. Turn your glove back the right way round and ease out the ears. This may 
take a little fiddling.
 Owl and the pussycat from Maggie Woodley's book 
3. Stuff your glove. You can shape your toy while you are stuffing and neaten 
out any unevenness.

4. For the owl: depending on the size of your glove, you may have to tuck in a 
little of the wrist cuff before you stitch it shut. Before doing so, cut some 
owl feet from your felt, and sew these into your seam as you go along.

5. For the cat: don't tuck the wrist cuff in, just sew it shut (your cat will 
be taller than the owl). Shape the head by stitching a line of running stitch 
just below where you want your cat's head to be. Pull the threads tight to 
gather the fabric and shape the head. For a simpler alternative, use an elastic 
band, and then hide the elastic with the cat's ribbon.

6. Now make your owl an owl by adding big bright eyes, a beak and some wings. 
You can either stitch the buttons and beak on, as shown here, or use PVA glue. 
If gluing, use circles of felt for the eyes instead of buttons. (Some cheaper 
types of synthetic felt may not glue well, in which case you should sew on the 
features.) Here they are all sewn on (securing the eyes with the buttons, the 
beak with stitches across the top and the wings with a short running stitch).

7. Sew or glue a tummy, felt eyes and a nose to the cat's face, add a pretty 
ribbon around its neck and you're done!
 