
As a child, when I wasn’t eating, sleeping or at school, I was making. 
My memories of childhood relate to stuff – smell, material and texture: 
digging up the garden to make heavy, grogged clay; melting wax crayons to make 
3D shapes; building matchstick houses; casting plaster in Disney latex moulds; 
and cutting out. Always cutting, shaping and sticking.

 Since then, I’ve studied, made and taught sculpture. I know what it feels 
like to submerge my hands and mind in making, occupied with the struggle to 
transform and connect material. Since 1995 I’ve been working with friend and 
colleague Sheila Ceccarelli throughAccessArt <https://www.accessart.org.uk/> to 
explore how we can enable making in others. We’ve seen over and over again how 
making transforms people, just like makers transform materials.

It feels so fundamentally good and right to use our hands to manipulate 
materials – to use tools to extend our ability; to put stuff out into the 
world. The urge to alter our environment is part of our genetic makeup. The 
skill of making lies latent within all of us.

We now know that creativity is good for the economy too. The UK creative 
industries generate £84.1bn a year and account for 2.8 million jobs. It’s the 
fastest-growing sector of the economy.
It’s looking good for makers.


We work a lot in schools and see 10-year-olds who can’t use scissors. We see 
art squeezed into obedient slots that require no mess, quick results and easy 
success. We see children who have never had to solve the problem of a sculpture 
that doesn’t balance; never had an argument with a lump of stuff; and never 
learnt the need to rebuild.

We see children who have never felt success from using a tool to help them 
manipulate material, never felt the pride of producing something for others and 
never felt the optimism of daring to ask: “would it work if … ?”

Somehow, somewhere along the line, making became seen as a “nice” activity, 
but one we could do without.

So are we really preparing our children for their creative futures? There are 
so many reasons not to make and we need to talk about them. Let’s get the 
reasons our children aren’t making out in the open.

Making connects the hand, eye and brain in a very special way. It’s empowering 
for both maker and viewer

 * It takes time and energy: making with a class of 30, or even a household of 
one or two, can be exhausting.

 * There’s enough to be getting on with: pressure from other subjects means 
making and the arts can get squeezed out.

 * Homework encroaches on spare time at home, which could be spent making.

 * It creates mess: wouldn’t it be nice if we could make like a singer sings, 
without the mess to clear up afterwards?

 * Making can be risky: a child might burn their finger on a glue gun or cut 
themselves with a saw.

 * There’s enough stuff in the world: do we really need to make more?

 * Making uses resources: aren’t we meant to be trying to use less?

 * We don’t need to make to survive: we generally buy what we need, so we 
don’t need to learn the skills first-hand any more.

 * We don’t need to make to entertain ourselves: in the past we might have 
kept our hands and eyes busy with making in our spare time, but now we occupy 
ourselves through binary code.

But when we give children the time and space to make – and present them with a 
pile of materials – they fall to it with such a will. The appetite to make is 
there, even when no one speaks of it.

Making connects the hand, eye and brain in a very special way. It’s empowering 
for both maker and viewer. The act of making is optimistic; it’s an act of 
faith. People of all ages feel better for doing it.

Making can also be very social – conversations can meander while hands are 
kept busy. But it can also be very personal and give confidence to children who 
listen to their own internal monologue that takes place as they make in 
solitude.

If we want a world full of creative, entrepreneurial thinkers, we need to 
enable and sustain making from a very young age. Not all of us will become 
sculptors or engineers or designers, but we will become more connected, rounded 
and creative people.

So while making may sometimes seem inconvenient, we need to find the time, 
space and resources to make it happen.

Paula Briggs is director of AccessArt <https://www.accessart.org.uk/> and 
author ofDrawing Projects for Children 
<http://www.accessart.org.uk/drawing-projects-children-paula-briggs/> and Make, 
Build, Create: Sculpture Projects for Children 
<https://www.accessart.org.uk/make-build-create-sculpture-projects-for-children>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 