
It is hard to imagine Indian cinema without a vibrant and audacious heroine 
entertaining the masses through film. However, women's portrayal in the Indian 
media has been challenged by local grassroots activists, who believe that it is 
perpetuating gender inequality.

"Women will always be disproportionately affected by poverty as long as there 
is gender discrimination," said Sapna Shahani, Director of the 'Women Aloud 
Video blogging for Empowerment' (Wave) project. "We need gender equity in the 
media so that more awareness and information is circulated about development 
issues since they disproportionately affect women."

As a result, the Wave project was initiated by Shahani alongside Angana 
Jhaveri in 2009 as a video platform for women based in India to highlight the 
challenges faced throughout the country, as well as address issues faced by 
women. "We wanted to apply our knowledge of creating media in the public 
interest towards development communications in India since we saw there was a 
gap in the existing information available, particularly through a gender lens," 
said Shahani.

According to a recent study by the Press Council of India, although the 
estimated number of women in both the media has increased in absolute terms, 
the ratio to men in the Indian media has more or less remained static. Areas 
such as Chennai, South India on the other hand has progressed in terms of 
allowing women into the media field. Approximately 200 women are now 
undertaking journalism jobs in the city.

"I think it is important to address the gender ratio of journalists since 
women's issues do not get adequately represented in the media," said Shahani 
who began the project after attaining the MacArthur Foundation's Digital Media 
and Learning Award. "So it was fulfilling to see that our training worked 
because we had previously never organised such intensive training that conveyed 
information about the Millennium Development Goals, entrepreneurship and more."

However, media-related work in remote areas has often been seen to be 
precarious, with a number of incidents of sexual assault, harassment as well as 
killings seen through the recent murder of Delhi- based Producer, Soumya 
Vishwanathan in 2008.

The Press Council of India has also been highlighting the importance of 
portraying women accurately in the media, even reporting that "The nation 
cannot progress, as long as women are left behind as the lesser half of 
society. Therefore, the improvement of women's conditions, status and image 
must be defined to be a major objective for media channels."
As indicated by the Global Media Monitoring Project's report in 2010, only 22% 
of the people interviewed, heard, seen or read about in mainstream broadcast 
and print news are female.

Shahani emphasises the importance of India following the United Nation's 
recent sanctions, to promote gender equality and empower women. "Women's 
empowerment is the only way India can make progress towards the Millennium 
Development Goals. An integrated approach is needed between government schemes, 
NGO initiatives along with general awareness led by a responsible media," 
stated Shahani.

Roli Majahan, a Lucknow-based freelance reporter has also been adhering to the 
scheme as part of a new wave of tech-savvy women journalists emerging in the 
country. With the aid of the Wave project, she has been fully equipped with a 
video camera and vital media skills to encapsulate the move to empower women on 
film.

"Wave might not have bought some earth shattering change but it has ignited a 
spark of change," said Mahajan, the creator of "Naheed, The Woman who tried." 
The primary focus of the film surrounds Naheed Aqueel, who has sought to 
educate women by way of strengthening their voice and improving their 
socio-economic status. Mahajan captures life changing entrepreneurial skills 
being taught by Aqueel to one of the most underprivileged Muslim women in 
Northern India.

"I do not like the mainstream media in India because of the lack of the 
journalistic zeal that one is taught about in Journalism schools, so this was 
my chance to tell what I wanted in the way I liked," said Mahajan. The film is 
one of several community-based video blogs featured online for the Wave project 
in order to tackle the growing problems of a male-dominated media spectrum. 
Aqueel, who has also joined the Wave project after her entrepreneurial venture, 
is using the equipment provided by the project, to document her progress.

Neha Sehgal, a Mass Communications lecturer at DAV College for Girls, in 
Haryana and also a participant in the Wave project has similarly been detailing 
the progress of women in North India. "Honour killings and female foeticide is 
a problem that affects Haryana. The removal of this practice in Indian society 
is a serious challenge. We need wide-scale publicity in the media to highlight 
the seriousness of the practice," said Sehgal.

However, as a lecturer, Sehgal believes that women's portrayal in the media is 
not the only problem that needs to be tackled. "It is only by a combination of 
monitoring, education campaigns, and effective legal implementation that the 
deep-seated attitudes and practices against women and girls can be eroded," 
said Sehgal.

The video-blogging movement has proved to be a useful tool as Director Sapna 
Shahani explains that "It is a good way to share deeper connections across 
borders and is an affordable tool to increase information and communication 
around development." And though the scheme originally began as a 
women-only-network, plans to open up to some men are in the pipeline. "I don't 
think a women-centric approach is enough to eliminate poverty." Shahani 
believes that in including men in discussions and actions around women's 
empowerment, they can sensitise men to critical women's issues.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 