
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> scored, was 
sent off and missed a penalty as Real Madrid bounced back from last weekend's 
defeat by Barcelona to beat Almeria 4-2 at the Bernabéu.

Ronaldo, starting his first home match in more than two months following an 
ankle injury, also created a goal as Madrid made hard work of seeing off lowly
Almeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/almeria>, having to come from 2-1 
down to record victory.

There was little sign of the drama to come as Manuel Pellegrini's men ended an 
impressive first-half display 1-0 up thanks to Sergio Ramos' header.

But Almeria, who did not have a shot on goal in the opening period, stunned 
their hosts with two goals in three minutes from Fernando Soriano and Kalu Uche 
to lead 2-1.

That sparked the home side into action, and Madrid responded with goals from 
Gonzalo Higuain, Karim Benzema – who scored after Ronaldo's penalty had been 
saved – and then Ronaldo in the final 17 minutes.

The former Manchester United man was booked for taking his shirt off to 
celebrate that goal, and that proved costly as four minutes later he was handed 
his marching orders after picking up a second yellow following a tussle with 
Michel.

His dismissal did not cost Madrid too dearly, though, as they held on to make 
it seven home wins from seven and keep the pressure up on leaders Barcelona.

Third-placed Sevilla saw their title hopes suffer a setback as they were held 
1-1 by 10-man Valladolid. Manolo Jimenez's side went behind after 33 minutes 
when Angola striker Manucho gave the visitors a surprise lead.

But Valladolid found themselves a man down five minutes later after Borja 
Fernandez was sent off for a cynical lunge on Diego Perotti. Jose Luis 
Mendilibar's side conceded a penalty on the stroke of half-time which Luis 
Fabiano converted.

But Sevilla failed to make their numerical advantage count and were unable to 
make up any ground on the top two.

Diego Forlan and Sergio Aguero were on target as Atlético Madrid beat Xerez 
2-0. Forlan converted a cross from Jose Antonio Reyes for the opener after 29 
minutes and strike partner Aguero struck the second after 65 minutes as 
Atlético secured a second successive victory.
 