
"After an effervescent start, things go flat," Aravind Adiga wrote in the 
Times, reviewingThe Pregnant Widow. "Giant packages of cultural information . . 
. are airdropped into the novel; you get the sense that Martin Amis is 
operating an heroic famine-relief effort for his culturally undernourished 
readers . . . A potentially stunning novel ends up containing the familiar 
ratio of what is good and bad in Amis's writing, the usual mix of Amis gems and 
Amis junk." "I love this novel,"Philip Hensher said in the Daily Telegraph. "It 
is beautifully achieved, cunningly relaxed, and reveals considerable ­emotional 
depth in its last pages . . . The Man Booker Prize would be no more than its 
due." "He's not bad at trying to imitate the thoughts of a sex-obsessed young 
man,"Harry Mount conceded in the Sunday Telegraph. "He's not so good at 
recapturing the wickedly funny thoughts ofMartin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> when he was a young man." 
"Despite the absence of anything resembling a plot, it is an addictive read,"
Richard Bradford observed in the Spectator. "Keith is the most grievous, 
heartbreaking individual so far created by his author. If, as is implied, he 
speaks for him, then one can only feel something akin to heedful pity." "The 
Pregnant Widow . . . shows Amis ­growing into a new mode, as a ­chronicler of 
loss and uncomfortable metamorphosis,"Bharat Tandon wrote in the Times Literary 
Supplement. "If his next novels ­continue in this vein, then this book's own 
awkward transition will have been ­worthwhile."

"Admirers who have been wondering what Andrea Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> will do next will not be 
disappointed,"Ruth Scurr said in the Times, reviewing The Long Song. "For all 
its power to disturb, this is a beautifully written and cleverly constructed 
novel that projects convincing personal relationships on to the feral backdrop 
of the Jamaican plantations." "She dares to write about her subject in an 
entertaining way without ever trivialising it,"Kate ­Kellaway noted in the 
Observer, "andThe Long Song reads with the sort of ebullient effortlessness 
that can only be won by hard work." "Being reminded how recently black people 
were called 'niggers', raped, sold, parted from their children and made to work 
in the sugar cane fields until they dropped is never going to make for 
comforting reading,"Amanda Craig wrote in the Daily Telegraph. "Yet this is a 
life-affirming tale in which cruelty and horror are laced with comedy as the 
house slaves thwart and subvert their white 'massas' at every turn."

"Every aspect of 1930s life is here," Lara Feigel said in the Observer, 
reviewingThe Thirties: An Intimate History by Juliet Gardiner. "If there is an 
overall thesis in this book, it is that the 1930s was a messier and more 
multifarious decade than is often supposed." "Gardiner's use of the diaries of 
ordinary people . . . gives verve and authenticity to her story,"Richard 
Davenport-Hines wrote in the ­Sunday Times. "The cinematic clarity of 
Gardiner's descriptions of accidents and ceremonies tells more about the decade 
than a page of statistics." "For the depth of its research, the quality of the 
writing and the sheer richness and vibrancy of the material, this is a quite 
outstanding work of social history,"Dominic Sandbrook declared in the Daily 
Telegraph. "It is comfortably the definitive account of a decade that has been 
much maligned."
 