

Director: Ken Hughes
Entertainment grade: C–
History grade: D

Oliver Cromwell was a political and military leader during the English Civil 
War. After the execution of King Charles I, he became Lord Protector of the 
Commonwealth of England. The republic did not long outlast his death in 1658.

People
 Warts and all … Richard Harris as Cromwell. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
It's 1640, and curmudgeonly Puritan Oliver Cromwell is packing up to move to 
America with the rest of the fun police. He might not fit in with the Pilgrim 
Fathers, though: he starts out rabidly pro-king. When one fellow suggests 
taking up arms against the monarch, Cromwell bellows that it is treason, and 
throws him out of his house. Then the clown-suited Earl of Manchester puts 
enclosures round the common lands. Cromwell rages and fumes at the king's 
toff-friendly policies. Then he's in a church and, would you believe it, some 
royal twit has only gone and put gold things on the altar. Cromwell completely 
loses his rag, chucking plates and candlesticks hither and thither while 
yelling about graven images. "God damn this king!" he howls. It's only 20 
minutes in, and already the film's apparent hero, played by Richard Harris as 
if suffering from acute constipation, has lost the audience's sympathy. Unless, 
of course, you just can't get enough of wild-eyed, pompous, middle-aged men 
shouting fundamentalist diktats at you. It's like watching Fox News.

Politics
 Fop-in-chief … Alec Guiness as Charles I. Photograph: Kobal 
The hero void cannot be filled by languid fop-in-chief Charles I (Alec 
Guinness). Inaccurately, Cromwell suggests that England become a democracy. 
"Democracy, Mr Cromwell," replies the king, "was a Greek drollery based on the 
foolish notion that there are extraordinary possibilities in very ordinary 
people." And then he flies off on his broomstick, surrounded by winged monkeys. 
No, not really. Cromwell goes on to suggest that everyone should have schools 
and universities as well as democracy, and someone even talks about votes for 
the poor and underprivileged. This is completely wrong. The groups that spoke 
for the rights of the common man during the English Civil War were the 
Levellers and the Diggers. Cromwell suppressed both. Some Levellers actually 
went on to ally with Royalists. Absent entirely from the movie, too, is his 
Irish campaign, which even in its most forgiving interpretation doesn't do much 
for Old Ironsides's supposed status as a hero of liberation.

War
 Ready for action. Photograph: Kobal 
At the Battle of Edgehill, Charles's dashing nephew Prince Rupert of the Rhine 
(Timothy Dalton) arrives with his big flashy sword and fluffy white poodle, the 
latter groomed to match his elaborately plumed hat. Rupert did have such a 
poodle, Boy, which was the envy of the Grand Turk. It was often seen on the 
battlefield, and ultimately joined the death toll at the Battle of Marston 
Moor. Prince and pooch are shown leading the Royalists to a resounding victory, 
despite Cromwell's brave frontline fighting. This isn't true at all. Edgehill 
was inconclusive, and Cromwell arrived a day too late to fight. Predictably, he 
reacts by shouting even more, and stomps off to form the New Model Army. Cue a 
training montage of recruits struggling over fences, clashing swords together 
and decapitating straw Royalists. Thereafter the film skips directly to the 
Battle of Naseby, at which it claims the Parliamentarians were outnumbered. 
That's exactly the wrong way round.

Regicide
 The King and I. Photograph: Kobal 
The most accurate scenes are those of Charles's goodbyes to his children and 
execution, and even those aren't right. His marriage is portrayed as a 
half-hearted struggle against a scheming Catholic wife, Henrietta Maria, lazily 
characterised as Lady Macbeth. Playing Charles, Guinness aims for quiet 
dignity, and achieves stilted apathy. When king and queen kiss goodbye, the 
earth stays resolutely still. Finally, the axe falls, and the executioner holds 
up the king's severed head, crying "Behold the head of a traitor!" Famously, 
these words were not said at Charles's execution: the executioner wished to 
remain anonymous. A few not especially credible rumours said it was Cromwell 
himself. Unfortunately, this is followed by yet more scenes of parliamentary 
debates on committees of inquiry, which are exactly as thrilling as they sound.

Verdict

Roll on the Restoration.
 