
Chris Elders is Chevron professor of petroleum geology at Curtin University. 
Prior to that he was a professor at Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. 
He moved to Australia in 2013

After 20 years at Royal Holloway, part of the University of London, a number 
of friends and colleagues commented that it was a "brave" decision to move half 
way across the world to Curtin University. I don't think there are many that 
would have to think twice about exchanging Egham for Perth, but while the 
differences are obvious, there are many similarities that have made the 
transition very straightforward.

After nine months in my new home, I don't feel as if I have been particularly 
brave, but I have found the change stimulating, exciting and invigorating. At 
the same time I have moved from a small college with a 125-year history and 
8,500 students to a university with a student body of 38,000 that has rapidly 
developed in the 27 years since its transformation from the Western Australian 
Institute of Technology to become ranked 25th in the 50 universities under 50 
years old. So not just a new country – a different style of institution as well.

There are of course new things to learn. Australia must be world champions in 
the use of acronyms, so there is a whole new language of abbreviations to learn 
and different terminologies that can at first seem strange (everyone on a grant 
is a principal investigator, not just the person leading the project, and a PDF 
is a postdoc, not an electronic document).

Having avoided the worse excesses if the GFC (Global Financial Crisis – you 
see what I mean?), my first impression of Australia was of a much more buoyant 
mood and well resourced system than in the UK. However a number of things have 
conspired to take the shine off that.

The mining boom is coming to an end, bringing a sharp whiff of reality to a 
high cost, strong currency economy. The change of government last September has 
also brought with it a sudden raft of policy changes, eerily reminiscent of 
those that have been introduced in the UK – although here in Australia they 
were introduced in a budget announcement that no-one had really anticipated.

It is striking that with this, and with other education policies affecting 
schools, that they have been introduced in such a hurry that their 
implementation hasn't really been thought through. Even government ministers 
aren't clear how they will work out, resulting in contradictory statements that 
are hastily "clarified" or withdrawn.

Not surprisingly, the natural feeling of optimism that pervades the Aussie 
spirit is giving way to a feeling of nervousness and uncertainty. It's 
inevitable that the liberalisation of fees, rising student debts, and cuts in 
research funding will all be implemented in one form or another.

But many positives remain. I am struck by the much greater sense of 
collaboration between institutions, compared with the more fiercely competitive 
atmosphere in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/11/australia-uk-universities-hierarchical-bullying>
.

Although funding for research remains highly competitive, it feels as if there 
are more opportunities, and in my own field of petroleum geoscience, there are 
tremendous opportunities to develop applied research and training programmes, 
in a sense to catch up with the UK.

And while some aspects of university administration are more complex and 
labyrinthine, it is a pleasure to work in a system where quality assurance is 
applied with a much lighter touch. It is also a pleasure to work with students 
who show a higher degree of independence and initiative.

Superficially, the higher education sector in Australia can seem more like the 
education system that I joined 20 years ago in the UK – the changes that have 
been introduced in Britain during that period are happening, or are on the 
horizon in Australia. I hope thatAustralia can learn from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight>, and 
introduce some of those necessary changes in a more positive way, so that we 
can continue to enjoy the enterprise and resourcefulness that this special 
country brings.
 Emily Hudson: 'I have found that the UK's size makes it far easier to 
maintain connections with the broader academic community.' Photograph: Edmund 
Blok 
Emily Hudson is a law fellow at St Peter's College, University of Oxford. 
Prior to that she was a lecturer at the University of Queensland. She moved to 
the UK in 2012

Why did I decide to leave my job at the University of Queensland and move to 
the UK? The last few weeks notwithstanding, certainly not for the weather!

In many respects the decision to accept a job at Oxford was easy. Oxford is 
one of the world's leading universities, and with its tutorial system and 
college structure, it promised an experience different from anything in 
Australia. And of course there was the opportunity to live and work in another 
country.

Although my own teaching responsibilities have changed dramatically, for 
instance moving from coordinating a compulsory undergraduate subject with 
upwards of 300 students to delivering tutorials for the 20 law students at St 
Peter's College, I think there are broad similarities between teaching in the 
UK and Australia.

Experiences are institution- and course-specific, and can change from one 
group of students to the next. I have found that the Oxford environment 
encourages students to be more self-sufficient, and that the tutorial system 
provides unparalleled opportunities for feedback and mentoring. However, Oxford 
does not have a monopoly on excellence – I taught many brilliant students at 
the University of Queensland, and can vouch for the breadth and depth of my 
legal education at the University of Melbourne.

Research experiences likewise seem to be institution-specific, although there 
are some common themes across the sector. One example is the influence of 
external measures of research quality. Here the UK and Australian systems each 
have their pros and cons. For instance, the UK rules regarding contributions to 
theResearch Excellence Framework <http://www.ref.ac.uk/> (four publications 
from any given person put forward, unless they fall within an exception) can 
make planning easier, and compared with the Australian model, emphasise quality 
rather than quantity.

That said, I know some academics found the process of having their work 
assessed by their institution to be brutal. The Australian system requires a 
certain percentage of publications to be contributed across the entire faculty, 
which can create a greater sense of community – although the rules can be such 
that productive members of staff come under pressure to pump out publications.

In terms of the overall culture, I have found that the UK's size and proximity 
to other countries makes it far easier to maintain connections with the broader 
academic community. Australia also has an active community of scholars, but it 
is harder to generate the energy of the UK. That said, the Australian lifestyle 
has a lot to recommend it, particularly for those who like outdoorsy stuff. I 
can understand why the British excel at pub-based pursuits like darts and 
watching sport.

Finally, and although it may be crass to discuss this in polite company, the 
issue of salary has to be mentioned. To put it bluntly, academic salaries in 
Australia are much higher than the UK. In my field, staff in permanent 
positions can earn twice as much by working in Australia, especially those in 
mid-level and senior positions.

Of course, in some Australian cities a seemingly high salary is quickly eaten 
away by eye-watering costs of living; and early-career and non-permanent staff 
get some pretty shoddy treatment in both countries. However, I am concerned 
that the UK academy should not become a hobby farm for those who were born or 
married into wealth.

This blog post is part of our two-week series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight> on 
the differences and similarities between Australian and UK higher education.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 