
Angola are considered a rising force in African football. They took part in 
the last World Cup and receive huge investment from their oil-rich government. 
Toppling Egypt, five times continental champions and current African Cup of 
Nations holders, in yesterday's quarter-final would have been a fine way to 
signal a shift in power but instead the Pharaohs produced a regal demonstration 
to send the upstarts packing. In doing so they secured a semi-final against the 
Ivory Coast, whom they beat on penalties in the 2006 final.

Egypt were by far the more fluid unit, entrancing the Angolans with canny 
movement and slick one-touch passing with Al Ahly's Mohamed Aboutrika, who is 
widely regarded as the best midfielder still plying his trade with an African 
club, the game's outstanding performer.

Excellent goalkeeping by Lama meant Egypt did not take the lead until the 23rd 
minute, Hosni Abd Rabou converting a penalty after Andre was punished for 
charging down a free-kick with his arms.

Angola rallied, with the new Manchester United signing Manucho sparkling for 
the first time in the match. Twice in three minutes the 24-year-old striker 
latched on to long balls and threatened the Egypt defence. First he won a 
dangerous free-kick and on the second occasion he shrugged off two defenders 
and cracked a splendid shot into the top corner.

Egypt did not take long to reassert their superiority, however. Ahmed Fathi 
swung in a cross from the right and Kali attempted an acrobatic clearance but 
instead fell embarrassingly on his behind. Amr Zaki compounded the defender's 
embarrassment by turning the ball into the net.

Though the Egyptian goalkeeper, Essam Al Hadari, nearly presented Angola with 
an equaliser at the start of the second half, Egypt continued to dominate. Not 
until the last five minutes did Angola really apply sustained pressure but the 
Egyptians conceded nothing more than a succession of corners.

Cameroon completed the semi-final line-up last night, beating Tunisia 3-2 
after extra-time to secure a tie against Ghana. Stéphane Mbia scored the winner 
in the 92nd minute, his second goal of the game. Newcastle United's Geremi had 
put Cameroon 2-0 ahead in the 27th minute.

Didier Drogba has said Freddie Kanouté was given the 2007 African Footballer 
of the Year award only because he did not go to last Friday's ceremony. "I was 
told if I didn't appear the rules would change and the prize would go to the 
runner-up," Drogba said. He said he was unwilling to go two days before Ivory 
Coast's quarter-final and had "pulled out of future elections".
 