
App: Currency Converter 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/currency-converter-free/id380877896?mt=8>

By: oWorld Software

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone, iPod touch, iPad and Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>

What is it?

Exactly what its name suggests – a tool that allows you to convert the value 
of one currency into another.

What does it promise?

"Easy to use and with a regularly updated currency change! An essential 
application for all the travellers: convert the price of an item you're going 
to buy, negotiate the currency exchange."

Is it easy to use?

Fairly. Once it's downloaded, clicking on the icon takes you to the main 
screen. In the middle are two scrollable menus of currencies, 62 in total, and 
below is a keypad. You choose the currencies you want to move between then use 
the keypad to type in the value you want to convert. As you do so the 
conversion takes place at the top of the screen.

One downside is that although the list of currencies is alphabetical by 
country, it's quite hard to find what you want on the menu if you don't know 
the abbreviation for it. Another is that the button to swap the way you are 
converting – eg from pounds to euros to euros to pounds – isn't entirely 
obvious.

In its favour, you don't need to be online to use the app, although of course 
you will need to be online to get updates as currencies fluctuate.

Is it fun?

Hardly, unless you find that you can actually afford another ice-cream or trip 
to the bar.

Is it pretty?

Clean and functional would probably be words that first sprung to mind.

Should you download it?
 Currency Converter QR 
If you are holidaying overseas and want some idea of how much everything is 
costing you, then yes. Of course, the exchange rate won't be the one you are 
being charged by your bank if you withdraw money from a cash machine or use 
your credit card (and won't include any charges that come with that either), 
but it isn't far off the best-buy deals if you are purchasing currency before 
you travel.

It's certainly close enough to give you an idea of how much that pizza would 
be costing you at home, and could help you avoid a nasty shock when you get 
home and read your bank statement.
 