
 A man accused of supplying the gun used to kill the police accountant Curtis 
Cheng 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/curtis-chengs-son-asks-pauline-hanson-not-to-use-fathers-death-to-attack-is>
 has admitted failing to answer questions put to him at the New South Wales 
Crime Commission.

Talal Alameddine, 23, originally faced 20 charges of refusing or failing to 
answer questions to the commission about his alleged involvement in the 
shooting death of Cheng on 2 October last year.

On Tuesday in Sydney’s central local court, 16 counts were dropped and he 
pleaded guilty to the remaining four.

He had earlier argued officers delayed charging him in a ruse to waive his 
right to silence in front of the NSW Crime Commission.

He was arrested five days after the Parramatta shooting and told he would be 
charged with preparing for a terrorist act but was then released without charge 
and summonsed to appear at the commission the same day.


On Tuesday in Sydney’s central local court, Alameddine’s defence argued this 
chain of events was a deliberate attempt to circumvent his right to remain 
silent. This is because, once a person is charged with an offence, by law they 
have the right to silence.

“The right that he had was side-stepped,” lawyer Avni Djemal told the court.

Rob Bhalla, representing the NSW Crime Commission, denied there were any 
“nefarious objectives in mind”.

“They were not ready to charge him on that day,” Bhalla said. “It was a 
reasonably complicated investigation.”

The defence attempted to subpoena the notebooks and internal correspondence of 
two investigators but was unsuccessful. Magistrate Beverley Schurr said the 
subpoenas were in effect a “fishing expedition” and she was satisfied there 
were no grounds for them.

Counter-terrorism police swooped on Alameddine in pre-dawn raids on 7 October 
last year, weeks after he allegedly handed another man a .38 Smith & Wesson 
revolver that prosecutors say was then used byschoolboy killer Farhad Jabar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/08/farhad-jabar-troubled-soft-spoken-boy-turned-into-killer>
 to gun down Cheng as he left police headquarters in Parramatta.

 