
Australian jobs have never faced a greater threat than they do under Malcolm 
Turnbull’s government. Almost 40 years after trickle-down economics was 
introduced in the US and UK under Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher,Malcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> has 
sought to import an even purer form of this foreign product into Australia.

If Turnbull wanted to destroy Australian jobs, cripple economic growth and 
entrench inequality, his unfunded $50bn corporate tax cut would be a fantastic 
way to start. This toxic foreign import follows the voodoo logic that “tax cuts 
for the wealthy will drive economic growth and improve the lives of everyone in 
the community, from the top down”.

As the reigns of Reagan and Thatcher will attest, the reality couldn’t be more 
different.

No jobs and growth joy for Coalition in latest investment figures | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/27/no-jobs-and-growth-joy-for-coalition-in-latest-investment-figures>
One of the policies I was associated with during my time as treasurer was an 
attempt to lower Australia’s corporate tax rate, so you would think I should be 
a supporter of Malcolm Turnbull’s decision to cut corporate taxes.

I’m not.

Along the way in a long political life, you learn a few things, and this has 
got to count as the biggest thing I learnt: corporate tax cuts are yesterday’s 
solution to today’s problems – their economics don’t work, and arguably their 
politics never did.

Our efforts in government were of course part of an entirely different context 
in which we were trying to manage the stresses of a two-speed economy by 
placing more weight on resource rent taxes and less on the corporate rate, but 
let’s put that aside for the moment.

As a solution to Australia’s current jobs and growth challenges, a corporate 
tax cut doesn’t make it even into the top 10 of sensible policy responses.

Turnbull runs a classic trickle-down argument that his policy will restore 
Australia’s appeal to foreign investors. Cutting the corporate tax rate from 
30% to 25%, a policy championed by the Business Council of Australia, would 
indeed align Australia with the average of its OECD counterparts. But 
conditions apply …

In a series of tax transparency reports legislated by Labor in 2013 and 
released earlier this year, the Australian Taxation Office revealed that, 
courtesy of deductions, deferred losses, minimisation and evasion, public 
companies in Australia pay an average of 24% on their taxable income, while 
private companies pay an average of just 19%.

Although most Australian businesses pay their fair share of taxes, these 
shocking figures shred the case that Turnbull’s company tax cut has anything to 
do with attracting foreign investment.

To illustrate, consider a street lined with private companies, each making 
more than $200m a year. A prospective investor strolling down this street has a 
one in three chance of being courted by a company which pays zero corporate tax 
in Australia. Unaware of a given company’s tax arrangements, our investor is 
likely to allocate funds where returns will be maximised. Other factors being 
equal, the companies promising the highest returns are those most likely to be 
avoiding their tax responsibilities in Australia.

Company tax cuts are not a knight in shining armour to save the economy | John 
Daley and Brendan Coates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/company-tax-cuts-are-not-a-knight-in-shining-armour-to-save-the-economy>
The case for Turnbull’s company tax cut in promoting “jobs and growth” rapidly 
evaporates once we expose its trickle-down foundations. If jobs and growth 
aren’t materialising at Australia’s effective company tax rates of 24% and 19%, 
how will a cut in the headline rate make a difference? And will those companies 
who currently pay no tax, at any rate, suddenly be inspired to hire?

These skewed policy priorities are not cost-free – everyday workers without 
access to Panamanian tax havens or corporate tax minimisation opportunities 
look at policies like this and see the deck is loaded against them.

Jobs, growth and competitiveness don’t “trickle down” from corporate tax rate 
tinkering. Instead, they stream out from sustained, long-term investment by 
both the government and the private sector.
 