
I am so tired.

I’m not just physically tired – although I can count the hours of sleep I’ve 
had the last two nights on one hand. I’m spiritually tired. My body and bones 
ache, my heart aches, my eyes blur, my brain is struggling to process the 
everyday while it processes the unavoidable.

I, with so many of my black brothers and sisters, am on the long watch. 

This time it began with the shooting of Alton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-baton-rouge-investigation-department-of-justice>
. A man shot multiple times by police outside a store while selling CDs with 
permission of the store owner. Like many other black people, I try to avoid the 
videos showing the violent deaths of my brothers and sisters at the hands of 
the state, but it is so hard. There are so many videos, so much death.

Bring the Dallas murderers to justice. And the killers of black people too | 
Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/dallas-murderers-killers-black-lives-matter>
The images show up on your screen without warning and suddenly, you are 
watching your own death, your brother’s death, your son’s death. It’s a punch 
to the gut, swift and deep. And you feel sick and sad and so very afraid. But 
the long watch begins like it began with Trayvon, with Mike Brown, with Eric 
Garner, with Tamir Rice. Once again, I began scouring news outlets to see what 
I could learn, looking for statements from the police departments, mayors, 
governors – any sign of possible justice. We haven’t seen justice yet for any 
of the black men and women taken from us by the police, but we still look, hope 
and try.

Then, while I was still reeling, still hurting, I stumbled across a Facebook 
live video ofDiamond Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/07/minnesota-police-philando-castile-video>
 recording the last minutes of her boyfriend Philando Castile’s life while the 
cop who had just shot him multiple times in front of her and her four-year-old 
daughter pointed a gun at them and screamed.

Diamond Reynolds’ voice was calm as she pointed the phone’s camera at her 
boyfriend, who was slumped over, covered in blood, struggling to breathe.

“You shot four bullets into him, sir. He was just getting his license and 
registration, sir,” she says to the police officer while keeping her hands and 
body painfully still. It may seem strange to some – this woman so calmly 
documenting her boyfriend’s violent death, her respectful tone to the officer 
who just shot him. But Diamond Reynolds was doing what so many black people 
must do: calculate the risk, protect those we love, try to ensure our slim 
chances at safety and justice – all while screaming inside.

The last time I was pulled over by police, my two brothers were in the car 
with me. The brother on the passenger side, Ahamefule, is a gentle man, but to 
the cops he’s a black man who is 6ft 6in. I worry about him every time he steps 
behind the wheel. In the backseat was my youngest brother Basil, smaller, less 
intimidating to most – but he had just arrived from Nigeria and had had no 
contact with American police. We worried about him the most – he didn’t know 
the drill. In the seconds between the lights first flashing and the officer 
walking up to my window we had to quickly and calmly instruct our youngest 
brother on what to do.

“Stay calm,” my brother said with authority, “Do not say a word. Keep your 
hands still. Do. Not. Move.”

When asked for license and registration I couldn’t access it because my 
brother’s long legs blocked the glove compartment.

“Aham, I need you to get my registration,” I said as his face filled with 
dread.

“I am reaching for the registration in the glove compartment,” my brother said 
slowly and clearly. He waited for the officer to nod his head before his 
shaking hands moved for the documents.

Three passengers sat silently, calmly, in terror. We take these steps because 
it’s all that we can do, but we know that nothing can guarantee our safety.

Now isn't the time for Dallas to divide: we must reach out to one another | 
Ross Ramsey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/dallas-divide-stay-together-protestors-police>
“You told him to get his ID, sir – his driver’s license,” Reynolds said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/facebook-live-video-appears-to-show-black-man-shot-police-minnesota-philando-castile>
 as her boyfriend sat next to her covered in blood. “Oh, my God. Please don’t 
tell me he’s dead. Please don’t tell me my boyfriend just went like that.”

I see that video in my head on repeat. Sometimes I see Philando Castile, the 
school cafeteria manager who was beloved by his family, community and the kids 
he saw at work every day. Sometimes I see my brother. I scream inside.

And in the midst of all this, the work continues. We research what’s being 
done. We look for signs of justice. We plan marches and campaigns. We don’t 
have time to grieve, because we know that the clock is ticking and it’s just a 
matter of time before there will be a new video with another black body lost to 
the fear and hatred that this country has of black skin.

We organized our grief and fear and love and went to the streets again 
Thursday night. All across the country, we flooded the streets along with 
allies and friends who love us, to demand the simple thing denied us – for our 
lives to matter. And during one of the few outlets of action we have, someone 
started shooting.

I watched video, of black and white people running in terror while police 
officers bravely ushered them to safety as bullets flew by. Eleven officers 
shot – five dead. All that we wanted was our officers to stand with us, to 
protect and serve us like they do the white citizens of this nation. And in 
Dallas, they did. But before we could have a moment to feel safe; before we 
could take more pictures of black people and cops standing side by side 
affirming that black livesdo matter, before we could show that progress can be 
made, officers were dead in the streets.

I wanted to crumple and fall, I wanted to cry and scream until I could cry and 
scream no more. But I couldn’t, because like always, I have to keep watch. 
Because while there was never any question that the shooters of these cops 
would come to justice (and indeed, three suspects are in custody, and one, the 
alleged shooter, did not survive the night), I also knew that we black people 
who dared demand that our lives matter were now even less safe.

We had no idea of the shooter’s identity or motive and yet before the night 
was over former congressman Joe Walsh haddeclared war 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/ct-joe-walsh-twitter-dallas-tweet-20160708-story.html>
 on Black Lives Matter and President Obama. “Real America is coming after you,” 
he threatened. The New York Post declared “Civil War” on itsfront page 
<https://twitter.com/nypost/status/751303762095079424>. The Drudge Report 
declared 
<http://www.mediaite.com/online/drudge-report-covers-dallas-with-black-lives-kill-headline/>
, “BLACK LIVES KILL” and The Wrap echoed both sentiments,asking 
<https://twitter.com/TheWrap/status/751313817829724160>, “Is This War? When 
#BlackLivesMatter Veers Into Violence.”


And so, with this added grief, I and so many other black people in America 
must push forward knowing that this horrific act of violence will be used to 
silence us, to tell us that we have no right to demand protection under the law 
and justice for crimes committed against us. We are so sad and scared and 
disheartened. We have worked so very hard to simply be seen as human, but the 
progress we made was so fragile, the fear and hatred toward us so strong, that 
it can be shattered with an act of violence that horrifies us as much as anyone 
else.

I and many others have been desperately reaching out to my community, 
reminding them that what we demand is not too much, what we say is not 
controversial, what we fight for is not wrong. Black lives matter. That is all. 
That is all we want our country to believe.

Black lives matter. We will not stop saying it.
 