
Protests against a $105m budget cut to the top arts funding body, Australia 
Council, were held around the nation on Friday.

Hundreds of artists and arts sector workers held dance actions in the major 
capitals and regional towns such as Lismore and Bathurst.

An online petition 
<http://www.australianunions.org.au/australians_for_artistic_freedom> has 
attracted over 7,000 signatories, including writers Thomas Keneally, Alexis 
Wright, Christos Tsiolkas and JM Coetzee.

Much of the anger was directed toward the arts minister, George Brandis, who 
earlier this month announced as part of the new budget $105m in funds over four 
years, usually reserved for the Australia Council wereto be reallocated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-takes-100m-from-australia-council-to-establish-arts-excellence-program>
 to a new national program for excellence.

The council’s new budget for the coming year will be $184.5m, a shortfall of 
$23m.

City of Sydney’s culture manager Rachel Healey questioned why “a whole new 
tier of government arts funding” was being created, in an address to roughly 
100 people at a Sydney action in Hyde Park.

“What’s rational about creating a myriad of new hoops for artists to jump 
through, more mountains of submissions for committees to cast their bleary eyes 
over? And this from the government that is the scourge of red tape!”

Australia Council has a peer-review system in awarding grants to applicants. 
It is currently unclear how the new body to be established by Brandis will 
distribute funds, with a guideline for applicants to be published in the coming 
weeks.

Sydney photographer William Yang said many of his projects had been funded by 
the council and called their system of peer assessment “the fairest way to go”. 
He said the proposed national program for excellence had “overtones of a show 
pony for the arts”.


He said art “does not magically arrive at its flowering point of excellence, 
but needs to be cultivated and nurtured. With cutbacks it is always the 
grassroots which is deprived of nourishment and art is diminished.”

Rosie Dennis, director of the Urban Theatre Projects was a key organiser 
behind the national actions and told Guardian Australia the council’s peer 
assessment panels careful considered how each project added to Australia’s 
cultural economy.


“It’s about having a healthy mix: opera and ballet, but also experimentation 
and risk and encouraging all of that. Especially for artists at the beginning 
of their career.”

Dennis said it was important to preserve the “arm’s-length funding” of 
Australia Council and it was “not the government’s role to get involved in 
deciding which projects get funding”.

In an interview with ABC radio 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/booksandarts/brandis-on-new-arts-funding-body/6478600>
 on Tuesday Brandis said there was a widespread perception in the arts 
community that the Australia Council can be “a closed shop” and this was 
particularly a perception held outside Melbourne and Sydney.

The establishment of a second funding body would extend funding access to “a 
wider variety of potential applicants than is the case at the moment”. He added 
the cut was only 12-13% of the council’s budget and that “the lion’s share of 
grant funding will continue to be delivered through the Australia Council”.

“The Australia Council ought to continue to have the principal role in arts 
funding in Australia ... that being said, I do not favour the view that it 
ought to be a monopoly funder of the arts.”

The process for awarding funds by the new body would be analogous to the way 
the Anzac Centenary Arts and Culture Fund had been administered, he said, with 
an advisory panel of experts who assess projects and make recommendations.

In a media release on Thursday, the council stated that government-directed 
programs would remain unaffected by the cuts, including funding for28 major 
performing arts companies 
<http://www.australiacouncil.gov.au/strategies-and-frameworks/list-of-the-mpas/>
 such as the Australia Ballet, Opera Australia and Bangarra Dance Theatre.


However among the schemes that would be affected: the June round of grants and 
a new six-year funding scheme for organisations program. The ArtStart, Creative 
Communities Partnerships Initiative and Artists in Residence programs will also 
not be offered in the future.

Dennis said it was the independent artists and small companies working in 
regional and remote Australia “on the smell of an oily rag, but having a really 
big impact” who would be impacted by the cuts.

Labor’s arts spokesman, Mark Dreyfus, told Guardian Australia the announcement 
was “immensely disruptive” and the minister has failed to explain why he had 
made these decisions or anything about the new funding structure.

“This decision should be reserved before more disruption and damage occurs.”

The artistic director of the State Theatre Company of South Australia, Geordie 
Brookman, said all members of the Australian arts community were part of an 
“ecology” and that damaging one section “damages everything”.

Speaking to a small gathering on the steps of South Australia’s parliament 
house he said he didn’t want children growing up in a world where art is 
dictated by commercial “fluff and sparkles” and that the indie and 
small-to-medium sector of the arts was not merely a “training ground” but 
essential to the arts community.
 