
The door to Cell 404 slammed. Rubashov immediately fell into a deep sleep. An 
hour before he had been dreaming of being arrested, when two men had knocked on 
the door of his apartment and driven him to the prison in a foreign car.

"How do these capitalist automobiles cope with our roads?" he had asked, 
trying to engage his captors in conversation.

"It's a Ford Escort. It would fall apart anywhere," the short one had replied, 
signalling the discourse was at an end.

The sound of a bugle woke Rubashov from a contented, dreamless sleep. "I 
suppose some might think it highly unnatural to have fallen asleep so easily at 
a time of great stress," he thought to himself, "yet as the whole purpose of 
this book is to framework the ruthless deterministic inevitability of a 
totalitarian regime then you will see there is no cause for anxiety when you 
know you will be shot on page 210."

He stretched out and surveyed his cell. A picture of Number 1 hung over his 
bed. The face looked at once both familiar yet unfamiliar, Rubashov mused. In a 
certain light, it could have been mistaken for Stalin yet that could not be so 
for No 1 was not merely a representation of a Soviet five-year plan of 
upper-lip facial growth, but a symbol of the repressive nature of moustaches in 
general.

The recognition of this triggered a toothache of equal symbolism and Rubashov 
allowed the pain of memory to wash through him. As a younger Party apparatchik, 
had he not expediently expelled a young German, called Richard, from the Party 
whilst on one of his visits overseas, thereby condemning him to death?

And as his toothache worsened, had he also not been implicated in Little 
Loewy's suicide when he had forced him to break the year-long strike and allow 
Soviet weapons into fascist Italy? Rubashov had done it unquestioningly for the 
good of the Party, but now as he allowed the grammatical fiction of the 
capitalist first person to penetrate his consciousness a stirring of bourgeois 
guilt emerged.

A tapping on the pipes disturbed the silence. It was no 406 sending a message. 
A-R-S-E. Rubashov tapped back urgently. D-O-N-T Y-O-U M-E-A-N A-R-I-S-E? There 
was a moment's pause before the answer cam back. T-H-E-R-E I-S N-O I I-N 
S-O-C-A-L-S-M Y-O-U A-R-S-E. Here is the dialectic flaw of vowellian communist 
fiction, Rubashov thought. Since when was there an I in EGO?

The cell door opened and a guard led him down the corridor. Was this the 
moment of death? He was taken into a brightly-lit room, where his old Party 
colleague, Ivanov, was sat behind a desk.

"We have evidence that you have been engaged in counter-revolutionary 
activities and have been plotting the death of Number 1," Ivanov said.

"You know that's nonsense," Rubashov replied. "I have always been a loyal 
member of the Party."

"We have ways and means of dealing with false consciousness," Ivanov smiled 
gently. "But because you are my friend and to make the point that totalitarian 
regimes can also distort the truth without recourse to violence, we won't be 
torturing you."

I am very worried you may not have noticed this is a serious critique of 
totalitarianism so in the guise of Rubashov's diary this chapter explores the 
moral relativism of authoritarianism whereby the end always justifies the means.

The grammatical fiction of personal guilt prompted another toothache, in the 
course of which Rubashov recalled how he had betrayed Arlova, his mistress and 
librarian, when the First Secretary had decided her judgment was untrustworthy. 
Had he not as effectively condemned her to death as surely as he himself was 
soon bound to be?

"Enough of this capitalist sophistry," Ivanov declared at Rubashov's next 
interrogation. "Surely you have worked out by now that none of this is 
personal. Totalitarianism can only survive in a climate of fear and mistrust 
and for that we need an enemy from within as well as one without. Today it's 
your turn. You are muggins. Just confess to a lesser charge and you'll be out 
in five years."

"OK, then," Rubashov replied. "But you didn't need to do anything so crude as 
to let my old friend Bogrov be shot outside my door to force my hand. 
Totalitarianism is so much more subtle than many believe and I would have 
confessed anyway."

"I'm sorry that was the idea of Gletkin. He doesn't have the nous of us old 
Party members."

I am still very worried you may not have noticed this is a serious critique of 
totalitarianism so in the guise of Rubashov's diary this chapter explores the 
moral relativism of authoritarianism whereby the end always justifies the means.

Rubashov relaxed as the guard took him for his final interrogation session. 
Today he would shake Ivanov's hand and sign the deal that would save his life.

"I'm afraid we've had to shoot Ivanov for not being on message," said Gletkin.

"Oh dear," Ivanov sighed. "I suppose that means we've got at least another 50 
pages on the duplicity and amorality of repression and that you are going to 
present me with mountains of flimsy evidence and witnesses who have 
deliberately misunderstood my jokes which will conclusively prove my guilt, 
while maintaining that embryonic totalitarian regimes are not bound by the same 
legalistic niceties as mature democracies because the importance of their 
survival transcends an objective truth.

"Indeed," said Gletkin. "And you will come to realise that you are definitely 
guilty of something – if not the crimes with which you are accused – and will 
decide you cannot avoid the totalitarian inevitability and that it is better 
for you to accede to the state – thereby showing how triumphantly repressive it 
in fact is – than to risk damaging it with a futile challenge.

"You are so tight. I am guilty of everything."

"In which case, for the charge of going on and on about the evil of 
authoritarianism long after everyone has got the point, this court sentences 
you to death."

W-S-H-T W-A-S M-E, prisoner 406 tapped out.

I wish it was me too, thought the reader.

"Thank God it's me," said Rubashov as a bullet shattered his skull.
 