
In 1972, long before eBay or Amazon, students from Stanford University in 
California and MIT in Massachusetts conducted the first ever bit of e-commerce. 
Using the "Arpanet" account at their artificial intelligence lab, the Stanford 
students sold their counterparts a small amount of marijuana. Ever since, the 
net has turned over a steady trade in narcotics. According to the Observer's 
survey 16% of current UK drug users have scored from the net and the number is 
growing.

Just like almost every other business, drugs are moving online. And, just like 
almost every other business, e-commerce is faster, easier and offers great 
value. Within five years, the street pusher could be more or less obsolete, run 
out of town in the same way Amazon has hounded independent booksellers.

I'd never bought illegal drugs before. Unlike most of my peers, I've never 
even tried illegal drugs – aside from the occasional spliff in my 20s. But 
earlier this year an innocuous-looking white envelope was posted through my 
door by Royal Mail. It was about the size of a postcard, but a little bulky, 
and padded with bubble-wrap. It looked, felt and smelled no more suspicious 
than any other item of post I'd received that week. The only difference was 
that it contained a very small amount of high-quality cannabis. With a few 
simple clicks, and without leaving my home, I'd done what thousands of people 
have done over the past couple of years: I bought drugs from the notorious 
"dark net markets".

You can't access these websites using a normal browser such as Chrome or 
Internet Explorer. The dark net markets sit on an encrypted part of the 
internet called Tor Hidden Services, where URLs are a string of seemingly 
meaningless numbers and letters that end in ".onion", and are accessed using a 
special browser called Tor. The browser, which was originally built by the US 
Navy but is now an open-source project, allows people to browse the net without 
giving away their location.

Although it used to be a little tricky to set up, Tor now looks and feels like 
any other web browser. True, it's a little slower because of how it cloaks your 
identity (which entails bouncing your URL request around the world via several 
other "nodes" that use the same software) but that's a price many are willing 
to pay for online anonymity. This little-known parallel internet is a natural 
home for an uncensored drugs marketplace, as it is for whistleblower websites 
and political dissidents who also rely on its powers of obfuscation.

The most infamous of these dark net markets was called Silk Road, named after 
the ancient trading route. Following a lengthy investigation by the FBI, Silk 
Road was closed down in October 2013, after more than two years of 
uninterrupted trade. (The trial of Ross Ulbricht, 29, who the FBI alleges ran 
the site, is ongoing – Ulbricht denies all charges.) At the time, prosecutors 
proclaimed the beginning of the end of this illicit trade. But as soon as it 
was knocked offline, dozens of copycat sites were launched by anonymous 
operators. In 2013 there were a small handful of these marketplaces. There are 
now around 30, including Hydra, Pandora, Outlaw Market, Agora, Silk Road 2.0 
and 1776 Market Place. And most of them are doing a decent trade.

The first thing that strikes you on signing up to Silk Road 2.0 – which was 
set up within a month of the original being busted – is how eerily familiar it 
all feels to anyone who's used eBay or Amazon. Every one of the thousands of 
products on offer has a detailed description, photograph and price. All 
products and vendors are rated out of five by buyers, who also provide detailed 
written feedback. There are customer service buttons and shopping trolley carts 
and free-package-and-delivery and one-off specials. The strange juxtaposition 
of the familiar and unexpected is a little unsettling – but you quickly get 
used to it.

You don't, however, get used to the unbelievable choice of products on offer. 
Technically speaking, Silk Road 2.0 is an anonymous market for anything (with 
some exceptions, such as images of child abuse – even radical libertarians tend 
to draw the line here), which means wares stretch from the mundane to the 
bizarre: listings include a complete boxset ofThe Sopranos and a $100 Marine 
Depot aquarium supplies voucher. In April, the most popular-selling item on the 
entire site was a fake £20 Tesco voucher. But most people are here for the 
drugs. There are hundreds of vendors to choose from, selling every conceivable 
narcotic: heroin, opium, cocaine, acid, weed, steroids, prescription. Under 
ecstasy alone: 4-emc, 4-mec, 5-apb, 5-it, 6-apb, butylone, mda, mdai, mdma, 
methylone, mpa, pentedrone, pills.

It's the customer reviews, not clever encryption, that's the oil in the 
machine, the key to understanding how these markets tick. All the vendors use 
pseudonyms, but they keep the same fake name to build up their reputation. 
Because it's so easy for buyers to switch allegiance to any one of 900 
competitors at any moment, the vendors are forced to compete for custom. The 
only way to get it is by having a good history of positive feedback from other 
users.

As I browsed through the marijuana listings, I found 3,000 offers advertised 
by more than 200 dealers. So (what else?) I began to scour user reviews, trying 
to spot those that others had found reliable and trustworthy: "First order was 
lost … I got a reship and now I'm very happy … He is one of the best vendors on 
the road!! Very friendly and very good communication too. I will be back 
soon."; "Please check out this vendor … 5 Stars."

A few reviews like this will make a dealer's reputation. As a result, dealers 
here are polite, attentive, and consumer-centric – offering free packaging and 
delivery on big purchases, refunds, special offers and even loyalty systems. 
Some even offer freebies to anyone willing to write lengthy and careful 
feedback. I got in touch with "DrugsHeaven" on the site's internal email 
system. He or she was based overseas, but the vendor page advertised "excellent 
and consistent top quality weed & hash for a fair price".

There was a refund policy, estimated shipping times, detailed terms and 
conditions, and close to 2,000 pieces of feedback over the last four months, 
averaging around 4.8 out of 5. (And, importantly, the occasional negative 
review.) "I'm new here," I said. "Do you think I could just buy a tiny amount 
of marijuana?" DrugsHeaven quickly responded: "Hi there! Thanks for the mail. 
My advice is that starting small is the smart thing to do, so no problem if you 
want to start with 1 gram. I would too if I were you. I hope we can do some 
business! Kind regards. DrugsHeaven."
 The dark net enables users to buy drugs online. Picture posed by model 
Photograph: Robert Matton AB / Alamy/Alamy 
Law enforcement agencies around the world – and especially in the US – have 
started to take a keen interest in what takes place in this strange encrypted 
internet, and are getting better at shutting down these sites. Periodically one 
market disappears following a police raid or some vendors are arrested. It's 
usually the result of infiltration by undercover cops, or, more often, human 
error. But it's an arms race, and it feels like the police are losing. Because 
they live on the fringes, dark net markets are remarkably adaptive, and learn 
from each mistake: always innovating ways to be more secure, more 
decentralised, harder to combat. There is a bustling online community dotted 
all over the world comprising libertarians, bitcoin fanatics, drugs aficionados 
and dealers, who all constantly monitor the markets, check security 
vulnerabilities and performance, and update others on what they find. Each has 
his or her own motivations – for the libertarians it's a slightly delusional 
way of denuding the state – but together they keep these sites functioning 
smoothly.

Take the payment system. You don't pay with credit cards, of course, as that 
would be too easy to trace. The currency of choice is bitcoin, the digital 
crypto-currency, which can be exchanged easily enough for real world currency, 
and offers its users a high degree of anonymity. When a flaw was spotted in the 
payment system (site administrators would hold on to buyers' money until the 
transaction was complete, but were running off with it) the community developed 
an even more secure payment method, called "multi-sig escrow", where the money 
is only transferred if two of the three parties sign off on the transaction. To 
help keep buyers anonymous, other developers have created clever "tumbling" 
services, which are a sort of micro-laundering system that obscures who is 
sending bitcoins to whom.

Every month the sites get smarter. In April "Grams", a search engine for 
drugs, was launched and included "trending" searches and advertising space. 
According to James Martin, author of a new book,Drugs on the Dark Net 
<http://www.palgrave.com/page/detail/drugs-on-the-dark-net-james-martin/?K=9781137399045>
, some vendors are even branding their opium or cocaine as "fair trade", 
"organic" or sourced from conflict-free zones. "We are a team of libertarian 
cocaine dealers," writes one dealer, targeting the ethically conscious user: 
"We never buy coke from cartels! We never buy coke from police! We help farmers 
from Peru, Bolivia and some chemistry students in Brazil, Paraguay and 
Argentina. We do fair trade!"

This restless competition is good for customers. The offline drugs market as 
it stands is all local monopolies and cartels, run by dealers and gangsters. By 
introducing clever payment mechanisms, feedback systems, and real competition, 
power is shifting to the users. And that does precisely what economics 
textbooks predict. The most surprising statistics about Silk Road 2.0 are not 
the amount of available drugs (although that is truly staggering); it's the 
satisfaction scores.

When I analysed 120,000 customer reviews made on the site earlier this year, 
more than 95% scored 5/5. These are results any legitimate enterprise would die 
for. True, price is more variable. According to one study, which compared 
average drugs prices on Silk Road from vendors in a number of countries to the 
average street price there, marijuana costs a little more online, although 
cocaine was significantly cheaper. But the overwhelming consensus among users 
of the site is that the quality of the product is far higher and its purity far 
more reliable – and that's something most people will pay a little more for.

My marijuana, I was told by an expert friend before disposing of it, was 
exceptionally good, and cost around £7 for the gram. (In fact, it looked like a 
bit more than a gram. Doubtless DrugsHeaven was hoping for repeat custom.) It 
is of little surprise therefore that the dark net markets are growing so 
quickly. According to a report by theDigital Citizens Alliance 
<http://www.digitalcitizensalliance.org/cac/alliance/default.aspx>, there are 
now 45,000 drugs products for sale on these sites. In January, it was around 
30,000.

The fact that it is so effective creates a dilemma for those who worry about 
drugs in society. Thanks to their smart use of technology, dark net markets are 
almost impossible to close down: they are too adaptive, too creative. This 
means more and better drugs more readily available at a competitive price, and 
that's nothing to celebrate. According to Andrew Brown from the charityDrugscope
 <http://www.drugscope.org.uk/>, availability and price are closely correlated 
with level of use. Besides, there is violence and corruption at every point in 
the supply chain as drugs move from producers to users. Sites such as Silk Road 
might shorten the length of that chain, but there will still be gang wars in 
Mexico over drugs routes, there will still be people becoming addicted to 
harmful substances.

But history suggests that those who want drugs usually find a way to get them. 
In October 2013, a large-scale study by theInternational Centre for Science in 
Drug Policy <http://www.icsdp.org/> brought together data from seven drugs 
surveillance systems around the world. The unsurprising conclusion? The "war on 
drugs" is failing. Illicit substances are more available than ever. Sites such 
as Silk Road offer a glimpse of an alternative. Half of the 7,000 organised 
crime gangs in the UK are involved in drugs. Although reliable figures for the 
cost of street trading are notoriously difficult to find, a study by the UN 
suggests that the costs associated with drug-related crime (fraud, burglary, 
robbery and shoplifting) in England and Wales were equivalent to 1.6% of the 
country's national income.

From what little is known of them, most of the dealers on dark net markets 
resemble middle managers in logistics companies who spend their days taking and 
shipping orders all day and working out new marketing strategies. They aren't 
violent gangsters fighting over turf. As these markets continue to grow the 
street dealer will be squeezed out. For the user too, the benefits are plain. 
On the street, drug purity is wildly variable: the average purity of street 
cocaine is 25%, but has been found to be as low as 2%, typically cut with 
mixing substances such as benzocaine.

This is extremely dangerous, because overdosing is often the result of not 
knowing the purity, dosage, or content of the drug you take. In 2009-10 a 
contaminated product led to 47 heroin users in Scotland being infected with 
anthrax. Fourteen died. The user-ranking system provides a more reliable way of 
determining the quality and purity of the product: trusting the feedback of 
people who have used it.

But perhaps the biggest win of all could be the simplest. In a perverse way, 
the brutal efficiency of these sites could strip illicit drugs of any remaining 
allure or mystique.

Buying drugs from professional-looking sites with user ratings, 
proceed-to-carts and customer-service buttons makes sourcing cocaine a lot like 
buying a DVD or doing your weekly shop. And every bit as glamorous.

Jamie Bartlett is the author of The Dark Net ( 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780434023172>
William Heinemann), which is out now
 