 David Willetts has consistently backed every rightwing cause: the poll tax, 
the Tories' NHS reforms, which he pioneered, and proposals to raise the 
pensionable age to 67. He urged the unemployed to undercut wage standards to 
get jobs and opposed a national minimum wage, predicting 1m job losses from it.
Nobody has doubted Mr Willetts' high intelligence, only the quality of some of 
his judgments. He is an intellectual Thatcherite, a member of her No Turning 
Back cheering clique. After serving in her policy unit at No 10 he became 
director of studies at the rightwing centre for policy studies before 
inheriting the safe seat of Havant in 1992.

Despite this he is suspect among unbending Thatcherites because he tried to 
cosy up to John Major when he became prime minister.

David Willetts <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidwilletts> has also 
been constrained by two nicknames at war with each other. First he was tagged 
"Two Brains" by Michael White of the Guardian. This stuck as it became clear 
that on his coolly creative calculations rest Tory hopes of matching their 
spending plans with their tax promises. Used sardonically, it also conveys his 
special quality of superior omniscience.

The other nickname, the Young Dissembler, arose from his unconvincing effort, 
while he was party whip, to explain away his memo to the members' interest 
select committee, in which he noted that the committee's Tory chairman, Sir 
Geoffrey Johnson-Smith, "wants our advice". The Sunday Times exposed the 
document, claiming that Mr Willetts had wanted the committee's Tory majority to 
smother an inquiry into Neil Hamilton's cash-for-questions affair, thus 
compelling his resignation as paymaster general (1996). Mr Willetts pleaded his 
inexperience as a junior whip for using "want" in the archaic sense of "lacks" 
but Robert Harris, writing in the Sunday Times, was not convinced and sneered 
that this argument required "a special kind of idiot, who takes a first in PPE 
at Christ Church".

It would be wrong to suggest that this Birmingham-born 44-year-old is 
completely a dried up rightwing stick. As shadow social security secretary 
(1999- ) he was one of the seven members of the shadow cabinet who pulled the 
rug from under shadow home secretary Ann Widdecombe in the wake of her proposal 
for zero tolerance for cannabis users, by confessing to youthful indulgence. He 
said, "I had two puffs, didn't like it and have never had any experience of 
drugs since."

Ask Aristotle about David Willetts 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5542,00.html> 
 