 Television has made David Blunkett and his guide dog familiar figures, though 
he is the third - not first - blind member of the Commons. But the image of the 
smiling, bearded, blank-eyed orator with fingers skimming across his Braille 
notes is not all the public remember about New Labour's education minister.
First and foremost, he has stood out as a successful spending minister in a 
challenging department, asserting the government's reputation for demanding 
higher standards from an educational establishment, which still doubts his 
plans.

As such David Blunkett <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidblunkett>, 
once the north's leading exponent of "municipal socialism", has become a 
favourite of Tony Blair. But that does not mean his priorities are the same as 
his party leader. Mr Blunkett knows Labour needs middle class votes and his 
main objective is to improve state education so it opens windows of opportunity 
for the children from impoverished families.

He himself had a narrow escape - as the blind child of a poor one-parent 
family - from being limited to becoming a Braille typist. His target is genuine 
meritocracy: "Tolerating mediocrity and excusing failure is unacceptable, 
passing as it does, disadvantage from one generation to the next, reinforcing 
the gap between rich and poor and widening the gulf between those who succeed 
and those who fail."

Born blind in Sheffield in June 1947, he grew up in poverty after his father, 
a gas board foreman, died in an accident at work. From the age of four, Mr 
Blunkett was consigned to the Sheffield School for the Blind and then went on 
to the Royal Normal College for the Blind in Shrewsbury.

After securing his O-levels and A-levels at night school, he went to Richmond 
College, Sheffield, and then Sheffield University where he secured an honours 
degree, with Bernard Crick as his tutor. He then studied at Huddersfield 
College of Education to qualify as a teacher in further education.

Having joined the Labour party at 16, he was elected to Sheffield Council at 
22, making him its youngest-ever councillor. "I came in as an angry young man 
on the right," Mr Blunkett recalls. At 25 he was elected to south Yorkshire 
county council in 1973 and became leader of its Labour group in 1980.

He contested the Sheffield Hallam seat in February 1974 and missed by one vote 
from being selected for safe Penistone on Jack Mendelson's death in 1978. His 
election to Labour's ruling NEC in 1983, the first non-MP to succeed since 
Harold Laski 40 years before, was as the amiable representative of northern 
Labour's urban strongholds. His own "socialist republic of south Yorkshire", 
with its well-publicised cheap bus fares, gained him many admirers and he 
consistently topped the NEC polls.

When he entered the Commons in 1987 as Sheffield Brightside's successor to 
near-Stalinist Joan Maynard, his reputation had evolved to that of a leftwing 
conciliator. He established this in 1985 by offering Liverpool's militants the 
chance to avoid utter destruction by Neil Kinnock who admired his skill in 
"skating on thin ice".

He won a place on John Smith's shadow cabinet in 1992, after having managed 
the failed leadership campaign for eurosceptic Bryan Gould. In his first post, 
as health spokesman, he did not initially score as effectively as his more 
abrasive predecessor, Robin Cook. When Tony Blair took over in 1994 on John 
Smith's death, Mr Blunkett moved to education where he replaced the ineffective 
Ann Taylor.

When Labour's 1997 victory transformed him into secretary of state for 
education, Mr Blunkett had no illusions about the limitations on reaching his 
lofty ambitions. He knew Chancellor Brown's tight ceiling on expenditure would 
inhibit the hiring and keeping of teachers and the financing of the expansion 
of higher education.

In office he has led the government's drive to improve school standards and 
reduce class sizes. So far the standards have risen quicker than the numbers in 
classrooms have fallen. His tough work ethic has gained admiration among 
parents and teachers who, on the whole, have been relatively supportive. His 
public spat with Chris Woodhead, the former chief inspector of education, has 
also earned him brownie points.

But his colleagues have been less enamoured with his "old fashioned" views on 
the age of consent and abortion. It is these personal opinions, rather than his 
ministerial performance, which may hold him back as he climbs the Whitehall 
greasy pole.

His disability is no longer the object of much interest. The public do not see 
the sophisticated Commons equipment which translates Hansard into Braille and 
are unaware of the hours he spends listening to tapes which summarise newspaper 
articles. Nor does the public know his short-fused prickliness when not 
consulted on issues.

He has proved an instinctive backstairs conciliator, shown most effectively in 
1996 when Harriet Harman's decision to send her son to a grammar school led to 
an outbreak of war in the parliamentary Labour party. He is more aware than 
most about the danger of New Labour splitting into factions and was horrified 
as Mr Blair, Mr Mandelson and Mr Brown pursued private vendettas in public.

But above all he has proved determined to exploit his flexible negotiating 
skills to fulfil his party's 1997 election commitment, to put "education, 
education, education" at the top of its priorities in office.

Ask Aristotle about David Blunkett 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-477,00.html>
 