
Australia’s batsmen embarrassed Pakistan’s patched-up attack on Friday at the 
SCG, handing Nathan Lyon the perfect platform to shine on the final day of the 
three-Test series.

Australia declared at 241-2 late on day four of the third Test, setting the 
tourists a target of 465 after demoralising their bowlers in record-breaking 
fashion.

The cricketer who laughed: beleaguered Yasir Shah still a lovable figure | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/the-cricketer-who-laughed-beleaguered-yasir-shah-still-a-lovable-figure>
The hosts’ run-rate in their second innings was a record 7.53 from 32 overs 
when Steve Smith pulled the pin; previously the highest rate in a Test innings 
of 100-plus runs was 6.82.

Pakistan were 55-1 in response at stumps, with Lyon having taken the only 
wicket to fall.

The veteran offspinner, who had been on the cusp of being dropped earlier this 
summer following a lean trot, will be asked to bowl Australia to victory on day 
five.

Confidence should not be an issue for Lyon, who starred in the Boxing Day Test 
and snagged three wickets at the SCG in Pakistan’s first innings of 315.

Smith is certain to bowl him in long spells on Saturday, with star pacemen 
Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood exhausted after playing all six Tests of the 
home summer.

The spin-friendly pitch is starting to crack, while Pakistan have been asked 
to achieve a record run chase for the second time in the series.

Quick runs were the order of the day after Smith opted against enforcing the 
follow-on in Sydney, where the morning session was washed out for the second 
day in a row.

Smith, David Warner, Usman Khawaja and Peter Handscomb didn’t disappoint, 
feasting on the many loose balls dished up by the tourists.

Pakistan have looked remarkably non-threatening in the field throughout the 
three-Test series, which Australia had wrapped up in Melbourne.

Even by those standards, they underwhelmed on Friday. Mohammad Amir didn’t 
bowl because of injury, while hobbled legspinner Yasir Shah went for almost 
nine runs an over.

Australia v Pakistan: third Test, day four - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/06/australia-v-pakistan-third-test-day-four-live>
Khawaja, opening in the absence of concussed Matt Renshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/concussed-matt-renshaw-withdrawn-from-third-test-against-pakistan>
, top-scored with 79 not out but it was Warner who stunned the SCG faithful 
with a quickfire knock of 55.

Warner set an Australian record by taking just 23 balls to reach 50. It was 
the second-fastest half-century in Test cricket history. Only Misbah-ul-Haq’s 
21-ball effort against Australia in 2014 was faster.

The highlight came in the fourth over of the innings, when Warner hammered 
Yasir for consecutive sixes and helped himself to 21 runs.

Earlier in the week, the vice-captain started the match by becoming the first 
batsman to achieve a century before lunch on day one of a Test in Australia.

The tourists resumed at 271-8 on Friday, frustrating Australia for 15 overs 
before Hazlewood removed Yasir and Imran Khan in the space of three balls.
 