
David Biddle could probably pass unnoticed through a gathering of voluntary 
sector bigwigs, even though the charity he leads is one of the fastest growing 
and most controversial in the UK.

Biddle, 62, is chief executive of the recently rebranded Change, Grow, Live 
(CGL) <http://www.changegrowlive.org/>, formerly Crime Reduction Initiatives 
(CRI), which more than doubled its turnover during the five years of the 
coalition government, when many other charities were struggling, and is poised 
to post figures showing a further 12% rise in income in 2015-16 to more than 
£158m.

Critics say this remarkable growth has been achieved at the expense of small, 
local charities that have been brushed aside by CGL’s relentless 
contract-winning machine. Having cut a swath through the drug and alcohol and 
offender services sectors, it is turning its sights on social care, mental 
health and public health – hence, in part, the rebrand – and prompting charity 
and NHS trust chiefs operating in those areas to glance nervously over their 
shoulders.

There are casualties, but that’s in the nature of contracting. There is no 
God-given right [for a charity] to exist.

When Biddle was quoted in a Guardian article last year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/09/how-sustainable-are-charity-contracts-for-public-services>
 about charity contracts for public services, readers’ comments included 
charges that the then CRI was “corporate”, “predatory” and leading “a race to 
the bottom”. One chief executive whose alcohol charity has recently lost its 
main contract to CGL, and is facing a doubtful future after 35 years, says many 
junior staff have opted to leave rather than transfer to the new provider, 
while “all seniors have been made redundant – we have lost several hundred 
years of experience”.

Biddle rejects the accusation that CGL’s strategy is to prey on smaller fry. 
“There may be examples [of incumbent charities closing after losing contracts] 
but that’s in the nature of contracting,” he says. “There are casualties, but 
it’s not a deliberate ploy.

“There is no God-given right to exist. We don’t have a right to exist. What we 
do have is a responsibility to make things better for the people who need our 
services. We would probably not go for a contract if the people in the area 
were delivering really well – that would be a waste of resources. We are not 
indiscriminate.”

He denies, too, that CGL exploits its workers. Although they have had only one 
– 1% – wage rise over the past five years, he says the charity pays “as well 
as, if not better than, most” and has protected its salary scales and training 
budget. It has piloted an initiative whereby staff are entitled to a “wellbeing 
hour” every week – “an opportunity to go off and have a breather, reflect, 
think” – and is extending it across the organisation.

If Biddle is disinclined to apologise for any fallout from CGL’s success, this 
rare interview does suggest the charity is trying to be more open. It is intent 
on upping its profile post-rebrand, with initiatives including offering 
£100,000 in grants of up to £2,500 each to projects that support people 
affected by substance misuse in Birmingham, where it last year took over drug 
and alcohol services city-wide under the nameReach Out Recovery 
<http://www.changegrowlive.org/content/reach-out-recovery-birmingham>.

This use of sub-brands has probably contributed to CGL’s low profile. Another 
part of its operation is crime prevention charity Sova, a wholly-owned 
subsidiary since 2012 with turnover of £4.5m and 135 staff (out of CGL’s total 
2,400 across England and Wales). Biddle says he would not rule out taking in 
further organisations on such a basis, and adds that “one or two” are thinking 
about it, but admits to being “prodded by our marketing people” to major on the 
new CGL name.

Change, grow, live describes exactly what the charity is seeking to enable 
people to do, he says. Besides which, its widening client base didn’t all take 
kindly to using services with “crime” in the name. The rebrand has cost almost 
£200,000, he concedes, but he reckons it will pay for itself within 12 months. 
It’s not the first reinvention of the charity, which was founded in 1977 as 
Saro and became CRI in 2000 when Saro merged with Second Chance and the St 
Thomas Fund.

Biddle, a probation officer by training, joined Saro in 1996 when it employed 
just eight staff. The first had beenDavid Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2012/apr/17/leading-questions-david-royce-crime>
, its chief executive, and it was the Royce-Biddle partnership that led the 
organisation’s spectacular growth. When Royce stepped down as CRI chief 
executive in 2013, Biddle was appointed his successor.

His own background is evidently a key influence. Born in Hartlepool, to a 
lorry-driver father and shopkeeper mother, he was “one of the lucky kids” who 
passed the 11-plus and went to grammar school. After qualifying, he spent many 
years in the probation service in the north-east and didn’t make a decisive 
journey south until he was in his mid-40s. Many of his peers who went into 
industry in and around Hartlepool have spent long periods out of work.

How sustainable are charity contracts for public services?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/09/how-sustainable-are-charity-contracts-for-public-services>
“So many capable, talented, intelligent people who spent years on the dole 
sucking their bloody thumbs,” he reflects. “It’s just wrong, an utter and 
complete waste of potential.”

Biddle, who speaks rapidly and with passion, returns to this theme several 
times. The experience, it seems, drives his determination to provide better 
life chances for drug and alcohol misusers, ex-offenders and others on 
society’s margins, and fuels his impatience with services he sees as simply 
supporting people rather than challenging them to move on.

“What we saw through the early years of the [2010] drug strategy  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/drug-strategy-2010>was an expansion 
of people coming into treatment,” he says. “We wanted to get them in, but we 
forgot to get them out … My joy in life is seeing people go through the door 
and not come back.”

At this point he reaches for a printout of performance data for CGL’s services 
in one locality, apparently at random, and points to an impressively 
comprehensive range of figures including numbers of people who returned after 
going through that door: seven out of 74 six months after concluding opiate 
treatment; just three out of 325 six months after treatment and support for 
alcohol misuse.

The charity has invested heavily in information systems to enable this 
monitoring and reporting. Growing numbers of its field workers are fully 
mobile, attending an office just once a week, and sophisticated algorithms have 
been developed to make possible instant analysis of service-user data to 
establish who, for instance, is most at risk, who should see a doctor within 
the next 10 days, and whether their mixes of prescribed medicines pose any 
danger.“What pisses people off is that we are very, very businesslike,” says 
Biddle. “I’ve heard it said that we’re like a cult, because we can be perceived 
by our competitors as ruthless, but a cult doesn’t require people to think. I’m 
interested in people who can exercise professional autonomy, who are able to 
take decisions and show initiative.”

The charity is already winning business beyond its core sectors. It is working 
with 8,500 people with mental health difficulties, and Biddle says it has “a 
couple of contracts” for projects countering child sexual exploitation. But he 
expects a slowdown in the overall rate of growth: “We’re probably going to 
stand still for a while, but actually standing still in today’s market is 
pretty good.” He adds that they are experiencing some “interesting” cuts in 
contract prices of up to 20%.

“The focus is going to be on changing the balance of the way we work, looking 
more broadly at working across a range of issues that people face,” says 
Biddle. I think that’s part of the maturation of the organisation: “If you look 
at our culture, where we’ve come from and how we see the world, why would you 
not?”

Curriculum vitae

Age 62.

Lives Brighton.

Family Partner, two sons from previous marriage.

Education St Francis grammar school, Hartlepool; Teesside Polytechnic (CQSW 
social work); South Bank University (MPA public administration).

Career 2013-present: chief executive, CGL/CRI; 2006-13: deputy chief 
executive, CRI; 1996-2006: services manager, Saro/CRI; 1994-96: senior 
probation officer, south London; 1986-94: senior probation officer, Teesside; 
1982-86: probation officer, Northumbria; 1980-82: probation officer, 
Bedfordshire.

Interests Fitness, cinema, music, reading, occasional pint of “real” beer.
 