
The relationship between Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s leader, and president 
Hassan Rouhani has been at the heart of the domesticpolitical realignment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/28/five-lessons-from-irans-2016-elections-tehranbureau>
 that made possible last July’s nuclear agreement with world powers and the 
strong showing for pro-agreement candidates in February’s elections for 
parliament and Majles-e Khobregan (the Experts Assembly), the clerical body 
that chooses the leader.


Next up comes improving economic performance, and this will be another 
challenge for both men and for their relationship. Both would like to see 
higher economic growth – at least the 5% that could see the labour market 
absorb new entrants each year – and both know faster and wider easing of 
international sanctions would help.


In his Nowruz speech in Mashhad on 20 March Khamenei accused the US of failing 
to respect the terms of last July’s nuclear pact by not lifting financial 
sanctions. The leader suggestedIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> 
needed to maintain a “resistance economy” to “fight unemployment and recession, 
control inflation and confront the threats of enemies”.

At tone at least, this differed from Rouhani’s continuing emphasis on 
attracting foreign investment and encouraging overseas trade, and from his 
desire to boost the role of the private sector – foreign and domestic - and 
therefore to constrain state and quasi-state organisations like tax-exempt 
religious foundations and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC).

Just as over the nuclear agreement, Khamenei must placate a variety of 
constituents. Would-be foreign investors need reassurances – no wonder, given 
the billions involved in many cases – but Khamenei needs also to carry 
fundamentalist supporters wary of foreign influence and fearful of any 
weakening of the Islamic Republic’s commitment to egalitarianism. And, of 
course, vested interests need appeasing.

Suitably, the term ‘resistance economy’ is flexible. Since Khamenei first used 
it in 2010, it has generally carried two related if different meanings - a push 
for self-sufficiency and domestic production, and secondly a commitment to the 
central place in the economy of ‘committed’ bodies like the IRGC. While the 
case for a ‘resistance economy’ in either sense was enhanced by sanctions, the 
term can stretch far enough to cover either a near-siege wartime economy with 
low international trade or an economy with a vibrant private sector that can 
compete well internationally.

Two years ago, Khamenei issued a degree calling for a ‘resistance economy’ 
based on higher production and self-sufficiency, greater investment of revenue 
from oil sales, financial reform, greater transparency and ‘knowledge-based’ 
industries. The decree was drafted by the Expediency Council, chaired by Akbar 
Hashemi Rafsanjani, Rouhani ally and fellow schemer in February’s elections.

Since Rafsanjani as president first encouraged the IRGC into an expanded 
economic role after the 1980-88 Iraq war, he has had second thoughts: it seems 
his notion now, presumably shared with Rouhani, is to shape the ‘resistance 
economy’ in such a way as to convince, or undermine, opponents who want to 
defend the IRGC’s protected economic position or resist Rouhani’s desire for 
detente with the US.

Will it work? The roots of a siege mentality are strong, going back to the 
1979 Revolution and the heroism of the 1980-88 war with Iraq, when there was 
talk of “economic jihad”. Years of economic sanctions have hardly encouraged 
openness, and have enhanced the IRGC’s role, both in import-export and in 
energy and infrastructure projects as its affiliated companies took over when 
international operators dropped out. Security considerations invariably favour 
those with the right connections and play against any kind of open competition.

The challenge for Iran’s leadership – Khamenei and Rouhani – is increased by 
the fact most Iranians have not benefited from the easing of sanctions since 
the nuclear deal. As has been highlighted by the invariably astute Djavad 
Salehi-Isfahani, economics professor at Virginia Tech, the Statistical Centre 
of Iran reported last month that bothinequality and poverty had increased 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/04/iran-rouhani-economic-inequality-rising.html>
 in the Iranian year ending on March 20, so ending a four-year decline in both.

Poorer Iranians are an important base for the egalitarianism that has long 
fuelled the fundamentalist camp, including theBasij movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/sep/08/basij-militia-and-social-control-in-iran-book-interview>
, while improving economic conditions has always been at the motivational heart 
of more pragmatic conservatives like Rouhani and Rafsanjani.

It was surprising, then, that Khamenei in his Nowruz speech welcomed the 
“preliminary actions” of Rouhani’s government in reducing inflation to 13% from 
over 40% but also set a timescale for “appropriate actions” to produce 
improvements by “the end of the year” (that is, the end of the Iranian year in 
March 2017).

Rouhani is well aware that the next presidential election is due shortly after 
that, in June, and that he will need a clearer ‘feel good’ factor if, as widely 
assumed, he seeks re-election. With his critics still on the back foot after 
February’s elections, Rouhani must feel a reasonable confidence.

This will be helped by the lack of an obvious, charismatic challenger. Saeid 
Golkar, senior fellow at Chicago Council on Global Affairs and lecturer at 
Northwestern University, who closely monitors chatter on social media told 
Tehran Bureau recently there are many who thinkMahmoud Ahmadinejad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-ahmadinejad> should run again: “He 
remains popular with the lower class, including the Basij, these people. 
Ahmadinejad knows this and believes they will come back to him for the next 
election...without Ahmadinejad, the hardliners don’t have anyone to compete, 
someone with charisma who can mobilise people”.

In 2005 Ahmadinejad promised to put the ‘oil money on the sofreh [the mat 
poorer Iranians sit on to eat their dinner]’. With oil revenue so far down, a 
new slogan would be needed, but economic expectations, or hopes, remain crucial 
to any electoral battle.

In his own message for Nowruz, Rouhani said he aimed for 5% growth over the 
next year and announced himself “certain that with interaction with the world, 
we can move towards economic prosperity”. With unemployment at 11% officially, 
job creation is vital and what Rouhani can achieve – and how he can achieve it 
- is complicated by the US dragging its feet over financial sanctions.

Interestingly, recent discussions in Tehran between Bijan Namdar Zangeneh, 
Iran’s oil minister, and his Indian counterpart Dharmendra Pradhan focused not 
just on increasing Iran’s oil exports and Indian investment of up to $20bn in 
energy schemes in eastern Iran but over payment methods. Tehran’s continuing 
problems in accessing around $6.5bn in oil receipts from India reflects 
Washington’s continuing restrictions on Iranians’ access to the dollar.

International sanctions against Iran are a complex web – and not one that 
could be readily swept away with the speed or vigour Iran’s leaders hoped. 
Washington continues to designate some Iranian entities, including the IRGC, as 
terrorist, which worries potential investors in Iran as theystruggle to 
understand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/apr/13/untangling-irans-web-of-sanctions-after-the-nuclear-deal>
 exactly what the IRGC ‘owns’.

So, as with the nuclear agreement, the “resistance economy” will depend not 
just on what happens in Iran, but on what happens in the US. The US Treasury 
has expanded its reach through enforcing stringent financial sanctions: it can 
spread fear merely by flexing its muscles. Or, as Khamenei put it at Nowruz, by 
acting “in such a way that big corporations, big institutions and big banks do 
not dare come and deal with Iran”.


Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has delivered 
on his 2008 campaign promise to engage with Iran, reaching a nuclear agreement 
many sceptics said would never happen. But his term is nearing its end, and 
Donald Trump is only the most extreme option facing Tehran.

Candidates have been competing, noted Khamenei, “to vilify” Iran. Take that as 
call for the troops of the “resistance economy” – whether in uniforms or 
civvies – not to leave the trenches any time soon.

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 