


I’m not sure exactly what I was expecting, but it was certainly more. The 
crowd at theMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> 
convention centre is in the hundreds, not the thousands, and they are subdued, 
not elated: focused like students cramming lectures in before the exams.

Deepak Chopra, the “new age guru” they have come to see, is also understated, 
the cadence, volume and pace of his voice unchanging – soporific even. There’s 
none of the ebullience of tent revivals, no ecstatic climax or deafening 
revelations. Chopra – a veteran of public appearances, and the author of 80 
books – is not a pulse raiser.

In the two-day conference – the Deepak Chopra weekend – it is just him and a 
screen on the bare stage, talking in an even monotone about how to slow the 
ageing process, how to think yourself healthy, how to have more interesting 
dreams.

This is a suburban spirituality. The pack of angel cards on the mantelpiece, 
the fretting over newspaper horoscopes, the turning of the tarot. Most of the 
crowd, of mostly women, are dressed the same, in black puffer jackets and big 
scarves; they could have been scooped up at random from the Chadstone shopping 
centre. They have paid between $500 and $600 for their weekend pass.

I’m here with two friends, all of us first timers to Chopra. The vibe was 
“very different” at the Dalai Lama event last year, Sophie says.

“Lots of Tibetan prayer flags, and all these colours.”

“People wearing hemp.”

“Monks.”

“Dreadlocks.”

“Yeah. People looked like they were really living it.”

No one here looks like they are “living it”. This is spirituality sotto voce. 

Six pillars

“I’m going to be talking about almost every aspect of healing,” the 
68-year-old Chopra tells us. He’s wearing all black – pants and a sleeveless 
jacket – with bright red sneakers, and glasses that seem to have 
diamond-encrusted arms. He is in Australia to promote his “six pillars of 
wellbeing”: sleep; meditation and stress management; exercise; healthy 
emotions; peace of mind; and good nutrition and hydration. On paper, it’s all 
sensible stuff.

This much I know: Deepak Chopra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/aug/17/healthandwellbeing.familyandrelationships>
Live with these front of mind, he says, and you can begin to “access your 
higher consciousness”, and live a life that’s mostly free of disease.

He begins with the healing power of sleep, “a fundamental pillar of 
wellbeing.” It’s hard to argue with this. I’ve had particular trouble sleeping 
and am getting ill, so sit down the back of the auditorium, a mess of tissues 
and water bottles.

Sleeping is the most efficient way to improve health, Chopra says; it will 
increase immunity, memory and creativity, and aid in the elimination of toxins. 
Deep sleep is also “a way of returning to your soul, to the underlying or inner 
being”, he says. “Ask yourself any question before you sleep ... and you will 
get the answer in the morning.”

So far, so good. It’s hard to argue against sleep. But then Chopra goes off 
piste, and gets the science involved.

In his new book Super Genes, Chopra claims 95% of disease-related gene 
mutations – including cancers, auto-immune diseases, and Alzheimer’s – are 
“influenced” by how we think, how we feel and our relationships. “You are not 
simply the sum total of the genes you were born with,” he and his co-author, 
Rudy Tanzi, write. They believe we can learn how to shape our gene activity. 
“You are the user and controller of your genes, the author of your biological 
story. No prospect in self-care is more exciting.”

In other words – we make ourselves sick. And not just sick, but terminally 
diseased.

Pad Thai and ginger tea 

A few years ago, at a meditation centre in Ubud, Bali, I met a group of women 
who were all on the alternate healing circuit. My curiosity was piqued – they 
looked less Eat Pray Love than suburban mums who had got on the wrong plane, 
ended up on the wrong holiday.

Over dinner, I discovered three of them had cancer and one had Parkinson’s. 
They were sick, but well enough to travel. They had a window of time, a grace 
period, and they were spending it in Bali.

They had read Chopra and motivational author Louise Hay, and over dinner they 
told me they had caused their own illnesses. Not through lifestyle choices that 
we associate with cancer – they were not smokers, and they were only occasional 
drinkers. Instead it was their emotions that had caused their cancer. Their 
anger. Their repressed sexual drives. Their unexplored trauma, going back to 
when they were girls. All the things they could have been but weren’t. All the 
things they could have said but didn’t. These things caused their cancer, was 
their cancer.

To prevent illness, we need to focus on our lifestyles – not just our genes | 
Deepak Chopra & Rudolphe E Tanzi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/04/prevent-illness-lifestyle-genes>
Pad Thai and pots of ginger tea. The heat and wetness of the night and the 
beads of sweat on the bottles of mineral water, and the driver booked the next 
day to take them to the place in the countryside where someone they called a 
healer would shake the cancer out of them in eight-hour stretches. I argued 
with them, like Robin Williams does with Matt Damon’s character in Good Will 
Hunting: “It’s not your fault, it’s not your fault, it’s not your fault.” But 
they weren’t even listening. They had read the books and listened to the tapes 
and this was their firm belief. But to me it seemed like just another way of 
being a woman, another way of blaming and hating yourself, of giving yourself 
the smallest lamb chop, of not making a fuss; of the quiet voice saying again 
and again, “sorry”, and “it’s my fault.”

Or maybe it’s just that we need to tell ourselves a story. A rogue cell 
dividing and dividing and dividing and dividing and dividing and dividing and 
dividing – this does not in itself a good story make.

Influence your genes

Chopra does not move explicitly into this dark territory during his weekend 
conference in Melbourne, but it’s a philosophy coded into much of his material.

Pacing the stage, he tells us again: “Ninety-five per cent of your genes can 
be influenced by you – your consciousness, your being, your soul. By changing 
the activity, you can change your body – and this is related to how we age and 
how we get sick. Ninety-five per cent of your gene mutations that may cause a 
disease to happen are influenced by your lifestyle. You can change the activity 
of your genes.”

We can change the expression of how we age.
Deepak Chopra 
Your body is a very dynamic activity, he says, and we control this activity. I 
am struggling to come to terms with not just the phrasing but the logic of this 
– some things are within our control, of course, but at a cellular level? “You 
can change everything about your body except your archetypal appearance,” says 
Chopra. “We can change the expression of how we age.”

He believes awareness is the key to reinventing the body, and that the key to 
awareness is affirmations: repeating a positive mantra or expression until it 
sort of “seeps” into your body.

The affirmation that Chopra recommends is not particularly catchy: “Every day 
in every way I am increasing my physical and mental capacity. My biological set 
point is – and then pick a number,” he says. “If you are 60 make it 40, if you 
are 40, make it 20. Go back 15 or 20 years. Don’t make it zero – you’ll 
disappear into an orgasm.”

Everyone laughs, a little grossed out.

But I am confused, as if I’ve walked in on a physics lecture when I am meant 
to be in a politics class. It doesn’t make sense. Can we really influence the 
behaviour of our genes, by repeating a phrase over and over?

And, if Chopra is right and we can change how we age, then why do we age at 
all? Why do we get ill? Why do we die?

A man in the audience poses this exact question to Chopra, during the Q&A: 
“Why do we age?”

Chopra answers: “Ageing is a program that’s built in your genes, which allows 
you to express your evolution. Death is the ultimate expression of the 
creativity of your soul – because after a while your soul says, ‘Been there – 
done that.’ You don’t want to remain a toddler for the rest of your life. 
There’s a timing for everything, and there is a program for this in your soul – 
you don’t want to be frozen in a certain body forever.”

Twitter test

Last year, Canadian researchers published a paper 
<http://journal.sjdm.org/15/15923a/jdm15923a.pdf> that used Chopra to show how 
some people have trouble “distinguishing profound statements from bullshit”. 
Using buzzwords gathered from his Twitter account, they randomly generated 
impressive-sounding phrases which – like many of his tweets – made sense 
grammatically but not logically. These were shown to participants alongside 
tweets from Chopra himself; the respondents were asked to assess the 
statements’ profundity.

The researchers found that “some people are more receptive to this type of 
bullshit”, and that detecting it “is not merely a matter of indiscriminate 
scepticism but rather a discernment of deceptive vagueness in otherwise 
impressive-sounding claims”. Participants were tested for their analytical 
skills; those who found Chopra to be profound scored lower in cognition and 
reasoning ability, and tended to be less sceptical of the paranormal.
Deepak Chopra (@DeepakChopra) 
Attention & intention are the mechanics of manifestation #CosmicConsciousness 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CosmicConsciousness?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/DeepakChopra/status/483188737162358785> June 29, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/DeepakChopra/status/483188737162358785> 
Sue Blackmore in the Guardian wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/may/07/deepak-chopra-wealthy-knows-illusion>
 that Chopra uses lots of scientific ideas – from quantum mechanics to 
evolution – “but he tends to twist them just at the crucial point”. When he 
claims that consciousness directs evolution, for instance, he “misses the whole 
point that evolution by natural selection … is a marvellously mindless process 
that does not require a designer or the power of consciousness to produce its 
wonders”.

So why is it, then, that I didn’t walk away from the Deepak Chopra weekend 
feeling ripped off and cynical?

In his response to the Canadian research paper, Craig Dalton of the University 
of Newcastlefound fault in the methodology 
<http://journal.sjdm.org/15/15923ac/jdm15923ac.pdf>: he said that even though 
the “pseudo-profound bullshit” might indeed be bullshit, it still had the 
ability to make us think; it could provide “glimpses of insight and wisdom to 
the subjects” – intended or otherwise.

A flower, the random sounds of a waterfall, a willow tree playing in the 
breeze, or the random scattering of autumn leaves, may lack the intention of 
profundity but they can all lead to transcendence and open us to beauty – as 
can a random statement generated by a computer.

Oliver Burkeman also approaches Chopra’s ideas with more generosity: “When 
Chopra writes that “you are not your brain” – echoing Eckhart Tolle’s“you are 
not your mind” 
<http://www.amazon.com/Power-Now-Guide-Spiritual-Enlightenment/dp/1577314808> – 
he can’t properly be accused of pseudoscience,”he wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/23/change-your-life-pseudoscience>
 . “I think that line expresses an arresting notion, but even if you don’t, you 
must admit it’s a philosophical claim, not a scientific one.”

And this is where the gold of Chopra lies: in the philosophy, not the science. 
In the idea that we all share a collective consciousness and an intelligence 
that doesn’t have the brain as its source.

By day two of Chopra lectures, I find the experience similar to spending time 
in a new country, immersed in a foreign language. It starts to make more sense 
the more you let the jargon wash over you – after all, with concepts like those 
that Chopra trades in, words alone are inadequate to the task.

Gold

I meet a man in the audience who is a neurologist, but who also teaches yoga. 

I want to hear more about what a member of the medical community is getting 
out of Deepak Chopra.

“What Chopra has done is distilled a lot of the knowledge from the Vedas,” he 
tells me. The Vedas is a large body of texts which originated in India, and are 
mostly published in Sanskrit. “There are thousands of books, which he’s 
probably read, and he’s distilled the lessons from the top hundred or so texts, 
and presents them in his own way to a western audience.”

Deepak doesn’t have the answers, but at least he poses the questions
Sharon, talk attendee 
This doesn’t come as a shock; my mum has been giving me the same advice for 
years: get a good night’s sleep, move around a bit each day, spend some time 
alone, and treat your body with respect, because it will repay you in spades.

I meet another woman, Sharon, who explains why she is here. 

“My mum had one of his books, I read it and it opened my eyes that this,” she 
gestures to the half-empty lobby of the convention centre, “is not all there is 
to the world. There’s something else. Deepak doesn’t have the answers, but at 
least he poses the questions – and I have those questions, too. ”

As Philip Larkin wrote in his poem: Church Going: “Since someone will forever 
be surprising/ A hunger in himself to be more serious.”

Someone will forever be surprising a hunger in himself to spend a weekend with 
Chopra, shifting through the thousands of words he speaks, hoping to find that 
nugget of gold.

 