
The yellow flare from an RAF Tornado jet lit up Akrotiri base in Cyprus as it 
hurtled down the runway and roared into the night sky.

It was one of four British jets that joined a mission to destroy an oilfield 
in eastern Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-approve-uk-action-against-isis-after-marathon-debate>
 just hours after MPs had voted in favour of Britain joining a 15-month bombing 
campaign last Wednesday night.

When the stock market opened that Thursday morning, shares in British defence 
companies leapt. BAE Systems, the £16bn company that is Europe’s biggest 
weapons manufacturer, rose by four percentage points in early trading. The 
shares have risen by 13% since theIslamic State terror attacks in Paris on 13 
November, which killed 130 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/27/paris-attacks-victims-families-attend-solemn-memorial-ceremony-two-weeks-on#block-56583b81e4b0dd35d29c32e3>
.

The escalation of US-led military action in Syria, however controversial, will 
nevertheless be a shot in the arm for a defence industry that has been in 
survival mode since operations in Iraq and Afghanistan were wound down.

Zafar Khan, defence analyst at Société Générale, noted. “What it does [the 
Paris attacks] is reassure people there is a need.”

“[It brings] home the proximity of all the problems and so it was clear that 
Europe would not be cutting budgets any more.”

British companies such as BAE, Chemring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/chemringgroup> and Cobham are viewed as 
likely to gain financially from a prolonged aerial campaign. BAE, which employs 
more than 88,000 people around the world, notched up profits of £508m in the 
first six months of this year.

According to figures from ADS, the industry body, the defence sector employs 
146,000 people in Britain and makes £22bn in sales a year. It accounts for 
exports worth £7.4bn each year, making Britain the world’s second-biggest arms 
exporter after the US.

Allied to this, the security industry – which covers everything from policing 
cyber-attacks to controlling large events such as the Olympics – employs a 
further 71,000 people, earns £8.5bn in annual sales and exports £2.4bn worth of 
goods and services.

Even before the Paris attacks, analysts had begun upgrading defence stocks on 
signs that military spending was about to rise.

This was particularly evident in the US, which is by far the biggest defence 
market and accounts for 40% of BAE’s annual sales. A strengthening domestic 
economy and heightened tensions in the Middle East have shifted White House 
priorities.

Khan said: “Even before the Paris attacks there was a feeling that defence 
budgets had bottomed out.”

Next year will herald the first rise in US defence spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-defence-spending> since 2010. The 
current two-year spending deal gave the Pentagon an additional $32bn (£21bn) 
war fund for operations against Islamic State; the next deal, starting in 2016, 
will hand the US defence department around an extra $56bn over two years.

Europe also looks likely to loosen its purse-strings following the atrocities 
in Paris.

According to Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> figures, from 2009 
to 2014 member countries excluding the US cut defence spending by $45bn, a 15% 
reduction over the five years.

This downward trend is now expected to reverse. Analysts at IHS Jane’s, the 
military sector specialist, reckon Europe’s defence industry is set to reap a 
$50bn windfall as governments stock up on military hardware and tighten up 
security.

Edmund Shing, global head of equity derivative strategy at BNP Paribas, said: 
“In the UK, the key company to invest in isBAE Systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/baesystems>. BAE is a huge defence 
supplier to the UK and US in particular, so it is well-placed to see a pick-up 
in orders and sales from this change in trend in Nato defence spending.”

The aerial campaign in Syria plays to BAE’s strengths. The British company 
builds the RAF’s Tornado and Eurofighter Typhoon jets, planes which cost around 
£64m each. It is also a key industrial partner on the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter 
built by the US firm Lockheed Martin.

A less obvious, but hugely influential, contribution could come from its 
Brimstone missiles. A key plank of David Cameron’s pitch to parliament ahead of 
last week’s vote to back bombing targets in Syria was the Brimstone’s 
capability for “surgical strikes”.

The prime minister claimed the missile allowed opponents of Islamic State to 
“strike accurately with minimal collateral damage”.

Brimstone is British-designed and made by MBDA, a specialist missile 
manufacturer owned jointly by BAE, France-basedAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> Group and Finmeccanica of Italy.

It uses a combined radar and laser guidance system to hit targets, including 
vehicles travelling at up to 70mph, while deploying a relatively small warhead 
to limit the blast zone.

These 1.8m-long hi-tech missiles weigh just 49kg but cost £175,000 apiece. 
They can be fired from seven miles away and are able to switch direction to 
another target even after launch due to their electronic guidance system. 
Britain’s Tornado jets can each carry 12 Brimstone missiles.

Britain’s latest five-year strategic defence and security review (SDSR), 
released last month, has also laid fertile ground for Britain’s defence 
industry to thrive.


In the review, David Cameron outlined plans to boost military spending by £12bn
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/23/cameron-to-announce-new-strike-brigades-in-strategic-defence-review>
.

This huge injection of cash will triple the pace at which Britain buys F-35 
jets from Lockheed Martin. It means the Royal Navy will have 24 of the jets to 
fly off its new Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers, instead of eight, when 
the first ship launches in 2020.

Britain also plans to buy more US-built Reaper drones, nine submarine hunting 
aircraft from Boeing, and create two new 5,000-strong “strike brigades” that 
will address threats around the world.

The prime minister’s trolley dash around the military bazaars of the west is 
in stark contrast to the penny-pinching that characterised the government’s 
previous defence review in 2010.

Back then, Britain was out of Iraq and operations in Afghanistan were winding 
down. The former coalition government responded by cutting aircraft, ships and 
personnel (around 17,000 uniformed personnel were given their marching orders).

Post-Afghanistan, the increasingly meagre rations served up by lawmakers in 
Britain and America pummelled defence stocks. The rout led to failed merger 
talks in 2012 between BAE and Airbus Group, as Europe’s two biggest aerospace 
and defence firms huddled together to ride out the storm.

The future for Britain’s biggest military manufacturer looks more rosy now.

Chemring is another British arms manufacturer that views the hostilities as a 
potential opportunity.

In its latest annual report, the producer of teargas grenades and guided 
missile decoys said: “Chemring is well-positioned to benefit from any sustained 
increase in demand as a result of the conflict in the Middle East.”

 * This article was amended on 8 December 2015 to clarify that the Brimstone 
missiles are able to switch direction to another target even after launch due 
to their electronic guidance system.
 