
The minister for international security met one of the backers of the fund set 
up to support the jet-set lifestyle of Liam Fox's self-styled adviser, the new 
defence secretaryPhilip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> has disclosed.

The junior defence minister, Gerald Howarth, met a representative of IRG Ltd, 
which is one of six organisations named as funding Pargav, the company set up 
to pay for Adam Werritty's first-class flights to meet up with Fox overseas.

The meeting in the House of Commons in September took place on the suggestion 
of Fox, who resigned as defence secretary earlier this month after revelations 
about his working relationship with his friend Werritty, who was not an 
official adviser.

No civil servants were present at the meeting – a breach of the ministerial 
code.

Werritty, who spent more than £140,000 of Pargav funds on first-class flights 
and five-star hotels to meet up with Fox at 19 locations across the globe, was 
present at the meeting. Labour said the disclosure showed that the scandal 
around Fox's links with Werritty continued to grow.

Hammond, who took over as defence secretary following Fox's resignation, said 
Howarth had met Werritty three times since last year's election.

"Adam Werritty was also present at a meeting between Mr Howarth and a 
representative of IRG Ltd regarding information that could be useful to the 
department relating to Iraq. The discussion centred on the economic and 
political landscape in Iraq," Hammond said in a parliamentary answer on Monday. 
"No further contact or action has taken place."

Last week, Sir Gus O'Donnell, the cabinet secretary, said Werritty had met 
Howarth "twice at social events and one official meeting at the suggestion of 
Dr Fox".

A Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> 
spokesman said: "Mr Howarth met Mr Werritty twice at social events and one 
meeting in the House of Commons on 27 September 2011 at the suggestion of Dr 
Fox. It was a general discussion with Stephen Crouch, of the Iraq Research 
Group, (IRG) on the economic and political landscape in Iraq and did not lead 
to further action.

"The cabinet secretary has recommended in future that where discussions take 
place with external organisations which raise substantive issues relating to 
departmental matters and where an official is not present, ministers should 
inform their department."

IRG was set up after the Iraq war to support Iraqi families living in Britain.

It is said to be led by Stephen Crouch, the former chairman of the Tory 
party's Carmarthen West and South Pembrokeshire constituency. The Guardian has 
been unable to contact Crouch once helped arrange a £5,000 donation to the 
local party from Tony Buckingham, an oil tycoon with interests in Kurdistan.

O'Donnell's report said: "The links between Dr Fox and Mr Werritty mean that 
the donations given to Mr Werritty could at least be seen as giving rise to the 
perception of a conflict of interest."

The report stated that Fox "did not live up to" standards of behaviour 
foreseen in the ministerial code and that there was a "failure of judgement on 
his part for which he has taken the ultimate responsibility in resigning".

Jim Murphy, the shadow defence secretary, said: "This is a scandal that 
continues to grow and will not go away. There are big questions the government 
needs to answer about what has been happening in the most sensitive of 
government departments. If there were more off-the-books meetings with people 
funding Adam Werritty's organisations, this would be a really significant 
development."

Labour tabled more questions on Tuesday night demanding further details of IRG 
Ltd and its representatives, and asking whether the organisation holds any 
government contracts.

Hammond's parliamentary answers also explained that Lord Astor of Hever, the 
under-secretary of state for defence, met Werritty during a defence industry 
gathering in the Middle East last December.

"Lord Astor had occasional social contact with Mr Werritty; contact as a 
result of their previous involvement with the Atlantic Bridge and contact in 
passing when visiting Bahrain for the Manama Dialogue in December 2010. None of 
these meetings involved official MoD business," Hammond said.
 