
Bill de Blasio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio>, the New 
York City public advocate who is dominating the Democratic race to become the 
city's next mayor, has survived a bruising TV dust-up with his rivals and 
enters the final stretch before next Tuesday's primary election flying high in 
the polls.

De Blasio's main rivals, the speaker of the city council Christine Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/christine-quinn> and former comptroller 
Bill Thompson, attempted to derail him in Tuesday night's televised debate by 
portraying him as a flip-flopper and charlatan who speaks from both sides of 
his mouth.

"He will say anything according to whose votes he is trying to win," sniped 
Quinn as De Blasio largely shrugged off the attacks, his 6ft 5in frame towering 
over the other candidates in a physical echo of his growing lead in opinion 
surveys.

"People who watched the debate are probably more interested in style than in 
substance and de Blasio just floated through it, the barbs bouncing off his 
back," said Kenneth Sherrill, political science professor at New York's Hunter 
College. "The voters saw him stand there and smile as his rivals shouted all 
around him."

Just hours before the debate, a new poll from Quinnipiac University gave a 
clue to why de Blasio was smiling. It showed that he had surged to 43% support 
from likely Democratic primary voters, way ahead of the other Bill and Quinn, 
who stood at 18% and 20%, respectively.

It also confirmed the effectively terminal implosion of Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>, the former congressman 
brought low by his internet indiscretions, who has fallen from among the 
favourites in July to just 7% today. The city's current comptroller John Liu, 
who is embroiled in his own campaign finance scandal, has also self-destructed 
to 4%.

Maurice Carroll, director of the polling institute, said that there was only 
one question remaining ahead of next Tuesday's ballot: can de Blasio attract 
more than 40% of votes cast to avoid a second-round runoff. Carroll anticipates 
that the final days of campaigning would see an increasingly frantic attempt by 
Quinn and Thompson to try and halt de Blasio's march towards the Democratic 
candidacy.

"De Blasio is going to go out there with a target on his back and with 
everybody aiming at him – that's the story of this week."

Whether de Blasio makes it past 40% partly depends on the turnout next 
Tuesday, which is hard to predict. But for the time being he is enjoying a 
bounce that is putting him within grabbing distance of the candidacy in the 
first round.

De Blasio's seemingly unstoppable rise is partly a reflection of Quinn's 
difficulties holding on to her previous frontrunner status. Her bid to become 
the first woman mayor of America's most populous city appears to be working 
against her.

"New York's a liberal city and all that," said Carroll, "but New Yorkers seem 
to like throwing women candidates under the bus."

In the Quinnipiac poll, only 18% of women likely Democratic voters back Quinn, 
compared with 44% for de Blasio. If this carries on, Quinn runs the risk of 
repeating the past disappointments of her female predecessors. Mary Codd, 
standing as a Liberal, lost to Ed Koch in 1981; four years later Carol Bellamy 
lost to Koch twice – first in the Democratic primary and then as a Liberal in 
the general mayoral election; and in 1997, Ruth Messinger won the Democratic 
nomination but lost to Rudy Giuliani.

Quinn has also suffered by dint of being seen as close to the incumbent mayor, 
Michael Bloomberg, allowing her detractors to portray her campaign as a bid for 
the fourth Bloomberg term in office. Against that, De Blasio has positioned 
himself to be, as Carroll puts it, "the noisiest liberal in the room" – a 
stance that normally plays well inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Democratic primaries.

His most extroverted policy in that regard is his pledge to increase taxes on 
rich New Yorkers with incomes over $500,000 to pay for increased investment in 
early child education. Quinn and Thompson ridiculed that idea during the 
debate, saying it would never get past the state assembly in Albany, which must 
approve any change to city tax rates, but at this stage in the game De Blasio's 
tax-the-rich ploy has the benefit of simplicity, and may attract many 
ideologically-motivated liberal voters.

He is likely to have a harder time explaining away his flip-flopping over term 
limits. In 2005, when he ran against Quinn to become speaker of the city 
council, he tried to lure fellow members with the promise to lift the two-term 
limit on their service. Three years later, he was on the other side of the 
argument, leading protests against Bloomberg's amendment that allowed the 
billionaire to stand for a third mayoral term.

"I made abundantly clear that what the mayor did in 2008 was wrong, and I led 
the opposition against it," de Blasio said during the debate: a bold statement 
that side-stepped the accusation that he had blatantly flip-flopped on the 
issue.

In the longer run, all of this may come to haunt de Blasio should he win the 
Democratic nomination and go on to face New York's diverse and notoriously 
cranky general electorate. But that's a fight for another day, and first he has 
an election to win.
 