 Dennis Skinner is unique, part parliamentary court jester, and part leftwing 
crusader. Familiar throughout the nation and loathed and liked with equal 
passion within Westminster, his great days may now be over.
Although warmly welcomed back in 2000 after his cancer specialist gave him the 
all clear, MPs have only seen a muted version of Mr Skinner since his return. 
Once Labour's leftwing Cromwell, the unyielding, incorruptible, puritanical, 
abrasively proletarian conscience of the hard left, he has recently seemed to 
pull his punches.

Even before his illness, Tony Blair's affectionate tolerance of this NEC 
member made him seem less a menace, more a mascot, who, in Ken Livingstone's 
words, was "allowed to do terrible things on the best carpet." He could hardly 
kick with conviction the shins of a Labour government starting to help 
ex-miners, even if he was the last known defender of Arthur Scargill.

Despite his age, Mr Skinner can still sometimes display the brilliant timing 
of his humorous, ego deflating interjections of old, but he would be the first 
to admit that attacking divided Tories since the mid-1990s has been much like 
shooting fish in a barrel. Still, he remains fiercely class conscious, enraged 
when it is suggested that he might live in middle class Chelsea with his 
American girlfriend. She was his researcher until he separated from his wife 
Mary in 1989.

The end of his marriage also put him at odds with his two brothers, once 
extolled by him as the "Clay Cross martyrs" - Clay Cross being the pit village 
of his Derbyshire youth.

Mr Skinner was the third of nine children of the miner Edward Skinner, who was 
sacked after the 1926 general strike, and Mr Skinner's thin skin can be 
attributed to the failure of his father ever to give him the praise he craved. 
As a star student, he entered Tupton grammar school at 10 and is remembered for 
trying to become a heel-and-toe champion and singing Cole Porter lyrics in 
local workingmen's clubs.

At 17 he followed his father into the mines, first at Parkhouse colliery, near 
Clay Cross, then at Glapwell colliery, near Chesterfield. By 1966, at 34, he 
was president of the Derbyshire miners. Selected to succeed another miner, 
Harold Neal, he became the MP for Bolsover with a majority of more than 20,000 
in 1970.

From the beginning he was the anthracite of the hard left, backing any other 
leftwing faction when not defending his own miners' caste. He opposed all 
punishment of left rebellions or expulsions, no matter how disruptive. Early in 
his career he earned his famous tag, Beast of Bolsover, from MP actor Andrew 
Faulds, after he accused Mr Faulds of lobbying for the Arabs. Mr Skinner's 
dislike of oil from the Middle East came from the fact that it competed with 
his coal.

The height of his political career was in the 1980s - he was a member of 
Labour's NEC from 1988 and the terror of the Tory benches. But Labour MPs 
sometimes resented his showmanlike parliamentary interventions, such as his 
suggestion to Margaret Thatcher on the day she resigned that she become the 
head of the centralised European bank.

He was notably embarrassed on his 65th birthday shortly before the 1997 
general election when John Major congratulated him on becoming a pensioner. 
Surprisingly, he failed to regain his NEC position in 1998, but was returned 
again in 1999 despite poor health. Mr Skinner remains determined to run again 
at the next election despite mutterings about his age.

In battling for lefty and miners' causes, Mr Skinner learned an important 
lesson: "I realised that you could get into trouble with a dull speech. But if 
you can keep them laughing, you can get away with murder." He has done that for 
more than 30 years in his grumpy Derbyshire growl.

Ask Aristotle about Dennis Skinner 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4801,00.html>
 