
My father, Derek Mortimer, who has died aged 80, was a committed educationist 
instrumental in the development of teacher education and the opening up of 
higher education opportunities in the new polytechnics from the late 1960s 
onwards.

Born in Trowbridge, Wiltshire, son of Alfred, a grocery manager for the Co-op, 
and Gladys, a housewife, Derek grew up in Melksham and attended Chippenham 
grammar school, where he ran and played competitive rugby and chess. He studied 
geography at University College London, where he met Margaret Stenning on a 
field trip to the North Downs. They married in 1959.

At college, Derek’s interest in geography was eclipsed by activity in student 
politics, and he became secretary of the student union, a sabbatical role that 
was later filled by my brother, Simon, who also studied at UCL. On graduation 
Derek worked as a teacher in a large comprehensive school in Birmingham. This 
was one of the first of its kind and was an ideal stepping stone into a career 
that was dedicated to equal access to education and opportunity.

Derek soon moved into teacher training and the new polytechnic system, where 
he played a key part in the establishment of the specialist BEd qualification 
and worked tirelessly around the country advising on teacher training 
initiatives and curriculum development. He was appointed OBE for services to 
education in 1989, recognising in part committee work for central government on 
teacher accreditation.

In the late 1980s, Derek moved to Ipswich as principal of Suffolk College. The 
remit was to develop further and higher education opportunities in the town and 
was an ideal opportunity for him, with his belief that all young people should 
have a fair opportunity to develop their skills. A modest man, and one who 
would want his legacy to be seen in the achievements and successes of his 
students, Derek left a lasting mark on the Suffolk community and his work 
contributed directly to the formation of University Campus Suffolk. The 
college’s decision to take a long lease on a run-down building on the Ipswich 
waterfront was definitive in encouraging subsequent large-scale redevelopment 
of the area.

He is survived by Margaret, by his children Simon, Jane and me, and by his 
sister, Christine.
 