
I never chose exile; it was forced on me. In 1982 I had packed my suitcase to 
return home from a London book launch when I learnt that the thenMoi 
dictatorship in Kenya planned to eliminate me 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/15/opinion/a-dictators-last-laugh.html>, 
euphemistically described as giving me a red-carpet welcome at the airport. At 
first I would only use the word shipwrecked, not exile, to refer to my 
situation; shipwrecks end with rescue, right? I did not unpack the suitcase. 
Seven years later the suitcase was still packed.

Maya Jaggi interviews Ngugi wa Thiong'o
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jan/28/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>
I carried it to America when in 1989 I accepted a visiting professorship at 
Yale University. For three years I resisted offers to turn my regular visiting 
status into a tenured position. It was only when I finally accepted an offer 
from New York University as professor of comparative literature and performance 
studies that I unpacked the suitcase. I soon realised that it was replaced by a 
packed suitcase in the mind.

I should have felt at home in New York. I met my wife, Njeeri, there and 
started a second family, assuaging the loss of my mother and my first wife. The 
city also carried an older memory. It was where I had landed when I first 
visited the US in 1966 and walked in the streets of Harlem, the site of the 
famed renaissance that meant so much to African writers of my generation. I 
worked at NYU for 10 years before moving to UC Irvine. I had accepted my exile 
status. But the suitcase in the mind would not let me just settle.

All my fiction is based in Kenya, and yet all but one have been written away 
from the country

Exile is more than separation: it is longing for home, exaggerating its 
virtues with every encounter with inconvenience. It’s worse for a third-world 
passport holder in the west, where one becomes a travelling paradox. In 1992, 
coming back to America from Japan, my wife, Kenyan-born but now holder of an 
American passport, was welcomed home. My green card not withstanding, I was 
held at the immigration barrier, and Njeeri had to run back to vouch for me. 
This was before 9/11, when such a gesture was possible.

Three years ago my 17-year-old son, Thiongo Kimathi, and I went to Berlin for 
the celebration of the German translation of my novelWizard of the Crow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/sep/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
. His American passport got him through without a question. My Kenyan passport 
had me stopped and questioned. My son intervened with all the authority of his 
American accent and passport. The official looked at me suspiciously as if I 
had kidnapped the American boy, flung my Kenyan passport at me, and warned me 
not to stay one hour beyond the three days prescribed in the visa. I would be 
treated as an illegal immigrant.

Exile can also turn one into a writing paradox, or rather deepen it. I have 
lived in America for more than 20 years, teaching in several campuses. I am 
member of the American Academies ofArts and Letters 
<http://www.artsandletters.org/>, and Arts and Sciences 
<https://www.amacad.org/>. My novel Wizard of the Crow won the 2006 California 
Commonwealth club gold medal. Four of my 10 honorary doctorates are from 
American universities. But I have never written about America, the beautiful or 
the ugly or the mixture. All my fiction is based in Kenya, and yet all but one 
have been written away from the country. The exception was written inside a 
maximum security prison.

What’s the pull of home? I must have been about 10 in colonial Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> when I saw men, women and children in 
a convoy of barbed-wired lorries being forcibly relocated from their lands to 
make room for white settlers. They sang a sorrowful melody, but one that 
described their love and solidarity in hardship: even when they picked a morsel 
from the ground they split it among themselves. It was an image that captured 
vividly the ideals of mutual care and collective hope in the anti-colonial 
resistance. In my first ever trip to Europe in 1965, virtually the entire 
village saw me off at the airport. They said: You must return home.

I did return, after my years at Leeds university, only to find myself packing 
my bags in 1969, for a two year self-exile in Makerere and Northwestern 
universities, returning to Kenya in 1972 only to end up in maximum-security 
detention five years later, and then in forced exile.

In 2003 I went home after 20 years to celebrate a new democracy following the 
electoral defeat of the Moi dictatorship. I was going to mark the formal end of 
my exile with the launch of the Gikuyu edition of Wizard of the Crow. Eleven 
days after our arrival,my wife and I were brutally attacked 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/3569480.stm> by four armed gunmen. We 
escaped with our lives, barely.

But I return again and again, in person, and in my writing, for the same 
reason that I have clung to my Kenyan passport, like a religious relic, that 
reminds me of the unfulfilled dream the caged men and women once sung about. 
It’s through their eyes that I have looked at the performance of the various 
postcolonial governments in Kenya.

One day I will unpack the suitcase in the mind and write about America and 
Europe, but I hope I will still find inspiration from those caged men and women 
whose melody of defiance embodies the dreams of all those who dream to change 
the world for the empowerment of the least among us.
 