
Twelve-year-old Maria Jose walks into school following a week's absence. Her 
clothes are dirty, she has bruises covering her arms and legs and lice visible 
in her hair. Her face breaks out in a smile as she runs directly to her teacher 
and proudly delivers her homework before finding her desk at the Ninos de la 
Luz School.

Situated in the beautifully named town Valle de Angeles, the school is just 
22km from the Honduran capital Tegucigalpa. Unfortunately, the town does not 
live up to its name.

"Last week her father was arrested for domestic violence, but the following 
day he was released. He returned home, tied up his wife and forced her to watch 
while he raped his two daughters," explains Fabiana Osorio Irias, her teacher.

Maria Jose's story is all too common. Leonie Webster, the founder and director 
of 'Heart for Honduras' charity, has worked closely with the women and children 
of Valle de Angeles for the past seven years. "Maria Jose's mother cannot leave 
her husband because, unlike the United Kingdom, there is no system to support 
vulnerable people. Without him, they have no housing or money and no-one to 
turn to."

The school comprises three small buildings, its perimeters established by 
barbed wire in an attempt to prevent the drug users within the community 
entering the premises and stealing anything of value. There are no windows and 
the dirt track by the school provides the only play area for a hundred 
children. Three teachers make up the entire teaching staff, one of whom has 
been absent for four weeks.

Fabiana has worked at the school for two years, "It's hard, we have no running 
water or toilets so we have to squat behind the classroom to do our business. 
Leonie's charity is a blessing as they are fundraising to provide us with 
running water."

The dearth of basic facilities is only a minor problem within this school 
compared to shortages of classroom resources, under-qualified teachers, 
understaffing, and outdated teaching methods. The Congress Country Study of 
Honduras states that 57% of children currently enrolled in public schools do 
not complete their primary level education. This statistic is amplified by 
precarious living conditions, lack of access to local schooling and parental 
need to increase household income by withdrawing children from school for 
employment. This minefield of issues has to be resolved before the 'Primary 
Education for All' Millennium Development Goal (MDG) can be successfully 
implemented.

Education is the second of eight MDGs drafted in 2000 to combat world poverty, 
prejudice, ignorance and indifference. "None of the MDGs can be achieved 
without education for all," claims Mr Kailish Satyarthi, the President of the 
Global Campaign for Education.

True as this may be, Honduras already spends more on education than any other 
Latin American country. Corruption and political upheaval heavily impacts 
education, making it responsible for numerous social and economic issues, 
which, in turn, prevents Honduras from climbing the statistical ladder. 
"Funding is filtered from the top," says Leonie. "The Government is corrupt, 
therefore schools do not receive the funds considered vital to provide a 
platform for addressing other MDG's such as maternal wellbeing, AIDS 
prevention, young person fatalities, teenage pregnancies and gender equality. 
Until a resolution is found, we cannot move forward."

Yet for Maria Jose, any education surpasses no education. "School is my chance 
to learn," she says whilst pulling down her sleeves, covering her bruises. "If 
I work hard enough I might be able to get a good job and help my mother and 
sister." Her younger sister Stephanie, who also attends the school, is 
electively mute. The probable cause being the constant abuse she endures from 
her father.

Maria Jose is determined to avoid the continuing 'lack of education leading to 
poverty' cycle and escape the widespread illiteracy that affects 40% of the 
total Honduran population and more than 80% in rural areas, according to the 
Ministry of Education. However, neither Maria Jose nor Stephanie will progress 
further academically than primary school, as their parents cannot afford the 
fees. Therefore, the quality of their learning is vital as it offers the only 
hope to equip them with the life skills necessary to seek employment.

Honduras was in the first band of countries nominated for the 'Education for 
All – Fast Track Initiative', set up in 2002 to accelerate the progress of 
quality universal primary education for children. Funding would be allocated 
to, "hiring new teachers, building new schools and providing books and 
materials," claimed the World Bank.

Despite this, ten years on the International Institute for Educational 
Planning admits, "Quality is low, efficiency weak, relevance questionable and 
wastage significant." The Ninos de la Luz School highlights these findings; 
"There are forty-five inter-graded children in Maria Jose's class. Many of them 
have had to repeat grades two, sometimes three times," explains Leonie. "These 
children live in extreme poverty with illiterate parents. School is the only 
place they can learn and if the teachers, through lack of funding and training 
aren't fully competent, what chance do our children stand?"

Additionally, teacher strikes are common in Honduras due to controversy over 
poor wages, but 88% of educational funding is already allocated toward their 
salaries. Studies found that on any given day 14% of teachers are absent from 
the classroom resulting in significant financial and learning deprivation. "Can 
you imagine what it means for a child to miss every day of school? The damage 
is educational, nutritional and emotional," declared Honduran President 
Porfirio Lobo Sosa, after a forty-six day strike last year.

"We need a unified effort to address our educational problems and a 
consolidated effort to solve them," says Leonie. "Re-educate and validate our 
teachers so they become role-models for our children. Renovate existing schools 
and better equip classrooms. Education should be a basic right for every child, 
but we need to address the existing educational issues before our children 
benefit from a fully formulated and effective system."

 For now, the aim of the MDG to have all children in primary education by 2015 
is the catalyst for quantity education. Significant and permanent changes need 
to occur before quality education for all children can be a realistic goal. It 
may not be ideal, but as Maria Jose says, "Without an education I only have 
hope. Even I know that hope is not enough to get me a job and a home. But 
education and hope… well, maybe that's different."
 