
A Belfast businessman has made complaints to police on both sides of the Irish 
border that one of the republic's state-rescued banks offered him around €1m, 
which in turn would have deprived the UK tax office of its share of €3m.

A potential Garda Siochána inquiry into the continuing battle between property 
investor Peter Curistan and the formerAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> has raised the prospect 
of the republic's police force carrying out a criminal investigation into a 
financial institution owned by its own government.

Curistan is fighting several legal battles with the bank. It has emerged that 
one of the claims, relating to a hearing in Dublin last year, alleges that a 
senior executive at Anglo Irish offered Curistan £750,000 to dissolve his 
property company Sheridan Millennium Ltd and thus "burn" his main creditors – 
Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC).

The offer of the money has now been reported as a criminal complaint to the 
Garda Siochána and the Police Service ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> (PSNI).

Anglo Irish was the bank that almost bankrupted Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> after the financial crash of 2008. 
It had become the preferred bank of property developers and speculators, who 
used billions of loans to fuel the republic's booming commercial sector and 
housing market. Anglo Irish and other banks were accused of encouraging 
speculation that left the country saddled with huge bank debts, and resulted in 
the EU/International Monetary Fund bailout.

The fallout from Anglo's collapse has already included the virtual destruction 
of a business empire controlled by Ireland's one-time richest man, Sean Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/20/sean-quinn-nephew-arrest-warrant>
, who borrowed heavily from the bank in the Celtic Tiger years.

Like Quinn, Curistan has tried to fight back against attempts by the now 
state-owned bank – now known as the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC) – 
to seize his assets. Unlike Quinn, the former Hong Kong-based entrepreneur is 
seeking to turn a financial battle in the courts into a criminal inquiry.

He said: "The reason why they [IBRC] did this was because as part of a plan to 
dispose of the Odyssey Pavilion [an entertainment venue in Belfast], the bank 
had agreed to pay almost €3m [to] creditors, of which HMRC was owed a 
considerable amount. The €1m was to encourage me to wind up the company without 
the bank then needing to make those commitments. Clearly I was totally shocked 
at how a state-owned bank could blatantly asked me to partake in such activity.

"As a fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland, I had a 
duty to report allegations of criminal activity to the appropriate authorities. 
And this is why both the PSNI and the Garda have been informed of this in 
recent weeks," he said.

During a case heard last March and April in Dublin's high court, the IBRC was 
seeking to seize a property Curistan owned in the Irish capital. A letter was 
read out in open court that suggested he dispose of another property in Belfast 
– the Odyssey Pavilion on the river Lagan. The entertainment centre was under 
the control of Sheridan Millennium, a Curistan-owned company at the time.

An account of a recorded mobile phone conversation between Curistan and the 
Anglo Irish Bank/IBRC official Joe McWilliams was read out in court. Before 
nationalisation, McWilliams was a director of lending (Ireland) in theAnglo 
Irish Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>.

The record of the phone call stated: "He [McWilliams] rang my mobile at 
approximately 5pm on Tuesday 3 February 2009. He stated that he had a thought 
that it may be better to wind up Sheridan Millennium now as he felt there would 
be continual pressure on the Sheridan Group in the future which may eventually 
lead to winding up.

"He went on to suggest that I should be given an incentive to the tune of 
£500-750,000 to have in my back pocket.."

Under cross-examination in open court by Curistan (who represented himself) in 
front of Mr Justice Charleton, McWilliams was asked under oath if he would 
disagree with that account of the phone conversation. To which McWilliams 
replied: "No, that was fairly accurate." However, he did not confirm the 
precise amount offered to Curistan.

Charleton asked why it was necessary to pay Curistan anything to wind up 
Sheridan Millennium. "The normal rule in corporate law is, there is no cakes 
and ale except for the benefit of the corporation," said Charleton.

"The normal rule in corporate law – Anglo is a corporation – the corporation 
is not entitled to spend money on anything which doesn't give the corporation a 
benefit or a potential benefit. It includes, in terms of commerce, that a 
corporation doesn't have the capacity to simply give away money.

"I still can't understand why you would actually pay money, three-quarters of 
a million pounds, that's nearly €1m, to Mr Curistan for his back pocket. I 
appreciate it is less than the €3m you would lend to him for the purpose of 
dealing with his creditors so that Sheridan Millennium would be able to carry 
on for a time until you could get an orderly takeover. Windups cause loss to 
creditors."

A spokesman for the IBRC said it would not comment on Curistan's complaint to 
the two police forces or the content of the court transcripts because the bank 
is currently involved in litigation with him.
 