
Companies often talk about the importance of getting employees fully involved 
in sustainability projects, but relatively few design specific initiatives to 
make sure this happens.

Drinks giant Diageo realised that employee engagement could be a missing link 
in its bid to achieve a range of tough environmental targets by 2015.

It decided it needed an inspirational engagement programme to capture the 
interest of the 20,000 people working at all levels in the business and in 80 
sites across 40 countries, and to find a way to help people share ideas.

It came up with the GreenIq competition through which teams compete to win 
Olympic-style medals for completing environmental initiatives.

Green teams are put together on site and can use an internal website to find 
out how to complete various initiatives. These range from bronze medal projects 
– such as setting environmental targets – to gold medal achievements like 
sending zero waste to landfill.

After 12 months of intense activity the first set of awards were announced in 
August 2010, with over 80 medals awarded, including 32 golds.

Winning sites were chosen from across the world, including Shanghai, London, 
Buenos Aires, Budapest, Dublin and Menstrie in Scotland, home to this year's 
GreenIq hero. Each winner was awarded £15,000 to invest in a new environmental 
initiative, either on site or locally.

Navarro Correas wines, for example, was recognised for cutting the amount of 
water used to make its products by 60% over two years, while Diageo's London 
head office managed to stop sending waste to landfill. In Shanghai, the green 
team devised a highly visible carbon dashboard to involve staff in cutting CO2.

The challenge now is to keep building on this momentum. One idea under review 
is to introduce a new platinum category to reward gold medal sites that help 
another facility start a green team.

But the most lasting impact of the campaign is that it is encouraging people 
across the business to think of more environmentally friendly ways to work and 
to share their ideas and successes.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 