
Sixteen days before the start of the Ashes, Cricket Australia sacked the coach 
of the Australian cricket team, Mickey Arthur. On the very same day, Cricket 
Australia announced thatDarren Lehmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-lehmann> would take over as 
Australia's coach with immediate effect. The objective behind that two-fold 
decision was straightforward and clear – to improve Australia's performances 
and chances of winning back the Ashes. Now that the Ashes are done and dusted, 
it seems reasonable to ask: did that unprecedented decision actually achieve 
its objective?

At the time that the decision was made, it was widely reported that Arthur had 
committed the deadliest sin of modern professional sports coaching: he'd lost 
the dressing room. Lehmann, the good old-fashioned Australian Test cricketer – 
festively plump, uncreatively nicknamed, beer-loving and cigarette-smoking – 
would win back the dressing room and imbue the young Australia team with the 
centuries-old lore, the hard-won wisdom and the old-school winning culture 
which made Australian cricket the envy of the world. Or so the theory went.

Thus far, it hasn't quite worked out that way.

The Argus Report, or, to give it its full, formal name: Australian Team 
Performance Review: Summary Report (dated 19 August 2011), is a bit like the US 
Bill of Rights; it's a document that everyone cites, but hardly anyone's 
actually read. Thus, it should come as little surprise that both documents are 
frequently misunderstood and misquoted.

The Second Amendment of the US Bill of Rights is frequently quoted as: "The 
Right to Keep and Bear Arms". But that's not the entire amendment; it's just an 
abbreviated version of the second half of it. The entire Second Amendment 
actually reads (emphasis added): "A well regulated Militia, being necessary to 
the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, 
shall not be infringed." As a matter of common sense, anyone who can read 
English can see that the first half of the amendment qualifies, to at least 
some extent, the right clearly contained in the second half. Just don't say 
that to the late Charlton Heston – or, it seems, the modern Supreme Court of 
the United States of America.

Similarly, the 40-page Argus Report is sometimes cited as if it were some 
sweeping, revolutionary document that proposes a root-and-branch overhaul of 
Australian cricket when, in truth, much of what it does is to merely codify and 
reiterate the traditional principles which have long underpinned the success of 
Australian cricket. That's hardly surprising when one glances at the list of 
authors: one titan of corporate Australia (Don Argus), one successful career 
sports administrator (Malcolm Speed), and three former Australian cricket 
captains (Allan Border, Mark Taylor and Steve Waugh) who are about as hard and 
old-school as they come.

Page 19 of the Argus Report contains two bulletpoints, in the section titled 
"Improve the selection function", which encapsulates the traditional Australian 
approach to selection:

- It is critical that superior performance is rewarded at all levels. Players 
must earn their positions in the time-honoured way of making runs, taking 
wickets and showing that they are ready to play at the next level

- At the same time, potential cannot be overlooked: there must be room for 
some intuition in selections

The first bulletpoint, embodying the ancient Australian philosophy of 
Sheffield Shield empiricism, is straightforward to apply in practice – just 
look at the Shield stats. An early model cylon could do that. The principle 
embodied in the second bulletpoint – the selectors' reserve right to make what 
are commonly described as "judgement calls" – is not so straightforward to 
apply, involving intuition rather than empiricism, subjectivity instead of 
objectivity. That's where the Australia selector earns his keep. Lehmann's 
debut Test series as Australia's coach and an Australian selector was chock 
full of judgement calls made predominantly by himself and Rod Marsh, the 
selector on duty.

The dawn of Lehmann's Test reign was marked by the jaw-dropping decision to 
dump the 25-year-old off-spinner Nathan Lyon from the XI for the opening Ashes 
Test at Trent Bridge. In his previous Test match in Delhi, Lyon, playing in 
just his third Test on Indian soil, had recorded match figures of 9/165. Even 
the great Shane Warne, in nine Test matches in India spread across three tours 
spanning over six years, never took more than six wickets in a Test match on 
Indian soil.

Lyon's performance in Delhi was hardly an aberration. His career Test record 
after that match read: 77 wickets in 23 Tests at an average of 34.09. For an 
Australian finger spinner in the modern era, that's very good. The last 
Australian finger spinner to play at least 23 Tests, Tim May, had only taken 75 
wickets at 33.54 by that stage of his career. Mike Hussey must reckon that 
Lyon's pretty good too: when Hussey retired from Test cricket in January 2013, 
he passed on the custodianship of the Australian team song to Lyon, an honour 
traditionally reserved for those who can be certain of selection in the team.

Since landing in the British Isles with the Australia A team in June for a 
pre-Ashes warm-up tour, Lyon had taken 12 first-class wickets in three matches 
at an average of 25 in the same spin-unfriendly conditions in which England's 
then second-choice Test spinner, Monty Panesar, only managed eight first-class 
wickets at an average of 39.38 in the same number of first-class matches over 
approximately the same period.

None of that was enough to save Lyon from the axe for the Trent Bridge Test. 
Lyon's replacement was a 19-year-old left-arm orthodox spinner named Ashton 
Agar. He'd played just 11 first-class matches for a return of 32 wickets at an 
average of 30.53. This was the very definition of a selection based on 
"intuition" and "potential". Still, on the face of it, this judgement call was 
so bold, so lacking in apparent reason thatCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia took the unprecedented 
step of releasing a press statement to explain the basis for the selectors' 
intuition: "The main reason for the selection is taking the ball away from all 
their right-handers and we think this is a really important weapon in 
particular for this Test match on that particular wicket."

That basis would be coherent – but for the fact that six of Lyon's nine 
wickets in Delhi were right-handed specialist batsmen: Cheteshwar Pujara, Virat 
Kohli (twice), Sachin Tendulkar (twice) and Ajinkya Rahane, all of whom can 
reasonably be regarded as equal, if not better, players of spin than the 
Anglo-South-African contingent of Jonathan Trott, Joe Root, Jonny Bairstow, Ian 
Bell and Kevin Pietersen.

Agar did OK in this summer's first two Ashes Test. And no, I'm not 
substantially factoring in his outstanding performances with the bat – he was 
picked as the sole specialist spinner, therefore, he must be evaluated 
primarily on the basis of his performances with the ball. Agar bowled with 
decent control and good flight but insufficient spin (especially side-spin) to 
consistently threaten to take wickets on modern Test pitches. After the first 
two Tests, he had taken two wickets at 124 apiece.

The question then on every Australian cricket supporter's mind was: would 
Nathan Lyon do a better job as the team's sole specialist spinner?

We soon got the answer to that question as, in a portent of things to come, 
the Australian selectors executed a U-turn as swiftly as a career politician, 
restoring Lyon to the Test XI at Agar's expense for the third Test at Old 
Trafford. That, in itself, was an odd decision. If the selectors were so 
confident in their intuition that young Agar was ready for Test cricket that 
they were prepared to drop Australia's best-performed Test spinner in the 
post-Warne era to make room for him, then tradition, if not reason, suggests 
that they should have backed their judgement by persisting with Agar, just like 
Australian selectors past stuck with young bucks like Warne and Steve Waugh all 
through the difficult early stages of their Test careers.

As it turned out, the answer to the question was what most Australian cricket 
supporters expected it to be: yes, Lyon would do a better job as the team's 
sole specialist spinner, as he claimed nine English wickets at 33.66 in the 
last three Tests, the highlight being a gutsy first innings, first day haul of 
4/42 at Chester-le-Street, including the wickets of Trott, Pietersen, Bell and 
Bairstow, which put Australia in pole position to win the fourth Test after 
having dominated the third Test.

Thus, the first big judgement call of the Lehmann era must be adjudged to be 
an unqualified failure — the confidence of both Australia's number one Test 
spinner and one of Australia's most promising young spin-bowling all-rounders 
was dented, and although Lyon, to his immense credit, fought back to perform 
creditably in the final three Tests, no one could suggest that Lyon is a better 
bowler now than he was before the start of the Ashes. Indeed, psychologically, 
Lyon must be now more uncertain than ever of his place in the team; if nine 
wickets in a Test match doesn't secure a spinner's selection for the next Test, 
then what will?

At around the same time that the first big judgement call of the Lehmann era 
was being reversed, the second one was being made: the retention of Usman 
Khawaja, at the expense of Phil Hughes, for the third Test. When that decision 
was made, Hughes had scored 494 first-class runs on tour at an average of 54.89 
with five fifties and a Test top score of 81 not out. By contrast, Khawaja had 
only scored 303 first-class runs on tour at an average of 30.30 with three 
fifties and a Test top score of 54. At that point in the Ashes series, Hughes 
had made the highest score of any specialist Australian batsman, which also 
happened to be the only knock by a specialist Australian batsman which altered 
the course of a Test match in Australia's favour, whereas Khawaja's top score 
of 54 at Lord's was not only substantially lower in quantum than Hughes's, but, 
more importantly, did absolutely nothing to change the course of the Test match 
in which it was scored.

So much for "rewarding" "superior performance" and "players … earning their 
position in the time-honoured way of making runs". The retention of Khawaja at 
Hughes's expense was about as intuitive and unempirical as selection decisions 
come. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that the well-established Australia 
selectors' prerogative to make subjective judgement calls empowered Lehmann and 
his fellow selectors to make that decision. But, because that power is a 
reserve power which, when invoked, deviates from the default empirical 
Australian approach to selection, it should only be used in exceptional cases, 
any use of it should be closely evaluated, and selectors who exercise such a 
reserve power unsuccessfully should be held strictly accountable for their 
actions. As that hoary old saying goes: live by the sword, die by the sword.

Lehmann must shoulder a substantial, if not the greater, part of the 
responsibility for the Khawaja decision. Khawaja, after all, is one of 
Lehmann's anointed disciples at state level.

In the Australian winter of 2012, the then 25-year-old Khawaja's career was at 
a crossroads. After being dumped from the Australia Test XI in December 2011, 
Khawaja had failed to score a single first-class half-century in the rest of 
the Australian season and his state, New South Wales, finished second-last on 
the Sheffield Shield table with just one win. It was to Lehmann that Khawaja 
turned to revive his career, making the decision to move 924 kilometres from 
Sydney to Brisbane so that he could take his cricket to the "next level". 
Khawaja made it clear that the opportunity to work with Lehmann was a 
significant factor in his decision to move: "To be under Darren Lehmann is a 
real plus. … I like the way he thinks about cricket, I like the way he goes 
about being a coach. He can be hard when he wants to and quite relaxed when he 
wants to."

Lehmann was no less effusive about Khawaja, praising his decision to move as 
"a mature cricket decision, based around joining a successful group" and 
declaring "I'm very excited about him coming into our culture, developing his 
skills and growing as a player." When Khawaja began the following Shield season 
in good form and Ricky Ponting's retirement opened up a spot in the Test team, 
Lehmann was quick to publicly put his new charge's name forth, opining "I think 
he's in the best six in the country. I think if they gave him a chance and let 
him have a good run at it he'd be fine".

After Khawaja was called into the Australian squad as an injury standby for 
the final Test of the home summer in January 2013, Lehmann continued essaying 
his theme of Khawaja getting a "good run" in the Test XI, telling ESPNCricinfo: 
"If he gets a good run at it, that's what you want. If he can get that run and 
he doesn't have that fear of getting dropped straight away, he'll do well."

Less than six months later Lehmann was the Australia coach and one of only two 
Australia selectors actually on tour during an Ashes campaign in England. He 
duly gave Khawaja a run in the Test XI – but he hardly gave Khawaja a good run, 
dropping him after just three consecutive Tests in which he averaged 19. It's 
worth recalling that Matthew Hayden took seven consecutive Tests before he 
established himself in the Test XI with a 119 in Mumbai (before that innings, 
Hayden averaged just 24.36 in Test cricket) and the man who did more than any 
other to ensure that Hayden finally, at the age of 28, received that fair go, 
Steve Waugh, himself took 27 consecutive Tests to nail down a spot in the Test 
XI with a 177 not out at Headingley in 1989 (before that innings, Waugh 
averaged just 30.52 in Test cricket).

The decision to pick a not-exactly-in-form Khawaja at number three then dump 
him three Tests later reaches the realms of truly Kafkaesque absurdity when one 
considers that the extension of Khawaja's run from one Test to two required the 
dumping of Phil Hughes – Australia's top first-class run scorer on tour and by 
far Australia's best-performed young Shield batsman over the past five years – 
and that Khawaja was replaced not by a specialist batsman, but by a fifth seam 
bowler (the seam-bowling-all-rounder James Faulkner) on a slow Oval pitch 
renowned for taking spin.

The 23-year-old Faulkner is a hardworker, a competitor and a ready-made Test 
player as a seam-bowling all-rounder batting at eight. But, with a first-class 
batting average in the high 20s, he's no top-six Test batsman, especially not 
in a team whose batting has been its Achilles' heel in recent years.

His selection for the Oval Test could certainly be rationalised as a just 
reward for a good tourist at the end of a long tour. But such an individual 
player reward rationale would be anathema to the very raison d'être of the 
Australian cricket team – you know, the one you heard Michael Clarke 
articulating at every opportunity this summer: it's about winning Test matches. 
It's difficult see how picking a fifth seam bowler at the expense of a 
specialist batsman, in a team whose weakness is its batting, could possibly 
improve the team's chances of winning a Test match played on a slow, spinning 
pitch.

Thus, the second big judgement call of the Lehmann era must be adjudged to be 
an unqualified failure – the confidence of not one but two young batsmen was 
shredded and the team's thorny problem of finding a long-term number three has 
been exacerbated rather than solved (Shane Watson, an all-rounder, should not 
be batting at three long-term because Australia need him to bowl).

In the May issue of The Cricketer <http://www.thecricketer-magazine.com/>, 
Malcolm Knox, the Australian "novelist-cum-cricket-writer extraordinaire" in 
the words of Gideon Haigh, wrote a typically perceptive Ashes preview article 
in which he described Hughes and Lyon as "the two players who embody 
Australia's position … The selectors have backed them, more or less, as the 
young batsman and bowler to fill the holes."

But since Knox's article was published, the Australian selectors have 
italicised the "more or less" for emphasis, doing anything but back Lyon and 
Hughes. Indeed, in the past six months, it seems that the solution to every ill 
facing theAustralia cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australia-cricket-team> is: drop Lyon and/or 
Hughes. The results speak for themselves.

The lack of faith in Lyon and Hughes is mystifying for they are precisely the 
kind of young blokes that Australian cricket has, historically, always placed 
its faith in – born-and-raised in obscure country towns with populations of 
five digits or less; hardworking, self-made and technically heterodox; 
fearless, bursting onto the Test stage at a young age (Lyon took 5/34 in Galle 
on debut; Hughes scored back-to-back hundreds in Durban in his second Test); 
and constitutionally averse to a clean shave.

In the post-2007 era of Australian cricketing decline, a complaint frequently 
aired by some sections of the Australian public unfamiliar with the concept of 
Australia losing Test matches is that the new generation of Australian 
cricketers are somehow not old-school enough, a perception perhaps best 
encapsulated by the sight of Mitchell Johnson modelling men's underwear. But 
the truth is that the current generation of young Australian cricketers are no 
less humble of origin – Peter Siddle is a champion woodchopper from country 
Victoria, James Pattinson comes from a family of roof tilers, Hughes is the son 
of a banana farmer, Lyon was a groundsman, and Khawaja is the son of migrants 
from Pakistan – and hardworking than their forebears; they just need to be 
backed by the selectors to the same degree that their forebears were.

Relax. A two-syllable word which forms the title of the "wonderful, 1980s 
classic" song by Frankie Goes to Hollywood used to brainwash male supermodels; 
a few, now barely remembered, months ago, it was also the buzzword of Lehmann's 
nascent coaching reign.

Lehmann's predecessor, Arthur, was supposedly the coach who made the players 
too tense, the stern disciplinarian who, along with captain Michael Clarke and 
team manager Gavin Dovey, made the decision to suspend four Australia players 
from a Test match in India for failing to complete a team task set by Arthur. 
According to this narrative, Lehmann was the liberator whom would amble into 
the dressing room and "relax" the boys. This view was well-summed up byRicky 
Ponting who wrote in his column in the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/cricket/article-2349170/The-Ashes-2013--Ricky-Ponting-column-Australia-play-fear-Micky-Arthurs-sacking.html>
 that Lehmann "will bring calmness to the group, make sure they try to have fun 
and enjoy the experience of playing for Australia", "instil confidence into the 
young guys in the team who seem to be lacking it at the moment", and make 
someone like Phil Hughes "feel confident and relaxed".

By the lead-up to the final Test at the Oval, with the Ashes already lost, 
Lehmann was making public statements about team selection like "yep, there is 
nothing wrong with that" when asked by the media whether players could be 
playing for their careers. Lehmann made that statement at a time when 
26-year-old Khawaja was in the midst of his first run in the Test XI in 19 
months, 24-year-old Steve Smith was in the midst of his first run in the Test 
XI in over two years, and 24-year-old Hughes was trying to psychologically cope 
with having been dumped from the Test XI when he was still the highest 
first-class run scorer on tour. Steve Waugh certainly wasn't a fan of Lehmann's 
public remark, telling Fairfax: "There was no need to actually say it out in 
the public arena – it just puts more pressure on the players."

Relaxed?

A team atmosphere where cricketers' careers are on the line after one or even 
three bad Tests sounds about as relaxed as the personal attitude of Australia's 
new Prime Minister to homosexuality – "I'd probably … feel a bit threatened."

To walk or not to walk? In England, that's a moral question. In Australia, it 
isn't.

The Australian cultural convention is that every individual batsman has the 
right to choose – there's absolutely nothing wrong with a batsman standing and 
accepting an umpire's decision, nor is there anything wrong with walking. But 
you ought to be consistent – you're either a walker like Adam Gilchrist, or a 
non-walker like Steve Waugh. You can't have your cake and eat it too by walking 
when it's convenient for you to do so (for example, when the umpire is clearly 
going to give you out anyway) and not walking when it's convenient for you to 
do so (for example, when it's a close call).

Broadly speaking, Australians aren't walkers. To be frank, that was one of the 
bedrocks on which the two great Australian teams of the modern age were built.

As Gideon Haigh explained, one of the core on-field values that Ian Chappell 
preached and practised was: "Don't walk, even on edging a catch, but accept the 
umpire's decision." It's one of the few things that Chappell and Steve Waugh 
wholeheartedly agree on. Waugh never walked and in his 2005 autobiography he 
even expressed his admiration for his erstwhile colleague Dean Jones as "the 
best non-walker I've ever seen because his reaction never gave any inkling as 
to his guilt. He just scratched centre, adjusted his pads and carried on in a 
'business as usual fashion'."

Jones himself went so far as to elucidate, in Dean Jones: One-Day Magic 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8142046-one-day-magic>, the art of how not 
to walk when one gets a close LB shout: "When that happens you can do two 
things: turn your back on the umpire and give the impression that it's just a 
frivolous appeal, or pretend to take a run, again showing you are unconcerned 
about the appeal. I never shuffle away from the stumps because that is often an 
admission of guilt."

Cast your mind back to Hobart in November 1999. It's the first year of Steve 
Waugh's captaincy of the Australian Test team. At close of play on the fourth 
day the Test against Pakistan, Australia are 5/188 chasing 369 for victory 
against a Pakistan attack featuring Wasim Akram, Waqar Younis, Shoaib Akhtar 
and Saqlain Mushtaq. Justin Langer is 52 not out and Adam Gilchrist, playing in 
just his second Test, is 45 not out. The next morning, Langer, on 76, flashes 
at a wide ball from Akram. There is an audible nick as the ball passes Langer's 
bat, which is nowhere near his body. The umpire Peter Parker gives it not out. 
Snicko shows a clear nick. Langer goes on to score 127, Gilchrist finishes 
unbeaten on 149, and Australia win the Test easily with four wickets to spare. 
At the time, Langer, with his tongue somewhere in the vicinity of his cheek, 
explained that the clicking noise was due to his bat handle creaking, but, in 
2010, he admitted: "I absolutely smashed it."

That miraculous win at Bellerive was Australia's third consecutive Test match 
victory. They went on to win 16 Test matches in a row, setting a new world 
record which still stands today. That feat, which defined an era and cowed the 
rest of the cricketing world into submission, would never have been 
accomplished had Langer walked after smashing it.

Waugh's successor as Australia's captain and best batsman, Ricky Ponting, was 
one of the greatest non-walkers in Australian history. Heck, in the Lord's 
Ashes Test of 2009, Ponting went so far as to order a 20-year-old Phil Hughes 
to stand his ground when he started to walk after accepting Strauss's word that 
he'd taken a low catch at first slip cleanly.

Historically, Australian cricket culture can quite fairly be criticised for 
many things, but hypocrisy isn't one of them. Australian cricket teams have 
always done what they say they'll do: play to win. Australian cricketers 
exercise their individual right to choose whether to walk, and fully respect 
the opposition's right to do likewise.

Thus, Stuart Broad's decision to stand his ground after whacking the ball to 
first slip late on the third day of the first Test at Trent Bridge, was 
brutishly criticised by English moralisers in their media and their general 
public – an English friend of mine who went to Harrow told me: "that was 
fucking cheating; as a public schoolboy who walks, I can say that" – but 
stoutly defended by the Australia captain Michael Clarke: "Well, I think it's 
up to him, there's no doubt about it. Look, I've always been a believer in the 
umpires are paid to make decisions. That's why they have a job. I certainly 
don't think any less of Stuart, that's for sure."

This Australia team may have lost the Ashes 3-0, but they and their captain 
upheld the values which made Australian cricket great. They fought hard; they 
accepted the umpires' decision, never whingeing even when it was blatantly 
incorrect; and, right until the very end, they kept going for the win, even 
when that meant risking the humiliation of losing (yet again).

What did their coach do?

Well, leading into the final Test, with Australia already down 3-0, Lehmann 
accused Broad of "blatant cheating" on Australian commercial radio. Yes, you 
heard that correctly; an Australian who played his entire career on Australia 
teams whose members routinely exercised their individual right to not walk 
criticised a young Englishman for doing precisely the same thing. I believe 
there's a word for that: hypocrisy.

Lehmann's time would be better spent investigating and explaining how 
Australia managed to burn their two umpire decision reviews – given to them for 
the purpose of correcting blatant umpiring errors – by the time Aleem Dar 
incorrectly gave Broad not out. The wastage of the second of those reviews was 
particularly self-evident – Pattinson's delivery to Bairstow was full, swinging 
in sharply, only struck the batsman in line with leg, and was easily sliding 
down leg – and highlighted the absence of a basic, clearly defined, rational 
system for utilising the decision review system in the Australia team: an 
astonishing omission for which the team's well-paid, full-time professional 
coach ought to shoulder a substantial part of the responsibility.

To return to the question posed at the very beginning of this article: did 
Lehmann's appointment as coach improve Australia's performances and chances of 
winning back the Ashes?

Australia lost the Ashes 3-0. That was bad. But the result wasn't the worst 
aspect of Lehmann's debut series as coach. The selection policies were. By the 
end of the series, the confidence of both Australia's best-performed spinner in 
the post-Warne era and Australia's best-performed young batsman since 2007 had 
been severely undermined, Lehmann's own batting disciple had been discarded 
like an orange peel after just three Tests, and Australia was playing five 
seamers on a slow, turning Test track.

It's difficult to conceive a scenario in which Arthur could have done any 
worse than Lehmann did, therefore, the answer to the question posed at the 
outset of this article must surely be "no".

Australia's selection policies exhibited all the logic of a practising 
creation scientist, the far-sightedness of a card-carrying member of the Flat 
Earth Society and the patience of the average One Direction fan. The level of 
reason apparent in Australia's recent selection policies is perhaps best 
surmised in a well-received speech by a US Presidential candidate on The 
Simpsons: "We must move forward, not backward, upward not forward, and always 
twirling, twirling, twirling towards freedom."

Why then, has there been no sign that Lehmann will be held accountable for his 
and the team's performances in the same fashion that his young players have 
been?

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This article first appeared on A Straight Bat 
<http://astraightbat.wordpress.com/>

• Follow SB Tang <https://twitter.com/sb_tang> on Twitter
 