
Once again, Anthony Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>
 has been caught with his pants down.

Huma Abedin separates from Anthony Weiner after latest sexting scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
This time, Huma Abedin decided enough was enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
. The trusted Hillary Clinton aide decided to separate from the scandal-plagued 
former congressman. The news came just a few hours after the New York Post 
published a piece saying that Anthony Weiner was caught sending explicit 
Twitter messages to an online acquaintance – who is also a reported Trump 
supporter.


The exchange, which allegedly happened last summer, included crotch shots (one 
of which appears to have been taken by Weiner while his son was lying asleep 
next to him) and steamy messages.


It’s truly bewildering how – despite numerous embarrassing sexting scandals – 
he made the same mistake over and over again. He continually exposed not only 
himself and his reputation to such absurd scandal, but his wife, her career and 
his family too. Why?

We could chalk this up to fallacies inherent in male sexuality, which often 
seem to be more evident in the powerful and famous. We could describe his 
behavior through the model of addiction – and the immediacy of cellphone 
technology and the anonymity of the online universe that makes us all so 
vulnerable. But I think there is more at work here.


Weiner review – a political scandal in slow motion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/10/weiner-documentary-review-anthony-weiner-sexting-scandal>
Anthony Weiner wanted to be caught, and caught and caught. It isn’t enough 
that he sent out the pictures himself in 2011. The latest rendition is 
revealing on a whole number of levels if we look closely.


First, he was apparently sexting with someone who is in the opposing political 
camp. His lady-friend supports the opponent of his wife’s boss – she couldn’t 
have more reason to want to turn him in.


In the direct messages published by the New York Post, Weiner allegedly sent a 
photo of himself with bulging underwear while his child lay beside him. 
“Someone just climbed into my bed,” the text reads. She replied: “You do 
realize you can see you[r] Weiner in that pic??”


This act seems to bring on a moment of conscience, and Weiner appears to 
become scared that he accidentally posted the message publicly online. It 
wouldn’t be the first time – that’s why he was forced to give up his seat in 
Congress in 2011, in his original sexting scandal. He writes: “Ooooooh … I was 
scared. For half a second I thought I posted something.” This is then followed 
by him writing “Stop looking at my crotch”.


It should also be noted that since Weiner tends to send pictures of his penis 
concealed by his underpants, they are appropriate for worldwide distribution 
and need not be censored or blurred. One might wonder whether, on some level, 
that is a deliberate choice.


“Whatever you did it on purpose”, his texting partner replies. She quickly 
corrects herself – of course he did it on purpose – with: “O I see, you thought 
you posted on your TL [timeline] not DM [direct message]. S--t happens be 
careful”. In hindsight, these misunderstandings seem oddly prophetic. He is 
doing this on purpose, making the same mistakes, not being careful, so that he 
can confirm for himself that everyone wants to see his stuff.

Still when he says “stop looking”, there is something genuine about that 
request. Anthony Weiner, I think, wants to stop these scandals. He wants to 
find a way for us to stop looking at him. Why does anyone try to get caught – 
if not to be stopped from carrying out a destructive behavior? The strange 
thing is that even public humiliation and scorn cannot stop him, which is what 
fascinates us and keeps the cycle going.


In Freud’s last published paper, The Splitting of the Ego in the Process of 
Defense, in 1938, he writes about sexual impulse and what happens when we are 
faced with prohibition that can result in danger. He found that, when presented 
with the choice between stopping or going ahead despite danger, some people do 
not decide either way. They keep both positions and split their mind in half, 
so to speak – inhabiting an untenable, split reality.

Who displays this contradiction better than Weiner? Is this not what we see in 
the play-by-play of his sexting, to say nothing of his entire life? 
Fascinatingly, Freud goes on to talk about the fact that this symptom of 
splitting often appears in someone’s relationship to his genitals.


This strange thing that Freud calls ‘castration anxiety’ is the contradiction 
between ‘I have it, this penis of all penises’ and ‘I have nothing, nothing to 
show for myself’. This is precisely what we see Weiner play out before our 
eyes, as he seemingly begs us to put some limit on his compulsive display of 
his genitals to the public.

Very Freudian, of course, but how can we bypass this when it comes to thinking 
about Anthony Weiner?

 