
Unbolt the doors, roll up the window blinds: the lock-in in last chance saloon 
is over. Didier Drogba was as statesmanlike as he always is in an orange shirt, 
walking round his team-mates picking them from the floor and raising spirits 
but he must fear that this is the end. He said afterwards that if he is wanted 
he will stay and spoke of shifting the focus to World Cup qualification but the 
Ivory Coast captain is 34 now; will he really be around in Morocco in 2015 for 
yet another last shot at theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>?

Seven years ago, when the Elephants lost on penalties in the final to Egypt in 
Cairo, it seemed inconceivable that that group of players, the so-called golden 
generation of Drogba, the Tourés, Salomon Kalou, Didier Zokora, Emmanuel Eboué 
and Arouna Koné would not win at least one Cup of Nations. Perhaps the term 
golden generation is itself a curse, a guarantee of non-success. And if it is, 
and this highly talented team is forever unfulfilled, how absurd that the coup 
de grace should have been delivered by Sol Bamba's backside.

Egypt in the final in Cairo in 2006, Egypt in the semi-final in Kumasi in 
2008, Algeria in the quarter-final in Cabinda in 2010. Zambia in the final in 
Libreville in 2012 andnow Nigeria in the quarter-final in Rustenburg in 2013 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n7wOl93MJr8>: it is a roll of defeats that 
could haunt Ivorian football for decades. The fitful gifts of Gervinho aside, 
there is little sign of fresh blood rising to replace the veterans: where is 
the generation to succeed the golden generation? Having missed this 
opportunity, it could be a long time before another occurs.

The setting was appropriately apocalyptic, morning sun yielding to heavy cloud 
cover and a blustery wind. Rain lashed the hills that surround the hills to the 
south and east of Phokeng, eddies of dust scudded across the plain to the north 
and lightning flickered constantly above the platinum works. The flaw that 
brought the Ivorians down was more familiar: their goalkeeper Boubacar Barry. 
After he had punched bewilderedly down the wrong line as Emmanuel Emenike's 
free-kick flashed passed him three minutes before half-time, the former 
Tottenham forward Mido tweeted that Barry had already won three Cups of Nations 
for Egypt. That was cruel and not entirely fair, for Barry is capable of great 
agility and has made some fine saves, but there was some truth to the jibe – 
and that, unfortunately, is not changed by his evident devastation.

On a human level it was impossible not to sympathise as he walked weeping from 
the dressing room to the team bus; from a football point of view you knew that 
if he was blaming himself he was pointing the finger in exactly the right 
direction. Barry has always been erratic and error-prone, his level far below 
that of the team's spine. That he has remained essentially unchallenged as the
Ivory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> No1 for six years 
is extraordinary.

To blame Barry alone, though, would certainly not be fair – even if he did 
signal he was having one of his skittish days with an unconvincing parry from a 
Victor Moses shot early on.Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> had dominated the 
first half – Emenike skewing wide a fine chance created by Brown Ideye – and 
were well worth the lead. Mikel John Obi was exceptional at the back of 
midfield, he and Ogenyi Onazi never giving Yaya Touré an inch. Essentially they 
did to him what he and Didier Zokora had done to Kanu in the 2006 semi-final in 
Alexandria and, as a result, he had far less influence than is usual, and was 
never able to set the Ivorian rhythm.

Ivory Coast rallied. Drogba, having been fouled, dinked the free-kick to the 
back post for Cheik Tioté to head in and for a time it seemed that, having 
stayed into the abyss, they had found some inner resolve to fight back. But 
then, 12 minutes from time, Sunday Mba, vindicating Stephen Keshi's decision to 
select domestic based players, was allowed to drift through two challenges. 
Bamba lunged in an attempt to block, and the ball flicked a buttock that sent 
it looping past Barry. The Ivorians, beset by the realisation it was happening 
again, had nothing left.

The Ivory Coast coach, Sabri Lamouchi, insisted afterwards that he "took full 
responsibility" and it's hard to believe he will not pay with his job. He 
raised the usual objection that this was his first defeat – echoing Vahid 
Halilhodzic after the defeat to Algeria three years ago – and in coaxing a 
couple of excellent performances from Gervinho, he has achieved more than many 
coaches ever will, but nothing that has happened in the months since he 
replaced François Zahoui have done anything to make his appointment seem any 
less strange.

A team as emotionally fragile as this, that bears with it always in the 
knockout stages the trauma of past failure, surely needed a coach with 
experience, somebody who could calm nerves and stiffen sinews. Zahoui, in fact, 
playing cautious football and eliminating risk, seemed to have the right idea, 
and but for a missed Drogba penalty and the emotional wave ridden by the 
Zambians, he surely would have brought home the trophy. Certainly he got far 
closer than Lamouchi.

For years, it feels, we've been saying "surely this time". In two years' time 
in Morocco, we probably won't. As Drogba knows from his Champions League 
success at Chelsea, it can be just as hope fades that achievements come, but he 
cannot go on for ever. Yaya Touré, Salomon Kalou and Gervinho should all still 
be somewhere near their peaks then, and that means they will have a chance, but 
in 2015 they will be just another side with a handful of good players: the 
golden generation is over.
 