


She wore the finest silks, lived in one of London's most desirable homes and 
studied in a library still regarded as one of the greatest achievements of the 
renowned 18th-century designer John Adam. Yet Dido Belle was the daughter of an 
unknown black slave woman so could not sit at the dinner table with her adopted 
family at Kenwood House in north London.

Belle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/11/belle-review-toronto-film-festival>
, a film directed by Amma Asante and released in America this weekend, tells 
the story of the illegitimate young woman who found herself among the household 
of Lord Mansfield, one of the greatest men of the Georgian age. As lord chief 
justice, in 1772 he ruled that a master could not take a slave out of Britain 
by force, a judgment seen as a key stage in the eventual abolition of the slave 
trade.

However a new biography of Mansfield, Dido's great-uncle and benefactor, has 
revealed that this complex figure was not the crusading liberal portrayed in 
the film. "He was a brilliant mind, but was chiefly interested in protecting 
the status quo," said author Norman Poser.

In Lord Mansfield, Justice in the Age of Reason 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Lord-Mansfield-Justice-Age-Reason/dp/0773541837>, 
Poser, a New York academic, argues that the eminent politician and judge does 
not merit his reputation as a radical hero of the anti-slavery movement. 
Although he was fond of Dido Belle and always fair to her, there is no evidence 
that she influenced his views. In fact, the judge's famous ruling in the case 
that later helped to dismantle slavery was the result of his slow 
acknowledgement that slaves had rights in law.

"The film is right to suggest Mansfield is closely associated with the cause, 
but he did not want to bring down the slave owners in America, or even to end 
slavery," Poser said.

"He did, however, eventually rule that the practice was so suspect it would 
have to be set down in deliberate legislation if it was to continue, rather 
than simply being supported by common law and precedent."

Mansfield's ruling on slavery in the "Somerset case" of 1772 reads: "It is so 
odious that nothing can be suffered to support it, but positive law." Invoking 
habeas corpus, he reasoned that the captain of the ship on which the slave was 
being deported could fairly be considered to be holding a man against his will.

"He was very reluctant to annoy the slave owners and vested interests," said 
Poser. "He rather hoped things would just go on as they were, saying 'I would 
have all masters think they were free and all negroes think they were not'."

Poser, 86, who has retired from teaching law, became intrigued by the story of 
Mansfield's home life when he saw the portrait of Dido Belle and her cousin 
during a visit to Scone Palace, the Mansfield family's Scottish home, in 2006: 
"I was also drawn to his remarkably clear legal decisions. He did not just give 
a ruling; he gave guidance on principles of law, many of which are still cited 
in cases on both sides of the Atlantic."

Belle, which stars Gugu Mbatha-Raw in the title role, comes out in Britain on 
13 June and hasalready been compared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/12/belle-film-british-slave-trade> 
to Steve McQueen's Oscar-winning film12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/12-years-a-slave>. Poser welcomes the British 
film and recognises that Misan Sagay's screenplay needed to flesh out the scant 
details of Dido Belle's story, yet he believes Mansfield was a more complex and 
powerful figure than actor Tom Wilkinson has the chance to convey.

The second son of a "questionable" Scottish Jacobite family, William Murray, 
as he was born, made a great deal of money as a young barrister before going on 
to serve as solicitor general, attorney general, Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
Speaker and finally lord chief justice.

At the centre of London society, he was friends with John Adam, poet Alexander 
Pope, actor David Garrick, painter Joshua Reynolds and Samuel Johnson's 
biographer, James Boswell, who regarded him as a man of "cold reserve and 
sharpness" who "chills the most generous blood".

In Asante's film Belle finds crucial evidence for her uncle while he presides 
over a case involving the mass drowning of slaves in the Caribbean. The real 
Dido Belle came to Kenwood because her father, a sea captain, brought her to 
his uncle as a companion to her cousin Elizabeth, the young woman she is 
pictured with in the Scone portrait.

Dido is thought to have joined Lady Mansfield in running a small dairy in the 
grounds of Kenwood, but Asante did not film in London, where Kenwood was 
undergoing restoration, but at Syon House and Osterley Park House in Middlesex, 
and in Buckinghamshire at West Wycombe House. (Cinemagoers in search of the 
real Kenwood can spot it in Richard Curtis'Notting Hill).

After Lady Mansfield's death, Dido stayed on to care for her uncle, reading 
newspapers to him at breakfast as he became crippled with rheumatism. He died 
at 88 in 1793, leaving Dido a provision in his will as well as setting aside a 
substantial one-off payment in a codicil.

He wrote: "I think it right considering how she has been bred and how she has 
behaved to make a better provision for Dido." After his death, she married and 
had three sons, dying in her early forties in 1800.

Poser's book tells the story of a generous and clever man, who read the mood 
of his times rather than setting out to abolish slavery. "A distinction should 
be made between Mansfield's decisions as a judge who consistently furthered the 
interests of merchants and property owners, even at the expense of fundamental 
human rights, and his humane conduct of his personal life," he writes.

But he argues that Mansfield's wider influence lives on in every branch of the 
law, from contract law to freedom of the press, where he ruled against prior 
censorship. "My daughter, who teaches law in Nebraska, told me he had been 
cited in the ruling of a recent paternity case there. It is strange that his 
name is not better remembered in Britain and America."
 