
Driving through the wind-blown volcanic ash of Wyoming, it seems impossible 
not to ask why anybody would live there. I live there. The best way I can 
describe the otherworldliness of the river by Bird Cloud, with its towering 
400ft cliff, is to invoke Uluru in Australia's red centre. Where else could a 
woman who carries centuries of Native American tradition in her little finger 
set down her roots?

During the 1980s, my sister and I were kept talking by a man in a shop and 
avoided being possibly involved in a fatal car accident as a result. It turned 
out the man's name was Proulx. It turned out he was no relation. I have since 
done a lot of research into previous generations of people named Proulx and 
none of them are relations either. Ah well.

I have lived in many of the wildest and most spiritual parts of North America. 
I had to leave Newfoundland when the local restaurant stopped serving turbot 
cheeks and I now find myself drawn away from Centennial because many of the 
inhabitants are too working class and watch American football on the 
television. So it is to Bird Cloud I am drawn, to create a sensitive 
eco-mansion with a $10,000 Japanese soak bath. All for just me.

There were difficulties finding an architect capable of realising my vision in 
the backwoods of Wyoming, as most could not conceive of anything but the most 
basic lumber dwelling. Eventually, I came across Kevin McCloud. "Annie has a 
dream," he said. "She wants to create a defiantly modernist Bauhaus structure 
that will breathe in the ancient spirits of the region. And with the reclaimed 
metal sheeting on the outside walls, that glows in the same blood-red of long 
dead Sioux warriors during the three hours of annual sunlight, I think she 
might achieve it."

It was also hard to find the right craftsmen. We tried Idle Ian and Bodger 
Brian, but it was clear when they arrived on site five minutes late that they 
were not up to my exacting standards. Eventually, Kevin found Patronised Pete 
and Put-Upon Paul, and the build got under way in late 2005. I had to go away 
to Capri for the winter and didn't return to Bird Cloud until the following 
spring. I was horrified. Not only were the tatami prayer mats made of 
unsustainable rice-straw, but the window in my bedroom had been positioned 
three inches too far to the left and my view of the eagle's nest was blocked by 
the cliff. It took three tonnes of dynamite and several hundred thousand 
dollars to rectify that problem.

The following three years followed a similar rhythm. I would go away somewhere 
important and glamorous for the winter, while Patronised Pete and Put-Upon Paul 
would work round the clock in the snow, and then I would come back and scream 
at them for having got nearly everything wrong. Imagine my fury to discover 
that the concrete floor sloped 2mm from the door to the wall and that it was 
not the precise shade of umber I had specified. That cost a further $70,000 to 
put right.

Worse was to come. My Japanese soak bath flooded the downstairs living area, 
ruining its recycled teak flooring, the cupboard drawers didn't open 
noiselessly, the temperature control for my library was faulty, the deer antler 
door handles had not been polished and the Polygal windows arrived with the 
wrong kind of non-abrasive dirt. I couldn't write a word for weeks.

During the rare lulls between catastrophes, I would take to the outdoors, 
removing the cattle that had wandered on to my estate and communing with the 
sublime, while giant eagles soared above me, repeatedly yodelling, "Thank 
Christ someone as deep as Annie has come to live in this Godforsaken land" as 
they patrolled the desolate skies. And then, disaster once more. Not only had 
Moron Martin, the landscaper, planted non-native species of chenopodium 
throughout my 700 acres, he had used non-organic compost to do so. I had to 
remove three feet of topsoil throughout to avert an environmental disaster.

In 2009, after an agreeable six months in Germany, the work was complete and I 
was able to soak in my Japanese bath after a tough hour searching for 
prehistoric relics from the 19th century, congratulating myself that the 
project had only come in $4m over budget. And then Patronised Pete called to 
remind me that they didn't bother to clear the snow from the minor roads in 
winter, so I had really just built myself an expensive summer house. So my 
restless spirit must move once more. Luckily, Kevin has identified the perfect 
plot in the Yukon.

Digested read, digested: Grande Dame Designs.
 