
My good friend and colleague Dinesh Allirajah, who has died aged 47 following 
complications from surgery, was a believer in the liberating and educative 
power of the arts. He was chair of the National Association for Literature 
Development (1995-97) and Catalyst Dance and Drama (1999-2001); a founding 
board member in 2005 of Literature Northwest; chair of the trustees of the 
National Black Arts Alliance from 2002; and director of Comma Press publishers 
from 2012.

During the 1990s, he worked as a literacy and creative writing teacher, 
running workshops in community centres, schools and prisons, and latterly 
lecturing and tutoring at Liverpool John Moores University and the universities 
of Central Lancashire and Edge Hill, Liverpool. He was also a writer in 
residence at Liverpool Hope University.

He wrote poetry and song lyrics, and his work was published by Sable magazine, 
Peepal Tree Press, Spike Books, The Windows Project, Comma Press, Moving Worlds 
magazine and Amauta Publications. He entranced audiences with performances of 
his work in the UK, France, Poland, Germany, Bangladesh and Nigeria.

Dinesh was born in Kensington, central London, son of Evelyn, an English 
teacher, and Sivam, an engineer, and grew up in Upper Norwood with his brother, 
Duleep. Both his parents were from Sri Lanka – his father was Tamil and his 
mother Sinhalese – and Dinesh’s heritage informed his creative passions and 
teaching.

He left Liverpool University with a BA in modern history and an MA in ethnic 
studies. His dissertation was titled Groove in Tongues: The Radical Potential 
of Black BritishPoetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>. At 
university he had begun promoting jazz and club nights with friends. In 1989 
they moved to radio, first to the Liverpool pirate station Toxteth Community 
Radio and then to Choice FM. In 1992 Dinesh was a co-founder of the poetry 
performance collective Asian Lives, Asian Voices. For many years he worked 
alongside George McKane, the founder and director of Yellow House, on art 
projects with young people.

Having dedicated much of his life to enabling others to write, he recently 
mused on his blog Real Time Short Stories that at last – while apparently 
recovering from an operation – he had time to write himself. He will be 
remembered for his humour, and as a generous, supportive and trusting soul with 
an encyclopedic knowledge of writers matched by his love of music (jazz in 
particular) and cricket.

He is survived by his fiancee, Vic, two sons, Bruno and Rufus, from a previous 
relationship, his mother and his brother.
 