
Sudan may have been the only team to fail to score and Mali were muck, but 
surely the biggest disappointment of the tournament wereSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>. The Teranga Lions arrived in 
Ghana as the most in-form team in the continent and with captain El Hadji Diouf 
insisting they would finally rid themselves of the tag of "the only African 
giant never to have won the tournament".

The closest they've come was when they reached the final in 2002, just months 
before famously shocking France in the World Cup. That team's most potent 
menace was Khalilou Fadiga, whose heart problems subsequently prevented fans of 
Internazionale and Bolton from seeing him in full bloom, but most of the other 
main players from the class of '02 were here in Ghana and, bolstered by more 
recently-emerged talents such as Habib Beye, Diomansy Kamara, Mamadou Niang and 
Abdoulaye Faye, they were expected to muster a vigorous last hurrah.

Instead all they offered was sporadic effort, muddled performances and a 
sneaky party in the build-up to yesterday's match against South Africa. Diouf, 
midfielder Ousmane Ndoye and goalkeeper Tony Sylva, whosecalamitous blunder 
against Angola <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cvWuOKQGml4> led to defeat in 
the second match,were rumbled in a Kumasi nightclub 
<http://football.theguardian.com/breakingnews/feedstory/0,,-7271735,00.html> on 
Tuesday night - a particularly dumb indiscretion by Diouf, who'd previously 
decided that the wise thing for him, as captain, to do following the loss to 
Angola was slam the country's football administrators ... and his team-mates, 
whom he said lacked concentration and, according toquotes in the Senegalese 
press <http://www.seneweb.com/>, were "a bunch of queers".

Their manager Henri Kasperczak was so exasperated by his own inability to 
instil basic discipline and harness the team's potential thathe resigned before 
yesterday's game 
<http://football.theguardian.com/breakingnews/feedstory/0,,-7261741,00.html> 
even though the arithmetic of Group D meant Senegal still had a chance of 
reaching the quarter-finals. Clearly he knew his players were not particularly 
bothered about taking that chance.

The new manager Lamine Ndiaye dropped Diouf, Sylva and Ndoye. Though he 
fielded some less familiar faces Senegal still exuded the same ennui. Pape 
Bouba Diop moped around the middle like a burly goth, Kamara only broke into a 
run when strolling around in a daze became too boring and the entire defence 
couldn't even summon the will to communicate with each other. Niang, the 
striker who's been outstanding for Marseille all season, was bafflingly 
ineffective, not even managing to get into a position to add to the sitters he 
somehow missed in the first two matches.

Senegal's goal came from a basic blooper by Aaron Mokoena triggered by a smart 
ball by Bayal Sall, who along with winger Frédéric Mendy (bizarrely substituted 
by Kasperzak in the first two games) was a positive for Senegal to take out of 
the tournament - and may soon find a bigger club bidding to take him out of 
Bastia. Before and after that equaliser, however, Senegal were utterly 
outplayed, made to look like lumbering oafs by a skillful South African side 
that exuded all the effervescence and purpose that their vaunted opponents 
sorely lacked.

Encouragingly for 2010, this tournament has shown that Carlos Alberto Parreira 
is having an impact in South Africa. Their vibrant movement, brazen dummies and 
confident one-touch passes suggests the manager is successfully overhauling the 
Bafana's style, making them more Brazilian than brutish. With deft and nimble 
players such as Steven Pienaar, Teko Modise, Elrin van Heerden the hosts of the 
next World Cup can look forward with optimism. Though they could still do with 
finding a goalscorer, or patching up the problem with Benni McCarthy.

Senegal, meanwhile, must go back to the drawing board. The remnants of the 
class of '02 will now surely be binned and go down as a golden generation that 
became grubby with sloth or indifference.

"They're fools and wasters," railed Ousmane Mbengue, one of the 400 or so 
djembé-beating Senegalese fans in Kumasi's Baba Yara Stadium yesterday. "We've 
come from all over west Africa to support them and they just couldn't be 
bothered." A Ghanaian journalist told me that several Senegalese fans tried to 
get on to the pitch to "beat the hell" out of the players after the Angolan 
defeat, but Mbengue insisted that wasn't true. "We were furious alright but we 
wouldn't do that. Although it's true that some of the lads wanted to storm the 
team hotel. Not to batter them though, maybe just to jostle a couple of them. 
Such as big-mouth Diouf.

"But the calmer heads amongst us advised them not to and they soon cooled 
down," concluded Mbengue. I decided to go out to the team hotel last night just 
in case the calmer heads weren't heard this time round. All was quiet. Even the 
players, none of whom would consent to more than a cursory "hi". I didn't see 
"big-mouth Diouf" - had he already gone out partying? Orjumped on a private jet 
home <http://www.bwfc.premiumtv.co.uk/page/General/0,,1004~1230477,00.html>? Or 
was he sitting silently somewhere after realising, at last, that talk is cheap.
 