
"Era un disastre" my young guide told me. He gestured across the steamy 
tobacco fields from the shell of his small house. "The drying houses were torn 
apart, all the chickens were blown away."

The Viñales landscape is extraordinary. Lush farmland nestles in a gentle 
valley, dominated by colossal limestone crags erupting from the fields. Dowsed 
regularly by tropical rains and baked daily in the Caribbean sun, the crags 
sweat nutrients into the rich tobacco fields.

Little evidence now remains of Hurricane Gustav, which tore through the region 
in September 2008. This disaster left 100,000 houses, schools and workplaces 
damaged, 6000 homes beyond repair. Hurricane Ike followed barely a week later, 
sweeping across central Cuba. Remarkably, 3 million people were evacuated 
across Cuba over the course of the 2008 hurricane season – over a quarter of 
the population – without a single life being lost.

Preparedness

In fact, Cuba enjoys something of a celebrity status for its disaster 
mitigation strategies. Both the International Federation of the Red Cross and 
Red Crescent and the United Nations Development Programme point to the Cuban 
model as an example for other Caribbean countries to emulate (indeed, the 
UNDP's Caribbean Risk Management Initiative is based in Havana).

According to 2004 Oxfam report "Weathering the Storm", the key to Cuba's 
disaster mitigation lies in community mobilisation at a grassroots level. As 
the hurricane season approaches, community and neighbourhood associations 
conduct local level "risk mapping", identifying vulnerable locations and 
buildings sturdy enough to serve as shelters. The findings are fed into 
regional hurricane response plans coordinated by Cuba's National Civil Defence 
network. Preparations are then disseminated through workplaces, local 
government and Cuba's national curriculum, culminating in a national simulation 
exercise every May. When a storm is approaching, therefore, the infrastructure 
is in place. The Cuban Institute of Meteorology can rely on state media to 
publish its warnings, while factory foremen and local governors can assume 
their Civil Defence roles with a detailed knowledge of priority evacuees, 
reliable shelters and the resources – vehicles and volunteers – which will be 
at their disposal.

As well as comprehensive planning, the report points to the "social capital" 
generated by such integration at the local level. Local women's associations 
are trusted by the pregnant women in their locality to ensure their evacuation. 
The local ham radio association is placed on standby in case the telephone 
systems fail. Citizens' roles in disaster mitigation and widespread faith in 
the contingency planning stand in stark contrast to attitudes in the United 
States. A 2007 survey conducted by the US National Center for Disaster 
Preparedness found that only 49% of respondents trusted the President to give 
reliable and accurate information on a natural or terror threat. Although the 
mechanics of evacuation in the Southern States would no doubt be very different 
– for example, far greater reliance on private transportation – that 82% of 
respondents would trust a sheriff or police commissioner to provide the same 
information suggests potential enthusiasm for a local-led response.

Recovery

The dominance of the public sector in employment in Cuba provides a large pool 
of labour, which the central government may direct to the affected region to 
bolster the clean-up operation. In recovery and reconstruction, however, there 
would seem to be little substitute for hard cash. The Cuban Government 
estimated losses in the 2008 hurricane season to total $10 billion, around one 
fifth of national GDP. Inevitably, international aid to Cuba takes on a strong 
political dimension. The Bush Administration's offer of $5 million (increased 
from an original $100,000) was rejected by Raúl Castro, who demanded instead 
the revocation of the United State's longstanding economic restrictions on the 
island so that Cuba could buy materials. With resources scarce, it falls to the 
central Cuban government to dictate the priorities for reconstruction. The 
local population have little option but to wait for their turn to come.

The system may favour Viñales: with tobacco providing Cuba's third largest 
source of hard currency, one would expect restoration of the region to be 
prioritised. The tobacco drying houses had been re-built and rural life had 
resumed. My newly married guide was soon to be a father, and with his father's 
help was building his first home on a pocket of land on the edge of the farm. 
He had proudly guided me through the structure where his father was busy 
sawing; the kitchen worktops, the electrical fittings, the newly concreted 
veranda.

"Y los asientos?" I asked him, knowing it was a terrible translation. I 
mimicked a chair rocking back and forth with my hand, the ubiquitous pastime of 
evenings in Cuba. His eyes lit up. "Ya lo compró!" he declared, laughing and 
exchanging a proud glance with his father. The house barely had a roof and 
floor, but the rocking chairs had already been purchased and were at his 
father's house. The recovery of the town may have owed more to its profitable 
landscape, but it was through the evacuation planning that the family had 
survived.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 