
Crowds flock to Shakespeare's birthplace. Visitors throng the Brontës' 
childhood home. Bonnet-fanciers trawl England for relics of the young Jane 
Austen. The early years of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, however, are way off the 
literary tourist trail.

In a former rectory deep in rural Lincolnshire, Jane Maitland leads me along 
straggling corridors to the room where the Victorian poet was born. Small and 
low-ceilinged, with a wrought-iron balcony, it could easily have become a 
shrine. In fact, it's her husband Johnny's dressing room and no, she says, it 
doesn't have a special atmosphere and it isn't open to the public.

"We do get coaches calling here, but there aren't as many as there used to 
be," she says. "Years ago, they often broke down outside and we'd make cups of 
tea for the passengers. Then they'd want to use the loo."

We're in Somersby, a hamlet of 11 houses near nowhere in particular except the 
neighbouring hamlets of Bag Enderby and Ashby Puerorum. As you read this, 
however, crowds may be rolling up to its stocky little church which is hosting 
a Tennyson memorial service as part of a summer of Lincolnshire events to mark 
the 200th anniversary of his birth, which falls on Thursday.

There have been guided walks, exhibitions, concerts, readings and lectures. 
Still to come is a Tennyson Knees-Up on Friday, which suggests a rollicking, 
rib-tickling side to his character which somehow eludes his published work. And 
a new Tennyson Trail takes in towns and villages associated with him, most of 
them in the Lincolnshire Wolds. This is what my wife and I are exploring.

The Wolds, we soon discover, are one of England's great unexplored beauties. 
They stretch down the right of the county and give the lie to the idea that 
Lincolnshire is relentlessly flat. From Louth, where we're staying, down to 
Somersby, there's a lyrical landscape of rolling hills and swirling lanes. 
Beyond the high-banked hedgerows are dark copses, secluded villages, ancient 
earthworks and deserted churches up grassy tracks.

It's a secret rhapsody in green. Even the churches are built in a strange 
olive-tinged sandstone, as though greenness is seeping up into them. The roads 
are almost empty, and it's not hard to imagine a Victorian farm cart trundling 
round the next corner. It's all very timeless, all very dream-like: a place, as 
Tennyson wrote in "In Memoriam", of "calm and deep peace on this high wold". 
And always there are vast skies.

Somersby, a hamlet in a hollow, is astonishingly hard to find, even with an 
Ordnance Survey map. And once there, you could walk past the birthplace, now 
called Somersby House, without realising it; most photographs show the back of 
the rambling building, with its Gothic wing built by Tennyson's father when he 
was rector there.

Memorial service-goers will have a chance to glimpse it, when tea is served on 
the lawn. But otherwise this is very much a private home. Gawp through the gate 
if you must and imagine the young Tennyson doing his party piece: showing off 
his strength by picking up a Shetland pony and marching round with it in his 
arms.

"We live miles from train stations and motorways," says Jane. "There's no 
village shop and no pub, and a lot of village people round here don't drive. 
But we do get the mobile library. We really live in a different world from most 
people."

Across from the rectory, the church houses a few mementos of the poet - a 
quill pen and two clay pipes - and a formidable bust of him. Jowly and 
lank-haired, he glowers at the pulpit where his father, a violent man dependent 
on drink and drugs, would have preached. Tennyson tea towels cost £2.95. A 
pheasant cackles outside.

We follow the road to the stream that inspired the poem "The Brook" ("when all 
the wood stands in a mist of green"). Then comes Harrington Hall, whose garden 
reputedly inspired the one into which the poet urged Maud to come. Then 
Tetford, where the White Hart Inn, the poet's local, preserves Tennyson's 
favourite oak settle under the horse brasses in the back bar. The nearest the 
afternoon chat here comes to literature is a debate about MPs' poetic licence 
with their expenses.

Soon we're back in Louth, a friendly, unaffected market town of great charm. 
It's a steady place, where old men wear straw panamas without affectation, and 
you feel a day without at least two scones with strawberry jam is a day wasted. 
Eve & Ranshaw sets the pace: the department store boasts that it has been "here 
under nine reigns" (since 1781) and sells a nice range of antimacassars and 
double bedspread sets. Soaring over the town is England's tallest parish church 
spire; it shoots up 90 metres like a rocket. Inside, carved angels crouch in 
the rafters, ready to leap to eternity.

We take up Tennyson's trail at Louth Grammar School. He hated it, and cried 
every morning. When he enrolled, he could repeat the Odes of Horace by heart; 
when he left he was so traumatised that he could hardly recite the Lord's 
Prayer.

He had happier memories of his first appearance in print: Poems by Two 
Brothers (with his brother Charles). It was published by Jacksons, a printer in 
Market Place. Its building, frontage little changed in 200 years, is now an 
Oxfam shop. Assistant Gill Chatfield points out the Tennyson plaque ("It's only 
little: we're not flamboyant in Louth") and delves in the storerooms for 
interesting editions.

"The Lady of Shallot," she muses. "That takes me back to my O levels. We had 
to learn great chunks of it off by heart." And she starts to recite - "She made 
three paces through the room, She der-der-der-der lily bloom" - as customers 
look on, a touch bemused.

The Tennyson brothers celebrated their publishing success with a trip to the 
seaside resort of Mablethorpe, where they declaimed their poems to the waves. 
They spent their childhood holidays there, but that was before the railways 
brought the holidaying masses. They would be intrigued by modern Mablethorpe, 
with Sharky's Family Bar, Luckie's Prize Bingo and Campbell's Dodgems. But it 
has a glorious beach and interesting beach huts. We have tea in one of the 
cafes. The man at the next table orders a Mars Bar pancake.

We drive south, past the more "select" Sutton-on-Sea, past Bohemia Way and the 
Bacchus Hotel and the Sunkist Caravan Park, to a place that would surely still 
appeal to Tennyson: Anderby Creek. Basically a row of houses and a cafe, it's 
agreeably lonely, with wind-buffeted reeds clinging to sand dunes where silent 
men walk dogs as a rainbow arches over the sea. Earlier this year, a "Cloud 
Bar" opened here - the world's first cloud-viewing platform, it shows you how 
to tell your cumulus from your stratus from your Boeing 747 vapour trail.

On the way home, we drive through Tealby, a smart village whose churchyard 
includes a Victorian gravestone to "Frances - wife of Field Flowers". 
Tennyson's grandfather lived here, and paid the 16-year-old poet 10 shillings 
for an elegy to his grandmother. "That is the first money you have ever earned 
by your poetry," the old man wrote to him, "and, take my word for it, it will 
be the last." It just shows how wrong grandfathers can be.

• Kenwick Park Hotel, Louth (01507 608806; kenwick-park.co.uk 
<http://www.kenwick-park.co.uk>) has doubles from £70 B&B. The Cowshed (020 
7627 2354;cottageinthewolds.co.uk <http://www.cottageinthewolds.co.uk>), a 
self-catering cottage in Somersby, offers three-night weekend breaks from £135. 
Information on the Lincolnshire Wolds from 01522 526450;discovereastmidlands.com
 <http://www.discovereastmidlands.com>. For information about the new Tennyson 
heritage trail and listings for the bicentennial celebrations contact 01522 
552222;tennyson2009.co.uk <http://www.tennyson2009.co.uk>
 