
Cameroon became the champions of Africa for the third time yesterday with a 
dramatic penalty shoot-out victory over the hosts Nigeria.

The 4-3 win, after the match had finished 2-2 following extra-time, was 
steeped in controversy after Victor Ikpeba's fourth penalty for Nigeria was not 
awarded by the Tunisian referee Mourad Daami despite appearing to cross the 
line after hitting the underside of the crossbar.

Arsenal's Nwankwo Kanu had earlier seen his penalty, Nigeria's third, saved by 
Boukar Alioum.

After Marc-Vivien Foé of West Ham had spurned the first chance to win the game 
for Cameroon, placing his penalty wide of the post, Liverpool's Rigobert Song 
held his nerve to seal victory.

Nigeria had recovered from two goals down to force the game into extra-time. 
Samuel Oto'o silenced the 40,000 fans at the Surulere Stadium with a superbly 
taken goal in the 27th minute. The Real Madrid teenager controlled a quick 
free-kick before turning past Furo Iyenemi and firing a shot into the far 
corner.

Cameroon quickly doubled the lead when Nigeria's goalkeeper Ike Sharunmu let a 
shot from Patrick Mboma squirm through his legs.

Twice Cameroon spurned chances to put the result beyond doubt. Oto'o hit a 
shot at the legs of a defender after Sharunmu stumbled outside his penalty 
area, before Mboma's 41st-minute header struck a post.

The hosts scored a desperately needed goal just before half-time when Chukwu 
Ndukwe made the most of poor Cameroon marking to finish from close range. Then 
Jay-Jay Okocha marked his return to the team after a one-match suspension with 
a stunning 25-yard shot to make it 2-2 within 90 seconds of the restart.

Cameroon had beaten Nigeria in the African Nations Cup finals of 1984 and 1988 
but they squandered several more chances to seal a comfortable victory this 
time, with Eto'o especially unlucky to see a 51st-minute shot bounce back off 
the post.

"All credit to the players because they could have easily lost faith after 
Nigeria made it 2-2," said Cameroon's coach Pierre Lechantre. "But they came 
out fighting and showed how determined they were to win this cup."

Nigeria, unbeaten at home for 19 years and defending an 11-match unbeaten run 
in the tournament, took the game to Cameroon in extra-time, Babangida and 
Ikpeba both coming close to scoring as penalties loomed. But they could not put 
an end to Cameroon's jinx over Nigeria.

Meanwhile South Africa's Mark Fish announced his retirement from international 
football after South Africa's 2-1 victory over Tunisia in the third-place 
play-off, citing distaste for the South African federation as the reason for 
his decision. The Bolton defender, who has 58 caps, said he was unhappy with 
the treatment of the coaching staff and the way football is run in South Africa.

Nigeria  (4-4-2): Shorunmu; Okpara, Iyenemi, West, Babayaro; Oliseh, Adepoju 
(Ikpeba, 96min), Okocha, George (Babangida, 70); Kanu, Chukwu (Aghahowa, h-t).

Cameroon  (3-5-2): Alioum; Song, Kalla (Mettomo, 93), Njanka; Foé, Wome, 
Njitap, Mayer, Olembe; Mboma, Eto'o (Job, 72).

 Referee: M Daami (Tunisia).
 