
The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record column, 
Sunday May 15 2005

"In the article below, we quote from a report by the Sir Norman Chester Centre 
for Football Research at Leicester University, stating that in 1988, winger 
Mark Walters was subject to racist taunting from his own club's fans after 
joining Rangers. We should clarify that only one Rangers fan was ever 
officially found to be involved in racist chanting against Walters and was 
subsequently banned from Ibrox stadium for life. On 2 January 1988 at Celtic 
Park, Walters was subjected to racial abuse and chanting and again a week later 
at Tynecastle during a Hearts v Rangers fixture. On both occasions, the abuse 
came from Celtic and Hearts supporters respectively."




The quietest, but perhaps the most profound, change in English football in the 
past decade has been the thorough integration of African footballers into the 
upper echelons of the game. Jay-Jay Okocha, Celestine Babayaro, Nwankwo Kanu, 
Quinton Fortune, Fredi Kanouté, Lomana Tresor Lualua, Yakubu Aiyegbeni, Kolo 
Touré and many others have established themselves at the highest level, but at 
the head of this recent tradition of African footballing excellence in England 
stands Lucas Radebe. He arrived at Elland Road in 1994 in a deal that brought 
both him and the highly fancied Phil Masinga from South Africa to join Howard 
Wilkinson's Leeds United. Eleven years later, Radebe has now played his final 
game in England.

There were African footballers in the British game before Radebe. Leeds's own 
Albert Johanneson arrived in 1961 from Johannesburg and played 200 games for 
the club before moving to York City in 1970. In 1965 he was the first African 
to play in the FA Cup final . His performance on the day was, however, 
characterised by an all-too-familiar occurrence of stage fright. It was George 
Best who noted that 'Albert was quite a brave man to actually go on the pitch 
in the first place, wasn't he?' The racism of the period was endemic. 
Johanneson did not help matters with his unfortunate habit of calling his 
teammates 'sir '. After his retirement from football, he disappeared into 
obscurity; in 1995 he died alone in a Leeds high-rise flat, the victim of 
depression and alcoholism.

The same natural reticence did not mark the personality of Ghana striker Tony 
Yeboah. He arrived at Leeds at about the same time as Radebe, with a reputation 
as the tough, free-scoring centre-forward of Eintracht Frankfurt. When 
Wilkinson was asked by the press if he was 'any good ', meaning was he another 
of these Africans whose natural ebullience might not survive a harsh English 
winter, Wilkinson replied with one of his better ripostes, pointing out that 
Eintracht Frankfurt had not made him captain because he was black. He won goal 
of the season with an astonishing volley against Liverpool on his debut and 
averaged a goal every other game. In the end, Yeboah stayed for two years at 
Leeds. He eventually left after a bitter falling out with the new manager, 
George Graham.

The late Eighties and early Nineties are remembered for the rise of black 
British footballers. This, after all, was the era that saw Ugo Ehiogu captain 
the England under-21 side against Holland in 1993. In the same year, Paul Ince 
became the first black footballer to captain the full England side when he led 
the team out against the United States. However, the rise of Lucas Radebe was 
about to refocus the media's attention on African players.

Born in Soweto, South Africa, in 1969, Radebe grew up in a small house as one 
of 11 brothers and sisters. His early years coincided with the most difficult 
period of the anti-apartheid struggle and he was frequently a witness to the 
escalating violence perpetrated by both local gangs and white South Africa's 
security forces. Radebe, who carried a knife and was street-smart, just about 
managed to stay on the right side of the law; although he was active in the 
student movement, which hijacked government vehicles and dispensed vigilante 
justice when necessary, Radebe himself never physically harmed anybody.

When Radebe was 15, his increasingly anxious parents sent him away to school 
in one of the so-called independent homelands, Bophuthatswana, in the 
north-west of the country. There he began to train as a teacher, but he was 
bored by his studies and by the strange rural surroundings. To pass the time in 
this 'Bantustan', as apartheid's 'black homelands' such as Bophuthatswana and 
Ciskei were known, he began to play football, initially preferring to play in 
goal, but soon switching to the outfield where he was a holding midfielder.

His skills brought him to the attention of the famous Johannesburg club Kaizer 
Chiefs and their scout Patrick 'Ace' Ntsoelengoe. He persuaded Radebe to move 
back to Johannesburg and sign professional forms. Soon after, in 1991, an 
incident occurred that made the young footballer realise just how precarious 
his situation was in South Africa. While on his way with one of his brothers to 
do some shopping for his mother, he heard gunfire. Used to the sound of shots, 
he and his brother looked around to see just who had been shot. It was then 
that Radebe felt the pain in his back and noticed that he was covered in blood.

Once Radebe reached hospital, the doctors determined that no vital organs had 
been hit, although he had lost a considerable amount of blood. The bullet had 
entered his back and passed out through his thigh, but he was reassured that he 
would be able to play football again. Although nobody was ever arrested and 
charged with his shooting, Radebe initially suspected that somebody had been 
hired to shoot him. There had, after all, been talk of his leaving Kaizer 
Chiefs for another club, and such 'punishments' were not uncommon in the 
prevailing climate of the country. When, three years later, Leeds came knocking 
on his door, Radebe was ready to start life anew elsewhere.

His first two seasons at Leeds were not promising, with Radebe making only a 
handful of appearances. To make matters worse, his friend and compatriot Phil 
Masinga was also finding it difficult to establish himself in the first team, 
even though he was supposed to be the 'key' acquisition of the pair. After two 
years, Masinga was sold to St Gallen in Switzerland.

Radebe's perseverance was repaid with the arrival as manager of George Graham 
in September 1996. Graham saw what Wilkinson had failed to see and his very 
first action as manager was to lobby the board to sign this 'fringe' player to 
a long-term contract. Finally, clear of niggling injuries and a doubting 
manager, Radebe quickly became a rock at the heart of the Leeds defence. In 
1998 'the chief' was appointed club captain. Other English clubs noticed and in 
the late Nineties a steady flow of African players began to filter into the 
mainstream of English football.

Radebe's development as a South Africa international coincided with the 
emergence of his country from the apartheid era. He made his debut for Bafana 
Bafana, as South Africa are known, in 1991; in 1996 he was part of the team 
who, on home soil, defeated Tunisia 2-0 to win the African Cup of Nations. By 
the time France 98 came around, Radebe - by now a friend of Nelson Mandela, who 
called him 'Big Tree' - was captaining South Africa to a respectable campaign 
in their first appearance in the World Cup finals. Their only defeat was to the 
hosts, the eventual winners.

In September 1998, Graham left Leeds for Tottenham Hotspur and Radebe was 
devastated. His game had blossomed under the tutelage of the defensive-minded 
Scotsman and Radebe considered moving clubs with him. However, the new manager, 
David O'Leary, like his predecessor, made it clear to the Leeds board that the 
first, and most important, priority was the resigning of Radebe to a contract 
that would effectively keep him at Leeds for the rest of his career. It wasn't 
just Radebe's performances on the field that earned the respect of O'Leary and 
others, but his extraordinary dedication to anti-racism work, and his 
commitment to the evolution of football in his home country was attracting wide 
attention. In 2000, Fifa, the game's world governing body, honoured him with 
their fair-play award and the citation made special mention of his work with 
children in Soweto and all over South Africa.

The most serious attempt to lure Radebe away from Elland Road was in 2000, 
when Leeds turned down an offer of £6 million from Roma. Thereafter, nearly two 
years of recurring knee and ankle injuries led to his retirement from 
international football as the most capped South Africa player of all time, but 
these problems also severely restricted his playing time at Leeds.

In 2002 I interviewed a recuperating Radebe in a cramped office at Elland 
Road. As we talked about his South African childhood, about Leeds and racism, 
we were continually interrupted by everybody from coach Brian Kidd to Rio 
Ferdinand. They were surprised to see him at the training ground and clearly 
full of respect for the quiet dignity of the man. It was easy to see how this 
tall, imposing man had earned his nickname from Mandela, but the reflective 
thoughtfulness of his conversation lent him the air of a politician or diplomat 
as opposed to that of a footballer.

Now the playing days of South Africa's first footballing superstar are over. 
Last week a remarkable array of players assembled at Elland Road to participate 
in a testimonial that saw a Leeds Legends XI pitted against a World Football XI 
under the judicious eye of Sam Allardyce.

I was there, too. I am a life-long Leeds fan, but I would not have flown in 
from New York City, where I now live, to pay tribute to any post-Revie player 
other than 'the chief '. I attended my first Leeds game as a five-year-old back 
in 1963 . I revelled in the triumphs of the Sixties and Seventies while 
learning how to endure the racism and hostility of the period. But, in the end, 
the verbal and, at times, physical abuse eventually proved too much and I spent 
10 years boycotting Elland Road. The sad fact was that, for the longest while, 
it appeared that neither Leeds nor the city council wished to do anything about 
this serious problem.

The arrival of Radebe at Elland Road finally brought to the club a man who 
combined world-class footballing excellence with the dignity and authority to 
combat racism, both for Leeds and for South Africa. In these difficult, 
transitional times for the game, I salute him as representing everything that 
is good about football. Radebe is donating the £500,000 that his testimonial 
game earned to charity, a gesture which is thoroughly in character. I wish 
there were some way to keep him at Leeds for ever, but as South Africa prepares 
to host the 2010 World Cup we will, fortunately, be hearing much more about 
'the chief' in the immediate years ahead.

© Caryl Phillips <https://www.theguardian.com/books/caryl-phillips> 2005

· Caryl Phillips is the author of A Distant Shore, which won the 2004 
Commonwealth Writers Prize. His latest novel, Dancing in the Dark, will be 
published in September.

Landmark moments

1881 Andrew Watson, born in British Guiana becomes the first black player to 
play international football, for Scotland against England. He wins three caps.

1889 Arthur Wharton becomes England's first black professional player when he 
signs for Preston North End.

1908 Walter Tull plays the first of two seasons at Tottenham, before four more 
at Northampton. After becoming the first black officer in the British army he 
is killed in 1918 on the Somme.

1965 South African Albert Johanneson becomes the first black player to appear 
in an FA Cup final. He starts for Leeds as they lose 2-1 to Liverpool at 
Wembley.

1977 Laurie Cunningham becomes the first black player to represent England, 
for the under-21s against Scotland.

1978 Viv Anderson is the first black player to represent England at full 
international level, winning the first of his 30 caps against Czechoslovakia.

1982 Cyrille Regis comes on as substitute in England's 4-0 win against 
Northern Ireland. Before the game he receives a letter containing a bullet and 
a message: 'If you play for England at Wembley, one of these will be shot into 
your knees, you black bastard.'

1984 John Barnes's wonder goal for England against Brazil in Rio De Janeiro is 
overshadowed by the presence on the trip of National Front activists. Barnes 
recalls: ' From checking in my bags at Heathrow until the end of the trip 10 
days later, there were three NF members never more than a couple of paces 
behind myself and [fellow black player] Mark Chamberlain. On the way back, I 
heard them telling people the result was Brazil 0 England 1. Scorer Mark 
Hateley.'

1988 English winger Mark Walters is subject to racist taunting from his own 
club's fans after joining Rangers.

1993 Paul Ince becomes the first black player to captain England, in a 2-0 
defeat against the United States.

1994 South Africans Lucas Radebe and Phil Masinga join Leeds, heralding the 
emergence of a new multinational and cosmopolitan game in England. Within a few 
years Patrick Vieira, Thierry Henry and Marcel Desailly of France's World 
Cup-winning side are all playing in England.

2004 Ron Atkinson is forced to resign as an ITV pundit when he makes racist 
remarks about Chelsea's Desaillyafter a Champions League defeat to Monaco.
 