
Public hospitals are facing a future funding crisis after deep federal 
government cuts, the Australian Medical Association has warned, boosting the 
state premiers’ case as they demand the prime minister,Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, reverse reductions in 
health spending in last year’s budget.

The AMA’s annual public hospital report card has found public hospital beds 
are not keeping pace with population growth and demand, elective surgery 
waiting times are not improving and emergency department waiting times are 
improving only slightly and remain below a national target.

And the AMA’s president, Brian Owler, said the performance of hospitals would 
only get worse after the federal government “retreated from its 
responsibilities” on hospital funding, cutting $1.8bn in immediate funding over 
the next four years in the 2014 budget and reneging on a deal to help meet 
increased hospital costs in the long term, saving $57bn over the next 10 years.

“The states and territories are facing a huge ‘black hole’ in public funding 
after a succession of commonwealth cuts,” Owler said. “A perfect storm is 
building ahead of new commonwealth public hospital funding arrangements based 
on indexation and population growth, which will take effect from 2017-18. These 
new arrangements will be imposed on a system already struggling with 
insufficient capacity, a system that is underperforming against key 
benchmarks,” he said.

State premiers have been making the same case since last year’s budget and 
intend to demand answers from the prime minister at the Council of Australian 
Governments (Coag) meeting on Friday. On the same day state health ministers 
will be making the same case at a meeting with the federal health minister, 
Sussan Ley, in Sydney.

The South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jay-weatherill>, told Guardian 
Australia on Wednesday the commonwealth should raise more revenue by cutting 
superannuation tax concessions, cracking down on multinational tax avoidance, 
imposing a tax “floor” on high net worth individuals or extending the GST to 
online purchases.

The federal government is looking at some of those ideas in preparations for 
the 2015 budget in May, but with a view to paying down the deficit or paying 
for other spending priorities – not in order to undo cuts it made in last 
year’s budget.

The commonwealth had hoped the looming crisis in hospital funding might 
convince the states to agree to an increase in the goods and services tax, but 
the states have not, and according to Weatherill, it is now up to the 
commonwealth to sort out the mess.

“It was their funding cut to hospitals and they need to help us find a 
solution ... the first four years of these spending cuts are difficult but 
after that it becomes entirely impossible,” Weatherill said.

The New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> premier, Mike 
Baird, is also demanding the commonwealth reverse the cuts.

“What happened last federal budget is not sustainable,” he said before the 
recent NSW poll. “The commonwealth and the federal government said, ‘We are 
going to allocate a large part of the future growth in health costs from 
ourselves to the state governments ... that is not sustainable.

“The states do not have the capacity to meet those health costs on their own. 
The commonwealth has a critical role to play. It’s not sustainable, to pass 
that health cost, which is the biggest cost to every state budget, down – that 
is the number one issue, we need to ensure the federal government deals with.”

According to the AMA report, to be released Thursday, the ratio of bed numbers 
to the general population has not improved since 2009 and has declined as a 
proportion of over 65-year olds in the population, elective surgery waiting 
times have flatlined at 36 days and only 70% of urgent patients are seen within 
agreed emergency department waiting times – a small improvement but below 
national benchmarks.

The $57bn in long-term commonwealth funding reductions means NSW will lose 
almost $16bn, Victoria $12bn, Queensland $10bn, Western Australia $5.7bn,South 
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> $3.5bn, 
Tasmania and the ACT around $1bn and Northern Territory about $600mn. The cuts 
were included in the commonwealth’s long-term spending projections in the 
intergenerational report, which the Abbott government uses to claim it has 
“halved” projected deficits compared to what they would have been under Labor 
policies.

Friday’s Coag meeting will also discuss the feud between the states over the 
divvying up of GST revenue. The commonwealth is expressing sympathy for Western 
Australia’s demands that it get a bigger share than that allocated by the 
independent Commonwealth Grants Commission, but also insisting that the states 
work out a solution. No other state supports Western Australia’s position.
 