
60,000 people watched the opening game of the twenty-fourth African Nations 
Cup in Tunis last night, but Democratic Republic of Congo coach Mick Wadsworth 
wasn't one of them.

Wadsworth is an engaging Barnsley man, a great friend of Sir Bobby Robson, and 
described by one former colleague as having a very dry sense of humour and 
being 'the only man I know in English football who likes Arthur Scargill'.

His CV reads: lower-leagues and non-League player, then coach, assistant or 
manager at Frickley Athletic, Barnsley, the FA, Barnsley again, Carlisle 
United, Norwich City, Scarborough, Colchester United, Newcastle United, 
Southampton, Oldham Athletic, Huddersfield Town and the Democratic Republic of 
Congo.

Throw in his work in St Kitts helping out his old mate Eric Winstanley, a hero 
of the Barnsley terraces, and it is clear that Wadsworth has seen a lot of the 
football world. But never anything quite like African football administration. 
'Unbelievable. Diabolical. An absolute nightmare,' he says at the team hotel, 
looking slightly older than he did a few weeks ago. 'But I'm enjoying the 
experience.'

Wadsworth should have been at the Rades stadium on a scouting mission last 
night but due to an administrative error (what else?) he wasn't allowed in - 
the Tunisians hadn't sorted out his accreditation in time. He ended up asking
The Observer to do the scouting job for him. 

The hosts, Tunisia, are in the same group as Congo and the teams meet on 
Wednesday. First, Congo take on Guinea this afternoon in his first competitive 
game in charge of an international team.

How did he end up here? The short answer is: quicker than the players. Instead 
of taking a direct two-hour flight from Cairo, where they had a pre-tournament 
get-together, to Tunis, they were sent by the Congolese Federation via Paris, 
which meant 19 hours in transit and an arrival time of 5am. It was cheaper that 
way.

The long answer is: because he had Lomano LuaLua on the books when he took the 
Colchester job, because the now-Newcastle striker recommended him, because 
Bobby Robson gave him a glowing reference and because he fancied it.

Having been detailed to watch Cameroon for the then-England manager at Italia 
90, he took an interest in African football. Wadsworth agrees that the 
England-Cameroon quarter-final was the best match of the tournament, and 
recalls: 'I was so impressed. The skill, the vibrancy, it stayed with me over 
the years. I've followed a few Nations Cups on television and I spoke to Bobby 
at length after he went to the 1998 tournament in Burkina Faso, when he was 
working for Barcelona. It sounded great, I'm adventurous, and here I am.

'The Congolese have a European overseer, if you like, and he mentioned to 
LuaLua that Congo were looking for a change.'

Apart from a brief spell in 1996 the last time they had a white coach was in 
1974, when they became [as Zaire] the first black African side to qualify for 
the World Cup finals. LuaLua recommended Wadsworth and that was that. He was 
offered a three-month contract just for this tournament. Depending on results, 
Congo will then decide whether they want Wadsworth to stay for World Cup 
qualifying and he will decide whether he's keen.

LuaLua, who moved to Britain as a young boy, but has a Congolese wife and a 
house in Kinshasa, is captain of the Simba, as Congo are known, and Wadsworth's 
key player. 'The first time I saw him, at my first training session with 
Colchester, I knew he was a talent. Strong, incredibly flexible, knock him down 
and he's back on his feet again before his arse has hit the ground. Incredible 
dribbling ability. And he can cross the ball.'

When Wadsworth became Robson's assistant at Newcastle, he helped with LuaLua's 
move into the Premiership. The pair have a task on their hands because Congo's 
best player, the Monaco striker Shabani Nonda, is missing, injured. Quality 
players from Auxerre, Anderlecht and Porto have declined to travel with the 
Simba, and if they lose today that will be the end of their hopes. 'I'm going 
to enjoy it, whatever happens,' says Wadsworth. 'Strip away the glitz and 
what's the difference between coaching at Congo or Newcastle? Pitch, grass, 
cones, bibs, goals, players, coach... that's what I love. It can be rewarding 
anywhere.' That was over lunch at the St Leger Hotel in Doncaster in December. 
Since then an awful lot of glitz has been stripped away. 'If I was 10 years 
younger it would have driven me nuts, what's happened in the past few weeks. 
But I'm older, wiser. I'm 52 now, I'm more patient.' Has his attitude changed? 
Long pause. 'I'm more understanding now.'

He has had to be because, in no particular order: 1) Apart from his contract, 
Wadsworth has not had a single sheet of paper from his employers. No team list, 
contact list, schedule, staff contacts, hotel details, nothing.

2) He has been unable to contact two players he was interested in. 'There was 
one at Birmingham and they haven't any record of where he is and they've lost 
another in Romania. They don't have a database of players and no contact 
details.'

3) The training camp in Egypt was 'a disaster'. The accommodation, at a 
stadium, was extremely basic, and the team were locked out of training because 
the bill for hiring the facilities hadn't been paid. 'Nobody had any money, 
ever. And even if you wanted a new toilet roll you'd have to go through 
Kinshasa.'

4) They didn't know when they were leaving Egypt, or where they were going to 
stay in Tunis. Then there was that 19-hour journey.

5) Yesterday, Congo lost the services of Franck Matingou when the football 
federation failed to get clearance from Fifa for the France-born defender to 
play for Congo. 'I'm not sure that we will be allowed to replace him. I 
certainly hope so,' said a clearly irritated Wadsworth. Wadsworth's first 
match, a friendly against Egypt, was comical, and though he can laugh about it 
now, he didn't at the time. Congo, a goal down, started to improve and scored a 
good equaliser. While they were celebrating on the touchline by the dugout, the 
referee allowed Egypt to restart, and they scored in an empty goal.

'We didn't have anyone on the pitch!' says Wadsworth. 'There was pandemonium. 
I had a right go at the Egyptian coach [with whom he has since made up]. The 
referee was diabolical, absolutely diabolical.' The goal stood, there was a 
five-minute argument and Congo eventually drew 2-2.

There have been lighter moments, though. Among them was Wadsworth's first 
meeting with his new bosses. 'I went down to London the Sunday before Christmas 
to see the Sports Minister. He was with the ambassador, who was wearing a 
bright-yellow, baggy tracksuit and looked like Puff Daddy.

'We had a coffee and a bite at a hotel in Brent. I paid. At about 
half-past-two they said, "Where's LuaLua?" Of course he was in Newcastle. So I 
drove them up there. We needed petrol on the way. I paid. And we stopped at a 
services. I asked the ambassador if he wanted a sandwich and he swept 
everything off the counter into a big bag. I paid.

'When we got to Newcastle we met LuaLua at a hotel. I paid.' Not that 
Wadsworth is complaining about money. They paid up his contract in advance - 'I 
didn't ask for a fortune' - and he enjoyed the company of his new employers. 
'The ambassador put his arm around me and said, "Mick you are my brother. We 
must do it. We must get you a Congo passport".'

If Congo are among the many have-nots of African football, Cameroon, winners 
of the past two Nations Cups, are undoubtedly foremost of the haves. Last 
Thursday while Congo were returning from a distant training ground that was 
'worse than the Dog and Duck in Barnsley to play on' Cameroon were launching 
their new all-in-one kit and the Puma PR machine went into overdrive. Players 
from English, Spanish and German leagues, dripping with gold jewellery, fended 
off questions about who they most feared and Manchester United's Eric Djemba 
Djemba told us how much he had learnt in his first six months at Old Trafford.

Meanwhile, Wadsworth was preparing for his next battle, trying to persuade the 
Congo federation to pay the players' allowances. All 22 are entitled to US$7 
(£3.88) a day, which is worth having if you're playing in Africa, and about as 
much as you'd earn taking a throw-in in Europe's top leagues. The day rate is 
one of the reasons why many European club coaches see the Nations Cup as a 
Micky Mouse tournament. But it's misleading.

Ever more players are earning a fortune in Europe. Ten years ago when the 
Nations Cup was last staged in Tunisia England's representation was Efan Ekoku 
of Norwich City. This year there are 18 Pre miership players and five from the 
Nationwide.

The one who attracted most attention in the build-up was Frédéric Kanouté of 
Tottenham, France under-21 and now, because he is a dual national and the 
eligibility rules have changed, Mali. Kanouté and his Mali team are at the same 
hotel as Congo and on Friday he came over for a chat. There will be many more 
in his position, he said, especially Francophone dual nationals. 'I'm French 
and I'm Malian,' he said. 'I'm not 100 per cent one or the other. If people 
can't accept that, it's their problem not mine.'

When more opt to play for African countries 'the level of interest and 
standard of play will improve even more, and it's already a strong tournament'. 
Could we see a future when all African teams comprise only dual nationals and 
Europe-based players with no one coming from Africa? 'Perhaps,' he said. 'But 
that's how it is now, that, how do you say,mondialisation.' 

Mali, who reached the semi-finals two years ago with a young team, could 
surprise a few of the more established countries here. It is difficult to see 
beyond Senegal and Cameroon for the winners, though.

Certainly it won't be Congo, even if they do expect to fare better in the 
group stage than they did under their first white coach, the Yugoslav Blagoje 
Vidinic, in the 1974 World Cup in West Germany. Under their former name, Zaire, 
they lost 2-0 to Scotland then 9-0 to Yugoslavia.

In their third match, defender Mwepu Ilunga famously raced out of a defensive 
wall when Brazil had a free-kick and booted the ball up the other end of the 
field. It served to waste a bit of time. Ilunga, recently interviewed by the 
BBC, revealed that the players had all but given up in the 9-0 game because 
they had not been paid.

Mobutu Sese Seko sent his presidential guard to warn the team that if they 
lost by 4-0 to Brazil they would not be welcome back in Kinshasa. 'They closed 
the hotel to journalists and threatened us,' said Ilunga. Zaire lost only 3-0 
but went home penniless and Ilunga said last year: 'Look at me now. I'm living 
like a tramp.'

The murderous, money-grabbing Mobutu ruined Zaire and will go down in history 
as probably the worst ruler of any African country. According to a special 
report on Africa in last week's Economist magazine, the civil war in Congo is 
the worst conflict since the Second World War, with more than three million 
killed between 1998 and 2003.

Many are still in fear for their lives, especially in the east, and the 
magazine states: 'In the north-east, militias are trying to eliminate whole 
tribes. Throughout eastern Congo, rape, including male rape, is routine. Some 
guerrillas carry little bottles of palm oil, in case.' Civil servants in one 
town haven't been paid for 10 years, people use old crates and abandoned 
vehicles as homes and shops.

It is a wonder Congo functions at all. Putting out a football team in a 
tournament half a continent away is an achievement in itself, one of which 
Congo's people will be very proud in the coming weeks judging by some of the 
'good-luck' faxes arriving at the team hotel in Tunis last week. Football will 
be a welcome diversion.

Wadsworth has been to Kinshasa once (this time he didn't pay, but LuaLua did). 
'What an intense place,' he says. 'But so sad. On the drive from the airport to 
the hotel we must have passed a million people on the streets trying to sell a 
banana, a box of matches, to put back together a 30-year-old car from 
50-year-old parts, anything to make a buck. And in all that there were smiles. 
The people have been wonderfully warm. It has been chaotic, but they are good 
people.'

Premiership players in Africa 

 CAMEROON Geremi (Chelsea) Eric Djemba-Djemba (Man United) Salomon Olembe 
(Leeds United) DR CONGO  Lord Ndiwa (Bolton) Lomama Lualua (Newcastle)  MALI  
Frédéric Kanouté (Spurs) NIGERIA  Joseph Yobo (Everton) Celestine Babayaro 
(Chelsea) Nwankwo Kanu (Arsenal) Isaac Okoronkwo (Wolves) Yakubu Aiyegbeni 
(Portsmouth) Jay Jay Okocha (Bolton) SENEGAL  Aliou Cissé (Birmingham) Henri 
Camara (Wolves) Lamine Sakha (Leeds) El Hadji Diouf (Liverpool) Salif Diao 
(Liverpool) Lamine Sakho (Leeds United) S AFRICA  Mbulelo Mabizela (Spurs) 

 THIS WEEK: Today:  Group A: DR Congo v Guinea (1pm).  Group C: Zimbabwe v 
Egypt (3.30pm); Cameroon v Algeria (6pm). Tomorrow: Group B:  Senegal v B Faso 
(6pm); Kenya v Mali (1pm). Tuesday: Group D:  Nigeria v Morocco (1pm); S Africa 
v Benin (5pm).

 Wednesday: Group A:  Rwanda v Guinea (1pm); Tunisia v DR Congo (3.15pm).  
Thursday: Group C: Cameroon v Zimbabwe (3.30pm); Algeria v Egypt (6pm). Friday: 
Group B: Senegal v Kenya (1pm); Burkina Faso v Mali (6pm).  Saturday: Group D: 
Nigeria v S Africa (1pm); Morocco v Benin (5pm).

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 