
Doctors from Barts hospital have warned of the dangers of alternative 
medicines after a four-year-old autistic boy was admitted to hospital suffering 
adverse effects from a cocktail of supplements.


The child, who was not named in a report of the incident, had been vomiting 
and constipated for three weeks and also lost 3kg in weight before he was taken 
to accident and emergency and diagnosed with severe hypercalcaemia – or very 
high calcium levels in his blood.

Police were called to investigate a naturopath who had advised the family to 
give their son a combination of 12 different complementary therapies including 
calcium, vitamin D, camel milk and zinc.

The parents only revealed he had taken the supplements three days after he was 
admitted and doctors said it should be “routine practice” to take details of 
alternative therapies as part of the patient’s medical history.

There is no scientific case for homeopathy: the debate is over | Edzard Ernst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/12/no-scientific-case-homeopathy-remedies-pharmacists-placebos>
Writing in the British Medical Journal’s Case Reports, doctors from Barts 
Health NHS Trust, in London, said: “His parents were devastated that something 
they had given to their son with good intent had made him so unwell.

“The safeguarding team became involved as well as the police to investigate 
the naturopath who had advised the therapies.

“Many families view these therapies as safer ‘natural’ options. But as this 
case demonstrates there can be significant adverse effects which may go 
unrecognised due to lack of monitoring, recognition and experience with these 
therapies.”

The boy eventually made a full recovery two weeks later.

Responding to the doctors’ alternative therapies warning, Jane Harris, of the 
National Autistic Society, said: “This awful case shows we need more 
professionals in place to give families accurate advice and talk to them about 
what really helps and how to find the right support.

“It’s crucial that doctors and healthcare professionals take the concerns of 
families seriously and are able to talk through the potential risks of 
alternative therapies, even when they might seem harmless.”
 