
Tim Hayward, food writer and editor of Fire & Knives food quarterly: 

Unless you've been trapped down a well all week, I assume you've seen Alex 
James's piece 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/features/4068586/Why-fast-food-is-on-a-roll-in-the-UK.html>
 in theSun. It's a stonking great opus, in which he's managed to get himself 
invited into Greggs', McDonald's and KFC's factories and concludes that their 
food is great and an all-round blessing on humanity. At one point – and this is 
the one that caused Twitter to melt – he avers that McDonald's is in some ways 
"very similar to a Michelin-starred restaurant". I'm finding this frankly 
fascinating. It's got the online food community up in arms like nothing else 
I've seen for a long time – there's a really angry backlash against "one of us" 
supporting the fast-food companies, particularly in such a powerful medium. 
Personally, I reckon he's wrong to the point of being irresponsible to defend 
fast food in our largest circulation tabloid, but the fact that he is, that the
Sun wants to publish it and their readers want to read it indicates that the 
national conversation about food, from media and government, is 
catastrophically missing the most important audience.

Jay Rayner, Observer food writer

I'm not about to defend Alex James's latest infantile contribution to food 
journalism, but you are right. The prominence of his piece does flag up the 
fact that much of the earnest debate about food in this country has become akin 
to a clinking middle-class cocktail party, which simply ignores and excludes 
vast slabs of the population. It is, for what it's worth, also grossly 
hypocritical; we both know that wherever food obsessives gather together, 
online or otherwise, they will occasionally let the mask slip and boast of all 
the "bad" things they have eaten; about their love for sausage rolls, and the 
relative merits of Burger King over McDonald's. We need a more sophisticated 
debate over our food culture, one that faces up to a few realities. Of course 
the big fast-food multiples have too many outlets – a proliferation of these 
places in deprived inner-city areas is a clear marker of food poverty – and 
planning laws could be used to tackle that. But, at the same time, Greggs 
genuinely does make a point of using the local produce our guardians of food 
culture bang on about. Likewise,McDonald's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mcdonalds> pretty much created the market 
for free-range eggs in the UK when it swapped supply overnight from battery 
eggs in the early 00s. They have awards from Compassion in World Farming and 
the RSPCA to show for it. Our national conversation about food must start to 
think seriously about the industrial food process, and the benefits it can 
bring to the culture. Otherwise it will go nowhere, and fast.

TH: I think you've nailed it with that word "industrial". When food is so 
emotional and personal for food lovers, the idea that it can be industrially 
created with financial profit as the motive is easy to hate. It's also 
impossible to avoid. I think the 1851 census was the first in which more than 
half of the UK population lived in cities. Since that point, concern for a 
direct "relationship" with food has been a minority interest. For the majority, 
the chicken is practically irrelevant; the retailer or processor is who we get 
to engage with. I'm not so much of a dewy-eyed utopian that I want to see us 
return to rearing our own pigs and bartering for oats, but surely, once most of 
our food is going through industrial processes, it becomes subject to market 
forces. A food processor or manufacturer will always profit from meeting our 
baser tastes while driving down costs – hence mass obesity. Under those 
circumstances, patronising though it is, it becomes the responsibility of the – 
admittedly wholly middle-class – food media to speak out against "big food", or 
at least not promote it in such an unqualified way. Hell, you've got me 
thinking in terms of "betrayal" now.

JR: There can be a lot to hate about the industrial food process. Believe me, 
I've spent enough time investigating the impact of the multiples at every stage 
of the food supply chain to know that change is vital. But the reality is that 
there has always been an industrial process, since the very first Egyptian 
sowed his very first crops on the banks of the Nile. An industrial – for which 
read large-scale – food production system, responding to the demands of the 
market, is not necessarily evil. Indeed, on a small, overpopulated island like 
ours it's vital. The issue is, how do we engage with it? We can completely turn 
away from the likes of Greggs, McDonald's and KFC with our noses in the air 
(while, as I say, filling our pockets with flaky sausage rolls as a mark of our 
enthusiasm for food). Or we can get a little more sophisticated about it, stop 
being patronising and ask why it is that vast slabs of the population have no 
interest in the kind of saliva-flecked conversations you and I have, and ask 
what sort of industrial food process we want. In short, if notGreggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/greggs>, then what?

TH: You're arguing me back into an unattractive stance of sophomoric Marxism 
but, truth is, I'm too cynical to believe businesses of that scale could ever 
make a change that would reduce profits while generally benefiting society. 
They just can't – it's like expecting bankers to take a pay cut. The only 
things that will get them to change are legislation (yeah, right) or public 
opinion. And that means that opinion formers such asAlex James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james> and the Sun are hugely 
powerful. I'd argue that the main, proven way to engage with a company is by 
media pressure on behalf of consumers, which in my book puts James's "roll over 
and tickle my tummy" piece way out beyond irresponsible.

JR: Well, Tim, you have grown the right sort of beard and started dressing 
like a peasant since you moved to Cambridge to open your own restaurant [the 
recently reopenedFitzbillies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/nov/11/fitzbillies-tim-hayward-cambridge>
, a 90-year-old bakery], so I think you can wear the old-school Marxist tag 
very comfortably. On one point we agree: Alex James'sSun piece was both stupid 
and irresponsible. All that said, I think there are grounds for optimism; that 
big business really can be shifted by market forces to do good. And curiously, 
the best example of that really is McDonald's. Their business was collapsing 
towards the end of the 90s. They turned it around by committing to only using 
British and Irish beef, making all their milk organic and swapping their entire 
egg supply to free range. Their turnover improved. We may both have grave 
concerns about the proliferation of their offerings and the way they make chips 
that taste of cardboard despite using potato. But it is proof that it's worth 
engaging with the industrial food process and encouraging the big players to do 
better. Just don't go expecting the former bassist from Blur to be the man to 
make it happen.
 