
Ignatius Mayero is thankful. As the Project Co-ordinator for Bega Kwa Bega 
(BKB), he knows that lives have been saved thanks to loans paid out to the 
handicraft group by Shared Interest (SI), a "cooperative lending society" based 
in the UK. "I think this is the most important step that we have made. With a 
loan we have started a cake making project that will accommodate other girls 
and also act as a supplementary unit of production beside our work of making 
handicrafts."

Bega Kwa Bega, meaning "shoulder to shoulder", aim to provide people from the 
Korogocho slums in Nairobi, Kenya, with a means of trading with other 
countries. The handicraft group employs dozens of talented females, who have 
recently been provided by SI with Term Loans to purchase sewing machines 
necessary for the production of their handicrafts.

The results of the additional equipment are there for all to see; BKB now runs 
six projects, including baking and sewing and the turnover has resulted in more 
money going back to the people of Korogocho. Over 85 percent of their products 
are exported to countries such as the UK.

Before SI, BKB's limited resources for handicrafts meant that they could not 
afford to employ any more people. "This [loan] will help our women continue 
working as they wait for the orders since there [are] some seasons that we 
don't receive orders."

Entrepreneurial aid schemes, such as SI, are believed to be the way to 
ultimately alleviate Africa from poverty. The World Economic Forum and the UN's 
Millennium Development Goals both state that the eradication of poverty in the 
long term will be down to "trade" not "aid".

A topic which has caused much controversy, former Goldman Sachs strategist, 
Dambisa Moyo's book 'Dead Aid' ascertains that western aid keeps African 
countries in poverty, rather than ease the results of it. Moyo is not the only 
one. Author of award-winning book 'The Bottom Billion', Paul Collier also says 
rather controversially, "Aid is to buy influence rather than have an effect in 
the country."

As an alternative, many experts have spoken about the benefits of setting up 
entrepreneurial opportunities for individuals in the developing world through 
private lending, providing them with the money and tools to be able to start 
their own businesses and repay their loans. Many companies have been 
established for this purpose, and distance themselves from "charity" status.

Lewis Temple, chief executive of International Development Enterprises (IDE) 
believes this is the best way to eradicate poverty amongst farmers in poor 
countries, stating "We provide income opportunities for farmers to earn 
sustainable and long term cash income."

IDE's aim is to equip farmers in rural areas of Africa and Asia with cheap, 
affordable agricultural tools through the private sector. IDE also help farmers 
set up business links at regional markets and work closely with local 
non-governmental organisations to help farmers establish their own trade.

Far from seeing IDE as a charity, Mr Temple believes, "[It is] a more 
dignified approach that enables farmers to use their own skills and enterprise 
to challenge poverty. A donation of cash is a short term fix that humiliates 
the farmer and diminishes their abilities to lift themselves out of poverty."

Meanwhile, charities have fought back against the rising animosity towards 
aid. Coco, a UK based charity which focuses on education and healthcare for 
children in developing countries, specifies that all donations are used to 
"maximum effect" by co-operating with local community organisations.

"Entrepreneurial investment in developing countries is undoubtedly a necessity 
for growth, poverty alleviation and development," says Lucy Philipson, Coco's 
Operations Manager who thinks that aid has been unfairly dismissed. "However, 
whilst investment in trade is important, trade alone cannot fight poverty. Aid, 
both emergency and development, is still needed as long as developing countries 
exist."

Ms Philipson believes that it is not merely western aid which stifles growth 
in developing countries. "Corrupt governments, unaccountable aid agencies and a 
general failure to be transparent give aid a bad name. But not all aid 
organisations operate without morals or ethics, some of us genuinely work in 
partnership with communities to alleviate poverty."

Countries dubbed "fragile states" such as Sierra Leone and Zimbabwe still rely 
heavily on aid actually reaching the right causes within the country, where 
there is fear of corruption and government misspending. Charities are 
continuously lambasted for not distinguishing between development aid and 
emergency aid and not making aid money more easily accounted for.

Changing the way in which aid money is dispensed could be the only way 
developing countries are improved. Experts now argue that the problem lies in a 
"one size fits all" strategy formed and applied by European governments. Where 
aid money is given directly to the government, countries such as Tanzania have 
been known to invest heavily on the needs of civilians. In countries such as 
Zimbabwe, however, there is no visible improvement to the infrastructure of the 
country. The EU maintain a travel ban and have frozen assets of Zimbabwe's 
president Robert Mugabe for the disputed 2008 elections and alleged human 
rights abuse by his government: driving Mugabe to plead for more aid.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development reported this year 
that most rich countries still have a long way to go in order to meet their 
pledges to the developing world before the economic slump. OECD member 
countries which include the US, Japan, Germany, France and the UK gave on 
average 0.3 percent of their national income as aid last year, which was far 
below the UN target of 0.7 percent.

Aid is undoubtedly one way of helping those in poverty, but how much actually 
goes directly to those it aims to help? In an ideal world, aid would work in 
tandem with the ability to trade. Countries such as Tanzania prove that when 
aid is correctly applied communities can flourish, especially improving the 
country's infrastructure. Trade loans compliment this, providing a basis for 
families to alleviate themselves from poverty forever.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 