
If SF is grounded in hard scientific fact, and science is killing God, then 
what place does that leave for divine intervention in the pages of SF 
literature? When I tweeted this question,@MirabilisDave 
<http://twiter.com/MirabilisDave> gave Arthur C Clarke's famous dictum a twist, 
quipping that "Any sufficiently advanced technocrat will be indistinguishable 
from God."

 Roger Zelazny could almost have written Lord of Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575094215/lord-of-light>
 in response to this idea. In this classic of 1960s SF a group of human 
explorers colonise an Earth-like planet. But instead of creating a paradise, 
the original colonists keep control of their futuristic technology and set 
themselves up as gods over their fellow man. To mark themselves out they take 
on the aspects of the Hindu pantheon – Vishnu, Krisha, Kali and many others – 
and use their power to enslave generations of their own descendants in an 
enforced agrarian caste system.

But their conceit backfires when rebel colonist Sam sets himself up as the 
Buddha and, over the course of many lifetimes, makes spiritual and 
philosophical war against his god-like former colleagues. Zelazny's genius in 
Lord of Light is to show both how religious ideas can reinforce oppression, and 
how they offer a route to liberation and spiritual freedom. Religion is a 
battle ground, and walking away from it only concedes the war to your 
opponents. 

If all technocrats were as charming and witty as the Minds of Iain M Banks's 
Culture novels, technocracy would be a far less chilling prospect. As@modulux 
points out <http://twitter.com/modulux>, the artificially intelligent 
supercomputers, with the power to build worlds and govern billions of human 
lives, are at least "weakly god-like". So lovely are the Minds that they really 
rather win one over to the idea of a benign power taking over the world. Maybe 
Apple's Siri will one day take on the job! 

That nightmare scenario might read more like Harlan Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/harlan-ellison>'s I Have No 
Mouth And I Must Scream. In Ellison's masterpiece of future horror AM, a 
supercomputer responsible for destroying humankind, tortures the last survivors 
for eternity, resurrecting them after each death, mutilating their bodies and 
perverting their minds. AM is the vengeful God we all hope and pray does not 
exist, and inspired both Terminator's Skynet and the human-hating machines of 
The Matrix.

Ted Kosmatka's Prophet of Bones <http://www.tedkosmatka.com> is a sci-fi 
thriller that builds an alternate world from one simple idea: what if 
creationism had debunked Darwinism and the modern world believed it had existed 
for only 5,800 years? As a child Paul Carson researches evolution in mice, an 
experience which opens his mind to the scientific discovery that will help him 
bring scientific truth back to the world. But he is up against a conspiracy of 
silence that has kept that truth from the world for centuries.

Kosmatka's chilling high concept is grounded in the fact that our society 
lived in ignorance of evolution for centuries, when the evidence of it was 
right there for us to find at any time. New ideas always disrupt old ones, and 
the powers who benefit from the old ideas, be they the church or other 
institutions, never welcome the change. It raises the question of what ideas we 
are ignoring or repressing right now that could transform our understanding of 
life and the universe as profoundly as Darwin's theory of evolution.

Science fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/science-fiction> has always 
been a place where weird, disruptive and sometimes downright dangerous ideas 
have been allowed to express themselves. If there's one thing SF writers like 
to do, it's argue. Tell them God is good and they'll prove why he doesn't 
exist. Show them there is no God, and they'll invent one just to to prove you 
wrong. Science fiction isn't so much about science as it is about the quest for 
new ideas that will smash apart the old ones. That's why the best SF is always 
outside the mainstream. If it was winning literary awards, that would only 
prove it wasn't really doing its job.
 