
Fans and managers alike have been thinking it and saying it for a while now: 
'We'll be all right when we get our Africans back.' Harry Redknapp joined in 
last week during his love-in with Avram Grant after Portsmouth's 1-1 draw with 
Chelsea. 'Don't be surprised if they win the treble,' he said of Chelsea's 
prospects when they have Essien, Drogba, Kalou and Obi back in their ranks.

 You can believe it if you like, but I'm not so sure. Not unless Didier 
Drogba, Kolo Toure, Michael Essien and Harry's own Sulley Muntari are 
superhuman. Or their club doctor has discovered a homeopathic and legal form of 
human growth hormone.

Here's a hypothesis, and you'll have to stretch your imagination a little. Go 
back to Euro 2004 and let's just suppose Wayne Rooney was never injured, Sol 
Campbell's headed 'winner' in England's quarter-final against Portugal had been 
allowed to stand, and Sven's battling heroes had gone on to play two more 
games. And then we'll move the tournament back a few months to, say, January 
and February. So Rooney, Lampard, the Nevilles, Scholes, Carragher, Gerrard, 
Ashley Cole, Joe Cole and their team-mates would traipse home for the Trafalgar 
Square necessaries, straight from their post-match party, then pump themselves 
up for the last 12 league games of the season, the business end of the FA Cup, 
and the Champions League knockouts. All in the knowledge that as soon as that 
lot is out of the way they knuckle down to four successive weekends of World 
Cup qualifiers in June. Sound good?

 That's the reality for the top players in the African Cup of Nations. Those 
from Ghana, Cameroon, Ivory Coast and Egypt will have played five or six games 
in 20 days after the third place play-off and Sunday's final. Six games in an 
intense international tournament, in extreme heat - probably hotter than in 
Portugal three and a half years ago - on hard, unforgiving pitches, against 
even harder, even more unforgiving tacklers. They have been looking forward to 
the Cup of Nations for months, have targeted victory here as a crucial part of 
their plans for the first African World Cup, in South Africa in 2010. Whether 
they were winners or losers in the last few days, will they really be at their 
best - and should fans expect them to be - when they return to club football?

 There will be those who look at the original line-up of teams in Ghana and 
say: Namibia, Sudan, Zambia, Benin? This is a Mickey Mouse tournament.' Yes, 
and Rigobert Song is Bambi.

 The Cup of Nations is tough. This tournament has been the toughest yet, the 
hardest to win, because the quality has been higher than ever before. Ivory 
Coast might have blown it in their semi-final, but just run through their 
starting line-up (and the bench, for that matter) and ask yourself how many of 
these players would get into the England squad. Plenty. Nine of their top 
players are at clubs who have played, or are still playing, in this season's 
Champions League - more than Fabio Capello could call on at Wembley on 
Wednesday.

All of which gives Manchester United (one Angolan quarter-finalist who has 
never played for the first team and has been loaned out to Panathinaikos) a 
potentially massive advantage over Arsenal (three players in the semi-finals, 
one in the final) and Chelsea (three in the semis and another one in the 
quarters) in the remainder of the season.

Alexandre Song does not play often enough for Arsenal to give them any 
worries, but their 'Mr Angry', Emmanuel Eboue, is an important player and Kolo 
Toure even more so. Both the Ivorians have been key men in Ghana and Kolo Toure 
has also had to play with a groin injury. For Chelsea, John Obi Mikel had a 
rest after Nigeria's woeful effort, Michael Essien has sweated buckets for 
Ghana and been one of the players of the tournament, Salomon Kalou has been in 
good form and his captain, Drogba, led the Ivory Coast's challenge from the 
front. Are they going to be at their best as Chelsea challenge for four 
trophies? Maybe they'll be up for it, and fit for it, in one or two, but all 
four?

 And what of Harry's returning hero, Muntari? Pompey have played all eight 
games against the 'big four' and although they have a chance of Uefa Cup 
football, Sulley has already made it clear that he doesn't want to be playing 
in it next season. He wants Champions League football at a bigger club. So he 
might give it his best shot in the FA Cup, but how motivated is he going to be, 
having just helped Ghana to the semi-finals, against Middlesbrough and Wigan? 
Up at St James', Kevin Keegan will welcome back Geremi, but with Cameroon going 
all the way to the final surely even the over-optimistic Newcastle fans can't 
expect him to return in top form.

 United's lack of top African players will surely benefit them in the coming 
weeks. There is, though, hope for their 'big four' rivals. Manucho, their 
Angolan striker, looked sensational in Ghana. Three of his four goals - two 
headers and a left-foot screamer - were among the best in the tournament.

He might even be in the United first team in January 2010. And the next Cup of 
Nations is in Angola.
 