 The internet and other networks are based on a fundamental idea developed by 
the computer scientist Donald Watts Davies, who has died aged 75. He is not 
always given full credit for his contribution because Paul Baran, an American 
working at the Rand Corporation in California, had independently come up with 
the same idea. However, Baran was focusing on a way to restructure AT&T's 
telephone system. Davies was creating a data network, and the design of the 
Arpanet, the precursor of the internet, was changed completely to adopt his 
technique.
Also, Davies's term for the idea, which he called "packet switching", was much 
catchier than Baran's "distributed adaptive message block switching". Davies 
had considered many possibilities - block, unit, segment, etc - before deciding 
on packet as a sort of small package. And as he later told Baran: "Well, you 
may have got there first, but I got the name."

Like all beautiful ideas, "packet switching" is fundamentally simple. The 
problem with long-distance communications is that it is difficult and expensive 
to maintain a connection that stretches a long way across many different 
telephone lines through many different exchanges, some run by different 
companies. Why not chop the message into small packets first, then shove them 
on to the network and let them make their own way to their destination by the 
easiest route available? The receiving system can shuffle them into the right 
order, and ask for any missing packets to be re-sent.

The postal service works in the same way. Packet switching is just like 
sending someone a book, each page in its own numbered envelope, for the 
recipient to reassemble on arrival. Once you've put all the envelopes in the 
nearest post box, you don't care how they get to the destina tion address. In 
the context of voice telephony, of course, this idea sounds outrageous, and 
Baran's proposals met with considerable hostility. But as a way of building 
computer networks, such as Davies proposed, it was wonderfully simple and 
logical. It was rapidly adopted, with British Telecom offering a data service 
called Packet SwitchStream (PSS).

The idea also transformed the economics of communications. You no longer 
needed to make a long-distance call to send data across the world, only to call 
the network's nearest node - which today is usually a local internet service 
provider.

Davies did not, of course, go on to found a mega-corporation and try to 
dominate data networking. He wasn't that sort of chap. Brian Oakley, who ran 
Britain's strategic computer research initiative, says: "He was an ideas man, 
and didn't follow through. It wasn't that he couldn't have, it was just that he 
chose to move on to the next idea. But one of his key features was that he 
would pick things up well before other people realised they were going to be 
important."

He was born in Treorchy, in the Rhondda Valley. When his father died a few 
months later, his mother moved Donald and his twin sister to her home town of 
Portsmouth. He went on to get a first in physics at Imperial College, London, 
at the age of 19, then took another first in mathematics, graduating in 1947.

At Imperial he attended a lecture about ACE, one of the first digital 
computers, which was being built at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), and 
promptly applied to join the team. There he worked with Alan Turing, the 
computer pioneer best known for his wartime code-breaking work at Bletchley 
Park, and stayed for 37 years, a well-respected member of Britain's scientific 
civil service.

NPL gave Davies the opportunity to work in a wide range of fields from machine 
translation (Russian into English) to superconducting materials, and it was at 
NPL that he developed the packet switching idea in 1965. He was also the first 
project leader for the Ministry of Technology's advanced computer technology 
project. Although shy, Davies's intellectual powers commanded respect. He was a 
leader, and also liked.

In his last years at NPL, Davies formed a computer security group and worked 
with the clearing banks on cryptography and the security of their networks. 
After retiring in 1984, he continued to work as a data security consultant, and 
for fun developed a PC simulation of the first computer he had helped design, 
Turing's Pilot ACE.

This idea neatly encapsulated a career that - thanks to the incredible pace of 
technological development - covered the entire history of digital computing and 
data communications. Davies was privileged to work on one of the first 
computers, and lived to see them become part of everyday life. He was also one 
of the originators of distributed data communications networks, an idea that 
seemed abstruse in 1965 but led directly to the ubiquity of the internet.

He is survived by his wife, Diane, a daughter and two sons. 

 Jack Schofield 

 Donald Watts Davies, computer scientist, born June 7 1924; died May 28 2000
 