
There are many options on how best to spend a shrinking pot of public money. 
But if one of the goals is preserving fairness, safeguarding cohesion and 
ensuring that everyone – regardless of background – gets the best chance to 
thrive, Doncaster provides the perfect example of what not to do.

Since May, Peter Davies has been the south Yorkshire town's elected mayor, 
representing the English Democrats. He has sought to make "soft" cuts – the 
kind that make ratepayers feel their money is not being wasted. Here are some 
of the issues he has targeted: a gay pride event; translation of leaflets into 
minority languages; funding for Black History Month; jobs of diversity 
officers; funding of groups that do not specifically serve the majority 
"indigenous" population.

Davies is an extreme example, but there will be other council leaders who, as 
the purse strings tighten, are tempted to see expenditure on the services that 
help disadvantaged groups or aid equality as easy soft cuts.

"The very area we should be strengthening -equality- is under the greatest 
threat," says Simon Woolley, coordinator of Operation Black Vote. "We get this 
wrong and those least likely to defend themselves will be readily thrown out of 
work, and find it most difficult to be re-employed. Furthermore, our inability 
to close the inequality gap could result in community antagonism, and in some 
places rising crime."

The decisionfor policymakers, at local and national level, should not be 
solely what a service costs, but what it is worth. Not all grants to all 
minority groups are deserved or well spent; some have squandered the money or 
have been ineffective. But focus on the bulk of the money spent on community 
inclusion and cohesion. How much does an area such as, say, Tower Hamlets, east 
London, benefit from residents who do not have English as a first language 
being able to participate in the community? How much does London benefit from 
the £100,000 the Greater London authority grants to the annual gay and lesbian 
Pride event, in terms of what it says about the capital – let alone the 
financial gains to bars, shops and restaurants?

A harsh light will shine on spending, and rightly so. But when community 
services are assessed, let us think of Jagtar Singh Dhindsa, who came to 
Britain without English as a first language. He benefited from funding– in his 
case, section 11 money that was channelled towards the education of young 
people from ethnic minorities and. Today, he is leader of the Labour group on 
Watford borough council and is chair of the National Association of Black, 
Asian and Ethnic Minority Councillors. If that doesn't represent best value for 
him and the wider community, what does?

Hugh Muir is a Guardian journalist

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 