
A secretive donor in the Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> affair who gained access to a 
defence minister for a private meeting is a defence lobbyist who has used a 
false name and given the impression he worked for British intelligence, 
Guardian inquiries have established.

The lobbyist, Stephen Crouch, was granted a meeting with the arms sales 
minister, Gerald Howarth, at the request of Howarth's boss, Fox, the then 
defence secretary, after secretly donating a reported £20,000 to fund the 
expenses of Fox's aideAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>. This has led to a call for Sir 
Philip Mawer, the independent adviser on ministerial interests, to mount an 
investigation.

Crouch, a Tory donor and activist, has links with former special forces 
officers such as Tony Buckingham, who now runs Heritage Oil, and Tim Spicer, 
who runs the Aegis security company in Iraq. Crouch is on record lobbying for 
contracts in Iraq, in association with a former MI6 officer, Rupert Bowen, and 
a former UK ambassador to the Middle East, Julian Walker.

Crouch is registered at Companies House as a director under the name Stephen 
Crouch Plantard de St Clair. Pierre Plantard de St Clair was a notorious French 
hoaxer who died in 2000, and who fabricated the legend of the so-called Priory 
of Sion, which figured in the best-selling fantasy thriller The Da Vinci Code.

BDG Management Ltd, which until last year paid Crouch fees for introducing 
civil engineering business in Iraq, said: "He said it was a hereditary name or 
title which he was entitled to use."

Traced to Istanbul, where he said he was meeting an Iraqi delegation, Crouch 
did not respond to questions about his use of the Plantard name.

He denied, however, that he was acting on behalf of the defence industry in 
helping fund Werritty's company through a body called the Iraq Research Group, 
or IRG. He said of IRG: "We are privately funded, but I can't go into that … 
I've been forbidden to speak to the press."

Crouch denied being a "donor" as a report by the cabinet secretary, Sir Gus 
O'Donnell, had described him. Instead, he said IRG had paid Werritty a "flat 
fee" after Crouch met him socially, in the hope that Werritty could provide 
introductions to British energy companies.

The apparent inconsistency between the two accounts is likely to raise 
concerns that the full details of the behaviour of Fox, a former Tory 
leadership contender, have yet to emerge.

According to the Ministry of Defence, the meeting Crouch arranged with Howarth 
on 27 September took place with no officials present. The MoD said: "The 
cabinet secretary has recommended that in future where discussions take place 
with external organisations … where an official is not present, ministers 
should inform their department."

At the Crouch meeting, where the MoD said the economic and political landscape 
in Iraq was discussed, Werritty was also present. It was not stated whether 
Howarth was aware that Crouch had, in effect, paid Werritty beforehand.

Buckingham's company has sought to expand aggressively into high-risk 
oil-bearing regions in Iraq and Libya. During last year's general election, 
Buckingham donated £5,000 via Crouch to a successful candidate in a marginal 
seat, Carmarthen West. Crouch had temporarily taken up residence in the 
constituency, and volunteered to act as party chairman. The victorious MP, 
Simon Hart, says he understood Buckingham and Crouch were friends. Buckingham 
donated another £50,000 to Conservative HQ.

Hart said: "We didn't know much about Crouch. He had an air of mystery and a 
hint of an intelligence services background. He took me to lunch in the Special 
Forces Club in London and he was known jokingly to us as 'the spy'."

Dr Willem Frischmann, of Pell Frischmann engineering consultants in London, 
which paid Crouch fees through BDG Management Ltd until 2010, said: "He 
introduced us to the Aegis security firm and Tim Spicer in Iraq. I thought he 
was part of MI5 or MI6. It was implied he was part of them."

Crouch, along with Walker and Bowen, is currently listed under the heading 
"IRG" as an honorary member of the Iraqi-British chamber of commerce and 
industry. He has a history of lobbying for contracts in Iraq stretching back to 
the days of the Saddam regime.

• This article was amended on 27 October 2011. The original incorrectly 
described Philip Mawer as the parliamentary obudsman. This has been corrected
 