
When I was a child, there were two books of poetry in the whirligig at home: a 
collected Tennyson that had once been given to my great-grandmother by my 
great-grandfather, and a Collected Poems of Rupert Brooke which my mother had 
won as a school prize. Nobody read them. Nobody read anything much. They 
preferred the life outdoors. Then I began doing English A-level, and was taught 
for the first time by Peter Way, who walked straight into my head and turned 
the lights on. Within a few weeks my old life seemed to have fallen away 
(though not the subjects it contained), and all I wanted to do was to write and 
read poems.

My parents were bemused, but Mr Way was pleased and began lending me books of 
his own: Wordsworth, Hardy, Edward Thomas, Larkin. One day, standing by his 
desk to return whatever it was I’d borrowed that week, I noticed at his elbow a 
copy of Door into the Dark by someone I’d never heard of before –Seamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney>. Noticed because I wasn’t sure 
how you pronounced “Seamus”, because the title was so alluring, and because the 
lettering on the jacket was very beautiful.

“What’s that, sir?”

“It’s just come out.” (This would have been the winter of 1969.) “It’s his 
second book.”

I wanted to borrow it, but I couldn’t; Mr Way was still reading it. So next 
weekend I biked into Oxford and bought a copy in Blackwell’s. I already owned a 
few Penguin poetry collections (Robert Graves, e e cummings, Baudelaire: I had 
no plan to my reading, I was just gobbling at random), but this was the first 
book of proper contemporary poetry. It felt like a significant moment. And …

In later life we can still sometimes sense the top of our head ripping open 
when we find a new book to love. But not much compares to the sheer amazement, 
delight, shock, recognition we felt at such moments in the earlier part of our 
lives. Today I have only to see that same copy of Door into the Dark sitting on 
my bookshelves to remember the feeling that a locked-up door in my life had 
suddenly swung open, and a different future was possible.

And, paradoxically, all the more so because as well as feeling absolutely 
surprising, the book was full of things I recognised – even though the rural 
East Anglia of my childhood was a far cry from rural County Derry, and my stage 
in life was very different from Heaney’s. When I read about the “Green froth 
that lathered each end / Of the shining bit”, I saw the horses in the stable 
yard at home; when I came to the “billhook / Whose head was hand-forged and 
heavy”, I was clearing undergrowth with my dad; when I swam through A Lough 
Neagh Sequence, I was back fishing again in the rivers and loughs I’d known in 
my childhood.

In other words, the book made me feel adventurous and rooted at the same time. 
Of course I missed important things – including and especially a lot of the 
politics and religion, which I picked up later in poems like In Gallarus 
Oratory and Requiem for the Croppies. But I’d heard the principal melody of 
things, or so I felt, and it’s not an exaggeration to say I fell in love with 
it.

Since then, I’ve read better books of poems, including better books by Heaney, 
but no other collection has touched me like this one. The squelch and slap of 
the writing; the beautiful interplay of vowels and consonants (which carried 
Heaney’s voice into my ear long before I ever heard him speak); the connections 
between past and present (always cleverly done, but with no smartassery); the 
narrative anecdotes (in The Wife’s Tale, for instance), as gripping as a short 
story; the warmth of the heart at work.

Inevitably, I suppose, I wanted to contact the man who had made me feel like 
this – just to thank him. So I wrote him a fan letter. I shudder now to think 
what it must have said, and even at the time it didn’t seem strange that I 
never had an answer. But I was undaunted.

Early in the spring of the following year, I noticed that Heaney and Ted 
Hughes (whom I had also got pretty keen on) were due to read some poems by 
Wordsworth (ditto) at an event at the Poetry Society in London – I think it 
must have been to celebrate the bicentenary of Wordsworth’s birth.

Off I went to listen, and found myself in an audience about 25-strong. 
Imagine. At the end I took up my copy of Door into the Dark for Heaney to sign. 
I must have told him about the unanswered missive, because in black biro on the 
title page he wrote “Seamus Heaney toAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion> – instead of a letter – with 
thanks 7th April 1970.” I carried it home like a trophy. Actually no, not at 
all like a trophy – or only when I showed it to Mr Way. Like treasure.
 