
The Manchester United-bound striker Manucho scored twice to help Angola come 
from behind to earn a surprise 3-1 win overSenegal in Tamale yesterday.

Abdoulaye Faye's header after 20 minutes had given Senegal a first-half lead 
but Manucho headed in an equaliser five minutes after the restart and put 
Angola ahead following a goalmouth scramble midway through the second half. 
Flavio's header in the 77th minute made sure of victory, leaving Angola top of 
Group D with four points from two games whileSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>, with only one, are in danger of 
an unexpected early exit.

Several Namibia players were offered money to throw today's match against 
Guinea, the president of the country's football association has said. John 
Muinjo admitted players were offered £15,000 each by a syndicate to lose the 
game, which takes place in Sekondi today. It is the second match-fixing claim 
to hit the tournament after Benin's coach, Reinhard Fabisch, revealed last 
Thursday that he was approached by a man with a similar offer before his side's 
game against Mali.

Muinjo said several players had been approached, adding: "These players then 
came up to us as members of their management ... We had a meeting amongst us 
and then contacted CAF [Confederation of African Football] explaining to them 
what had happened. They sent someone over to the hotel to speak to the players 
and question them about the issue."

Kolo Touré has been ruled out of Ivory Coast's final group match against Mali 
tomorrow. The Arsenal captain limped out of his side's win over Benin last 
Friday and officials have confirmed that he has a groin injury. Reports have 
suggested Touré has suffered a muscle tear, although it is not yet known how 
severe the problem is.

The defending champions Egypt maintained their prolific scoring form with a 
3-0 win overSudan in Group C on Saturday. Hosni Abd Rabou's twice-taken penalty 
in the 28th minute put them in front in Kumasi before Mohamed Aboutrika scored 
twice in a five-minute spell late in the game. Aboutrika, however, earned a 
rebuke from the CAF for displaying a t-shirt with the slogan "Sympathy with 
Gaza" as he celebrated his first goal. The midfielder was booked for the 
gesture.
 