
Alaa Al Aswany's accusation of western double standards towards Islam is 
weakened by two badly chosen examples (Western hostility to Islam is stoked by 
double standards and distortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jul/20/islam-west-muslims-media-prejudice>
, 21 July). The argument about chastity in Christianity and Islam is undermined 
by the difference in outcomes for the women in question: there may be penalties 
for pre-marital intercourse in the US (eg parental blame) but they do not 
equate with the range of penalties applied in some versions of sharia law, or 
some nations where Islam influences judgments about personal behaviour. In 
general, chastity is a personal choice in the west, not something 
institutionally enforced. And the two murders of women he debates are not 
parallel in the way he maintains: the murderin a courtroom in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/07/german-trial-hijab-murder-egypt> 
was a crime by an individual; themurder on the streets of Tehran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/22/neda-soltani-death-iran> was an 
act of state policy. Western public responses to the two cases are not 
hypocrisy, but reflect a sense of these differences.

No doubt his analysis of Islamic tolerance is correct, but it misses the 
point: it's not what your holy text says that counts, it's what you make it 
mean in life that is significant. His examples must be seen in the context of 
the interpretation ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, by 
various Islamists, in public life. The west is entitled to debate the 
significance of these matters.

Name and address supplied

Alaa Al Aswany's important insight into our western prejudices is timely. As a 
long-standing admirer of Islam (along with other religions) I have been 
dismayed by the prejudice with which Muslims are treated by our media, at times 
resentful on their behalf when we try to export our "civilisation" into their 
societies. Our pornography, violence, drugs, insolence, generational hatred, 
greed, self-righteousness, and degradation of women outweigh in Muslim eyes 
much of the brave, courageous and civilising efforts still practised by certain 
women and men in the west. Taking an honest look at ourselves and others can 
only help in the present tensions.

Ian Flintoff

Oxford

The conspiratory fantasy concocted by Alaa Al Aswany is ludicrous. The Silver 
Ring Thing <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silver_Ring_Thing#Criticisms> has been 
made fun of for a number of years. To accuse the western media of having double 
standards because a woman murdered by a racist is not given the same salience 
as one murdered by the Iranian authorities is intellectually dishonest. A woman 
dies as a result of domestic violence every three days. They are not made into 
martyrs in the news. Spurious comparisons do not prove bias. Aswany might be 
supporting a liberal religion and democracy. Alas, in his dismissal of the 
western media, he fails to understand the key role of the questioning of 
practices and ideas, be they political or religious, which are the backbone of 
liberal democracy.

Francesca Montemaggi

Cardiff

Alaa Al Aswany claims Ahmadinejad as the winner of the elections and compares 
the murder of Neda Soltan with the death of an Egyptian woman by a racist in a 
German court. This attitude towards the regime in Tehran by the Arab 
intellectuals on the left and Islamists is nothing new and the reasons can be 
summarised as: the hatred towards Israel; corrupt local regimes; and 
helplessness in bringing about democratic change in their countries. It is for 
these reasons that these groups embrace regimes such as Ahmadinejad's, who 
portray themselves as "anti-imperialists". I strongly recommend that Aswany 
does some research on the true nature of the Iranian regime and he'll find 
horrendous crimes against the Iranians, including mass murders of political 
prisoners, and suppression of minorities, women and trade unionists.

Name and address supplied

Not merely the Silver Ring Thing, but also the Church of England and Roman 
Catholic church regard fornication and adultery as sins. What sets Islam apart 
is not the objects of its disapproval as the cruelty of its punishments. 
Western religions do not behead 19-year-old girls. And, as for double 
standards, are male fornicators beheaded? I think not.

John McBride

London
 