
The actor Douglas Campbell, who has died aged 87, made a significant impact in 
theatre on both sides of the Atlantic. A working-class boy fromScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> who rose to play lead roles at the 
Old Vic, he later became a distinguished and revered actor in Canada. Like his 
mentor, the director Tyrone Guthrie, he believed passionately in the virtues of 
the thrust stage for performing Shakespeare, a belief that led him to theatres 
from Stratford, Ontario, to Minneapolis and Sheffield. A socialist, pacifist 
and vegetarian, he delighted audiences as Falstaff, a character who reflected 
perfectly his larger-than-life personality and capacity for enjoyment.

Campbell was born in Glasgow, where his father Dougald, a friend of the Labour 
leader Keir Hardie, was a postal inspector, and his mother Ethel was an amateur 
actor and secretary of the Scottish Socialist party. His ambition was to be a 
painter, but his father discouraged the idea. Kicked out of school for refusing 
to wear a gas mask because he saw it as a preparation for war, he became 
a conscientious objector.

He was then taken on by the Old Vic as a driver for its wartime touring 
companies. Guthrie's production of King John inspired him to become an actor, 
and in 1942 he joined a company touring north Wales, headed by Sybil Thorndike 
and Lewis Casson, whose daughter Ann Casson he later married. The actor Miriam 
Karlin remembers him at this time as "a real, rough-and-ready, red-haired Scot, 
a tub-thumping kind of character, but with a great sense of humour".

After the war he joined a repertory company in Coventry, which toured small 
towns in the Midlands. There followed stints at Birmingham Rep and Glasgow 
Citizens theatre, and several appearances at the Edinburgh festival. In 1951, 
at Guthrie's invitation, he returned to the Old Vic, and in his second season 
played Othello, Macbeth, and Theseus in A Midsummer Night's Dream. He went on 
to play the title roles in Julius Caesar and The Merchant of Venice and, at the 
Bristol Old Vic, Antony in Antony and Cleopatra.

In 1953 he was a founder member of the Shakespeare festival in Stratford, 
Ontario, appearing in Richard III and as Parolles in All's Well That End's 
Well. He and Ann then moved with their children toCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, where he became a key figure at 
Stratford in the pioneering work of Guthrie and the designer Tanya 
Moiseiwitsch. Over the course of 25 seasons there, he directed many plays, his 
major roles including Oedipus, Othello, Sir Toby Belch (in Twelfth Night), 
Henry VIII, Falstaff and King Lear. In 1954, to give the actors work outside 
the festival season, he and Ann set up the Canadian Players, which toured 
platform-style productions without costumes or scenery to theatre-starved 
areas. They staged Peer Gynt with two ladders and a plank, and an Inuit King 
Lear set in the Arctic.

In 1963 he followed Guthrie to Minneapolis, where Campbell became assistant 
director and later artistic director at the Guthrie theatre. He won acclaim by 
playing Clytemnestra and Athena in Guthrie's masked production of Aeschylus's 
trilogy Oresteia, retitled The House of Atreus. In Minneapolis, his socialism, 
his commitment to nuclear disarmament and his opposition to the Vietnam war put 
him at odds with the authorities. He was often harassed at the 
American-Canadian border, and once refused entry.

On Broadway he played the title role in Paddy Chayefsky's Gideon, directed 
an adaptation of Moby Dick and appeared in and directed the anthology The 
Golden Age. He returned occasionally to the UK, playing Falstaff and Bottom in 
A Midsummer Night's Dream at the Old Vic in 1960-61. In 1972 he went as an 
actor and artistic adviser to the new Crucible theatre in Sheffield. 
Subsequently, with the actor James Tomlinson, he set upTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> North to tour provincial theatres 
in the north of England.

Touring was what Campbell thought theatre was about, and he believed firmly in 
its power to change people. He once described himself as a William Morris 
socialist. "Like Morris, I'm interested in craft, in doing things well, and 
living life well." The actor Christopher Plummer recalled this side of him: 
"As a lover of the night, he always managed to outlast any over-zealous 
drinking competitor who dared challenge his capacity."

The director Michael Langham, a lifelong friend and colleague at Stratford, 
saw him as "a gloriously forthright, honest, full-blooded trouper, given 
equally to the lyric, the farcical, the tragic and, unexpectedly, the sublimely 
tender; a team player, loving and encouraging the clannishness and comradeship 
of a theatre company".

In Who's Who in the Theatre, he listed his recreations as "fencing, painting, 
argument and shove ha'penny". He was frank about his appearance, once stating: 
"I'm not particularly good-looking, I've got a big, bulbous nose, and I'm on 
the heavy side." Fiercely independent, he claimed to have little time for 
critics. "I never paid the slightest attention to what they wrote about me," he 
said. "If I did, it would be difficult to sustain my pacifism."

At work until the end, he was in rehearsal as the Judge in a Canadian 
production of Inherit the Wind when he was taken ill. Ann Casson died in 1990. 
He is survived by their children, Dirk, Teresa, Tom and Benedict, and by his 
second wife, Moira Wylie, and their children Beatrice and Torquil.

• Douglas Campbell, actor and director, born 11 June 1922; died 6 October 2009
 