
Equatorial Guinea’s Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> swung from fairytale 
to farce in a matter of hours this week and it seemed sadly apposite that one 
of their heroes from this tournament, Javier Balboa, was complicit in this 
third place play-off defeat. Balboa’s penalty, the first to be taken in the 
shootout, was skied high and wide of the target, Raúl Fabiani’s subsequent miss 
effectively confirming that DR Congo – who have impressed with their 
counterattacking football for most of this tournament – leave for Kinshasa with 
their best finish since 1998.

Among the hosts’ punishments for the violence that marred Thursday night’s 
semi-final defeat to Ghana was the suspended prospect of playing a home game 
behind closed doors. When this match kicked off in front of barely 300 
supporters, the total eventually struggling into four figures, it was tempting 
to consider that they have already served their time on this front. A police 
helicopter, used to such brutal effect during those disturbances, hovered 
overhead and a security operation that promised “stricter measures” had been 
notably ramped up. These had clearly been deterrent enough: this crowd was 
never going to threaten a repeat offence and the heavily-armed officers were 
able to spend most of a humid early evening watching from the stands.

It felt unfortunate that Equatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea>, for whom history 
gives no reason to expect another appearance at this level any time soon, could 
not contest this fixture in front of the kind of audience their achievement has 
merited. Their games have been raucous, sometimes joyous occasions but the 
public stayed away this time and Esteban Becker’s team needed a degree of 
self-reliance to muster the kind of energy that their support had previously 
helped generate.

They made their customary fast start all the same and, 10 minutes in, the DRC 
goalkeeper Robert Kidiaba – aged 39 and playing his final international – 
blocked from Balboa and Emilio Nsue in quick succession. The same two players 
miskicked, one after the other, from the resulting corner.

The Congolese setup had not been shy to advise that they preferred to play 
without supporters present and their team, which began without the 
centre-forward Dieumerci Mbokani, presented little first-half evidence that 
they wished to be here. There was one clear chance and it fell to Yannick 
Bolasie, whose generally positive tournament was spoiled when his mistake led 
to a goal for Gervinho in the semi-final.

He erred again this time when a diagonal ball from Issama Mpeko evaded the 
home defence and, clean through on the left, Bolasie sliced badly wide of 
Felipe Ovono’s left post.

But the lack of activity before the interval was such that even the police 
chopper, which had circled at close quarters throughout the first half, 
appeared to become bored by its conclusion, heading away to the west.

Its presence was now as necessary as that of the grenade-wielding riot police, 
sourced from Angola, who lined up to protect the press box. DR Congo opted for 
some force of their own at the break, Mbokani replacing Hervé Kage, and were 
nearly rewarded for a far brighter start to the second half when Ovono, a 
terrifically brave young goalkeeper who seems wasted in the Equatoguinean 
league, made a flying save to divert Chancel Mbemba’s free header wide.

The tempo had at least picked up now and a better opportunity came on 53 
minutes when Cedrick Mabwati squared for Mbokani, who should have scored but 
barely reached Ovono with his miscue. Pockets of space were appearing and 
Juvenal, the home captain, shot wide before Kidiaba had to emerge quickly to 
deny Nsue again.

For all the extra intent there were only two more openings in the 90 minutes, 
Nsue tackled by Cédric Mongongu when clear and Rubén Belima wasting a gift of a 
counterattacking situation. It meant that the game went straight to penalties, 
a resolution whose efficiency was welcome on this occasion.

Balboa, so cool from 12 yards in the wins over Gabon and Tunisia, shot high 
and wide, before Fabiani’s tame shot was gathered by Kidiaba.

Mongongu scored the last of DR Congo’s four successful penalties to secure the 
third-place trophy for his team.
 