 To everyone's surprise, the parliamentary career of scholarly, eccentric Dr 
Julian Lewis has been outstripped by his streetfighter friend John Bercow, now 
deputy to Ann Widdecombe as Conservative spokesman for the Home Office. Mr 
Lewis and Mr Bercow shared the helicopter which enabled them on the same day to 
be selected for safe Tory seats: New Forest East and Buckingham and both were 
elected for the first time in 1997.
Dr Lewis was thought better qualified for a front rank career, as the 
respected, even feared, former deputy director of the Conservative research 
department who resigned in 1996 because the Major government had been 
inadequately opposed to the single currency.

But his encyclopaedic knowledge of the cold war, which made him such a feared 
opponent of CND leaders, seemed dated by the time he reached the Commons in 
1997.

His almost paranoid fear of a federal Europe might have made him the 
philosopher king of the Europhobes who crowded the Conservative benches after 
1997. But this missed the emotional core of his fear: that a federal Europe 
will be dominated by Germany.

This comes from the eastern European roots of his family, many of whom were 
killed by the Nazis. When Tony Blair authorised British force to rescue 
Kosovars from Serbian genocide, Dr Lewis was one of only four Tory MPs to back 
him fully, in contrast to the little Englanders in his party who opposed 
intervention.

If he misses the press plaudits won by his old ally Mr Bercow when slugging it 
out with Jack Straw, he doesn't show it. Dr Lewis seems happy enough in 
parliament, serving on the defence select committee, boiling arguments down in 
letters to the press opposing a European army and defending America's role on 
this side of the Atlantic.

These scholarly arguments do not produce the fanfare of publicity he achieved 
in the 1980s as the Tories' "witchfinder general" and "scourge of the CND". 
Then, he saw proponents of unilateral nuclear disarmament as fools who would 
happily hand the USSR a monopoly of nuclear weapons.

The strength of his opinions is belied by his baby face and soft voice with 
its remnants of a Welsh accent. He was born in Swansea in 1951, the son of a 
tailor. From Dynevor grammar school he progressed to Balliol College, Oxford 
and then to St Anthony's College where he achieved a DPhil in strategic studies.

He broke on the political scene in Newham North East in 1976-77, when he 
infiltrated the local Labour party to fight leftwingers trying to oust its 
Labour MP, Reg Prentice, later a Tory MP and minister.

Forming the coalition for peace through security, he then harried Bruce Kent, 
the CND's leader. In 1982 he drowned out an anti-Falklands war demonstration 
led by Tony Benn and Arthur Scargill by playing the national anthem. He had a 
banner, "President Reagan Is Our Friend", fly over another CND demonstration. 
Those were his days.

Ask Aristotle about Dr Julian Lewis 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-3110,00.html>
 