 Though Dr John Reid smiles on television, he is a hard man with a past. A 
Glaswegian ex-communist trusted by Tony Blair to deliver the goods, Dr Reid has 
now been charged with saving the Northern Ireland peace process after Peter 
Mandelson's implosion. If he does so, the highest offices in the land may be 
open to him in New Labour's expected second term. If he fails, expect this 
ambitious fixer to crawl from the wreckage nonetheless.
Born in Lanarkshire in 1947, John Reid comes from Catholic mining stock. His 
father was a postman and his mother a factory worker, but he broke away from 
his roots thanks to hard work and a good education. This culminated in a 
doctorate in economic history at Stirling University: a well-informed and 
sometimes brilliant analyst, Dr Reid is no dim central belt machine politician.

He joined the Communist party in 1973, leaving it to become a professional 
Labour party activist with close links to Neil Kinnock. He reaped his reward in 
1987 when he won the ultrasafe seat of Motherwell North (now Hamilton North and 
Bellshill). He voted for Tony Blair as party leader in 1994 and by the end of 
that year was deputy spokesman on defence.

As a junior defence minister after the 1997 election he succeeded brilliantly 
with the strategic defence review, cutting military costs while winning over 
the defence chiefs. Friends noticed how he came to love the technicalities of 
defence administration, able to recite missile specifications at the drop of a 
hat and fond of taking the salute at parades.

In spring 1999 he was promoted to the cabinet as secretary of state for 
Scotland, a post greatly diminished in importance by devolution. Despite this, 
he built his profile, prepared to put the government's case on any issue 
against tough TV interviewers. He had to cope with the fall out after Donald 
Dewar, Scotland's respected first secretary, died in 2000, standing by as Mr 
Dewar's successor Henry McLeish took the Scottish executive down an 
increasingly nationalist path.

He will no doubt have been glad to escape to the more challenging fields of 
the Northern Ireland office in January 2001. Here he will have to cope with 
another, even more unpredictable devolved executive as well as the demands of 
the ex-terrorist organisations.

He will be judged on two things: whether he persuades the IRA to decommission 
at least some of its weapons and whether he secures the implementation of the 
Patten police reforms.

But as one of Tony Blair's current favourites he may not get the chance. After 
all, another reshuffle beckons after the general election.

Ask Aristotle about John Reid 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4372,00.html> 
 