
An ordinary day is in progress at Birmingham Ormiston academy 
<http://www.boa-academy.co.uk/>. In a mirrored studio, a group of leotard-clad 
students rehearse a tap routine while down the hall, two boys sit crouched over 
a vast mixing desk, headphones on, blending beats. “Baby Got Back” blasts out 
of the student-run radio suite and the sound of harmonised choral singing 
drifts down the stairwell.

This is one of the country’s few state-funded performing arts academies, a 
sister to theBrit School in London 
<http://www.brit.croydon.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>, and home to 
950 pupils aged 14 to 19, many from underprivileged backgrounds and the 
majority of whom have their sights set on a career in the performing arts.

Nobody would underestimate how tough it will be to make it in such a difficult 
industry. But, if recent complaints are to be believed, they will have even 
less chance than their privileged peers who increasingly dominate the arts from 
acting to music.

Labour MP Chris Bryant made a plea in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/16/arts-diversity-chris-bryant-eddie-redmayne>
 last week for more to be done to help working-class talent, arguing high fees 
for performing arts colleges were creating a culture where affluent, public 
school-educated performers such as Benedict Cumberbatch, Eddie Redmayne and 
James Blunt dominate.

“It is really tough forging a career in the arts if you can’t afford the 
enormous fees for drama school,” Bryant wrote in anopen letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/19/chris-bryant-letter-james-blunt-in-full>
 on Monday. “If you don’t know anybody who can give you a leg up, if your 
parents can’t subsidise you for a few years whilst you make your name.” Singer 
Blunt hit back, calling Bryant a “classist gimp”.

Julie Walters: lack of working-class actors is sad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/23/julie-walters-lack-working-class-actors-sad>
Now the heads of some of the UK’s most prestigious drama schools have also 
rejected Bryant’s claims. Certainly, recent data shows that 50% of students at 
ArtsEd drama school in Chiswick in London get financial assistance, in the form 
of bursaries and scholarships, while at the Liverpool Institute of Performing 
Arts, 87.4% of undergraduates came from state school.

At Guildhall School of Speech and Drama in London 79.5% of drama 
undergraduates admitted last year came from state schools and 20 out of 26 
graduating students from the Bristol Old Vic last year were also 
state-educated. At Rada in 2012/13, 40% were from a household with an annual 
income of less than £25,000.

While several of those running the top performing arts institutions 
acknowledged that elitism in the arts was increasingly an issue in the UK, they 
laid the blame at the door of poor arts provision and access at secondary 
school and local authority level, and the lack of money in arts institutions to 
pay young people a living wage once they left drama school.

Joanna Read, principal of the London Academy of Music and Drama (Lamda), said 
around a quarter of its students were on scholarships and that Bryant singling 
out actors such as Cumberbatch, Redmayne and Damian Lewis was misrepresentative 
and unhelpful.

“I thought it was a petty jab and certainly in Lamda’s case I think completely 
unfounded,” she said. “We do regional auditions and we work in partnership with 
a number of youth arts organisations across the country to disseminate this 
idea of performing arts as a viable career, regardless of your finances.”

Read added: “Look at people like David Oyelowo who is in Selma or Sam Claflin, 
who is in Riot Club – both were Lamda students and both did not come from 
privileged backgrounds. For every one of these Benedict Cumberbatchs that is 
making the headlines, I could pull out five equally talented and equally 
successful actors who have made their careers from a different pathway.”

Jane Harrison, principal of ArtsEd, agreed: “We do an enormous amount of 
outreach to places where the students may not seem typical of those who would 
go into training, who come from a really diverse range of backgrounds.”

One such student is 21-year-old Juma Sharkah, a refugee from Sierra Leone who 
came to London as a teenager and after attending Kingston Community school, was 
awarded a full scholarship and bursary to attend ArtsEd at 18. She is now in 
her third year there and is currently the lead in the Royal Court’s acclaimed 
play Liberian Girl. She said Bryant’s comments were unhelpful in disproving the 
idea that drama school was just for “posh people”.

“I thought I was going to feel out of place and I thought it would just be 
rich, white people but it is nothing like that,” said Sharkah.” I feel at home 
here, there are so many different people from different backgrounds.”

Harrison believed the uncertain period for students when they leave drama 
school, particularly with most having to live in London, could be behind the 
disparity in those represented at the higher echelons in the arts.

“If there were more schemes for young actors, directors and playwrights, say, 
giving them help during that period when they leave drama school then that 
obviously would do a lot to redress the balance of those from more privileged 
backgrounds,” she said. “With less funding in arts institutions, those kinds of 
bursaries or schemes are really needed, otherwise we could start to see this 
impacting on diversity in a very damaging way.”

Back at Birmingham Ormiston Academy (BOA), the students were divided on the 
issue of elitism. While all were determined to make a career in performing 
arts, many were apprehensive about how they would afford to move to London both 
for their vocational training and to pursue their career full time.

“I never look at a successful actor and think, oh they went to an independent, 
fee-paying school, that must be why they’re successful,” said Frederica 
Williams Davies, a 17-year-old musical theatre student. “I don’t think it 
matters where you went to school, how much money you have, because that 
actually only takes you so far. Yes, it might make your life a little bit 
easier along the way, but acting is still an industry that judges people on 
their talent, not where they went to school. There’s no way I can easily afford 
the fees of drama school but I will be trying out for scholarships. Money will 
be a drawback but I won’t let it stop me because there have been so many actors 
who have made it without rich parents.”

But dance student Gabbie Dale, 18, said finance would inevitably be a barrier. 
“I will not be able to afford to go to London to study dance at university,” 
said Dale. “I’ve already got savings but I won’t be able to do it in the next 
couple of years anyway. As a dancer, that has a real impact on my career 
chances because as you get older you have less work. I’m like a ticking clock – 
if I can’t afford to move to London in the next two years, that will make it 
really difficult for me to succeed as a dancer. So specifically for dance, 
that’s where coming from a rich background helps, because its so difficult to 
both earn money and to study dance.”

Joseph Carter, 17, had similar concerns and, despite having recently got into 
a dance school in London, said he was worried how he would afford the cost of 
living next year if he didn’t get one of the only four scholarships available.

“I think the London thing is a massive barrier,” added acting student Todd 
Jennings, 17. “It used to be the case that university fees and drama school 
fees were much less than they are now and living costs in London weren’t so 
high so it didn’t seem so financially impossible to move down there, whereas 
now it seems like the whole system is designed for people who are independently 
wealthy. It seem to me it is much easier for them to succeed.”

For the BOA students, the blame for any elitism in the arts lay mainly with 
the school curriculum. All had been at mainstream state schools previously and 
said from their experience they neither valued nor funded the arts. Of the 11 
BOA students the Guardian spoke to, all said they had been failed by the arts 
provision at their former schools and most agreed that it was only coming to 
BOA that had made them believe pursuing a performing arts career was viable.

“I went to a big comprehensive school and drama there was really poor and I 
felt like I was the only person who was interested in it, which was created by 
a lack of fostering in the arts earlier on in life,” added Jennings. “I think 
it’s really important that the government puts more money into the arts in 
schools to open it up to more people. It may be argued that the people in more 
privileged, rich backgrounds like Harrow and Eton, are offered the 
opportunities to go see theatre, to be in theatre, so I think it’s really 
important state schools foster a similar environment, otherwise we will see 
even more of a divide between rich and poor in the arts.”

Paul Collard, chief executive of the charity Creativity, Culture and 
Education, which focuses on access to the arts for young people from 
disadvantaged backgrounds, said the projects which used to pick up the slack in 
efforts to introduce underprivileged young people to the arts had now virtually 
all been cut. He cited two major programmes, Creative Partnerships and Find 
Your Talent, which had worked across the regions to create pathways into the 
arts for children between 11 and 16, both of which had been completely 
abolished under the 2010 cuts.

“What is clear now is that young people, especially those in the less affluent 
regions, are not getting any opportunities at all, because arts provision has 
absolutely been at the forefront of the cuts so almost the whole structure for 
providing arts education and access for young people has been swept away,” said 
Collard. “Elitism is becoming more prevalent in the arts but people and 
politicians do not seem willing to acknowledge the real foundations for it.

“It is massively going to impact on diversity in years to come because a whole 
generation of people will have had none of those opportunities or access to the 
arts,” he added. “And I think it will only get worse.”
 