
What a grim day Friday was - especially after the late-night highs of 
Thursday, at the Ghana team hotel.

It can be very difficult, unlike in the old days when you had seven teams in 
the same hotel, to get proper interviews with players, so two of us hatched a 
plan on Thursday. We ditched the stadium and watched the first half of Ghana v 
Namibia in the National Theatre, along with a couple of dozen women and 
children who must have been dropped off there while their husbands/fathers went 
to the game. Then we headed off to the Fiesta Royale, a very swanky hotel on 
the Sekondi road, to await the return of the Black Stars.

It was quite an atmosphere, with stunning women hanging around to meet players 
they'd never heard of, a band playing at the foyer long before the coach pulled 
up, and everyone enjoying a few drinks. As soon as the players walked in, we 
asked Junior Agogo if he fancied doing an interview for two of Britain's top 
Sunday papers, and he was off and running before we could the digital recorders 
out. Great value, too (you can read it in The Observer).

Then we had a good late-night session with a bunch of South Africans who 
produce an African football show, and headed back to base very pleased with 
ourselves. Then came Friday morning. What a comedown. The news desk had asked 
me to interview Ama Sumani, the terminally ill Ghanaian woman who was taken 
from her Cardiff hospital and deported.

"Sent home to die," as she put it. What a grim story. Ama was in tears most of 
the time, occasionally incoherent, and clearly distressed. She was sent by the 
British government to Accra because her visa had expired. She knows nobody 
there, had no friends or relatives in the capital, and had nowhere to stay 
after one night in a hotel at the British taxpayers' expense. "Barbaric" is 
what The Lancet said. You hear people here complaining they've had this and 
that nicked (as I have, though I didn't make a fuss about losing a phone) by 
pickpockets. What must she feel about the theft of her dignity and a percentage 
of what time she has left?

It was hard to take much of an interest in the football after that, and there 
was very little to be interested in when Nigeria played. They could have been 
at it for 24 hours and they still wouldn't have scored. Two teams without a 
goal in the tournament - Sudan andNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team>.

How the mighty are fallen. It's off you go, Berti, even if the players are 
just as guilty. You'll take most of the flak, and the Middle East beckons, or 
maybe the Austrian first division. But we won't be seeing you round these parts 
again.

Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2008/jan/25/ghana.keta.sandlanders> 
to watch Brian Oliver's video feature on Keta Sandlanders, the fledgling 
Ghanian team using the internet to appeal to football fans around the world to 
help them survive and thrive.
 