
Since entering recovery 28 years ago, I’ve spent a great deal of time thinking 
about the conundrum of addiction. The most commonly accepted definition – the 
one used in psychiatry’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, the DSM – can be 
summarized as “compulsive drug use despite negative consequences”. It’s 
completely odd, then, that we treat punishment, which is just another word for 
“negative consequences”, as the best way to stop it.

During my addiction to heroin and cocaine in my 20s, I kept using despite 
getting suspended from Columbia University, which I’d worked most of my 
conscious life to be able to attend. I kept injecting despite losing friends – 
though difficulty socializing was one of the main reasons I took drugs in the 
first place. I kept on despite the risk of overdose death, disease, the 
disappointment of my family and the stigma.

The strange history of opiates in America: from morphine for kids to heroin 
for soldiers | James Nevius
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/long-opiate-use-history-america-latest-epidemic>
And yet the US has some of the toughest drug sentences in the world. American 
drug policymakers expect fears and harsh consequences – like arrest and 
incarceration – to stop addicts like me from using illegal drugs. Instead, to 
begin addressing America’s opioid epidemic, we need to recognize addiction as 
the specific type of brain health issue it really is: a learning disorder – 
specifically, one characterized by failure to learn well from punishment.

Why is learning so important in addiction? For one, addiction can’t occur 
without it. If you don’t learn that a drug makes you feel better (at least at 
first) and then continue to take it to cope even when it does more harm than 
good, you can’t be addicted. If you don’t learn the connection between the drug 
and its effects, you basically wouldn’t even know what to crave, so you 
couldn’t pursue it.

Second, like other developmental disorders – such as ADHD, dyslexia, autism 
and schizophrenia – addiction unfolds as the brain matures through specific 
stages and the person responds to formative experiences. ADHD and autism, for 
instance, tend to start producing symptoms in early childhood, while 
schizophrenia does not usually appear until adolescence and early adulthood.

Addiction, too, is overwhelmingly a disorder of emerging adulthood. Ninety 
percent of all addictions begin during the teens and 20s. This isn’t 
coincidental: during this time, the circuitry of the brain involved in love and 
parenting begins to come online, and it is this same system that goes wrong in 
addiction. When vulnerable people – particularly those predisposed to mental 
illness and those who have experienced childhood trauma – reach their teens, 
they often learn that drugs ease their way into the social connections that are 
so important at this age.

If we want to end the opiate epidemic, prisons are a good place to start | 
Chandra Bozelko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/08/opiate-epidemic-prisons-drugs>
Essentially, addiction occurs when you fall in love with a drug rather than a 
person. Love wires memories into the brain very differently than learning 
abstract subjects like math typically does. And love requires that you persist 
despite negative experiences – no one could be a good parent or partner without 
doing so, at least to some extent. But if you bring that persistence and the 
sense that this relationship is crucial to your survival to your connection 
with a drug, serious problems can ensue.

The good news about addiction as a learning disorder is that the learning that 
occurs doesn’t “break” your brain. Instead, what happens is, again, very 
similar to the changes seen when someone falls in love or becomes a parent. 
These experiences profoundly shift values and priorities – and they can lead 
people do things that they otherwise wouldn’t. But they don’t eliminate free 
will, they simply skew it, which is why the relationship between addiction and 
choice is so difficult to describe.

Still, just as most people can get over breakups, the same is true for 
addiction. Research shows that half of all addictions – including those to 
heroin and opioids – end by age 30, with the exception of tobacco. In my case, 
I quit at 23, right at the age when research suggests that the parts of the 
brain that maximize self-control finally become mature. I chose to attend rehab 
on my own, two years after an arrest for dealing, which had actually worsened 
my drug use by terrifying me about my future. It wasn’t fear of negative 
consequences that allowed me to quit.

The US incarcerates more people than anyone else; with 5% of the world’s 
population, we have 25% of its prisoners. Overdose now kills more people than 
car accidents. The war on drugs, with its complete misunderstanding of 
addiction, is a large contributor to the problem.

Understanding addiction as a learning disorder, then, has profound 
implications for all aspects of drug policy. If we want to do better, we need 
evidence-based treatments, prevention programs and other policies that 
recognize the role of learning and development – and we must stop trying to use 
punishment to fight a condition that is defined by its lack of response to 
negative experience.
 