
The heads of 13 of the world's biggest drug companies, brought together by 
Bill Gates <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates>, have agreed to 
donate more medicines and, in a rare spirit of co-operation, to work together 
to find new ones in an attempt to end many neglected tropical diseases that 
kill and maim some of the poorest people on the planet.

The 10 diseases targeted affect 1.4 billion people. They include lymphatic 
filariasis, river blindness, schistosomiasis and Chagas disease. Often the 
treatments that exist are ineffective, and sometimes even fatal.
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation> is 
putting in $363m (£231m) over five years to fill gaps in research and drug 
distribution programmes for the control and, hopefully, elimination of these 
diseases, while the Department for International Development has announced 
£195m until 2015. USAid and the World Bank are also committing money and help. 
Endemic countries have also pledged to step up treatment.

"Maybe as the decade goes on, people will wonder if these should be called 
neglected diseases. Maybe as the milestones go on, we will call them just 
tropical diseases," Gates told the London meeting.

The most likely disease to be eliminated is Guinea worm, which has been the 
target of the Carter Foundation for decades. Last year, the former US president 
Jimmy Carter said they needed just $60m more to finish the job in the single 
remaining endemic country, South Sudan. That money will now be available.

The biggest contribution of the pharmaceutical companies, including Britain's 
GlaxoSmithKline <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glaxosmithkline>, the US 
groups Pfizer and Abbott and many others, are among drug donors. Those that had 
donation programmes are extending them to 2020.

Unusually, some of the companies have agreed to co-operate to try to develop 
badly needed new drugs. Abbott, Johnson & Johnson andPfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> are working together, under the 
direction of the public-private partnership DNDi (Drugs for Neglected Diseases 
Initiative), on new remedies for worm infections, particularly those causing 
river blindness and lymphatic filariasis.

All 11 companies have agreed to open up their compound libraries – details of 
potential drug treatments that have gone through some tests but not found a 
commercial use – to DNDi, which hopes effective drugs for neglected tropical 
diseases may be discovered. "It is a very good push in the right direction," 
said Bernard Pécoul, executive director of DNDi. "We have signed some very 
specific agreements and we have opened the door to negotiations with other 
partners." Sir Andrew Witty, chief executive of Britain's GlaxoSmithKline, who 
co-chaired the pharmaceutical round table with Gates, cited an African saying: 
"If you want to travel fast, travel alone – but if you want to travel far, 
travel in a group."

He had been "delighted at the energy we've found in the other companies", he 
told the Guardian.

They had all offered individual drug donations in the past, but now they had 
come together to work out not just what each was prepared to give, but to 
supply what was needed. "The biggest achievement over the last year, I think, 
has been to get some of the companies to really massively increase their 
commitments, so that everybody is kind of at this at an industrial level. I 
hope that what everybody is going to see today is an industry at its best, 
actually," he said.

The initiative is a response to a World Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation> roadmap – a plan 
to tackle diseases that impede development by preventing the poorest children 
from accessing education as well as limiting adults' ability to work. WHO's 
director general, Margaret Chan, set an ambitious timetable during the launch 
at the Royal College of Physicians in London.

"These ancient diseases are now being brought to their knees with stunning 
speed," she said. "With the boost to this momentum being made today, I am 
confident almost all of these diseases can be eliminated or controlled by the 
end of this decade."

Some experts were less optimistic, however, and critical of the drug donation 
focus. Medécins sans Frontières (MSF), the volunteer doctors' group that helped 
found DNDi, said while it was delighted neglected diseases were now getting 
attention, WHO and others were underplaying the difficulties of eliminating 
some, such as Chagas disease, sleeping sickness, and visceral leishmaniasis, by 
2020.

New diagnostic tools were needed to catch sleeping sickness, caused by the 
bite of the tsetse fly, before it became hard to treat, for example, as well as 
new drugs that could be used by healthcare workers with only basic training in 
remote areas of Chad, the Central African Republic and South Sudan. In the 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), where about three-quarters of reported 
cases of sleeping sickness have been detected, funds for the strong national 
control programme supplied by Belgium since 1997 would be withdrawn by next 
year. "Nothing offered at the London NTD meeting... will address this looming 
crisis," MSF said.

In a letter to the Lancet, Dr Tim Allen from the London School of Economics 
and Dr Melissa Parker from Brunel University warned that there were problems 
with mass drug handouts. These included the undermining of countries' fragile 
health services by large internationally-funded giveaways of free drugs for 
all, without a great deal of evidence as to their efficacy.
"We are concerned by the way in which competition for multimillion-dollar 
grants is closing off debate and restricting critical analysis of what is 
actually occurring on the ground," they wrote.

Devastating diseases - and their treatement

• Blinding trachoma: More than 40 million people at risk and 8 million in 
danger of imminent blindness.

• Leprosy: 213,000 cases left in 17 countries - a 90% reduction since 1985. 

• Chagas disease: Insect-borne, killing up to 50,000 in the Americas each 
year. Causes irreversible damage to heart, oesophagus and colon. Existing drugs 
inadequate.

• Sleeping sickness: Transmitted by tsetse flies in sub-Saharan Africa. In 
later stage, parasite invades the central nervous system. Treatment derived 
from arsenic kills 30% of patients.

• Leishmaniasis: Parasitic disease in 88 countries affecting over 12 million 
people. Few effective drugs.

• Guinea worm: Eradication campaign has been a big success thanks to 
distribution of pipe filters to block ingestion of worms in drinking water.

• Lymphatic filiariasis (elephantiasis): One billion at risk, mostly in 
tropical regions, and 40 million severely incapacitated or disfigured. Two 
separate drugs prevent transmission.

• River blindness: Caused by infection by the nematode worm. About 500,000 
people thought to be blinded, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa.

•Schistosomiasis (bilharzia): Can cause life-threatening urinary or liver 
damage or cancers. Seventy-six million children need single dose treatment.

•Yaws. Non-fatal bacterial skin disease: Can lead to chronic disfigurement and 
disability. Cured by a single antibiotic.
 