
On the death of Ted Hughes nearly 10 years ago the search began for a writer 
to fill the historic role of Poet Laureate. Among those considered 
frontrunners, alongside Andrew Motion, the current laureate, were two brilliant 
rival poets:Carol Ann Duffy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-ann-duffy> 
and Simon Armitage. While Armitage was ruled out because of his relative youth, 
Duffy's unconventional lifestyle was said to have counted against her.

With the role due to fall vacant again next year, both candidates have emerged 
at the head of the pack once more, with Duffy the favourite at the Department 
for Culture, Media and Sport.

Glasgow-born Duffy would be the first woman to hold the 400-year-old office, 
should she accept, as government sources now suggest she might.

The prestigious and, some would argue, anachronistic job of writing verse for 
the monarch has been associated with great literary names such as Alfred Lord 
Tennyson, Cecil Day-Lewis and John Betjeman. Today the laureate is no longer 
given the role 'in perpetuity'. What is more, the token annual salary of £100 
and 'a butt of sack' (108 gallons of sweet wine) is no longer offered by the 
Crown. Instead, after the post was modernised by Tony Blair, the title is 
awarded once every 10 years and provides a more conventional, if still modest, 
annual income of less than £20,000.

Before Motion settled to the task in 1999, Duffy had been the favourite. 
However, her status then as the mother of a young child and as a woman in a 
lesbian relationship made her wary of taking up such a prominent national 
position.

It was also suggested that Blair, then Prime Minister, had vetoed Duffy 
because he was concerned that her domestic arrangements would be inappropriate 
for such a public figure.

Now, as the gift of the position comes around again, things look different for 
Duffy. Her daughter, Ella, is almost a teenager and her relationship with her 
fellow Scottish poet, Jackie Kay, has ended. She has built on the success of 
her 1993 collection, Mean Time, which won both the Whitbread and Forward 
prizes, with an intense 2005 work, Rapture, which won the TS Eliot prize. 
Duffy, born in 1955, has also been appointed an OBE and a CBE and is now a 
regular feature of the GCSE syllabus.

The other leading candidate for the role is Yorkshireman and former probation 
officer Simon Armitage, an equally popular and acclaimed poet.

'These two are both premier league and it would be nice to have a poet 
laureate whose work was read by children in schools,' said Daisy Goodwin, who 
is a television producer and a passionate promoter of poetry. 'Both Simon and 
Carol Ann are fantastically well qualified. I don't know though whether either 
of them really wants it. I doubt they are ardent monarchists.'

Armitage, a Manchester Metropolitan lecturer, is perhaps best known for his 
controversial millennium eve poem and for writing about the collapse of the 
World Trade Centre towers in his work 'Out of the Blue'. He is clearly at home 
with lyric responses to the events of the day, which is a key demand of the 
poet laureate.

'Simon is very good at writing topically,' said the poet Craig Raine. 'Though 
both Carol Ann and Simon would do the job very well.'

If the role were given to a woman, it would mark a change in national 
appetites. While many of Britain and Ireland's reigning literary titans are 
men, among them Raine, Seamus Heaney, Don Paterson and James Fenton, it is also 
true that female poets are more popular than ever with their audience.

These writers include Wendy Cope, Lavinia Greenlaw and Jenny Joseph, whose 
poem 'Warning', which begins 'When I am an old woman I shall wear purple,' was 
once voted the nation's favourite contemporary poem.

Duffy's many poems for children are particularly acclaimed and the title poem 
in her recent children's collection, The Hat, imagines a line of poets passing 
down their tradition, like a hat, for the next generation to wear. The poet 
uses the idea both to pastiche the work of her great forebears and to teach her 
readers a little bit about them.

The work led critics to wonder if Duffy saw herself as standing next in line 
for the hat. She certainly wanted, she said, to see more women's work rooted in 
the nation's poetic canon.

'When I was young, there was a sense that, if poetry wasn't written by dead 
men, then it had to be somehow difficult and have secrets.'

If Duffy does secure the Queen's nomination, on the advice of Downing Street, 
maybe the next Master of the Queen or King's Music will be a mistress too.

The contenders

Carol Ann Duffy, 52

Born in Glasgow: as well as poetry she has written children's books and plays.

From Translating The English, 1989: 'Welcome to my country! We have here 
Edwina Curry and the Sun newspaper... The Princess Di and the football 
hooligan.'

Simon Armitage, 44 

Lecturer at Leeds University, famous for 'Out of the Blue', his response to 11 
September 2001.

From Killing Time, 1999:

'Britain is an aircraft carrier moored off the coast of continental Europe, 
home to a squadron of hawks and harriers.'

James Fenton, 59 

A former Vietnam war correspondent and Oxford University's former Professor of 
Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>.

From God, A Poem, 1983:

'I didn't exist at the Flood, 
And I won't be around for Salvation 
To sort out the sheep from the cud.'

· This article was amended on Sunday May 25 2008. The article above mistakenly 
claimed that Simon Armitage was a lecturer at Leeds University. He actually 
lectures at Manchester Metropolitan. This has been corrected.
 