
Either Jordan Belfort made a few calls to clear the shelves, or not many rival 
films are daring to take on the beast that isThe Wolf of Wall Street 
(Universal, 18), but Martin Scorsese's frenzied finance-world freakout lords 
over this week's DVD release schedule like, well, a shark-suited One Percenter 
surveying his minions from a skyscraper height.As well it might 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/11/wolf-of-wall-street-martin-scorsese-quaaludes>
, with more than £22m in the bank making it Britain's third-highest grosser so 
far this year – a pretty surprising result for a three-hour fiesta of craven 
capitalism driven by an openly loathsome hero.

Leonardo DiCaprio plays Belfort – the self-made New York stockbroker turned 
motivational speaker by way of imprisonment for fraud – in a mode of grinning, 
shellacked burlesque, while Scorsese goes equally large, cramming Belfort's 
Quaalude-assisted ride to hell with noise, grimy comedy and sometimes literal 
ticker-tape. It's entirely too much, yet on the other hand, any less would 
probably be inappropriate to its milieu. And while the film doesn't actively 
celebrate Belfort's misdeeds, it enjoys them in dubiously complicit fashion; 
whileearlier rumours of a four-hour cut  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/29/wolf-of-wall-street-four-hour-cut-sex-swearing>
for DVD haven't come to pass, its luxurious length already feels an indulgence 
of both its director and his subject. Scorsese has made better films in recent 
years, then, but he hasn't made one quite this electrified.
 Taylor Schilling in Orange is the New Black: 'one of the most wickedly smart 
American TV imports of recent years'. Photograph: Jojo Whilden/Netflix 
Women get rudely short shrift in The Wolf of Wall Street, so it's a good week 
forOrange is the New Black (Lionsgate, 15) to make its DVD debut, months after 
originally airing on Netflix 
<http://www.netflix.com/WiMovie/70242311?trkid=50000152>. There's a 
distribution pattern that may seem quaint in the near feature, though for 
non-Netflixers, it's a welcome chance to catch up on one of the most wickedly 
smart American TV imports of recent years. Based on a memoir by writer Piper 
Kerman, a Wasp-ish bisexual sentenced to 15 months in prison for smuggling drug 
money, Jenji Kohan's coolly funny series offers a gratifying cross-section of 
modern-day femininity amid its spiky ensemble. Taylor Schilling's clever, 
commendably unlikable work in the lead is complemented by a range of deft, 
tangy supporting players – Laura Prepon is especially marvellous as Kerman's 
rough-edged ex.

A couple of low-key but worthwhile independent dramas surface this week after 
having skipped cinemas. The best of them isWish You Were Here (Metrodome, 15), 
a sharply whittled, exactingly plotted Australian mystery from first-time 
director Kieran Darcy-Smith, with a steely performance from Joel Edgerton as 
one of four friends whose southeast Asian couples' vacation sours alarmingly 
when one of their party disappears. Parcelling out information in staggered, 
non-linear fashion, it's slippery, surprising stuff. The reliably superbAidan 
Gillen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen>, meanwhile, overcomes 
some Benetton-cinema contrivances in The Good Man (Soda, 15), a handsome, 
well-intentioned parable that braids two seemingly separate moral dramas – one 
concerning a slick Belfast banker, the other a poor, socially conscious student 
in a Cape Town township – across geographic and class lines.

Debuting with little fanfare on iTunes, meanwhile, is the modest charmer A 
Birder's Guide to Everything – a generically kooky indie-style title for a 
genuinely sweet coming-of-age tale. Kodi Smit-McPhee plays the adolescent 
wounded by his mother's death and his father's impending nuptials, who seeks 
solace in his school's Young Birders Society; it's a light, tender distraction, 
less precious than it sounds and enlivened with one of Ben Kingsley's 
customarily daffy cameos as a celebrated bird-watcher – if any such thing 
exists.
 