
Had there been a referendum here this week Australians would have voted 
unanimously for England’s rugby players to leave. Even if the visitors do lose 
the third Test and fail to gain a 3-0 series margin it has been a memorable 
tour that has confounded their reputation locally as oval-ball dullards. Eddie 
Jones complained about being searched at the airport on arrival but he can 
expect to be fast-tracked through departures.

It is worth remembering, too, that the past month has not simply been a 
triumph for Jones, such a shrewd manipulator of friend and foe alike. 
Insufficient credit has been paid to Paul Gustard and Steve Borthwick, his 
assistant coaches, who have helped to transform England’s defensive and forward 
urgency. Then there isDylan Hartley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dylan-hartley>, whose captaincy touch has 
been as spot-on as Jones’s laser-beam judgment. Rarely has a supposed bad‑boy 
leader presided over such a feelgood revival.

Dylan Hartley fits bill as England captain under Eddie Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/07/dylan-hartley-fits-bill-england-captain-eddie-jones>
The skipper has been particularly impressive this week: setting the right tone 
at training, stressing the importance of the final Test and even presenting a 
cheque from the squad to the Coogee Surf Club to help out with repairs 
following this month’s destructive storms. Chris Robshaw, his predecessor, 
remains one of the squad’s reliable cogs but England look a different animal 
with the slightly edgier Hartley at the helm.

For him to be mentioned as a viable candidate to captain the British and Irish 
Lions’ tour to his native New Zealand next year is conclusive evidence of his 
contribution, given he was suspended from the last Lions trip to Australia in 
2013. Hiscurrently injured team‑mate James Haskell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/22/dylan-hartley-lions-tour-new-zealand-eddie-jones-rugby-union>
, another influential tour figure, is pretty keen to join him: “The closest 
I’ve got to the Lions so far is London zoo. Lions’ tours are what dreams are 
made of. For me that’s bigger than anything. To play in a Test match – I’d 
probably explode in pride, disbelief and excitement.”

Saturday’s game at Allianz Stadium, just across from the Sydney Cricket 
Ground, will have a slightly different feel but, giventhe early Bodyline theme 
of the tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/26/eddie-jones-england-australia-squad-the-breakdown>
, it feels an appropriate choice of venue. There were even faint echoes of 
Douglas Jardine in Hartley’s final pre-match address. “I want to be remembered 
this week as a winner,” said the Northampton hooker, brushing aside any notion 
of English complacencywith the series already won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/18/england-v-australia-second-rugby-union-test-in-melbourne-live>
. “We want to be the best team in the world. The best team in the world doesn’t 
win two games and then clock off in the last one. They win three games. I don’t 
want to go on holiday next week with a loss.”

The 30-year-old grew up in New Zealand and has a fair idea of how the All 
Blacks would respond to this sort of situation, regardless of England’s eight 
successive wins under Jones since the beginning of February. “We don’t think 
about the last eight games, we just think about preparing for this week and 
what makes us tick. I don’t know precisely what the All Blacks do but as soon 
as you don’t prepare well you become complacent and then the weekend becomes a 
gamble,” he said. “I know if we prepare well and have clarity in what we’re 
doing, everyone can be confident. When you’ve got confidence you can go out and 
play.”

Hartley confirmed last Tuesday’s contact session, the final one of a marathon 
season, had been among the most intense of recent times. “Tuesday is the big 
physical day and you’d think that as it’s the last one of the season the boys 
might think: ‘We’ll just get through this.’ But it was probably the most 
physical Tuesday I’ve seen from the guys.”

Billy Vunipola ready for one final push as England seek whitewash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/21/billy-vunipola-england-australia-final-push-whitewash>
It has given him the belief that, for the first time since 1971 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=02oiocM1mVE>, the Wallabies can be whitewashed 
at home: “I don’t know what Australia will do but I know what we’ll do; we’ll 
front up like we’ve done every week. We’re going to be physical and we’re going 
out to win the game.”

Hartley’s team-mates love that kind of pre-match rhetoric. “I think it’s funny 
people thought [appointing him] was a controversial decision,” said Haskell. 
“Anyone who’s vanilla is never really that successful. I’m not saying Dylan’s 
got a flawed character. What I’m saying is that a little bit of edge, a little 
bit of something about you, is good. It shows you know both sides of the path. 
He’s been great for us.”

Jones has also saluted Hartley’s ability to set the tone, describing his 
captaincy as “absolutely outstanding”. For all his talk of this weekend as the 
equivalent of a World Cup final, though, there is no sense England are yet 
approaching their final destination. Victory this weekend would stretch their 
winning run since the final World Cup pool game against Uruguay to 10 games, 
only four short of the national record established by Clive Woodward’s side 
between 2002 and 2003. That team were at their peak; this squad have an average 
age of around 24. With the under-20s team contesting their world championship 
final against Ireland on Saturday, Jones is not alone in detecting better times 
ahead, on the field at least.

“It’s great for the players because eight months ago they weren’t feeling very 
good about themselves,” he said. “The whole English rugby community wasn’t 
feeling good about itself but now rugby has an opportunity for a big lift in 
England.”

All that remains – to coin a redundant phrase – is to finish in the manner to 
which this squad are becoming accustomed. Jones lost the last Testhe coached in 
Sydney by 30-13 to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/aug/14/rugbyunion.newzealandrugbyunionteam>
 but Owen Farrell, George Kruis, Billy and Mako Vunipola and Maro Itoje take 
some beating these days. If England’s attacking game has yet to flourish 
consistently, Farrell’s outstanding goal-kicking has so far rendered that 
deficiency largely irrelevant.

The Wallabies, for their part, look marginally stronger in the front five and 
finally have a specialist second ball-player at 12, both of which should make 
them more dangerous. They might be vulnerable at the lineout, though, and 
England have been doing a good impression all week of a team with another big 
game in them. Assuming that famous old military figure General Fatigue does not 
intervene, a narrow, high-scoring victory and a 3-0 series success would 
deliver Hartley’s squad another jam-filled slice of history.

Australia I Folau (Waratahs); D Haylett-Petty (Western Force), T Kuridrani 
(Brumbies), M Toomua (Brumbies), R Horne (Waratahs); B Foley (Waratahs), N 
Phipps (Waratahs); J Slipper (Reds), S Moore (Brumbies, capt), S Kepu 
(Waratahs), W Skelton (Waratahs), R Simmons (Reds), S Fardy (Brumbies), M 
Hooper (Waratahs), S McMahon (Rebels).Replacements T Polota-Nau (Waratahs), S 
Sio (Brumbies), G Holmes (Reds), A Coleman (Western Force), W Palu (Waratahs), 
N Frisby (Reds), C Leali’ifano (Brumbies), T Naiyaravoro (Waratahs).

England: M Brown (Harlequins); A Watson (Bath), J Joseph (Bath), O Farrell 
(Saracens), J Nowell (Exeter Chiefs); G Ford (Bath), B Youngs (Leicester); M 
Vunipola (Saracens), D Hartley (Northampton, capt), D Cole (Leicester), G Kruis 
(Saracens), M Itoje (Saracens), C Robshaw (Harlequins), T Harrison 
(Northampton), B Vunipola (Saracens).Replacements J George (Saracens), M Mullan 
(Wasps), P Hill (Northampton), J Launchbury (Wasps), C Lawes (Northampton), J 
Clifford (Harlequins), D Care (Harlequins), E Daly (Wasps).
 