
Like many companies, E.ON had experimented with a champions scheme to help it 
meet some key environmental targets such as recycling and energy use.

But three years in, the first scheme was widely seen as being tired and 
uninspiring.

So in 2009 E.ON went back the drawing board and, working with Futerra 
Sustainability Communications, set about devising a new approach that fosters a 
deeper level of engagement and focuses wholeheartedly on innovation. Champions 
2.0 was born.

Through the scheme, champions are given deeper training in sustainability, 
explicit support from senior managers right up to board level, and are 
encouraged to come up with their own ideas. Acting as environment leaders, 
senior managers oversee the scheme and co-ordinate initiatives between the 
company's UK offices.

All initiatives are pitched at a high level, linked directly to E.ON's overall 
strategic goals, particularly its aim to improve environmental decision-making 
at all levels of the business.

Champions are taught to think strategically and to communicate effectively. 
Positioned at different levels in the company, they are ideally placed to get 
input from a diverse range of employees and to win their support for 
initiatives.

Champions 2.0 was launched with a thank-you campaign and a series of staff 
roadshows. This allowed E.ON both to celebrate past achievements and get 
feedback from staff on how to improve the scheme.

10 training modules were devised backed by a judo belt-style system denoting 
the level of expertise and the achievements of the champions. A basic knowledge 
of sustainability and behaviour change, for instance, entitles champions to a 
red belt; those selected as key influencers earn the green belt, while the 
black belt is reserved for decision-makers overseeing schemes across offices.

Some 200 champions have been recruited so far. E.ON and Futerra are now 
looking to devise more sophisticated ways to measure their performance and 
their input, going beyond purely hard data and incorporating more qualitative 
metrics, using social networking, project management and opinion surveys.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 