
Adelaide’s premiership hopes have been dealt a major blow after they fell to a 
29-point loss to West Coast, which will likely dash their hopes of a top-two 
AFL finish. The Eagles dominated the play and led at every break to claim a 
14.16 (100) to 10.11 (71) win on Friday night atAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> Oval.

It paves the way for West Coast to claim either a top-four finish or a home 
elimination final depending on the weekend’s remaining games. It will also fill 
the Eagles with confidence they can perform against the competition’s best 
sides without injured star Nic Naitanui, who was replaced admirably by back-ups 
Scott Lycett and Jonathan Giles.

Adelaide could finish as low as fifth, and a home qualifying final will be 
achieved only if there are upsets in at least two other games. In a sell-out 
clash with finals-like intensity, West Coast proved better at handling the 
pressure.

Mother who put son in blackface costume needs education, says Nic Naitanui
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/26/mother-who-put-son-in-blackface-costume-needs-education-says-nic-naitanui>
The Eagles, led by Luke Shuey, Andrew Gaff and Matt Priddis, won the battle in 
the middle and moved the ball through the corridor with ease. Gaff had a 
career-best 41 disposals after gathering 38 touches in last week’s win over 
Hawthorn.

After a tight first quarter, West Coast went out firing in the second term as 
Shuey ran rampant, gathering 12 of his 31 touches to continue his magnificent 
run of form. The Crows fought back to reduce the margin to 11 points at 
halftime, but it was all West Coast in the third stanza, booting five 
unanswered goals to dismay the 50,785-strong crowd.

Adelaide, missing suspended star Rory Sloane, were uncharacteristically sloppy 
and struggled to supply their high-powered forward line as Eagles Jeremy 
McGovern and rookie Tom Barrass gathered a combined 16 marks. After booting 20 
goals in his past four games, Eddie Betts didn’t have a touch until the second 
quarter and finished with just one goal.

West Coast spearhead Josh Kennedy kicked five goals to take his season tally 
to 80 and open up a near unassailable lead in his pursuit of a second 
consecutive Coleman Medal. The Eagles now enter the finals as one of the form 
sides after claiming successive wins against Greater Western Sydney, Hawthorn 
and Adelaide.
 