
It might be about criminals exploiting a sweet old lady so they can rob a 
bank, but The Ladykillers is regularly named as one of the nation's favourite 
comedy films. Now the Ealing classic is to be brought to the stage in a new 
version written by Father Ted and The IT Crowd writerGraham Linehan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/graham-linehan>.

Producers will announce that the memorably dark and stylish 1955 film is being 
adapted for the stage, with Peter Capaldi in the role of the charming but 
sinister gang leader Professor Marcus, played first byAlec Guinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-guinness>.

The stage play will be very much Linehan's version. "I wanted the film to 
haunt the play rather than it be a transcription," he said.

There will also be more laughs. Linehan had been asked by producers if he 
agreed that The Ladykillers was a great film but could be funnier. "I realised 
that what they were offering me was a chance to play with these brilliant dolls 
in a huge dollhouse," he said.

He wondered if the film's director, the late Alexander Mackendrick, and the 
writer, William Rose, who died six years earlier than the director, in 1987, 
would enjoy his version. "What I didn't think they'd like is if I just did a 
straight transfer from screen to stage. I'd hate it to sound as if I'm being 
critical of the original film because I'm not in any way. What we're doing is 
rethinking what is a dark, black, comedy into more of a farce."

Linehan wrote the script with the memory of the film ringing in his head 
rather than studiously watching it again and again. "I'm impatient to see it on 
its feet and see if it all makes sense."

The story is about an octogenarian lady, living in an old house in King's 
Cross, London, who needs a lodger. When the charming Marcus turns up – Guinness 
memorably playing him in a Nosferatu-meets-Alastair-Sim way – her prayers are 
answered. It's even better when his friends arrive to rehearse for their 
amateur string quintet. Of course, they are not what they seem.

Capaldi, known for the best swearing ever on television in the form of The 
Thick of It's character Malcolm Tucker, will play the professor. "It is a 
wonderful part," he said. "We did a rehearsed reading of Graham's script and it 
just flew off the page. The terrible thing is that I just felt terribly at home 
with this evil character – it felt like coming home, this is what I should be 
doing."

He admitted he was slightly terrified to be following in Guinness's footsteps 
but "you can't walk around saying you have to emulate what went before, you 
have to find your own take on it".

Linehan is giving bigger roles to the other gangsters, not least the Teddy 
Boy spiv Harry, originally depicted by Peter Sellers, who will be played on 
stage by Stephen Wight. The actor and comedian Ben Miller will take on the 
creepy Louis, as originally played by Herbert Lom; James Fleet (Hugo from The 
Vicar of Dibley) will play the major; and Clive Rowe (Hackney Empire's regular 
and celebrated pantomime dame) will play big and dumb One Round.

Marcia Warren takes the part played so memorably by Katie Johnson, as the old 
lady, Louisa Wilberforce.

Even diehard Ealing fans might agree that the Frankie Howerd barrow boy and 
horse scene is the film's one dud note. "I want to keep it all in the house, so 
I don't have to use it," said Linehan.

The Ladykillers was the last of the great quintessentially British comedies 
that Ealing studios was renowned for, following films such as Kind Hearts and 
Coronets, and The Lavender Hill Mob. In the Guardian's top 25 of the greatest 
comedy films of all time last year, the film came fifth in a list topped by 
Woody Allen's Annie Hall.

The play will be directed by Sean Foley and opens at the Liverpool Playhouse 
in November before transferring to London's Gielgud theatre.

• This article was amended on 7 June 2011. The original said that The 
Ladykillers is to be brought to the stage for the first time. This has been 
corrected.
 