
A host of foreign state-owned rail operators will be vying against Sir Richard 
Branson's Virgin Rail to run the last major route in public hands after the 
government launched the contest to reprivatise the east coast mainline 
franchise.

The service is run by Directly Operated Railways, the government-owned company 
that took over in 2009 after National Express said it could not afford the 
payments under a £1.4bn contract.

As the privatisation process got under way, the transport secretary, Patrick 
McLoughlin, said: "We want to see a revitalised east coast railway, one that 
both rekindles the spirit of competition for customers on this great route to 
Scotland and competes with the west coast on speed, quality and customer 
service."

The Department for Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> said a 
strong private sector partner would deliver a "world-class railway for 
passengers and best value for the taxpayer".

However, Labour and the unions have strongly criticised the government for 
pushing the east coast line back into private hands, with DOR on course to 
return around £1bn in premiums and profits to the state over its five-year 
tenure.

The east coast company will be sold to a private operator with rights to run 
trains on the London-Edinburgh line for eight to nine years, with a possible 
extension. The terms of the franchise will encourage the next operator to 
retain the current brand. In line with the process for all European state 
contracts, the franchise was advertised to the private sector in the Official 
Journal of the European Union on Friday.

Eurostar <https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurostar> and Keolis, both 
owned by the French state railway SNCF, have already said they will join forces 
in the race for the line. Arriva, owned by Deutsche Bahn, is likely to be 
joining them. A shortlist of bidders will be announced in January.

An award is due to be made by next October, for the new operator to take over 
in February 2015, before the next general election. Labour has indicated it 
would keep the line in public hands. The coalition prioritised the reletting of 
the east coast line while granting direct awards to privately owned Virgin, 
FirstGroup and National Express to run other services until as late as 2017, 
after the rail franchising programme was thrown into disarray by the bungled 
reletting of the west coast contract last year.

The east coast competition is likely to reignite the rivalry behind the west 
coast debacle, which saw FirstGroup awarded the rights to the London-Glasgow 
route run by Virgin, only for the government to scrap the competition under a 
legal challenge from Branson's firm.

Mary Creagh, Labour's shadow transport secretary, said the east coast move 
showed the government had learned nothing from the west coast franchising 
fiasco.

She said: "David Cameron should tackle his government's cost of living crisis 
and cap rail fare rises for struggling commuters, instead of obsessing about 
handing East Coast over to the private sector."

Labour has suggested that the state-owned DOR should be allowed to bid for 
future franchises.National Express has ruled itself out of the running.

The east coast runners and riders


Virgin Rail

Runs the west coast mainline; co-owned by Branson's group and bus operator 
Stagecoach.

Eurostar-Keolis

The French connection: two firms majority owned by SNCF. Keolis holds four 
British rail franchises.

First Group

Operates trouble-strewn Thameslink and Great Western franchises. It will also 
want to put the scars of last year's west coast debacle behind it.

Arriva

Subsidiary of the German state-owned Deutsche Bahn. Arriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> has yet to confirm it 
will bid.

Abellio

Subsidiary of the Dutch rail operator Nederlandse Spoorwegen; has a hand in 
three UK franchises.
 