
The problem with French landscapes and restaurants is that appearances are so 
very deceptive. How many times have I fallen for a restaurant because of its 
looks, only to find that, once inside, things go rapidly downhill, because the 
charm was all about effect, appearances, illusion. By this token I would be 
tempted to expect an establishment that looks a bit clunky to turn out to be a 
gem.

At the seaside, the restaurants right on the seafront are often mediocre, 
because the view makes up for everything. But in a dimly lit alleyway with no 
view, the delight has to come from what's on your plate. And that's why this 
place, La Beaugravière,  about 48km north of Avignon, has been delighting me 
for 20 years.

The restaurant guides must have problems with this place, because its location 
leaves a lot to be desired: it's just off the French version of Route 66, the 
once-legendary but now little-regarded N7 from Paris to the Riviera.

There are plane trees aplenty, a car park, and five rooms (€62 a night) on the 
first floor. On a dark night I find it by its flimsy neon sign. The chef's wife 
is inside – and she's definitely not the type to swan around in Dolce & Gabbana 
to a soundtrack of Rondò Veneziano. Say to Guy Julien that his cooking has 
really developed these past few years and he just shrugs and laughs. "I dunno." 
He does know, of course, but the point is that he has no illusions about this 
world of pomp and prevarication.

Basically, La Beaugravière is one of those restaurants that I like – a bit of 
a pirate, sailing a lone course, full of chaos, passion and laughter.

Guy is still all about innocence regained, about basic pleasures. In the huge 
dining room, with its 1970s lighting, an open fire flickers gently as the first 
customers arrive. Do they have any idea that beneath their feet lies a wine 
cellar that would amaze the most passionate oenophile? Possibly the world's 
best collection of Côtes du Rhône.

Guy's other speciality, apart from keeping his head down, is truffles. But not 
as we know them. Not chopped up small by a white-gloved Parisian. And not in 
December, the traditional month for eating truffles in France. No, to taste 
truffles at their best, head to La Beaugravière in February. Should you have 
the €110 or the €168 truffle menus? I don't know. Guy served us salt-crusted 
truffle croutons and then a divine plate of seasonal vegetables with crushed 
black truffle (€68) – a heavenly combination worthy of a three-Michelin-star 
establishment – and then a dish that will linger forever in my memory: 
truffle-studded scallops in a creamy truffle soup (€68). It was indescribably 
good. The special fresh truffle menus have now finished, but dishes to try 
year-round include pumpkin soup with truffles, black truffle risotto, and 
truffle ice cream. There are also €28 and €45 menus.

Now it's your turn.

• La Beaugravière <http://www.beaugraviere.com/> +33 4 9040 8254). Flybe 
<http://www.flybe.com> flies to Avignon from Exeter, Southampton, Manchester 
and Birmingham.Jet2Com <http://www.jet2.com> flies to Avignon from Leeds 
Bradford.Europe <http://www.raileurope.co.uk> has return fares from London to 
Avignon from £119.
 