
Three-quarters of the way through Cameroon's second match in the group stages 
of theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> in Angola, they seemed 
to be on their way out. Having lost their opener to Gabon, they trailed Zambia 
1-0 and seemed devoid of ideas on how to break them down. Geremi slung in a 
typically uninspired cross from the right. Kennedy Mweene, the Zambia 
goalkeeper, started to come for it, checked, came again, got his feet in a 
terrible tangle, and finally sprawled on the ball, only for it to squirm under 
him and inside the post.

In a tournament of atrocious goalkeeping, that was probably the worst moment, 
yet Mweene is a keeper of pedigree, having been named goalkeeper of the year in 
the South African Premier League in 2009.

Of 53 goals scored in the group stage, 23 could be attributed to a greater or 
lesser extent to goalkeeper error. It is difficult to envisage much of an 
improvement between now and the summer, so goalkeeping ability, or lack of it, 
could be a massive handicap for the six African teams at theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> finals.

There have been some real howlers here in Angola. The host nation, for 
instance, seemed to be cruising to victory in the opening game when Carlos 
Fernandes dropped a cross and allowed Seydou Keita to begin Mali's fightback 
from four goals down. In the same group, Algeria's Faouzi Chaouchi was 
responsible for two of Malawi's goals in his side's 3-0 defeat, fumbling a 
cross and smacking a clearance straight into a forward.

It is not just that some of the goalkeeping has been bad; a lot of it has been 
unfathomably eccentric. Late in Mozambique's draw with Benin, for instance, 
Rafael came for an overhit through ball, gathered comfortably, and then 
attempted to flip over. Misjudging it badly, he landed on his neck, injuring 
himself and sending the ball squirting loose. He was lucky it did not cost a 
goal.

"You see a lot of mistakes," says the former Nigeria goalkeeper Idah 
Peterside. "You saw the game where the Mozambique goalkeeper tried to act 
funny. These things are long gone in football. We did that 20 years ago, but 
now the game is more technical."

This means that sides with a good goalkeeper have a huge advantage – and it 
may yet be significant that Ivory Coast's greatest weakness is their keeper, 
Boubacar Barry of KSC Lokeren. "I think [Essam] El-Hadary is the best in the 
tournament," says Ahmed Hassan, Egypt's captain, of his side's keeper, who has 
been instrumental in the Pharoahs' successes in the past two Cups of Nations. 
"He is strong and secure and that gives us lots of confidence."

El-Hadary has barely been tested so far in Angola, so survives with his 
­reputation intact, as does ­Cameroon's Carlos Kameni of ­Espanyol. He has had 
his wobbles, but Kameni appears to be the only African keeper going to the 
World Cup who looks up to the task.

A new book on African football, The Feet of the ­Chameleon, sets out the 
theory why Cameroon has traditionally produced good goalkeepers. Claude Le Roy, 
who has as much experience of coaching in Africa as any European, tells of 
going into the Bassa region of central-­southern Africa and discovering a game 
that involved two boys facing each other across a courtyard. One would head a 
ball and try to hit the roof of his opponent's house; the other would jump to 
try to save it. But Le Roy tells the book's author, Ian Hawkey, that even in 
Cameroon, goalkeeping lags behind that of the rest of the world.

"Look at the conditions. The pitches are covered in stones and broken bottles, 
or they're hard as concrete. Nobody wants to dive around and train on this."

Cameroon aside, there is no great tradition on which young keepers can draw, a 
point made by Gabon's Didier Ovono, who has so far been the best goalkeeper in 
the Cup of Nations. "It's about the mentality," he says. "In Africa they don't 
give a lot of work to the goalkeeper. When you go abroad you must have the 
technique to play there. If you do not, you cannot.

"Overseas they start at eight years old to play goalkeeper. In Africa you must 
start outfield, and you go in goal later, when you are 12, 13. It's difficult 
because we don't have good goalkeeper coaches."

The 27-year-old was a midfielder who converted to play in goal aged 12, and 
showed enough promise for his government to pay for him to attend Thomas 
Nkono's academy in Barcelona. Nkono played in two World Cups for Cameroon (1982 
and 1990) and was in the squad for USA 94. "I stayed one year to get 
technique," Ovono says. "Nkono told me everything I know in football. After, 
when I was 18, I started in El Salvador." He moved on to Georgia where he won a 
league title with Dinamo Tbilisi, and is now a regular for Le Mans in France's 
top division.

Peterside speaks similarly of going in goal in his teens because it was his 
best chance of getting into the side. Tellingly, his heroes were not African, 
but Gianluca Pagliuca of Italy and Sergio Goycochea of Argentina. "A lot of 
people want to score goals and have the glamour and the money," he says, before 
explaining his theory that African keepers cannot secure the moves to Europe 
they need to progress because so few African keepers have ­succeeded before, so 
clubs are unwilling to take a chance.

"Everybody wants the new Michael Essien," says Tom Vernon, Manchester United's 
scout in Africa, who runs an academy in Ghana. "So other positions don't get a 
look-in."

That may be so, but on the evidence of the past fortnight, their suspicion 
appears justified. And so the cycle of underachievement keeps on turning.

The most common excuse for goalkeepers has been the ball, which is of global 
concern given it is the same Adidas Jabulani model that will be used at the 
World Cup. "It is a very fast ball and because of this, it is often very 
difficult to judge its flight," Nigeria's Vincent Enyeama says.

Ovono agrees. "All the goalkeepers are talking about it. It doesn't have just 
one trajectory, it moves a lot. When they shoot it strong, you cannot follow 
the ball. You saw that against Tunisia. The ball came like this [mimes ball 
moving straight] and at the last moment, it moves. So you have to wait for the 
last moment."

Watch out, then, for more howlers in South Africa.
 