
App: echoecho <http://www.echoecho.me/>

By: Purpose Wireless Inc

Price: Free

Available on: iOS/Android/Blackberry/Ovi

What is it?

An app to help you geo-locate friends on the move and to source nearby bars, 
cafes and restaurants.

What does it promise?

"With just one click, you can see where your friends are. Or tell them where 
you are."

Is it easy to use?

It's a little fiddly. First you have to register via an SMS – never my 
favourite way of doing things given the ease of stumbling unwittingly into 
expensive text-based services or scams – then invite friends to join. Once 
you've done this, and assuming all your friends have too, you can see where 
they are on an integrated Googlemap – although you have to send a request to 
that friend each time you want to find them. This seems counter-intuitive: if 
they've accepted your friend request they are surely already OK with you seeing 
where they are. But I'm guessing the service uses a ping-style request system 
to avoid accusations that the app can be used to stalk people.

When we tested it in the office it placed me exactly where I was, but put a 
colleague who was sitting at the next desk 300 yards down the road, which isn't 
ideal.

The creators claim a WebEcho service allows users to share their location with 
(and find) friends even if they haven't downloaded the app – but I couldnt 
fathom how to do this from within the app itself.

Is it fun?

If you can get people you know to download the app and they don't mind telling 
you where they are, it's definitely amusing to see where your friends are 
hanging out.

Is it pretty?

The logo is a neat two-tone orange graphic, while the app itself boasts a neon 
tube-like title spelt out in the same orange colours at the top of every page.

Should you download it?

The app offers a simple interface that will be attractive to many users, but 
the more techie smartphone user will probably have been usingGoogle Latitude 
<https://www.google.co.uk/latitude/b/0> to do a similar thing for years. So 
whether you download it depends on whether you would use it out in the real 
world and if you can persuade your friends to sign up.

If you often meet friends (especially flitting from group to group in the same 
evening), it could definitely be a time-saver. We've included it in the 
consumer app of the week slot because it could save you cash – if you use a 
pay-as-you-go phone, using echoecho to find friends could be cheaper than 
having to text or call them to find where they are, then searching for that 
venue on Googlemaps.

Echoecho's creators claim that "you are in control of what you share, when you 
share it, and with whom you share it", which is laudable. But in reality, 
asking friends where they are before you can find them, rather than just 
opening the app to see where they are instantly, adds an unnecessary delay that 
frustrated me. Others may prefer this method.
 