


Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> has accused the 
acting chief executive of Boots of avoiding his taxes and being in an unholy 
alliance with the Conservatives after the businessman claimed that a Labour 
government would be a catastrophe.

In an escalation of the row, the Labour leader took Stefano Pessina to task 
after he gave an interview to the Sunday Telegraph expressing his fears about 
the prospect of Miliband as prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/01/labour-boots-stefano-pessina-chuka-umunna-tax-uk>
.

Speaking in a debate for young people on Sky News, Miliband said: “Yesterday 
the [boss] of Boots started telling people how to vote in the UK general 
election. Well, it turns out he lives in Monaco and is actually avoiding his 
taxes. I’ve got to tell you, I don’t think people in Britain are going to take 
kindly to being lectured by someone who’s avoiding his taxes on how they should 
be voting in the UK general election.

“You have now got this unholy alliance between the Conservative party and 
people like him who are actually saying that a country can’t change … Part of 
my job is to stand up to these powerful forces who aren’t paying taxes, who are 
avoiding their taxes.

“They have a responsibility … that goes from top to bottom in our country. How 
can we say to people on benefits they should be responsible when some of the 
top, powerful people in this country are avoiding their taxes and not doing the 
right thing?

“Mr Pessina, who has been lecturing us about what we should be doing, frankly, 
I think he should be paying his taxes.”

Miliband promised he would make sure companies such as Amazon and Google paid 
a fair share of tax in the UK. “This is something the world has got to get to 
grips with,” he said.

“This is about decent businesses in this country. The vast majority [of 
businesses] are doing the right thing and, frankly, they are as narked as we 
are about the fact there are some people and businesses who are not doing the 
right thing. We’ve got to clamp down on it.”

Earlier, Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>, the shadow 
chancellor, suggested the Conservatives would try to influence voters by 
persuading more high-profile people to speak out against Labour in the coming 
campaign. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today: “I would think in the next three months 
we are going to have a number of people brought forward by the Conservatives, 
whether it’s Gary Barlow or Mr Pessina, saying: ‘Don’t vote Labour.’ The idea 
that somebody who doesn’t pay tax in Britain telling people how to vote will 
stick in the craw.”

Balls pointed out that Pessina criticised only one policy – the threat of 
leaving the European Union – something only likely under the Conservatives or 
Ukip.T

he Tories insisted they had nothing to do with Pessina’s comments but George 
Osborne took the unusual step of providing a direct quote highlighting the 
businessman’s stance. The party has previously been known to approach 
businesspeople to speak out on sensitive political issues such as the Scottish 
independence referendum.

Douglas Alexander, the head of Labour’s election campaign, had already 
described Pessina’s comments as rubbish, while Chuka Umunna, the shadow 
business secretary, said the electorate was unlikely to listen to someone who 
does not live or pay tax in the UK.

Boots was targeted by tax campaigners when it moved its formal tax residence 
from Britain to Switzerland following Pessina’s private equity-backed buyout in 
2007. When Pessina merged Boots with US group Walgreens in 2014, there were 
plans to move its headquarters from the US to Switzerland for tax reasons, 
although the idea was abandoned after a US political row and a potential 
customer backlash.

The weekend row started with Pessina – who lives in Monte Carlo and has a 
fortune estimated at £7.5bn – saying that ifLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> politicians acted in the way that 
they spoke “it would be a catastrophe”.

In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, Pessina, 74, said: “The problem is 
would they [Labour] act that way or not? One thing is to threaten and to shout 
but it is completely different to be in charge and to manage the country day to 
day … [and if they did it would be] not helpful for business, not helpful for 
the country and in the end it probably won’t be helpful for them.”

Pessina, whose company has 2,500 shops and employs 70,000 staff in Britain, 
declined to say which policies he particularly objected to but there has been 
previous criticism by business executives of Labour promises to reintroduce a 
50p top rate of income tax, freeze prices in the energy sector and impose 
restrictions on the size of high street banks.

A spokesman for Walgreens Boots Alliance had no immediate response to 
Miliband’s comments. A statement on Sunday night from the company attempted to 
clarify Pessina’s comments: “The comments made by Stefano Pessina were a small 
part of a much larger conversation and have been taken out of context. Stefano 
Pessina was expressing his personal views only and is not campaigning against 
Ed Miliband or the Labour party.

“Indeed, he previously held good relationships with the Labour governments 
under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, as well as the current coalition government 
led by David Cameron and Nick Clegg.”
 