
England’s head coach, Eddie Jones, said he hoped the historic 3-0 series 
whitewash of Australia will lift the public mood in his adopted country 
following this week’s EU referendum. Jones also praised Owen Farrell’s 
goal‑kicking, describing it as “solar‑system class” followinghis team’s 44-40 
third Test victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
.

With England having doubled their previous tally of major summer Test wins in 
the southern hemisphere in the space of three weekends, Jones suggested the 
outcome would at least be a temporary distraction from the implications of the 
Brexit vote. “I’m sure people in England will be talking a little less about 
the pound devaluing and more about the value of the England rugby side going 
up,” said the Australian.

“Very few sides beat Australia in Australia. The All Blacks do but there 
aren’t too many others. We’ve not only beaten Australia, we’ve beaten them 3-0 
and it’s the first time they’ve been whitewashed since 1971. It’s a significant 
achievement but it’s only a small step for us.”

Farrell’s 24-point haul – he scored a total of 66 points and missed only three 
attempts in the series – was a key element in ensuring a clean sweep and Jones 
praised the input of Jonny Wilkinson, who has been coaching him on an 
occasional basis. “We’ve got to be very thankful to Jonny Wilkinson for the 
work he has done with Owen Farrell and George Ford. He’s been superb. Owen’s 
been absolutely terrific on tour. His kicking is solar-system class … he’s 
absolutely outstanding.”

The head coach was less impressed with England’s defence after Australia 
scored five tries. “We have had two poor games in defence and one very good 
game. If we want to be the No1 team in the world, which we do, we need greater 
consistency in that. But to come here, having been training since June last 
year, and to win that game at the end was a fantastic effort. The players 
showed toughness and they were brave.”

The disappointed Wallabies coach, Michael Cheika, was critical of some of the 
officiating but conceded Jones had made England significantly stronger. “He’s 
obviously added some starch to the team, there’s no doubt about that,” he said. 
“They have had a good reaction to him and worked hard. They haven’t lost a game 
since he has been in charge so you can’t really say anything, can you? It’s 
been plain sailing.”

While Cheika braces himself for a local backlash – “There will be plenty of 
people looking to put the boot in but I’m ready for that” – Jones will be 
reflecting on a “fantastic series” that has propelled England to second place 
in the world rankings. “There were weaknesses in the Australian side that we 
identified and we thought we could get them in certain areas. We did that to 
some extent so the possibility of us winning 3-0 was strong.

“It’s been a great tour and it’s been fantastic for rugby … it’s been a 
pleasure to be here. Being an Australian, I’m always grateful for what 
Australia have done for me but it’s certainly nice beating them 3-0.”

England complete Australia whitewash with thrilling 44-40 win in third Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report> 