


Suddenly it feels like a trick of the imagination that Roberto Mancini has 
been accused this season of undue conservatism. Edin Dzeko, Mario Balotelli, 
David Silva and Carlos Tevez were all shoehorned into Manchester City's attack 
for the first time and, after a successful night of experimentation, Mancini's 
men moved into the last 16 with something to spare.

They did not quite manage to silence the unrelenting Aris support – the kitrini
 made a lasting impression as perhaps the most voluble and choreographed away 
fans ever to visit this stadium – but they were superior in every other 
department. They have scored 19 goals in their last five home games and can 
look forward to a tie against Dynamo Kyiv courtesy of an early double from 
Dzeko and a deflected Yaya Touré strike with a quarter of an hour to play.

A seventh successive home win was not entirely without complications, Vincent 
Kompany being forced off after damaging his hip in the first half. Kompany 
joins an injury list already featuring Adam Johnson, James Milner, Nigel de 
Jong and Micah Richards, and will undergo tests in the morning to ascertain the 
seriousness of the problem. "I hope it's not serious and that he can play 
against Fulham on Sunday," Mancini said.

This was the only downside for City and, for Dzeko in particular, it was a 
night of huge satisfaction. These were not his first goals for his new 
employers but it was the first time he has bristled with confidence. His 
finishing was clinical, the relationship with Tevez blossoming, and the Bosnian 
is now displaying the kind of prolific centre-forward play that persuaded City 
to pay £27m for his services.

It was a good night, in other words, for the City chairman, Khaldoon 
al-Mubarak, to fly in from Abu Dhabi for his first match in two months. City 
played with width and penetration and their attacking quartet had an elusive 
quality, Dzeko remaining the focal point but Tevez, Balotelli and Silva 
interchanging positions, driving forward from all angles.

"The problem is when we don't have the ball but I think it can work 
sometimes," Mancini said. "Maybe not often, but sometimes. We were excellent in 
that first half."

Aris were moderate opponents, and there were times when the gap between the 
sides felt more like a chasm. In terms of Greeks bearing gifts, the tone was 
set in the seventh minute when the centre-half Nikolaos Lazaridis made a hash 
at clearing Aleksandar Kolarov's long ball and suddenly Dzeko was clear. His 
first touch was a little loose but, steadying himself, the second was a low, 
right-foot shot, across the goalkeeper and just inside the far post.

Within five minutes the night had become an exercise in damage limitation for 
City's opponents. This time the move originated on the left, Silva playing a 
ball infield to Tevez and the Argentinian picking out Dzeko, running through 
the inside-right channel. Dzeko worked the ball on to his left foot and, 
applying just the right measure of curl, sent a firm and precise left-foot shot 
into the same corner of the goal.

The early onslaught subsided a little thereafter, though City retained an air 
of complete superiority and Dzeko will feel he should have completed a 
hat-trick late in the first half, Silva's pass splitting the Greek defence to 
leave him clear only for the goalkeeper, Michail Sifakis, to claw the ball away 
from his feet.

The second half was not so frenetic – "so-so", to use Mancini's description, 
with City no longer attacking with the same drive. Even so, there was only one 
brief flurry when Aris came out of the defensive shell that had frustrated 
Mancini's team nine days earlier in Thessaloniki. City were comfortable and it 
was probably only to be expected that they would ease off, with three more home 
games to come in the next nine days.

Nonetheless Balotelli had struck a post before Touré tried his luck with a 
long-range effort that took a decisive touch off Ricardo Faty to find the 
bottom corner.
 