
It was an ordinary match played in an extraordinary din and, for Manchester 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, an opportunity 
missed, perhaps. Roberto Mancini's team will be confident of progressing when 
the sides meet at Eastlands next week but they could conceivably be in a much 
stronger position had they shown greater ambition and fluency in attack.

Instead there were only fleeting moments when they threatened to turn down the 
volume of a raucous crowd, with Mancini unusually forthright in his criticisms. 
The Italian spoke of the pitch being partly to blame but he was also unhappy 
with Edin Dzeko, the £27m signing from Wolfsburg, who was substituted six 
minutes from the end.

"I expect more from him. He's a new player and I think he has the same problem 
as Fernando Torres at Chelsea because when you sign for a new team in January 
you don't know your new team-mates, you don't know the system and it's not 
easy. But he needs to improve and it's important he improves quickly."

City's best two chances had both fallen to the Bosnian – one a poor connection 
with his shot after 16 minutes, the other a twisting header in the second half 
that brought a one-handed save from the goalkeeper Michalis Sifakis.

"Dzeko had a chance and he should score," Mancini said. "It was a difficult 
game because the pitch was not good and Aris played with 10 men behind the 
ball. Maybe it would have been different if we had scored when we had that 
first chance."

Dzeko, in fairness, looked fitter and more energetic than in previous matches, 
although his touch was erratic and his partnership with Carlos Tevez, playing 
just behind the taller man, is still very much a work in progress. It was rare 
for Tevez to be so peripheral, although Mancini defended the Argentinian, 
arguing that the problem was the supply line and questioning the contribution 
of Shaun Wright-Phillips.

"Shaun should do better than that," he said of a player who submitted a 
written transfer request in the final days of the transfer window. "We had only 
one cross throughout the second half and it was from Gareth Barry. With Dzeko 
playing, we should have crossed it more. Maybe Carlos was quieter than usual 
but we cannot always rely on Carlos to score once or twice in every game."

The pitch, as Mancini stated, was not conducive to flowing football, although 
it was still disappointing that City's front players took so long to adapt. 
David Silva showed some neat touches without being able to find the killer pass 
and the fit-again Mario Balotelli was unable to influence the match when he 
came on as a 77th-minute substitute in his first appearance since 28 December.

The noise was guttural, choreographed and unrelenting and the atmosphere is 
undoubtedly a factor why the Greeks boast such a formidable record on this 
ground, with no defeats now in 26 European games stretching back 43 years.

On that basis City are entitled to regard this as a satisfactory result as 
they aim to book a meeting in the last 16 against Besiktas or Dynamo Kiev.

"It will be different at our ground because the pitch is much better. We will 
have a good pitch to play with the ball on the floor," Mancini said.

"Nil-nil is dangerous, though. It's a good result but not a perfect result. 
Everything is open."

Nonetheless it would still represent a major surprise were Mancini's men not 
to progress. Aris were ordinary opponents, lacking width and penetration.

There were times when City were careless with the ball and lacked cohesion 
but, on the balance of play, Mancini was entitled to talk about his side being 
the more adventurous. Joe Hart's only noteworthy save came in the 63rd minute 
when the right-winger Neto fired in a diagonal shot from long distance.

Several City players complained after the match that they had been targeted by 
a laser pen shone from the crowd, although the club are not planning to make an 
official complaint.
 