
An Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> school that has a 
mural in its assembly hall featuring a large golliwog is to hold extra 
anti-racism lessons after a woman protested about the "racist and offensive 
nature" of the picture.

Margaret Neizer-Rocha complained to the police, City of Edinburgh council and 
MSPs after spotting the image on Friday morning as she visited Wardie primary 
school while thinking of applying for a place there for her young son.

Neizer-Rocha said she was astonished to find that the mural with the golliwog, 
painted in 1936 and featuring scenes from Alice in Wonderland across nine 
panels, had been restored in 2011 with a £17,600 grant from the Heritage 
Lottery Fund (HLF).

The golliwog is sitting on an alcove ledge above the Alice in Wonderland 
figure in the mural's central panel.

The mural and Wardie school's distinctive architecture are well known in 
academic circles. They are part of the internationalDecorated School project 
<http://thedecoratedschool.blogspot.co.uk/2011/09/wardie-school-edinburgh-and-its-alice_21.html>
, which is studying art and school buildings with funding from theArts and 
Humanities Research Council <http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>.

Experts said they were unclear as to why the image was ever included in the 
first place: it does not feature in Lewis Carroll's story. They have speculated 
that it may have been added to promote Robertsons' jam, which used to have a 
golliwog on its logo.

The HLF admitted it was unlikely its staff had inspected the mural since the 
grant was a small sum awarded under its fast-track funding scheme. An HLF 
spokeswoman said it would now contact the school to discuss the controversy.

Edinburgh council refused to consider covering up the image but said it would 
now use additional teaching packs fromShow Racism the Red Card 
<http://www.srtrc.org/news/news-and-events?country=scotland> at the school.

A spokeswoman insisted the council and school took diversity and anti-racism 
extremely seriously. She said Wardie had aUnicef Rights Respecting Schools award
 <http://www.unicef.org.uk/rrsa>.

She added: "The mural is of both historical and artistic importance. While we 
understand the offensiveness of the image, it is in no way indicative of the 
attitudes of either the school or the council. Our equalities policies and 
approaches are robustly multicultural and anti-racist, promoting diversity and 
good relationships among pupils."

Neizer-Rocha said she would find some other school for her son; and she had 
spoken to police who were looking into her complaint.

She said the image should be removed or covered up. "It's an inappropriate 
image for a primary school gymnasium and assembly hall. It's one thing if it 
was a museum piece or an exhibition, where you might explain what a swastika 
was or Ku Klux Klan outfit. It goes back to the American black sambo, the 
blacked-up face. It's offensive to me: I find it racially offensive."

Jeremy Howard, a co-ordinator of the Decorated School project, from the 
University of St Andrews, said the golliwog had been discussed as part of the 
project. But he said the school had to acknowledge that it raised significant 
issues.

"This is history: if you start painting it out or get rid of it you're 
deceiving people about what views were prevalent in the 1930s.

"I think once children are being taught about issues of race, social issues 
and human rights, especially as they get to primary 6 or primary 7 [aged 10 to 
12], that could definitely be the time to introduce it. It seems to me to be a 
perfect tool for that, saying that in the past the establishment didn't even 
blink an eye at having this here, but we do now."

• This article was amended on 18 November 2013. In the original version, 
Margaret Neizer-Rocha's name was wrongly given as Mary Rocha.

• The image accompanying this article was replaced on 26 November 2013 because 
of a copyright issue.
 