
On the road out of Freetown, Sierra Leone's bustling capital, lines of painted 
shacks gradually recede into banana groves, sugar-cane plantations and land 
blackened by recent slash-and-burn farming. The number of young people working 
in the rice fields is immediately striking. Processions of children march along 
the road, balancing piles of dried palm leaves on their heads. Moses Marah, who 
is guiding me around the remote Northern Province, shrugs: "This is what it is 
like – children must work to help their families".

In 2004, Sierra Leone made education up to the age of 13 free and compulsory 
but many children, particularly those in rural areas, still have no access to 
schools. 72 million children worldwide are in the same position. The second 
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of education for all by 2015 is far from 
being achieved.

Sierra Leone ranks among the lowest in the UNDP's Human Development Index. The 
life expectancy is 48 and the average adult has only 2.9 years of schooling. 80 
percent of people live in rural areas, often in extreme poverty. Those 
attending school are often malnourished, and are therefore less able to 
concentrate and less likely to develop basic learning capacities. According to 
the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), the rural-urban educational 
disparity is the main obstacle to universal primary education.

Access to education in rural parts of Sierra Leone is limited by the severe 
lack of schools and qualified teachers. In 2003, writer Aminatta Forna set up a 
primary school in Rogbonko, a village that her grandfather founded almost a 
century ago. Until then, children had to walk five miles to the nearest school, 
swimming across a river that flooded in the rainy season, during which only the 
bigger children could manage the journey.

Remote villages are often prohibitively far away from their closest schools, 
and irregular attendance and drop-outs are common. With Forna's help Rogbonko 
was able to train its own teachers, but few rural communities can afford the 
government's distance-learning scheme. Horatio Nelson-Williams, the coordinator 
of Sierra Leone's Education For All programme, acknowledges that "one of the 
major challenges is to get qualified teachers to teach in rural schools". 
Schools are also desperately short of materials. Forna gives surplus donated 
books to other rural schools: "They have absolutely nothing".

The language divide is a further obstacle to rural education. The national 
curriculum is taught in English and in Rogbonko, where the villagers speak 
Temne, the learning process is slow: "It's very hard for children to be taught 
in English", says Forna, "it takes them so long to get to the point where they 
understand anything".

Sierra Leone was once a bastion of Western-style education. In the early 19th 
century, the rate of primary school attendance in Freetown was higher than it 
was in Britain. From its founding as a settlement for freed slaves, education 
has been a preserve of the urban elite, distancing them from the indigenous 
rural population. After independence in 1961, this division was deepened by 
decades of dictatorial misrule. Rural people saw little of the profits from the 
diamonds they produced and public services were all but non-existent.

Twenty years ago, Sierra Leone's President Momoh declared that education was a 
privilege, not a right. As the country plunged into a ten-year civil war, it 
was a privilege denied to most of the population. Almost 1,300 primary schools 
– an estimated 70 percent – were destroyed during the conflict, mainly in rural 
areas where the rebel Revolutionary United Front could easily prey on villages 
for food and child conscripts. When the war ended in 2002, 67 percent of 
children had no education.

Some of the lucky ones spent their childhoods across the border in Guinean 
refugee camps. Moses, 25, is now struggling to save up for university. He 
remembers his time in Guinea fondly: "I learned lots of languages and got a 
basic education. I would not have learned anything if I had stayed in Sierra 
Leone".

The Ministry of Education now accepts "the right of all children to quality 
primary education", as embodied in the MDGs. But the former dictator's words 
still ring true in much of the country. Many rural families survive on 
subsistence farming and rely on their children to work the land or perform 
domestic duties. The FAO points out that "hunger is highly correlated with 
educational deprivation", but parents have more immediate concerns about food 
security, especially during the 'hungry season'.

In Rogbonko, nestled deep in the forest, crowds of children sit in dusty 
circles weaving baskets. They pound rice or palm kernels and haul their baby 
siblings around on their hips like miniature mothers while their parents work 
on the communal farms. Initially, the plan was to educate one child from each 
household, but the school was inundated with entire families eager to learn. 
The school cannot teach all the village children, but it ensures that everyone 
it enrols stays to the end.

Since its emergence from civil war ten years ago, Sierra Leone's educational 
prospects have improved. 69 percent of children now attend primary school. Yet, 
at the current rate of progress it is difficult to imagine how the second MDG 
will be fulfilled by 2015. UNICEF estimates that 300,000 children of primary 
school age in Sierra Leone are still out of school. A much larger number never 
set foot in a secondary school.

Education is widely accepted as the best route out of poverty for developing 
countries. It increases economic activity, boosts gender equality, stimulates 
social productivity and reduces mortality. Poor and post-conflict countries 
like Sierra Leone cannot provide comprehensive education on their own. 
Nevertheless, Forna is hopeful: "I think [universal education] is achievable", 
although she would like to see more government-driven progress. The success of 
Rogbonko's school is an example of a rural community claiming its right to 
education. It is up to the government and its international sponsors to deliver 
that right to every child, wherever they live.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 