
Today in Govindpuri, an urban slum nestled among the wealthy residential 
neighbourhoods of south Delhi, twelve-year-old Sadam sits naked in a plastic 
chair. He has spent most of his life here, trapped within the blue walls of 
this two-room shack, a cramped and windowless house that he shares with his 
mother, father and nine brothers and sisters.

Sadam was diagnosed with Cerebral Palsy when he was five years old. 'Then 
there was hope' says his mother, Nazma who was told there was a chance that her 
son would walk and could 'do something with his life'. But with a family of 
twelve living on less than £4 a day Nazma could not access the support and 
education that her son needed and hope quickly faded.

Seventy percent of disabled children in Delhi have never even been to a rehab 
centre. Sadam is one of the luckier ones. On diagnosis he was referred to 
Astha, an NGO that provides outreach support to disabled children in 
Govindpuri. Outreach care-worker Seema Gurung has been visiting his home for 
seven years. Before working with Astha Sadam lay prostrate all day, now he has 
had an operation on his back and therapy that has given him increased 
muscle-control and the ability to sit. Those who have worked with him 
acknowledge Sadam's potential for much more. With their support, Nazma has 
lobbied a local school to enrol her son, demanding the educational support he 
needs to become part of the community.

In 2005 the Government of India declared that every child from 6-14 has the 
right to 'Free and Compulsory Education'. In August 2009 that right was 
enshrined in the constitution. To implement the act the government runs a 
scheme called Savva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), 'Education for All'. The initiative 
is working to ensure the inclusion of every child in formalised schooling. SSA 
is partly funded by the World Bank, EU and DfID and is working to prepare the 
education system to accept any child regardless of gender, income, caste or 
disability. SSA is pushing for a more inclusive child-centred curriculum that 
breaks away from the blackboard and textbook tradition of Indian schools. It 
provides 3,000 Rupees (£44) per child per year for support services and 
advocates a 'zero rejection policy'.

But the reality of inclusion is light-years away for families like Sadam's. 
Many factors complicate the problem for India's poorest. When Nazma approached 
her local school the principle told her that if Sadam were to attend she would 
have to sit with him all day. With nine other children to look after this is 
impossible. Several teachers asked, 'what is the point of bringing Sadam to 
school? He will just sit here'. The idea that he has the potential to learn and 
contribute is alien to this society.

The problem also lies deeper within the community. In the beginning Sadam's 
father brought him to the Astha centre every day. After a week he could 
communicate with his carers and was learning quickly. But soon after he stopped 
showing up. When questioned on this Nazma gestures to her back, too weak to 
carry a twelve-year-old boy half a mile to the centre. His father has fallen 
victim to drug abuse, which is rife in Govindpuri and he no longer helps. Like 
many parents of the disabled in India, Nazma finds it easier to keep her son 
within the safe and loving confines of her home. 'People don't like my family 
because of my son', she says and repeats the word 'nafrat'-hatred. Social 
stigmas label families of the disabled unlucky and isolate them, making it hard 
for siblings to work and to marry within the community.

This is why Education for All is so important for India. 'Where do you see the 
disabled child?' asks Poonam Natarajan, head of the National Trust, a 
government body that promotes the rights of the mentally disabled. 'Do you see 
them in the park, in the public schools? No. That is where the stigma lies. 
Nobody knows how to deal with them, how to work with them, how to be friends 
with them.' In 1985 Poonam started Vidya Sagar, an education centre for 
children and adults with special needs in Chennai, southern India. Vidya Sagar 
now works with 1,500 children with disabilities all over the city. She is 
convinced that mainstream education is possible for all.

On an adjacent block to Sadam lives Mohan, an eleven-year-old boy who is more 
than duly excited about starting school this year. Mohan was diagnosed with 
unspecific mental disability when he was five and has been working with 
different NGO's for the past four years. Now he goes to an informal NGO-run 
education centre in the slum. He has learnt to read and write in preparation 
for his next year at government school. His father is very proud. 'I have 
worked very hard to achieve this and now because of Astha my son is going to 
school'.

However, putting mentally disabled children in mainstream schools is a 
divisive issue even within a disability sector that, for the most part, works 
together. Merry Barua is founder of Action for Autism an NGO that works with 
25,000 people in Delhi. She is worried about the effect of compulsory 
education. She believes it encourages special needs schools- that don't follow 
a recognised curriculum- to close down, pushing children with high support 
needs back into the isolation of their homes.

Attitudes on inclusion also vary geographically. Some of the southern states 
like Tamil Nadu, where Chennai is, have achieved much greater strides in 
inclusive education claiming 98 percent enrolment. Complicated issues arise in 
each state but in the poorer south more progressive government and stronger 
civil-state partnerships have increased the efficacy of NGO's working with 
disability.

The rebirth in India's primary education system will drive development 
forward. The battle against exclusion of disabled children must be achieved as 
part of this movement and facilities for educating children with severe 
disabilities must be an intrinsic part of the system from the beginning. India 
has to avoid leaving children like Sadam behind and it has far to go.

Last week, two government officials visited Govindpuri to survey the 
neighbourhood. The slum is to be demolished to prepare Delhi for the 
Commonwealth Games in September. After living here for nineteen years the 
family will be forced out to Nazma's village eighteen hours from Delhi. In 
rural areas less than 1% of disabled children are enrolled in schools.

'How will Sadam access support there?' asks Seema. Nazma shrugs helplessly, 'I 
don't know.'

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 