
Mohamed Zidan had promised that the world would see who was the better team, 
and so it did. For Egypt, who were determined to make a point after missing out 
on a place at the World Cup, this was revenge on an epic scale. After an 
emphatic victory, they will wonder how on earth they allowedAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> to beat them in a World Cup 
play-off in Omdurman 70 days ago.

Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> didn't just beat Algeria 
tonight; they humiliated them, rendering them an ill-disciplined rabble who 
finished the game with just eight men. The Pharaohs' passing, as hypnotic as it 
has been all tournament, had already given them control when a dreadful error 
from Rafik Halliche after 37 minutes, brought on by the mounting pressure, gave 
them the game.

Zidan, as though inspired by his own description of the game as "war", was 
brilliant tonight after a subdued tournament, and when he initiated a rapid 
break from an Algeria corner, Halliche missed a long diagonal and Emad Meteeb 
was clean through. Halliche's attempt to recover was clumsy and as Meteeb went 
down the Beninois referee, Koffi Codjia, awarded a penalty and showed a second 
yellow card. Hosny Abd Rabou converted the penalty and Algeria fell apart.

As they protested about Abd Rabou's stuttered run-up to take the penalty, 
their goalkeeper, Faouzi Chaouchi, seemed to aim a head-butt at Codjia. The 
referee only cautioned the goalkeeper, but if the Confederation of African 
Football takes a dimmer view of the incident he could be banned from all three 
of Algeria's group games at the World Cup – the second of which, of course, is 
against England.

"Today we played against Egypt and the referee," said the Rangers and Algeria 
defender Madjid Bougherra. "He was rubbish. Sometimes you see this in Africa. 
You cannot believe it when you see this on the pitch. But we are going to the 
World Cup. That is our consolation and there we can enjoy it because they have 
good referees."

Zidan curled in a precise second goal 20 minutes into the second half, and as 
Egypt began taunting their opponents by playing keep-ball, the red mist 
thickened around Algeria. In a crazy final quarter, Portsmouth's Nadir Belhadj 
was sent off for a horrible lunge at Ahmed El Mohamady. He now faces the 
prospect of missing the first World Cup game, against ­Slovenia. Mohamed 
Abdelshafi then clipped a third Egypt goal from a tight angle, Chaouchi was 
shown a red card for a swing at Mohamed Nagui and Nagui bundled in a fourth.

So Egypt stride on, unbeaten in 18 games at the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>, and only a youthful 
but resilient Ghana, who beat Nigeria 1-0 earlier, stand between them and an 
unprecedented third consecutive title.

Already short on forwards, Egypt may be without Meteeb, who was forced off 
with a hamstring injury. Such concerns, though, are for later; as hundreds of 
fans were bussed back to the airport tonight, all they cared about was having 
made an old enemy look rather foolish.
 