
By the end it all felt very familiar. There again was the goalkeeper, Essam El 
Hadary, bouncing up and down on the crossbar. There again was the coach, Hassan 
Shehata, being thrown in the air by his players like a birthday boy being given 
the bumps. And there, yet again, was Ahmed Hassan, receiving the cup from Issa 
Hayatou, raising it and pointing his finger in the air in thanks to Allah. As 
it was in Cairo, as it was in Accra, so it was again in Luanda.

By winning an unprecedented third consecutive Cup of Nations, this Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> side have confirmed their place in 
history. They will not be at this summer's World Cup finals in South Africa but 
this may be the best team Africa has produced. Records were broken or extended 
wherever you looked.

This is Egypt's seventh title, three more than their nearest challengers, 
Cameroon and Ghana, who must now live in the knowledge that they have only won 
as many as Hassan, Egypt's remarkable captain. Five other players – This is 
Egypt's seventh title, three more than their nearest challengers, Cameroon and
Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana>, who must now live in the 
knowledge that they have won only as many as Hassan, Egypt's remarkable 
captain. Five other players – El Hadary, Hany Said, Wael Gomaa, Ahmed Fathy and 
Emad Meteeb – played in all three finals, while Shehata who, after 18 games, is 
still unbeaten in the competition, equalled the Ghanaian CK Gyamfi's record of 
three titles as coach.

As in those previous two finals Egypt were not especially convincing. They 
were the best team in the tournament and deserved their success but they were 
perhaps fortunate that a youthful Ghana could not find penetration to match 
their passing. Asamoah Gyan, a figure reborn in this competition, toiled 
heroically alone up front but their coach, Milovan Rajevac, will know he was 
left too isolated. Only with a couple of free-kicks, one just too high and one 
flapped uneasily wide by El Hadary, did they go close.

The game, in the end, was decided by the prolific substitute Mohamed Gedo, who 
took his tally for the tournament to five and confirmed himself as top scorer, 
as he played a one-two with Mohamed Zidan, advanced into the box and curled a 
precise finish beyond Richard Kingson. There were Ghanaian tears at the end, 
but Rajevac's side are too gifted, too matureThere were Ghanaian tears at the 
end, but Rajevac's side are too gifted, too mature to fade away, and will 
surely be back. This Egypt, though, perhaps will not. This has been one of the 
greatest of all generations, but, as their general manager Samir Adly 
acknowledged, the sense is that the sun may be setting on their golden age.Ghana
 (4-2-3-1) Kingson; Inkoom, Addy, Vorsah, Sarpei; Agyemang-Badu; Annan; D Ayew, 
Asamoah; Opoku (Addo 89); Gyan (Adiyiah 87).

Egypt (3-5-2) El Hadary; Fathy (Moatasem 90), H Said, Gomaa; El Mohamady, A 
Hassan, Ghaly, Hosny, Moawad (Abdelshafi 57); Zidan, Meteeb (Nagui 70).

Referee Koman Coulibaly (Mali)
 