
With the elections nearing, it seems that all has gone quiet in Al-Tahrir 
Square. But for the occasional clash between civilians and the police, it seems 
that the people of Egypt are done making demands. Given that the world's eyes 
are on Syria at the moment, one could be forgiven for thinking that in the face 
of the upcoming elections, the same Egyptians who marched Mubarak out of power 
might have gone home; that the revolution is over.

This is not the case, says Iman Emi, a mother of two living in Cairo. "The 
country is on hold", she says, "until we settle and elect the president and the 
new government bears its responsibilities". Much like the quiet that comes 
before the storm, Egypt is bracing itself for any eventualities that will 
result from the coming election.

The women of Egypt are holding their breath. When the new government is 
elected later this month, it will be they, among others like the Coptic 
Chrstians, who will bear the consequences. Their success in achieving equal 
rights will determine whether the uprising of January 25th 2011, which paved 
the way for the Arab Spring, was a success. If the new government does not push 
the agenda for women's rights, it will have undermined the hopes of those who 
fought and died for a better Egypt. After all, how significant is the freedom 
won in the revolution, if the women of Egypt are deprived of the fruits of that 
freedom?

The women's revolution has outlasted (or at least out-shouted) the original 
uprising largely for two reasons. For one, the absence of women on governmental 
committees has not gone unnoticed. Vickie Langohr reports in Foreign Policy 
that government ministers are actively barring women from taking ministerial 
positions because they claim it would be unsafe for them to do so. Iman, who 
considers herself to be among the empowered women in Egypt, believes that when 
the temporary government was put together, it "brought to parliament a few 
individuals whose beliefs belong to the medieval century". This medieval 
attitude is sadly being reflected in the policies of the candidates for the 
next election.

 Military cruelty has also provoked demonstrations by women, such as the Blue 
Bra demonstration in December- the largest demonstration by women in Egypt in 
almost a hundred years. When images and videos of a woman being stripped and 
brutally attacked by the military went viral, the country took again to the 
streets, this time in defence of its daughters. The image of the young woman, 
whose abaya was pulled over her head exposing her blue bra, marked the 
beginning of a new kind of fight.

This fight is not for equal rights- liberation is what is being demanded. 
Liberation through equal rights. When American-Egyptian Mona Eltahawy 
published, "Why do they hate us?" in the May/June issue of Foreign Policy, she 
sparked her own revolution: a thought revolution. The aim of the piece, she 
says, is to "remove the Mubarak in our mind, the Mubarak in our bedroom, and 
the Mubarak in our street". What she is calling for is a more meaningful shift 
in attitudes towards women. In other words, if women are free by law, but are 
not free in the eyes of their oppressors, which Eltahawy claims are men, then 
they are not truly free.

Compelling as Eltahawy's case is, once cannot help but feel that women no 
longer see themselves as victims. Moreover, if the new government stands in the 
way of women achieving equal citizenship they will not simply return to life 
under the veil, toiling obediently in their homes. No, the seeds that were sown 
in the revolution were hugely significant, and what we are seeing now is the 
rise of a more confident woman, willing to fight for her rights.

Some have chosen to fight in the court, such as Samira Ibrahim, who took legal 
action against a military doctor who performed 'virginity tests' on her and 
seven other female demonstrators in March. Despite the doctor being acquitted, 
the fact that the case made it to court at all is significant.

The fact that women like Samira Ibrahim feel secure in fighting increasingly 
public battles over such subjects is important. It tells us that while men may 
be trying to make victims of women-through institutional discrimination or 
otherwise- women are not making victims of themselves. Their self-esteem is 
evolving. They have found their right to self-determination, and it is this 
that is at stake if the new government does not recognise its responsibility to 
accommodate the rights of women into the new constitution.

A survey by Amnesty, however, gives us little reason to be hopeful. Amnesty 
recently asked parties running in the upcoming election to sign a "human rights 
manifesto". Point nine of the manifesto addressed women's rights. In total, 
only twelve of the fifty-four parties either signed the manifesto or agreed 
orally. Of those twelve, five did not agree to point nine.

All is not lost, however. Those who fought, or witnessed those who did, know 
now that they can fight. Some have become increasingly creative in broadcasting 
their demand for women's rights, like Aliaa Magda Elmahdy, who caused 
controversy last year when she posted a nude photo of herself on her blog as an 
expression of outrage at the existing discrimination in Egyptian society.

Egypt is doing all that it can at present. Despite all its tactical strength 
and creativity, however, it needs an ally in the international community who 
must remind the future president of his obligation to commit to a programme of 
women's rights reform. "The Egyptian woman is an essential part in rebuilding 
democracy," argues Ms Emi. It is critical for the developed world to ensure the 
success of women who are fighting for their freedom. We must support the women 
of Egypt.
 