
Police have arrested four members of a satirical street group that mocked 
Egypt’s president and his supporters in video clips posted online. The move is 
part of an escalating crackdown on dissent that lays bare the government’s 
diminishing tolerance for criticism.

Mahmoud Othman, the street performers’ lawyer, said the four were arrested 
late on Monday in Cairo. He said they were likely to face charges of inciting 
protests and insulting state institutions. A fifth member of the group, 
Ezzedeen Khaled, 19, was detained on Saturday and faces the same charges.

The four arrested on Monday are Mohammed Adel, Mohammed Dessouki, Mohammed 
Yahya and Mohammed Gabr. The lawyer said their ages range between 19 and 25. 
The sixth member of the group, Mohammed Zein, has not been detained, Othman 
said.

Egypt police suppress protests against Sisi government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/cairo-protests-egypt-red-sea-islands-saudi-arabia>
The group, Awlad el-Shawarea (Street Children) has a large social media 
following. It shoots selfie-style clips on the streets that deal mostly with 
social and political issues.

A recent video was entitled “al-Sisi, my president, made things worse” while 
another clip mocked president Abdel Fatah al-Sisi’s hallmark speech endings of 
“Long live Egypt!” and his recent references to advice from his late mother 
“never to covet what belongs to others”.

The group has also recently devoted an entire clip to Egypt’s surrender of 
control over two strategic Red Sea islands to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
, mocking the oil-rich kingdom as lacking in civilisational pedigree. It also 
mocked the Egyptian government for seeking to silence those who claim the 
islands are Egyptian.

News of the transfer of the islands broke during last month’s high-profile 
visit to Cairo by the Saudi monarch, King Salman, who announced a 
multibillion-dollar aid package toEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, raising speculation that the deal 
over the Tiran and Sanafir islands at the mouth of the Gulf of Aqaba was a 
sell-off.

Authorities have been cracking down on activists, journalists and civil rights 
lawyers following anti-government protests last month that followed the 
announcement over the islands.

Sisi took office in June 2014, nearly a year after he, as military chief, led 
the ousting of Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s first freely elected president, whose 
divisive, one-year rule sparked massive street demonstrations calling for his 
removal. Sisi has since overseen the arrest of thousands of Morsi supporters as 
well as scores of pro-democracy activists who fuelled the 2011 uprising against 
the 29-year rule of autocrat Hosni Mubarak.

Under Sisi’s rule, many freedoms won as a result of the 2011 uprising have 
been eroded and a personality cult has been built by supporters in the media. 
The general-turned-politician, however, has been devoting most of his time and 
energy to the revival of the economy, initiating a series of ambitious mega 
projects that are yet to bear fruit for the country’s 90 million people.
 