
Uncertainty over the futures of the Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> playing squad is expected to 
finally end on Monday, with decisions due regarding who will be sacked at Ibrox.

Rangers' administrators, Duff and Phelps, have confirmed that about £1m a 
month needs to be saved from the club's budget between now and the end of the 
season. The Rangers manager,Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>, held his latest round of 
talks with the administrators on Sunday. Rangers' woes continued with a 2-1 
home loss to Hearts, 24 hours earlier.

McCoist could lose up to eight of his first-team squad, although the matter is 
complicated by the willingness of some players to take pay cuts – or even play 
for free – for the remainder of this campaign. The manager himself is believed 
to have offered to go without wages until May.

Sources have stressed it is reaching the required budget cut which is 
important, rather than the number of personnel who must depart for that target 
to be reached. Either way, a bleak Monday at Rangers beckons, with 
administrators ready to impose their own cull if no suitable consensus is 
reached between members of the playing staff.

McCoist said: "It's not my job, I'm not making anybody redundant, I'm not 
telling anybody they have lost their job. I won't be [in with the players] but 
I will be waiting outside if and when it happens. My job is to support and be 
there, which I will be.

"It's been really difficult for everybody. The one thing I would do is pay 
tribute to the entire staff. It's not just the players and the coaching staff - 
it's everybody here. I would pay tribute to the workforce at Ibrox and the 
workforce at Murray Park in what can only be described as extremely difficult 
circumstances. Morale and an inner strength to keep going and be there for each 
other, to me, is really evident and very strong. That will help us get through 
it."

Paul Whitehouse, one of Rangers' joint administrators, admitted making such a 
significant financial cut will prove difficult as McCoist looks to keep a 
competitive team on the pitch for the rest of the season.

"That is the balance that is very difficult to strike and that's why it is not 
an immediate decision that could be made," Whitehouse explained. "All the 
parties have bought into the difficulties and complexities of the process of 
trying to weigh up the strengths and weaknesses of each person. It is 
difficult, it's a challenge, but ultimately it is challenge we have got to face 
and deal with.

"We have to make sure we have a blend of players performing well on the pitch 
but also retain a business that is capable of attracting an investor."
 