
Tottenham Hotspur are braced to cope without Emmanuel Adebayor during the 
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
after all, with the Togo forward's presence at the tournament over the next 
month leaving the Premier League club to consider a new bid for the Brazil 
forward Leandro Damião.

Adebayor had suggested last year that he would not take part in the finals in 
South Africa, which run from 19 January to 10 February, due to a row over 
unpaid bonuses and theTogo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/togo> team's 
security. The 28-year-old had retired from international football in April 2010 
having been profoundly affected by the terrorist attack on the national team 
bus, which left three people dead before the previous tournament in Angola and 
despite returning to the fold in November 2011, had quit again, apparently over 
the pay dispute.

Yet Togo now claim that he has changed his mind again and will be available 
for the tournament, having apparently flown to Ghana to meet up with the squad 
for their pre-finals training camp. Indeed, the Togolese president, Faure 
Gnassingbé, was due to meet Adebayor personally in a bid to persuade him to 
spearhead the side's Group D campaign against Ivory Coast, Algeria and Tunisia. 
"Of course we're in the African Nations Cup with Adebayor – we will be together 
in South Africa," the head of the Togo Football Federation, Ameyi Gabriel, is 
reported to have told Radio Algeria International. "It is very important to 
have him there because he is our player and captain of the team."

Adebayor has until Wednesday to confirm his availability – regardless, Spurs' 
players were granted three days off after Saturday's win over Coventry – when 
national associations have to submit their final squads for the tournament. 
Spurs have stressed they would not stand in the player's way if he chose to 
represent his country, ruling him out of the side's next four games, despite 
the potential disruption it might have on their season. Adebayor boasts only 
two Premier League goals this term, with Andre Villas-Boas having relied 
heavily on Jermain Defoe up front.His absence would leave the manager reliant 
upon such players as Clint Dempsey or Gylfi Sigurdsson up front should the 
England forward succumb to injury.

That reality could prompt a renewed attempt to secure Damião, a long-standing 
target at Spurs and the leading goalscorer at the London Olympics. The 
23-year-old already has 14 caps and has been the subject of previous failed 
bids at Internacional – Villas-Boas claimed last week that the striker "fits 
the profile" of potential additions – even if Spurs' instinct would more 
normally have been to return to the Brazilian club in the summer with an offer 
for the highly-rated forward. Tottenham's hierarchy are currently considering 
how best to pursue targets this month and, while there is established interest 
in the likes of Damiao and the Crystal Palace forward Wilfried Zaha, they are 
keen not to pay what they would consider to be over the odds.

Both Spurs and Lazio have been charged by Uefa over the conduct of their 
supporters during the 0–0 Europa League draw between the clubs at Stadio 
Olimpico on 22 November. Disciplinary proceedings have been opened against the 
Italian club over the alleged racist behaviour of their fans, who were chanting 
"Juden Tottenham" at the away fans that night. Further action has been brought 
against Lazio over "missiles and/or fireworks" thrown by supporters during the 
game in Rome, the late arrival of the team at the stadium and tardy submission 
of the team sheet.

In the reverse fixture at White Hart Lane in October, Lazio's fans had been 
found guilty of monkey chants aimed at three home players. Tottenham have been 
charged over separate crowd disturbances at the Group J game in Rome, with both 
cases to be heard on 24 January.
 