
Togo secured the draw they needed against Tunisia and so made it through to 
the quarter-final of theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> for the first time in 
their history. Those are the bald facts, but they don't begin to tell anything 
like the full story of an extraordinary night at the Mbombela. It may not have 
been great football, but it was magnificent drama.

The Sparrowhawks, exploiting Tunisia's shambolic offside line, broke through 
again and again in the early stages and eventually took the lead after 13 
minutes,Emmanuel Adebayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/emmanuel-adebayor> laying in Serge Gakpo, 
whose firm low shot from just inside the penalty area beat Moez Ben Cherifia. 
Replays showed that for once the offside trap had worked and Gakpo was a foot 
or so offside. That was tight, though, so you could forgive the officials that 
one. The penalty the South Africa referee Daniel Bennett then awarded Tunisia 
on the half hour, penalising Dare Nibombe for a push on Walid Hichri, seemed 
harsh but was at least explicable. Khaled Mouelhi rolled in the penalty to 
level the score.

But in the second half, Bennett's decisions became increasingly bizarre. He 
denied Tunisia a clear penalty when Vincent Bossou clattered through the back 
of Oussama Darragi. He ignored two decent Togolese shouts and then waved play 
on when Ben Cherifa blatantly tripped Adebayor as the Tottenham forward 
wandered round him. When the 5ft 10in Serge Akakpo chopped down Youssef 
Msakhni, he booked the 6ft 5in Nibombe, who had been about 10 yards from the 
incident. And then, with 13 minutes remaining, he awarded a penalty to Tunisia 
as Saber Khalifa tumbled in the vicinity of Nibombe.

As the two Togolese journalists sitting next to me, having passed through 
anxiety to anger to resignation, giggled at the sheer preposterousness of it, 
Togo's players reacted furiously. Floyd Ayité was booked for his protests, 
Adebayor for knocking the yellow card out of Bennett's hand and the goalkeeper, 
Kossi Agassa, for standing in a protracted shrug next to the penalty spot. If a 
penalty can be embarrassed, Mouelhi's was, and he dinked his kick against the 
post.

Tunisia, who had started with a weird timidity, piled forward. Togo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/togo> held firm. Shots were blocked and 
shots flew wide and then, in injury time, a free-kick cannoned off the 
excellent Komlan Amewou and fell for Fakhreddine Ben Youssef no more than four 
yards out. Agassa hurled himself at the substitute, whose shot hit the shins of 
the keeper and spun wide.

Tunisia's exit means that, for the first time since 1992, there will be no 
north African presence in the quarter-finals. Given Morocco, self-destructive 
as ever, went home unbeaten, that Algeria were staggering unlucky, outplaying 
Tunisia and Togo but losing to both, and that football in Egypt, the most 
successful team in Cup of Nations history, has fallen victim to the political 
upheaval 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2013/01/30/sport/football/port-said-egypt-football/> 
there, it would be premature to declare a significant trend of decline in the 
north African game.

As Bennett blew the final whistle, he stood awkwardly with his officials in 
the centre-circle as players from both sides ignored him.

People who see him referee regularly in the South African Premier League and 
the African Champions League say he is usually reliable but this was a 
performance of staggering awfulness. When we talk of bad refereeing 
performances we usually mean two or three bad decisions plus a couple of 
borderline ones he got wrong; Bennett made at least four absolute howlers.

The two coaches, Didier Six of Togo and Sami Trabelsi of Tunisia, both 
declined to comment on the refereeing in a farcical press conference that was 
almost aborted before it had begun by a row over translation. Trabelsi 
threatened to walk out before being convinced to stay by Six, who had himself 
stormed out 22 seconds into the press conference that followed Togo's defeat to 
Ivory Coast in protest at what he, slightly bafflingly on that occasion, saw as 
inadequate refereeing. "If we had money, we would pay for translators," a 
Confederation of African Football official later said; perhaps,if the 
allegations in France Football 
<http://mondialblog.tumblr.com/post/41778888466/qatargate>this week are true, 
it's something Qatar could help out with.

"I think the referee was not seeing our penalties, but at the end of the day I 
told the players on the pitch that we had to keep going, and keep enjoying 
ourselves," said Adebayor. "I cannot blame him. Today was not his best day. 
What do you want me to tell you? He had a bad day, but fortunately we found a 
way out and we're just happy that we're still in [the tournament]. We just have 
to enjoy it, and he has to watch the game a little bit better and try and find 
a way that if you give a penalty [for something] to one side, then you give it 
to both sides."

He was scathing too about the pitch, reduced to compacted sand because 
unusually heavy rain brought on a fungal infection. "The stadium is one of the 
best I have played in, but to be honest with you – I'm very sorry – but it's a 
disgrace for our continent to be playing on this pitch when it's on the TV 
around the world," he said. "CAF have to sort things out, to solve the problem. 
At the end of the day, we are all African and we have to be honest with 
ourselves: it's a beautiful stadium but the pitch is not happening. Those 
people that watch the game in Europe, they'll be sending SMSs to me asking: 
'Are you playing in the bush or what?' It's a disgrace to our continent. We can 
do better."

What makes Togo's progression to the quarter-finals so impressive – in which 
they will meet Burkina Faso, themselves in the last eight for the first time on 
foreign soil – is the chaos that surrounded their preparation.

"I'm very proud of my country, of what we have been through," said Adebayor. 
"I think you guys know better than I do that two months ago when we qualified 
against Gabon, we went through a lot of difficult moments, of me coming to the 
Africa Cup of Nations or not coming.

"Today I'm here and I'm very happy – I'm part of the history. It's a good 
thing for the country and a good thing for me. We can even go beyond what we 
think we can do and I hope now we have a chance to win the cup. We just have to 
go for it now."

Adebayor was undecided for a long time as to whether to join the squad, 
understandably given what happened last time Togo qualified, three years ago. 
Then, driving from a training camp in Congo into the Angolan exclave of Cabinda 
where they were scheduled to play their group games, the team bus was attacked 
by gunmen who left three people dead, including a close friend of Adebayor, the 
press officer Stan Ocloo.

In an interview in l'Equipe this week, he spoke movingly of how the tragedy 
had affected him. "He was like an older brother," Adebayor said of Ocloo. "He 
counselled me; I called him when I was sad at my clubs. I spent a year and a 
half [trying] to digest that he had died in my arms. I collapsed in tears, I 
saw everyone crying. I thought for a very long time. When I was home in 
Manchester, if something fell down, I hid under my bed … The sound has remained 
registered in my head.

"When I returned home from Cabinda to Lomé, for the funeral, I did not really 
eat for three weeks, I drank water and tea. In Manchester the same. The club 
took me to a psychologist, it was really decisive. When a brother dies in your 
arms, it's very, very hard …"

Given CAF's response to Togo's withdrawal from the tournament 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/jan/10/togo-quit-africa-cup-of-nations>
 was to ban them from the 2012 competition – eventually readmitting them after 
the qualifying draw had been made – it's no wonder if Adebayor has little faith 
in their capacity to provide security. He has had problems with his own 
federation as well, frustrated at the lack of organisation, the inadequate 
hotels and medical facilities and at constantly having to pay to rescue 
team-mates stranded at airports.

In the end, though, patriotic spirit and the desire to honour the dead of 
Cabinda won through. "It's a historic thing," Adebayor said. "We feel very 
sorry for those people. We had a nice team together, and some of those people 
have gone. It's tough. But this is a special moment for our country."
 