
Emmanuel Adebayor has labelled the decision to ban Togo from the next two 
editions of theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> as "outrageous".

The west African side were yesterday banned from the next two tournaments and 
hit with a fine following their withdrawal from this year's competition in the 
wake of a terrorist attack on their team bus. The decision was made by the 
executive committee of the Confederation of African Football and was greeted 
with disgust by theTogo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/togo> captain, 
Adebayor.

The Manchester City striker claimed Caf's Cameroonian president, Issa Hayatou, 
had "completely betrayed" the Togo squad and called for him to leave his post. 
"Mr Hayatou has served Africa extensively, but now he must escape," Adebayor 
told L'Equipe. "This decision is outrageous."

Three people were killed in the 8 January attack, which occurred in the 
Cabinda region of Angola while Togo were en route to the team hotel two days 
before their opening match. There followed a period of confusion as to whether 
the players wanted to play on, but they were ultimately called home by their 
government having decided themselves they wished to stay.

Caf deemed that move amounted to political interference, leading to 
yesterday's sanction.

"They do not care about the voice of the world," said Adebayor. "It was our 
head of state [Faure Gnassingbé] who sent us to the Africa Cup of Nations to 
defend the colours of our country. He said the threat surrounding our squad had 
not gone and told us to return to our country. We are only ambassadors. We were 
obliged to return, and there was nothing we could do."

Togo's French coach, Hubert Velud, was also astonished by the decision and 
wants to know whether it is one supported by the Fifa president, Sepp Blatter, 
and the head of Uefa, Michel Platini.

"I am curious to know if Blatter and Platini will endorse this decision," he 
said. "If they let this go, it is the gateway to completely dysfunctional 
football. I officially launched an appeal to international bodies to see their 
reaction."

The striker Jonathan Ayité also criticised Caf for the decision. Ayité, who 
plays for the French side Nimes, was on the bus at the time and has described 
the suspension as a "scam".

"It's a big disappointment," he told French Radio RMC. "It is unacceptable to 
do that. I will not use the words you need. But to be scammed like this by CAF 
... Frankly, there is no compassion on their part. I can not find the words. I 
do not understand."

Ayité was left even more furious after claiming that the organisers had 
assured Togo's players there would be no harsh consequences if they did decide 
to withdraw.

"Before leaving, the officers told us they would not apply the rules to the 
letter, they would be lenient," he said. "And now, once everyone has returned 
to his club, they [change their minds]. This is unheard of. I do not know what 
went into their heads. There are some shenanigans in the air."

The Togo government has already threatened legal action, while an appeal from 
the Togolese Football Federation is reportedly set to follow.
 