
Andy Flower hailed Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> for the quiet steel behind 
his first Ashes triumph as England captain but refused to deny speculation that 
he is planning his own exit at the end of the winter's return series in 
Australia.

England's team director seized the chance to defend Cook's leadership, which 
has regularly been criticised as dull and unimaginative by Shane Warne, 
especially during the fifth Test at The Oval.

"There's more to leadership than funky field placings and stuff like that," 
said Flower. "I think Cook's strong leadership was a key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/aug/25/england-alastair-cook-michael-clarke-ashes>
. The players need to trust and respect their leader. He is a man they all look 
up to and he has a certain conviction and inner strength that will serve 
English cricket well."

Flower has shared three Ashes series wins with Cook and the pair have the 
chance to add two more in the next two years – in Australia this winter and 
then at home in the summer of 2015. But the Sunday People stated that Flower 
has agreed with the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board that he should stand down 
early next year.

The ECB poured cold water over the report and rejected the suggestion that it 
had decided it may soon be time for Flower to move on. It will therefore be 
down to the man himself to decide whether he wants to carry on into the 2014 
summer. When asked directly about the report in his single post-match 
interview, he told Sky Sports: "We've got to enjoy the moment and don't look 
too far ahead. We have to really enjoy this evening."

He is likely to be pressed further in a detailed series review on Monday and 
the situation has been further complicated by a claim that Hugh Morris, with 
whom Flower has worked so closely, is set to resign as the ECB's director of 
England cricket to return to Glamorgan (written in the Daily Telegraph by Steve 
James, Morris's former county opening partner).

The ECB eased what it conceded was an unacceptable burden on Flower when it 
appointed Ashley Giles to a new role as the coach of England's one-day and 
Twenty20 squads last autumn.

That means Flower would have a relatively light winter as England's Test coach 
in the winter of 2014-15, when England have a six-month break between the 
second of next summer's two home series, against India, and a three-match 
series in West Indies in April 2015 – after the 50-over World Cup in Australia 
and New Zealand.

Cook admitted he was drained but said lifting a replica of the Ashes urn at 
8.08pm on a darkening August night had been the highlight of his career – 
although he may take some persuading to study the photographs that were taken 
as fireworks lit up the Oval pavilion.

"It was an incredible feeling and one which unfortunately happens so quickly 
after such a long build-up," he said. "I tried to take my time and probably 
pulled a very ugly face as a result. I don't want to look at the footage."

He said the criticism he and his team have received during the last few days – 
whether of their slow over rate, slow scoring or Darren Lehmann's cheating 
accusations against Stuart Broad – had been "water off a duck's back" and 
expressed an admirable hope that England will receive a "pretty respectful" 
reception when they defend the Ashes in Australia. "It's been an interesting 
series," he said when asked if the level of on-field sledging had cranked up 
from recent clashes. "But I think it's been played in the right spirit."

The teams observed the tradition of sharing a beer at the close of the series, 
Lehmann having approached Broad to clear the air.

Ian Bell was awarded the Compton-Miller Medal as the man of the series, as 
decided by the respective chairmen of selectors, Australia's John Inverarity 
and England's Geoff Miller. Bell refused to rate the series as the most 
satisfying of his four Ashes wins, saying that the significance of winning in 
Australia in 2010-11ranked alongside his more significant personal contribution 
to this one. "We've had to fight for every win," he said, "and as a senior 
player now, it's nice to contribute from time to time."

Michael Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke> was 
phlegmatic about being booed by a section of the Oval crowd after the messy 
climax but said he had not regretted setting England a last-day run chase, even 
as he confronted the distinct possibility of a historic 4-0 defeat. "There's a 
risk you're going to lose but I'm not scared of that risk," he said. "We didn't 
have much to lose and that's the way I want this Australia team to play. 
Hopefully some of the people enjoyed it."
 