
Andrew Strauss, Lord Straussy to be if the general mood of the country has 
anything to do with it, wants England to be ranked No1 in the world. It is a 
laudable ambition even allowing for the euphoria in which it would have been 
revealed. Not that this is anything new though. Every strategic plan offered by 
the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board 
— every other year it seems — has as its central plank the ambition to be top 
of the tree. It was the goal in the aftermath of the Ashes win in 2005 as well, 
and now, here they are Ashes winners once more and ranked fifth in the world. 
That is progress for you.

Four years ago however it was not an unrealistic target. Michael Vaughan had 
at his disposal arguably the most potent pace attack available to any England 
captain, a coterie of world class batsmen in Marcus Trescothick, Kevin 
Pietersen (albeit in his first series) and himself and, bridging the divide 
between batsmen and bowlers, the Colossus, Andrew Flintoff. That is a fair 
nucleus around which to build.

The same side would contest the following series in Australia it was assumed. 
Instead it went pear-shaped. Vaughan's knee went, and so did Trescothick's 
mental health. The bowling attack fragmented. Flintoff struggled with one 
injury after another, and Simon Jones never played another Test after that 
climactic game in Nottingham. Ashley Giles, struggling with injury himself, 
retired and Matthew Hoggard was discarded the winter before last and put out to 
grass with Yorkshire.

On the field at The Oval on Sunday as the game was won were the last vestiges 
of that side: Flintoff, ready for the surgeon's knife once more; Steve 
Harmison, clinging on; Strauss, Paul Collingwood and Ian Bell. There was to be 
a change of the coaching guard too, for Duncan Fletcher, the man who 
masterminded the 2005 win was in charge of the debacle in Australia and would 
not survive beyond the World Cup fiasco that followed. The stability that once 
promised to bind the side together proved to be a pipe dream.

No golden era eventuated. While Ricky Ponting returned to Australia intent on 
rectifying the situation, England gloried in the triumph and gloried and 
gloried. They have gloried to this day, the tedious interminable big-screen 
replays of that golden summer irritating beyond measure. Before each day's 
play, the terrific tenor Sean Ruane has stood on the outfield, facing the teams 
as they emerge on to the field, and belted out Jerusalem — plucky in the 
extreme when it is the baggy green sprinting past — and kept a straight face. 
Patriotism and partiality are not the same as jingoism.

The immediate aftermath of the 2005 win was memorable. The bus ride to, and 
the scenes in, Trafalgar Square were spine-tingling and raised no criticism 
from this quarter. For a couple of months, the team had brought immense 
pleasure to millions and it was a way of rejoicing and showing appreciation. 
But it went on and on. The gongs were awarded by the handful, to players and 
backroom staff. Awards programmes came and went. All this hysteria, no one 
wanting to miss out on the act, was beyond the control of the players.

Hindsight though suggests that the real nature of the job demanded that the 
focus, even in such happy times, should be on the future rather than tied up in 
celebrating the past. England were not allowed to move on and by the time they 
got to Australia for the rematch, they were still riding the euphoric crest 
while Ponting had laid his revenge plans. Even into this series, the 2006-07 
series in Australia had become the forgotten one.

This time there is no intention of a triumphalist repeat. Today, the bulk of 
that side travel to Ireland for a limited overs prelude to what will prove an 
anticlimactic and overlong series of Twenty20 and one-day internationals 
against Australia. By the time they return, even after only a couple of days, 
the spontaneity of four years ago will have dissipated. That is to the good. 
Strauss is a man who learns lessons, and already he, and the estimable 
understated head coach Andy Flower, will be looking to the future. The South 
Africans, the new top dog, need to be toppled just as the Australians managed 
before they came to England. Beyond that, until the following winter when the 
Ashes contest is renewed, the pressure comes off a little.

Both will be keen to examine how the system of producing players of 
excellence, and then of maintaining that standard, can be enhanced. Flower is 
certain to re-examine the way in which central contracts are handed out, 
balancing the need to have control over the elite players while not wishing to 
recreate the cosiness as opposed to security and continuity that these 
contracts bring. Despite the win, some casualties may return to the ranks of 
county professional and told to earn their way back.

Of more concern has to be the domestic structure. Last week, Ravi Bopara, 
omitted from the Test side on account of the demoralising working over he had 
been given in the first four Tests, went back to Essex and responded with a 
double century. This says more about the standard in which he was playing and 
the lack of intensity than his talent. It flatters to deceive. A gulf is 
widening between the first and second division of the county championship while 
that between county and Test cricket has not been diminished.

So rather than concentrate on new money spinning but irrelevant takes on the 
T20 format, perhaps, if this country remains serious about wishing to become 
the leading Test match nation (something incidentally it might be deemed to 
have been only on the rarest of occasions in Test history) then the structure 
and level of domestic competition has to be raised. A new level created in 
fact. A proposal might be for a six team competition, amalgams of three 
counties each, with neither overseas players nor Kolpaks or any others on flags 
of convenience. Each to play the other once over four days. Elite players to be 
made available where possible.

It will never happen and would not do so overnight in any case: too many 
vested interests. But this Ashes win is not the be all and end all. It is, or 
ought to be, just the beginning.
 