
Is there anything as snug as your own forest den? Or as fun as building it in 
the first place? After all, den-building is a wonderfully inclusive activity, 
guaranteed to enhance children's problem solving, spacial awareness, team 
co-operation and leadership skills. Touch wood.

Form the basic structure


Step 1 Identify your "base tree". The ground beneath it should be relatively 
flat (comfy for sitting), and the tree itself should have a thick branch that 
is just the right height for securing your building branches against.

Step 2 Find three long "base branches" to form the basic lean-to shape. If 
they have thin branches coming off them, so much the better; these will act as 
cover and be easy to weave other branches into. Wedge the tops of these 
long branches into the fork of the tree, making sure they are good and steady.

Step 3 Place a series of short, heavy logs in a semi-circle around the edge of 
your new den. These should prevent any of the lean-to branches sliding away and 
hitting occupants on the head!

Step 4 To work out which side your door should be, check which way the wind is 
blowing by licking your finger and holding it up. The cold side is where the 
wind is coming from, so your doorway should face the opposite way.

Step 5 Gather more long branches and lean them up between the base branches, 
creating a snug space around half of the tree trunk. Then weave thinner 
branches (ideally with leaves to act as cover) between the "walls", and stuff 
more leaves into the gaps to make your shelter wind-resistant.

(Still with us? If not, you could also check out Forest Holidays' how-to guide 
<http://www.forestholidays.co.uk/forestipedia/how-to-build-the-ultimate-forest-den>
.)

Customise your den


Step 1 Draught-proofing. Sweep out the floor inside and cover it with a picnic 
rug to warm things up a bit. If you've got a large cardigan handy, perhaps you 
can use that as a door covering? Leaves or hay also make great draught-breakers 
in the bottoms of the walls.

Step 2 Entrance. Look out for man-made items such as a tyre, which could make 
for a grand doorway. A few large stones can create a nice doorstep. Try a glass 
jar with pebbles as an improvised doorbell.

Step 3 Layers of moss can soften edges and give a lovely ancient feel to your 
den. If you're in a coniferous forest, fallen pine cones are a must; you could 
also create a pine-cone path to your front door.

Stock up!


You will need food supplies, obviously – what good is a den otherwise? Bring 
along a Tupperware box of Robin Hood cupcakes (Robin Hood ate nothing but 
cupcakes; it's a well-known fact) or a stack of sandwiches, but don't forget to 
take your rubbish away with you afterwards.

forestry.gov.uk/naturedetectives <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/naturedetectives>
 