
The England team are to be provided with extra security at the Ashes this 
winter, as the ECB reacts to Darren Lehmann's suggestion that the Australian 
public "give it" toStuart Broad <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stuart-broad>
 "right from the word go".

Lehmann has apologised to Broad for making the remark and told him that his 
comments were "just jest done in banter", but Andy Flower was particularly 
unamused by Lehmann's words, which were made on Triple M radio. "I think when 
we are put in these positions they are fairly responsible positions and I think 
that you have to take those responsibilities seriously," he said. "I don't 
think that was a well-judged thing to say."

Lehmann said that the fall out from his comments had been "a good learning 
curve for a new coach".

Broad may have a little explaining to do himself, seeing as he, Kevin 
Pietersen, and James Anderson have all been accused of urinating on The Oval 
wicket late in the night after the close of play on Sunday. The team decamped 
from the dressing room to the pitch to carry on their celebrations, and were 
out in the middle singing Wonderwall together at 11pm on Sunday night. The 
three are then supposed to have relieved themselves on the pitch.

Flower chuckled when he heard of the indignant Australian reaction to 
England's antics. "Really? That's interesting," he said, before pointedly 
adding, "Well, it's nice to be able to celebrate a win. England's managing 
director, Hugh Morris, said he wouldn't comment until he knew what the facts 
were. Pietersen is away on holiday, while Broad has gone down to Southampton to 
join up with England's T20 squad.

Talking of watershed moments, Flower said that Monty Panesar may have reached 
one in his career. Flower said that England had not considered picking him for 
the fifth Test, because they felt it was too soon after his embarrassing 
behaviour on a night out in Brighton. But Panesar will definitely be available 
for selection in the winter. "It's not as if it didn't happen," he said of 
Panesar's recent trouble. "But there's got to be a cut-off time at which time 
he is available.The Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> away is a 
few months away." It is, but the fractious atmosphere between the two teams 
looks set to linger. 
 