
So what was learned at The Oval? That Michael Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke> is better at winning friends 
than cricket matches. That the Aussies do not think Chris Rogers, demoted to 
No9, is much of a slogger. And that one never knows what to expect in this game.

The final day of The Oval Test had been sold out since last November. The 
chief executive of Surrey CCC, Richard Gould, had put the tickets on the market 
at half the price of the other days and the punters had punted by buying them 
up. At 11am on Sunday they must have wondered whether it was all worthwhile. 
The game seemed dead provided England avoided the follow-on, which they duly 
did.

So there would be a few titbits to chew over as the series fizzled to its 
whimpering finale. Do England really regard Chris Woakes as a viable No6? It 
was hard to understand how he was chosen to bat so high in the first innings 
when Samit Patel was always at No7 and below Matt Prior in the winter.

And in between checking train times one wondered about Prior. Here he 
shepherded England past the follow-on as he did at Manchester but that was the 
sum total of his contributions with the bat in the series. He has had a modest 
time in front of the stumps while most of the catches have gone to Brad Haddin 
this summer, who would go on to break Rod Marsh's series record. For the moment 
Prior remains unassailable but what if he broke a finger?

But all that became a debate for another day. To the delight of just about 
everyone at The Oval the Australians decided not to go quietly. When England 
were dismissed 115 short of Australia's total Michael Clarke juggled the 
batting order. Out came Shane Watson instead of Rogers and it was clear that 
something was up. England would be batting again soon. This was great news for 
a capacity crowd, all so admiring of Clarke's enterprise. It was also, by the 
way, jolly good news for Stuart Broad, who would pick up four more Test wickets 
without the usual amount of sweat required.

Clarke timed his declaration perfectly, well almost. He had to shame England 
into chasing the runs. That was the only chance of him achieving the miraculous 
victory he craved. He managed that all right and he had the vast majority of 
onlookers purring with delight, whether it be the punter from just down the 
road in Pimlico or the greatest wrist-spinner ever to grace the game, who was 
patrolling the media centre. Against the odds the game was alive and for that 
the plaudits kept flowing in Clarke's direction.
 Alastair Cook kisses the Ashes urn after England won the series 3-0. 
Photograph: Gareth Copley/Getty Images 
But the art of captaincy is not a popularity contest. Nor is the assessment of 
the great Shane Warne to be taken too literally. He has, as they say, been on 
Alastair Cook's case throughout the series along the lines of: "I just don't 
get why Cook is so negative and has been through the whole series."

Or: "Why did @KP24 not come in and at least try for a win. Negative stuff 
again. Such a shame".

Hence we have the picture of the roundhead Cook, whom Warne constantly 
needles, and the cavalier Clarke, whom he constantly praises. Clarke is 
manifestly innovative in the field by the placement of his fielders and by 
bowling changes which are seldom obvious. And clearly he has the capacity to 
surprise with his declarations. Clarke is fun to watch, forever searching for a 
rabbit somewhere deep in his baggy green cap. (Warne is surely a better poker 
player, though.)

All this may reflect Clarke's restless temperament but also the fact he is 
captaining a side that in the last six months has always been condemned to 
chase the game. Behind in the series or in the match and the captain has to try 
to conjure something from somewhere.

Clive Lloyd, when leading West Indies, did not bother with that clever stuff. 
He did not need to. He just mumbled something to his bowlers like: "Your turn 
now, Joel."

Less obviously Cook has not had to contrive anything special in this series. 
He has bowlers he can trust – well, he had three of them in this game – and no 
frills have been required. He is a pragmatist, who senses when the odds are in 
his favour, as he recognised on Sunday night after Clarke's declaration.

Moreover captaincy is not just about what happens on the field. It continues 
beyond the boundary; in the dressing room, in the team bus, in the bar. This 
knack of bonding a side together is invisible to almost everyone and therefore 
more difficult to assess. But Cook, universally respected by his peers, has, 
one suspects, a significant edge over his Ashes rival Clarke here.

There is one other tedious criterion of captaincy: the results of his team. 
This summer there has been much purring at the brainwaves of Brendon McCullum 
of New Zealand and the cuteness of Clarke. As for their opposite number, 
boring, negative captain Cook: this summer his record in Test matches reads 
played seven, won five (almost six), drawn two (almost one).
 