
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?

On his first day in charge of the Welsh rugby union team, so the story goes, 
Graham Henry walked through the changing room without saying a word and opened 
a window at the far end. As the fresh air swept in he turned to the team, who 
had lost 96-13 to South Africa that summer, and told them "you can win". It was 
an apt introduction. Henry was Wales's eighth coach in a decade. Andy Flower 
has been in charge of England for five years, and the atmosphere in England's 
changing room seems similarly stale, in need of some fresh air and thinking.

There aren't any such anecdotes about Flower's first encounter with the 
England team, but we have been told that the tone of his tenure was set in a 
meeting with the players at the Kingston Hilton after they had been bowled out 
for 51 by West Indies, in which he spoke about individual and collective 
responsibility. "It is all our jobs to do something about this," he told them. 
"And if we don't we will be out of jobs."

Could Flower use the same line now? He knows he has the support of the ECB. 
Their chief executive, David Collier, has said that he is sure Flower will "do 
a great job leading the team into 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/04/ashes-2013-14-cook-flower-safe-ecb>
". Since that tour to West Indies, Flower and England have only lost three 
series out of 15, and among the wins are an away series in India and three 
Ashes. Those are his credentials, and they seem to be sufficient for his 
employers. The board has not once wavered in its support of the team director. 
It is a position which runs against the tide of public opinion, and one which 
will leave the ECB looking foolish if England perform as poorly in the summer 
ahead as they did in the winter just gone.

The ECB's steadfast commitment is admirable, their loyalty commendable, but 
their rush to assert it a little rash. Better, surely, to have waited till the 
review was over. It feels as though they have pre-empted their own inquest. 
"The buck stops with me," Flower told the press after the defeat in Kingston. 
Does it still? He says there will be changes to the "playing personnel and 
support staff", the very same people who are being asked to provide honest 
input into the review of this tour. It would be understandable if they were 
reluctant to be entirely frank about what went wrong, given that the man they 
may want to criticise will still be in charge when it is over.

If Flower and the ECB still have faith that he will prevail, and turn this 
tour into a defining event in the team's history, they can't let that optimism 
cloud their understanding of the ugly reality of their immediate situation, or 
their willingness to be brutal as they confront the need for change. The truth 
is that the challenge facing Flower now is different to the one he first took 
on, or any he has faced since. He will have to adapt to succeed, rather than 
revert to what worked for him once before.

Eight of the players in Flower's first squad, for that match in Kingston, were 
on this Ashes tour. Five of that XI – Ian Bell, Alastair Cook, Kevin Pietersen, 
Matt Prior, and Stuart Broad – played in the the opening matches of both 
series, and two more, Graeme Swann and James Anderson, came into the team for 
the second Test in West Indies. That group of seven have played together in 28 
Tests of the 66 Flower has overseen. Remove any one of the seven, and the 
number leaps up. The six without Bell have played 39 of the 66 together.

Each one of the seven made their debut before Flower took charge of the team. 
Under Flower, England have given Test caps to 20 new players, a list that runs 
from Amjad Khan to Boyd Rankin. Only one, Jonathan Trott, could be said to have 
been an unequivocal success. Two more, Michael Carberry and Tim Bresnan, now 
find themselves lining up among the first against the wall. A third, Ben 
Stokes, has made such an impression in his first few matches that he seems 
certain to be a part of the team for a time to come. But then, that was once 
true too of Joe Root, Steve Finn and Jonny Bairstow. As well as Flower has 
shaped and steered the team he inherited from Peter Moores, he has been less 
adept at integrating the next generation of players into the set-up.

Flower has said that "this will be a new start and so it should be, it does 
feel like the end of an era". The test of his commitment to that principle will 
come in June, when England play Sri Lanka. Will England pick Prior again, 
simply because Bairstow was so underwhelming in those last two Tests? Or will 
the slot be open for whoever makes the best case at the start of the county 
season? Steve Davies, Ben Foakes, Jos Buttler, Craig Kieswetter must all reckon 
themselves in the running. English cricket, as that list shows, is not lacking 
talent. You could pick similar crops of contenders among the batsmen – Eoin 
Morgan, Varun Chopra, Sam Robson, Moeen Ali, James Vince – and the quicks – 
Graham Onions, Tymal Mills, Jamie Overton, Chris Jordan.

Flower is going to have to be ruthless enough to dismantle what remains of the 
team he has built, wise enough to decide which bits of wreckage are worth 
salvaging, and driven enough to set about building something new. He has shown 
he has those qualities, and in abundance. But there is more. Flower needs to be 
open-minded about changing his own management style and structure, and, as 
Michael Vaughanhas written 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/cricket/international/theashes/10552857/Ashes-2013-14-Kevin-Pietersen-must-be-given-more-power-if-he-is-axed-it-will-be-a-sad-loss-for-English-cricket.html>
, allowing different views and dissenting voices to thrive in the team 
environment. And it is this last quality that Flower seems to lack.Reports of 
the dispute between him and Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/07/andy-flower-england-team-director-kevin-pietersen>
, which may be pushed to the point of "him-or-me", are an ill omen at the start 
of a new era, harking back as they do to the end of an old one.

• This is an extract from the Spin, the Guardian's free weekly cricket email. 
To sign up, click here <https://id.theguardian.com/email/list?guni>.
 