
The England and Wales Cricket Board has overhauled its central contract 
system, bringing renewed emphasis on leading limited-overs players, the details 
of whichwere revealed in the Guardian earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/england-central-contract-structure-one-day-cricket-andrew-strauss>
.

England shake up central contract structure to reward one-day players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/england-central-contract-structure-one-day-cricket-andrew-strauss>
The new arrangement splits the senior international group into Test and 
limited-overs specialists – the most significant restructure since central 
contracts were introduced to great effect 14 years ago.

Four players, the batsman Joe Root and the all-rounders Ben Stokes, Chris 
Woakes and Moeen Ali, have been included in both pools, with six others handed 
Test-only deals and seven more in the white-ball grouping.

The ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> has been keen to elevate the 
standing of one-day and Twenty20 cricket, particularly with next year’s 
Champions Trophy and the 2019 World Cup both being staged on home turf.

Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> said: “We 
believe the restructure of the central contract system will recognise the 
increased focus of the shorter format and the importance that we place on this 
as we continue our progress towards hosting the 2019 World Cup.”

The director of England Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
added: “It is undeniable the introduction of central contracts in 2002 has 
greatly benefited the fortunes of the England Test team. During this period the 
team have consistently performed well against the other Test nations around the 
world. We hope that continues over the next few years.

“The international game is evolving rapidly, and we have to keep pace with 
developments on the field. Our game-wide strategy sets out the objective of 
creating balance between the formats, and this is reflected by the restructure 
of central contracts. Ultimately, we are fully committed to developing 
world-class players in both red and white-ball cricket to aid the goal of 
becoming the world’s number one team.”

Under previous provisions only the one-day captain, Eoin Morgan for the time 
being, was eligible for a central deal while other non-Test players could at 
best earn incremental deals.

The ECB is three years into a six-year agreement on remuneration with the Team 
England Player Partnership but it has joined the Professional Cricketers’ 
Association in giving the green light to these changes.

An ECB statement read: “Under the new system England selectors have awarded 10 
Test contracts and 11 white-ball contracts. Test specialists and those playing 
in all forms of the game will have their salaries paid in full by the ECB. 
Those on white-ball contracts will receive their supplement on top of their 
county salary.”

Test contracts: Moeen Ali (Worcestershire), Jimmy Anderson (Lancashire), Jonny 
Bairstow (Yorkshire), Stuart Broad (Nottinghamshire), Alastair Cook (Essex), 
Steven Finn (Middlesex), Joe Root (Yorkshire), Ben Stokes (Durham), Chris 
Woakes (Warwickshire), Mark Wood (Durham),

White ball contracts: Ali, Jos Buttler (Lancashire), Alex Hales 
(Nottinghamshire), Eoin Morgan (Middlesex), Liam Plunkett (Yorkshire), Root, 
Jason Roy (Surrey), Adil Rashid (Yorkshire), Stokes, Woakes, David Willey 
(Yorkshire)

Increment Contract: Gary Ballance (Yorkshire)
 