
Steve Waugh has provided Stuart Broad with authoritative Australian backing 
for hisrefusal to walk at Trent Bridge last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/15/england-andy-flower-stuart-broad>
, although it is unlikely to count for much with the rabid Queensland crowd at 
the first Test at the Gabba on Thursday.

In an exclusive interview with Monday's Australian newspaper, the famously 
tough former captain suggested Broad's behaviour had provoked so much fury 
among Australians because it was the sort of thing they expect from their own 
team – and suggested it as evidence of the steely attitude of Andy Flower's 
England team.

"He did absolutely nothing wrong, Stuart Broad," Waugh said of the incident 
during the first Test at Trent Bridge, when he stood his ground after an edge 
deflected off the gloves of Brad Haddin and was caught by Michael Clarke at 
first slip. "I don't hold any grudges at all against Broad. We tend not to like 
cricketers who actually play like Australians. In my experience, the guys that 
are hard-nosed and get in your face like Javed Miandad, Arjuna Ranatunga, 
Sourav Ganguly andStuart Broad <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stuart-broad>
, we would probably like to have them on our side. That's why we don't like 
them."

Kevin Pietersen would presumably fall into that category, which might explain 
the front page of Brisbane's Courier Mail before his 100th Test – a picture of 
the 33-year-old arriving at the airport wearing sunglasses, earphones and 
rucksack, under the headline "He's so arrogant not even his own team likes 
him", a description that may have been true in the summer of 2012 but is now 
out of date and smacks of desperation.

Waugh is more magnanimous, conceding: "England have become very good at 
winning and really good at not losing. They fight hard. They're a toughened 
Test match team and we're up against a good unit but I don't think they're the 
greatest team ever."

Waugh said the challenge for Clarke, whom he regularly advises, and his 
Australia team is to match England's toughness. "What I'd most like to see is 
Australia stopping those really disastrous sessions where we lose nine wickets 
or the opposition gets 150," he added. "If we stop those bad sessions, we can 
compete and win the series and, from Australia's point of view, there's no 
reason why we can't go on to win the next four or five series. All we're 
lacking is a bit of self-belief and mental toughness and Test match toughness."

Waugh believes that the selection of George Bailey, Australia's Twenty20 
captain, may help in that regard. "That's a positive selection," he said. "His 
moment of truth comes this week."

Bailey flew into Brisbane on Sunday before a probable first Test cap at the 
age of 31, although Australia's oldest batting debutant for 34 years will still 
be younger than seven members of England's probable team and six of his own.

"I'm not sure being older makes it easier," said the amiable Tasmanian, who 
will be joined by England's Michael Carberry, another thirtysomething set to 
make his second Test appearance, in aiming to follow the example set by Chris 
Rogers at the age of 35 in the summer series in England.

"The advantage of being 31 – and I suppose it can be looked at both ways but I 
see it as a positive – is that you probably only get one crack at it. I'll play 
the way I play and I won't go out there trying to be anything but myself.

"Having been around this side for a little while, I know what it's like but I 
think this build-up is going to be completely different, so there's a sense of 
anticipation."

England still have a major doubt over Matt Prior. He did some training in 
Sydney but has still to subject thecalf he injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/11/matt-prior-england-ashes-injury> 
in England's penultimate warm-up match in Hobart to anything like a full 
fitness test. Jonny Bairstow remains on standby.
 