
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> and alcohol seem to go 
together like ... well ... gin and tonic. But now it gets the players into a 
spot of bother.

The England cricketers' impromptu party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/28/england-apologise-for-ashes-celebrations>
 on the Oval square to celebrate their 3-0 victory was inconveniently distant 
from the nearest conveniences. Thus the slowest of half-volleys was delivered 
to the old Aussie journalist, Malcolm Conn, a traditional and enthusiastic 
tormentor of the Poms, who was still slaving away in the Oval press box. He 
dispatched the "news" with a flourish.

Soon the talk was not of England's fourth Ashes triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/25/england-australia-fifth-test-match-report>
 in five series but of a sombreEngland apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/28/england-apologise-for-ashes-celebrations>
 albeit accompanied by a few cheerful headlines. "Ashes to Splashes" said the 
Mirror and the Sun. The Mail, however, with remarkable economy and no 
discernible sense of humour, managed to condemn the majority of our 
professional sportsmen in just seven words. "Are cricketers now as yobbish as 
footballers?" they asked.

It was hard to tell whether our cricketers or our footballers should feel more 
outraged by this question and it seemed odd that the Mail were not quite so 
condemnatory of the 2005 Ashes victors, some of whom relieved themselves at a 
reception in the gardens of 10 Downing Street (it was, I suppose, a Labour 
prime minister). Instead in 2005, to mark the historic victory, the Mail 
offered "commemorative wallpaper for your computers 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/cricket/article-362242/Celebrate-Englands-Ashes-glory-wallpapers.html>
", which showed an inebriated Andrew Flintoff and Kevin Pietersen "celebrating" 
on the open-top bus ride.

Somehow the 2013 victors are not loved like those of 2005. The Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> triumph of eight years ago took us by 
storm. Every cricket fan was enchanted. But in 2013 victory was expected. So we 
are not so grateful now.

The players are grumpy that their achievements are not recognised and instead 
they are castigated for the boorishness of their celebrations and their misuse 
of alcohol.

Actually the current lot – despite the Oval shenanigans and the more serious 
misdemeanours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/07/drunk-monty-panesar-urinating-bouncers>
 of Monty Panesar down in Brighton – are more sober than the vast majority of 
their predecessors. Our cricketing heroes often liked a drink.

On the eve of the opening Test of the "Bodyline" series of 1932-3 Douglas 
Jardine asked Leslie Ames, his wicketkeeper, to keep an eye on Harold Larwood 
and Bill Voce since he knew they liked their beer. Ames dutifully tagged along 
but merely got drunk himself. "The trouble was," he said, "that what was 
nothing to them was too much for me." The drinking culture was a recurring 
problem on that tour for Jardine, who recognised that he had to turn a blind 
eye for the common good.

Then there was Compton (Denis, not Nick). "Wicked rumours enhanced the legend 
that Denis had probably just arrived from a night on the town, ripped off his 
dinner jacket, picked up the nearest bat and walked straight to the wicket. 
Sometimes he had." Thus wrote Ian Wooldridge in a wonderfully evocative piece 
in the Mail after Compton's death in 1997. He added that Compton may be the 
only footballer to have played the second half of a Cup final on a "remedial 
double brandy".

We all revel in such stories. They add to the glamour, especially with the 
passage of a few years. There is Brian Close in 1977, well-lubricated at a 
reception for the Australians at the Roman baths after the second day's play in 
Bath, demonstrating his prowess at underwater swimming with such vigour that 
his 46-year-old body is so damaged that he is unable to take any further part 
for Somerset in the tourist match.

In Adelaide in 1982 after a Test defeat my room-mate Ian Botham decides that 
morale must be lifted with a whisky and ice-cream evening in the hotel bar.

He keeps ordering them for everyone into the early hours. "We'll split the 
bill as usual," he says as we check out, a little bleary-eyed on my part, the 
following morning. And one day I'll tell you about a Pernod evening in 
Bournemouth that led to my first call-up for England (why have I never drunk 
Pernod since?).

Botham was not involved that night. But he changed the rules. Botham in the 
80s was so newsworthy, more recognisable than any Manchester United footballer 
(I know, it's unthinkable now). His "celebrity" ensured that the old tradition 
of "what goes on tour, stays on tour" was eradicated. Newsmen kept appearing 
everywhere. By the 1986-87 trip to Australia Botham had to create his own "bat 
cave", his room in the hotel. Any drinking, celebratory or otherwise, had to be 
done there in private.

Since then the players have increasingly kept their distance, not just because 
of the newsmen, but also because of the mobile phone and social media 
explosion, which means that twitterers can become like the delatores 
(informers) of ancient Rome. As the England players discovered in Kennington 
there is always someone looking on.

Our international players do not deserve too much sympathy for that – there 
has been no better time to be an England cricketer. But in recent times they 
have had to be more discreet and more disciplined. Like modern-day footballers, 
who can no longer try to ape the lifestyles of the giants of the past (Jimmy 
Greaves, George Best and Bryan Robson), our cricketers are generally convinced 
of the need to look after their bodies – with the odd Flintoffian aberration.

So they are entitled to celebrate an Ashes victory with some vigour. They just 
have to be more careful how and when they do it, recognising the sad truth that 
the modern journalist seldom sleeps and nor do his informers.
 