
An England governed by Andrew Strauss would have been a vote-winning concept 
for the 23,000 at The Oval and millions beyond. It would be a country where 
egos are constrained, frailties overcome, lost causes chased to the end and 
victory greeted not as an excuse for self-aggrandisement but as a spur to 
achieve even more.

A curiosity of our culture is that some of our finest virtues have expressed 
themselves through England cricket captains, from the cerebral Mike Brearley 
through the strategically astute Michael Vaughan to Strauss, an extension of 
the public school sporting leadership tradition who is simultaneously modern 
and classless. The story of the 2009 Ashes series between teams who, in their 
less impressive phases, evoked the old standby of two bald men fighting over a 
comb, is the tale of how a modest man became a ruler by accident and inspired 
his men to conquer the internal voice that said 2005 was a one-off.

To hear the England team director, Andy Flower, identify fourth place in the 
world rankings as the next big target is a measure of how much has changed 
under Strauss. Four years ago, the main objective was to slurp all night and 
concentrate the mind on not falling off an open-top bus. Kevin Pietersen's 
skunk-haired weave up Downing Street and Andrew Flintoff's epic inebriation 
expressed England's joy at having the Aussie boot removed from their throat 
after 18 years.

This time the celeb-making industry is not in overdrive. Stuart Broad is a 
younger, fresher Flintoff without the Test runs quite yet to justify his 
overnight Bothamesque billing, and Strauss will become a god to those who 
lament the loss of humility in modern sport, but the emphasis was always on the 
action, the cricket, the attrition that kept two flawed teams locked together 
from Cardiff to Lord's, Edgbaston to Headingley and finally back to The Oval, 
which out-performs even HQ in the emotional stress it places on audiences.

Collective effort was summer's theme. There was no long roll call of 
cricketers who had passed from good to great. Broad, Matt Prior, James 
Anderson, Graeme Swann, Graham Onions and Jonathan Trott all shuffled or leapt 
forward, in Trott's case certainly, but Alastair Cook, Ravi Bopara, Paul 
Collingwood, Ian Bell, Steve Harmison and Monty Panesar all stagnated or 
regressed. There was no innings to compare with Pietersen's swashbuckling 158 
at The Oval in 2005, no Famous Four bowling attack of Flintoff, Jones, Hoggard 
and Harmison – all in their prime.

If 2005 was the glamour series, with its superstars and its strong Corinthian 
strivings, 2009 was recession cricket: two teams with lowered heads going about 
their business in a five Test cycle of crash and recovery. Definitive 
statements, though often made (for example – England were dead meat after 
Headingley), came back to bite their authors with sadistic frequency. The 
rational mind searched for patterns and trends and pointers, but none could be 
trusted. Consider this: the team that struck 674 for six declared in their 
first innings of the series – and then won the fourth Test by an innings and 80 
runs – lost the Ashes to an England side whose No3 batsman (Ravi Bopara) 
crashed and burned, and whose two best players, Flintoff and Pietersen, were 
barely a factor, beyond Big Fred's brilliant spell on the fifth day at Lord's 
and his run-out of Ricky Ponting at The Oval.

At the start of the series, the ECB went proselytising in Wales for the 
friendly Test, where the staff greeted visitors like long lost brothers and 
English and Welsh spectators came together with all the awkwardness of a blind 
date. Quickly they subsumed ancient antipathies to form a united front against 
Australia, a cat impersonating a lion after the mass retirements of Shane 
Warne, Glenn McGrath, Adam Gilchrist, Matthew Hayden and Justin Langer, and now 
cajoled along by Ponting and his Peter Pan, Michael Clarke, who faced their 
greatest political test. How to convince their own dressing room, never mind 
the English, that power had shifted from one generation to the next as 
painlessly as the No10 jersey was once passed along the line of great Welsh 
fly-halves?

Ponting is the skipper who brought Billy Murdoch off the history pages and 
back into the news. A captain knows he is in trouble when pictures of men with 
mutton chop whiskers and hooped caps start appearing in the papers under the 
implied headline: grim precedent. Murdoch is the only other Australian to lead 
his country on two losing Ashes tours of England. But there is another way of 
looking at Ponting's stewardship. Given the exodus of all-time talent after 
2007, the temporary mid-series implosion of Mitchell Johnson, the team's new 
strike bowler, and the spiriting away of Phillip Hughes, who was dropped after 
two Tests, Ponting did well to put Australia in such a promising position after 
four matches.

Any declaration that he deserved to keep his job could start by pointing out 
how close he came to forcing a comparatively mediocre side to override its own 
deficiencies. But his decision to omit the squad's only specialist spinner on 
an Oval pitch that Steinbeck might have written about in the 1930s had Warne 
muttering about a "staggering" miscalculation that, once the toss was lost, 
handed the match and the series to England.

In Wales, where English cricket's ruling body were condemned for elevating 
commercial considerations above the needs of the team (in truth, the Cardiff 
Test was a triumph, despite the excessively benign pitch), Warne was playing 
poker in Las Vegas while the faultlines in the new Australia stayed hidden 
until the final two sessions of the fifth day, where Monty Panesar and James 
Anderson survived the final 69 balls to pull off an unlikely draw.

Panesar as Davy Crockett induced mirth as well as angst. His exaggerated 
defensive strokeplay suggested a man shouting at himself inside to make every 
part of his body form a citadel that would keep Australia's bowlers out. Great 
rearguards keep the banter flowing in the pub, afterwards, but by then the 
pundits were already marking out Australia's apparent superiority, as expressed 
by the centuries for Ponting, Simon Katich, Brad Haddin and the unheralded 
Marcus North, whose stoicism throughout the series placed another mark in the 
credit column for his captain.

Australia's inflated pre-tour publicity stemmed mainly from their series win 
in South Africa, which had avenged their home defeat against the same opponent. 
Johnson was billed (often by the media, it ought to be said), as the new 
cold-eyed Aussie terror with Poms in his cross-hairs, when he was really just a 
still-callow talent whose slingy action could disintegrate into wild flinging 
when the pressure got to him. Equally Hughes' habit of shuffling backwards at 
the crease and flashing outside his off-stump was a mere detail that would not 
stop him smashing England's bowlers all round the ground.

England, too, had their smoke and mirrors. By Lord's, Pietersen was unable to 
walk properly and Flintoff was playing on one leg, thus evoking Sven-Goran 
Eriksson's talent for overlooking David Beckham's injuries. There were times 
when England's willingness to field an obviously damaged player – even one of 
Flintoff's stature - threatened to bring the whole enterprise into disrepute, 
but Flintoff saved the management with his superbly entertaining rampages at 
Lord's, where he finally wrote his name on the bowling honours board with his 
five for 92.

Whatever the purists say, Flintoff stomping in to break an Australian 
partnership has been one of the best micro-dramas of the past five years in 
English sport, and his flourish at Lord's was his last exposition of real 
concentrated menace. In 2005, bursts of electricity around the grounds were 
common. There were players you will always be proud to say you saw. That was a 
series of infinite possibilities and extravagant deeds. This was one was closer 
to Sumo: two grunting protagonists heaving one another around the stage until 
one could take it no more.

After another summer of prattling about Fred Perry and the 73-year hiatus on 
Wimbledon's Centre Court, an even greater anomaly presented itself at Lord's, 
where England had not beaten Australia since 1934. This farcically long wait 
was ended by Strauss, with his first innings 161, a statement of his growing 
confidence and resolve. He, remember, had stepped over the bodies of Kevin 
Pietersen (captain) and Peter Moores (coach) back in January to restore order 
in a dressing room with more cliques than ancient Rome. On paper, it was like 
sending a vicar in to quell a riot, but you don't score 474 runs as opening bat 
in an Ashes series if you like being pushed around. Politically, Strauss was 
never more impressive or powerful than when acknowledging the evidence of his 
own eyes and leaving Flintoff out at Headingley, a decision that gave the 
all-rounder the maximum chance of contributing in the decisive Test in 
Kennington.

Promises of a "barbecue summer" kept many at home, and left some looking for a 
weatherman to tar and feather, but only Edgbaston was properly messed up by 
rain, to end in stalemate, before England, leaving their brains behind in 
Birmingham, motored north to Headingley to post a performance so bad that they 
might have been back in Australia on the calamitous 2006-07 tour, which they 
lost 5-0. Not once but twice, England's bowlers banged the ball in short on a 
pitch that begged for a fuller delivery, which is how Australia's seamers had 
approached it, removing Strauss and co for 102 after lunch en route to a 
whopping victory.

By now the heckling of Australia's captain was appalling those with manners 
and delighting others who think everything that happens inside a sporting arena 
is an exercise in irony and can be placed in inverted commas. "Panto booing" is 
the shorthand for this tendency and it had the predictable effect of 
encouraging sympathy for an implacable opponent who, in Cardiff, passed into a 
four-man club of batsmen who have scored 11,000 Test runs. The only hostility 
between the two sides came with the time-wasting furore on the fifth day in 
Cardiff. Both countries lacked the inner certitude to turn the series into a 
feud. Strauss and Ponting were too busy holding their teams together to engage 
in psychological sniping, though Strauss did say that he thought these 
Australians lacked the "aura" of their illustrious predecessors.

Aura was the summer's buzz-phrase. It was hard to define, in words, but easy 
to illustrate by pointing a finger at Warne, who has made such an auspicious 
start as a broadcaster. Is there no limit to his gifts? This time, though, 
England were spared his triumphalism, because the wounded animal that limped 
down from Yorkshire had a surprise in store, not least for Ponting, who was 
borderline smug in the pre-match press conference. A draw would do it, chaps, 
and then it was all aboard for Edinburgh, on "an open-top train", perhaps, as 
Punter joked.

A taste for melodrama is a facet of English team sports. The country's 
footballers cannot leave a World Cup without first failing to negotiate a 
penalty shoot-out. The nation's rugby players must first lose 36-0 to South 
Africa in the group stage before meeting them again in the final. And cricket 
must wear a custard pie on its face before springing back to life. If the 
previews for The Oval seemed excessively pessimistic, the 2005 equation was 
reversed. This time England needed a win and Australia could get by with a 
draw. Four years ago, Michael Vaughan's team assembled beneath the gas works 
2-1 up.

Heads or tails? Twenty-two days of combat and it all comes down to a spinning 
coin. That, plus Ponting's aberration in leaving Nathan Hauritz on the 
sidelines. According to Warne, the outcome was determined not by the 22 men on 
the field so much as the man who wasn't there, and who wasn't Warne either. 
Hauritz, a competent spinner and a good pro, will end up a footnote in Ashes 
history, while Ben Hilfenhaus, Peter Siddle and Marcus North surpassed 
themselves with the ball in a losing effort.

Broad's five for 19 in 47 balls to remove Australia for 160 on day two was the 
signature achievement of a grand finale. It was satisfying for England that the 
most memorable feat of the final Test should come from a 23-year-old who was 
converting promise into plunder just when they needed it most. Winning the 
Ashes is about seizing the here and now, but so much the better if you can 
plant a flag in the future too, as Broad did.

With sweet consideration, the English summer saved its best light for the most 
delicious moment, casting England's players in a warm heroic glow. The sun 
illuminated colours enshrined in childhood memory. What does summer look like? 
For many, still, it looks like tired but exultant cricketers at the end of a 
long contest, as evening approaches and the audience arrange their emotions.

The fiesta of 2005 was an end in itself. English cricket mistook it for the 
moment of arrival, rather than just a step, as England's rugby World Cup 
winners had two years earlier. Australians grumble, fairly, that the top three 
wicket takers all wore baggy green, along with six of the top seven 
run-scorers. They won the battle by eight centuries to two (one of them by 
Trott, a converted South African) but still lost the bigger struggle to a team 
who won just enough of the decisive phases to bring them victory.

So now England aspire no higher than to be the fourth best team in Test 
cricket, a noble, if unexciting, aim. Flower talks not of new gongs from the 
Queen but achieving the "consistency" that has eluded this team. This is not 
champagne talk, but it reflects the reality of England's undulating nature, 
which again showed itself in this series.

Can this weakness be cured? Vaughan had a chance, post-2005, but was too often 
injured and missed the 2006-07 ride to oblivion, for which Flintoff was the 
pilot. Strauss is sound of mind and body. He is no longer the call-out guy for 
when more famous names screw-up. He was England's best batsman and the most 
influential player of the series. Now the sated Oval horde want to know whether 
he can shape a new England generation in his own image: render them less 
neurotic, less faction-ridden, more even in the application of their talents.

Pietersen's limelight-addiction will have hurt him as he watched this victory 
unfold without him but he will return to a more promising landscape than the 
one he left at Lord's to go under the surgeon's knife. There was no need for a 
victory parade this time, not that the new regime wanted one. England are not 
as good as they were in 2005, but are better in lots of other ways.
 