
The biggest problem England are going to have in the forthcoming one-day 
competitions is to play with the confidence necessary for success. The 
triangular series in Australia and the World Cup in the West Indies are 
monumental tournaments for the beaten and battered team who are clinging 
desperately to second place on the Test-match rankings and who are sliding 
quickly in the official one-day standings.

When I look at the squad I can't help but think it is one chosen with no 
confidence and no real plan in mind. By now the selectors should have been able 
to say that this is the squad for both tournaments. My understanding is that 
this is not the case. They have chosen only for the series in Australia.

It's been four years since the last World Cup and I would have thought there 
must be core of at least 12 players who are almost 100 per cent certainties to 
be in the top 14 for the most important event in world cricket. I don't believe 
they even know who is going to keep wickets in the West Indies. I certainly 
don't have anything against Paul Nixon, but at 36 years of age and no real 
international experience, is this a wise move? Was he chosen to play a few 
games against the Aussies and Kiwis and hopefully reverse-sweep England to a 
few unlikely victories and give as good or even better chat than he or his 
mates get? Or, is he going to replace Chris Read?

If Nixon is a serious contender for the World Cup, then why hasn't he played 
during the past four years? Why is Monty Panesar all of a sudden a one-day 
player? Surely if he's to go to the Windies then he should have been playing 
one-day cricket all last summer in England.

Jon Lewis is another player who must wonder what the hell is going on. It 
appeared to me from afar that he was almost England's best bowler in the 
one-day series against Pakistan at the end of last summer. As a result he was 
chosen for the Champion's Trophy but it was not until England could not make 
the finals that he got his chance. When he was finally chosen, England won a 
game - and guess who has the best figures?

I won't even go down the Michael Vaughan track because I mentioned in my last 
article how crazy I thought it was him being recalled for the one-day series. I 
will say that England will not do well in the triangular series, but have a 
silly chance of being competitive in the World Cup.

Australia are world champions in both forms of the game and will start hot 
favourites for both tournaments. New Zealand always gives the Aussies a decent 
run for their money and I expect them to come out hard against Australia and 
England. England will experiment with their team in the hope of finding a squad 
for the World Cup and this will further dent their confidence. Sorry, but 
England have no chance.

If they are smart, during one of their experiments in Australia they will play 
Jamie Dalrymple and Monty Panesar in the same side. It could be in Adelaide or 
perhaps Sydney where they will get a little turn. This is what they will need 
to do in the West Indies and if they do they could just spring a surprise. From 
what I've seen on TV the West Indian pitches will not be quick and bouncy and 
the slower bowlers may be just what the doctor ordered.

I imagine Kevin Pietersen will get some bowling, as will Paul Collingwood. 
Even a few little sneakers from Ian Bell could be quite effective. The man to 
make these moves is Andrew Strauss. As much as I love Andrew Flintoff as a 
bloke and a cricketer, I think Strauss is the best choice as captain in the 
helter-skelter of the one-day game.

I go for James Anderson or Liam Plunkett in front of Sajid Mahmood, mainly 
because until Mahmood starts taking some care with his cricket and doing the 
little things a lot better then he cannot be chosen for England. He has natural 
ability, but this is not enough, I'm afraid. He needs someone to give him a big 
rocket at the moment.

I hope England at least try this XI in Australia and if they do and win a game 
or two with this combination then it may restore a little confidence which has 
been systematically destroyed by a rampant Australian combination.

Apart from Australia, South Africa (who always seem to win when chasing more 
than 400), the West Indies (with good recent form in one-day cricket) and 
Pakistan (a team you can never discount), Sri Lanka and New Zealand could be 
the most confident about making the semi-finals.

India and England have not shown enough form to be serious contenders, but 
such is the nature of one-day cricket you cannot really discount any of the top 
eight nations.

For England to do well everything will have to fall into place, but huge 
tournaments from Flintoff and Pietersen will certainly help their cause.

They must make some decisions asap and trust their decisions in order to find 
the confidence necessary to be successful. It won't be much fun for the England 
faithful if they don't.

Rod Marsh played in seven Ashes series for Australia and was England's Academy 
director from 2001 to 2005

The Ashes in words

'There had been a psychological shift in pressure and pride. They now knew 
they were in for a battle.' Duncan Fletcher on Australia in his 2005 Ashes 
diary.

'I think leaving here having lost 5-0 we're in a better position that we were 
the last time we were here when we lost 4-1. To some degree it has been a 
rebuilding exercise where these youngsters are trying to get the experience 
required to beat a side of this calibre, but I don't think they have shown they 
are not good enough at this stage. I don't think it needs a major overhaul.' 
Fletcher yesterday, after the whitewash.

'Shane Warne, Glenn McGrath and Ricky Ponting are bloody legends, mate, and 
you lot ain't up to much. Didn't you just get beaten by the PM's side?' 
Brisbane taxi driver's verdict ahead of the first Test. England had indeed lost 
their tour opener against a PM XI by 166 runs.

'It does hurt when people say that, because you know I don't like losing and I 
will do anything to win for England and for the nation. I'm a heck of a team 
player, a massive team player. If I wasn't I would be happy that I have got 420 
runs at 60. I am the first one to give advice. I'm helping out Monty [Panesar] 
at the moment. I'll work with anybody.' Kevin Pietersen's response to criticism 
from Australia coach John Buchanan that he was not a team man

'After a few pints and a few more vodka-Red Bulls I think I said I loved him. 
Jeez, we were poleaxed that night.' Warne's recollection of an evening with 
Michael Clarke emphasises that there are no problems with Aussie team spirit

'I've been lucky enough to have played in lots of winning teams, but this one 
has been a bit special.' Ricky Ponting hails his conquering heroes

'I scored 8,000 runs and played 100 Tests before I got one and what did he 
score? Seventeen runs? And the others played five Tests to get one? I feel so 
bad about mine I'm going to tie it around my cat. It's a joke.' Geoffrey 
Boycott's contribution to the MBE debate. Warne had spent much of the 
sledge-fest fifth Test in Sydney taunting Paul Collingwood for being awarded an 
MBE 'for scoring seven at the Oval'

15

Number of feet wide of the stumps Steve Harmison's opening delivery of the 
series ended up. It was taken at second slip by Harmison's best friend and 
captain Andrew Flintoff

3.5 Number of dollars in millions the Western Australian Tourist Board 
calculate the Barmy Army spent in Perth watching England lose the third Test 
and Ashes. England held the urn for 463 days. The shortest on record.
 