
England are set to name Marland Yarde and Luther Burrell in their lineup to 
face Australia in the first Test but now appear to have shelved their initial 
plans to shiftMaro Itoje <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maro-itoje> from 
the second row to the blindside flank. Owen Farrell is also poised to start at 
fly-half ahead of Bath’s George Ford.

Dan Cole warns Australia that England’s scrummaging has regained its edge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/08/dan-cole-australia-england-scrummaging-first-test>
Only a couple of weeks ago Yarde and Burrell were battling to make the tour 
party, let alone the starting XV for a pivotal fixture against the Wallabies. 
With Manu Tuilagi injured and the uncapped Ben Te’o having missed some training 
this week, however,Eddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> 
is understood to have opted for Yarde in place of Jack Nowell on the wing and 
given Burrell a further chance to extend his international career in the No12 
jersey.

England have been coy about the fitness of certain individuals since arriving 
on the Gold Coast but, barring another late rethink, the option of moving Itoje 
to the back-row seems to have been resisted for the time being. There is also 
looming disappointment for Exeter’s Nowell and Bath’s Ford, both of whom have 
started regularly since Jones became head coach.

The team will be confirmed on Thursday, with Australia also due to unveil 
their side for Saturday’s eagerly awaited encounter. Competition for places 
increasingly intense given that England have yet to lose since Jones took 
charge completing a Six Nations grand slam in March and beating Wales at 
Twickenham .

A third of the side is likely to be comprised of Saracens players, who have 
already completed a domestic and European trophy double, including Farrell 
whose all-round form has earned him the No10 jersey. The consistent club 
efforts of Alex Goode, however, are again understood to have gone unrewarded, 
not for the first time in his Test career.

George Gregan: ‘Everyone in Australia is excited about Eddie Jones returning’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/08/george-gregan-australia-eddie-jones-england>
Jones, meanwhile, has told the local Courier Mail that Sam Burgess was a 
“non-event in England’s confused strategy at the World Cup” but suggested he 
would have been “an excellent Test player if he’d had the will to stick at it.” 
He believes, however, that Te’o has the potential ability to make the leap from 
Australian rugby league to Test union in the near future. “Tough guys like Te’o 
bring something extra to a squad, a bit of an intangible. Plus he’s done the 
hard yards in 50-odd games for Leinster.”

England’s head coach has also impressed on all his players that weariness at 
the end of a long season is an unacceptable excuse. “It’s not just end of 
season, roll your eyes and get on with it,” confirmed the Leicester prop Dan 
Cole. “You understand this will be step up from Six Nations and if you want to 
be successful you have to come here. Previously tours might have been relaxed 
but on this one we are working as hard as ever.”

Possible England XV: M Brown (Harlequins); A Watson (Bath), J Joseph (Bath), L 
Burrell (Northampton), M Yarde (Harlequins); O Farrell (Saracens), B Youngs 
(Leicester); M Vunipola (Saracens), D Hartley (capt), D Cole (Leicester), G 
Kruis (Saracens), M Itoje (Saracens), C Robshaw (Harlequins), J Haskell 
(Wasps), B Vunipola (Saracens).
 