
Do not adjust your screen. England have indeed won a cricket match in 
Australia. Nine matches and 131 days since their last victory inCardiff in 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/15/jos-buttler-england-australia>
 England beat Australia quite comfortably in the end , leading from the front 
in a 57-run victory propelled by fine and fearless all-round performances by 
Jos Buttler and Ben Stokes.

Alastair Cook had already announced at the toss – a little oddly given heads 
or tails normally does the trick – that he is now "desperate" to stay on as 
England captain, and in the moment of victory he raised his arms in a weary 
gesture of triumph before allowing himself to gambol from team-mate to 
team-mate with a huge grin on his face. Cook has suffered horribly over the 
past three months,from a bad back in the opening warm-up match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/29/alastair-cook-back-injury-england-ashes>
 to successive annihilations in Test and one-day series. He will at least 
always have Perth.

"Losing 10-0 was a prospect and not to allow that to happen with a very good 
performance, we did a lot of good things very well," Cook said afterwards, 
confirming also that afterhis doubts in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/19/alastair-cook-may-quit-england-odi-captain>
 he is now committed to carrying on as captain if requested. "Last week was a 
tough three days, I spoke what I was feeling but we can move on," he said. "It 
would be wrong so close to the World Cup to change. We're getting some very 
valuable experience in the same conditions we'll play in."

England had posted a formidable-looking 316 batting first, 40 runs more than 
the previous highest-winning chase on this ground. With David Warner, Michael 
Clarke, Shane Watson and Brad Haddin missing from Australia's team they really 
were not going to get a better chance to avoid the looming threat of a 10‑match 
"Cookwash" decider in Adelaide. If complete annihilation narrowly avoided is 
not usually cause for jubilation, moments of grace on this tour have been 
scarce and England will seize this one happily.

On a typically true Waca pitch that seemed to gleam a little in the late 
afternoon sun, Australia set off with familiar intent in pursuit of England's 
total, surging to 40 without loss off their first five overs before Tim Bresnan 
drew an edge from Shaun Marsh that was caught by a leaping Ian Bell at second 
slip.

Cook remained commendably aggressive in the field throughout, even as 
Australia's 50 came up in the ninth over and nerves began to fray just a little 
as Aaron Finch, in flat-pitch biffer mode, hit James Tredwell on to the roof of 
the stand at cow corner and then flicked the next ball flat and hard into the 
crowd below.

Matthew Wade was finally euthanised from the crease after a scratchy 23, 
caught at mid-off swiping at Ravi Bopara in the course of England's first 
maiden over of the series. George Bailey departed at 133 for two, well caught 
by Buttler, and England were edging in on something that looked like victory.

Fighting a lone hand, Finch stroked his way to a fine and occasionally brutal 
second hundred of the series off 97 balls, before guiding a short ball from 
Bresnan into Stuart Broad's hands at third man. England were giddy, and when 
Glenn Maxwell was caught by Buttler off Stokes to leave Australia 225 for six 
and needing almost nine an over it was onlythe unscabbed wounds of Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/17/england-lose-australia-second-odi-cricket>
 that stilled any premature thoughts of victory. Stokes had suffered at James 
Faulkner's hands last week but he got his man here and celebrated with relief 
as much as any great joy, before Bresnan took the final wicket of James 
Pattinson.

Earlier England had batted with concentrated aggression having lost the toss. 
Cook took 14 off Nathan Coulter-Nile's first over, thrashing past point with a 
hint of contained fury and Bell twice lofted Faulkner back over his head with 
lovely easy power, not so much bullying the bowling as tickling it expertly to 
death.

Cook was bowled slogging at Maxwell and Bell went to a high-class fifty off 48 
balls before departing in the limpest fashion, caught at short fine leg 
flicking daintily at Dan Christian. Stokes, in at No3 again, brought up a 
timely first fifty in one-day internationals with a huge straight six off 
Maxwell, and produced a controlled, assertive innings of orthodox attacking 
strokes, before skying Faulkner's slower ball on 70.

Bopara went cheaply before Buttler began to find the boundary, getting going 
with a pair of fizzed cover drives off Mitchell Johnson, who was a shadow of 
the menacing figure of the Test series. In 20 international overs 
post-moustache his figures are one for 131.

Buttler continued to bat with controlled brutality before he was caught at 
third man for 71 off 44 balls. With Stokes also picking up four wickets as 
Australia fell away there was evidence of the explosive talent in this England 
team. For now, though, they will just take a win.
 