
It's 34 years now since the first global one-day event and England hardly need 
reminding they are yet to break their duck. It seems strange that they are the 
only major cricket nation never to have lifted a trophy, but I believe there 
are a couple of reasons. The first is that conditions in England are not 
conducive to producing the kind of wristy batsmen who are able to improvise as 
limited-overs cricket demands they do. The second is an old bugbear of mine: 
English cricketers play too much and that takes away their hunger.

I'm not writing off the chances of the current side, because they are playing 
with a lot of confidence at the moment after beating West Indies in all forms 
of the game over the last month. But I always felt English cricketers were not 
encouraged to improve their one-day skills by a system that simply presents 
them with another chance as soon as the previous one has passed.

Look at all the one-day cricket that is played at domestic level in England, 
and then think of, say, the South Africans, who have always excelled in 
limited-overs cricket with a far smaller domestic programme. If England do well 
over the next fortnight, it will be in spite of the county set-up, not because 
of it.

There could, though, be another factor holding England back if and when they 
reach the Super Eight stage of the World Twenty20, and that's the lack of 
exposure their players have been given to the Indian Premier League. It's tough 
enough that they have been seeded to meet India, South Africa and Australia – 
even withoutAndrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> – 
after the group games are over. But it's even harder when you consider that 
only England and Pakistan, whose players were not allowed to take part in the 
IPL, have failed to benefit from what is now the world's leading Twenty20 
competition. The Aussies managed to get exposure for some of their unknown 
players, but Paul Collingwood and Owais Shah didn't even make it on to the 
field.

Having said that, England will be on a high after disposing of West Indies so 
comfortably on Wednesday. They won without a major contribution fromKevin 
Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, who rightly 
pointed out recently that other players have to start contributing, and they 
have unearthed a little gem at the top of the order in Ravi Bopara. It's great 
to see a fighter like James Foster back in the side, and even the lack of 
continuity regarding the captaincy hasn't unsettled them too much, because Paul 
Collingwood seems to have got them playing with the same spirit put in place by 
Andrew Strauss in the Test side.

Ideally, of course, all the players would have had a couple of knocks by now, 
so in some ways that nine-wicket win at Lord's could be counter-productive, but 
it's good to see the confidence building and England know that if they can come 
up with a couple of top performances in the Super Eights, anything is possible.

But I have to admit I still have a concern about Luke Wright at the top of the 
order, even after his blistering knock two days ago. Even in Twenty20, which 
isn't the lottery some people believe, you need consistency. You can't just 
come up with a match-winning knock every 10 games or so and nothing in between. 
The IPL showed that the best players are the ones who excel in every form of 
the game. Some thought Twenty20 cricket would produce a special breed of 
player, but that hasn't really happened, and I'm worried that Wright still hits 
across the line too much.

People sometimes ask me whether I think Twenty20 is good for the game. Sure, 
it's created a few problems for the longer forms of cricket, but it's getting 
people interested in cricket who previously were not, and one of the most 
heartening aspects of the IPL in South Africa was the number of small kids who 
came along and watched. I read the other day that 70% of spectators at the IPL 
had never watched any form of cricket before, so that can only do the game a 
lot of good. I hope the fans come out in force in the next fortnight.

As to whether this tournament will have any relevance to the Ashes, I'm not so 
sure. Of course it's important to win, and people like to talk about momentum. 
But I've always felt England prefer the role of underdogs, so in a bizarre kind 
of way the best thing for them to do in the next fortnight might be to perform 
well but not actually win the whole thing! Whether Collingwood preaches that 
message is another matter.
 