
At least this contest went the distance. After a series of truncated Tests the 
outcome of this isolated T20 match was in doubt until the penultimate ball. 
England, thanks to some inspired out-cricket in the closing overs – after some 
shabbier stuff earlier on – won by five runs. With the match in the balance the 
fielding was sure and bowling intelligent while there was a hint of panic in an 
Australia camp that contrived to lose five wickets for 16 runs in 14 balls 
towards the end of their chase.

Eoin Morgan delighted with England’s steadfastness in edging Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/31/eoin-morgan-delighted-england-steadfastness-in-australia-win>
Cardiff has seldom been a happy hunting ground for Australia. In Test cricket 
they drew when they should have won in 2009; they lost the crucial first match 
of the recent series here; and in 2005 they were humbled by Bangladesh.

Australian cricketers dream of playing at Lord’s or the Kia Oval but perhaps 
not at the Swalec Stadium and they will not take home many happy memories from 
their latest visit to Wales. Despite a silky-smooth 90 by Steve Smith, in his 
first match in charge as captain in all three formats, England kept their cool 
and prevailed.

Smith’s decision to bowl first looked especially canny after six overs when 
England were a paltry 27 for two. But then Moeen Ali and Eoin Morgan combined 
in a superb 135-run partnership, which highlighted the advantages of batting 
first. Both these knocks will have delighted the decision makers in England’s 
hierarchy.

Moeen did not play in the early-season white-ball matches against New Zealand; 
there was an understandable inclination to protect him for the trials ahead, 
especially as a bowler. But after an ebullient Ashes series he was recalled and 
given the responsibility of replacing Joe Root at No3. Moeen, we know, will bat 
wherever he is told. On this occasion he settled in nicely after Pat Cummins 
had dispatched Alex Hales and Jason Roy in his first over.

Meanwhile Morgan’s preparation for this match and the forthcoming 50-over 
games has been unorthodox. After a torrid time for Middlesex and a long 
conversation with Angus Fraser, his director of cricket at county level and an 
England selectorMorgan took a month off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/30/eoin-morgan-twenty20-england-australia>
 from competitive cricket, a strategy that might have old-timers spluttering 
into their post-match beer. To use Morgan’s own phrase, he opted to “press the 
refresh button”.

That now looks to have been a very good idea. Morgan, after a little 
reconnaissance (which approximates to three dots in T20 cricket), struck the 
ball with awesome, wristy power. The boundaries are short at the Swalec and the 
outfield is currently lush (as they often say in these parts), which may 
explain why there were as many sixes (11) as fours in the England innings. Some 
of Morgan’s strokes, such as the flat-bat smash into the river Taff, do not 
even appear in modern coaching manuals. Unfortunately he barely has any time to 
press his refresh button again, since the next match at the Ageas Bowl on 
Thursday.

Smith hinted at egalitarian tendencies as a captain since he gave eight of his 
men a bowl and the eighth to be summoned was the leg-spinner Cameron Boyce, who 
was flown over specifically for this game. Boyce bowled six balls, which 
yielded 19 runs as Moeen explored the boundaries, and he was not required again.

The target of 183 was never impregnable despite the early loss of David 
Warner, caught at third man off David Willey, and Shane Watson, bowled by 
Steven Finn. Watson’s dismissal was not conventional. The ball took the bottom 
of his bat and bounced up towards the stumps whereupon Watson attempted to kick 
it away. Usually a cricket ball is magnetically attracted to Watson’s pads or 
boots but on this occasion there was no contact. So the ball dribbled on to the 
stumps.

Smith then combined with Glenn Maxwell and England could not part them for 11 
overs. Smith led the way. One of his sixes clunked into the top deck of the 
pavilion, which is a very long way from the middle. For much of the time 
Maxwell was prepared to look on admiringly until brilliantly caught on the 
leg-side boundary by Ben Stokes from Moeen’s first ball.

Then, after Reece Topley, an impressive debutant, had snaffled his first 
international victim and Smith had been caught on the midwicket boundary off 
Willey, England seized their chance eagerly. Australia needed 11 runs off the 
last over to tie the match and prompt a super over. Stokes relished the 
responsibility, as did fielders on red alert. The Aussies will be glad to 
return to England.
 