
In a desperate attempt to salvage something from their hapless tour to 
Australia, England have turned to the captain who led them to Ashes glory in 
2005,Michael Vaughan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-vaughan>.

Last night in Sydney, chairman of selectors David Graveney announced that 
Vaughan would lead England in the triangular one...#8209;day series against 
Australia and New Zealand that begins with a day-night match in Melbourne on 
Friday against the home team. This means that Andrew Flintoff, who led England 
throughout the Test series, returns to the ranks.

Graveney said: 'It will be a fantastic boost for everyone to have Michael 
Vaughan back as captain for the one-day series. His leadership experience will 
be invaluable as we prepare for a tough series against an excellent Australian 
team.

'It is to Andrew Flintoff's credit that he was prepared to take on the 
responsibility of leading the Test side in Michael's absence. But Michael is 
England captain and he will now begin the task of preparing the team for the 
challenges that lie ahead.'

The decision to recall Vaughan so rapidly to the England team is a big gamble, 
which reflects how poorly England have performed on tour. Vaughan last played 
for England in the Lahore Test 13 months ago, since when he has been plagued by 
a recurrence of an injury to his right knee.

Last summer, his rehabilitation failed. After playing several games for 
Yorkshire in June, the injury flared up and he had a fourth operation on the 
knee in July. Throughout the Ashes tour, Vaughan has been in Australia, too 
prominently in some people's eyes, attempting to strengthen the troublesome 
knee.

He joined up with the Academy in Perth and played two games for them, without 
scoring many runs, and on Friday in Bowral he hit 27 for MCC against a Bradman 
XI, the gentlest possible preparation for a one-day international against the 
mighty Australians this week.

A month ago he played for England in Perth in their two-day match against 
Western Australia. He fielded for 94 overs on the first day, which represented 
progress of sorts, although his mobility did not measure up to what is required 
for one-day international cricket.

The selectors must be hoping that Vaughan can transform the mood. Even more 
optimistically, they must presume that he will score runs in a form of the game 
in which he has rarely excelled.

Other returning 'crocks' in the England party have been unable to achieve that 
goal in Australia this winter. Most notably, it took Andrew Flintoff and Steve 
Harmison, both coming back from injury, two or three Tests to find their form 
as batsman and bowler respectively.

It would be a remarkable achievement for Vaughan to stay fit, score runs in 
the forthcoming series and oversee the odd England victory. If he manages that, 
he has every right to lead England to the World Cup in the Caribbean in March.
 