
As a keen cycle tourer, my habitat of choice for biking had always been the 
open road – breezing along country lanes, stopping now and then for a brew and 
a view, but mostly chewing up the miles from one town to the next with my 
belongings strapped to the rack.

It was, therefore, something of a departure to leave my panniers behind and 
plunge wheel-first into theForest of Dean 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestofdean>, enticingly cool and shady on a sunny 
day, with little idea of where or when I would pop out again, or what I might 
encounter on the way.

Several hours later and with dirt-flecked legs, I emerged to glorious views of 
a nearby peak with my cycling habits transformed. Riding in a forest was 
liberating and primal, fun and physical, easier than anticipated and free of 
the tarmac and traffic I had grown so used to. It was just my bike and me, and 
I loved it.

Several forays into forests since, I have begun to appreciate them as an 
ever-changing environment. Dry and dusty under-wheel one week, moist and mulchy 
the next, they continually offer something new, giving me a totally different 
ride every time. On a bike, each contour and every descent or incline, no 
matter how minor, make themselves known.The differences between each season 
(already more pronounced in forests than anywhere else) seem so much more 
intense from my bike saddle. The effort of even the gentlest pedalling opens up 
the airways and fills them with bluebell and wild garlic scents in spring, 
leafy greenery in summer and musky fungi in autumn.

In a forest, it's possible to go sedately or explosively depending on your 
mood. Family cycling trails abound, and having a bike opens up so much 
opportunity for exploration, which is essential in places likeKielder 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/kielderforestpark> in Northumberland – England's 
biggest forest. But serious mountain bikers, too, can testify to the gnarly 
drops, technical climbs and tight switchbacks that English forests boast.

Children find forests innately fascinating: no place is riper for storybook 
adventure, hollering and hiding. Add a bike to the mix and it's a joy 
unmatched. Dodging the trees at speed (however slowly they pedal, they'll feel 
faster than the wind as they zip past tree after tree), taking on the knobbly, 
rooty ground, then picnicking on the forest floor, gives kids the freedom they 
crave with little risk.

And you're less exposed to the weather under a canopy of trees, which is far 
better for cycling with little ones. I've enjoyed many rides in the sheltered 
sanctuary of woodland when it's been wet and windy elsewhere. By the same 
token, on scorching summer days I've appreciated the cool haven that forests 
offer, dappled with sunlight, out of the full, bleaching glare of the sun.

Most forests have trails to suit young children and novice riders. Flat, wide 
paths in the Forest of Dean and some remarkable scenery mark it out as 
especially family-friendly – and one of my favourites – but it has more 
difficult routes for experienced mountain bikers, too.Bedgebury 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/bedgebury> in Kent and Sherwood Pines 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/sherwoodpines>, Nottinghamshire, are also good 
all-rounders with a wide range of routes, so you shouldn't find it difficult to 
pick the right location for your group.

It's amazing how fast going off-road can improve your cycling skills, fitness 
and confidence. Get rid of that baggage and get on your bike now.
 