
England Women need to steel themselves as they enter the final stage of the 
Ashes, needing three victories to retain the trophy.

After squandering an early lead in the one-day series, a dismal performance in 
the only Test ensured that Australia have the advantage heading into the T20s. 
England must win all three games.

They will take some heart from their record at Chelmsford, the venue for the 
opening match. They have never lost a game there – they crushed South Africa 
there last year – and they will play in front of a sell-out crowd.

England’s best performance of the series came in the opening one-day game at 
Taunton, where they faced a tired-looking Australia. Since then, neither 
England’s the batting and bowling have not fired in tandem. There have been 
strong individual performances – Katherine Brunt during the Test match – but 
they have not come together as a team.

More is needed from Sarah Taylor. She made a pair in the Test at Canterbury, 
her technical difficulties showing as she stepped across her stumps, making her 
an ideal lbw candidate. Australia will look to target this.

Charlotte Edwards, the captain, has said T20 is the one format where England 
can change their fortunes. It is the form they play most frequently and which 
encourages innovative stroke play and big-hitting – something they seemed 
frightened to do in the Test. Taylor, for example, can play shots all round the 
ground. In more familiar surroundings, she needs to push through her recent bad 
patch.

There has been plenty of talk from England about playing positive cricket. It 
is one thing to talk about it and another to actually follow through. They 
have, so far, been outplayed by a positive Australia side. England’s strike 
rotation has got worse while Australia’s has improved. Their fielding slipped 
throughout the one-day series, and their middle order has been unable to 
shepherd the team to competitive totals.

Australia, by contrast, have barely put a foot wrong. Meg Lanning has been an 
innovative captain. Her team have supported one another with bat and ball. 
Ellyse Perry is in good form with bat and ball, and Jess Jonassen offers strong 
support down the order. Jonassen previously opened the batting and bowling for 
Australia in T20s. She and Elyse Villani could form a formidable opening 
partnership.

Grace Harris, a late call-up to the squad, could be key in securing Australia 
an Ashes victory. She scored an unbeaten 151 from 74 balls in a domestic T20 
game and is a powerful striker of the ball. Her big-hitting could throw the 
England bowlers off their lines.

England will also be desperate for the weather to clear. With Australia 
leading 8-2, England can no longer win the series but with two points on offer 
for each T20 match they could tie at 8-8 and retain the Ashes.
 