
England have apologised for any offence caused during the celebrations of 
their Ashes series win at The Oval on Sunday.

Some of England's players are alleged to have urinated on the pitch hours 
after the series ended on Sunday night. And in a statement released on the 
England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board's 
website, the team have now apologised if any of their actions may have caused 
offence.

"The England cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> would like to state 
that during our celebrations after winning the Ashes at no time was there any 
intention to disrespect Surrey CCC, The Oval or anyone else involved in the 
game we love," the statement read. "As a team we pride ourselves on respecting 
all things cricket including the opposition and the grounds we play at. We got 
carried away amongst the euphoria of winning such a prestigious series and 
accept that some of our behaviour was inappropriate.

"If that has caused any offence to anyone we apologise for that and want to 
reassure people that it was a simple error of judgment more than anything else."

The allegations arose following eye-witness accounts from Australian 
journalists, who were still in the ground while England celebrated their 3-0 
series win in the middle. Reports have since indicated the ECB has launched an 
investigation into the matter after being contacted by the Surrey chief 
executive Richard Gould.

The off-spinner Graeme Swann appeared to confirm the story when writing in 
Tuesday's Sun newspaper, but attempted to play it down. "We did go out to the 
middle of the pitch, all the lads, drinking beers, singing a few songs and 
enjoying each other's company," he wrote. "I think the call of nature might 
have come once or twice but it was nothing untoward. It was midnight, a private 
celebration in the middle of the pitch and the ground was dark."

England's Twenty20 captain Stuart Broad declined to speak about the 
celebrations this morning at a press conference ahead of his side's first 
Twenty20 match against Australia at the Ageas Bowl tomorrow.
 