
“Change” is a word that has always caused me difficulty. The truth is, I feel 
that I have changed very little in the last 54 years. Of course, I have changed 
physically – but on the inside? There have been tiny shifts, I would say, in my 
personality and consciousness, but nothing radical. Nothing that would really 
justify using the word change. That sounds like a damning statement, I know, 
and I feel defeated rather than smug about it. A lot of these shifts, 
admittedly, have been brought about by books.

It wasn’t until my early twenties that books began to have an effect on my 
politics. Had I been a few months older, I would undoubtedly have voted for 
Margaret Thatcher in the 1979 general election. Four years later, I voted for 
Michael Foot. What had happened in the meantime? I seem to remember that 
reading Tony Benn’sArguments for Socialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/14/tony-benn-obituary> was 
something of a watershed, but really I think it had more to do with leaving 
home for university and escaping the shadow of my father’s ultra-conservatism 
more than anything I was reading.

As a postgrad I encountered Alasdair Gray’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/13/alasdair.gray> magnificent novel 
1982, Janine, and that perhaps influenced me more than anything. Not only did 
its hard-headed political analysis reinforce my burgeoning socialism, but it 
taught me something more profound: it is a deeply, harrowingly emotional book, 
and it made me see that political allegiances derive from emotional sources 
rather than rational ones. Conservatism and socialism are not competing belief 
systems between which one might vacillate according to reasoned argument: for 
the vast majority of people, including myself, they are gut instincts. This is 
why election campaigns can be so exhausting and, ultimately, futile.

To find a book that truly changed me, though, I have to go back to my very 
earliest memories; back to the days when I was an infant, endlessly pliable and 
susceptible to every influence. Perhaps what I’m really talking about is a book 
that formed me rather than a book that changed me: and that book would have to 
be The Teacher’s Treasury, volume I, one of the first books to bear the name of
Enid Blyton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/enid-blyton> on its cover and 
spine.

Jonathan Coe: a bit of a rotter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/feb/24/fiction.jonathancoe1> 
The copy that my family possesses belonged to my grandmother, who must have 
used it when she was working as a primary school teacher in Shifnal, 
Shropshire, in the 1920s and 30s. It is falling apart and half the pages are 
imperfectly held in place by sticky tape. It is a bulky volume in navy blue, 
resembling a family bible more than anything else. The pages are pleasantly 
thick to the touch as you turn them.

The book consists of three sections. Number two is Rhythm and the Dance, which 
contains various music and movement exercises such as “pawing, high-stepping 
and galloping movements” and A-Hunting We Will Go. Section three is Nature 
Notes, a collection of short descriptive essays on birds and flowers. Both were 
invaluable to the village schoolteacher, I’m sure, but I’ve never read either 
of them.

The important section, for me, is the first: Stories. Here are all the titles 
that I remember from my infancy: Peronel’s Polish, The Magic Easter Egg, King 
Strawberry-Head, The Pedlar’s Needle. Just making a list of these titles is 
enough to transport me back to my grandparents’ house in Shropshire in the 
mid-1960s, the narrow upstairs bedroom I would share with my brother, the 
benign, loveable figure of my grandfather sitting on one of our twin beds and 
reading these stories to us as a prelude to sleep. He was an engaging, animated 
reader, never more so than when he tackled Redcap and the Broomstick Witch.

Other people will cite, as their earliest memory of evil incarnate, the wicked 
witch in Disney’s Snow White: but to me she has always been a pussycat compared 
to the gnarled old witch in this story, turning up uninvited at people’s 
cottages to sell them her malevolently enchanted brooms.

People should always behave kindly to one another and greed, above all, must 
always be punished

In her introduction Blyton says of these stories that “there is a definite 
lesson to be found in each, and it should be the aim of the teacher to see that 
every child has grasped it”. Well, it would be a dim child indeed who could not 
grasp the lesson visited upon King Strawberry-Head, whose lust for the 
eponymous fruit makes his head turn into a giant strawberry. It’s a perfect 
example of Blyton’s unsubtle moralising but also her genius for memorable 
imagery.

In that respect, the story that has stuck with me most vividly for the last 
fifty-odd years is The Land of Ps and Qs, in which rude children who will not 
say please and thank you get swept off (via a circle of magic toadstools and an 
underground railway) to the Castle Courteous. Here, if they forget to say thank 
you for any item of food they are given, it sticks to their bodies, so that 
they are soon walking around covered in lamb chops and apple pies.

I realise now that, for me, the didactic intent and the narrative invention of 
these tales are inseparable, and provide equal pleasure. Heavy-handed though 
Enid Blyton’s polemics were they worked, and the crude sense of social justice 
they embodied – in which people should always behave kindly to one another, and 
greed, above all, must always be punished – has profoundly influenced not just 
my own value system, but my own fiction.
 