
There is nothing better than winning a match that was looking as if it was 
lost. So Eoin Morgan could afford a rare smile after England’s five-run victory 
over Australia in their Twenty20 match here on Monday. His team held their 
nerve whereas the Australians did not.

England’s Ben Stokes helps beat Australia in T20I with fine final over
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/31/england-ben-stokes-beat-australia-t20>
Morgan was happy to highlight two young men who stayed calm when it mattered, 
David Willey and Ben Stokes. Neither is a shrinking violet and it is clear that 
Morgan likes this type of cricketer in his team. “Willey is brilliant. He’s a 
bit like Ben Stokes. He loves the limelight and the responsibility. He’s not 
one to shy away and plays a big part in the changing culture of the team,” said 
the captain.

Willey contrived to dismiss the Australia captain, Steve Smith, when he 
appeared to be winning the game while Stokes was given the burden of bowling 
the final over when Australia required 12 for victory. “He [Stokes] was not 
earmarked to bowl that over but that’s how it worked out,” added Morgan. “He 
took his responsibility well.”

Morgan must also have been happy that the decision to allow him to rest for 
four weeks prior to this batch of one-day fixtures was so spectacularly 
vindicated. “I felt fresh mentally and physically. I’d had 11 months without a 
break,” he said. “If I’d known last October [when he was not England captain] 
what was going to happen, I would have earmarked a rest earlier. I’ve never 
asked for a break before and Gus [Angus Fraser] was exceptional at Middlesex. 
It has worked out well.”

Now Morgan looks forward to the five ODIs with a spring in his step. “We have 
a very exciting group of young cricketers – even outside the 14 in the squad. 
It’s a very exciting time,” he said. “But we must recognise that this is just 
the start.”

Smith was equally cagey. As Michael Clarke’s vice-captain he let slip a quote, 
which was a tad dismissive of his English opponents before the Test series 
began. Now he acknowledges: “With the newer guys in the team England are now a 
tough side.”

Smith may have regretted bowling Cameron Boyce, his eighth bowler, since his 
solitary over went for 19 runs. “It was a tough time for him to bowl,” he said. 
“But he’s only here for one game so I thought he deserved a crack.”

This match was a fine advert for T20 cricket, a topic which is currently on 
the agenda among the counties. On Tuesday the ECB will meet the county chief 
executives and then on Wednesday the county chairmen to discuss the future 
format of domestic cricket in England. Those in the shires will be eager to 
learn more about the ECB’s plans to reduce the number of games of Championship 
cricket as well as their vision for T20.
 