
Eoin Morgan returns to lead England in Monday’s one-off Twenty20 international 
against Australia in Cardiff following hismonth-long sabbatical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/03/eoin-morgan-sit-out-middlesex-games-england-australia-cricket>
, a break that has seen energy levels renewed.

Morgan has not played a competitive match since 1 August when a third-ball 
duck in Middlesex’s Royal London Cup match with Hampshire convinced him that 
his search for form, amid a run of 13 innings without a half-century, was 
tantamount to banging his head against a brick wall.

The 28-year-old left-hander led from the front in England’s 3-2 one-day series 
win over New Zealand in June but, while Alastair Cook’s Test side were en route 
to their Ashes victory, spent four weeks recharging his batteries in a rest 
period agreed by his director of cricket at Middlesex, Angus Fraser.

“I sat down with Gus and discussed the pros and cons of it,” said Morgan, who 
will captain England for the 33rd time in white-ball cricket. “He was 
understanding and brilliant in the way he managed it because he said the 
priority was English cricket, which is a tough decision as a director of 
cricket at a county team.

“We talked about the benefits of it and, sitting here now, I’m probably twice 
the man I was a month ago because of the hectic nature of the schedule. I feel 
really fresh. My attitude, my mind, my body is a lot better than it was a month 
ago. I’m raring to go. I can’t wait to get started.”

Today’s match, the second in a double-header at the Swalec Stadium after the 
final fixture of the women’s Ashes series, sees Morgan link up with the head 
coach Trevor Bayliss for the first time in an England capacity, with the pair 
having previously worked together at Indian Premier League side Kolkata 
Knightriders.

Victory would not raise Morgan’s men from their lowly eighth position in the 
world rankings, although it would drop Australia one place to third. The only 
other context for the encounter, which precedes the five-match one-day series 
beginning in Southampton on Thursday, is in helping shape the squad for the ICC 
World Twenty20 in India next March.

England will select from a 13-man squad, with the Hampshire batsman James 
Vince – top scorer in this year’s T20 Blast – and the Essex left-armer Reece 
Topley pushing for debuts. From the sidethat beat New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/23/england-new-zealand-twenty20-international-cricket>
 in their one-off T20 at Old Trafford in June Joe Root and Mark Wood are rested 
while Jonny Bairstow misses out to Jos Buttler behind the stumps. Moeen Ali and 
Chris Woakes, back from rest and injury respectively, could feature.

Australia last played T20 cricket in November – a 2-1 series win over South 
Africa at home in which Bayliss, then head coach at New South Wales, took 
charge as Darren Lehmann took time off – and are hoping the arrival of fresh 
recruits, such as the batsman Marcus Stoinis and leg-spinner Cameron Boyce, can 
lift spirits after their Ashes defeat.

The tourists are without James Faulkner, who starred in Lancashire’s Finals 
Day victory on Saturday, following his suspension for a drink-driving offence 
and will be led by Steve Smith in the absence of their regular captain, Aaron 
Finch, who has only just returned to cricket at Yorkshire after suffering a 
broken foot.

“We really want to start this [part of the] tour very well and gain some 
momentum going into the one-dayers,” said Smith, who is now Australia’s regular 
captain in Test and 50-over cricket. “It’s obviously been a long tour for a lot 
of the Test guys and to have a few fresh faces brings some energy and 
enthusiasm to the group.”

All eyes will be on the Cardiff pitch, which has been prepared by assistant 
groundsmen Robin Saxton, Andrew Noyes and Kenny Lawrence after the head 
groundsman, Keith Exton, was fired by Glamorgan last Thursday in light of the 
“unfit” conditions that forced their London One-Day Cup match with Hampshire to 
be abandoned at the start of the month.

England (possible) Hales, Roy, Ali, Morgan (c), Stokes, Billings, Buttler, 
Willey, Rashid, Woakes, Topley

Australia Warner, Watson, Smith (c), Maxwell, M Marsh, Stoinis,

Wade, Coulter-Nile, Starc, Cummins, Boyce
 