
If there is a single motif running through the analysis of England's 
capitulation on this tour of Australia it is simple fatigue. England's players 
have looked tired. The management has looked tired. The tactics, in all forms, 
look tired, from the dry bowling and dry captaincy of the Tests to the 
building-a-platform approach in the powerplay overs in the first two one-day 
internationals, a tactic that has been described by at least one wag as like 
watching a particularly cautious early-season Texaco Trophy match from 1984.

With this in mind there has been a notable sense of freshness about certain 
members of the one-day team since their arrival, almost as though the 
invitation by the management to make a play for a place in the broader picture 
has been quietly heeded. Chris Jordan, who has been added to the Twenty20 squad 
in place of Steven Finn, has been pleasantly invigorating, not just with his 
accurate and penetrative new-ball bowling, but also with the very visible sense 
that here is a man who is enjoying playing for his country.

Most noticeably Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> 
has seemed to be operating under a different set of physical laws to those 
members of the top order still bruised by the humiliations of Brisbane, 
Adelaide, Perth and Melbourne. There was a temptation to take with a slight 
pinch of salt Morgan's suggestion shortly after he arrived in Australia that 
new faces would bring a new perspective to this ailing tour, but in his own 
case he has walked the walk.

Arriving hot on the heels of his eye-catching role in Gazi Tank Cricketers' 
Dhaka Premier Division triumph – Morgan made 84 off 71 balls in the decisive 
defeat of Prime Doleshwar Sporting Club – England's middle-order terrier has 
been uncluttered at the crease in scoring 50 and 106 at Melbourne and Brisbane.

Perhaps the best part of Morgan's high-class hundred in the defeat at the 
Gabba came when he noticed, just as Michael Clarke was about to bowl, that 
Australia were one fielder short in the inner ring and recalculated his shot 
instantly, slogging the ball out towards midwicket where it was caught by Glenn 
Maxwell. As Australia celebrated Morgan refused to leave the wicket, 
successfully claiming a self-umpired free hit, a super-smart piece of cricket 
by a batsman who, at his best, always seems utterly in the moment.

More broadly it has been a successful and indeed timely entrance to a tour 
that continues to lurch horribly towards the possibility of the triple-format 
whitewash. There is already an abruptly conjured lobby calling for Morgan to be 
given another opportunity in the Test team and Morgan has spoken pointedly of 
his desperation to play Ashes cricket. As England's one-day batting coach 
Graham Thorpe pointed out ahead of the third one-day international here, there 
is a window of opportunity that seemed entirely closed before the Ashes squad 
was picked.

"England need competition for places," he said. "For the first time for a long 
time, England have that situation ahead of them. It is slightly unsettled, 
maybe in both squads, and that gives opportunities to players to stand up. But 
Morgan is certainly playing well, which is an encouraging sign, not just for 
the one-day team but also with competition for the Test team as well."

For some it will be a mark of the current sense of desperation that Morgan is 
being considered in these terms given the haplessness of his performances in 
his last Test series, against Pakistan in the Emirates, at the end of which 
Andy Flower openly questioned Morgan's suitability for Test cricket.

Morgan was suffering from a very visible tic at the time, crouching bizarrely 
at the crease as the ball was bowled, a note of interference from his Twenty20 
power hitting. In the current series he has looked beautifully still at the 
crease, crouch now fully eradicated, although the doubts will always remain 
that Morgan is not a long-form player, not helped by the fact he played two 
first-class matches last summer. "The one-day format is different, we know 
that," Thorpe said. "There aren't three slips and a couple of gullies. Also the 
mindset of how you play one-day cricket, but Morgs has been fantastic."

This Morgan is bright, tough, blessed with jaw-dropping shot-making talents, 
and surely too good at 27 to be thrown away entirely by a team in need of fresh 
muscle. This is a batsman who, two years before his unravelling in the Emirates,
scored a fine hundred in his second Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/30/eoin-morgan-kamran-akmal-england-pakistan>
 against a Pakistan attack made up of Mohammad Asif, Mohammad Amir, Umar Gul 
and Danish Kaneria.

There are further complications. It might be difficult to style Morgan as a 
possible successor to Kevin Pietersen in the middle-order aggressor role if 
Pietersen ends up being excluded from the Test squad on the grounds of his 
participation in the Indian Premier League. Morgan spoke in Melbourne about his 
own intention to play the IPL season. Depending on how the rest of this one-day 
series pans out, he may even feel tempted to examine this decision a little 
more closely.

Morgan aside, Thorpe also joined Flower and Alastair Cook in offering words of 
encouragement for Joe Root after a run of 2, 1, 3, 24, 15, 4 and 19 in his past 
seven England innings. "We know he hasn't made the number of runs he made last 
year," Thorpe said. "I'm impressed by him as a character. That's one of the 
most important things at this level – the character and resilience needs to be 
there to survive some of those harder times."
 