
The Equatorial Guinea federation has been fined $100,000 (£65,000) and ordered 
to meet the cost of treatment to supporters injured during theAfrica Cup of 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> match between 
the host nation and Ghana.

Ghana won 3-0 in Malabo but the match was marred by unruly behaviour from the 
home fanswho forced the Ghana supporters to take refuge behind one of the goals 
after showering them with missiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/05/africa-cup-nations-ghana-equatorial-guinea-violence>
, forcing a near 40-minute hold-up before the visitors went through to the 
final against Ivory Coast on Sunday.

The Confederation of African Football said 36 Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> supporters were hurt after coming 
under attack from home supporters, with 14 taken to hospital. It said one of 
those in hospital was under close observation.

The president of the Ghanaian Football Association said on Friday that he 
feared supporters would be killed in the violence that marred the semi-final.

Kwesi Nyantakyi told the BBC World Service on Friday: “We’re lucky we haven’t 
lost any lives, though people have sustained injuries arising from objects 
thrown at them.”

A horrifying array of items were picked off the pitch, including what appeared 
to be a small rock, half a dining plate and a jagged shard of mirror.

Nyantakyi told the BBC World Service: “African football has grown beyond this 
level and in the 21st century we expect to see more decency in the behaviour of 
fans.

“A high-profile game of this nature should have attracted police, intelligence 
officers and military.

“I couldn’t have counted 50 policemen at the stadium, the rest were from 
Angola, who were not familiar with the terrain, so they didn’t know how to 
handle the situation. So the Ghanaian fans were left at the mercy of these 
violent fans.”

Jonathan Mensah, who played in the match for Ghana, labelled the violent 
scenes “unacceptable” for any environment.

“It was really an ugly sight. It has been a great tournament so far without 
any major problems.

“It’s unacceptable for such things to occur anywhere in the world, let alone 
in a football stadium. I hope all fans are safe and my thoughts are with those 
who have sustained any injuries.”

Equatorial Guinea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> 
stepped in to host the tournament at the 11th hour after Morocco pulled out due 
to fears regarding the Ebola epidemic.

Equatorial Guinea face a third-place play-off against DR Congo in the same 
stadium on Saturday. In addition to the fine, Caf said the hosts would have to 
play their next match behind closed doors but suspended the punishment for the 
third-place game.

It said: “In the event that identical incidents occur in the third-place match 
on February 7, the disciplinary committee of Caf will automatically impose the 
behind-closed-doors sanction on the Equatorial Guinea team who will have to 
play their next official international match without spectators.”
 