
The louspeaker crackled to life. “This is the minister of sport of the 
Republic ofEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea>,” a disembodied voice 
said. “I want to urge you all to calm down and cooperate with the police. We 
are sending a poor image about our country …” The crowd responded with boos and 
whistles. Another warning from the PA – and then the police moved in.

Smoke bombs flew. A chopper appeared, lowering its rotors to scatter fans as 
police brandished batons and Tasers. For a brief moment there was a rush as 
supporters made for the exits, all played out to a global audience.

By this time the Ghanaian fans who had been pelted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/05/africa-cup-nations-ghana-equatorial-guinea-violence>
 had left their position and were on the pitch behind Equatorial Guinea’s goal. 
They were shielded by a group of police but that did not stop missiles being 
thrown from the stands.

Police managed to get the fans to another part of the stadium and, after a lot 
of back and forth between officials and a near 40-minute delay, play resumed. 
It did not last, however, and the full-time whistle came, five minutes early.

The two sets of players exchanged jerseys while Ghana’s players started 
dancing and celebrating. But off the pitch some Ghanaian fans made the mistake 
of leaving the stadium too early. “We thought we should go and start getting 
into our buses which was outside the stadium,” said Gyikua Asiamah. But when 
they got outside, a mob rounded on them. “Look,” she said, showing a plastered 
cut above her eyes. “I was lucky, some of the men who tried to protect us were 
really badly hurt.”

Meanwhile Ghana’s sports minister, Mahama Ayariga, had shed his suit jacket as 
he spoke to the country’s embassy in Malabo about ordering in extra buses for 
visiting supporters.
 A riot police officer runs to shield a Ghana player after Equatorial Guinea 
supporters threw objects on to the field during the Africa Cup of Nations 
semi-final. Photograph: Sunday Alamba/AP 
The Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> Football Association 
president, Kwesi Nyantakyi, calmed scared fans before addressing the media. 
“This is the highest state of barbarism. To take the law into your own hands 
and react to a ref’s decisions is unacceptable,” he said. “This is a very 
negative commentary on the state of African football. Africans are not violent. 
Africans are not barbaric.”

Trouble had begun to brew in the 41st minute. The referee, Eric Otogo, had 
given a few 50-50 challenges to Ghana in the first half-hour and, when he 
awarded the Black Stars – as Ghana’s national side are known – a penalty, the 
crowd’s displeasure was clear.

Bottles were thrown and, when by half-time they were 2-0 ahead, the Ghana team 
had to leave the pitch and then rejoin the game protected by police riot 
shields. By now the helicopter, complete with gun-toting police perched on 
board, was hovering dangerously close to the stands. “Are they going to shoot 
the fans?” asked a senior Confederation of African Football official.

Then it turned out that the police in the stadium were not from Equatorial 
Guinea but were special forces flown in from Angola, which brought its own 
problems. One policeman said they “really wanted to control the crowd earlier 
but it is not our country, so we were not sure of what to do”.

Fifteen minutes before full-time Ghana’s captain André Ayew had guided the 
ball home for a 3-0 lead. “The referee is from Gabon and he didn’t like us. I 
don’t understand how Caf gave this game to him,” complained Achille, a 
volunteer.

It was a valid comment. Gabon is a fierce regional football rival and 
neighbour of Equatorial Guinea. Thierry, another volunteer, added: “Because we 
beat them [2-0 in the group stage], you could tell from the way he handled the 
game that he didn’t want us to win.”

Equatorial Guinea v Ghana semi-final marred by violence – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/feb/05/equatorial-guinea-v-ghana-semi-final-marred-by-violence-in-pictures>
In the media centre colleagues were filing out of the door behind me. My head 
was buried inside the laptop and it did not occur to me that they were running 
from something. And then the smell ...

The last time I was tear-gassed was in 2012 when police had to disperse angry 
crowds during Ghana’s general elections so it might be thought I would 
recognise the odour by now.

The glass window behind me was rapped urgently – a colleague was gesturing 
furiously for me to get out of the commentary area. Before I could respond, I 
was choking. I grabbed my cell phone. Bottle of water. As I reached down to 
unplug the laptop, my eyes started burning. “Let’s go!” a voice barked. I 
yanked the plug out and scurried to where the wheezing and coughing journalists 
had congregated.

Four 60-seater buses soon arrived. Fans raced each other into them and even as 
they pulled out of the stadium, there was still fear.

African football has struggled to shake off the stigma attached to its name 
and, for a tournament that had been hastily organised afterMorocco’s withdrawal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/11/morocco-disqualified-africa-cup-of-nations>
,Equatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/14/equatorial-guinea-new-hosts-africa-cup-of-nations-morocco>
 had received generally good reviews.

“The government of Equatorial Guinea had done very well to organise this 
tournament. Is this the icing on the cake for them? This is unacceptable and 
sad,” was Nyantakyi’s take on the situation.

Back at the stadium it was almost midnight. The Ghanaian journalists were 
allocated a bus and it sped outside the stadium. It was clear that the rioting 
had continued even after the fans had been forced out of the stadium.

Broken chairs, rocks, wood and other objects littered the street. There was a 
sense of disbelief about it all. In the silence of the bus racking sobs could 
be heard in front as the ordeal started to sink in.

Gary Al-Smith is an African football specialist who is covering the 2015 
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
in Equatorial Guinea for the Guardian. Follow him on Twitter: @garyalsmith
 