
France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> are going through the 
emotional wringer at this Euro but, as far as results are concerned, they are 
purely elated. After another stuttering, stumbling performance that looked set 
for frustration, Antoine Griezmann played the role that reduced Dimitri Payet 
to tears in their opening game by snatching delirious victory from the jaws of 
a disappointing draw with a 90th-minute header. Not to be outdone, the little 
wizard from West Ham triggered an outpouring of joy with a virtuoso goal in 
stoppage time.

Having broken Albania’s remarkable resistance, France become the first team to 
qualify for the knockout stage of this tournament, thanks to their double late, 
late show. It has become a happy habit.

It was hard for Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> to 
stomach, having played with admirable resilience. They do not have any points 
to show for two high-concentration performances where their few lapses were 
brutally punished. France plugged away without looking particularly convincing 
– no doubt that will be a talking point in the French camp over the coming days 
– and their persistence paid off when Adil Rami slung in a cross to find 
Griezmann, one of the smallest players on the pitch, unattended. For a small 
striker he is impressively efficient with his head, and he did not disappoint 
here.

That it was Griezmann who made the critical breakthrough was significant in 
that it embodied how Didier Deschamps is shuffling his attacking pack. In the 
opening game against Romania he began with Griezmann and Paul Pogba, and the 
tempo of the game improved when he introduced Anthony Martial and Kingsley 
Coman. This time the situation was reversed.

A pessimist might say that the manager does not know his best team. An 
optimist will say that France are blessed with options and variation, and it is 
asking a lot of most defences to try to deal with all those forward forces 
during 90 minutes.

Still, it was a was a bold call to tinker so radically with his front line. 
Unleashing the speedy verve of the younger pair was intended to pep up France. 
But those expecting an instant lift had not factored in the strong Italian 
influence Giovanni De Biasi has given Albania. They were resolute, organised, 
sharp in the tackle and keen to cover one another defensively as France probed.

The Stade Vélodrome crackled with nervous energy, the highly tuned expectancy 
of the French coursing in one direction, euphoric delight brimming out of the 
Albanians, who even before the game had been dancing and tooting car horns near 
theRond-Point du Prado, just outside the super-structure of Marseille’s 
modernised amphitheatre.

Initial excitement mutated into gnawing tension as France’s positive 
intentions began to break down. A spark in the restructured team did not happen 
naturally.
Payet 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Dimitri%20Payet&team=France&isSimple=true>
Albania sensed they could do some damage. Ermir Lanjani, making inroads with 
his persistence on the left, saw a shot deflect off Patrice Evra. Shortly 
before half-time Evra was lucky not to be penalised when a high foot caught 
Andi Lila at head height. Ledian Memushaj’s free-kick skimmed the roof of the 
net.

In the dugout Deschamps bit his nails. Yet again France went in for their 
half-time team-talk with much to discuss after an inhibited performance. Other 
than checking the flight of a couple of Olivier Giroud headers as they drifted 
over, Etrit Berisha had not been a busy goalkeeper.

The solution? Deschamps tried to flick the switch with the introduction of 
Pogba, and later Griezmann. France reverted to their plan A in a 4-3-3 and 
revved up to start again. They almost scored immediately as Giroud’s cross 
bounced off Blaise Matuidi’s shoulder and Coman headed goalwards. It was close 
but not half as close as Bacary Sagna, who was a fraction away from scoring an 
own-goal past Hugo Lloris as he tangled to try to challenge Memushaj. The sound 
of around 60,000 sharp intakes of breath accompanied the sight of the ball 
bouncing back off a post.

Back came France, with Pogba arriving unmarked to meet Payet’s delightful 
cross only to put his rising shot too high. The next chances fell to Giroud, 
who skewed a header wide before thumping another against a post. The crowd 
called for one of their old favourites, André-Pierre Gignac.

France continued to try to press for chances but clean, clear-cut sights of 
goal were hard to come by. Their support could not believe it when Pogba 
slipped as he shaped to shoot but just as it seemed the opportunities had 
knocked and nobody had answered, Griezmann transformed everything for theEuro 
2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> hosts.

Dimitri Payet’s stunner rescues France’s welcome party against Romania
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report> 