
Atlético Madrid had the night's most impressive result, beating Lazio 3-1 at 
the Stadio Olimpico. The Germany striker Miroslav Klose gave the Serie A side 
the lead in the 19th minute but the Spanish side came back hard with Adrían 
López scoring six minutes later and Falcao scoring each side of half-time.

Salzburg are all but out of the competition after a 4-0 drubbing at home by 
Metalist Kharkiv. The Ukrainian side, showing great style, scored in the first 
and last minutes of the match through Taison and Devic, with Jonathan Cristaldo 
adding two more before half-time.

Lokomotiv Moscow came from a goal down, scored by Iker Muniain after a great 
run by the winger Markel Susaeta, to earn a 2-1 win againstAthletic Bilbao in 
the Russian capital.

Denis Glushakov scored from the penalty spot in the 61st minute after a foul 
on Felipe Caicedo and it was Caicedo who scored the winner 10 minutes later. 
This tie provides the potential last-16 opponents for Manchester United,who won 
2-0 at Ajax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/16/ajax-manchester-united-europa-league>
.

Schalke drew 1-1 at Viktoria Plzen, Klaas Jan-Huntelaar equalising Vladimar 
Darida's first-half effort.

Legia Warsaw and Sporting also drew, 2-2 in Poland, with the Portuguese side 
equalising twice through Daniel Carrico and André Santos after goals from Jakub 
Wawrznyiak and Janusz Gol. The winners in the second leg will play either 
Manchester City or Porto in the last 16 afterCity's 2-1 win in Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/16/porto-manchester-city-europa-league>
.

In Holland AZ Alkmaar edged Anderlecht 1-0 courtesy of Adam Maher's 
35th-minute effort and another Dutch team,PSV Eindhoven, came away from 
Trabzonspor with a 2-1 win after scoring twice in the first 11 minutes through 
a thunderous shot by Tim Matavz and a neat finish by Ola Toivonen. Olcan Adin 
pulled one back with a fine solo goal in the 33rd minute but PSV are favourites 
to play either Stoke City or Valencia in the last 16,after the Spanish side 
took a 1-0 advantage home from the Britannia Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/16/stoke-city-valencia-europa-league>
.

Twente Enschede came back from the Romanian capital with an impressive 1-0 win 
after Ola John chipped theSteaua Bucharest goalkeeper, Ciprian Tatarusanu, in 
the 53rd minute in a game refereed by Mark Clattenburg.

Udinese and PAOK Salonika drew 0-0 while Wisla Krakow and Standard Liège 
scored a goal apiece. The Belgian side went ahead through a Gohi Bi Cyriac 
penalty, after Wisla's Michal Czekaj was sent off for a foul, but Tsvetan 
Genkov equalised for the home side with two minutes left.

Bruges led at Hannover through Maxime Lestienne's header but two goals in the 
last 17 minutes from the substitute Artur Sobiech and Jan Schlaudraff, who 
slotted home from the spot after Sobiech was fouled, gave the German side 
victory.
 