
AZ Alkmaar, the leaders of the Dutch league, survived playing 87 minutes with 
10 men and missing a penalty to reach the quarter-finals of theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> at the expense of 
Udinese, but another Eredivisie side went out, PSV Eindhoven failing to 
overturn a first-leg deficit at home toValencia.

Alkmaar had Nick Viergever sent off in the third minute, while Rasmus Elm 
fired a penalty over the crossbar as they scrambled to a 2-1 defeat atUdinese, 
which was enough to send them through to the quarter-finals 3-2 on aggregate.

Viergever's early dismissal was further compounded when two goals from Antonio 
Di Natale drew the hosts level on aggregate within the opening 15 minutes.

But Udinese <https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> failed to make the 
most of their chances and Alkmaar went back in front on aggregate through a 
31st-minute strike from Erik Falkenburg, They then held out for just under an 
hour to secure a place in the last eight.

The 2004 winners Valencia also had a man sent off as they moved through 5-3 on 
aggregate after a 1-1 draw at PSV. Adil Rami opened the scoring forValencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> on 47 minutes before Ola 
Toivonen equalised. The goalscorer Rami was sent off in injury time.

Hannover progressed with an emphatic 4-0 second leg win over Standard Liège in 
Germany to send them through to the quarter-finals 6-2 on aggregate.

Mohammed Abdellaoue opened the scoring on four minutes before two own goals 
from the Brazilian Kanu either side of the interval. Sergio Pinto added a 
fourth in stoppage time, after Standard had Serge Gakpé sent off.

Metalist Kharkiv of Ukraine staged a fine late comeback to nudge out Olympiakos
 with a 2-1 win in Greece, which saw them through on the away goals rule after 
a 2-2 aggregate result.

Iván Marcano's early goal increased Olympiakos' aggregate lead but Cristian 
Villagra equalised on the night in the 81st minute and Marko Devic scored the 
all-important winner four minutes from time.

A Klaas-Jan Huntelaar hat-trick helped Schalke come back from behind to beat 
Steve McClaren'sTwente, a 4-1 win on the night giving them a 4-2 aggregate win.

Willem Janssen had extended Twente's advantage with a 14th-minute opening goal 
but Huntelaar equalised on 29 minutes and added two further second-half goals 
either side of a 71st-minute effort from Jermaine Jones.

Atlético Madrid wrapped up an impressive 6-1 aggregate win over Besiktas with 
a 3-0 win in Turkey. Adrián López put the La Liga side ahead before late goals 
from Radamel Falcao and Eduardo Salvio completed their easy passage.
 