
Reflecting on life in 1920s New York, F Scott Fitzgerald opined that “the 
hangover became a part of the day as well allowed-for as the Spanish siesta”. 
But while 21st-century bosses may not be quite as accommodating as the Wall 
Street tycoons of the roaring 20s, hangovers are certainly part of theChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> party season.

Whether it’s how to avoid them in the first place or negating the suffering 
after the event, hangovers have been pondered over for millennia. In ancient 
Rome, Pliny the Elder declared it advisable to line the stomach with a meal of 
roasted sheep’s intestines before hitting the drink, while centuries later the 
English herbalist and botanist Nicholas Culpeper wrote that hangovers could be 
relieved by stuffing the nasal passages with the juice of tree ivy. However, 
despite having socio-economic consequenceshigher than many common diseases in 
terms of absenteeism and reduced work productivity 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10836917>, it is only relatively recently 
that hangovers have been considered worthy of serious scientific study.

Why are they called hangovers?

The hangover was first described 
<http://www.ingentaconnect.com/contentone/ben/cdar/2012/00000005/00000001/art00001>
 more than 3,000 years ago in the Susruta Samhita, an Indian textbook on vedic 
medication. It was described asparamada, a post-drinking condition 
characterised by thirst, pain in the head and joints, and heaviness of the 
body, with no known cure.

But the word hangover has only become associated with alcohol in the past 
century. It first appeared in the English vocabulary in the 19th century as an 
expression for describing unfinished business from meetings, but it was not 
until 1904 that the word began to crop up in reference to alcohol.

What causes them?

Hangovers develop when blood-alcohol content returns to zero, leading to 
headaches, nausea, anxiety, dry mouth, sweating, gastro-intestinal complaints, 
concentration problems, dizziness, drowsiness and hyper-excitability. One of 
the causes is the way that the body metabolises the compounds found in 
alcoholic drinks. Alcoholic drinks contain very small amounts of methanol (in 
addition to ethanol), which the body breaks down into the toxins formaldehyde 
and formic acid about 10 hours after drinking, making you feel ill.

Another long-standing scientific theory has been that hangover symptoms are 
down to dehydration, because alcohol decreases the production of an 
anti-diuretic hormone, something the body requires to reabsorb water. With less 
of it available, the body loses fluid through urination. Yet, while hormonal 
changes resulting from a dehydrated state do cause dry mouth and thirst,studies 
on the biological changes <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14693266> 
present the day after excessive drinking suggest it isn’t quite that simple. 
Many of the cognitive alcohol hangover symptoms – such as memory loss, mood 
changes and anxiety – appear to be down to the effects of immune system 
activation and its impact on the central nervous system. As the body tries to 
process the alcohol metabolites in the bloodstream, it produces tiny molecules 
called cytokines. Cytokine receptors are particularly dense in the hippocampus, 
a brain structure crucial to memory function, andsome studies have shown that 
increased cerebral cytokine concentration 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2740752/> can cause weakness, 
decreased appetite, sickness and inability to concentrate.

Why do some people not get them?

It has been reported that 28% of drinkers say they never experience a hangover 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18412754>. The exact reasons why are 
little understood, as even when alcohol exposure is monitored under 
experimental conditions, there are considerable individual differences in terms 
of hangover response. It is thought to be down to a mix of genetic and 
environmental factors. Two genotypes – ADH1B and ALDH2 – are associated with 
the flushing or blotching response on the face or body following alcohol 
consumption, and have been found to be related to heightened hangover 
susceptibility.Some studies also show that heavy hangovers are more common in 
drinkers <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15869353> with a family history 
of alcoholism, with alcoholics getting the worst hangovers of all.

Can consistent hangovers have long-term consequences?

Yes. The pathophysiology of why this occurs is not fully known but various 
studies of university students have found a link between frequent hangovers and 
adverse neurocognitive outcomes such as decreased white-matter integrity in the 
frontal part of the brain and the cerebellum, which plays an important role in 
motor control. It is thought that the former could lead to sustained 
impairments in memory and attention span.

Does a ‘full English’ the next day really help?

Fried food can make you feel better. Drinking alcohol lowers your blood-sugar 
levels and eating a carbohydrate-heavy meal can help restore these to normal.

Do they worsen with age?

The common belief is that hangover symptoms become more severe with advancing 
age, possibly due to the body becoming less efficient at processing alcohol, 
but, from a scientific viewpoint, there’s little evidence to show that this is 
true. This is mainly because hangover research is almost entirely carried out 
on young adults,but the few studies that have been done comparing age groups 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/acer.12238/abstract> find that post 
binge-drinking hangovers are worst in younger people.

Is there a ‘miracle cure’?

The quest for a hangover cure is about as old as recorded history. The oldest 
known cure is the “hair of the dog”, which does have a biological basis. If you 
continue drinking alcohol during the hangover phase, your body will stop 
metabolising methanol into toxins, and go back to processing ethanol, leaving 
the methanol for later.

But when it comes to dealing with the inevitable, various substances have been 
tried and tested over the centuries. The Romans recommended raw owls’ eggs, 
which may have had some beneficial effects, as eggs contain cysteine, an amino 
acid depleted by alcohol. The ancient Assyrians chose to consume a more dubious 
concoction of ground birds’ beaks and myrrh. In the era of Genghis Khan, Mongol 
warriors ate pickled sheep eyes, while in medieval Europe physicians 
recommended raw eels and bitter almonds.

More recently, a number of companies – no doubt thinking of the vast 
commercial potential – have tried to develop a valid hangover medication. But 
while various anti-inflammatories – such as the migraine drug, tolfenamic acid, 
or herbs such as borage – have shown some benefits, so far no treatments have 
received FDA approval as scientifically valid hangover cures.
 