
The seed was planted almost 40 years ago, when I saw a film called The 
Grieving Snow. I was eight, and this story of two brothers searching for 
injured people on mountainsides changed the way I looked at the world. As a 
boy, I was lacking in self-confidence, afraid of everything. I wanted to be 
courageous like those brothers.

I had the opportunity to learn how to climb as a cub scout and seized it, even 
though I found heights terrifying. In my teens I began training on cliffs near 
my home in the south of France, eventually moving into free solo climbing – 
tackling rock faces without ropes and cables. I'd found my passion; blissful 
solitude mixed with the exhilaration of being caught in a place between life 
and death.

I was almost 30 when I saw my first skyscraper. Well known for my 
rock-climbing, I was approached by a documentary maker who suggested something 
new, more urban. I seized the challenge. On rock, I use a technique called 
fissure escalation, seeking out cracks, pits and scars – in Chicago, the face 
of that first tower seemed blank and featureless, devoid of the handholds I 
relied on. Once I'd started, though, I found the textures I needed; window 
frames, ledges and protrusions, and up I went.

In the years since, I've conquered more than 100 skyscrapers, but one 
continued to obsess me. Rocketing half a kilometre into the sky above Kuala 
Lumpur,the twin Petronas towers 
<http://www.petronas.com.my/internet/pett/pettweb.nsf/frm_home_hi?OpenFrameset> 
had twice foiled me. A deep balcony runs around each building on the 60th 
floor, there's no avoiding it. Like most of my ascents, I'd had to attempt the 
Petronas without permission, and on both occasions police captured me on that 
balcony.

Two months ago, on the 52nd anniversary of Malaysian independence, I made my 
third attempt. I started my ascent before sunrise. The first two metres are 
always crucial – after that, my ankles are safe from the grasping hands of 
policemen. Petronas had installed extra CCTV since my last attempt, so I 
plotted my course carefully, dashed towards the side of the building and leapt 
for my first handhold.

On a climb, all my attention is focused on finding the next hand- and 
foothold. The gathering crowds on the street below, the cheering, the sirens – 
nothing breaks the spell. It's an addictive sensation. I had no real 
expectation of reaching the summit. Even if I made it past the 60th-floor 
balcony, I knew there were further platforms at the 72nd, 80th, 84th and 88th 
floors, each offering a fresh opportunity to the security team.

As dawn broke, I made it over the first balcony. Now clearly visible from the 
ground, I knew it was a race against time – clear of the remaining balconies, 
I'd be out of reach.

There's a degree of improvisation in a climb. It's like unlocking a puzzle. I 
kept seeking out ways to continue the ascent, zigzagging up the side of the 
building. The final balcony had larger windows than the others and I was 
certain I would be apprehended. Only when I was above it did I realise my 
greatest challenge had yet to be faced.

The tower is topped by a tapering spire with a gigantic sphere at its base. 
This bulged above me, blotting out the sky. Close up, though, I saw it was made 
up of parallel loops of piping, too wide and slippery for me to grip. But in 
between each was a recessed grille. Reaching in, I was able to grab that and 
haul myself up. All I had to do now was scale the spire. At the top was a 
second, smaller globe just wide enough for a man to stand on. I tied a 
Malaysian flag to the pinnacle, then tried to haul myself on to the globe. It 
took three attempts, and all the time I was thinking, "Am I going to be able to 
get back down?"But as I stood on top, arms outstretched 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8231076.stm>, buffeted by an oncoming gale, that 
hardly seemed to matter.

Every building I conquer gives me the sense of having been reborn – the 
sensation I crave – but this moment had been a dream I'd cherished for 12 long 
years.

Halfway around the world, my wife Nicole and three sons would likely be 
asleep. Just as they respect my need to climb, so I respect their wish to hear 
about my ascents only after the event. I'd have plenty of time to talk to them 
on the phone during my night in custody, then I'd return home and start 
planning my next climb. Meanwhile, for a little while, let it just be me, the 
sky andthis overwhelming sense of elation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/01/alain-robert-climbs-petronas>.

• As told to Chris Broughton
 