
Archaeologists have said there is no credible evidence to back comments made 
by Senate crossbencherDavid Leyonhjelm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/david-leyonhjelm> that cast doubt on whether 
Aboriginal people were the first Australians.

Leyonhjelm was responding on Thursday to the release of a parliamentary 
committee report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/25/bipartisan-report-recognition-indigenous-australians-constitution>
 on recognition of Indigenous people in the constitution.

The Liberal Democrat said he needed to be persuaded that Aboriginal people 
should be recognised as the first Australians. “There may have been people in 
Australia prior to the Aborigines,” he told reporters in Canberra. Some 
anthropologists argued that case, he said.

His view was based on the Bradshaw or Gwion Gwion rock paintings in Western 
Australia, which some amateur anthropologists in the 1990s theorised were 
painted by a different ethnic group that was eventually displaced by Aboriginal 
Australians.

Leyonhjelm said several serious anthropologists had made the argument, but 
could not name them or their credentials. “I could [name them] if I checked it 
out,” he said. “You’ve asked me at a door stop, I can’t off the top of my head.

“But if there is any doubt at all, why would you put history in the 
constitution?”

Archaeologists told Guardian Australia there was no credibility to his views.

 Joe Dortch from the University of Western Australia called them 
“old-fashioned”. He said using the Gwion Gwion rock paintings as evidence of a 
different race that pre-dated Aboriginal Australians was an “old chestnut that 
gets repeated” but had no credibility.

Dortch has worked extensively with geneticists and in 2011 was the co-author 
of thefirst Aboriginal full-genome study 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6052/94.ful>. It showed an unbroken 
Aboriginal lineage over 2,500 generations, or about 60,000-75,000 years – the 
longest continuous lineage outside Africa.

“Genetically, there’s very little admixture for 50,000 or more years,” he 
said. “There are some genetic signals indicating fleeting visits from Asia, but 
these are very minor in the overall genetic makeup.”

Although new discoveries were always being made, there was no physical or 
genetic evidence of any changeover in population, he said. Leyonhjelm’s views 
came from a “political stance” and “that’s why it keeps getting trotted out”.

The director of the centre for rock art research and management at the 
university, Jo McDonald, said academic circles had “moved well past this 
argument” and neither the age nor the style of the artwork was any kind of 
“anomaly” that could be used as evidence of a prior race.

Independent senator Nick Xenophon strongly supports recognising Indigenous 
people as the first Australians. “Any evidence to the contrary seems quite 
fanciful and, quite frankly, insulting,” he told reporters.
 