
In medicine, "untoward incident inquiries" tend to look for systems failures, 
rather than one individual to blame. It's certainly clear thatAndrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield> and his co-defendants 
failed to meet the high standards required of doctors in research. The GMC 
found he was "misleading" "dishonest" and "irresponsible" in the way he 
described where the children in the 1998 paper came from, by implying that they 
were routine clinic referrals.

As the GMC has also found, these children were subjected to a programme of 
unpleasant and invasive tests which were not performed in their own clinical 
interest, but rather for research purposes, and these tests were conducted 
without ethics committee approval. It's plainly undesirable for doctors to go 
around conducting tests like colonoscopy on children for their own research 
interests without very careful external scrutiny.

But there is the wider context: Wakefield was at the centre of a media storm 
about theMMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> vaccine and is now being 
blamed by journalists as if he were the only one at fault. In reality, the 
media are equally guilty.

Even if it had been immaculately well conducted – and it certainly wasn't – 
Wakefield's "case series report" of 12 children's clinical anecdotes would 
never have justified the conclusion that MMR causes autism, despite what 
journalists claimed: it simply didn't have big enough numbers to do so.

But the media repeatedly reported the concerns of this one man, generally 
without giving methodological details of the research, either because they 
found it too complicated, inexplicably, or because to do so would have 
undermined their story.

As the years passed by, media coverage deteriorated further. Claims by 
researchers who never published scientific papers to back up their claims were 
reported in the newspapers as important new scientific breakthroughs while, at 
the same time, evidence showing no link between MMR and autism, fully published 
in peer reviewed academic journals, was simply ignored. This was cynical and 
unforgivable.

Then, after Tony Blair refused to say if his son had received the vaccine, the 
commentators rolled in. Experts from Carol Vorderman to Fiona Phillips have all 
shared their concerns about MMR with the nation.

The MMR scare has now petered out. It would be nice if we could say this was 
because the media had learned their lessons and recognised the importance of 
scientific evidence, rather than one bloke's hunch.

Instead it has terminated because of the unethical behaviour of one man, 
Andrew Wakefield, which undermined the emotional narrative of their story. The 
media have developed no insight into their own role – and for this reason there 
will be another MMR.
 