
Fabio Aru described his triumph in the Vuelta as “a dream come true” after 
coasting over the line on the final day’s ceremonial ride into Madrid.

The 25-year-old from Sardinia went one better than the second-placed finish 
behind his idol Alberto Contador at this year’s Giro d’Italia to confirm his 
status as one of the hottest up-and-coming riders in the sport. He is the 
youngest winner of the Vuelta since the Spaniard Melchor Mauri won in 1991. 
“Today a dream came true, a dream I’ve had since I was a child,” Aru said.

“I’m very emotional, very proud,” he added. “I have to thank my team-mates, 
they always believed in me and I dedicate this win to them and to my family. 
It’s been a very hard Vuelta but I’m sure the public have liked it. It’s been 
spectacular.”

Joaquim Rodríguez of Spain was second overall for Katusha, 57 seconds adrift 
of Aru, with Poland’s Rafal Majka of Tinkoff-Saxo a further 12 seconds behind 
in third as Germany’s John Degenkolb of Giant-Alpecin won Sunday’s sprint 
finish.

Aru was not even Astana’s leader when the three-week race began but moved into 
contention after his compatriot Vincenzo Nibali, the 2014 Tour de France 
champion who won the Vuelta in 2010, was disqualified for hanging on to the 
team car after a crash on the second stage.

Aru’s chances were further boosted on the 11th stage when Chris Froome’s bid 
for a rare Tour-Vuelta double was ended by a heavy fall that left the British 
Team Sky leader with a fractured bone in a foot and forced his withdrawal.

The Dutchman Tom Dumoulin was the surprise leader by six seconds over Aru 
heading into Saturday’s decisive penultimate stage after a scorching 
performance in Wednesday’s time-trial.

But Aru and his Astana <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> colleagues 
wrecked the Giant-Alpecin’s rider’s chances of a podium finish when they left 
him flailing on the third of four ascents and he dropped down to sixth overall 
as Aru grabbed the red jersey.

“This is not just a triumph for Fabio Aru, this is about the victory of a 
team,” Astana’s director, Alexander Vinokourov, said. “On paper it seems easy 
but the reality is that it was very tough,” added the 2006 Tour of Spain winner.

Aru said after Saturday’s stage he would like to ride the 2016 Tour de France 
but first would meet with Astana to decide on the year’s objectives.

Vuelta a España 2015: Stages 12 to 21 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/sep/14/vuelta-a-espana-2015-stages-12-to-21-in-pictures> 