
Images harvested from social media sites such as Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> could be part of the latest 
counter-terrorism measures, the attorney general’s department has confirmed.

In September, the justice minister, Michael Keenan, announced that the federal 
government would spend $18.5m to develop the nationalfacial biometric matching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/04/facial-recognition-technology-identity-tesco-ethical-issues>
 capability, known simply as “the capability”.

Under questioning in Senate estimates on Tuesday night, senior officials from 
the attorney general’s department said that photos could be pulled from social 
media sites and used in the new system.

The Greens senator, Scott Ludlam, asked: “Is there any law that would prevent 
the system from ingesting [photographs] from publicly available sources like 
social media sites?”

The facial recognition databases are coming. Why aren't the privacy laws? | 
Kyle Chayka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/30/facial-recognition-databases-privacy-laws>
Andrew Rice, the assistant secretary of the department, answered: “It’s 
possible that still images out of these kinds of environments could be put into 
the system. That would be a choice for the users of the system.”

But he added that it could only happen if users of the capability, such as 
police agencies, could legally draw on those sources at present.

“Making those choices will be on the basis of their existing legal 
permissions,” Rice said.

The proposal is for the new system to draw on official photos, including 
driver’s licence and passport photos, to create a database. Stills taken from 
CCTV and other sources are of lower quality and therefore more likely to be 
inaccurate, Rice said.

The fine print of the new system is still being worked out. Privacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> impact assessments are expected to 
conclude in early 2016. The threshold for what offences would necessitate the 
use of the capability is also unclear.


“This is not something that would be available for broad usage within 
agencies,” Rice said.

The attorney general’s department has consulted with all state and territory 
police agencies, as well as federal departments such as immigration and foreign 
affairs and trade.

Consultations will also occur with privacy organisations, but not with members 
of the public, Rice said.

Ludlam expressed concern that the system was being handled “behind the scenes” 
by security agencies and the attorney general’s department.

“We’re certainly looking at being very transparent about the use of the 
capability,” Rice replied.

Keenan said in September that the system would have strong privacy safeguards. 
“The new capability will initially provide a one-to-one image-based 
verification service among commonwealth agencies, with other agencies expected 
to join over time,” he said.

“This process will expedite putting a name to the face of terror suspects, 
murderers and armed robbers, and will also help to detect fraud cases involving 
criminals that use multiple identities. This initiative does not involve new 
powers for the commonwealth; it’s simply a mechanism to share existing 
information already held by jurisdictions.”

The new powers do not need to go through parliament to be enacted.

“I’m not aware that it requires legislation,” the attorney general, George 
Brandis, told Senate estimates on Tuesday.
 