
Congressional Budget Office reports do not usually generate the excitement 
that's come with thelatest 
<http://cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/45010-Outlook2014.pdf>
. Already lip-smackingly dry and dense prose (the rhetorical equivalent of the 
world's worst sponge cake) is studded with caveats ("projection", "estimate", 
"uncertain") that make it difficult to simply rip out a catchy piece of news.

This is why recent headlines about the report, and many of the news stories, 
are based on a phrase that appears nowhere in it: the Affordable Care Act will 
eliminate 2.5m jobs.

This is what the report says:

 The ACA will reduce the total number of hours worked, on net, by about 1.5 to 
2% … almost entirely because workers will choose to supply less labor.

There is, in the relevant section, no mention of jobs lost. The scary 2.5m 
number comes from a paragraph that quantifies that 1.5 to 2% in terms of 
"full-time-equivalent workers". It's just another way to say 2% reduction in 
hours worked. You know, all those hours lost divided by the number of hours 
worked in a full-time-job. A decline of 2% in hours worked islike having 2.5m 
fewer workers; it does not mean there are 2.5m fewer people working.

That has not stopped the headlines. Conservative media has been howling the 
loudest, with Fox News, unsurprisingly, leading the chorus. Some less 
ideologically-motivated outlets adopted the head-turning phrasing, even if they 
cloak their misrepresentation in the guise of speculation about the impact of 
the report on political campaigns. One article in Politicoreported the findings 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/02/05/politico-obamacare-cbo_n_4732199.html>
 accurately ("its … not about actual job losses") only to immediately discount 
them in their hurry to get to the process point: "But what matters politically 
is how the numbers look in attack ads. And in this election year, '2m lost 
jobs' is a Republican ad-maker's dream."

I guess that's true, if "Republican ad-makers dream" means they wish they 
could make ads about 2m jobs being lost. Because if those jobs aren't lost, and 
– as the report also says – "employment and compensation will increase over the 
coming decade" – then the ads will be selling not just a candidate but a 
different version of reality. That seems like a heavier lift.

As the breathlessness of the reporting has dissipated, there have been smaller 
headlines offering more nuanced interpretations – at least in outlets that do 
not service the particular demographic that Fox does. (This 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/cbo-botched-health-care-law-rollout-will-reduce-signups-by-1-million-people/2014/02/04/c78577d0-8dac-11e3-98ab-fe5228217bd1_story.html>
 Washington Post correction is representative of the general backtracking.) The 
newer analyses reflect what all those "projected" and "estimates" and 
"uncertainties" are doing in the report: the long-terms effects of Obamacare 
will be both positive and negative, and it is almost impossible to predict 
what, on balance, will happen.

The White House and Democrats have, of course, chosen to accentuate the 
positive. They are, I think, bending the report at a less extreme angle than 
those on the right: "2m jobs lost" is simplynot true. Many conservatives have 
attempted to work with the less dramatic, more honest assessment of loss in 
hours work. This approach, however, bothers me just as much as the lie.

We will live out the future the CBO writes about, interpretations will be 
validated one way or another once the actual results begin to come in, but it's 
harder to erase the ugly attitudes that prop up that misinformation in the 
short term and prime a conservative audience to believe what Fox says and only 
what Fox says in the long term.

Sean Hannity, for instance, interpreted the reduction in hours to mean that 
"people will refuse to get up and go to work because they don't want to lose 
their government subsidy". Krauthammerpainted 
<http://www.foxnews.com/on-air/special-report-bret-baier/2014/02/06/all-star-panel-can-white-house-spin-grim-cbo-prognosis-obamacare>
 a picture of makers and takers, declaring the subsidies to be "the essence of 
liberalism, is that you can then choose not to work, and the people who do work 
end up subsidizing you". Follow these conversations further and you find that 
it's not enough to imply that those who work fewer hours are leeches,they 
should stand in fear for their mortal soul. Krauthammer asserts that the policy 
robs "people who are unsuccessful in society" of the "habit and dignity of 
work".This 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/gracemarieturner/2014/02/06/the-human-tragedy-of-obamacares-job-losses/>
 Forbes columnist mourns those who will "never experience the joy of a 
rewarding job", and on his radio show yesterday, Hannity referred to those who 
might cut their hours as "spiritually dead".

These commentators at least get the supply/demand equation right, as they 
imagine an economy where jobs are plentiful and ready for the taking. But then 
an array of prejudice and error: they presume that a pool of any significance 
will be in a position to choose between a working more hours continued 
subsidies; that "not working" always means "not having a job"; that anyone 
given the choice not to work, won't; that non-working hours will always be 
spent self-indulgently; that the only meaningful use of one's time is to earn a 
wage.

If the decision to work fewer hours was simply about maintaining the same 
lifestyle – or an even less strenuous one – the implicit conclusion that Fox 
makes about the kind of person who would choose to work less might be valid – 
and ugly. If "working fewer hours" means "more hours of idleness", further 
conflating "fewer hours" with "no job" pushes the stereotype of those who 
choose part-time employment into the realm of a welfare queen on her 
Obamaphone, perhaps in line for free birth control.

But buried in the dry statistics of the CBO report is the unspoken assumption 
that there are benefits to working fewer hours that don't come from being freed 
from a an hourly wage. Humans tend to believe that dignity can stem from an 
avocation as much as a vocation and that the "rewards" one might gain from 
having a job can be weighed against less tangible benefits. I think even 
conservatives, when pressed, would agree.

The problem is that they must fan the flames of rage in their supporters. They 
must allow that, sure, time with one's family is good and that's what other 
conservatives might use free time for… but there is an other. There is a 
population, one large enough to instill discomfort, that will use free time to 
indulge in "hedonism" (as Hannity put it). This is certainly a judgment on 
population far greater than the percentage of the population that might make 
the choice the CBO outlines. It is a judgment aboutanyone that qualified for 
subsidies.

Except not you, conservatives say to their voters. It's not you, Fox viewer.

But statistically, it probably is: Most 
<http://www.people-press.org/2012/09/27/section-4-demographics-and-political-views-of-news-audiences/>
 of the Fox audience (33%) makes less than $30,000 a year, which is not just 
within the range of Obamacare subsidies, but expanded Medicare. (It's also the 
highest proportion of low-income viewers of any of the news networks.) Another 
31% earn between $30,000 and $74,999 thousand – the upper limit of which would 
put a household of four in the range of subsidies. In fact, of all the 
Americans that consume political media, those that turn to conservative outlets 
are the most likely to make less than $74,999: They make up 58% of Limbaugh's 
audience, and 57% each of O'Reilly's and Hannity's. (Compared to 44% for Rachel 
Maddow, 51% for the New York Times.)

So when conservative pundits talk about people that might choose to do 
something else with their time besides earn an hourly wage, they are aren't 
talking about "the other" at all. They are tellingtheir audience that the 
choice not to work is a threat to their humanity, that they are "unsuccessful 
at society" and, of course, to choose anything else but longer hours at a job 
is (Hannity again) "being robbed of your soul".

I don't often wish that more people could hear what insults are directed at 
them, but in this case, it only seems fair.
 