
If I had known how injury-prone my legs were, I might have thought twice about 
this marathon attempt. Actually, that's a lie. I would have gone ahead and done 
it anyway, but at least I would have been prepared for the setbacks.

After months of effort to heal my injured right knee - carefully working the 
muscles to weed out imbalances, gradually realigning my foot so it landed 
straight and mentally padding the knee in the finest cotton wool - my left leg 
had an attack of jealousy. It wanted attention and, just over a fortnight ago, 
it gave out.

By then, I had almost got back on top of my training. I could run for more 
than an hour for the first time since December, and thanks to lots of cycling 
in the meantime, I was still on track.

The day my left leg buckled started like any other. A gentle warm-up and then 
a jog. About 15 minutes in, the lower part of my left calf felt a little tight 
but not too bad, so I carried on. When I stopped, 35 minutes later, my left leg 
was a little unsteady. Not serious, I thought, as a bit of muscle pain here and 
there should be nothing to worry about. Wrong.

I realised that something might be amiss when I fell over while trying to get 
out of bed the next morning. My hunch was confirmed when the pain hadn't gone 
away even after swallowing several packets of ibuprofen over the course of a 
week. Every step I took sent sharp pains shooting down my left leg.

Yet another trip to the physio (my fourth) pinpointed the problem as an 
inflammation of several knee ligaments where they attach to the top of the shin 
bone. A classic over-use injury, and one that would take a couple of weeks to 
heal. A couple of weeks of inactivity, that is, while wrapping bags of frozen 
peas around my knee for 20 minutes every two hours.

There are now just three weeks to the marathon and I'm in a desperately 
disappointing situation: as if being several weeks behind with the training 
wasn't glorious enough, there's now the added advantage of not actually being 
able to run. So, the question racing through my mind is, do I run the London 
marathon this year or not? Answers on a postcard, please.

alok.jha@theguardian.com <mailto:alok.jha@theguardian.com>
 