
I’d love to tell you that my favourite book is by Flaubert 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gustave_Flaubert> or Angela Carter 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angela_Carter>, maybe even Alex Garland 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alex_Garland>. But the one that affected me most 
was written by an overlooked British icon – Fay Weldon.The Life and Loves of a 
She-Devil <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Life_and_Loves_of_a_She-Devil> 
didn’t so much “change” my life as present itself to me as a sort of manifesto 
for living. Its protagonist, the devilish Ruth Pratchett, has had more impact 
on my adult adventures than my own mother. She taught me that the best – the 
only – way to exact revenge on a cruel and unjust world is to become rich, 
powerful and beautiful. In any order you like – for to become one provides the 
necessary tools to become the others.

It is simply written. Weldon doesn’t faff about trying to draw attention to 
the writing process, and it’s not the sort of book you need a dictionary to get 
through. The poetry lies in its clarity, wit and ruthless pragmatism. She 
describes the world as it is, not as we would like it to be. Everyone has a 
weakness. Everyone has a price. Everyone can be seduced. Husbands are for 
borrowing and babies are for sale. Though her humour feels light, Weldon never 
shies away from the darker side of humanity.

Ruth is a large, ugly woman despised by her husband, who felt pressurised into 
marrying her to please his parents. The idea that anyone would marry due to 
social pressure feels weird and anachronistic in 2014, but when She-Devil was 
published in 1983, I suppose there must have been a good deal more of those 
sort of marriages. Ruth has cumbersome hands, a wart and a clumsy disposition; 
she has awkward children who don’t respect her, and animals that eat butter and 
vomit over her carpets. The neighbours pity her, but not enough to welcome her 
into their social circle. When Ruth’s husband begins an affair with Mary 
Fisher, writer of romantic novels and owner both of great legs and a decidedly 
phallic lighthouse, Ruth snaps. In spectacular fashion. She runs upstairs a 
weeping wife; she descends a she-devil.

What did I know about life as a frustrated suburban housewife when I first 
picked up my mother’s copy, around the age of 13? I didn’t realise it at the 
time, but I was opening a magic book full of dark tricks that time has taught 
me really do work. Ruth Pratchett is Machiavelli and Madonna rolled into one; 
she’sBecky Sharp <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Becky_Sharp_(character)>, but 
sharper; she is every scheming, practical, bitter woman. And I fell instantly 
in thrall to her.

In retrospect, it’s not hard to see why the novel’s themes of control, 
autonomy and transformation appealed to me. I was on the verge of an unwanted 
puberty. I wasn’t able to understand or articulate it back then, but deep down 
I’d been hoping I would blossom into a woman. Biology had other plans. I never 
thought it would be possible for me to transcend my lot in life – my penis – 
and become the person I felt I was supposed to be. When I read the book I just 
knew I loved Ruth Pratchett; over a decade later, I realise I loved the 
possibility for radical transformation she represented.

At 13, I was old enough to have an inkling of what the rest of my life might 
hold in store, and young enough to be impressed by even the most obvious of 
observations on how the world works. I was hungry to know about power, the 
better to dismantle it all and bend reality to meet my needs. Ruth showed me 
how. By draining her heart of love and letting the vibrant energy of hate flow 
through her veins, she gets what she wants. Her decision to redefine the world 
on her own terms and refusal to be defined by others electrified me. There is 
nothing Ruth can’t do. When her property looks likely to fall into the sea, she 
has the beach restructured and the cliffs made stable because, as she points 
out: “Nature gets away with far too much.”

She taught me I could have anything, if I wanted it enough and was smart 
enough to go after it. No one had told me that before. Ruth burns her house, 
discards her children and leaves the pets to fend for themselves. Not the 
hamster, though. He’s chewed one too many pairs of socks, and she lets him 
burn. She’s never cruel for the sake of it, but if you have it coming, you’d 
better watch out.

Ruth taught me that what is good is not always what is kind, and what is kind 
is not always what is good. The people she manipulates along her journey are 
all richer for having had her in their lives. Aside from her various 
pseudonyms, Ruth never lies – not about the important stuff. The law can be 
broken and documents forged, but she always has some insight about where others 
are going wrong. The world is full of stupid people but she doesn’t waste time 
arguing with them. She’s far too concerned with getting what she wants. It 
seems like a message to the women of the era.

Weldon occupies a strange place in the literary hierarchy, not quite feminist 
enough to be considered a darling of the movement but not quite frothy enough 
to be dismissed as “chick lit”. I don’t see how anyone, though, could sit with 
this book and not be seduced by its humour. She’s written great novels before, 
and since – boring ones, too – but none I’ve enjoyed as much as this. It’s a 
shame that the TV and film adaptations fell so wide of the mark. Neither 
captures the book’s brilliance. Even Meryl Streep as Mary Fisher can’t save the 
day.

Where I come from, no one told us we could become anything when we grew up. 
The best you could hope for was a decent rave, or a job in a pub, or saving up 
enough money to buy your council house. I had no idea that it was possible to 
transcend the limits of the everyday life I so despised. I doubtFay Weldon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fayweldon> wrote her novel with people like 
me in mind. But that’s the thing with books, isn’t it? They mean so many 
different things to so many different people. Weldon knew what she was doing 
when she created Ruth Pratchett, but I wonder how many other she-devils she has 
unwittingly brought into being. We all love a good anti-hero, but an 
anti-heroine is even better because, if we’re really honest, there’s a 
she-devil inside all of us.
 