
Ferrari are to make a determined bid to sign Adrian Newey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey>, Formula One's greatest 
designer who has inspired championship-winning cars at Williams, McLaren and 
Red Bull.

The Scuderia, the biggest and richest team in F1, see Newey as the man to 
guide them out of their malaise – they have not won a race since the Spanish 
Grand Prix a year ago and are third in the constructors' championship, already 
131 points behind Mercedes.

"Ferrari badly want Adrian Newey. I don't know whether they have talked to him 
yet, but if not, they will," a source closeto the Italian team said.

Ferrari's pursuit of Newey predates the emergence of Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> in 2010 when that team won the 
first of their four straight double championships. Now the Italian team are 
more desperate than ever. Their re-signing of Kimi Raikkonen has not been a 
success – he languishes in 11th place in the drivers' championship – and the 
love affair with the double title-winner Fernando Alonso has cooled on both 
sides in the past year.

But, essentially, the car is the problem. The complex changes for 2014 handed 
a massive advantage to the works teams but while Mercedes have dominated, 
winning all five races and also finishing second in four of them,Ferrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> have struggled, and in Sunday's 
Spanish Grand Prix they were more than a second per lap slower than Lewis 
Hamilton and Nico Rosberg.

The Red Bull car is generally accepted to be the best designed on the grid but 
their Renault engine has not been able to compete with Mercedes.

"There's always rumours, isn't there?" said Christian Horner, the Red Bull 
team principal, regarding speculation surrounding Newey. "It's the silly 
season. We're all under contract, so at some point I've got to think about the 
future, but my focus at the moment is trying to get back on top of those silver 
cars.

"It is an annual thing that there is speculation about Adrian's future but he 
has made his feelings clear to me about the team. He has paternal feelings 
towards the team and he is much more involved than he has been, and he enjoys 
the environment he works in.

"You can understand why Ferrari would be looking. Adrian has always enjoyed a 
challenge."

Newey, who earns an estimated £10m a year with the Milton Keynes team, is 
already rich and his head is unlikely to be turned by the wealth on offer at 
Maranello. Also, he hates politics. He walked away from McLaren because of the 
interference there and Ferrari are worse, by far the most political team in the 
paddock. Newey is known to enjoy life at Red Bull, who give him the freedom to 
do what he wants.

Two years ago he said: "Ferrari are a great team. Many drivers end up 
succumbing to Ferrari's romance and engineers aren't completely callous, but I 
won't be going to Ferrari.

"One reason is that my family is in England and being involved with Red Bull 
from the start has been hugely rewarding. I have no desire to work for anyone 
else in F1."

The former McLaren driver Martin Brundle said: "If I was at Ferrari, I'd be 
trying to sign Adrian Newey. The worst that can happen is that it destabilises 
Red Bull, or they might get hold of him. The story is building a head of steam 
in the Italian media."

If Newey does go to Ferrari it would be a blow for James Allison, who made the 
same move from Lotus in September. The current Ferrari was designed, mostly, 
before he arrived.
 