Thrill rating 5/10 
Danger rating 1/10

Fitness rating 4/10

In a nutshell ...

With archery set to take over the hallowed turf of Lord's cricket ground at 
the London 2012 Olympics, and more and more schools putting the sport on the 
timetable, this is a sport on the up. But the traditional version (shooting a 
still target from a fixed position) isn't the only option. If creeping around 
in the bushes like one of Robin Hood's Merry Men, wielding a huge bow and 
aiming at foam deers and giant teddy bears (there's no telling what you might 
find in the woods these days) sounds right up your adventuring alley, then give 
field archery a try.

What's the buzz?

Down the years, the age-old skill of archery has been well employed by Brits 
seeking to defend themselves against attack and pillage (although King Harold, 
of course, didn't do quite so well out of it at the Battle of Hastings). But, 
even if you don't have to see off rampaging hordes, shooting arrows a really 
long way will still put a smile on your face - especially if you are using a 
mighty and historic longbow. With plenty of practice, competition standard can 
be reached very quickly. While having big biceps won't help you, perseverance 
and a good aim will.

Thrill a minute?

It might not always be fast-paced and adrenaline-fuelled, but in competitions 
where speed is of the essence, the blood really starts pumping as archers load 
and shoot arrow after arrow. Field archery allows a greater sense of freedom 
and adventure, as archers find themselves peering around trees, standing on 
obstacles and squatting in odd positions to hit that "kill zone".

Adrenaline peak

Always assuming you can cope with killing (a fake) Bambi, landing a kill shot 
right on the deer's flank is a primordially satisfying feat. And honestly, no 
animals are even remotely hurt in the process.

Where to do it

London Archers has a site in Kensington Palace Gardens - a noble backdrop 
which is hard to beat. Visit the National Field Archery Society website for 
information on clubs across the country, as well as forthcoming shoots and 
events.

Who can do it

Physical strength is not important: anyone can shoot a bow and arrow. Bows 
come in different poundages (the amount of weight you pull back to fire the 
arrow) so all ages and strengths can have a go. Women are especially good at 
archery (of course) and frequently beat men at competition level.

What to take

Archers should wear close-fitting clothes, although green tights have not been 
proven to affect performance. Remove chunky jewellery and tie long hair back. 
Sturdy shoes are also a must as you'll be racing around the woods.

Typical prices

Membership is typically around £70 a year and includes insurance. Most clubs 
will have equipment which you can use to get started. Beginners' lessons start 
at around £60 for a six-week course.

Impress your pals

In the 15th century, King Edward IV had to ensure all men were able to defend 
their country, so he passed a law stating that every Englishman from 16 to 60 
had to own a longbow. Not only that, they had to be seen to practise their aim 
every Sunday after church. Women, presumably, didn't need the practice ...

YouTube searchwords 'field archery compilation'

Good links

londonarchers.co.uk <http://www.londonarchers.co.uk>

nfas.net <http://www.nfas.net>

efaafieldarcher.com <http://www.efaafieldarcher.com>

archeryevents.co.uk/fieldarchery/ 
<http://www.archeryevents.co.uk/fieldarchery/>
 