
The current financial crisis gripping the world will not be the last, former 
US Federal Reserve chairmanAlan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> has warned, despite 
describing it as a "once in a century type of event".

He also predicted that Britain would be harder hit than the US by the collapse 
in world trade.

He told BBC Two's The Love of Money series <>: "Obviously we've both suffered 
very considerably but ... Britain is more globally orientated as an economy and 
the dramatic decline in exports globally and trade generally following the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers had dramatic effects in the financial system of 
Britain."

"It's going to take a long while for you [Britain] to work your way through 
this."

Speaking a year after the spectacular failure of US investment bank Lehman 
Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers>, which plunged 
the world into financial and economic chaos, the former Fed chief said: "The 
crisis will happen again but it will be different."

Financial crises "are all different, but they have one fundamental source," he 
explained. "That is the unquenchable capability of human beings when confronted 
with long periods of prosperity to presume that it will continue."

Blamed by some for not doing more to stave off the current downturn, Greenspan 
denied any responsibility.

"It's human nature, unless somebody can find a way to change human nature, we 
will have more crises and none of them will look like this because no two 
crises have anything in common, except human nature."

Howard Wheeldon, senior strategist at BGC Partners, strongly criticised 
Greenspan's latest comments.

"It contains absolutely no humility or even the remotest hint of 
responsibility that he himself might have ensured the situation we have just 
gone through could have been avoided. The word 'sub-prime' does not get 
mentioned at all as far as I can see – neither do the words I am sorry!"

"Apparently Mr Greenspan believes the problems that we have suffered can just 
be put down to 'human nature'. By that he could be suggesting that whatever 
regulations that might have been put in to stop the 2008 rot, they would have 
been unstoppable. Maybe so, but I prefer to believe that if suitable laws and 
rules are in place then human kind and particularly those that work in 
financial markets will, and generally always do, observe the rules. Sure there 
is always the odd rogue like Madoff but at some point they are always found 
out," Wheeldon said.

The credit crunch was triggered by the US sub-prime mortgage slump, but 
Greenspan said any factor could have acted as a catalyst. "Something sooner or 
later would have emerged," he said.

Greenspan also said that the world's financial institutions should have seen 
the crisis coming.

"The bankers knew that they were involved in an under-pricing of risk and that 
at some point a correction would be made," he said.

"I fear too many of them thought they would be able to spot the actual trigger 
point of the crisis in time to get out."

To prevent future crises, he called on financiers and governments to clamp 
down on fraud and increase capital requirements for banks.

Greenspan also warned governments against resorting to protectionism. "The 
most recent endeavour to re-regulate is a reaction to the crisis. The 
extraordinary impact of these global markets is making a lot of financial 
people feeling they have lost control.

"The problem is you cannot have free global trade with highly restrictive, 
regulated domestic markets."
 