
I received a parking charge from Parking Eye for a visit to an Aldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> store in Oldbury (near Birmingham), 
claiming I was there for 16 hours, which I can prove is incorrect. I’d gone to 
the store on 7 January to buy a fryer on offer. As there were none in stock, I 
left and was only in the car park a few minutes.

I went back the following evening (8 January) but, again, they were sold out. 
After leaving Oldbury I visited two Aldi stores in Netherton, finally getting 
the fryer from the store at Pear Tree Lane and (according to my receipt) paying 
at 20:13, so would have left that car park around 20:15.

However, the parking charge records say I was still at the Oldbury site and 
fails to pick me up leaving the store. I have appealed and am disgusted that 
this is how Aldi treats loyal customers. I also received the letter after the 
early payment date had passed. My receipt proves my vehicle was elsewhere. What 
do I do if they reject my appeal?PR, Rowley Regis, West Midlands

Aldi has confirmed the charge was incorrectly issued and has been cancelled, 
so there’s no need for an appeal. A spokesman said: “Our parking management 
provider has confirmed that the charge was incorrectly issued due to a 
technical error. We apologise for any inconvenience this may have caused PR.”

That said, we have seen many examples of supermarket visitors wrongly being 
caught out when making double visits, identified and explained by the Parking 
Prankster <http://parking-prankster.blogspot.co.uk/2014_02_01_archive.html> 
blogger and website.

This is down to automatic numberplate recognition technology, which records 
multiple short visits being shown as one long visit, typically leading, as in 
your case, to a parking charge notice being issued when it should not have been.

Parking Prankster explains: “ANPR technology is not the same as CCTV; it does 
not record a continuous stream of images. A photograph is only taken and 
recorded when a numberplate is detected.” Many operators, it adds, pretend the 
“double visit” problem does not occur.

But it seems to happen with such regularity it’s time major parking operators, 
linked up with supermarkets, take the necessary measures to ensure regular 
shoppers are not so unfairly penalised.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <http://consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 