
When Andrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> reached 
the 90s at the Melbourne Cricket Ground yesterday he had in mind a Plan A to 
stalk his maiden Test hundred stealthily with singles. On the other hand it 
might be wise to have a Plan B, which came out as: "If he [bowler Paul 
Collingwood] slips it up, then I'll give it some Larry Dooley."

Dooley, an Aussie boxer, was renowned for his flailing style; the same has 
applied to Symonds in his time and it was fitting he should cleave to Plan B, 
with a flex of his wrists and a flat six over mid-on. Not that he saw the ball 
land in the crowd, being in the air himself.

Centuries have been celebrated in this Ashes series with uncommon abandon, 
like a form of collective therapy. But the hug into which Symonds leapt with 
his fellow Queenslander Matthew Hayden was of the kind usually accompanied by a 
primal scream.

Symonds was lucky in finding in Hayden probably the only team-mate who could 
have caught him. Hayden was the ideal partner in a host of different ways. He 
was a solemn 52 and Symonds a skittish four at lunch when Channel 9 fished from 
its files "Roy's Classic Catches" - a wholesome lifestyle feature from the 
Packer ministry of truth devoted to Symonds' angling exploits.

It had a certain validity, nonetheless. Fishing is not only an enthusiasm he 
shares with Hayden but the source of an unusual bonding experience seven years 
ago when Hayden's boat was overturned by a wave off Stradbroke Island, pitching 
both into the water.

This was a genuine challenge rather than something dreamed up at John 
Buchanan's boot camp and they spent some hours in Moreton Bay before being 
rescued. The rescue of an Australian innings would not have seemed facile by 
comparison but it would have felt feasible. To be fair, too, Symonds' hundred 
was a landmark looming larger than most. Were Australian cricket a school, he 
would be the class trier: the boy who, asked to spell a word, would throw in a 
few extra letters just to be on the safe side.

"Give me a simple, clearly defined task and let me get the job done," he 
thought aloud when asked about his career when recalled to the Test team in 
Perth. But Test cricket is tricky, full of traps and snares, exceptions and 
ambiguities, and he has struggled just as much as a Test average of 18 before 
yesterday implies.

In this innings Symonds finally showed the patience to allow for them, waiting 
21 balls to get off the mark, and the nerve to assert himself when it mattered, 
celebrating his landmark with a third fifty in 54 balls.

To their partnership of 279, meanwhile, Hayden provided the centre of gravity, 
with seven hours of methodical application. He is a figure of disproportions, 
his chest and torso improbably large, his bat disarmingly dainty, as though it 
is a favourite he has outgrown but cannot replace. His dimensions can make him 
look ungainly. To the straight ball he lurches forward like Frankenstein's 
monster. But he casts a long, broad shadow, hiding the stumps from view with 
his huge physique, eating up distance with his big front-foot stride, 
especially when he bats out of his crease to flush out half-volleys.

He also has experience, not simply of Tests but of Tests missed, from lack of 
form, lack of opportunity, doubt of technique, doubt of temperament. Ten years 
ago on this ground he was bowled first ball by Curtly Ambrose playing no shot 
and trailed off to the sound of his own feet. Now only Don Bradman, Steve Waugh 
and his captain, Ricky Ponting, have more Test hundreds, and nobody in this 
team has more first-class hundreds.

England began the day with the objective of early wickets and nearly outdid 
themselves. Ponting fell in a good spell from Andrew Flintoff, in which he was 
never allowed to take liberties. He was looking to assert himself when he tried 
to lasso a short ball from wide of off-stump but could not ride its bounce.

Michael Hussey's average then took a trim from 86 to 82 when he was bowled for 
the third time in the series, overbalancing as he transferred his weight 
forward without his front foot budging - not the hint of a weakness so much as 
of a non-strength. With the fall of Michael Clarke to perhaps Steve Harmison's 
best ball of the tour, Australia trailed by 75 runs with five wickets in 
reserve and their order upset by the abortive use of the nightwatchman, Brett 
Lee.

Flintoff, however, let the pressure slip. When Monty Panesar was introduced at 
117 for five, it was to a thankless field, mid-off and mid-on on the fence 
conceding the single. Symonds took to Matthew Hoggard, driving him along the 
ground and in the air to the cover fence and following with a pump-action pull 
over mid-wicket off the front foot.

The fourth fifty of the innings took a run a ball and the game bolted out of 
sight. It was still racing away at stumps, with Symonds still in place, still 
in form and having brought Larry Dooley back into the era of the corridor, the 
right areas and coming to the party with one's hand up.
 