
The art deco cinemas of the 1920s and 30s are some of the most optimistic 
statements ever made in stone. Which is why their ruin is one of architecture's 
saddest stories.

They were built at a time of hope, following the horrors of the first world 
war. After decades as a technical novelty, film had just matured into mass 
entertainment. New auditoriums were needed to meet demand; the ambitious, 
intoxicatingly modern deco style was at its height; money was available …

And the era's architects did not disappoint. Unencumbered by the irritant of 
windows, they were able to create majestic viewing halls in virtually any shape 
that could be imagined and engineered. Glamour, spectacle, scale, exoticism: 
these things were not just permitted, they were fervently desired. And the 
captivated public turned up in their millions.

Yet, like the prosperity and peace of the period itself, the cinemas' heyday 
was shortlived. Though they survived the second world war, they could not 
combat television. Some awkwardly installed more screens; some reverted to 
ancestral type by becoming theatres; some, in their later years, lured back 
many of their earliest customers with bingo; and others, yes, have struggled 
on. But many more have simply been demolished to make way for drab 
alternatives. A tragedy, as one often realises in the final reel, that was 
destined from the start.

1. Mecca Kingstanding, Birmingham

As large and glorious a deco cinema as you will ever see – though it's now a 
bingo hall. Its magnificent three fins and sweeping lines retain their allure.

2. Odeon Leicester Square, London

The jewel of cinema magnate Oscar Deutsch's Odeon empire, and still the 
largest single-screen cinema in Britain. But as you admire its black granite 
facade and doomy tower, consider that it replaced the Alhambra, a music hall of 
once far greater splendour.

3. The Abbey, Wavertree, Liverpool

A truly awe-inspiring local cinema, with strip-lit frontage and curved brick 
battlements. Today it has kept its glorious shape, but little of its dignity, 
by being repurposed as a supermarket.

4. Odeon Bury, Greater Manchester

In 1936 this was a white-tiled vision from an Odeon chain at the very peak of 
glamour. Today it has become a nightclub.

5. Ascot Cinema, Glasgow

Opened late, in 1939, this is a magnificent example of both a large art deco 
cinema, and how to convert one into something useful: in this case, a block of 
flats. The curved towers and vertical red stripes always remind its residents 
where they are.
 