
For Christians in the middle ages, God was more a ruler than a friend. Even 
now it is a sense of fear and wonder that one finds inside the great churches 
of the period, and definitely not a shoulder to cry on. So perhaps it is no 
surprise that medieval worshippers preferred to focus their feelings towards 
something a little softer in the shape of a rebranded Virgin Mary.

Throughout Christianity's first millennium, Mary had generally been depicted 
as a kind of minor royal in the holy story. During the 13th and 14th centuries, 
however, her human side – as a virgin and a mother – began to be more 
emphasised, and it made her hugely popular.

To many Christians, therefore, the lady chapel was the most important place in 
any church.

In gothic churches, the lady chapel is usually the largest and most 
prominently positioned, and it is often the place where one finds the best 
decorations, including statues, roof bosses and stained-glass windows. 
Sadly, this also made lady chapels very popular things to smash up during the 
Reformation, which means that there are few remaining.

1. Henry VII chapel

Attached to the eastern end of Westminster Abbey, this is certainly the most 
famous lady chapel in Britain, and perhaps the most spectacular. Many kings and 
queens (and Sir Isaac Newton) are buried beneath its floor.

2. York Minster

Completed in 1373, the chapel is dominated by the extraordinary Great East 
Window (left), which is the largest medieval stained-glass window in England, 
and some would say the world.

3. Ely Cathedral

The largest lady chapel in any British cathedral, it was completed at the 
height of the Black Death in 1349. Much of its original multi-coloured glory 
was destroyed during the Reformation, though some fragments still remain.

4. St Albans Cathedral

A perfect demonstration of the early 14th-century decorated gothic style, with 
a large and intricate window depicting the martyrdom of St Alban.

5. Ottery St Mary

A splendid chapel in a very grand Devon parish church (below), containing many 
original features such as a carved eagle lectern and the original canon's 
stalls and misericords (choir stall carvings).
 