
José Mourinho is a trophy hogger

José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> hasn't lost 
a home match in eight years. This is an amazing record. As is the fact that if 
Inter go on to wrap up a fifth straightScudetto – which looks likely after the 
weekend's derby victory – Mourinho will have won league titles in six of his 
last seven seasons as a manager, a Paisley-esque feat of cold-eyed 
trophy-hogging. The home record really stands out. How has he managed it? 
Perhaps through a reluctance to "rotate" his squad and take a gamble with a 
weakened team. Also, though, a certain level of tactical caution: in his final 
year at Chelsea Mourinho's team were unbeaten at home but still dropped 14 
points through draws.

No one really knows why teams tend to win more at home. Sven-Goran Eriksson 
mused on this in his pseudo-psychological tract On Football and couldn't come 
up with anything better than "players feel more at home in familiar 
surroundings". If home supremacy is grounded in intangibles, like confidence 
and personality, Mourinho's record is testimony to his own formidable reserves 
of both these qualities; and the inspirational, fraternal bond with his 
disparate multimillionaire changing room, which is perhaps his one great 
innovation.

Robinho is coming home

Robinho leaving Manchester City is a good thing for all concerned, but it is 
still a shame that a uniquely gifted player never settled and that his career 
seems to have become fuddled with preciousness and avarice after a solid couple 
of sea sons at Real Madrid. It is still fitting he should sign off with a goal 
at Scunthorpe: in a season and a bit in England this was the furthest from 
Manchester thatRobinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/robinho> ever 
scored a goal for City (Wolverhampton was his previous best). It was also only 
the second away win against an English team he played any part in. And yet at 
times he looked thrillingly potent and also sui generis in his elastic-limbed 
attacking style. A good thing he's going: but also a disappointment, and the 
Premier League is poorer for Robinho's weakness.

Arsenal got what they deserved

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> haven't won a trophy 
for four seasons, and yet Arsène Wenger felt it was appropriate to gamble in 
the FA Cup with an under-strength team against a mid-table Premier League 
opponent. It is to English football's credit that he didn't succeed. Stoke are 
a highly efficient team and taking them lightly was a mistake rightly punished. 
English football also showed its enduring hard edge in a difficult return debut 
for Sol Campbell, out-muscled or out-jumped by Ricardo Fuller at vital moments. 
Premier League teams will continue to make mincemeat of the physically 
underprepared or the callow and undercooked. This is their great strength and 
we should all be proud of Stoke.

Managers should watch their players' wages

In the ongoing brouhaha at Portsmouth much has been made of John Utaka earning 
£80,000 a week. Utaka has not been a success at Fratton Park (two and a half 
years have brought six league goals) and would surely have moved on but for the 
vast pay cut this would involve. This week at a press conference Harry 
Redknapp, who signed Utaka for Portsmouth, claimed he never got involved in 
players' wages and couldn't even tell you what his Spurs players were earning. 
There are no doubt plenty of self-motivated club owners around. But when will a 
manager – even a popular manager with plenty of friends in the media – be 
called to account? Redknapp has managed West Ham, Southampton and Portsmouth in 
the last seven years: all three have suffered some form of financial meltdown 
since. He says he has no interest in what players are earning. Maybe he should.

Africa deserves a better tournament

Why isn't the standard of football higher at the Africa Cup of Nations? The 
lingering impression is of a lack of depth beyond a sprinkling of 
underperforming stars.The goalkeeping has been occasionally laughable 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/jan/24/goalkeepers-africa-cup-of-nations>
. Algeria, who scored once in the group stage, are in the semis. The lack of a 
real powerhouse team is all too obvious. And from here on in you sense the 
endless penalty shoot-outs stacking up. Everybody wanted this to be a 
first-rate tournament ahead of the World Cup and a signal that Africa's major 
nations are ready to push on. It hasn't been. They aren't. Instead we have a 
tournament with its flair-inhibitor firmly strapped into place, and one that 
needs a big finale. Mainly, though, the Cup of Nations needs to stop taking 
place in February, right in the middle of the European season. It isn't working 
and Africa deserves better.
 