
Reckon those extra revision sessions paid off? If you think your grades will 
turn out better than predicted, you should consider trading up to a better 
course or university throughAdjustment 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/results/adjustment-%E2%80%93-if-you%E2%80%99ve-done-better-expected>
.

It’s not the most popular route to university: just 1,160 people accepted a 
place through Adjustment last year, according to Ucas figures. That could be 
down to lack of awareness, though Ucas professional development executive Alan 
Jones says he doesn’t envision a surge in interest in coming years.

Nevertheless, it’s a useful tool if it’s right for you – here’s how to do it.

Before A-level results day on 13 August 2015

1. Make a list of potential courses and universities

If you’re reconsidering your firm offer, start thinking about what you might 
like to do instead as early as possible – there’s just a five-day window for 
Adjustment. You’ll have to do the preparation yourself, which may be time 
consuming, but you can ask a careers adviser for advice.

“It’s good for students to be thinking about both Adjustment and Clearing at 
the same time,” says Hannah Moir, lecturer in exercise and prescription, and 
assistant admissions tutor for the subject at Kingston University. She says all 
kinds of courses take students through adjustment, even those as prestigious as 
law – and that students shouldn’t be deterred from applying to a university 
that previously rejected them. You’re not limited to courses or institutions 
you’ve already applied to.

The crucial advice from Michael Sanders, director for admissions and 
recruitment at the University of Manchester, is to be confident about both the 
course and the place of study. “Get either of those things wrong and it could 
be difficult,” he says. “If you’re happy you don’t even have to think about 
adjustment.”

Between A-level results day and the Adjustment deadline

2. Check you’re eligible for Adjustment and register with Ucas

If you have met every condition of your offer and exceeded at least one of 
them, you can register – there’ll be a button on your Ucas track page. You have 
five days to use adjustment from results day or from when your firm offer is 
confirmed, whichever is later; there’ll be a countdown clock in track.

Your firm choice is safe unless you agree to take up a place elsewhere.

3. Phone the universities you’re interested in

Unfortunately, there’s no central place listing Adjustment vacancies, but a 
good place to start is theUcas clearing search tool <http://search.ucas.com/>: 
universities that crop up in clearing have spaces to fill.

You can also call universities on spec – and as many as you like – but you’ll 
need to be realistic. “It’s important to recognise that some of the incredibly 
popular courses are massively oversubscribed and are very much less likely to 
have vacancies,” says Jones.

Have your Ucas ID number ready and tell the admissions tutor you want to apply 
through Adjustment – it’s a slightly different process to clearing. You may be 
asked to send confirmation of your results. Be prepared to answer questions on 
why you want to switch course or university. “What questions you will be asked 
really depends on whether the admissions tutor can understand the logic of your 
application,” says Sanders. Trying to switch from engineering to history may 
elicit more queries than swapping to civil from mechanical engineering, for 
example.

4. Confirm a new place – but only if you’re sure

Don’t rush into anything – remember, you’ll have some questions for admissions 
tutors too. “The three days around A-level results day are 72 hours of madness 
where everybody is stressed. Stress can make you stupid,” says Sanders

It’s vital to look at the small print, he says. What are the compulsory 
components of the course? Will you enjoy them? Is there still student 
accommodation available? Will you lose any scholarships or bursaries you’ve 
applied for? Have a list of questions at the ready when you phone universities.

“Don’t verbally agree to a position unless you’re sure,” says Moir. “As soon 
as you say it over the phone that gets processed straight away and your 
original firm offer is lost.”

Your new university will notify Ucas, which will make the changes in track. It 
can take a little while for information to be updated, so don’t panic if your 
new course doesn’t show up for a few hours.

Before university begins


5. Get on top of accommodation and finance

Once you’ve switched course, Ucas will send you a letter and many universities 
will also send out a welcome pack. Take this time to organise accommodation, 
apply for bursaries, start on the reading list, and so on. Make theStudent 
Loans Company <http://www.slc.co.uk/> aware of the change to avoid delays in 
payments.

Sanders also recommends contacting the university of your firm offer, as a 
courtesy, to let them know you won’t be attending. There’s no need to be 
anxious – they won’t grill you on your decision.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 