
When Portuguese explorers first arrived on the east African coast at the turn 
of the 16th century, an anonymous recorder on the voyage ofPedro Alvares Cabral 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Pedro-Alvares-Cabral> noted of Kilwa 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/144> (off the coast of present-day Tanzania): 
“This island is small, near the mainland, and is a beautiful country. The 
houses are high like those of Spain. In this land there are rich merchants, and 
there is much gold and silver and amber and musks and pearls. Those of the land 
wear clothes of fine cotton and of silk and many fine things and they are black 
men.”

The “Africa rising” story of booming economies and growing middle classes is 
important in correcting the global perception of Africa, for Africa has not 
always been in decline. The 500 years after the European arrival in Africa saw 
an increasing integration of Africa into the global economy, but often on terms 
which worked against Africa’s interests: the slave trade through the end of the 
19th century, then European colonial rule to the 1960s. The challenge of 
development has been the story since, asAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> struggled with the legacies of 
colonial rule, its marginal share of global trade, and corrupt and dictatorial 
leadership.

In the first decade of the 21st century, the tide seemed to have turned: six 
of the 10 fastest growing economies in the world were in sub-Saharan Africa: 
Mozambique, Rwanda, Angola, Nigeria, Chad and Ethiopia. While some benefitted 
from the rising oil price, Mozambique’s oil production was yet to come on line, 
and Rwanda and Ethiopia are not oil producers. As a region, sub-Saharan Africa 
grew at an average of 5% during the first 15 years of the new millennium, a 
sharp departure from the 1980s, which went down in history as Africa’s lost 
decade. The Economist once called Africa the “hopeless continent 
<http://www.economist.com/node/333429>”. In its “Africa Rising 
<http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21572377-african-lives-have-already-greatly-improved-over-past-decade-says-oliver-august>
” cover story in March 2013, the same magazine predicted that the average 
African economy will outpace its Asian counterpart.

This pendulum swing has been as refreshing as it has been uplifting for a 
continent that had misery and destitution as its key tropes. However, it is 
also true that poverty has remained widespread. Between 1990 and 2010 the 
number of people in poverty increased from 289 million to more than 413 
million, compromising the prospects of meeting the first millennium development 
goal, of eradicating extreme poverty.

And the sharp decline in global prices for commodities such as oil and copper 
since last year have raised major challenges, especially in major oil-exporting 
countries such Angola and Nigeria where oil accounts for more than 90% of 
export earnings. Today Africa’s share of global trade remains less than 3%.

The revolution in the worldwide web, social media, and the proliferation of 
mobile phones are accelerating the pace of Africa’s economic development. 
Mobile telephony has already unleashed innovation in banking across the 
continent. Still, the Africa rising narrative is complex, as it extends beyond 
economics. The 1980s and 1990s saw a brain drain from Africa, as academics and 
professionals relocated to the west. The focus has now shifted to brain 
circulation, with the rise of African trans-nationals and schemes that allow 
Africans living outside the continent to contribute to its development. . The 
strengthening of institutions that produce knowledge is central to Africa’s 
future.

The internet, social media and the proliferation of mobile phones are 
accelerating Africa’s economic development

We see glimpses of a confident Africa in how young people engage with western 
and diasporic influences. Ghana’s hiplife music, for example, represents the 
indigenisation of American hip-hop. Youth activism continues to play a key role 
in the democratisation process that is sweeping through Africa. Their embrace 
of social media signals a new energy that is finding expression in the creative 
arts and popular culture. But the frustration of social aspirations is also 
evident in the thousands of Africans who attempt the perilous Mediterranean 
journey to Europe, convinced that a brighter future lies beyond the continent.

The rise of a prosperous Africa will ultimately be based on the emergence of 
an assured African, confident in knowledge and identity, at home in Africa and 
the world at large. It was this spirit that surprised the Portuguese visitors 
to Kilwa in 1500.

Two centuries earlier, the Muslim king of Mali, Mansa Musa 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/world-history/meet-mansa-musa-i-of-mali--the-richest-human-being-in-all-history-8213453.html>
, made a pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324 with a stop in Cairo. The Arab historian 
Chihab al-Umari, who visited Cairo 12 years later, wrote that Mansa Musa “left 
no emir or holder of a royal office without a gift or load of gold, he and his 
company gave out so much gold that they depressed its value in Egypt and caused 
its price to fall”. This was at a time when two-thirds of the world’s supply of 
gold came from west Africa. Mansa Musa’s extravagance brought Mali to the 
attention of the world and Mali would appear on themap of the world drawn by 
Angelino Dulcert <http://www.sullacrestadellonda.it/cartografia/spagna1_en.htm> 
of Majorca in 1339 and on subsequent maps. There was a time when the economic 
actions of Africa’s rulers had worldwide consequences.

Africa is rich in natural resources. Africa’s knowledge base is expanding. 
Africa could still ultimately reclaim the position it occupied when the 
Portuguese explorers first arrived. But that story will be told not only in 
national income statistics. It is also a story of Africa’s cultural renaissance 
and the inevitable birth of a new African personality.
 