
Transfer speculation is predictably thin on the ground today, what with all 
eyes turned to the Nou Camp ahead of tonight's Champions League semi-final 
first leg between Barcelona and Chelsea. Well, all eyes except those in 
Newcastle, where the focus, obscured by fat fingers latticed across fearful 
eyes set in ashen faces, is on the fight to avoid the drop to Championship.

"Newcastle are heading for the Championship unless they can produce a miracle 
in their last four games," declares this morning's Daily Star, ladling on the 
hyperbole as five points from matches against Liverpool,Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough>, Fulham and Aston Villa 
would probably suffice. Besides, it's not as if life in the Championship is all
that bad. If it's the unspeakable hell-hole most Premier League sides make out, 
why do so many League One teams fight tooth and nail for the right to play in 
it?

So, rumours. Having been told that he must sell players before daily columns 
whose stock-in-trade is football transfer speculation with little basis in fact 
can start sidling up to strangers in pubs or at bus-stops and whisper "Gareth 
Barry toLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, it's 
definitely on this time" in their ears before disappearing in a puff of smoke, 
Rafael Benitez will round upRyan Babbel and Andrea Dossena and herd them out 
the exit door in a bid to top up the £20m war-chest he's been provided with for 
the summer. Whether the extra £15.73 his fire sale raises will help him lure 
any of his main targets –Valencia's David Silva and Portsmouth's Glen Johnson 
are the others – to Anfield remains to be seen.

Indeed, if today's Star is to be believed (and what newspaper boasting the 
headline "Chantelle: G-Force Will Make My Boobs Explode is not?)Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> have also been 
sniffing around Valencia, so much so that they've already agreed a £16m deal for
Wigan's Ecuadorian winger Antonio.

Meanwhile in the Championship, new Ipswich manager Roy Keane will bring his 
former lieutenantDean Whitehead to East Anglia during the summer should 
Sunderland fail to avoid the drop. Keane is a big fan of Whitehead's 
steely-jawed determination, apparently remaining blissfully unaware that the 
Sunderland skipper's jaw is naturally big and always looks like that, even in 
repose. Of course even if abjectSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> somehow contrive to stay up 
this season, Whitehead's chances of playing in the Premier League in 2010-11 
would probably be greatly enhanced by making the move this summer anyway.

Down the road on Teesside, Middlesbrough flop Afonso Alves will be kicked in 
the general direction of Benfica whether his side retain their Premier League 
status or not. A record £12m signing he may be, but his manager showed how much 
faith he has in the portly Brazilian striker by leaving him on the bench and 
sending on two midfielders when Boro were trailing against Arsenal on Sunday.

If you want to leave a comment below, please feel free. It can be a bit of 
transfer gossip you've heard, a nice poem, a thought for the day, or just a cry 
for help. All comments are welcome, as long as they don't breach ourcommunity 
standards and participation guidelines <https://www.theguardian.com/talkpolicy> 
(currently 1,587 words and counting, excluding FAQs).
 