
The Australian prime minister, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, has used a Magna 
Carta-themed lecture to say how hard it is to secure terrorism convictions in 
courts of law, and that the rising threat of foreign fighters “requires a 
modern form of banishment”.

In the speech dominated by observations about terrorism, the prime minister 
said the greatest freedom of all was to “live without fear and dread”. And he 
suggested Australians “could help to encourage the easy-going versions of Islam 
that the world so hopes for”.

Abbott made the remarks during a British high commission-organised event at 
the Great Hall at Parliament House in Canberra on Wednesday evening. He 
delivered the 2015Magna Carta <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/magna-carta> 
lecture, marking the 800th anniversary of the document that enshrined the 
principle that the king was not above the law.

The prime minister spent a large portion of the speech talking about 
terrorism, saying at least 120 Australians had joined groups fighting in Syria 
and Iraq.

He said the rule of law served just as much “to protect us from criminals as 
it does to protect us from tyrants”.

Australians, he said, should never abandon their freedoms in order to defend 
them, but added: “Arguably, the greatest freedom of all is the freedom to live 
without fear and dread; particularly the fear, and the morbid fascination with 
evil, that’s at the heart of this darkness.”

Abbott sought to justify proposed new laws to strip dual citizens of their 
Australian citizenship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/children-may-lose-australian-citizenship-under-proposed-legislation>
 if they are deemed to have gone overseas to fight for terrorist groups, even 
if they have not been convicted of an offence.

Putting Australian fighters in jail was, he argued, “easier said than done, 
despite new laws making it an offence merely to be present in designated 
terrorist-controlled areas”.

“We can’t readily put informers on the witness stand or always make available 
intelligence without risk to sources and it wouldn’t usually be possible, nor 
desirable, in such cases to bring witnesses from the Middle East to testify,” 
Abbott said.

“On the standard rules of evidence, without a confession, securing a 
conviction is hardly straightforward, let alone for crimes committed offshore 
in ungoverned space. Bringing foreign fighters back to face trial in Australia 
risks leaving them free on our streets rather than in our jails. That’s why the 
government has introduced legislation to strip citizenship from terrorists who 
are dual nationals.”

Magna Carta, which is often cited as an important document for the legal 
principles it contained, included the passage: “No free man shall be seized or 
imprisoned, or stripped of his rights or possessions, or outlawed or exiled, or 
deprived of his standing in any way, nor will we proceed with force against 
him, or send others to do so, except by the lawful judgment of his equals or by 
the law of the land.”

Abbott said fighting for a terrorist group at war with Australia was “the 
modern form of treason – and those who have left our country to fight against 
us may require a modern form of banishment”.


He pointed to Cicero’s comments from 1,200 years before Magna Carta arguing 
that “the safety of the people is the supreme law”.

“On the 800th anniversary of Magna Carta, we shouldn’t just celebrate the rule 
of law; we must defend it,” Abbott said.

“And this means ensuring that people trying to kill us, for who we are and for 
what we believe, should not be at liberty to do us harm. The Daesh death cult 
[a reference to Islamic State] has abundantly demonstrated that the first 
people it is coming for are the vast numbers of Muslims who don’t agree with 
it.”

Abbott said Australians had “become appalled at the very idea of killing in 
the name of God”.

“An Australian, for instance, could freely echo President [Abdel Fatah] 
al-Sisi of Egypt’s warning that Islam needs a religious revolution without fear 
of official persecution or need of police protection,” he said.

“In Australia and other western countries, along with every one else, Muslims 
are entirely free to proselytise for their beliefs. In parts of the Muslim 
world, however, the wrong proselytism is punishable by death.

“If Islam is to further develop an appreciation of pluralism, it may need 
Muslims protected by the rule of law and the other principles of liberal 
democracy that Magna Carta so potently represents. Australians could help to 
encourage the easy-going versions of Islam that the world so hopes for.”

Abbott’s observations follow his declaration to parliament in September 2014 
that Australians needed to accept a shift in “the delicate balance between 
freedom and security” in the interests of preventing terrorism.

Since that time, the government has made a series of changes to national 
security laws – generally with bipartisan support – boosting the powers of 
police and spy agencies and introducing new offences such as travelling to a 
declared no-go zone.

The laws ensure journalists, bloggers and whistleblowers face up to 10 years 
in jail for disclosing information about the Australian Security Intelligence 
Organisation’s “special intelligence operations”.

The Coalition and Labor also joined forces to pass mandatory data retention 
laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/26/mandatory-data-retention-becomes-law-as-coalition-and-labor-combine>
requiring internet service providers and telcos to store their customers’ 
metadata for up to two years, despite privacy concerns.

The latest citizenship laws – which will be debated after the winter 
parliamentary recess – target dual nationals who travel overseas to fight for 
terrorist groups.

But legal experts warned on Wednesday the bill was much broader and would 
allow citizenship to be stripped from dual nationals who had been convicted of 
offences that includeddamaging commonwealth property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/new-laws-dual-nationals-lose-citizenship-for-damaging-commonwealth-property>
.

Also on Wednesday, the Liberal party’s Victorian division attracted criticism 
for citing Abbott’s citizenship laws in an email to members seeking political 
donations“to support a SAFER Australia”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/liberal-party-email-invokes-terrorism-and-citizenship-laws-to-seek-donations>
 