
One of the bankers blamed for almost bankrupting Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has appeared in court to face 12 
new fraud charges.

Seán FitzPatrick, the former chairman of the now nationalised Anglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>, was accused in 
Dublin's district court on Friday of making false, misleading or deceptive 
statements relating to loans of almost €300m (£244m).

The court heard that FitzPatrick faces charges of making the statements to 
Anglo Irish's auditors, Ernst & Young, between 2002 and 2007 by under-declaring 
the loans to the value of €284.9m. It is alleged these loans were for 
FitzPatrick or those connected with him.

Dressed in a dark suit, blue shirt and red tie, the bank's former chairman 
took his place in the dock to face 12 charges relating to financial 
irregularities at the institution.

Detective Inspector Ray Kavanagh gave details of FitzPatrick's arrest by 
arrangement at the Bridewell police station at 9.04am. He said the 64-year-old 
made no reply after caution to the charges, which allege he made false or 
misleading statements to Anglo Irish Bank's auditors over five years.

It as the third time the high-profile banker has been arrested. He was 
previously charged with 16 counts related to the banks collapse, including 
providing unlawful financial assistance to 16 individuals to enable them to buy 
shares in Anglo Irish. FitzPatrick has been released on bail until 1 March. He 
was told there were no objections to bail provided certain conditions were met 
including that he continue to reside at his current address.

FitzPatrick and Anglo Irish's other directors have become hate figures in 
Ireland. During the republic's overheated property boom they were running a 
bank that became the major lender to speculators. So far the Irish taxpayer has 
paid more than €30bn to bail out the now nationalised bank, renamed the Irish
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Resolution Corporation.

FitzPatrick is the highest-profile banker to be charged in connection with 
Ireland's financial meltdown.
 