
Miriam O'Reilly, the former Countryfile presenter who won her age 
discrimination case against the BBC last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/11/countryfile-miriam-oreilly-tribunal>
, will tonight present an ITV investigation into whether television is ageist.

Featuring interviews with axed Strictly Come Dancing judge Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips> and newsreaders 
Michael Buerk and Angela Rippon, the programme also reveals the results of a 
poll that shows viewers want to see more older presenters on TV.

During the show, an edition of ITV1 current affairs programme Tonight, 
O'Reilly says she is still in discussions with the BBC about returning to work 
for the corporation.

She explains why she pursued her case against the BBC, saying: "My reaction 
was that I was sacked because of my age. My ability to do my job on Countryfile 
had never been questioned. I didn't think it was fair to lose it for something 
I had no control over – getting older. Deciding to take action though was the 
toughest decision I've ever had to make.

"The BBC has publicly and privately apologised to me for the way I was treated 
and we are discussing a possible return to work. I took this action because I 
want to continue my career as a journalist and presenter – I don't want to be 
defined as a 'poster girl' for discrimination."

In her first television interview about ageism since she was dropped by the 
BBC as a Strictly judge and replaced by Alesha Dixon, Phillips says she did not 
think it happened because of how old she was. When asked if she was a victim of 
ageism, Phillips responds: "No, not at all."

"She [Alesha] was a different person hired to give a different approach … I've 
never spoken about it other than to say, as I did, I was on a one-year contract 
and I had no entitlement to be brought back."

When asked what her reaction was to O'Reilly winning her case, Phillips said: 
"I was thrilled when I found out that you had won your case. I think it was a 
real victory … Whether we see more older people on screens or not, I actually 
believe it's part of a bigger picture.

"We are in an age that is in love with youth, so I think what we have to do is 
treasure our old in life, and the older generation, older population."

However, former BBC newsreader Buerk argues that changing trends, rather than 
ageism, are often to blame for a presenter moving on.

"If you've been hired because you are young and pretty, because you are 
mincingly camp, because you've ticked a particular ethnic box and then you are 
no longer young and pretty or the fashions have moved on and you suddenly don't 
have a job – get over it. It's show business," he says.

The BBC creative director, Alan Yentob, admits to Tonight that "in certain 
areas obviously men are better represented it seems than women".

"Are the over-50s sufficiently well represented on screen? I think it's still 
a work in progress, put it that way, but in certain areas obviously men are 
better represented it seems than women," Yentob adds. "We've found that out and 
it's something that is a matter of public debate at the moment, but we could do 
better is probably the answer to that."

In a poll, commissioned for Tonight, of viewers who were asked whether they 
wanted to see a greater number of older presenters on television than at 
present, 45% said yes, 28% said no.

And when asked whether the media is youth obsessed, 60% said yes, 27% said no.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 