


The founder and former chief executive of American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> Inc, Dov Charney, plans 
to file a lawsuit claiming $40m in damages for breaches of his employment 
contract, and more lawsuits are planned, his attorney said Friday.

The company’s shares were down 2.8% at 69 cents in late morning trading on 
Friday.

Charney was fired in December, six months after he was suspended for allegedly 
misusing company funds and for allowing the posting on the internet of nude 
photos of a former female employee who had accused him of sexual harassment.

Charney has denied the allegations.

“There will be other lawsuits we will be filing against the company, which 
they are aware of but have not revealed to the media,” attorney Keith Fink told 
Reuters in an email.

The claims for damages, first reported by Bloomberg, include almost $6m in 
severance, $1.3m in vacation-time pay and at least $10m for emotional distress.

Charney is also seeking 13m shares of the company, worth about $9.2m as of 
Thursday’s close. It was not immediately clear what makes up the balance of the 
damages being sought.

Fink said Charney was also likely to sue for defamation and breach of privacy 
related to his personal email and will seek a probe into the $10.4m of expenses 
American Apparel has said it incurred in investigating his alleged misconduct.

The lawsuit alleging defamation is “top priority” and might be filed as soon 
as next week, Fink said.

Fink alleges that the investigation was not independent, that he was denied 
access to documents, and that Charney was not questioned.

“These claims are baseless, and we are confident that Dov will lose on each 
and every one of these,” American Apparel spokeswoman Liz Cohen told Reuters in 
an email.

The US Securities and Exchange Commission has ordered an investigation into 
matters arising from the review by the board committee that formalized 
Charney’s firing, the company said on Wednesday.

American Apparel said it was not immediately clear whether the probe related 
to Charney’s conduct or to the board’s review.

Charney, 46, started American Apparel’s predecessors in 1989 and had run the 
company since 2007, when it went public.

American Apparel, which has not turned a profit since 2009, lost $28m in the 
fourth quarter.
 