
The former adviser on ministerial interests, Sir Philip Mawer, has said David 
Cameron should have asked him to investigate whether former defence secretary 
Liam Fox breached the ministerial code in his close relations withAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

Mawer told the public administration select committee: "I believe that the 
adviser ought to have been brought in and ought to been brought in pretty well 
from the outset. That is my view."

Mawer, who quit the post at the end of last year, said: "I was frustrated at 
the failure to call me in and I made clear to the Cabinet Office that the 
credibility of the role of the adviser had not been assisted. It was a missed 
opportunity and I regret it. I made my views very clear to the Cabinet Office 
and to the cabinet secretary."

He said he did not know why the then head of the civil service, Gus O'Donnell, 
and the prime minister had chosen not to refer the issue to him. He said he 
found it astonishing that the Ministry of Defence started investigating any 
breaches of the code by Fox.

Fox quit as defence secretary after being found guilty of multiple breaches of 
the ministerial code in his relations with Werritty.

Mawer said he would have liked to have shown he could undertake a "quick and 
dirty" investigation into the alleged breach.

He said ministers should be allowed to remain in office while an investigation 
is conducted, otherwise they would be at the mercy of the media.

The select committee is investigating the stewardship of the ministerial code. 
Lord O'Donnell has previously told the committee there was a need to 
investigate the Fox-Werritty claims quickly and it was his duty to investigate 
prima facie breach of the code.

The ministerial adviser, a post established by Gordon Brown to allow an 
independent figure to investigate breaches of the ministerial code by 
ministers, has to wait for a case to be referred to him by the prime minister 
before mounting an investigation.

Mawer investigated one minister, Shahid Malik, an inquiry that took four 
weeks. Mawer said he would have liked the opportunity to show he could produce 
a report quickly in the case of Fox.

He said O'Donnell's report on breaches of the code by Fox was so thorough that 
the prime minister felt it was not necessary to refer the issue to him.

Members of the committee claimed he had quit his post in anger at being 
bypassed by Cameron. Mawer denied this and rejected suggestions that Cameron's 
refusal to refer the Fox affair to him displayed a lack of personal confidence 
in him.

He said his former role provided protection for the prime minister, ministers 
and for the civil service. There was scope for revisiting the configuration of 
the role of advisers to ministers, especially the connection between his role 
and the role of the adviser on business appointments for former ministers, he 
said.

Mawer was succeeded by Sir Alex Allen, the former head of the intelligence 
committee. Allen said he was not aware if he was appointed after any open civil 
service competition, pointing out that the post was a personal appointment by 
the prime minister.
 