
Four young Egyptians have been remanded in custody, accused of making fun of 
the government in a satirical video posted on social networks, according to 
judicial sources.

The move is the latest in a crackdown on voices critical of the authorities in 
Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/egyptian-satirists-arrested-for-mocking-president>
.

Al-Jazeera accused of 'abandoning' journalist facing jail in Egypt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/05/mohamed-fawzy-al-jazeera-laid-off-egypt>
At the same time, a fifth member of the group known as Street Children 
arrested on Saturday was ordered released on bail.

Their latest production appears to have touched a nerve as police round up 
activists involvedin April protests against the president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/cairo-protests-egypt-red-sea-islands-saudi-arabia>
, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, for handing over two islands to Saudi Arabia.

Rights groups accuse Sisi of running an ultra-authoritarian and repressive 
regime since he deposed in 2013 his democratically elected Islamist predecessor 
Mohamed Morsi.

Mahmud Ottman, a lawyer for the four, said they were arrested late Monday 
while visiting a friend’s home in central Cairo.

On Tuesday, Mohammed Adel, Mohammed Gabr, Mohammed al-Dessouki and Mohammed 
Yehya were remanded in custody for 15 days, their lawyer and a judiciary 
official said.

In the group’s latest video, Street Children mock the devaluation of the 
Egyptian pound as well as the return of the islands to Saudi Arabia.

The four are accused of “promoting ideas calling for terrorist acts by posting 
a video on social networks and YouTube”, Ottman said.

They are also suspected of “incitement to take part in demonstrations 
disturbing the public order” and “inciting mobs to commit hostile actions 
against state institutions”, he added.

A Cairo court on Tuesday ordered the release on bail of 10,000 Egyptian pounds 
(about 990 euros) for a fifth member of the group, Ezzedine Khaled.

He is accused of “inciting protests and publishing a video that insulted state 
institutions”.

Ottman said the bail had been paid and he expected Khaled to be released.

Attempts to protest last month against the handover of the two islands to 
Saudi Arabia were nipped in the bud by the authorities.

Since then, they have also cracked down on activists, bloggers, lawyers and 
journalists.

The overthrow of Morsi, who was deeply unpopular, unleashed a police crackdown 
on his supporters that has killed hundreds of protesters and imprisoned 
thousands of people.

Hundreds of people including Morsi have also been sentenced to death in speedy 
mass trials denounced by the United Nations as “unprecedented in recent 
history”.
 