
American Idol <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, the 
former ratings juggernaut that earned the nickname “the Death Star” for its 
apparent ability to destroy all who opposed it, has finally met its match – 
apathy.

Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> announced on Monday that after 15 
seasons the singing competition is being dumped for someone younger and cuter: 
a slate of nine new shows the network hopes will end a ratings slump.


Idol still holds the record for the most consecutive seasons at No 1 – fully 
eight, from 2003 to 2011 – but viewer apathy and reality competition show 
fatigue have taken their toll. This season, American Idol struggled to hit 10m 
viewers. At its height the show’s season finales brought in over 30m viewers.


“I can’t say it’s a surprise,” said Brad Adgate, head of research for Horizon 
Media, which buys advertising for clients including Geico and CapitalOne. “The 
ratings have been in a freefall the last few years. The audience profile has 
gotten older. But it was an extraordinarily successful show. It would be hard 
to imagine a show that impacted a network the way Idol impacted Fox.”


Launched in 2002 and modelled on the UK’s Pop Idol, the show made a star of 
its most famous judge, Simon Cowell, and launched the careers of Jennifer 
Hudson, Carrie Underwood and Kelly Clarkson.

Idol wasn’t merely the biggest thing going at Fox; often it was the key factor 
in the network’s ratings success. The network built shows and nights of shows 
around the series, and often its return in the winter meant the difference 
between beating the other broadcast networks in season-long ratings (a favorite 
bragging right among network execs) and losing out to bigger shows. Fox’s 
eight-season-long winning streak is due in large part to Idol’s success and 
remains the longest a single network has dominated the ratings.


“It’s the last regularly scheduled show to average 30 million viewers for a 
season,” Adgate said. “You have to put it down as one of the most influential 
shows on television – it really showed that a reality show can get viewers and 
make money.” In its fifth and highest-rated season, the show averaged 39.5 
million live viewers total and 15.8 million aged 18-49 – the demographic 
advertisers pay for. Last season it averaged a little under 3.4 million viewers 
in the demo, including people who watched it the same day on DVR and probably 
fast-forwarded through the ads.


Empire: the outrageous black family drama that’s changing the look of US TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/08/empire-black-family-drama-changing-look-american-tv-lee-daniels>
There are other reasons to cut the show loose, first and foremost being simple 
expense. In the show’s seventh year of dominance, host Ryan Seacrestnegotiated 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ryan-seacrest-closes-deal-worth-86395> a 
300% pay raise, going from a meager $5m annually to a more liveable $15m, 
guaranteed for three years. Keeping Seacrest meant the show’s expenses grew 
even as its ratings declined.


There’s also some fresher material that’s doing well at the network. Fox has a 
new musical series it can build a schedule on: Empire, its hip-hop-themed 
series, which came out of nowhere at midseason to log far and away the highest 
ratings of any new drama this season. It’s a welcome change from this past 
fall’s American Idol replacement-hopeful, Utopia, which cost some $50m to 
produce and was dead in the water before Christmas. Empire is now the 
cornerstone of a lineup that, this fall, will include a series based on the Tom 
Cruise movie Minority Report, a show from the creators of American Horror Story 
called Scream Queens (starring Jamie Lee Curtis) and a Rob Lowe comedy called 
The Grinder, about the star of a canceled reality series.

 