 Frank Field, the priest-like Labour MP for Birkenhead, is treated with respect 
by his Tory opponents, if not always by his own party. This is not because of 
his deeply held Christianity. It is because of his working class parents, who 
imbued him so strongly with the spirit of hard work and self help that he sits 
at odds with the philosophy of his own party. His "unlovely truths" have often 
been closer to the thinking of Tory Peter Lilley than to any Labour colleagues.
Mr Field is also a relentless egalitarian, a crusader for the poor to better 
themselves. "He has no doubt that we are all endowed with the divine capacity 
of self improvement," said Roy Hattersley.

He carries this strange certainty with mixed political baggage. A one time 
supporter of the alternate vote system of electing MPs, he has many Tory 
friends and, like many Tories, he is against German domination of Europe and 
against the euro.

Born into a London Tory family in 1942, he joined the Young Conservatives at 
16. But he left for the Labour party the next year because of his aversion to 
apartheid in South Africa.

He made his reputation as an uncomfortable crusading pamphleteer while 
director of the child poverty action group, then the low pay unit. His well 
leaked report that the poor had got poorer under Harold Wilson played some part 
in helping Labour lose the 1970 election.

When Mr Field inherited his Birkenhead seat from Edmund Dell in 1979, it came 
with endangered shipyards. It also came with a nest of zealous local activists 
who tried to oust him. But he held firm and refused their pressure to support 
Tony Benn for deputy leader in 1981. A year later he urged Michael Foot to 
stand down as leader.

At one point the hard-left local activists even managed to deselect him as the 
Labour candidate. After a struggle he had the decision overturned by the NEC 
and was restored to fight the 1992 election.

Mr Field worked as opposition front bench spokesman on education and then 
became the respected chairman of the social security select committee 
(1990-1997). As such he made his mark as the only British politician prepared 
to question the basic principles of the welfare state.

In 1997 Tony Blair sent him to the Department of Social Security. Field wanted 
a Cabinet job running the department and initially had the prime minister's 
backing in this. But Blair was talked out of it instead asked him to serve 
under Harriet Harman as minister for welfare reform, asked by the prime 
minister to "think the unthinkable".

His appointment brought high expectations. They were not to be realised 
partly, as Field suggested in his Commons resignation statement a year later, 
because of a civil war which broke out between his department and Gordon 
Brown's Treasury over his plans for compulsory private pensions.

For good measure, he also fell out with Harriet Harman: insiders at the 
Department of Social Security said that the pair were barely on speaking terms. 
It was reported at one stage that they had met formally just once.

 After just 15 months both were sacked, with Mr Field protesting that "there 
was long effort to make sure I was neutered and sidelined in the Department of 
Social Security. This was led by Harriet Harman and her accomplices."

In true new Labour style he was savaged in the Sunday newspapers following his 
departure. He has since harboured understandable grudges and become a candid 
friend of the government.

Ask Aristotle about Frank Field 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-1704,00.html> 
 