
“I have no idea what we’re going to talk about,” Francis Ford Coppola said 
with a smile as he sat for a midday chat during the 15th annual Tribeca film 
festival. Spontaneity, as we’d learn, is very much the current philosophy for 
the man behindThe Godfather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/29/godfather-al-pacino-role-coppola-didnt-want>
 trilogy andApocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/30/my-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now>
.

The legendary director, writer, producer, winemaker and innovator spoke on a 
number of topics for an hour. Although the 77-year-old’s discursive manner may 
have been as knotty as the vines that grow his celebrated grapes, it remained 
clear that this was a man whose passion and dedication to pushing boundaries 
show no sign of slowing up.

Francis Ford Coppola: US should 'cough up' for Europe's migrant crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/28/francis-ford-coppola-europe-migrant-crisis-us-should-cough-up>
The director lit up when trying to explain his new project during the talk 
moderated by author and wine columnist Jay McInerney. Coppola says it will keep 
him occupied “into his 80s”.

Distant Vision is, in its current form, a 500-page cycle of plays that Coppola 
compared to Eugene O’Neill and Thomas Mann’s Buddenbrooks. It is a 
multigenerational tale about an Italian family similar to his own and its 
relationship to what he considers the most important innovation of his 
lifetime: television.

People will watch us put on the show, and then months later they can come back 
for the next chapter.

“Apocalypse Now was a movie about madness but it also was madness. It’s always 
great when the project is also the thing that it’s about.” To that end, Coppola 
is “inventing” a new medium, which he calls Live Cinema.

“Television is about an event, cinema is about the shot, and the juxtaposition 
of two shots to create a new idea. Live Television is the broadcast of an 
event: a baseball game or an opera, a musical like the recent Peter Pan or 
Grease.” Live Cinema, he continued, will have the nuance, lighting and montage 
of cuts and curation of closeups that we expect with movies, but, somehow, 
live. “People will come to a theater like this one to watch us put on the show 
and then months later they can come back for the next chapter.”

“So it’s basically a filmed play,” McInerney said, in an attempt to explain to 
the crowd, before being cut off. “No! It’s not, it’s not at all!” Coppola then 
discussed how television broadcasts of baseball games manipulate time on the 
fly to present images that feel seamless, like a hitter in the dugout, but are 
actually not linear. He also got a bit technical about the style in live 
broadcasts such as Peter Pan, in which cameras, afraid to get other cameras in 
their shot, shoot with long lenses, which necessitates a flood of flat 
lighting. Coppola plans to work around that although, he freely admits, he 
doesn’t yet know how.

“When I made Apocalypse Now <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> 
I had no idea how I’d do it, but I told people I could do it and then I did 
it.” Coppola said to applause, before admitting that during that production he 
was “so, so scared”.

Coppola isn’t new to attempts at radicalizing the film-making process. In 1981 
he shot One From The Heart entirely on soundstages, and cut the movie “live” 
with a complex electronic editing system. He essentially bankrupted his company 
as a result. In 2011 Coppola brought footage from his in-development film Twixt 
toSan Diego Comic-Con <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J8R-7mjn0SM> and showed 
how he could “jam” with the audience and re-sequence a scene on his iPad based 
on the reaction from the crowd. He spoke enthusiastically of taking Twixt on 
the road, and how each projection would then be a different show, based on the 
tenor of he crowd. (These engagements never came to fruition.)

Live Cinema is finding its footing in unexpected places, however. Last year 
Coppola took a crew and his “notions” to Oklahoma City Community College and did
some experimentation <https://vimeo.com/130273727>. “I can’t describe the 
process because I don’t know what I’m doing yet,” Coppola confessed. But he 
added that the next big live television event, NBC’s forthcoming production of 
Aaron Sorkin’s script for Rob Reiner’s film A Few Good Men, all set in a 
courtroom, is not what he has in mind. “If they came to me the movie I’d want 
to do is Lawrence of Arabia.”

The conversation concluded on the topic of Coppola’s very successful wineries, 
which he invested in when he realized his style of directing might not always 
find favor with the studios. “They started getting wise to us after Heaven’s 
Gate,” Coppola sighed, before thanking the audience for continuing to buy his 
products, and therefore keeping his art financed. “You all should get associate 
producer credits on my new project.”
 