
Nita May

 Nita May was arrested in Burma in 1989 during student uprisings against the 
military junta, which has ruled the country since 1962. Repressive and corrupt, 
the government had isolated Burma from the international community and mired 
the country in debt. In 1987 party chairman General Ne Win demonetised Burma's 
currency, wiping out the savings of millions and causing widespread anger among 
students. Caught up in the turmoil, May was jailed for three years. Now 64, she 
lives in London and works for the BBC World Service. She was awarded an OBE in 
1997.

When the student uprisings began in 1988 my late husband and I ran a 
publishing house in Rangoon and I wrote articles for various magazines. At the 
same time I worked for the British embassy as head of their information 
department. My job was to meet the politicians and student leaders that the 
military government didn't approve of, and to report from government press 
conferences. Because of my job, the government started taking me in for 
interrogation. They didn't like it that a Burmese woman was working for the 
British embassy.

I was taken for interrogation many times. They would come at night and 
blindfold me. It was always two or three weeks minimum in solitary confinement. 
They bombarded me with questions. I wasn't allowed to sleep for one week, 
sometimes two. I didn't know if it was day or night because it was a dark room. 
Then they'd let me out again. By taking me in and letting me out many times 
they created mistrust among my friends and colleagues.

In 1988 the Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi returned to Burma and formed the 
National League for Democracy (NLD) party. I followed her election campaigns 
around Rangoon. In July 1989 she was put under house arrest. After that the 
second man in the party, Kyi Maung, took over. He received a letter from the 
intelligence chief, General Khin Nyunt, threatening the NLD that if they went 
too far they'd be in big trouble. I persuaded Kyi Maung to give me that letter. 
I had it translated into English and passed it on to my ambassador. It went no 
further but when Kyi Maung was arrested soon after, I knew I would be next. I 
told my second son, who was still in his teens, that I might be taken away, and 
I showed him where I kept my money. Then they came and searched my house and 
took me to Insein, a notorious prison in the suburbs of Rangoon.

On 19 November 1990 my case was put before the military tribunal. They treated 
us as criminals rather than political prisoners. I was accused of leaking state 
secrets even though, as I argued, many people had already read that letter. I 
wasn't allowed a legal representative: they just told me I was guilty and 
sentenced me to three years. I was put in a damp, rat-infested cell, six by 
seven feet wide, with one window and one door. I slept on the floor on a rotten 
bamboo mat. As for sanitation, they gave me a pot and a pan. The food was 
terrible. Sometimes you could see worms in the vegetables.

Because I had been under tremendous pressure all those months, I didn't 
realise that I was pregnant. Then, in solitary confinement, I noticed. My life 
was torn apart. I couldn't imagine how I could have a baby in this prison.

When I was ready to give birth, I was moved to more spacious wards but the 
prison clinic was very dirty. As I was in my 40s and malnourished, I was 
worried that I couldn't have a normal delivery. My labour pains started at 
midnight on 30 June 1991. It was a difficult case so they agreed to take me to 
a prison ward at the hospital but I couldn't leave the prison until the gates 
opened at 5am.

It was amazing that my baby boy turned out to be quite healthy in spite of all 
the obstacles. But I decided not to keep him in prison so my husband took him 
away. I was parted from him for nine months.

My siblings in Australia began writing letters to the UK government and 
Amnesty. At first they were scared, believing that if you were highlighted too 
much you could end up in even more trouble, but in my view you've got nothing 
to lose. My name was brought up over and over again by Amnesty and I was 
released 18 months early, on 26 April 1992.

When I got out my son didn't recognise me. It was very hard for him to accept 
me as a mother because he hadn't seen me since birth. It was only when we 
arrived in Australia that he accepted me for the first time. But first I had to 
stay in Burma for a year because I was under probation. I rejoined the embassy. 
Then I got an offer from the BBC World Service. I sat the entrance exams and 
passed. I still work as a producer for the World Service today.

London is my second home. I live here with two of my sons. My middle son left 
for America and my husband passed away after I left Burma. My youngest son – 
the one who was born in prison – is 19. He's studying drama and performance 
arts and wants to be an actor.

To show my gratitude to Amnesty, I have taken part in most of the Burma 
campaigns. I know a lot about the people who are still in prison and I help by 
giving Amnesty photos and background stories. It's a risk but in my view it's 
worth it. If you are forgotten, they won't release you.KF

Pablo Pacheco
 Pablo Pacheco: ‘The letters let my jailers know that I was not alone’ 
Photograph: SOLARPIX.COM 
 Pablo Pacheco, 40, was arrested in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> in 2003 during "black spring", a 
government crackdown on political dissidents. A journalist and writer, he was 
sentenced to 20 years in prison, along with 74 others. He was released from 
prison last year and now lives in Spain with his wife and son.

I am a writer. I write what I think. I am an independent journalist and 
blogger, and I am currently writing my first book. The book is about my 
experiences in the prisons of Cuba where I spent a total of 87 months.

I got involved in the human rights movement in Cuba at the end of the 90s and 
worked as an independent journalist from 2000 until March 2003, when a wave of 
state repression, known as the "black spring", landed me in prison.

In Cuba dissidents like us are used to living in fear. But in this life there 
are risks worth taking. We knew we risked going to jail but what we practised 
was an independent journalism which, despite being officially prohibited, 
seemed to be tolerated. That quickly came to an end when the government decided 
to enforce Law 88 – the gag law, as it's known in Cuba – and started arresting 
journalists.

I was arrested on 19 March 2003 along with 74 other dissidents. I was having a 
siesta when they knocked on the door and presented me with an order for my 
arrest and a search warrant. The search began at 3pm and ended at 10pm. I lived 
with my wife and my son of four, who was sleeping and whom they woke up to 
check under his mattress. I assume they found what they were looking for – 
books from Reporters Without Borders,Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> reports, my 
typewriter, a radio, fax machine. The things they took away with them were a 
joke.

On 4 April 2003 I was sentenced to 20 years in jail. I saw a lawyer 24 hours 
before the trial and she made little effort to defend me. After the trial we 
were taken to Agüica prison in Matanzas, 400km from my home. I spent 17 months 
in solitary confinement, living under really difficult conditions; the food was 
so dreadful I lost 30lb. After that I was taken to Morón prison where I spent 
just over three years, and finally I ended up in Canaleta prison in Ciego de 
Avila. In Canaleta I shared a cell six metres long by five metres wide with 27 
other prisoners; there were rapists, murderers – the worst of the worst.

During this time I started writing a blog, Voces tras las Rejas (Voices Behind 
Bars), which I managed to dictate during the few minutes each day I was allowed 
to use the telephone.

The contact I had with Amnesty while I was in prison was very important to me. 
It took the form of letters sent from all over the world, mainly Europe, 
written by ordinary people I didn't know. This contact was important because it 
was a way of telling our jailers: this man has support from outside, he is not 
alone… which created a protective shield against many of the things that went 
on in prison. Such is the power of solidarity.

Several factors led to my liberation and exile: agreements between the 
Catholic church and the Cuban and Spanish governments; the hunger strike of one 
of our number, Guillermo Fariñas; and the support of the international 
community. On 10 July 2010 there was a knock on the door of my cell and the 
prison director told me I had a call from Cardinal Ortega. He informed me I was 
among six prisoners who might be sent to Spain. After 87 months of prison, 
separated from my family, living in extremely difficult conditions, I had no 
alternative but to accept. They didn't allow us to take leave of our friends 
and neighbours in Cuba. We were simply banished.

Only now do we realise what is involved in such a major change of life. It 
turns out the Cuban government has played one more trick on us by not giving us 
the documents to prove our professional qualifications. My wife, Oleivys, is a 
doctor but she has no papers and Cuba won't supply them.

We have been living in Marbella for eight months, my wife, my son, Jimmy, and 
I. But I have not managed to find a job yet. I would love to find work, even if 
it were washing dishes, to feel I belong in society again. At least I am able 
to work on my new blog, Voces del Destierro (Voices of Exile).

I am happy to say that the Cuban government has just announced that the last 
two prisoners from the "black spring" have been freed. This means there are no 
more prisoners of conscience in Cuba.

Also, I have now recovered from the experience of prison. The best thing is 
being reunited with your family, being able to hug your son, to give him a kiss 
in the morning and take him to school. That's the best recovery of all.PR

Omar Deghayes
 Omar Deghayes: ‘Their intention is to make you a wretch but resisting made us 
strong’ Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Observer 
Omar Deghayes, 41, was born in Libya, where his father (a union organiser) was 
imprisoned and killed by the Gaddafi regime. He spent much of his childhood 
with relatives in the UK and became a permanent resident at 16. He studied law 
at Wolverhampton University. While working in Afghanistan he married an Afghan 
woman and had a son. In early 2002 they fled to Pakistan to escape the war but 
he was arrested in Lahore. He spent time in the notorious Bagram detention 
facility before being transferred toGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, where he was imprisoned 
for more than five years. Released in December 2007, Deghayes now lives with 
his second wife and daughter in Brighton, where he works as a human rights 
lawyer.

When I finished studying, I thought it would be a good idea to have a break 
and travel. I went to Malaysia, Pakistan and then Afghanistan, where I found 
work importing and exporting dried fruit. I was also able to work as a lawyer, 
having studied both western and sharia law, and whenever I had free time I did 
voluntary relief work around the country. I got married and had a son. When the 
bombardments started in Afghanistan after 9/11, I decided it was too dangerous 
for my family. We fled across the border to Pakistan but my wife and child did 
not have passports to travel to the UK.

While I was trying to sort out their documents, we were living in a villa in 
Lahore. One afternoon our house was surrounded by many policemen with guns. 
They broke in and asked where the weapons were. I said we didn't have any and 
offered to show them our papers. Instead they dragged me out, tied my hands and 
put a black bag over my head.

First I was taken to a local prison and kept there for a month. We were 
subjected to beatings and torture and interrogation from Pakistani police. I 
didn't know what was happening to my family but I managed to smuggle a letter 
to my wife's father who came and took them out of house arrest.

Then I was taken to Islamabad. We were moved between different civilian 
locations and interrogated by Americans. One man said he was the director of 
the CIA's Libyan section. Another said he was from MI5.

I was taken, hooded and chained, to the airport in Islamabad and handed over 
to two US Marines. They put a thicker bag over my head with a bad smell in it 
and I was tied to the floor of a cargo plane. Lots of people were thrown in on 
top of me.

I ended up in Bagram military base in Afghanistan for two months. It was worse 
than Pakistan. We were surrounded by barbed wire, it was very cold and the 
floodlights made it feel like sleeping on a football pitch. They had guards in 
high places watching over us with guns, and if you were seen speaking to anyone 
they chained you to the wires in the stress position and kept you there for 
hours. You would be suffocated sometimes, and they hit you with electricity and 
guns. This happened to me several times.

I was very sick in Bagram. Every time I ate I threw up. I started to lose my 
mind and hear voices. When anyone spoke to me, it was like they were speaking a 
different language.

The journey to Guantánamo was one of the worst experiences of all. I have read 
since that it was engineered to break you psychologically. All our senses were 
blocked out. They put really tight goggles over our eyes and uncomfortable 
gloves on our hands and we were tied down. This went on for hours and hours. In 
the middle I started hallucinating and completely lost sense of where I was. I 
thought I was walking on the seaside in Brighton.

When I reached Guantánamo I was completely shaking. I was thrown on the floor 
and went through the ritual of being beaten and having my clothes taken off. 
For the first night I was chained to the bed of the prison clinic and they 
interrogated me in that condition. Then I was locked up in complete isolation 
for a month or two. Most of my five years in Guantánamo were spent in isolation.

There were fewer beatings compared to Bagram but the Americans were more 
sophisticated. Everything was designed to humiliate you. On paper you'd think 
bright lights and air-conditioned cells were for our comfort, and that the 
searches were for security, but it was the opposite. I spent five years in 
glaring light and in a cell so cold it was like a fridge.

That's not to say I wasn't beaten. Some of my fingers and my nose were broken 
and my ribs were damaged. I also lost the sight in one eye. One day they wanted 
to make an example of our block. I fought back. They held me down and a guard 
pushed his fingers into both my eyes. I refused to scream so the officer in 
charge made him push harder. Afterwards I had liquid coming out from both of my 
eyes and I couldn't see. They washed blood from my face and threw me back in 
the cell. One eye recovered but the other just got worse.

Prison is a bad experience, but to look at it positively we had more time to 
think about things and to revise our thoughts – about how as human beings we 
dealt with our families, and so on. Their intention is to turn you into a 
wretch but resisting made us stronger. We tried to find some goodness in those 
awful conditions. And the letters we received through Amnesty made all the 
difference. They gave us strength and made us feel that we weren't fighting 
this injustice alone. They also helped protect us from mistreatment. The guards 
were concerned by the letters and would think twice before touching us, knowing 
that we had all this support.

My eventual release was a combination of many people's work, including 
Reprieve and our lawyer, Clive Stafford Smith, but Amnesty had a leading role. 
They gave our cases much-needed publicity and made protest events all the more 
powerful and effective. Amnesty worked on my father's case in Libya so it's 
interesting that, 30 years on, they started speaking out on my behalf.

I was released in December 2007. It was a really nice time. I was so happy to 
meet the people who did so much for us, and to see my family again. My wife and 
I divorced during my imprisonment but I have since remarried and have a young 
daughter. Now I am a human rights lawyer working with different organisations, 
including Reprieve, and I'm on the board of directors with Cageprisoners. I do 
a lot of talks at universities and human rights organisations. It's very 
interesting.

Now my brother has been locked up in Tripoli – he disappeared in the recent 
incidents – and I am trying to help him and other family members who are caught 
up in the chaos in Libya.KF

Jack Mapanje
 Jack Mapanje: ‘Amnesty did a huge job. Without them I would not be here now’. 
Photograph: Gary Calton for the Observer 
 Jack Mapanje is a Malawian poet and academic. He was arrested in 1987 by the 
government of Dr Hastings Banda, who presided over one of Africa's most 
repressive regimes for 33 years. Under Banda's rule, opposition parties were 
banned, civil liberties restricted, surveillance rife and academics heavily 
censored. After three and a half years in prison, Mapanje was released in 1991 
and moved to England shortly afterwards. Now 67, he is a visiting professor at 
York St John University.

When I was arrested in September 1987 I was working as the head of the 
department of English at Chancellor College in Zomba. I was also chair of a 
linguistics organisation for African universities, and I'd returned from a 
conference in Zimbabwe the week before. My friend and I were recovering from a 
hangover at the Gymkhana club in Zomba when a man walked in and called my name. 
I followed him next door and the police commissioner was waiting for me in full 
regalia.

I was arrested at 1.35pm. I know that because it is a day I will never forget. 
They took me to the police headquarters in Blantyre and dumped me in a little 
office. I waited and waited and finally they called me to what I thought was an 
interrogation or my death. Several police commissioners were gathered around 
the table – it was the most horrific experience of my life – but none of them 
seemed to know what I had done wrong. Finally the inspector general said: "Can 
you take Dr Mapanje to a prison that has no cockroaches and hope the president 
can forgive him one day?"

The prison did have cockroaches – and mosquitoes and fleas. The conditions 
were horrid. Subhuman. The porridge was rotten. I tried to sip it on the first 
morning and had to vomit.

They put me in isolation at first, in a three-paces-by-three-paces cell. I was 
lucky – once upon a time it had held 12 people. After two weeks I was 
transferred to the kitchen. That really saved me. Then I, and other prisoners, 
started writing. We wrote on soap wrappers and toilet paper, and hid the pencil 
lead in our kinked hair.

The day I was arrested a friend of mine, an Irish priest called Father Patrick 
O'Malley, saw the police taking me away. He told my family and then rang a 
friend of his in Galway and told him in Gaelic that I had been arrested. The 
message got to my friend, Landeg White, at York University and he passed the 
information on to the BBC and then to Amnesty International. That's what saved 
my life. What the authorities used to do was arrest you and put you in prison 
without telling anyone. Then they monitored the radio stations to find out if 
anybody was talking about it. If nobody was, they could kill you.

Amnesty and other organisations sent letters of protest almost every week to 
the Malawian government. Letters came from all over the world, and writers such 
as Ngugi wa Thiong'o, Wole Soyinka, Chinua Achebe and Ben Okri supported us. 
The government released some political prisoners but refused to release me. I 
was in prison for three years, seven months, 16 days and more than 12 hours.

One day the prison chief told me that the authorities in Blantyre wanted to 
see me. So I went there and met one of the guys who had been at my 
interrogation and was now the head of the entire police force. He'd been trying 
to get me out all this time, he told me, but the president had written "never" 
next to my name on all the appeals. This time, however, the president had 
written "approved" on the appeal for my release. The police chief said: "Before 
he changes his mind, get out of here, go home to your wife and children." He 
also told me: "We have arrested and imprisoned so many people in this country 
but we have never had so much trouble as we had over you."

I stayed in Malawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi> for about three 
months after my release in 1991. I reapplied for my job at the university but 
they never replied. The chairman of the university, John Tembo, was one of the 
people who, I believe, had me put in prison. (He is the uncle of Cecilia 
Kadzamira, Dr Banda's companion, who was very powerful.) One day I met a man at 
a garage who warned me not to travel at night because the special branch might 
try to bump me off. So I decided to get the hell out of there.

Amnesty did a huge job fighting for my life and without them I would not be 
here now. I have been back to Malawi several times but the situation is getting 
bad again; the spies have entered the lecture rooms once more and the police 
are fighting lecturers over academic freedom.KF
 