Thrill rating 7/10 
Danger rating 9/10

Fitness rating 7/10

In a nutshell ...

Holding your breath under water for as long as you can and pretending to be a 
mermaid. This suspension of breathing - apnoea in scientific terms - is very 
difficult to master and can be extremely dangerous, but it has been used by 
divers for thousands of years.

Whether you're snorkelling and want to dive down to see something closer up, 
doing underwater photography or practising to become Britain's next Olympic 
synchronised swimming champion (there's still time, you know), the skill is the 
same.

But for most people, freediving conjures up images of competitive and extreme 
events in warm, clear waters (remember The Big Blue?), with intrepid divers 
wearing large single fins and speaking with sexy French accents. In fact, the 
sport is most often practised in regular swimming pools - although there are 
some purpose-built, tunnel-shaped pools around the UK.

What's the buzz?

When freediving in the sea, the feeling of being close to nature is much 
stronger than you get with scuba diving equipment, which can scare fish away. 
And pushing the limits of what your body is capable of in a single breath can 
be exhilarating when you beat your last record. It can also be dangerous if 
attempted without due care.

Thrill a minute?

The body adapts itself to being under water in fascinating ways. In some 
people, especially children, the mammalian reflex kicks in when the body is 
submerged. This vestigial impulse drops the heart rate, and shunts blood 
towards the core and away from extremities by shrinking the blood vessels (it 
also fills the lungs with blood plasma to stop them collapsing at depth).

While freediving, though, the really hard work is done by your legs and your 
brain - which has to actively control the impulse to breathe. Directly 
afterwards, you will ache from the lactic acid formed within muscles while the 
body has been working anaerobically. As the oxygen supply is renewed, this pain 
will subside.

Adrenaline peak

You don't want to be generating adrenaline while freediving! You need to 
remain calm with slow movements, to enable the body to survive on little oxygen.

Where to do it

There are many clubs in the UK that use local pools to train and also organise 
outdoor sessions. The British Freediving Association has an outdoor, inland 
training base at Vobster Quay, Somerset, for freedivers only. Most freediving 
clubs try to stay away from areas used by scuba divers and boats. You can have 
a go in any stretch of safe water, but only with a trained professional or 
expert on hand.

Who can do it

Two recognised bodies govern competitive freediving: Aida International and 
CMAS. Both offer courses from beginner level to advanced, and these are highly 
recommended to give you the skills needed and properly explain the dangers 
involved with this activity. For Aida courses, the minimum fitness requirements 
include being able to swim 200 metres non-stop, and holding your breath for 
1min 25sec. It is strongly advised that under-16s don't test themselves by 
freediving and join a snorkel club instead, owing to the potential risks of 
diving too deeply too soon.

What to take

There are specific masks and fins for freediving rather than using scuba ones. 
The masks are smaller, which means they can be equalised more easily, and the 
fins softer and longer so they can power you without as much movement from your 
legs (important, as your legs have to do an awful lot of work). There are also 
various monofins on the market, but these take some getting used to. A wetsuit 
is advisable at all times in the UK if diving outdoors; indoors wear a skin 
suit.

Typical prices

A three-hour, introductory indoor pool session costs £70. A weekend course to 
gain a "one star" Aida certificate in freediving costs £215 - or £300 for the 
more challenging "three-star" qualification.

Impress your pals

The absolute depth world freedive records are 214 metres for men (held by the 
Austrian Herbert Nitsch) and 160 metres for women, dived by the American TV 
celebrity and environmental spokeswoman Tanya Streeter.

YouTube searchwords 'freediving, dive, underwater'

Good links

britishfreediving.org <http://www.britishfreediving.org>

deeperblue.net/courses/ <http://www.deeperblue.net/courses/>

vobsterquay.co.uk <http://www.vobsterquay.co.uk>

emma-freediver.co.uk <http://www.emma-freediver.co.uk>


The rights and wrongs of underwater fishing

Spearfishing, as it's commonly known, is the practice of diving with only 
snorkelling gear and a spear or spear gun, to hunt for fish in their own 
environment. Although people tend to think of it in a negative way, 
spearfishing is arguably the most ethical way to catch fish you want to eat.

Being able to discriminately hunt for your dinner is in stark contrast to any 
fishing technique using lines or nets. Spearfishing allows you to select mature 
fish only, from the species you want to eat only. There is no by-catch thrown 
back dead into the sea, nor, for that matter, are whole schools of fish taken 
at once. It is, though, a very difficult activity, so be prepared to go hungry.

EC law bans the sale of fish caught freediving, and there are environmental 
standards as to the size of the fish caught, to ensure no young fish are taken. 
For example, a sea bass must be a minimum of 45cm long (much longer than you 
see in Sainsbury's fish counter) and a mackerel 28cm. There are also 
restrictions on shellfish - for example, you may only catch two lobsters a day.

There's an annual spearfishing competition in the UK, regulated by the British 
Spearfishing Association - for more details go to underwaterfishing.co.uk. And 
to find out more about fish catch sizes, check the fisheries website for the 
area you want to fish in.
 