
With investors shying away from risk once more as eurozone fears re-emerged, 
precious metals minerFresnillo was the biggest faller in the leading index.

Gold and silver both lost ground as the dollar became the last remaining safe 
haven. So Fresnillo fell 187p to £14.94. It was not helped by news that index 
provider FTSE Group was tightening its rules so that 25% of a company's shares 
must be in public hands, up from 15%. The move, which starts for new issues in 
January, affects Fresnillo as well asEssar Energy, down 13.5p at 193.1p and 
Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation, 36.5p lower at 611p. The companies have 
24 months to increase their free float to fit in with the new arrangements.
Fresnillo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/fresnillo> shares were also 
quoted ex-dividend.

Other mining groups were weaker, with Randgold Resources down 410p at £63.60 
andAfrican Barrick Gold 37p lower at 443.9p.

With continuing doubts about the effectiveness of the measures announced after 
last week's EU summit and the planned €200bn loan to the International Monetary 
Fund, theFTSE 100 finished 123.35 points lower at 5366.80, a 2.25% decline. 
Italian bond yields jumped sharply higher and the euro fell to an 11 month low 
as German chancellor Angela Merkel said there was no quick and easy fix to the 
problem. Meanwhile, news that the US Federal Reserve planned to keep its powder 
dry for the moment did not help sentiment, with Wall Street down around 130 
points by the time London closed. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital 
Spreads, said:
 Political leaders and central bankers seem to have got stuck in a quagmire of 
indecision so as a result financial markets gave up on their lack of resolve 
today. The prospect of the usual Christmas rally has almost completely 
disappeared as the prospect of a full scale European sovereign debt melt down 
in the near future became more of a reality.

The FTSE 100 is in the process of recording its fifth ever loss for the month 
of December since being established as all the festive cheer is being sapped by 
the continued lack of a lasting [solution] to the European debt crisis. 
Only one company in the FTSE 100 was in positive territory. Morrisons edged up 
0.8p to 316.9p as the supermarket group announced plans to create 7000 jobs in 
2012.

Lloyds Banking Group lost 0.65p to 24.065p despite saying Antonio 
Horta-Osorio, who has been on sick leave, would return as chief executive in 
January. At the same time Lloyds said it had picked the Co-op as the preferred 
bidder for the 632 branches it had to put up for sale.

Insurer Resolution made some early gains after Barclays said it was an 
attractive investment. Its founder Clive Cowdery obviously agreed, paying 
around £605,000 to buy 240,000 shares at 252.91p each. But with the market 
under pressure, it closed 1p lower at 250.9p.

Among the mid-caps SuperGroup, the retailer behind the Superdry brand, jumped 
36p to 538.5p after it unveiled positive trading so far in the weeks leading up 
to Christmas, but Anglo-Dutch IT services groupLogica lost 11.95p to 62.1p. The 
company warned of tough trading conditions in Europe, and announced 1300 job 
cuts.

Elsewhere Bodycote International dipped 8.6p to 247.3p despite suggestions it 
could become a bid target. Panmure Gordon analyst Oliver Wynne-James said:
 With a diminished following, Bodycote has drifted into deep discount 
territory and now looks ripe for a transfer to private ownership. The 
compounded returns for a new owner are sizeable and stand well ahead of those 
offered by Charter on the eve of its bid approach. With its sector relative 
hitting a 15 year low, the market chooses not to acknowledge its business model 
improvements. In our view, the share price already discounts a full double dip 
and any slowdown in the New Year would be the catalyst for corporate activity. 
Taking these value propositions on board, we reiterate our buy recommendation 
with a target price of 440p. 
Lower down the market Monitise, which specialises in mobile banking and 
payment systems, added 2.5p to 29p after saying first half revenues had nearly 
tripled to £15m. Philip Sparks at Evolution Securities said:
 The ramp up in Monitise's long term contracts with RBS and Visa has pushed up 
revenue growth. Investment has also increased, with Monitise putting the £24.7m 
raised from Visa Europe in November to work.
Its shares have been weak of late, but as this update shows, that has nothing 
to do with its operational performance. Today's statement should bolster 
confidence that Monitise is turning into a sizeable company. 
Aim-listed Acta added 2.75p to 8.625p after it signed a deal with Taiwan's 
Asia Pacific Fuel Cell Technologies. The two companies will develop refuelling 
stations for scooters and light vehicles that run on hydrogen.

Finally Real Good Food, one of the Guardian's share tips of the year, rose 
1.5p to 36.25p after an upbeat trading statement. The company, which 
distributes sugar and makes bakery products for the likes of Waitrose, said 
trading had continued to improve since July, and its borrowings had been cut. 
Analyst Phil Carroll at the company's broker Shore Capital said:
 [Real Good Food] looks to be an undemanding valuation and an attractive 
investment opportunity.  