
Despite the best efforts of the Vikings, who chose its inviting name to 
hoodwink prospective settlers, no one expects Greenland to be lushly 
hospitable. Its bleak magnificence had been laid out beneath my plane window 
for half the morning: a frosted, monochrome enormity of granite and glaciers 
two-thirds the size of India, fringed with slightly more inhabitants than 
Hereford.

All the same, stepping out into the still, bright morning at Kangerlussuaq 
airport, the brutal reality of life at minus 40C came as a shock. My nostrils 
crinkled as everything up them instantly froze. Then I breathed in, and Dracula 
punched me in the throat.

I'd come to try a bold twin experiment by Greenland's tourist authorities. 
First, a new season for holidaymakers: the flesh-shattering depths of winter. 
February and March are the cruellest months in the Arctic and almost all 
visitors to Greenland currently come in summer, when you only need one pair of 
gloves. Second, a new destination for the adventurous gourmet. Copenhagen'sNoma 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/18/noma-copenhagen-worlds-best-restaurant>
 has become one of the world's most-feted restaurant (and ranked the verybest 
for the last three years 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/awards/1-50-winners/noma/>) with its freestyle 
riffs on Nordic cuisine. Denmark's former colony now finds itself in the 
gastronomic halo, a challenge for native chefs even in the south of the 
country, where the Vikings' bucolic brand name seems least outrageous – they've 
got trees and everything. I'd come to the barren and permafrosted mid 
north-west, which must surely rank as the foodie's final frontier.

My base was Ilulissat, a town of 4,000 people and 2,500 sled dogs, situated, 
like every other settlement in Greenland, on the coast. It's a plucky, cheerful 
place with brightly coloured houses warming up the deep-frozen landscape, and a 
harbour becomingly strewn with little boats in ice-locked hibernation.

Both the hotels I stayed in were spanking new and devoid of traditional local 
character – wisely so, as a turf roof and fish-oil heating isn't likely to bag 
too many stars on TripAdvisor. What they did have were some tirelessly 
dumbfounding vistas. Ilulissat means "the icebergs" in Greenlandic, and what a 
sight they were through the treble-glazing: sometimes a fleet of Tolkienesque 
dreadnoughts, sometimes a Henry Moore retrospective on the run, lined up on a 
massive iced horizon thickly buttered with sunset, or picked out by a full moon 
and the free-form green swooshes of the northern lights. The Greenlandic winter 
landscape is under a fairytale curse: its serene, shimmering majesty tempts you 
outside, then snaps your flash-frozen soul in half.
 Fine dining, Ilulissat, Greenland. Photograph: Andrew Schoenherr 
Almost everyone in Ilulissat works in fishing, most of them at factories that 
process prawns and halibut for export to Denmark. Semi-independent Greenland is 
stumbling through a slow-motion divorce from its one-time overlord: Copenhagen 
still pays an annual subsidy and takes charge of foreign and financial policy 
but Inuit Greenlandic is now the sole official language, and the old Danish 
place names have been replaced. With its halting, sibilant clucks, Greenlandic 
is not an accessible tongue, though neither, as we've learnt from the strangled 
gurgles of many imported TV dramas, is Danish. The half-Greenlandic guide who 
showed me round what was once Jakubshavn said that her young son spoke better 
English than Danish. (She also told me that he once got frostbite on her 
20-minute walk to school.)

Reclaiming Greenland's national identity, insists champion chef Inunnguaq 
Hegelund, also means reclaiming its national cuisine. No easy task in a land 
where what passes for fertile soil is 500 years old.

"Well, it's amazing what you can do with angelica," he told me in his aunt's 
kitchen, bigging up one of the few plants that prospers here. (In the days 
ahead I found that what you can mainly do is make everything taste faintly of 
fennel and rhubarb.)

Hegelund is an engagingly self-assured 24-year-old, who isn't entering the 
national catering finals this year "to give someone else a chance". His 
repertoire at Ilulissat's Hotel Arctic is inevitably fish-centric, but the 
splendid meal he created for us at his aunt's was a tribute to Greenland's 
unsung, land-based fauna. I didn't imagine that sheep could survive in 
Greenland. The one I ate bits of obviously hadn't, but it was beautifully 
succulent. I'd never even heard of muskox, which despite its name and the beefy 
rareness of its meat, is a massively furry goat. Hegelund set it off with a 
rich sauce made from crowberries, which ripen in tiny black hillside clusters 
during Greenland's nightless summers. I was told that Greenlandic culture 
remains rooted in the kill-everything-and-eat-it tradition of the macho 
outdoorsman but Hegelund – trained in Denmark, and attuned to European 
sensibilities – understands that the typical gourmet tourist is unlikely to 
appreciate the marine-mammal aspect of this tradition. If the search for 
offshore oil continues to disappoint, tourism revenue may prove crucial for 
Greenland's independence, and people who go there want to watch whales, not eat 
them. And it isn't just the ethics that might leave a bad taste for visitors: 
when I tried seal a few days later, it proved stubbornly unmoreish: dark, 
tough, fishy meat that tastes like the smell of 1970s cat food.

The morals of seal hunting may deter some tourists from visiting but the 
clothing it yields is about practicality. My two-day dog-sledding trip simply 
would not have happened without my thermal sealskin anorak and salopettes, 
outermost of five layers of clothing. Without the matching mittens, and two 
pairs of under-gloves, I'd be typing this with my nose.
 Photograph: Andrew Schoenherr 
I've been dog sledding before, in Lapland with two of my children a few years 
ago. Then I took charge of my own sled, or tried to, clinging on to the 
waist-high bar like a man being dragged down the Cresta Run on a Zimmer frame. 
This time, there were many more dogs: 16 huskies instead of four, a tangled 
dog's cradle of yapping jostles. Plus, I was a passenger, sitting with only the 
ropes that attached the luggage beneath me to hold on to. My driver, Hans, was 
invigoratingly old-school. Frost speckled his sparse beard, and his legs were 
sheathed in a voluminous pair of polar-bear-fur trousers.

The following three hours offered an immersive experience of Greenland's 
hardcore winter wilderness. We swished across frigid lakes at the rear of an 
eight-sled canine convoy, the whiff of musky poo forcing its way up my nostrils 
through a bandit-scarf and two balaclavas. My face-holes began to leak fluids 
that soon solidified in the fabric that sheathed them. This grim carapace froze 
to my nose; then, after some ill-advised poking, to my tongue. My eyelids 
periodically bonded.

When I got off to help push us up, everything instantly defrosted into steamy 
sweat. The process was promptly reversed when we barrelled down the 
snow-marbled granite on the other side. With the brilliant sun nosing into 
another golden goodbye our convoy reached a pair of cosy huts. Then sped right 
past them and out onto the frozen fjord behind.

Hans and his friends were out here, in the ultra-remote, super-hostile middle 
of frozen nowhere, to go fishing. Some of them were already at it, winching up 
a long, many-hooked line through a hole in the half-metre ice. Hans told me it 
had been minus 55C out on the ice the week before. If the conditions were 
inhuman, then so was the alien panorama: a yawning white flatness girdled by 
heavy, lifeless mountains. The men at work might more convincingly have been 
prospecting for rare elements near the pole of Mars.
 Halibut fishing. Photograph: David Trood 
As it was, the first of a succession of huge halibut emerged from the hole, 
each waist-high to the men who unhooked them. When the time came to cut them up 
into chunks they were frozen rigid, though the smell of solid blood was enough 
to set the dogs off into a wolverine chorus.

The huts, when we made it back to them, seemed as warm and welcoming as a 
village pub on Boxing Day, though by the time our fresh-off-the-sled halibut 
soup hit the boil, the water in my bottle still wasn't moving.

I was too tired to care. The simple act of generating body heat all day had 
exhausted me: sitting on your arse is hard work when that arse is frozen. 
I rolled out a billion-tog sleeping bag on the floor and slept right through an 
apparently epic twin display of northern lights and snoring. We sledded back to 
Ilulissat and spent the following days in ever-smaller and more-remote 
settlements.

I took a helicopter over the fractured ice sheet to Disko Island, a Danish 
name that probably hasn't survived just so that I could send funny text 
messages, but because the native variant is Qeqertarsuaq. Eight hundred people 
live in the only significant town, another kaleidoscopic huddle of warm houses 
and frozen boats. Backed by long, flat-topped mountains, it looked like rural 
Iceland with a broken boiler. Everyone kept telling me that Disko was a sea of 
green in the summer, "though we know it's hard to believe".

Greenland's cultural collisions smashed out everywhere. Skinned seals were 
strung up from porches topped with satellite dishes. A hunter dragged a big, 
white arctic hare past a new supermarket full of Pringles and tortellini. 
Children in Manchester United shirts played three-and-in at a football net 
half-buried in iced snow. I had the finest meal of my trip – plump, moist, 
reindeer steak with crowberries – prepared by a Greenlandic cook who boasted 
that the only time he ever went outdoors was to smoke. The menu at Arthur, 
Disko's solitary restaurant, is winningly dependent on what this man can get 
his hands on: a fisherman had just turned up at the kitchen door with wolf-fish 
and a salesman's smile. When my helicopter out of Disko was delayed by a 
blizzard, the chef put together an impromptu muskox chilli.

I was taken out to a headland on the edge of town by Outi and Mads Tervo, 
husband and wife researchers at Disko's venerable Arctic station. They're 
studying the song of the bowhead whale, a huge and mysterious animal that 
suffered more than most in the bad old days: during the 1850s, four bowheads 
were being slaughtered every day. Mads opened a hatch in a squat little 
lighthouse and handed me a headset connected to a distant array of submerged 
microphones. Whale song is a soaring, groaning electronic chorus. Its purpose 
is still hazy, but the Tervos have established that the anthem, mimicked 
identically by every bowhead, is different each year.
 Photograph: David Trood 
Not bad going when you learn how many tunes some of them have to remember: 
recent autopsies have found evidence – in the form of ancient ivory harpoon 
tips embedded deep in their blubber – which suggests that bowheads can live for 
more than 200 years, longer than any other mammal. One which died during US 
president Bill Clinton's term of office survived a harpoon attack when Thomas 
Jefferson was president. It felt portentous when Outi pointed to sea, and in a 
distant patch of open water between the toothpaste-blue bergs, I saw two great 
black crescents rise and fall.

The final trip out of Ilulissat was an hour-long jaunt for my snowmobile 
driver, and an ordeal of Scott-grade folly for me. Snowmobiles go much faster 
than dogs, so passengers get much colder. My goggles were impenetrably 
ice-rimed before we'd even left town. When I sensed the terrain begin to 
undulate I curled both arms round my driver's tangibly reluctant torso, but 
numbness soon slackened my grip.

Blind, spent and mired in frozen mucus, by the time we arrived in Oqaatsut 
(formerly known as Rodebay) I didn't feel my life was worth saving. When I 
fumbled off my goggles my driver squinted at my central brow with some concern, 
then prodded it with an appraising thumb. "Souvenir of Greenland," he grunted: 
a crusty red bindi of first-degree frostbite.

I thawed out over a lavish marine buffet in a guesthouse run by a German 
couple. Wind-dried halibut, breaded capelin, deep-fried cod roe – as long as 
you forgot to eat the latter, everything was rewardingly weird and wonderful. 
I'd learned that even in Greenland's most unpromisingly desolate extremities – 
running water in Oqaatsut means a lump of melting iceberg in a tank – you will 
eat well. Perhaps especially well, with the nearest breakfast pop tart on the 
other side of two mountains and a frozen fjord.

Afterwards, I went out to explore with Ole Dorph, town elder and de-facto 
mayor. Home to 46 people, Oqaatsut in deepest winter had the thrilling air of 
mankind's last stand. Big icebergs came right up to the door. Sled dogs howled 
beneath racks of wizened fish left out to dry. A fair few of the far-flung 
scatter of houses were abandoned, their frost-bleached furnishings picked out 
by the late sun coming in through cracked windows.

Dorph told me that his town had been dying since its fish-processing plant 
closed in 2000. Oqaatsut, or more properly Oqaatsut, had begun life in the 18th 
century as a Dutch whaling station. He pointed out the original barrel-making 
cooperage, still apparently in use. "We have a little tourism," he said, "but 
most of us must take our living from the sea."

And with that he led me into a warehouse by the frigid shoreline. At the back 
stood a large, cold store, which exhaled a pungent fog when Dorph opened its 
heavy door. Inside, his deep-frozen dream for Oqaatsut's future lay piled up 
around us in thousands of vacuum-sealed sachets.

When the fish plant closed, Dorph set up a local co-operative and after many 
years of lobbying was awarded the right, under an "aboriginal subsistence" 
exemption, to kill and process a bowhead whale. The necessary investment almost 
crippled the tiny town, and things got worse when the grim work was done. In 
the 40 years since Greenland landed its last bowhead, people had lost their 
taste for its very blubbery meat. The supermarkets wouldn't take it. Nor would 
local fishmarkets. As Dorph discovered, even the people of Oqaatsut didn't want 
to eat the stuff, and two years on are now feeding it to their dogs.

I didn't know what to say, or what to think. This big fridge full of plastic 
bags was the final resting place of a mighty, majestic creature, the end of a 
life that might, just, have begun before Queen Victoria's. The people who lived 
here had, in the final analysis, slaughtered it for no reason, but I still felt 
for them. And with their nation's independence in some curious way beholden to 
ethically minded, foodie-centric extreme tourism, you have to believe that 
Oqaatsut's short-term loss is this truly astonishing country's long-term gain.
 