
Gordon is married to Sarah, who used to work for Alan, who owns Brunswick, the 
City's biggest PR firm. Stephen also used to work for Alan, but now he works 
for Gordon, who also happens to be godfather to one of Alan's children.

The appointment of Stephen Carter, former head of media regulator Ofcom, as 
Gordon Brown's new 'fixer' at Number 10 is testament to the growing power of 
Brunswick founderAlan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker>, 
whose sphere of influence now extends far beyond the Square Mile and deep into 
Whitehall and Westminster.

Parker is close to Brown and his wife Sarah , who ran her own PR company 
before moving to Brunswick, and the PM is said to have been impressed with
Carter, who was chief executive of Brunswick, after meeting him socially. When 
the 51-year-old multi-millionaire Parker remarried last year, Brown and David 
Cameron were among the guests and Parker has hired other politicos in the past, 
including Andrew Hood, a former adviser to former Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon, 
who joined the company as his 'chief of staff ' in a similar role to that 
carried out, briefly, by Carter.

Unlike the public affairs giants that regularly trawl government for senior 
personnel, Brunswick rarely dabbles in the world of politics, preferring to 
concentrate on the lucrative, if less glamorous, business of corporate mergers 
and stock market flotations.

But Parker has a habit of acquiring 'trophy' employees to impress his powerful 
roster of City clients; former Sun editor David Yelland is also a partner and 
so too was James Rubin, President Clinton's former press spokesman.

'They tend to stick around for a year, then they're off,' says a former 
Brunswick employee, and although Rubin stayed longer, that was true of Carter, 
who was bought in to run the group on a day-to-day basis amid talk of doubling 
the size of the company, which has about 400 employees in 14 countries.

Parker has long concentrated on a select group of accounts and generating new 
business, but has found it difficult to relinquish control of a firm he founded 
in 1987 with a handful of staff, reportedly rejecting a £200m takeover offer 
from Sir Martin Sorrell's WPP several years ago.

He is thought to be worth about £120m and has consistently resisted pressure 
to hand over stakes in the business to senior partners, prompting some to 
leave; tellingly, several have gone on to establish rivals based loosely on the 
Brunswick model, which owes more to high-powered consultancies such as McKinsey 
than to rival publicity firms that operate in the arenas of consumer or showbiz 
PR.

The Brunswick diaspora has prospered; Rupert Younger founded Finsbury with 
ex-Financial Times journalist Roland Rudd, and Andrew Grant formed Tulchan. 
Both are now firmly in the top 10 financial PR firms according to PR Week's 
'Deal Watch' chart, with Brunswick currently at the top, but they owe a debt of 
sorts to Parker.

When the stock market deregulated in the 1980s, financial PR was a shadowy 
occupation. Its most senior practitioners frequently handed out stories to 
Sunday business sections via the infamous 'Friday night drop', leaking details 
of an upcoming merger after the markets had closed for the week.

But City regulators soon stopped those practices and Parker, who began at 
rival firm Broad Street Associates, recognised that the industry would have to 
adapt. 'He was ahead of the game,' says one rival. 'He professionalized 
financial PR.'

Parker's father Sir Peter Parker, a former head of British Rail, was an 
industry doyen and some detect a deeply personal motivation behind his son's 
decision to enter the corporate world. 'He always wanted to make his dad proud, 
and in the end he succeeded, because his father was recommending him to people 
in his final years,' says a former employee.

Parker Sr was knighted in 1978, and there is mischievous gossip that his
son would like to go one better, perhaps by landing a seat in the House of 
Lords.

'He won't do that through financial PR, but through involvement with charities 
and the arts,' says a former associate. Parker entered the art world partly to 
rub shoulders with captains of industry, but is now thought to own two of 
William Blake's 'Elements of Blair's Grave', a series of watercolours put up 
for auction last year, and although the only trusteeship detailed in his brief 
Who's Who entry is at Demos – Labour's favourite think-tank – he is involved 
with several charities.

If Parker does indeed aspire to the Lords, that may help his cause, and the 
fact that two former Brunswick employees are by the side of the man who could 
grant his wish is unlikely to harm his chances either.
 