
New York, December 15

Walt Disney, the Pied Piper of Hollywood, who made a mountain of money out of 
a mouse, died today in Burbank, California at the age of 65. There was very 
little in the early life of Walter Elias Disney to show that he would emerge by 
his twenty-fifth birthday as the most revolutionary motion picture talent after 
Chaplin. The vital statistics, padded out from newspaper files, suggest a 
boyhood as corny as Kansas in August.

A Midwestern upbringing, the son of a carpenter who tried his hand at farming 
(so as to introduce the young Walt to a menagerie of adorable animals), a full 
stretch of grade school, an incomplete spell in high school, a boy of little 
scholarship and lively appetite for games who picked up pin-money in winter as 
a newspaper delivery boy, in summer as a candy butcher (sweets salesman) of the 
Kansas City-Chicago train. It is the standard biography of many another 
American folk hero.

His first job was a commercial artist with an advertising company. He went 
from there to a cartoonist's job on a film weekly and began to experiment on 
his own with cartoon slides. He soon wanted to see them in motion and drew a 
series, of Kansas City doings, for local theatres. They bore the awful name of 
Laugh-o-Grams. That was in 1922. The next year the pioneer's legend takes up 
again with his flight to Hollywood - with borrowed capital of $40 and the 
sketches of a film which would set a living girl against a cartoon background. 
At last, in 1928, he was signed by a genuine, licensed studio, Universal, no 
less, to draw and direct its "Oswald the Rabbit" cartoons. At the end of two 
years, there was a violent artistic quarrel and Disney went on his own and 
brooded over a mouse he had drawn on his railroad runs.

After two efforts that were scrapped as amateur, he came through with 
"Steamboat Willie", which had the luck to make shrewd use of the new device of 
sound. Disney never had any further need to borrow money.

So long as he cherished his outrageous ducks and mice and wolves, he was the 
darling of the intelligentsia. But "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," with 
their sweetness, cuteness and light doomed him as a highbrow renegade. But it 
also doomed him to a world gross of $8 millions. Luckily for most of the 
world's moviegoers, Disney was a rollicking and uncomplicated soul, who never 
felt that his ardent sentimentality was at odds with the Marx Brothers anarchy 
of Donald Duck. He went ahead with his "Pinocchio," "Fantasia," "Bambi," "Peter 
and the Wolf"and all the other 18-carat whimsies of the pre-Beat children's 
world.

Alistair Cooke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alistaircooke>
 