
I want to make a case for more public art in schools and colleges.

I recently created a sculpture for The Leys school 
<http://www.simonhitchens.com/latest-news/transition-point-installed/> in 
Cambridge. The piece is called Transition Point and is formed of two 
boulder-like standing stones placed in opposition to each other, one faced in 
mirror-polished stainless steel, the other in highly-polished black granite. 
The sculpture is inspired by the scientific concept of states of change – a 
moment in time when an entity changes from one state to another. But it's also 
inspired by its school location and symbolises the transition pupils undergo as 
they pass through their education in the school.

The process of creating and installing the sculpture has led me to think 
closely about the school environment for students around the country, and the 
importance of art as part of the education setting.

In our current educational climate, the arts are not often considered to be of 
prime importance by the government and by some educational institutions. They 
are – if you like – "extras", to be added in after the "real" subjects have 
been attended to. This notion of the arts as asomehow lesser subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/23/art-party-conference-bob-roberta-smith>
 is not a new one. However, it is particularly prevalent in the here and now. 
Schools and colleges are judged and held to account by their performances in 
what are perceived as the important subjects.

The arts are regarded as "soft" subjects by the educational establishment 
because they do not lend themselves to objective measurement or standardised 
tests. That which cannot be measured is viewed with suspicion. Because of 
government imperatives, schools and colleges focus on more easily measured 
targets of numeracy and literacy.

But what of emotional and cultural literacy? Our cultures are, after all, 
defined by our artefacts. We make art to help people make sense of the world.Art
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> asks more questions than it 
seeks to answer and, more importantly, it deals with opinion rather than fact. 
One of its roles is to encourage questioning and debate – it challenges, 
celebrates, commiserates and comments; it feeds our hunger to understand our 
lives and our world.

Search engines provide an answer to everything. We Google for answers to our 
questions and often accept the online answers as truth. The temptation is not 
to form opinions but rather to receive them. Annually, the tabloids explode 
with indignation about the latest Turner Prize shortlist. It's good popularist 
stuff and politicians ignore it at their peril.

However, the "I don't know much about art but I know what I like" argument 
misses the point entirely. Art need not necessarily provide instant 
gratification. One can't Google a response to an artistic stimulus. There is no 
"answer" – or, if there is, it lies in the consciousness of the observer and 
this is what makes it special. Art doesn't work like Google: asking questions 
without having answers is healthy and yet it's being "educated out" of our 
children.

In Britain, we have not always been good at supporting public art. As a 
society, we just don't seem to understand its value. In hard times we feel that 
the arts are a luxury, somehow divorced from the real world.

I contend that creativity in general and public art in particular are of the 
real world and currently under threat in our schools despite the fact that, 
more than anything else, they are capable of increasing our understanding and 
broadening our knowledge by showing our young people alternative world views.

It could and should become normal to factor in the aesthetic when creating 
educational environments. After all, what better setting to place works of 
public art than in a school, where they can provide a counterpoint to the core 
areas of the curriculum?

We all need to be made aware of the primacy of art in our lives. We should not 
see art as a short-term financial commitment but as part of the holistic growth 
of society. It's vital to have art – it's what makes our culture; it's what 
makes us.

Simon Hitchens is an artist <http://www.simonhitchens.com/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 