
Like all great American businesses, the modern Hollywood comedy blockbuster 
began life as the equivalent of a Mom and Pop store - in this case, a 
high-school revue in the little burg of Shorewood, Wisconsin (pop 13,763). The 
Kentucky Fried Theatre group was the creative kindergarten for three teenage 
nerds - brothers David and Jerry Zucker, and pal Jerry Abrahams - who would 
later hit on the novel wheeze of applying the juvenile antics of Mad magazine 
to the po-faced Hollywood disaster movie.

Flushed with the success of 1980's Airplane! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane>, the trio (collectively codenamed 
ZAZ) even went so far as to publish a Dogme-style vow of chastity that outlined 
their comedic guidelines ("Rule 11: We don't do anything that Jerry Lewis would 
do"). In recent years, David Zucker has found a hilarious new outlet, directing 
fulminating attack ads for the Republican party.

Not that ZAZ had the 1980s comedy scene all to themselves. Over in New York, 
NBC's Saturday Night Live provided a fertile tide-pool for such emerging 
stand-ups as Bill Murray, Eddie Murphy, John Belushi and (most alarmingly) 
Chevy Chase. Film-maker John Hughes effectively cornered the teen market with 
The Breakfast Club and Ferris Bueller's Day Off, while Harry Shearer, 
Christopher Guest and Michael McKean patented the spoof documentary with 1984's 
This Is Spinal Tap. Ironically, the film appeared to flummox some contemporary 
viewers, who took it at face value and assumed that, yes, the amp really did go 
up to 11.

The Saturday Night Live effect continued right into the 1990s. Having 
road-tested Wayne's World on the show, comic Mike Myers spun out the amateurish 
antics of two smalltown metal-heads into a phenomenally successful 1992 movie, 
and later devised the still more lucrative Austin Powers franchise. Another SNL 
graduate, Adam Sandler, broke on to the Hollywood A-list by effectively 
disregarding the ZAZ rulebook and pitching himself as a modern-day Jerry Lewis. 
But the most significant development in 1990s film comedy came courtesy of two 
sibling writer-director teams. American Pie (by the Weitz brothers) and There's 
Something About Mary (from the Farrellys) overhauled the teen romp for the 
emergent "kidult" demographic, balancing scatological comedy with rounded, 
sympathetic characters and pointed the way ahead.

The latter picture also served as a springboard for its star, Ben Stiller. 
Today, Stiller is regarded as the lynchpin of what the US media refers to as 
"the frat pack". This close-knit group of performers and film-makers includes 
Will Ferrell, Owen Wilson, Seth Rogen, Jack Black, Steve Carell and Judd Apatow 
- a former room-mate of Adam Sandler who cut his teeth scripting The Larry 
Sanders Show.

"I really wish we had a secret headquarters where there was a secret bat-cave 
inside the Hollywood sign," Jack Black mused recently. "We would drive in and 
talk about domination of world comedy. We'd have super-powers and drive out in 
our super-comedy machines." Of course, Black was only kidding. And yet for the 
frat pack, the art of kidding has bloomed into a multi-million dollar 
enterprise - and is therefore deadly serious.
 