
Pah, pah, pah. This is how Chinese farmers have described the dreadful sound 
of watermelons exploding in their fields.

Last summer, the overuse of growth chemicals led to acres of spoiled 
watermelons in Jiangsu province. Around the same time, hundreds of guests at a 
village wedding were hospitalized after eating pork laced with another harmful 
growth chemical. Other science fiction-like food scare stories include soy 
sauce made of human hair, fluorescent-blue pork and pork chemically made to 
taste like beef. These food scares remind many in China of the melamine-tainted 
milk that sickened 300,000 babies and killed six in 2008, and of growing food 
safety problems.

Shi Yan discovered, however, as a young doctoral student interning at a 
community-supported agricultural (CSA) farm in the United States that the 
growing food safety concerns in China could open a market for organic food. 
When she returned to China in 2009 after her six month internship at Earth 
Right Farm, she founded her own CSA farm (CSA) in Su Jiatuo, a village in the 
Haidian District close to Beijing, and named it Little Donkey Farm.

At first, her friends and family showed dismay at her career choice. 'They 
were wary and some were not very supportive,' says Shi Yan. 'But later, with 
the success of the Little Donkey farm and the spread of CSA in China, they came 
to support it.'

In China, very few young people are interested in farming because of the low 
wages and social stigma attached to the farmer - they are regarded as backward, 
uneducated and often second-class citizens. 'Young people leave the farms 
because they perceive them as being an economic dead-end where they will be 
tied to the land and struggle to accrue income,' writes Fan So-han in an email. 
Fan once worked for the Chengdu Urban Rivers Association (CURA), an NGO that 
helps to raise awareness of environmental issues in the region and who helped 
to develop an eco-farm in Anlong village in Sichuan province.

In some ways, Shi Yan has pioneered a vision of farming that is slowly 
chipping away at this stigma. When Shi first launched Little Donkey Farm in 
2009, only ten young farmers signed on. That number is now 30 and Shi Yan also 
receives over 30 applications for her internship program.

In order to spread the word about CSA and organic farming, as well as to 
attract new young college recruits, Shi Yan gives presentations at local 
communities in the cities. She has discovered that by connecting people to 'the 
story of rural' and giving them an opportunity to understand where their food 
comes from, many are persuaded to join the Little Donkey Farm. 'These food 
safety issues are only a phenomenon,' says Shi. 'The real problem, and why food 
safety is becoming a more serious concern, is because consumer's lack 
understanding and knowledge about farming and farmers.'

Local media coverage has also helped to spread word about CSA and eco-farming. 
'There has been much more coverage in the local Chinese press than in Western 
press,' said Shi Yan. The government of Jiage in Jiangsu province recently 
learned of the Little Donkey Farm and asked Shi Yan to help them set up a CSA 
farm, which they named Big Buffalo. The approach towards Jiage was slightly 
different than in Shi Yan's town. Since the village has been shielded from 
industrialization and relies heavily on agriculture, the local government 
decided to adopt a CSA program as way to raise economic productivity. The local 
government in Su Jiatuo also helped Shi Yan build her farm and she has felt 
that the government has generally been supportive of her initiative.

Growing food safety concerns coupled with harsh factory life has encouraged 
some young workers are returning home to engage in organic farming. In Sichuan, 
for example, CSA and eco-farming has attracted migrant farmers to return home.

Gao Qingrong, a young woman who works at the Anlong eco-farm started with the 
help of Fan, certainly feels that eco-farming is worth the hard labour and 
lower wages. 'Farming is in a way less difficult than factory life. In addition 
to the long and difficult working hours in factories, you don't often have 
satisfying relations with people in the factories. Farming does not have these 
troubles. While farming is also very strenuous the lifestyle is much better.'

Gao returned home in 2006 with no intention of returning to farm but 
discovered that her parents, now much older, were struggling with the upkeep. 
It was her parents' idea to try eco-farming and Gao at first discouraged it, 
seeing it as unproductive and too labor intensive. After reading Rachel 
Carson's Silent Spring, through which she came to understand the many benefits 
of eco-farming, Gao changed her mind.

Despite stories like those of Shi Yan and Gao Qingrong, the spread of CSA has 
been promising but fairly slow. Considered part of a new eco-agricultural 
movement some call 'New Rural Reconstruction,' it has yet to gain ground.

Gao tells me, however, with a determined confidence that despite the negative 
stereotypes of the farmer, she believes, fate-like, that farming has a future. 
She says matter-of-factly, 'The Chinese agriculture tradition will continue to 
get passed down. Things will naturally change for the better.'
 