
Let's open with three rousing psychedelic ho-hums for the Permissive Society. 
So long as you're reasonable and moderate in your desires, permission may be 
given. Say you want to start as a cog in Shell-Mex and end your days as a big 
wheel. Permission may well be granted if you're the right type: "The qualities 
the army wants in its officers are just as important as an executive."

Of course if you're unlucky enough to be some kind of fanatical maniac who 
wants to eat in a restaurant wearing a trouser suit, permission may be 
withheld. (And we prefer it if you remember your social status when deciding 
which bar to choose in a pub.) If you want to produce "The Soldiers," go ahead, 
you only need written permission from the surviving relatives of Sir Winston 
Churchill, Lord Cherwell, Lord Alanbrooke and Bishop Bell of Chichester - which 
would make a good grisly story-line for an Alfred Hitchcock movie.

Permission is "Fanny Hill" available only in an expensive edition. Permission 
is the BBC showing "The War Game" to an audience of defence correspondents (who 
are used to asking permission to print the stories they hear at briefings) 
rather than TV critics. Permission is the deportation of Lenny Bruce, the Home 
Office file on Stokeley Carmichael. Permission means that if you're not 
satisfied with the newspapers, you're entitled to start your own. Permission is 
still - please sir, may I leave the room sir?

Permission implies the wisdom of an officially appointed elder brother. 
Permission, however you shake it, satisfies only the powerful (who don't need 
it) and the timid (who ask little else from life).

The Permissive Society is only a stage in the real, long, bloody struggle for 
freedom. It's easy to forget, because there are no official reminders, that 
every piece of liberty you own has been won in the struggle between the people 
and the ruling classes. Even the right to be cremated had to be fought for, at 
length, in the nineteenth century.

It's too early to know what shape the Free Society will take in Britain, if it 
ever comes. But it is possible to talk about some of the people who want it.

The current tendency is for radicals to move in small groups. It seems likely 
that, given the growing distrust of the major political parties, the anarchists 
and "Third World" groups will be recruiting heavily in the next five years.

But they only form part of what everyone finally has to call "The Underground" 
- an anti-commercial, anti-war, anti-police collection of people, some good, 
some bad, some phoney, some real.

Naturally, if we ever reach liberty, equality and fraternity, it won't be due 
to the Underground alone. But its very existence as an expansion of the old 
Bohemian colonies is a symptom of change.

Mention the Underground and most of us are conditioned to think of drugs. 
Certainly cannabis is becoming easier to obtain and pot-smokers are becoming 
more discreet in their smoking habits. Nobody in the Underground doubts that 
pot will become legal. On the other hand hardly anyone in the Underground 
believes that heroin is anything but a particularly horrific way of suicide.

LSD is different. There are evangelists around who won't trust anyone who 
hasn't been on an acid trip. There are plenty of others who believe that a man 
should be in control of his own visions. After all, runs the argument, everyone 
has visions, but most people dismiss them as daydreams and so they don't 
develop them.

Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> in the Underground is, I'd 
hazard, about as permissive as sex in show business. Both inside and outside 
the scene, the really crucial part of the sexual revolution is still in the 
blue-print stage. Granted, sexual guilt is no longer so oppressive. But my own 
observations, inquiries and embarrassing moments indicate that most people are 
sexually unfulfilled most of the time.

There's plenty wrong with the Underground - too many people cashing in, too 
much fashion slavery, too much vagueness about intentions political or 
otherwise, too much belief that the universe is inside you (which doesn't help 
anyone who happens to be outside, starving, oppressed, bombed, or simply 
unhappy).

But the Underground does place a high value on gentleness. It has a 
willingness to experiment and take risks. It sometimes has spontaneity, 
generosity, and gaiety. Sometimes it may be totally exasperating. But there's 
more sense of life down there than in all the corridors of power placed end to 
end.

[Adrian Mitchell's piece was part of a wider study of 'the permissive society' 
run by the Guardian. Click toread 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2012/8/29/1346231005538/Permissive-society-articl-001.jpg>
 the full version of this article, as well as his views on the Underground's 
movers and shakers and a profile of RD Laing.]
 