
Lord Tennyson died yesterday morning. Sir Andrew Clark [the physician at his 
bedside] in an interview with a press representative yesterday morning said, 
"Lord Tennyson has had a gloriously beautiful death. In all my experience I 
have never witnessed anything more glorious.

"There were no artificial lights in the chamber, and all was in darkness save 
for the silvery light of the moon at its full. The soft beams of light fell 
upon the bed and played upon the features of the living poet like a halo of 
Rembrandt."

Leader comment

England will be the poorer by his loss. He has outlived Browning, Matthew 
Arnold, Carlyle, Darwin, John Stuart Mill – all the, so to speak, European 
Englishmen of his generation except Mr. Gladstone – and now he too has crossed 
the bar and put out to sea.

For half a century Tennyson has been the best loved poet of his countrymen, 
and has taught and charmed as well as echoed them. He has, above all, been the 
poet of the young. It has been a great position and a great influence, and 
Tennyson has been as careful as was Wordsworth that his successor should take 
the laurel from the brows "of him that uttered nothing base."

Englishmen have largely become a race of town-dwellers, but they have at the 
bottom of their hearts the nostalgia of the fields and woods, of mountain and 
seashore, and no one who can stir that love and longing ever appeals to them in 
vain.

Tennyson knows better how to touch those deep-rooted instincts than any 
English poet except Shakespeare and perhaps Keats. The "laburnums, dropping 
wells of fire"; the "Field of charlock in the sudden sun / Between two showers, 
a cloth of palest gold"; the summer night in which "Couch'd at ease, / The 
white kine glimmered, and the trees / Laid their dark arms about the field": 
the "loud south-westerns, rolling ridge on ridge".

Every reader has his own pet passages of this kind – we have purposely not 
quoted the most famous – and the list might be extended ad infinitum. Along 
with this exquisite precision and felicity of touch goes a not less close and 
sympathetic observation of the birds and beasts and fishes: the rabbit 
"fondling its own harmless face".

As to Tennyson's attitude towards tho deepest problems of human concern, it is 
only needful to say that it comes out chiefly in that poem [In Memoriam 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In_Memoriam_A.H.H.>] on his dead friend, which so 
many delicate and loving souls know almost by heart, and which in the last 
resort gives the hopeful answer of faith to the terrible questions it propounds.
 