
High-up in the mountains of South-West Ethiopia the mist mingles amongst the 
tree-tops. At ground-level, rich green foliage is abundant and plump red 
berries are ready for picking. This is the Oromia region of Ethiopia, and here 
thousands of families are dependent upon Ethiopia's native crop: coffee.

Dubbed 'Black Gold' in a 2006 film, coffee is the second most valuable 
commodity in the world after oil. But in Oromia and across Ethiopia, 
smallholder coffee growers find this hard to believe: "What I understand is 
that people in your country drink it, but I receive nothing," says one farmer. 
Coffee growers rarely get a fair deal and Ethiopia is one of the poorest 
countries in the world.

Just over ten years ago, the Oromia Coffee Farmers Cooperative Union (OCFCU) 
was founded and today, under the leadership of Tadesse Meskela it represents 
over 100,000 smallholder coffee farmers and their families. This union of 
cooperatives has turned around the fortunes of coffee growing communities in 
the Oromia region. "Our members are benefiting from the profits made by the 
cooperative," says Meskela. "Schools have been built, farmers earn a guaranteed 
price for their coffee and the cooperative can provide enhanced food security 
to farmers and their families." Such is the success of the OCFCU, more coffee 
cooperatives haven been founded in Yirgachefe and Sidama. Both of these regions 
grow unique, world-renowned coffee.

Cooperatives have brought Ethiopian farmers direct access to global markets. 
Miju Adula is the Chairman of the Kilenso Mokonsia Cooperative and in a report 
commissioned by Oxfam New Zealand he says: "We used to sell our coffee to 
exporters who would cheat us and sometimes they did not pay us at all. Now we 
know the value of our coffee and we receive profits from the coffee sold by the 
Union". Coffee growing in Ethiopia doesn't just provide export revenue; it is 
engrained in the cultural life of rural communities, who have been growing 
coffee for centuries.

Access to world markets and a fair price for the coffee that Ethiopian farmers 
produce isn't the only determining factor to the success of a coffee growing 
community. Like all agricultural producers, coffee farmers must hope for good 
climatic conditions each season; not too hot, not too cold and perfectly timed 
precipitation. Without these conditions, yields decrease, coffee quality is 
poor and the incidence of plant disease increases. Cooperatives have given 
their members access to fair market prices but can they support growers in the 
face of climate change?

For fairtrade coffee company Cafédirect, a recent winner at the Guardian 
Sustainable Business Awards, waiting to see how climate change affects their 
small holder cooperative farmers hasn't been an option. In 2007, Cafédirect 
launched a Public-Private Partnership programme known as Adaption to Climate 
Change for smallholders (AdapCC), with the German Technical Cooperative, 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit. Together they have worked 
with cooperative tea and coffee produces in Latin America and East Africa to 
identify the threats from climate change.

In the 2009 Oxfam Report, 'Suffering the Science', Willington Wamayeve, the 
General Manager of the Gumutindo Coffee Cooperative in Uganda which supplies 
coffee to Cafédirect says: "I have never known the weather to be so 
unpredictable. The coffee plants are badly affected – flowering is stopping. 
Last year alone we lost about 40% of our coffee production because of climate 
change." With the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predicting 
rising temperatures and increasingly erratic precipitation across East Africa, 
coffee growers are at an increasing risk of crop failure and declining yields.

Through the AdapCC partnership project, small-scale farmers worked with 
experts to recognise changes in climate that threaten coffee production. 
Growers were involved in identifying low-input technological and management 
changes that can mitigate the actions of climate change. Such steps can hugely 
reduce the vulnerability of communities and ensure that they keep on producing 
coffee, no matter what the weather does. The ethos amongst AdapCC farmers is 
"the climate changes and I adapt to it!"

Adaptation can be simple, but knowledge about the changing processes is 
required. In the instance of climate change and predicting the weather for each 
growing season, meteorological data is needed, but according to the World 
Meteorological Organisation (WMO), East Africa has one of the lowest densities 
of weather stations anywhere in the world. This lack of information makes 
predicting weather and climate in some areas almost impossible. But this 
needn't be the case.

In a partnership between the mobile phone company Ericcson, the Global 
Humanitarian Forum and the WMO, it is hoped that by 2012 large areas of East 
Africa will be covered by weather stations hosted on mobile phone masts. This 
much-needed information can then be used to monitor trends and changes in the 
weather and climate. Companies developing partnerships with developing world 
communities and actively pursuing corporate social responsibility programmes 
can bring solutions to problems that have big results.

Back in Ethiopia, the Oromia Coffee Farmers Cooperative Union has successfully 
transformed the lives of thousands of coffee farmers over the past twelve 
years. Tadesse Meskela has huge ambitions for the cooperative, but he also 
faces new challenges as he strives to support over half a million Ethiopians 
who are dependent upon the profits made through the selling of its coffee. The 
answers to these challenges don't just lie in smallholder farmers working 
together in cooperatives; partnerships with global private sector companies and 
non-governmental organisations will be critical.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 