
Banks and supermarkets are among the risers as leading shares struggle to 
recover from an earlier slump.

Tesco has climbed 6.7p to 371.9p on talk that US investment guru Warren 
Buffett had edged up his stake in the supermarket from 3.21% to 3.64%. Reuters 
commented this could be seen as a vote of confidence in new chief executive 
Phil Clarke, after Buffett earlier called forTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> to take a hard look at its loss 
making US operation Fresh & Easy.

Meanwhile Tesco's much trumpeted price promotion gets underway today but so 
far has done little harm toJ Sainsbury shares, which are up 4.3p at 270.6p.

Among the banks Lloyds Banking Group is up 1.1p to 35.245p while Royal Bank of 
Scotland has risen 0.71p to 23.54p and Barclays is 3p better at 149p.

The lack of concrete proposals and detail from the IMF and EU over the weekend 
as to how they propose to solve Greece's debt problems is putting the market 
under pressure again, despite suggestions of an increase in the Euro bailout 
fund to €3trn. There is a growing sense that Greece may default, and the 
question is whether the global authorities can put enough of a barricade in 
place to contain the chaos.

However, after a more than 2% decline on the Nikkei overnight, Europe is a 
little calmer at the moment. TheFTSE 100, having slumped to 4974 in early 
trading, has recovered to 5059.80, down just 7.01 points. German confidence 
figures, while lower, showed the country remaining relatively resilient 
compared to the rest of the Eurozone, helping push the German Dax and French 
Cac both higher. Lee McDarby at Investec Corporate Treasury, said:
 Following the confusion and uncertainty surrounding the euro zone last week, 
and despite talk over a possible €3trn fund allowing Greece to default and 
impose a 50% haircut on its debt, the weekend's discussions in Washington 
delivered no firm new announcements. Although nothing is concrete at the moment 
a package of this size would, if enacted, could cause some respite for the 
markets. Authorities could move closer to a solution over the next few weeks, 
especially bearing in mind the Cannes G20 Summit takes place in November.

The markets continue to be very nervous this week and are likely to remain so 
until any formal announcement is made.

With gold plunging as traders suggested investors were cashing some of their 
gains to cover losses elsewhere, precious metal miners are leading the way down.
Fresnillo has fallen 63p to £15.73, while Randgold Resources is down 170p at 
£61.80 andAfrican Barrick Gold is the biggest loser in the mid-cap index, off 
31p at 538.5p.
 