
Outsourcing companies had a mixed day, with G4S very much taking the wooden 
spoon.

The company - fresh from the tagging scandal where, along with Serco, it 
charged the government for electronic surveillance of criminals who were not 
being monitored, were in prison or even dead - dropped 6.1p to 229p. The fall 
was partly due to rival Securitas reporting lower than expected quarterly 
earnings and saying that signs of economic recovery in Europe and the US had 
not fed through to the security market.

At the same time Panmure Gordon issued a sell note ahead of G4S's results next 
month. Analyst Mike Allen said:
 We have reviewed our forecast assumptions and are now 5-11% below consensus 
earnings per share from 2013 to 2015. Our target price also falls to 200p, 
which is based on a more realistic multiple of 12.5 times 2014 earnings per 
share with return on capital employed of 10% which appears more appropriate. 
With 17% potential downside we switch our recommendation from hold to sell.

G4S faces a number of headwinds across different fronts with concerns over 
slowing growth in developing markets and weaker foreign exchange, further 
margin pressure in the UK and US together with further disposals required to 
deleverage the balance sheet. 
Meanwhile Serco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup> shrugged off 
a negative note from Shore Capital, closing 7.8p higher at 404p. Shore's Robin 
Speakman said:
 With Serco's shares now trading at very depressed levels, and ahead of the 
results for the full year to December 2013, we note that a number of contract 
announcements are due which may lead to a short term 'bounce' in the share 
price. Firstly an agreement to extend Serco's Northern Rail Franchise with 
joint venture partner Abellio, which is due to expire on 1 April this year, out 
to 2016; this is worth some £300m in revenue and around £35m in profitability 
on our forecasts for Serco. Securing the roll-over of this contract would be 
welcome indeed.

Secondly, securing the roll-over of the asset support contract for the 
Ministry of Defence at RAF Fylingdales, a small but technically important 
infrastructure. Thirdly, we believe that the UK government is due to announce 
the winner of the contract to manage the Defence Infrastructure Organisation in 
the near future, Serco's consortia (including Bechtel) is now bidding on equal 
terms to another consortia involving Capita.

Clearly, failure on the above contracts would be disappointing in the context 
of Serco's ongoing issues and the further profits warning of 30 January. We 
expect some positive news from the above, however. Longer term we believe that 
Serco faces a number of strategic headwinds deferring growth in earnings likely 
out to 2016. We would see any recovery in the share price in the short term as 
an opportunity to reduce weightings further therefore [our] sell is retained.

Subsequently the RAF Fylingdales contract was in fact re-awarded to Serco, 
although a deal to run London's community payback scheme appeared to have been 
ended a couple of years early.

Overall, the week started on a fairly calm note after recent volatility, as 
investors awaited this week's testimony on central bank forward guidance from 
both new Federal Reserve chief Janet Yellen and the Bank of England's Mark 
Carney. TheFTSE 100 finished 19.87 points higher at 6591.55, a two week high.

But Centrica closed 5.3p at 308.9p. The slide followed energy secretary Ed 
Davey asking regulator Ofgem to investigate gas prices and the profits being 
made by the big six suppliers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/10/ed-davey-energy-companies-gas-profits-british-gas>
He suggested companies could be broken up if they were deemed to be too 
dominant, with Centrica-owned British Gas singled out in particular. Fellow 
energy companySSE slipped 6p to £13.51.

But a rise in the gold price helped push up Mexican precious metal miner 
Fresnillo up 70p to 862.5p, while African Barrick Gold added 14.9p to 238.5p, 
helped by HSBC raising its recommendation from underweight to neutral and its 
target from 160p to 230p.

Vodafone was steady at 222p after reports it had made a €7bn offer for Spanish 
cable company Ono. Meanwhile Goldman Sachs resumed coverage with a buy rating 
and 275p price target. The bank said the mobile phone group was potentially 
both an acquirer and a target:
 We believe the current share price fails to reflect the opportunities for 
Vodafone to improve its structural position via accelerated investment (driving 
weaker competitors to consolidate) and via fixed line acquisitions, which in 
our view are a prerequisite to restore industry pricing power.

Additionally, Vodafone is one of the only substantial assets available to 
potential industry acquirers seeking to build global scale, with the added 
attraction of £106bn of long-lasting agreed tax losses.

We identify $2bn-$7bn of potential annual synergies should Vodafone combine 
with a leading global operator. 
Barclays ended 3.3p higher at 275p as it rushed out a profit announcement a 
day before it was due, showing a figure of £5.2bn, just below forecasts of 
£5.4bn. The surprise statement, following a comment in the Financial Times and 
a Morgan Stanley note on Friday, came as the bank was already in the news for 
leaking customer information. The full details are still due on Tuesday. 
Analyst Ian Gordon at Investec kept his buy rating:
 Apparently due to a leak, Barclays has been bounced into an early 
announcement of tomorrow's 2013 results. Adjusted pretax profit of £5.2bn is 1% 
ahead of us (£5,148m) but 4% below company-compiled consensus (£5,408m). So 
even if there is a small miss against more frothy sellside forecasts, we are 
reassured that the 2013 outturn was marginally better than we expected. Clear 
valuation support remains.

Insurers were under pressure on worries about the cost of the continuing 
floods across the country.RSA Insurance, which could reportedly tap 
shareholders for £500m as new boss Stephen Hester attempts rebuild its balance 
sheets, dipped 1.7p to 102.5p, whileAviva was 0.4p lower at 455.9p.

Mothercare slipped 2.5p to 251.5p despite weekend suggestions Asda could be 
interested in its Early Learning Centre business.

Finally Manx Telecom rang up an 18p rise to 160p on its first day on Aim. The 
company placed 110.1m shares at 142p with major shareholders including 
Fidelity, Blackrock and Artemis.
 