
Leading shares slipped lower for the second day running, despite a strong 
performance from heavyweight stockVodafone.

The telecoms group jumped 2.75p to 162.4p on rekindled hopes it could reap 
more than £50bn from its stake in US group Verizon Wireless.

Its partner, Verizon, said the wireless business had its strongest fourth 
quarter ever in 2012. But the real catalyst for Vodafone's rise was a comment 
from Verizon's chief executive Lowell McAdam that it was feasible for the US 
company to buy out Vodafone's 45% stake in their joint venture. He told the 
Wall Street Journal "we have always said we would love to own all of that 
asset." However analysts at Espirito Santo - which valued Vodafone's stake at 
around £50bn after accounting for tax - played down the idea of anything 
happening immediately:
 That is a very supportive statement for Vodafone, and is probably true, but 
in our view the transaction would have to be executed over 3 years, in three 
annual 15% blocks, due to Verizon's relatively high level of net debt and the 
cashflow drag from its wireline business.

However, we do not believe that Vodafone is interested in selling at this 
stage: Verizon Wireless represents over half its earnings and is a rare source 
of growth, as well as underpinning its dividend growth too. In other words the 
offer price from Verizon would need to be compelling and we are not sure that 
it has the firepower for that, yet. It is more likely in our view that the 
status quo persists or a while longer, but it is also possible that Vodafone 
rolls its 45% stake up into Verizon itself, in exchange for a 30-40% stake in 
the overall Verizon Group. 
Other possibilities which have been suggested by analysts recently include 
Verizon buying the whole ofVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> and selling off the parts 
it does not want.

Vodafone's rise added just over 5 points to the FTSE 100 but this was not 
enough to stop the index dipping 10.95 points to 6053.63 after earlier climbing 
as high as 6088. Angus Campbell, head of market analysis at Capital Spreads, 
said:
 A seesaw session today as buyers and sellers couldn't make up their minds as 
to whether the recent strength we've seen so far in 2013 has any more legs in 
it or that, bearing in mind the troubled waters that lie ahead, there's 
potential for a more comprehensive move to the downside.

The reluctance of the FTSE 100 to make any concerted effort towards posting 
gains was mainly down to a poor start to the US trading session across the 
pond, where the Dow Jones commenced in the red and continued lower ahead of the 
corporate earnings season which gets underway after the close tonight. 
Investors are just holding back on equities until there's a little more clarity 
on how corporate America is holding up following all that indecision regarding 
the fiscal cliff towards the end of last year.

Consumer stocks came under pressure on worries about discretionary spending 
being reined in, withWhitbread down 51p at £24.62. Tui Travel fell 9.8p to 
276.8p as Morgan Stanley downgraded from equalweight to underweight.

The biggest FTSE 100 faller of the day was production and exploration group 
Tullow Oil,which lost 46p to £12.25 after Investec analyst Brian Gallagher 
downgraded from hold to sell:
 Ahead of Tullow's trading and operational statement this Friday we downgrade 
the explorer to a sell and lower our sum of the parts-derived target price 
substantially to 1000p [from 1399p]. While still a best-in-class explorer, as 
Tullow has grown it has become increasingly leveraged to the "P" rather than 
the "E" side of its portfolio. We highlight a production profile that has 
slipped materially to the right, a looming capex bill and an exploration 
portfolio, that, while strong, may not have enough depth to offset fresh 
production disappointments. 
But cruise specialist Carnival sailed up 35p to £24.35 as UBS raised its price 
target from £25 to £27.

Shire rose 49p to £19.63 after the pharmaceutical group unveiled a deal to buy 
US group Lotus Tissue Repair, which specialises in the treatment of genetic 
disorders.

Shortly after the market closed the company announced chief executive Angus 
Russell would be speaking at a healthcare conference in San Francisco later and 
would sayShire <https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> expected to deliver 
double digit full year earnings growth in 2012. It was increasingly confident 
of meeting expectations for 2013.

As the consumer electronics show continued in Las Vegas, chip designer Arm, 
whose technology is used in Apple products including the iPad, climbed 9p to 
808.5p.

Credit Suisse raised its target price on the company from 645p to 780p and its 
earnings forecasts for 2012 by 3%, for 2013 by 10% and for 2014 by 12%, based 
on raised estimates for smartphone and tablet sales.

In a mixed day for miners, Anglo American added 27.5p to £20.28 after it 
unveiled Mark Cutifani of AngloGold as its new chief executive to replace 
Cynthia Carroll. Numis said:
 Cutifani has been chief executive of AngloGold Ashanti since 2007 and is 
widely regarded to have had a successful tenor, leading a successful 
restructuring campaign across the business. He will start from 3 April 2013 
with a £1.2m per annum salary plus incentives. Worth the money and a good hire 
in our view. 
Centamin climbed nearly 9%, up 3.63p to 44.18p after another halted shipment 
of gold from Egypt was allowed to proceed.

But African Barrick Gold slumped more than 20% after takeover talks fell apart.

In August, parent company Barrick Gold Corporation said it was in talks with 
China National Gold Group about a sale of its 73.9% stake in African Barrick. 
Now Barrick has said the discussions have ended, and price appears to be the 
issue. African Barrick's chief executive Greg Hawkins said:
 Whilst the discussions between China National and Barrick have not lead to a 
transaction, the process has re-emphasised the fundamental long-term value of 
African Barrick's portfolio and the scarcity of large scale producing 
opportunities to enter the gold market in Africa. 
Shareholders were not so upbeat however, and the FTSE 250 company's shares 
dropped 91.9p to 352.1p. Kate Craig at Liberum Capital said:
 A disappointing development - we had envisaged a bid at around 550p a share 
versus our net asset value of 418p a share. 
Among the retailers Debenhams lost 9p to 108.1p as it sacrificed profit 
margins to lure in shoppers over the key Christmas period. Like for like sales 
in the five weeks to 5 January rose 5%, butDebenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> said it had stepped up 
promotions so margins for the year would be rise by around 10 basis points 
rather than the previously forecast 20 basis points.

Finally SQS Software Quality Systems finished 9% higher at 278.5p after 
announcing €64m of new business, including its largest ever contract win worth 
€25m over the next three years.
 