
Leading shares fell to their lowest level for four weeks on continuing 
concerns about an economic slowdown in China and worries about the tensions in 
Ukraine.

The FTSE 100 closed at 6620.90, down 64.62 points, its worst since 10 
February, after disappointing trade data from China at the weekend pointed to a 
possible slowdown in the country, a key consumer of commodities. A bond default 
last week by a Chinese solar company raised concerns about the credit 
situation, with bonds in a similar business suspended on Tuesday on the 
Shanghai exchange. Copper in particular came under renewed pressure in early 
trading, since the metal is used for collateral for some of the opaque loans in 
China's shadow banking system, and if these go bad, the market could be flooded 
with selling. The metal made a slight recovery towards the end of the day but 
is still down sharply from recent levels.

Chris Beauchamp, market analyst at IG said:
 Equity markets have come under pressure around the world as copper prices 
continue to fall following weak economic data from China. Although copper 
prices have bounced slightly today, the drop through three-year lows on Tuesday 
unnerved markets. Throw in some headlines about Russian movements in Crimea, 
and you have the recipe for a continuing selloff.


But gold seemed to regain some of its lustre as a safe haven, helping push 
precious metals minerFresnillo 18p higher to 900p while African Barrick Gold 
added 10p to 260p. African Barrick was hit on Tuesday after a 10% stake sale by 
majority owner Barrick Corporation.

Elsewhere Prudential put on 37p to £13.98, making it the biggest riser in the 
FTSE 100 after operating profits for 2013 jumped 17% to £2.95bn, the top end of 
analyst forecasts, helped by double digit growth in Asian markets. The insurer 
was also boosted by news it was expanding a partnership with Standard Chartered 
to distribute its life assurance products. A

Vodafone added 3.3p to 229.55p as the market awaits the outcome of the mobile 
phone group's reported €7bn offer for Spanish cable company Ono.

The day's biggest faller in the leading index is G4S, down 12.9p to 232.5p 
following lower than expected profits. The security group reported a 2.8% rise 
in underlying profits to £442m but this was below forecasts of £455m.

But with a spate of charges including £136m relating to repayment to the UK 
government for overcharging on a tagging contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/12/g4s-tagging-charge-criminal-investigation>
knocked profits back to £56m, down 85%.

A number of major companies have seen their shares go ex-dividend, including 
British American Tobacco, down 116.5p at £32.18, and Hammerson, 22.5p lower at 
549.5p.

International Airlines Group edged up 0.8p to 444.8p after a positive note 
from Liberum. The broker said:
 British Airways will remain the main driver of IAG's performance. However, 
the turnaround at Iberia should not be underestimated. Although still 
loss-making, the path to profitability through better productivity, headcount 
reductions and long-term wage moderation is clear. An acceptable margin on €4bn 
of revenue at Iberia would add materially to the group result. We see scope for 
the group's 2015 €1.8bn operating profit target to be exceeded (our forecast is 
€1.96bn). Our recommendation remains buy with an increased target price of 550p 
(previously 450p). 
British Gas owner Centrica, up 0.9p to 327.9p, was boosted by analysts at 
Berenberg. Lawson Steele and Andrew Fisher upgraded their recommendation from 
hold to buy with a 365p price target, saying:
 We have to live with political risk in UK energy supply. We have to live with 
various other headwinds to growth, too. However, we also believe that 
Centrica's current valuation offers enough to take on these risks. This 
includes an estimated £200m per annum pre-tax impact from government 
intervention. Our resulting blue sky valuation range of 331p-399p also suggests 
a reasonable risk-reward balance. Yes, the group faces challenges and this is 
by no means a stock for the faint-hearted, but despite all else, Centrica has 
not suddenly become a bad business overnight. It still has a healthy balance 
sheet and good cash flow generation. 
Meanwhile Credit Suisse issued a neutral recommendation, saying:
 We believe self-help in the upstream gas and oil production is the key part 
of the turnaround. We also see an improving UK economy helping British Gas, and 
believe a price freeze by any future government will be unworkable without 
taking cost into general taxation.

Among the mid-caps, Kenmare Resources, which operates the Moma titanium 
minerals mine in Mozambique, fell 0.95p or 6.5% to 13.55p after reporting a 
$44m loss for 2013 compared to a $49.5m profit the previous year. It has 
completed its investment in Moma and restructured its debt, but commodity price 
falls hit cashflow and profitability and it suffered from power supply 
problems. Analysts at RBC Capital Markets said:
 Revenue and costs were below our forecasts due to accounting adjustments 
related to the expansion; adjusting for these brought revenues, costs and 
EBITDA in line with RBC. Kenmare is trading at a significant discount to our 
36p a share net asset value because of soft product markets and the impact on 
output of erratic power. Resolving the latter with generation-sets could be a 
catalyst for stronger investment performance. 
But Hikma Pharmaceuticals was 54p higher at £15.27 after full year profits 
more than doubled, helped by strong demand and higher prices for doxycycline, 
an antibiotic to treat bacterial infections such as Lyme disease.

In a busy day for retail news, online grocer Ocado fell 33p to 539p despite 
saying a rise in first quarter sales put it on track to make a maiden pretax 
profit this year.

The company, which has a partnership with Waitrose and more recently signed a 
£200m deal to provide Morrisons' online service, said sales had risen 18% to 
£218.8m in the twelve weeks to the end of February. But this was a slowdown 
from the 20% gain in the 16 weeks to December.

Elsewhere French Connection added 0.25p to 63.25p after the fashion retailer 
reporting improved results, with an annual loss of £4.4m compared to a deficit 
of £7.2m a year earlier. It said expenses were lower and second half trading 
was stronger in its key UK and European markets.

Two more retailers joined the stock market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/12/poundland-pets-at-home-float-share-price-ipo>
, with mixed results.Poundland priced its shares at 300p each and saw them rise 
to 370p in conditional dealings, butPets at Home fell from its offer price of 
245p to close at 238p.
 