
With mining shares dragging the market lower once more, outsourcing group Serco
 managed to buck the downward trend.

Its shares jumped 16p to 616.5p or nearly 3% after it forecast better than 
expected revenue growth for the first half of 2013 albeit with a slight dip in 
operating margin due to investment in bidding for contracts. David Brockton at 
Espirito Santo issued a buy note, saying:
 Demand for Serco's outsourcing services is driven both by a rising 
requirement for efficiency as well as growing levels of investment in social 
infrastructure globally, two factors which we do not expect to abate.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished at 6215.47, well down on the month and the 
quarter but up around 100 points on another turbulent week.

Both base and precious metal prices continued to come under pressure, on 
worries about economic growth and an end to quantitative easing.

So African Barrick Gold lost 8p to 96p while copper specialist Antofagasta 
fell 21.5p to 795p and controversial Kazakh minerEurasian Natural Resources 
Corporation ended 7.8p lower at 204p. A low-ball $4.7bn bid by its founders to 
take ENRC private moved a step closer after major shareholder and rivalKazakhmys
, down 6.3p to 258.7p, said on Monday it would back the deal, giving the 
bidders control of around 80% of its target.

Vodafone, which agreed a €7.7bn (£6.6bn) deal to buy Germany's biggest cable 
company on Monday, rose 1.5p to 187.85p after Deutsche Bank analysts raised 
their recommendation from hold to buy with a 217p price target.

The bank said the move for Kabel Deutschland could push Vodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> into cashing in its stake 
in its US joint venture Verizon Wireless to reduce debt and fund further deals. 
With US competition increasing, Deutsche believes it would be a good time to 
dispose of the stake.

Elsewhere Schroders added 27p to £21.83 after Exane BNP Paribas moved from 
neutral to outperform with a £25 target price, butBAE Systems lost 8.2p to 383p 
as Deutsche Bank cut its rating from buy to hold and JP Morgan Cazenove issued 
an underweight recommendation.

Property groups were in demand for their defensive qualities, with Hammerson 
8.5p higher at 487.3p andSegro climbing 4.8p to 279.2p after it announced a 
property joint venture in Europe with Canadian pension fund PSP Investments.

Engineering group Smiths Group slipped 11p to £13.08 despite growing hopes of 
a sale of its medical division. US group CareFusion was tipped as one potential 
purchaser, with analysts at UBS suggesting the business could fetch around 
£2.8bn. Moving its recommendation from neutral to buy, UBS said:
 We believe a sale of medical will be positive for Smiths as: (1) it will 
realise the fundamental value of medical; (2) it is likely to attract bidders 
for the other Smiths businesses and (3) will reduce the conglomerate discount 
some investors apply to Smiths driving a rerating of the shares. 
United Utilities, up 4p at 684p, was buoyed by talk during the week that 
LongRiver, the consortium which failed to agree a bid for Severn Trent, could 
be interested in the rival water company.

Finally CPP, the troubled card protection group which was finded for 
mis-selling offences, dropped nearly 19% to 3p after majority shareholder 
Hamish Macgrefor Ogston decided not to make a bid for the business. Ogston, who 
owns 575%, also said he would not take part in a refinancing of the company. 
CPP said it would continue talks with its lenders and other business partners 
about a long term funding plan.
 