
Leading shares continued their losing streak, down for the third trading day 
in a row after late jitters sent copper prices lower and hit the mining sector.

For much of the day, markets had been edging higher but lurking concerns about 
tensions in Ukraine and an economic slowdown in China refused to die down and 
finally got the upper hand. Added to that came talk of another possible Chinese 
corporate bond default, pushing Wall Street lower in early trading and sending 
many European markets into reverse.

By the close the FTSE 100 had dipped 3.93 points to 6685.52, having earlier 
climbed as high at 6718.

With copper falling to a four year low at one point on the Chinese worries, 
Antofagasta fell 18.5p to 840p and BHP Billiton lost 10p to £18.12.

Banking shares also came under pressure.

An appearance by Bank of England members, including governor Mark Carney, at a 
Treasury select committee hearing brought alleged foreign exchange manipulation 
into the spotlight and also reminded investors of the other various banking 
scandals.

A couple of broker notes added to the downbeat mood, with Barclays losing 
5.85p to 236.15p in the wake of Morgan Stanley cutting its earnings estimates 
by around 9% to 12%, partly due to weaker investment bank trading.

Royal Bank of Scotland closed 9.6p lower at 310.2p, hit by a reduce 
recommendation from Nomura.

Among the risers Aviva added 14p to 523.5p after a couple of positive City 
comments. Nomura issued a buy note following the insurer's figures last week, 
sayingAviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> was the key 
restructuring story in the UK sector. Meanwhile RBC moved its recommendation 
from underperform to sector perform and raised its price target from 400p to 
550p.

Sports Direct International climbed 29p to 838p as the retailer outlined plans 
to give founder Mike Ashley a £65m bonus to recognise its recent growth 
performance, with investors pleased by the targets set by the company.

Next added 150p to £67.45 after online sales did well in February due to the 
poor weather, according to the British Retail Consortium. In a buy note, Bank 
of America Merrill Lynch said:
 Next reports its 2014 results on 20 March and we expect these to lead to 
consensus earnings upgrades given Next's online momentum and an improving 
outlook for the UK consumer. We have nudged up our high end 2015/16 pretax 
profit forecasts as we now assume a slightly better Retail like for like and 
higher gross margin owing to the recent strength of sterling. Next's valuation 
is in line with the UK general retail sector but we think it deserves a premium 
owing to high online exposure (around 50% of profit) and high earnings 
visibility. 
But Marks & Spencer, lacking a strong online presence, was down 1.5p at 480p.

Johnson Matthey, the speciality chemicals group best known for its catalysts 
to control car emissions, went into reverse after a broker downgrade. Its 
shares fell 92p to £30.96 after Liberum moved from buy to hold, with analyst 
Adam Collins saying:
 We are trimming our earnings estimates by roughly 4% for 2014/15 and 2015/16 
due to foreign exchange translation, higher lost income from Amplats [Anglo 
American Platinum] and bigger start up losses from the new businesses than 
previously anticipated. Whilst none of this is sinister it pushes our estimates 
slightly below consensus..... We remain fans of the management and principal 
businesses but downgrade to hold seeing limited upside until upgrades return. 
Liberum also gave more detail on the Amplats situation:
 On 1 January 2014 Johnson Matthey's longstanding contract with Anglo Platinum 
came to an end. As part of the new agreement it will no longer receive a 
discount for purchasing platinum group metals from Amplats for its 
manufacturing businesses nor receive fees linked to the platinum price and 
trading volume for its role in developing and promoting uses for platinum. It 
will continue to purchase platinum from Amplats and will continue to conduct 
some market research for the company for a year or two but the metal purchasing 
will be without discounts and the market research fees negligible compared to 
before.

When the terms of the new agreement were originally announced in February 
2013, Johnson Matthey indicated that it expected commission income from the two 
lost streams to be £35m in the year ending March 2013. Previously we had 
assumed that the commission income in 2013/14 would also be £35m albeit 
pro-rata for the 9 months the contract remained in existence i.e £26m. We now 
understand that the 9 month contribution was actually around £31m as Amplats 
production volume rose in the year and fee income was partly linked to this 
higher volume.

Among companies reporting results, Close Brothers added 30p to £14.70 as it 
unveiled a 21% rise in first half operation profit.

Elsewhere African Barrick Gold headed sharply lower, down 58.1p or nearly 19% 
to 250p, after its majority shareholder sold a 10% stake. Canada's Barrick Gold 
Corporation has pocketed nearly £113m by disposing of 41m shares at 275p each, 
as it raises capital to help offset the recent slump in the gold price. The 
move will still leave it with a 64% stake in African Barrick,

Lower down the market Velocys, the specialist in technology for plants 
converting gas to liquid fuels, rose 5.5p to 157.25p. The company has agreed a 
closer collaboration with US car parts company Shiloh, which involves the 
latter buying around 601,000 shares for 200p each. Numis said:
 We see this as a positive step for Velocys as the company strives to continue 
to innovate, offering customers an optimised product using state of the art 
manufacturing technology and quality systems. We believe Shiloh's extensive 
automotive experience allows Velocys to automate the process of reactor core 
manufacture (e.g. through the use of high precision laser welding) reducing 
costs, increasing quality and providing the ability to rapidly scale production.

Finally, Wednesday sees the first day of conditional trading in both Pets at 
Home and Poundland. Alastair McCaig, market analyst at IG, said:
 IG's grey market has both companies trading at a premium to their IPO 
listings, which might seem overly optimistic. However, last year IG clients 
predicted that Royal Mail would start trading at over £4, versus its listing 
price of £3.30. Given that they also came within a few cents of Twitter's 
valuation on its first day of trading, we could see a similar strong start for 
tomorrow's stock market debutantes.
 