
App: FundedApps <http://www.fundedapps.com>

By: Offficial <http://www.linkedin.com/company/offficial>, the trading name of 
Ridgegate Digital

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>

What is it?

It allows you to submit your own app ideas, for £1.19 a pop, to the FundedApps 
creators who will analyse your idea before dumping it or creating it.

Who is it by?

FundedApps was formed in November 2010 as part of Offficial – an investment 
funding company which develops mobile apps, set up by ex-Nokia designer 
Alastair Curtis and msn.co.uk developer Jamie Lyons – and launched in February.

What does it promise?

FundedApps says it is "bringing brilliant ideas to life". If it likes your 
idea it will pay £250 plus 25% of any net profit the app makes when it is 
published.

How does it work?

FundedApps will acknowledge receipt of your idea in writing within three 
working days of your submission, and you will get a simple "yes" or "no" 
decision within seven working days (app ideas not submitted in English will 
automatically be categorised as a "no").

If accepted, your idea must overcome a further hurdle: it will be presented to 
an investment committee and you will only get your £250 if the committee grants 
final approval. FundedApps still reserves the right to cancel development of 
your app after this stage but it won't ask for the £250 to be refunded if it 
does so.

Once you have been paid £250 you effectively give up your full rights to the 
app. You will then be paid 25% of net profits on a quarterly basis within 15 
working days of the end of each quarter, and be provided with a statement 
setting out the revenue generated and your share of it.

So far, so transparent. But what happens if your idea is rejected? According 
to the legal blurb FundedApps will keep your idea "in strict confidence", and 
employees, agents and sub-contractors will be bound by confidentiality 
obligations. And Curtis himself says "All ideas are time-stamped and logged on 
a database, and we have no ownership of ideas unless they go forward. If we 
reject an idea, it remains the owner's idea."

Is it easy to use?

The actual process is simple. The home page features a giant grey wheel that 
users can move to access their history, notes and the legal terms and 
conditions – and has a large purple button in the middle for users to submit an 
idea. If users do so it is at this point they enter into a binding contract 
with Offficial.

Is it fun?

The process itself is not exactly a riot – you cut and paste an idea into a 
box and click send – although the wheel does make a robotic noise and parts of 
it glow when it turns. It would obviously be more of a blast if your idea gets 
turned into an app, but this is statistically unlikely: the creators state "the 
percentage of rejections will be high so brace yourselves for a potential 
rejection."

Is it pretty?

There's nothing offensive here, but the predominantly black and steel-grey 
colour scheme has a touch of the 80s Playboy theme about it.

Should you download it?

It's free, so there's nothing to lose, but whether you want to pay £1.19 to 
upload your app idea is a different story. If you are a clueless, penniless 
technophobe who happens to have a smart idea, it might be worth a look. But if 
you have any other way of getting your idea built and to market there seems 
little point in signing over the majority of your potential revenue to 
FundedApps.

As Curtis himself says: "The price of £1.19 helps provide a buffer to prevent 
people submitting silly or bogus ideas."

Ed Lea of established app developers Grapple Mobile 
<http://www.grapplemobile.com/> says the FundedApps creators will undoubtedly 
make the most money out of the app, but it's "not a bad deal for some 
consumers". He was a little wary because the company could not provide any 
evidence of a customer's idea making it to market. Indeed, since its launch the 
creators are yet to publish a customer-led app, nor will they say how many app 
ideas have been accepted, nor can it produce case studies of people who have 
had an idea taken forward to the next stage. Until this happens, FundedApps 
will face a degree of scepticism.
 