
Galen Rupp won his seventh consecutive 10,000m US Track and Field championship 
at a canter – and then admitted that the last three weeks, during which he and 
his coachAlberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar> 
faced allegations of doping, had been the toughest of his life.


“It’s been hard, I’m not going to lie,” he said, his voice barely louder than 
a whisper. “It’s been difficult to focus but I think that I’m really happy that 
our report came out and I stand behind it 100%.”


“I believe in clean sport and I believe the truth will prevail.”


Alberto Salazar’s defence under strain as witnesses dispute coach’s version of 
events
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-defence-doctor-magness-emails>
Rupp, the 10,000m silver medallist at London 2012, also confirmed that he had 
spoken to his friend and training partner Mo Farah in the weeks following the 
BBC’s Panorama documentary – which, among other things, alleged that Rupp had 
taken testosterone as a 16-year-old – and said that he hoped Farah would stay 
with the Nike Oregon Project.


“Yes, we’ve talked, for sure,” he said. “I can’t speak for him, obviously, but 
I think we have had a great thing going and he’s had great success, and we know 
we do things the right way. But the rest is up to him.”

Perhaps because of the cloying heat – the temperature gauge was still at 32c 
when the race started at 8.15pm – Rupp was content to spend most of the race 
lolloping towards the front. But with 1km to go he kicked hard and quickly 
established a winning lead over the pack. Ben True chased him home, but Rupp 
was always too strong and finished in 28 mins 11.61 seconds, with True second 
in 28:14.26.


Earlier, when Rupp’s name had been announced for the first time, there were 
cheers. When he crossed the line, punching his tiny fists in delight, he 
received a standing ovation.


“The people here are so great,” he said. “The support I receive down here and 
everywhere has just been tremendous. I was obviously pleased to get another 
championship and to do it here in Eugene, it’s always special.”


Rupp, who also confirmed that he would be racing in the 5,000m on Sunday, said 
that he stood firmly by Salazar’s mammoth 11,750-word response to Panorama’s 
claims.

“I stand behind it,” he added. “I thought it was great, I was really happy 
with it.”

Elsewhere on the first day of the US trials, 10 men went under the 10-second 
barrier during the 100m heats. Many of them benefitted from a strong following 
wind, but the 19-year-old Trayvon Bromell’s time of 9.84 sec had a legal 
windspeed of +1.3. Not only was it the second fastest time of the year – only 
Justin Gatlin has run faster – it was also the fastest ever time by a teenager.
 