
Guardian, May 18 1961

When the word got out that Gary Cooper (who died on Saturday, aged 60) was 
mortally ill, a spontaneous process arose in high places not unlike the first 
moves to sanctify a remote peasant. The Queen of England dispatched a 
sympathetic cable. The president of the United States called him on the 
telephone. A cardinal ordered public prayers. Messages came to the actor's 
house in Beverly Hills from the unlikeliest fans, from foreign ministers and 
retired soldiers, as also from Ernest Hemingway, his old Pygmalion who had kept 
him in mind, through at least two novels, as the archetype of the Hemingway 
hero; the self-sufficient male animal, the best kind of hunter, the silent 
infantryman padding dutifully forward to perform the soldier's most poignant 
ritual in "the ultimate loneliness of contact".

It did not happen to Ronald Colman, or Clark Gable, or - heaven knows - John 
Barrymore. Why, we may well ask, should it have happened to Frank James Cooper, 
the rather untypical American type of the son of a Bedfordshire lawyer, a boy 
brought up in the Rockies among horses and cattle to be sure, but only as they 
compose the unavoidable backdrop of life in those parts, a schoolboy in 
Dunstable, a college boy in Iowa, a middling student, then a failing 
cartoonist, failed salesman, an "extra" in Hollywood who in time had his break 
and mooned in a lanky, handsome way through a score or more of "horse operas"? 
Well, his friends most certainly mourn the gentle, shambling "Coop", but what 
the world mourns is the death of Mr Longfellow Deeds, who resisted and defeated 
the corruption of the big city; the snuffing out of the sheriff in High Noon 
heading back to duty along the railroad tracks with that precise mince of the 
cowboy's tread and that rancher's squint that sniffs mischief in a creosote 
bush, sees through suns, and is never fooled. What the world mourns is its lost 
innocence, a favourite fantasy of it fleshed out in the most durable and heroic 
of American myths: that of the taut but merciful plainsman, who dispenses 
justice with a worried conscience, a single syllable, a blurred reflex action 
to the hip, and who must face death in the afternoon as regularly as the 
matador, but on main street and for no pay.

He filled an empty niche in the world pantheon of essential gods. If no cowboy 
was ever like him, so much the worse for the cattle kingdom. He was one of Walt 
Whitman's troop of democratic knights "bright-eyed as hawks". He represented 
every man's best secret image of himself: the honourable man slicing clean 
through the rolling world of morals and machines. He isolated and enlarged to 
six feet three an untainted strain of goodness in a very male specimen of the 
male of the species.
 