
Patrick Dangerfield’s blockbuster move to Geelong headlined the official 
opening of the AFL trade period but the day ended with a bang as West Coast 
launched a scathing attack on the AFL. The Cats also welcomed Scott Selwood via 
free agency on Monday, after West Coast decided not to match the offer tendered 
byGeelong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> on Friday.

Adam Goodes credits Swans fans for giving him strength to carry on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/adam-goodes-sydney-swans-champion>
While understanding of Selwood’s reasons for returning home after eight years, 
the Eagles lashed theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> over the 
second-round draft pick (currently No37) they were awarded as compensation for 
his loss.


“Why have restricted free agency and free agency compensation if you are to be 
treated with such disrespect?” West Coast chief executive Trevor Nisbett fumed 
in a statement released on Monday evening.


“I believe that Andrew Dillon [AFL legal counsel] and Ken Wood [total player 
payments manager] have got this totally wrong and we are extremely 
disappointed.”


Dangerfield’s long-anticipated switch from Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> made the first big splash of the 
trade period, with the Crows agreeing to send the star onballer and pick 50 to 
Geelong in exchange for the Cats’ picks 9 and 28, as well as untried South 
Australian midfielder Dean Gore.


“Obviously it’s been a whirlwind couple of months – certainly now it’s been 
done it’s a fair amount of relief,” Dangerfield said from his new base at 
Simonds Stadium.


“I’ve loved my time at the Adelaide Football Club [but] eventually that had to 
come to an end and it’s nice that it has been done on day one of the trade 
period. I sit here now a very, very happy Geelong player.”

That will be cold comfort to Crows fans, who wave goodbye to a star player who 
can easily be considered one of the top five midfielders in the competition. 
Dangerfield, however, was a restricted free agent who would have only garnered 
Adelaide pick 14 in compensation if he had exercised his rights to move back to 
his home state under the free agency system.

Crows head of football David Noble is certainly comfortable that his club 
extracted the best possible return. “I think people that follow footy will 
understand,” Noble said of the deal.

“We said that we wanted to construct the best deal that we could – we could’ve 
ended up with nothing or we could’ve ended up with pick 14. “I think if you 
look at pick 9, pick 28 and a young talent coming in the door – it’s clearly 
better than we could’ve had.

“Free agency is really geared for a player, so for us to get a deal better 
than nothing or pick 14 – we’re really pleased.”


Like Jack Crisp to Collingwood last year, and so many before him, Gore is the 
sweetener or the “steak knives” thrown in to get the deal over the line but 
Noble is confident the former Sturt onballer has the makings of a long-term 
player for the club.


Selwood’s arrival for nothing as a free agent is a bonus for the Cats, who are 
also trying to engineer trades for Carlton’s Lachie Henderson and Gold Coast’s 
Zac Smith.


In other trade news, the Eagles sent their first-round pick (currently No17) 
to Brisbane in exchange for midfielder Jack Redden.


Essendon also reported that Brisbane ruckman Matthew Leuenberger opted to join 
the Bombers as a restricted free agent, while unrestricted free agent Matt 
Suckling left reigning premiers Hawthorn to sign with the Western Bulldogs.
 