
General Abdel Fatah Younis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-younis>, who has died aged 67, 
was a key figure in Muammar Gaddafi's 1969 coup d'état against King Idris of 
Libya. Younis remained within Gaddafi's inner circle and, until recently, 
served as his interior minister and commander of special forces. However, on 22 
February this year, Younis unexpectedly defected to the Libyan rebels based in 
Benghazi, in the province of Cyrenaica, who made him commander-in-chief, with 
Omar al-Hariri as head of military affairs and Khalifa Haftar, with whom Younis 
came into conflict, as commander of ground forces.

A good-looking man with a shock of white hair, Younis was a charismatic figure 
and his defection raised the morale of many rebels, who had idealism but lacked 
military training. When asked what kind of democracy he wanted, he said he 
envisioned "a genuine democracy in which we Libyans can lead a five-star life.
Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> earns $150m with its oil in a 
single day." Some rebels, not least the Islamists, nursed fierce grievances 
over Younis's harsh record as Gaddafi's effective number two. Younis defended 
his legitimacy as a rebel, arguing that he had only accepted the post of 
interior minister for the past three and a half years on the condition that he 
would never have to fire on his own people. He told a journalist that he had 
written to Gaddafi in January warning him of unrest and of anger over rising 
food prices. Gaddafi had sent the letter back with the text crossed out in red 
pen, as a warning.

Many commentators expressed scepticism at Younis's defection. The BBC's John 
Simpson hassuggested <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-14349736> that 
Gaddafi may have sent Younis to Benghazi to arrange a Tiananmen Square-style 
massacre of demonstrators but that the rebels captured him; Younis then 
promptly announced that he had planned to join them and the rebels found it 
convenient to go along with this possible fiction. The New Yorker's Jon Lee 
Anderson has written that it was possible that Younis had genuinely decided to 
do the right thing by defecting, but concluded: "At worst, he was a rank 
opportunist with the moral scruples of an octopus. That, to me, seemed more 
likely. 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2011/07/killing-abdul-fattah-younes.html>
"

Given his valuable military expertise, Younis was soon criticised for failing 
to deliver victory for the rebels against Gaddafi's regime in Tripoli. Some 
complained that although he made sporadic visits to the frontline at Brega in 
the Gulf of Sirte, he left untrained youngsters hopelessly manning the front 
while he remained safely at his Benghazi base. Rebels in Misrata, east of 
Tripoli, were said to have refused to take orders from Benghazi. Gaddafi's 
approach on Benghazi in March was only aborted by the intervention of the 
French airforce.

Younis was born in the Jebel Akhdar (Green Mountain) area, east of Benghazi. 
He went to the Libyan military academy in Benghazi with Gaddafi. When Gaddafi 
carried out the coup against King Idris on 1 September 1969, Younis took 
control of the Benghazi radio station. He rose quickly to the rank of general 
and for 41 years headed Libya's special forces. In 1992, he attended a key 
meeting with the British ambassador to Egypt where he apologised for Libya's 
involvement in the killing of the British police officer Yvonne Fletcher and 
offered to extradite her killers. He also admitted Libyan support for the IRA 
and offered compensation for their victims.

Confusion has surrounded Younis's death. On 24 July, he was reported to have 
been killed under "mysterious circumstances" in the Fourth Battle of Brega. 
Younis himself revealed this to be untrue in a radio interview the next day. He 
was then shot, along with two colonels, on 28 July, the day he had been 
recalled by the rebel National Transitional Council (NTC) to answer questions 
about the war to a panel of judges. The NTC's oil minister told the press that 
the gunmen who shot him were members of theObaida Ibn Jarrah Brigade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/30/libyan-rebel-soldiers-killed-younis?INTCMP=SRCH>
, an Islamist militia group loosely attached to the rebels. The Gaddafi 
government's spokesman, Moussa Ibrahim, suggested the killing had been carried 
out by al-Qaida. The motive for his killing may have been the suspicion that 
his family, who are from the Obeidi tribe in eastern Libya, had maintained 
links with Gaddafi. In April, Gaddafi's daughter Aisha refused to reject the 
suggestion that Younis remained in contact with her father after his defection. 
Younis's death came shortly after 32 nations, including the US and the UK, 
formallyrecognised the NTC as Libya's legitimate government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/15/libyan-rebels-international-recognition-leaders>
.

At Younis's funeral, his son Ashraf called for Gaddafi's return to bring 
stability back to Libya. "We want the green flag back," he shouted to the 
crowd, referring to Gaddafi's national banner. It was a risky display of 
emotion in a region so supportive of the rebels.

Younis is survived by his wife, two sons and a daughter.

• Abdel Fatah Younis, military leader, born 1944; died 28 July 2011
 