
Carol Ann Duffy, poet laureate

Geoffrey Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoffrey-hill> was, in 
poetry, a saint and a warrior who never gave an inch in his crusade to reach 
poetic truth. In four words - “God is distant, difficult” – he could suddenly 
illuminate, like lightning over a landscape.

Christopher Ricks, critic and scholar


There was no living poet whose latest work I more wished for and stood in need 
of at once, on the day of publication, above all for its immediacy. Long ago, I 
called him “a poet at once urgent and timeless”. Yesterday (30 June 2016), I 
collected the five copies that I had ordered ofhis mint-new Peer Gynt, 
complementing his superb 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/182187/peer-gynt-and-brand/>Brand 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/182187/peer-gynt-and-brand/>. He always 
maintained what he had maintained: that our word is our bond. What is it to
stand by what you have done and been and said? For my manifestly smaller part, 
I stand by my convictions, voiced over the course of 50 years, that his poems 
“matter increasingly, they accrue”. And that “Hill is his own man, yet his 
poems bear witness to TS Eliot’s high sense of tradition: ‘The existing 
monuments form an ideal order among themselves, which is modified by the 
introduction of the new (the really new) among them’”. In 1968, King Log was 
the really new. And still is. But then so was all that Geoffrey Hill created on 
poetry’s behalf, on his own dear behalf, and on ours.

Broken Hierarchies: Poems 1952-2012 by Geoffrey Hill – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/20/broken-hierarchies-poems-geoffrey-hill-review>



Andrew Motion, former poet laureate

Geoffrey Hill was one of the greatest English language poets of the last 
70-odd years, and time may well prove him the greatest of all. England stands 
at the centre of his work, but the brilliance and ambition with which he 
tackles themes of historical process, religion, politics and statehood (as well 
as the personal past), and the way his work combines subtlety with beauty, mean 
that from a local base he is able to address and include the world. From the 
comparatively clear earlier poems, all the way through to their later and more 
difficult counterparts, he has been exemplary: a poet of immense gifts, 
originality and authenticity.

Hermione Lee, critic and biographer

Long ago, in the mid-1980s, I did a memorable interview with him about his 
poem onCharles Peguy <http://www.oxonianreview.org/wp/a-difficult-poet/>, where 
he was, as ever, challenging, forensic, scrupulous and stringent about 
language, powerful, unforgiving about easy explanations – and also rueful, 
humorous and funny. I greatly admire in particular the earlier work, the 
tenderness of the love poems, the fierce attention to history, the intensity of 
the language.

In his lectures, he gave no quarter: he brought a rigorous dedication to the 
best use of language, a strong and passionate belief in what great poetry is, 
and a stringent, compelling analysis of how it works, combined with a comical, 
anarchic, self-dramatising presentation of himself as part sage, part 
anarchist, part bard, part wit – a combination of King Lear and Lear’s Fool.


[His students were] … transfixed … It was as if one of the legendary poets of 
the past had walked into the room, complete with white beard, stick, dark 
clothes, glamorous waistcoats, fierce burning eyes, and deep resonant voice. 
This was how a poet of the old schoolought to look. He presented no handouts, 
no PowerPoint, no aids to concentration:he just read and spoke with passion, 
fervour, often rage and scorn, about what poetry means, and is for, and does at 
its greatest 
<https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/war-and-civilization-series-lecture-2-war-and-poetry>
. There was plenty to argue with and disagree with. But it was a mighty, bardic 
performance and an unforgettable way of speaking. His readings of poems by the 
poets in his pantheon, in particular, were moving and generous.

Adam Foulds, poet and novelist

I was lucky enough to be introduced to Geoffrey Hill’s poetry early. As a 
teenager I bought the old Penguin edition of the Collected Poems. Between its 
front cover image of Gaugin’s painting of Jacob strenuously wrestling the angel 
and a back cover thickly set with praise from the likes of George Steiner and a 
small inset photograph of the man himself scowling beneath a stark and 
supremely self-confident comb-over, this book contained all of Hill’s first 
four astonishing volumes. I had been warned of Hill’s difficulty, the hard work 
needed to make sense of the poems, but it took no effort to appreciate 
immediately the precise sensuousness of his language and intellect:


I leaned to the lamp; the pallid moths
Clipped its glass, made an autumnal sound.
Words clawed my mind as though they had smelt
Revelation’s flesh.

 From such lines it was clear that Hill was, in Auden’s phrase, one of those 
poets by whom the language lives. The work is indeed erudite and allusive. Hill 
is a poet who matches TS Eliot’s ideal of the individual talent taking his 
place within the tradition, rearranging it, revivifying it, entering its 
complex conversations. While some are put off by Hill’s references to other 
works and times, feeling a chilly, admonitory blast from an impatient scholarly 
superego, it always seemed generous to me, an invitation into the treasure 
houses of European literary culture. One’s ignorance lasts only as long as one 
allows it to and the rewards for effort are great cultural riches. The 
allusions are necessary to a poet whose work has so much to do with the 
exercise of the historical imagination in a poetry that wishes to charge every 
word with meaning. Take this line from one of three poems entitled A Short 
History Of British India, a sub-sequence within the longer sequence An Apology 
For The Revival Of Christian Architecture in England.

With indifferent aim
unleash the rutting cannon at the walls
of forts and palaces

Notice how ‘indifferent aim’ implies both the military activity that doesn’t 
care about the number or type of casualties and the lack of any long term “aim” 
or plan, and notice too how brilliantly “rutting” evokes the back and forth 
movement of cannons firing between machicolations, satirises the phallic pomp 
of empire, indicts its rape of other nations, and brings to mind the idea of 
getting stuck in a rut. All achieved so economically, so memorably. This is 
great poetry that combines sensuality, precision and historical insight.

Hill’s words have clawed my mind for the last twenty-five years. Our loss in 
his death is grievous and deeply sad in what are already sad times but he 
leaves behind him a body of work of unparalleled integrity, beauty and depth 
that will be read for centuries to come.


Jacqueline Norton, Hill’s editor at OUP

We’re very saddened by the news of Geoffrey Hill’s death, but also grateful to 
have worked with him and extremely proud to have published hisCollected 
Critical Writings 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/books/the-book-of-the-week-geoffrey-hill-collected-critical-writings/401128.article>
 in 2008 andBroken Hierarchies: Poems 1952-2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/20/broken-hierarchies-poems-geoffrey-hill-review>
 in 2013. Both volumes gather a lifetime of brilliant work – much of it recent 
- and show what a very great poet and critic Geoffrey is. The acclaim poured in 
for these books. The critical writings won the Truman Capote prize in 2009 and 
reviewers of Broken Hierarchies recognised the depth of Geoffrey’s poetic 
genius. His fierce intelligence will be much missed, as will his moral 
seriousness.
 