
The Belgian opera administrator Gerard Mortier, who has died aged 70 of 
pancreatic cancer, was a self-confessed Machiavellian, described entirely 
without malice by his younger colleague and supporter Peter Sellars as "a 
little Napoleon, who knows exactly what he wants to do, and then does it". That 
ambition and determination – Mortier was a personable and courteous man but 
also steely and ruthless – enabled him to place his iconoclastic stamp on three 
major operatic institutions: La Monnaie, Brussels, the Salzburg festival and 
the Paris Opéra.

Born in Ghent, Mortier later claimed that his intellectual outlook owed much 
to his education at a Jesuit boarding school, where he was encouraged to engage 
with the writings of freethinkers such as Marx, Nietzsche, Ibsen and Sartre. 
But that Jesuitical upbringing may have helped to shape the puritanical 
aesthetic he also developed. "Art should not be easy," he once said. "It's not 
worth having if it comes with no effort."Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> had the emotional power to transform, 
he believed, and art separated from the gritty realities of everyday life was 
anathema to him.

There were early signs of this antipathy to mindless opera in the 
quasi-terrorist principles of a club, called Jeugd-Opera, led by Mortier when 
he was still a student at Ghent University. The hedonistic joys of a Puccini 
evening for the Belgian bourgeoisie in the stalls would be disrupted by 
activists pelting the stage with rotten tomatoes and dropping incendiary 
pamphlets from the gods.

Mortier studied law then journalism before working as an administrator for the 
Flanders festival. After a year at the Deutsche Oper in Düsseldorf, he became 
assistant administrator at the Frankfurt Opera under Christoph von Dohnányi. 
Appointments at the Hamburg Staatsoper (1977-79) and the Paris Opéra (1979-81), 
where he was strongly influenced byRolf Liebermann 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-rolf-liebermann-1045094.html>
, led to his appointment as general director of the Théâtre de la Monnaie, 
Brussels (1981-92).

He brought the house international recognition with his seriousness of 
purpose, building up a first-class orchestra and chorus (in conjunction with 
his close friend, the chief conductor Sylvain Cambreling), rejuvenating the 
repertoire and hiring top directorial talents such asPatrice Chéreau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/08/patrice-chereau>, Peter Stein, 
Luc Bondy and Ruth Berghaus. Among the successes of these years were 
outstanding productions of Boris Godunov directed by Klaus Michael Grüber, a 
radical Ring directed byHerbert Wernicke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/apr/20/guardianobituaries.tomsutcliffe>, 
the premiere of John Adams's Death of Klinghoffer, and a Mozart cycle.
 Tenor Tom Randle, right, as Jack Twist and bass-baritone Daniel Okulitch as 
Ennis del Mar perform Brokeback Mountain at the Teatro Real, Madrid. 
Photograph: Carlos Alvarez/Getty 
His casting was judicious rather than starry: "My public knows that the doors 
of the Monnaie are too small forPavarotti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/sep/06/guardianobituaries.obituaries>, 
the corridors too narrow for Jessye Norman" was an oft-repeated affirmation of 
faith. Opera was in general prioritised over dance, but Mortier did appoint the 
American choreographer Mark Morris, whose Dido and Aeneas, to Purcell's score, 
and L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato, to Handel's, were highly regarded 
in some quarters, though not by the more conservative elements of the 
theatregoing public and press.

Mortier spent lavishly on the house, endowing it with excellent technical 
facilities and astunning foyer <http://www.lamonnaie.be/en/39/Entrance>, with a 
floor designed by the American minimalistSol LeWitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/apr/11/guardianobituaries.usa> – a fan 
design in cool black and white marble – and an exuberant ceiling triptych by 
Sam Francis. A government inquiry was critical of his spending, but Mortier 
survived, finally leaving to take up the directorship of the Salzburg festival.

If at La Monnaie Mortier had taken on the bourgeoisie bruxelloise, in Salzburg 
he declared war on the well-heeled international opera circus that pitched camp 
in the city of Mozart's birth each summer. Artistic sclerosis was widely 
perceived to have set in during the Karajan era and Mortier proclaimed his 
determination to root out the "mafia" holding the festival to ransom. 
Complaining, justifiably enough, that artistic policy at Salzburg had come to 
be governed by the moguls of the major recording companies, he set about a 
radical overhaul.

Hitherto neglected tranches of 20th-century repertoire were explored, among 
the chief successes being Sellars's productions of Messiaen's Saint François 
d'Assise (1992) and Ligeti's Le Grand Macabre (1997), and Berg's Lulu directed 
by Peter Mussbach and conducted by Michael Gielen (1995). Janacek was 
introduced to the roster, though Grüber's sanitised production of From the 
House of the Dead was memorably described by the critic Michael Kennedy as 
"more like a holiday camp than a gulag".

With his Ensemble Intercontemporain Paris, Pierre Boulez presented four 
programmes of his own music alongside works by Messiaen, Varèse, Webern and 
Schoenberg. The seigneurial rights to Mozart's music, arrogated to themselves 
by the Vienna Philharmonic, were challenged by Mortier's desire to develop a 
"kaleidoscope" of possibilities, with the Chamber Orchestra of Europe, Camerata 
Academica and other ensembles conducted by innovators such as Roger Norrington, 
John Eliot Gardiner and Simon Rattle. Mortier was less successful in that 
particular campaign than he might have hoped, but the innate conservatism of 
the Vienna Philharmonic (which refused to use the scholarly new Bärenreiter 
editions or to abandon the deputy system, whereby the players who perform on 
the night are not necessarily those who have rehearsed earlier in the day) at 
least came under scrutiny.

Fears that top names would abandon the festival proved unfounded: among the 
many high-calibre artists of the Mortier years were Cecilia Bartoli, Teresa 
Berganza, Bryn Terfel, Thomas Hampson, Placido Domingo, Daniel Barenboim, 
Evgeny Kissin, Maurizio Pollini and Anne-Sophie Mutter. For better or worse, 
Salzburg was abandoned, at least in the early Mortier years, by droves of the 
old-guard audience, alienated in part by the new demographic encouraged by 
successful youth subscription schemes. He admitted defeat on his bid to reduce 
the stratospheric ticket prices, but the hegemony of the record companies was 
vastly reduced - even if the industry was at that time in decline anyway.

On his departure from Salzburg in 2001, Mortier applied his energies to a new 
festival in the Ruhr, before accepting the directorship of the Paris Opéra, 
where he mounted Saint François once again and the spectacular Sellars Tristan 
und Isolde, with Bill Viola's orientalist, New Age video projections.

Mortier had always longed to work in New York (the corridor outside his 
Brussels office had been dubbed "Fifth Avenue") and in 2007 he was appointed 
general manager and artistic director ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City Opera. His ambitious 
proposal to close and renovate the company's Lincoln Centre home, balancing the 
books by dipping into the endowment fund and staging innovative, top-quality 
productions, was not received with unqualified enthusiasm in the NYCO 
boardroom. Mortier tested the board's patience further by aligning himself with 
one of the bids to run the Bayreuth festival, and the catastrophic economic 
downturn of autumn 2008 prompted it to offer Mortier a budget of only $36m – 
little more than half the $60m he had initially been promised. The company 
filed for bankruptcy in 2013.

Mortier meanwhile had moved on to the Teatro Real in Madrid, where he mounted 
productions intended for New York: Philip Glass's Perfect American and Charles 
Wuorinen's opera Brokeback Mountain, based on theAnnie Proulx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx> story of love between two 
cowboys, filmed by Ang Lee. The latter, neatly programmed alongside Tristan und 
Isolde, another tale of forbidden love, opened in January 2014.

Last September, when Mortier's cancer was announced, it was revealed that he 
was in dispute with the Teatro Real board and the Spanish government, insisting 
that there were no suitable Spanish candidates to take over his job. It was the 
final campaign in the career of an implacable warrior and artistic guerrilla, 
whose revolutionary aspirations challenged the entrenched values of the 
operatic establishment.

He is survived by a sister, Rita.

• Gerard Mortier, opera and festival administrator, born 25 November 1943; 
died 8 March 2014
 