 Gerry Adams is a great persuader - the question is in what cause. The bearded, 
now greying Sinn Fein president has a history of ultranationalism in Northern 
Ireland, but is now integral in the efforts for the peace process to continue, 
if not thrive. A sign of the times was his efforts, at the end of 2000, to 
persuade American businessmen to invest in Northern Ireland and its workers.
This feat, however useful, was dwarfed by Mr Adam's success years earlier in 
persuading embittered IRA prisoners in the Maze that their target of violently 
forcing the British Army out of Northern Ireland was counterproductive, and 
that peaceful, political negotiation was the best alternative. Those talks 
behind bars eventually produced the Good Friday agreement, with its crucial 
further release of prisoners.

Not that Mr Adams is as gentle as he looks. Educated at a Jesuit Christian 
Brothers school, in 1964, he was, at 16, already a supporter of radical 
nationalism. One of the most authoritative reference books on Northern Ireland 
says "he was believed by security forces to be head of [Provisional] IRA in the 
Ballymurphy area of westBelfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> when 
he was interned in 1971".

After he was interned the IRA demanded that he be one of those included in 
secret London talks with William Whitelaw, then Northern Ireland secretary. 
From then on Mr Adams advanced the idea of a two-front advance, the armalite 
and the ballot box.

After being again interned and released, his supporters took control of the 
nationalist movement, but he argued they could not win a purely military 
victory. He switched his efforts to building up Sinn Fein as its militant 
political wing - although the IRA continued its bloody terrorist attacks.

In 1982 he was elected to the Northern Ireland assembly, and in 1983 he ousted 
the longstanding moderate nationalist Gerry Fitt from his West Belfast seat, at 
the same time becoming Sinn Fein president. But he could not take his place in 
the Commons since he refused to take the oath of allegiance to the Queen.

In 1988 he had two secret meetings with SDLP leader John Hume to discuss a 
route away from Northern Ireland's bloodshed and in 1993 he began secret 
negotiations with the British government. Following talks with President 
Clinton, the IRA began a 72-hour truce in 1994, making it permanent in August.

The next four years saw a tussle between the British forces, demanding weapons 
decommissioning before talks, and Mr Adams' republican colleagues, demanding 
talks before decommissioning. The ceasefire broke down in 1996, as he had 
warned, with bombs in Manchester and London's Docklands.

None of this harmed his own electability. Sinn Fein gathered support and in 
the 1997 election Mr Adams retook West Belfast, and the party's chief 
negotiator, Martin McGuinness, won Mid Ulster.

On the back of this, and the election of a Labour government, the IRA restored 
its ceasefire. Labour's new Northern Ireland secretary, Mo Mowlam, invited Mr 
Adams to all-party talks, which eventually led to the Good Friday agreement. 
This made provision for a new assembly, crossborder bodies, the early release 
of prisoners and the decommissioning of arms.

Mr Adams was elected to the Northern Ireland assembly in 1998, a powerbroker 
in the province's fragile coalition government. Despite setbacks this has not 
fallen, but nor has Mr Adams delivered on his promises of decommissioning. 
Unionists have questioned whether it will ever take place and - despite hopeful 
signs - their doubts appear well founded. But ifGerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> can deliver in the end, he 
will deserve tribute as the greatest persuader of all.

Ask Aristotle about Gerry Adams 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-17,00.html>
 