
My alarm goes off at 6:30am. After having breakfast with my wife and listening 
to the morning news on radio, I spend time praying, which, as a Christian, is 
an important part of getting myself in the right frame of mind. At 8am, I walk 
the 40 minutes into Sheffield city centre with my wife, who’s a social worker 
for the NSPCC.
 Photograph: Mark Willoughby 
Leading the charity CRI young people’s drug and alcohol service in Sheffield 
is a huge privilege. It’s an extremely varied role, no two days are the same. 
The service is commissioned to provide specialist support, including one-to-one 
interventions and group work programmes, to young people under the age of 19 
with problematic drug and alcohol use. We also deliver training to health, 
social care and education professionals across the city, helping them to 
support young people as best they can.

I start the day by replying to emails and then might chair our team meeting, 
discussing new ideas, developing plans and addressing any issues, as well as 
providing updates on current cases. There are lots of reasons why a young 
person might develop a problematic relationship with alcohol or drugs. Getting 
to the heart of what might be motivating a young person’s substance use, and 
helping them address the underlying cause, is a key priority for us.

The team will then head out to their youth work bases across the city where 
they will meet with young people in schools, community centres and in their 
homes, while I might attend a multi-agency planning meeting for children and 
young people services across the city. For lunch, I tend to bring in tasty 
soups made with leftover vegetables from the week before, which I find is an 
easy and economical way to make sure I have a healthy meal during the day.

The afternoon could begin with a supervision session with one of my team, 
discussing their objectives and how they’re doing. The work we do can be 
emotionally challenging, so making sure my team get the right support for their 
wellbeing is very important. I could follow this by leading a group work 
session with young people exploring their use of cannabis or their drinking.

Recently, we’ve had a lot of young people with physical and mental health 
issues caused by new psychoactive substances (commonly called legal highs). As 
a team, it’s very important we’re responsive to changes in the use of different 
substances, so we can spot emerging trends and make sure we’re providing the 
right kind of support. The young people we work with may be at risk of sexual 
exploitation, self-harming, homelessness, or may be in local authority care, 
which is why we tailor our support to meet their individual needs. We give 
one-on-one psychosocial support, such as basic cognitive behavioural therapy, 
motivational interviewing and solution focussed therapy.

I might finish the day by analysing the service’s spending before ensuring the 
office is safe and secure before I head home. We handle a lot of sensitive and 
confidential information so we need to ensure our information security 
protocols are watertight.

I joined CRI in October 2013, as I wanted to have more involvement with my 
community, and to have a tangible impact on the lives of vulnerable young 
people in my area. It’s something I’ve always been passionate about, which is 
why I spent 12 years as a youth worker, as well as supporting the development 
of food banks and leading a homeless soup kitchen with my church. Recently, I 
ran the Sheffield half marathon to raise money for Roundabout, a charity that 
supports homeless young people in Sheffield.

Arts psychotherapy: I am helping to give vulnerable children a voice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/feb/13/arts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton>
My life outside work is equally fulfilling. For the past two and a half years, 
my wife and I have welcomed into our family a young man made homeless as a 
teenager. I am also a musician and play in an acoustic indie band, occasionally 
gigging in local bars and cafés.

I’m not someone who has a life plan; my life is motivated by seeking social 
justice and contributing as best I can. My motivation is rooted in my Christian 
faith, which empowers me to love others above myself and to seek the prosperity 
and fulfilment of the community I live in.

Alongside the obvious rewards, leading a young person’s drug and alcohol 
service can be very demanding. Young people are constantly faced with a range 
of challenges, on top of which they have to battle negative stereotyping of 
drug and alcohol users. Thankfully I have the privilege of working with an 
incredibly motivated team who do whatever they can to tackle this kind of 
stigma. They are a real inspiration!
 