
There's a big subject here that we've been chatting about for a while, but 
I've avoided writing about it in part because I know it's a minefield and 
whatever I write I'm bound to put someone's back up and cause offence, but also 
because it's a subject about which I have many more doubts than certainties and 
don't, honestly, know what I think. I'm probably only writing about it now in 
the hope that someone out there can enlighten me.

The whole debate began because a guest was doing a job – I can't even remember 
what it was now – and at the end he proudly stepped back to admire what he had 
done. He idly said: "That makes me feel like a man," but immediately began to 
worry that a sentence like that was sexist, as if by suggesting that a labour 
was specifically enhancing to male self-esteem implied it was something a woman 
couldn't do. I thought it all rather funny: just at the moment he was feeling 
like a man, he had an inner voice of 21st-century egalitarianism telling him 
that maybe he shouldn't feel like a man. So we started laughing and got talking 
about it, and then started chatting about the whole thing with a few women 
here, and we've kind of been thinking about it ever since.

I've always thought, or hoped, that one of the reasons a place like this might 
work, for men at least, is that there are plenty of "manly" things to do. If 
you're felling trees, or chopping wood, or feeding pigs, or building shelters, 
it's hard not to sense that you're straining your sinews and somehow proving 
yourself at primitive tasks. That's quite a consolation to those who feel that 
the contemporary badges of manliness, inasmuch as they exist at all any more, 
have passed them by or, more probably, are not worth much anyway. In a society 
in which men are largely deprived of anything that makes them feel manly (a 
large wallet, fast car or fancy phone has never done it for me or, I suspect, 
millions of others), it's perhaps not surprising that so many of us long just 
to swing an axe.

And yet there's nothing about any of those tasks I've mentioned that are at 
all gender specific. In fact, the only professional forester who has been here 
recently was a woman; the best pig breeder round here is a woman. So I'm not 
sure what I think any more. I find myself in the strange position of hoping 
that any male guest who comes here might, if he needs to, regain self-esteem 
through "feeling like a man" (whatever that may mean), but at the same time 
realising there might be something excluding in their saying so. Is there an 
equivalent phrase for women? Someone suggested "having a girlie day", but I'm 
not sure what that would mean either. Surely not, as one friend says, just a 
session buying shoes and then watching multiple episodes ofGossip Girl? And if 
we're not supposed to say something makes us feel like men, what are we 
supposed to say? "It makes me feel like a human being"?

What interests me is whether leading a slightly more primitive existence 
inevitably leads to more primitive gender roles and whether that would be a bad 
thing. I can already hear the sucking of teeth, so let me assure you that 
blokes here do their fair share of washing up, cooking and so on. In fact, a 
friend who's on a similar journey up north has become a dab hand with a sewing 
machine as he stitches canvasses for yurts. So it's not a question of becoming 
chauvinistic cavemen. But there is something that happens when you go back to 
the land, when you become diggers again. We had noticed it on other communities 
and are beginning to notice it here: old-fashioned gender roles are subtly 
reasserted. When, for example, you've got to smash 4in stakes through ice and 
very rocky ground with a 20kg post rammer, you probably want a man on the job. 
Am I allowed to say that?

I suppose it all comes down to the old chestnut of whether it's better to 
accept and treasure gender differences or to ignore and move beyond them. What 
has surprised me is that so many people (men and women) seem contented, rather 
than frustrated, to rediscover the differences.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 