
"My aunt and my mother pounded my chest every day when I was barely 10 years 
old. I cried endlessly." Brenda Mahop, a first year Law student at the 
University of Yaounde II-Soa recalls the distressing memory of undergoing 
'breast ironing' to IPS news.

According to Gender Empowerment and Development, a Cameroon-based organisation 
dedicated to improving the lives of women and youths, breast ironing, is a 
traditional practice carried out in parts of Cameroon, and also in some regions 
of West and Central Africa, which involves massaging or pressing the breasts of 
adolescent girls in order to supress and reverse their development. The 
practice, which commonly involves using heated objects- often spatulas, stones, 
pestles and hammers- is performed often times by women (and in secret from men) 
in the belief that a flat, child-like chest will discourage unwanted male 
attention, rape and pre-marital pregnancy.

Nonetheless, Brenda is not the only girl to fall victim to this practice. The 
UN reports that at least 3.8 million female teenagers are at risk of having 
their breasts ironed; with 50% of adolescent girls in cities and a quarter of 
all girls nationwide have their breasts 'ironed.'

"So long as it will not kill the girl, I will prefer the breasts to be 
deformed and have her go through her education without an unwanted pregnancy or 
deadly HIV virus," states a mother who ironed her daughter's breast to IPS. 
Most of the mothers who performed breast ironing interviewed by IPS shared a 
similar story: their intent was not to deliberately inflict pain on their 
daughters, but to protect them from the taboo of teenage pregnancy and sexual 
transmitted diseases.

"Yet, despite how well-intentioned some of these mothers may believe they are 
being," states Sharmon Monagan, from Nova Southeaster University. "The 
consequences of this painful and psychologically traumatizing practice do not 
outweigh the benefits. Breast ironing is a painful and debilitating experience."

Beyond the pain and trauma caused by breast ironing, an extensive study 
conducted by the German cooperation agency, GTZ, showed that there are a 
serious number of physical and mental health implications: the most serious 
include an elevated cancer risk, the inability to produce breast-milk, and 
psychological problems. Brenda told the IPS that she now suffers from heart 
problems and questions whether her condition is related to these events.

Ironically, breast ironing, which many female proponents believe deters 
teenage sex, may be contributing to a significant number of adverse 
consequences. According to GTZ, young people make up most of the 5.5 percent of 
the population living with HIV, and teenage pregnancy in Cameroon is a growing 
concern. What's more, the psychological trauma that accompanies the act usually 
makes it difficult for girls to concentrate at school, has accounted for a good 
number of school dropouts amongst teenage girls.

Now a local women nongovernmental organisation, called Network of Aunties 
Association, RENTA, made up of members who have undergone the practice, are 
spearheading the campaign against breast ironing. Set up in 2006, RENTA have 
trained and recruited over 6,000 volunteers, commonly known as "Aunties" to 
bring sex-education to both Cameroonian girls and boys. Brenda is an example of 
just one of the thousands of women who have used their horrific experiences to 
prompt themselves to join RENTA's campaign against breast ironing.

To date, RENTA has produced a number of radio and television spots promoting 
the dangers of breast ironing; and have distributed hundreds of leaflets 
discouraging women from inflicting the practice on young girls.
Through psychological counselling and community support, RENTA Aunties are not 
only helping victims who have suffered from the practice, but they are also 
encouraging the empowerment of all women, by raising the necessity of teaching 
sex education.

Their philosophy behind sex education is that an educated woman will counsel 
their girl children about their sexuality, rather than subject them to such 
bodily mutilation. According to GTZ, in different communities in Cameroon, 
aunts were formerly responsible of taking care of the sexual education of young 
girls. However, due to urbanisation and economic problems, families then 
separated, and thereby put a distance between the aunt and her niece. Today, 
many mothers in Cameroon still find it difficult to discuss openly with their 
daughters about sexuality. This is why RENTA's use of "Aunties" in their 
campaign is significant, as it reconstructs the affectionate and symbolical 
relationship the aunt once had with her niece during her adolescence.

"However, in a country where conversations about sex in the family run counter 
to acceptable norms, much still needs to be done to kill the culture of 
silence," states gender consultant Dr. Awa Magdalene.

And, it is not just the lid of the sex education taboo jar that needs to be 
lifted. Although, Cameroon ratified the Convention of the Rights of the Child 
in 1993, which implies that the government has a legal responsibility to 
protect girls from the injury and abuse of breast ironing, no girl has ever 
been bold enough to report the perpetrator, many of the times which are their 
mothers, to the court of law. And despite the series of problems caused by 
'breast ironing,' there has not yet been an official law passed in Cameroon 
prohibiting the act.

Justine Kwachu, executive director and co-founder of Women in Alternative 
Action, a non-profit organization in Yaounde promoting women's equality, 
lobbies not only for sex education but for punishment. Kwachu petitions 
Cameroonian parliamentarians for support of anti-discrimination legislation 
that proposes a 10-year prison sentence for those caught practicing the custom.

When this legislation will be passed? Only time can tell. Till then, Flavien 
Ndonko an anthropologist at GTZ is optimistic about the impact educating women 
will have in decreasing the scale of breast ironing in parts of Cameroon.

"This is a good way to resolve the problem," says Ndonko. "As there is no way 
to justify it, they will realise that it is a futile practice, and hopefully, 
they will stop doing it."
 