
Preamble:
Ghana's mish-mash of tyros and veterans has probably surpassed expectation by 
reaching the semi-final and now comes their biggest challenge: downing 
arch-rivalsNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> 
would ensure (a) a place in the final (b) a lovingly-penned chapter in Black 
Stars' folklore and probably also (c) a berth for several of the youngsters in 
the summer's World Cup squad, for which competition is now intense. The Super 
Eagles, eager to avenge defeats in the sides' last two encounters, have not 
been in full flight so far in this tournament, due mainly to a lack of 
creativity from midfield but when they have managed to supply the strikers with 
the ball, those strikers have shone, particularly Pter Odemwingie.

Teams:
Ghana: R. Kingson; S. Inkoom, I. Vorsah, E. Addy, H. Sarpei; Addo, K. Asamoah, 
H. Dramani, A. Ayew, A. Gyan, M. Amoah

Nigeria: V. Enyeama; M. Yusuf, D. Shittu, O. Nwaneri, U. Echiejile, S. Kaita, 
A. Yussuf, P. Odemwingie, J. Mikel, C. Obasi, O. Martins

3:49pm: Good to see Odeminwingie, Obasi and Martins all starting - that 
suggests an attacking approach from coach Amodu. And good also to see Samuel 
Inkoom again in action: his success over the last two years suggests the former 
Porcupine Warriorhas heeded his idol Emmanuel Eboue's advice about training on 
the beach and avoiding women ... <>

3:53pm: CAf really need to sort out their ticket-pricing policy out. The 
stadium in Luanda is approximately 8.9% full for a continental semi-final that 
also happens to beone of the world's most fun-filled derbys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/feb/07/newsstory.sport15>.

3:55pm: The camera pans to a paint-covered man in the growd who is holding up 
a large placard bearing the message: DO NOT BE AFRAID. Too often fans restrict 
their pronouncements to strictly football-related matters, here at last is a 
helpful supporter imparting advice we can apply in many spheres. I look forward 
to future matches at which fans display banners urging the citzenry to LOOK 
BOTH WAYS BEFORE YOU CROSS THE ROAD or DON'T FORGET TO WASH BEHIND YOUR EARS or 
NEVER MIX WHISKEY WITH SCRUMPY JACK.

3:58pm: It has emerged that the line-ups I've just published are not totally 
correct. That is standard protocol for this tournament, of course. I'll make it 
right any minute now. If only a member of the crowd had thought of holding up a 
placard with the line-ups ...

1 min: Enterprising start from Nigeria, with Martins sprinting straight at the 
oposing defence before swapping passes with Odemwingie and ... letting the ball 
run away from him into the keeper's arms.

3 mins: Annan, making his first start of the tournament, catches Martins with 
a late tackle. Mikel lofts the freekick towards the back post, but Vorsah 
clears well. "Your words of advice are wise," confirms Colin Greer. "May I add 
a couple gained from my own life experience: 1) NEVER FEAR A BALD MAN and 2) 
WHEN IN DOUBT... PANIC

5 mins: Nigeria have had most of the possession so far and the preferred ploy 
for the moment seems to be to seek Martins early, the former Newcastle man 
continually offering plenty of latent menace as he continually loiters off the 
shoulder of the last defender.

7 mins: Kaita clips one over the top for Martins, who again has dashed away 
from the last man ... but Vorsah, who has been splendid in this tournament so 
far, intervenes before Martins can get off a shot.

8 mins: Ayew performs a stylish flick to connect with an addy cross, but fails 
to find the requisite accuracy. So the ball trickles wide.

10 mins: From corners and freekicks Nigeria are constantly aiming for Shittu, 
but Vorsah has repelled everything so far.

12 mins: A break in play to enable medics to chunter on and treat Opuko, 
another young player who has impressed at this tournament. He's unlikely to be 
seriously hurt, being that all that happened was that Mikel's flailing arm 
lightly brushed against him.

14 mins: It's all a bit patchy and improvised from Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana>, not unexpectedly. Nigeria are the 
smoother outfit and more and more of the game is being played in the Black 
Stars' half. All in all, however, quality is quite low so far. "The WWF/E 
was/is the home of the held-up placard," reports Mike Gibbons. "I remember 
seeing one wrestling 'match' in the haze of the mid-nineties in the crowd of 
which a little lad held up a placard proclaiming 'THIS SIGN MEANS NOTHING' - a 
bizarrely existentialist statement in such an environment." Golly, Magritte 
would have been proud.

16 mins: Asamoah shoots from the half-way line. A cunning lob? No, he drilled 
it along the ground. Would you believe that it posed no difficulty whatsoever 
to the keeper?

19 mins: Nigeria stroke the ball around the back for a bit, and then lost 
possession as soon as they ventrure forward, whereupon Ghana, in turn, stroke 
the ball around the back for a bit, before raiding forward via Asamoah down the 
left and winning a corner.

GOAL! Nigeria 0-1 Ghana (Gyan 21') Asamoah hit an out-swinging corner towards 
the near post, where Gyan met it powerfully to but it into the net. Cue 
amusingly deranged Super Chickens dancing celebration, at least that's what it 
looked like.

23 mins: Gyan almost catches Enyeama out with a dainty lob from 25 yards. 
Fortuantely for the beaten keeper it dropped just over the bar. "Another useful 
piece of advice would be DON"T TAKE A HOT BATH IF YOU HAVE A HEADACHE", 
prescribes Ian Copestake. A propos of that, another one might be DON'T TAKE A 
HOTBATH UNLESS YOU'VE PAID FOR IT.

25 mins: Shittu attempts some trickery at the back and that is rarely 
advisable from him. Gyan, perhaps too stunned, narrowly fails to nick the ball 
off the burly stopper, who celebrates his reprieve by whacking clear in more 
familiar fashion. "WWF maybe the spiritual home of signs and placards, but I 
think that in the UK, Darts has really cornered the market," flubbersw Ed 
Bayling. "At one event the other year they even supplied whiteboards and 
markers so people could write their own. My favourite was a chap holding up a 
whiteboard that read KIDS, TELL MUMMY I'M AT THE DARTS ..."

27 mins: Odemwingie cuts in from the left and lets fly with a shot from 25 
yards ... it bangs in to Martins, who thus finds himself with the ball at his 
feet some 16 yards from goal. He belts it badly wide. "Regarding the outbreak 
of Super Chickens dancing, I'd like to raise my transcontinental cyber-sign," 
beseeches Justin Kavanagh. "COUNT NOT YOUR FOWL WITH EAGLES AROUND."

30 mins: Opuko falls to the ground after tackling Yusuf - that's t he third 
time since the beginning of the game that he's been on the turf, and each time 
in seemingly genuine pain. It won't happen again, however, as he's stretchered 
off and repalced by Dramani.

31 mins: Odemwingie heads wide at the back post after an elegant cross from 
Echiejile, who has been a revelation in this tournament since somewhat 
surprisingly displacing Taiwo.

33 mins: Lovely reverse pass by Yusuf to Martins, but the striker dawdles in 
the box, allowing the ubiquitous Vorsah to snuff out the danger.

35 mins: Odeminwgie darts this and that, then runs out of patience and bops a 
shot off from 23 yards. Wide it went.

37 mins: Ayila careers into Ayew, chopping him to the ground like an angry 
lumberjack. Yellow card.

40 mins: Inkoom scurries down the right but fails to find Gyan with his 
attempted through-ball, allowing Nigeria to try another forward move, which 
like most of the others decomposes amid sloppy passing and generally tuneless 
interaction. "Following on from Mike Gibbons' rather literal example, maybe the 
fans need to take their cues from some other 20th century art movements and 
insurrectionists," quoth Adrian Cooper. "Situationist Internationale (VICTORY 
WILL BE FOR THOSE WHO KNOW HOW TO CREATE DISORDER WITHOUT LOVING IT), the 
Dadaist angle from the 1968 Paris student riots (UNDER THE PITCH, THE UNDERSOIL 
HEATING) and the Futurists (erm...REGARD FOOTBALL JOURNALISTS AS USELESS AND 
DANGEROUS)?" Discerning readers may, at this point, resemble the subject of 
Edvard Munch's most famous oeuvre.

41 mins: Kaita has a blem from 25 yards. It probably seemed like it was a 
worth an effort, but the result suggests otherwise. "DON'T HAVE YOUR DAD 
INSISTING ON TAKING YOU OUT FOR DINNER WHEN ALGERIA v EGYPT IS ON," counsel Kat 
Peterson, seemingly unaware that many modern eateries are equipped with 
new-fangled contraptions called televisions.

43 mins: Mikel spoons a dangerous freekick towards the penalty spot, and 
Kingson does well to come and punch it off the head off Nwaneri.

45 mins: Woeful miss! Odeminwingie took an astute pass from Mikel and had the 
option of (a) squaring the ball to Martins who was in splendid isolation on the 
edge of the six-yard box or (b) score himself from a not-too-tight angle. 
Instead he dragged a pitiful shot some five yards wide. He made himself look a 
fool there. Worse, given my preamble, he has also made me look a fool.

Half-time: Nigeria have had enough chance to be at least level, so there is no 
reason for suggesting they cannot turn this around. On the whole, however, it 
must be acknowledged that the game has been plod. "Tele-what?" frowns Kat 
Petersen, before taking a moment to adjust her Spinning Jenny. "There is a way 
to find out what's going on in the football other than the MBM? How exciting. 
It's not dangerous, is it?" It is extremely dangerous. Toxic even. I know 
because Michael Franti said so.

Placard watch: "In Italia 90 the Irish fans put their own slant on the 'John 
3:16' placard you see at lots of sports events (particularly in the US) with 
one bearing 'Jack 3:16'," recalls Mike Gibbons. "I believe that was the famous 
Geordie fisherman's preferred ratio of short, precise passes to agricultural 
thwacks downfield from Pat Bonner."

46 mins: We have resumption.

47 mins: Fine midfield generalmanship from Mikel, taking the ball off an 
opponent, holding off another two and then slipping a precise pass to Ayila, 
who in turn finds Odemwingie on the left. He smashes it across the face of 
goal, where Vorsah diverts it back to his own keeper.

49 mins: Nigeria have made a bold start to the second half but Ghana continue 
to defend well. Addy was well placed to block an Obasi shot from 15 yards.

51 mins: Mikel, interestingly, is advancing far farther forward than we 
habitually see him with Chelsea, leaving Kaita to shiled the back four. He's at 
the hub of most of his country's play, which makes sense as he seems to be 
their best passer.

53 mins: Gyan appears to be made of Teflon, for nothing is sticking to him, 
meaning any attempt by Ghana to relieve the pressure is short-lived as Nigeria 
quickly win the ball back and renew their, admittedly sketchy, forward march.

54 mins: Inkoom, unaware that he had enough time to trap the ball, survey his 
options and perhaps compose a short poem, nods it out of play to concede a 
needless corner. Happily for him, Nigeria waste it.

55 mins: Yusuf slashes the ball high and wide from 29 yards. Only he knows why.

56 mins: Annan justifiably booked for a flagrant dive.

57 mins: A barnstorming run by Asamoah concludes with a hopeless shank into 
the stands.

59 mins: The ball bounces to Martins at the rim of the Ghanaian box, and he 
attempts a shot ... misses the ball entirely ... and twirls in comical fashion. 
My fear now, readers, is that Nigeria's somewhat haphazard pressure is 
nevertheless going to lead eventually to an equaliser, and we'll have to endure 
another 30 minutes of this swill.

60 mins: Obasi scampers on to a through-ball only to spank it high over the 
bar. In previous matches Nigeria have struggled to create opportunities but 
profited expertly from those that they did make, here it is the opposite. "I 
think this placard business is a great idea for sporting events," yelps Mike 
Hollitscher. "IT'S COLD OUT WEAR A HAT OR YOU'LL CATCH YOUR DEATH or WHERE ARE 
THE KEYS DAMMIT HELP ME FIND MY KEYS."

62 mins: As Ghana drop ever deeper, either because Nigeria are winning the 
battle in midfield or because the Super Eagles' erratic shooting has convinced 
them there is nothing to fear, Yusuf balloons in a cross and Addy heads clear.

64 mins: Dramani makes a rare incursion into the Nigerian half, then pulls his 
cross way, way back to Gyan, whose shot from 30 yards does not even 
inconvenience Enyeama.

66 mins: Nigeria change: Ayila off, Nsofor on.

68 mins: Raking long ball from Mikel, which Martins for once takes down well 
between two defenders ... only to then trod on it. "Any mention yet of HELLO 
MUM?" wonders Andrew Benzeval. "Seems an obvious classic. Or perhaps "[ ] OUT", 
thus leaving the discerning fan with an all purpose anti-chairman sign that can 
be re-used as and when the next lunatic takes over the asylum."

70 mins: Another Nigeria change: Odeminwingie off, Yakubu on. On another note, 
word from my superiors (yes, I realise that may not be specific enough, given 
that it could refer to around 97% of earth's population) is that the 
auto-refresh fandangle is now working.

72 mins: Unlucky! Obasi conjured nicely at the edge of the box and then played 
in Echiejile, who thundered it across the face of goal. Yakubu reacted sharply 
to get a touch, but couldn't manoeuvre his leg quickly enough to divert the 
ball on target. So it flashed fractionally wide.

74 mins: Martins clips a dainty ball through for Yakubu to chase. The 
Evertonian gets his head to it and seems poised to shoot from 12 yards before 
Vorsah dispossesses him well. They've defended well at times, Ghana.

76 mins: Yes, at times Ghana have defended well. At other times, such as a 
moment ago, they have not. A straightforward ball over the top caught them out, 
leaving Martins to sprint into the box. Again, however, the Ghanain central 
defenders recovered in time to prevent the shot.

77 mins: Excellent punch clear by Kingson after a Nigerian corner. "Is there 
any reason why we haven't seen sponsored placards a la darts at football 
stadia?" wonders Andrew Sowden. "Oops, are those your ears pricking up Mr 
Marketing man?" Sorry to tell you that assorted beer vendors already engage in 
that practice, Andrew.

80 mins: Nigeria change: Yusuf off, in considerable pain, Odiah on.

82 mins: Shittu slides in to thwart a rare Ghanaian counter. Had he missed 
that, Gyan would have been clean through.

84 mins: Ghana change: Amoah on, Gyan off.

85 mins: Inkoom booked. Mikel flights in the freekick ... but it was a 
diabiolical delivery and Ghana clear with ease.

87 mins: Nigeria are lamping the ball into the box from all angles now, but so 
far Kingson has responded to that threat in admirable fashion, punching clear 
with great authority.

88 mins: A corner breaks to Kaita, wide on the left, some 30 yards out. He 
could loft it back into the box ... but elects to fire it into the stand 
instead.

90 mins: There will be a minimum of four more minutes.

90+1 mins: Vorsah unjustly penalised for dispossessing Nsofor. The freekick is 
in prime crossing position, wide on the left. Yakubu instead rolls it to Kaita 
about 25 yards out, and he slashes his attempted shot wide.

90+2 mins: Kingson booked for time-wasting.

Full-time: Dramani attempts to run down the clock in the corner but fails to 
bear in mind that keeping the ball is a fundamental condition of the success of 
such a strataegy. Therefore Nigeria are able to counter. In theory. In practice 
they mustered no threat. And on that note, the ref blows for full-time. Hats 
off the the young Ghanaians. The Super Eagles will need to improve before the 
World Cup if they're to make any impression there. Even before this tournament 
they were planning to change their manager; that looks a certainty now. But 
they could do with a few new players too.
 