
Preamble: Hello boys and girls, and welcome to the first of today's African 
Cup of Nations semi-finals. Hosts Ghana are promising a win - despite playing 
without suspended captain John Mensah - but Cameroon coach Otto Pfister reckons 
he can "tactically paralyse" them. We shall see.

Teams:
Ghana: R. Kingson, Sarpei, Pantsil, Annan, L. Kingston, Essien (capt), Agogo, 
Muntari, Addo, Owusu, Dramani

Cameroon: Kameni, R. Song (capt), Atouba, Geremi, Eto'o, Emana, A. Song, 
Idrissou, Mbia, Job, Bikey

Gah! Apparently Ghana had someone knacked in the warm-ups, but I missed who 
... I shall let you know as soon as I do.

I've arrived a bit late to do a proper preview ... But Paul Doyle has already 
done a far better job than I ever could - check out his wise wordsright here 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/sport/2008/02/07/haphazard_cameroon_stand_in_th.html>
.

1 min Goalkeeper Richard Kingson is the man missing for Ghana, and helpfully I 
can't work out who has replaced him over. This is off to a good start. Either 
way, it's not good news for the Black Stars against a Cameroon team who have 
scored 13 goals in four games.

4 mins Scrappy opening for both teams, as a throw-in pings off a series of 
Ghana players' heads in the box, before Cameroon eventually hack it clear. 
Mensah looks unimpressed on the sideline.

6 mins Dearie me - the first opportunity goes begging for Ghana as Sulley 
Muntari whisks a free-kick right across the six yard box from about 25 yards 
out on the left. Eric Addo comes tearing in and is totally unmarked at the back 
post, but can't get his head to the ball and it bounces harmlessly wide.

9 mins OK - finally I have this cleared up. It wasn't goalkeeper Richard 
Kingson who got injured in the warm-up, but midfielder Laryea Kingson, who was 
replaced by Andre Ayew. Richard Kingson does take a knock now though as he goes 
up to punch away a cross from Alex Song under pressure. After a couple of 
minutes' treatment he's back on his feet, if looking more than a little peeved.

12 mins The football, like this MBM, is still a bit patchy at the moment - 
other than that Muntari free-kick we're yet to see a real chance for either 
team.

15 mins Contrary to everything Arsenal fans have learnt about him over the 
past two and a half years, Alexandre Song looks very tidy in the middle of the 
park for Cameroon. He's providing most of their drive going forward and has 
looked very composed in possession. As I type that Samuel Eto'o takes 10-yard 
run-up at a free-kick about 30 yards out, then wellies it straight into the 
legs of Ghana's wall.

18 mins Muntari gives the ball away softly in midfield, but then lunges into a 
diving tackle to win it straight back before pushing it on to Agogo, who 
charges towards the Cameroon area, but forgets to do anything with the ball and 
ends up losing control of it as he reaches the goalline.

20 mins Emana flashes a bouncing ball over the bar from just outside the D for 
Cameroon, under pressure from Essien.

23 mins While we're waiting for either team to take charge of this game/create 
a proper chance, here's one to consider for Chelsea fans - who would you rather 
see lose today if it could only be one out of Ghana or the Ivory Coast? If 
Ghana crash out you get Essien back, but if Ivory Coast lose Drogba returns. 
Does the arrival of Anelka make having Drogba back less pressing? And does the 
fact that Arsenal would get Toure back too play into your considerations?

26 mins An absolutely mammoth throw in from the left for Cameroon is easily 
claimed by Kingson.

28 mins Ayew slams in what I believe is Ghana's first shot on target, weaving 
his way in from the left flank, cutting inside two defenders then attempting to 
drive the ball back across his own body towards the near post. He doesn't get 
enough behind it, though, and Kameni gathers without too much trouble.

31 mins Song floats a delightful ball out to Emana in acres of space on the 
right for Ghana, but he takes too long, and his eventual cross is deflected 
away by a recovering defender. Owusu-Abeyie breaks fast for Ghana, but loses 
the run of himself as he tries to cut back past his man for the third time just 
inside the box on the left-hand side.

34 mins "Any thoughts on Ghana's John Paintsil's performance at the African 
Cup of Nations, and whether he deserves to be sitting at the bench at West 
Ham," asks Naheem Charania. "Also, has Eto'o's play throughout the tournament 
been as disastrous as it has been in today's game?" I'm afraid I can't be an 
awful lot of help here Naheem, as I have been off in America covering the Super 
Bowl for GU for a significant chunk of the tournament, and sadly US TV coverage 
of proceedings has been less than comprehensive. I can tell you Eto'o has 
scored four goals in four games so far, but three were penalties. He's been 
totally anonymous so far today.

37 mins Oooh - Geremi absolutely crushes a free-kick goalwards from about 40 
yards out, and Kingson gets set to ignore it as it appears to be drifting high 
and wide of the right-hand post. But it swerves back and dips at the last 
second and eventually pings off top-right corner of the woodwork. What a goal 
that would have been.

44 mins Apologies - in typically glorious GU style, I have been completely 
unable to update my MBM for the past 7 mins as our network decided to take an 
afternoon break. The good news is you haven't missed a lot, other than several 
readers pointing out the folly of my earlier question regarding who Chelsea 
need back more out of Essien or Drogba. Obviously the losing teams in today's 
semi-finals will still end up having to play in the third-place playoff. "But 
if there was a possibility of them coming before the weekend, I would prefer 
Drogba back," chips in Surya Gagan. "We have Claude Makalele and John Obi Mikel 
as suitable cover for Essien."

45 mins (+2) Agogo and Andre Bikey clash heads as the former tries 
unsuccessfully to tame a long ball up from defence. Ghana have been pumping 
quite a few of those forward so far this match, with very little success.

 45 mins (+3) "As an Arsenal fan I'm hoping for a terrible injury involving 
Drogba and Essien that somehow also rules Cristiano Ronaldo out for the 
season," pipes up Monty Hadadi, helpfully, as Ayew flicks a header up over the 
bar from about 10 yards out. And that brings to a close a rather disappointing 
first half.

Half-time email tomfoolery "I'm not sure you're endearing yourself to anyone 
with that Super Bowl reference," chimes Laura McInerney. "Also, on 31 mins, it 
would have been better if it said 'Owusu-Abieye breakfasts for Ghana'." Better, 
but sadly untrue, I fear.

Roy Rayburn, on the other hand, fully understands my pain. "I think 'less than 
comprehensive' is about right," says Rob with regard to African Cup of Nations 
coverage Stateside. "A co-worker just saw that I was reading the MBM and when I 
explained what it was, responded: 'They play soccer in Africa?'"

46 mins Cameroon make the first substitution of the game, bringing Bochum 
midfielder Joel Epalle on for striker Mohamadou Idrissou, who had been largely 
ineffective thus far. "This game proves just how good a midfielder Essien is 
when he's storming forward and how much Ghana and Chelsea lose when he's stuck 
back in defence," argues Seiriol Hughes, ignoring the fact we've already 
established that the Essien/Drogba debate is a moot point. "I'd rather Drogba 
come home soon - I want to see how he's going to fit in with Anelka - but I 
think Essien is the better player, if deployed properly."

49 mins Ghana are trying to push on here - with first Abeyie, then Dramani, 
then Essien taking turns to break out of midfield and causing the Cameroon 
defence no end of bother with their direct running, but all three seem to run 
out of ideas as they reach the box, and each time Cameroon clear.

52 mins Song has picked up a bit of a knock for Cameroon - not sure exactly 
what, but he's walking with a pronounced limp. That could be problematic for 
Cameroon, he's been probably their best player so far. Eto'o jabs a 
through-ball past Ghana's last defender for Joseph Desire Job to chase, but the 
latter is already offside.

55 mins Eto'o suddenly looks to have woken up - shrugging off Essien's 
challenge as he chases a through-ball into the box, and then pulling the ball 
back to Epalle on the edge of the box. Sadly for Cameroon he can't control it 
properly, and Ghana clear.

57 mins "Geremi does not have his own name on his shirt," parps Ian Copestake, 
who may not know that Geremi's full name is Geremi Njitap, but is more likely 
just being facetious. "Perhaps this explains why neither team seems to be 
playing like themselves." It's been a little livelier so far this half, Ian. 
Still pretty scrappy, but at least both teams are trying to get forward more.

60 mins Annan has a dig from the edge of the box, but he gets too much 
underneath it, and in the end it flies a comfortable way over the bar.

62 mins "Why are there so few African coaches involved in this tournament," 
demands Gary Naylor as Rigobert Song nicks the ball off Agogo's toes with a 
perfectly-timed sliding challenge by the corner of the six-yard box. "Saying 
that African football needs further development 18 years after Cameroon all but 
beat England in the World Cup quarter-final won't wash. I guess it's because so 
few top European clubs have given African coaches a chance - what a lot of 
potential going to waste." Muntari swings the ensuing corner in and it only 
just eludes the head of an unmarked Pantsil head bythis much at the back post.

65 mins Another surge forward from Dramani, who feeds Abeyie on the edge of 
the D, but Rigobert Song blocks the latter's attempted shot.

66 mins And yet another very tidy corner ensues from Muntari - this time it's 
Essien who nearly meets it, but Song gets just enough on it to flick it away.

69 mins Ghana are all over this game now. First Muntari blasts the ball into a 
wall from a free-kick about 30 yards out, before the rebound is floated in 
towards Essien and Agogo in the box. it only just eludes Agogo, but is hacked 
away before it reaches Essien and goes for a Ghana corner.

GOAL! Ghana 0-1 Cameroon - N'Kong (71 mins) Unbelievable. One second Paintsil 
is thrashing in another low drive from the edge of the box for Ghana , which 
Kameni just about holds on to, and then seconds later Cameroon are ahead. The 
ball was cleared long by Kameni, then N'Kong, Epalle and Eto'o exchanged 
one-touch passes in a beautiful little triangular move which ended with N'Kong 
charging onto the ball 15 yards out and placing it across Kingson's face and 
into the far corner of the net.

74 mins Agogo gives away a free-kick as he barges Kameni into his own net 
after the goalkeeper had claimed a looped cross from the left. For all their 
pressure, it has to be said that Ghana have still not created many clear-cut 
chances.

77 mins And just as I type that, of course, they get one - Agogo thundering 
past Song and on to a long-ball as it bounces into the area. He gets there just 
before Kameni about eight yards from goal, but the keeper spreads himself well 
and gets a solid block on Agogo's first-time effort.

80 mins My, oh, my - Agogo will have himself to blame if Ghana do lose this 
game. Once again Muntari lifted an absolute peach of a cross in from a 
free-kick about 20 yards out on the left, Agogo was left totally unmarked by 
the penalty spot, but he directs his header over the bar. You really do have to 
at least put that on target. For the umpteenth time this game, woeful set-piece 
defending from Cameroon goes unpunished.

83 mins "It's taken American sport far too long to encourage black coaches, 
especially given the high percentage of black players in their three main 
sports," points out Ian Copestake in response to Gary Naylor's earlier email 
(62 mins). "So it is not an African problem alone." Ghana continue to pump long 
balls towards the Cameroon area, without much joy.

86 mins Ahmed Barusso is on for Ayew as Claude LeRoy searches for a way to 
give his Ghana team some fresh impetus.

89 mins Cameroon are taking the life out of this game, bit by bit. Eto'o 
collects a long ball and makes his way down to the corner flag, before 
eventually trying to cut inside, then losing possession.

Red Card! Andrey Bikey (90 mins) What on earth? Bikey has just been sent off 
for pushing over a member of medical staff. The stretcher had been driven on to 
the pitch to attend to Bikey's team-mate Rigobert Song, and for no obvious 
reason Bikey just lost it, shoving over one of the stretcher bearers. He will 
now miss the final, should Cameroon hold on.

90 mins (+3) Barusso spurns what will probably be Ghana's last chance of the 
game, thrashing a free-kick a long way over from 30 yards out.

Peep! Peep! Peeeep! And that will be that. Cameroon beat Ghana for the first 
time in 41 years, much to the delight of my Nigerian colleague Kay, who just 
keeps saying "Julius Agogo" and laughing to himself. Cameroon are through to 
the final of the 2008 African Cup of Nations, and will be playing the winner of 
Ivory Coast's semi-final with Egypt later tonight. You can follow that game 
with Gregg Roughley by clickingright here 
<http://football.theguardian.com/news/matchreport/0,,2254066,00.html>. Thanks 
for all your emails, sorry I could use them all.
 