
This excellent tournament has delivered some crackers so far, and this could 
be another. Hosts Ghana will expect to win this: their side boasts Michael 
Essien and Sulley Muntari, two of the players of the tournament so far; they 
tonked Nigeria 4-1 last year at Brentford's Griffin Park; and the clueless 
Berti Vogts is in charge of the Super Eagles. But Nigeria, who are due a good 
performance, have gained confidence after a rickety start and are talking up 
their chances. "It's going to be Black Sunday for the Black Stars," saysNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> media officer 
Peterside Idah, while midfielder Seyi Olofinjana reckons here victory would be 
"the most suitable way of getting our revenge for what happened in London". It 
is on.

Likely style of this minute-by-minute report, for your faithful MBM 
correspondent is quite tired afterthis emotionally draining Keegfest 
<http://football.theguardian.com/News_Story/0,,2251747,00.html>: Minimalist.

Kick off: 5pm.

Ghana: 22-Richard Kingson; 2-Hans Sarpei, 4-John Paintsil, 5-John Mensah, 
18-Eric Addo; 6-Anthony Annan, 8-Michael Essien, 11-Sulley Muntari, 20-Quincy 
Owusu Abeyie; 3-Asamoah Gyan, 9-Junior Agogo

Nigeria: 12-Austin Ejide; 2-Joseph Yobo, 5-Obinna Nwaneri, 6-Danny Shittu, 
3-Taye Taiwo; 14-Seyi Olofinjana, 10-John Obi Mikel, 15-Ike Uche, 16-Dickson 
Etuhu; 8-Yakubu Aiyegbeni, 11-Peter Odemwingie

Referee: Mohamed Benouza (Algeria) 

The atmosphere at the Ohene Djan Stadium in Accra: Absolutely crackling. 
Despite the two countries being locked in fierce rivalry, the anthems are being 
played out to a cavalcade of cheering and trumpet blowing. Regular patrons of 
Wembley Stadium in London would do well to take note.

Both teams partake in a pre-match huddle... then we're off! This is the 60th 
meeting between these two sides. Ghana stroke it around for a couple of seconds 
- and immediately it all kicks off! Nwaneri slides in late on Muntari, who gets 
up and goes nose to nose with his aggressor. The ref races in to pull both men 
apart, and it all calms down quickly enough. What a start.

3 min: Odemwingie breaks clear down the left and swings over a cross towards 
Yakubu, but the ref blows up for offside. A positive start by Nigeria, though. 
"The late Mr Judd it seems wasn't keen on the minimalist tag," writes Ian 
Copestake, who has quickly cottoned onto the fact that I don't know anything 
about art (though I know what I like, and I like what I see, and what I like 
and see is ART). "Rather his 'work sought autonomy and clarity for the 
constructed object and the space created by it, ultimately achieving a 
rigorously democratic presentation without compositional hierarchy. It created 
an outpouring of seemingly effervescent structure without the rigor associated 
with minimalism proper.' So there."

5 min: Mikel chips a ball over the Ghana back line for Odemwingie to chase, 
but he's cooked it too much and the ball nestles in the advancing Kingson's 
hands.

6 min: Ghana's first real shot in anger: Essien latches onto a dropping ball 
just outside the area and loops a wild volley over the bar. The effort inspires 
some wild freestyling from trumpeters in the crowd; it's like selected passages 
from Albert Ayler's Spiritual Unity, played backwards, in a vast tin drum.

9 min: Taiwo is booked for a late lunge on Agogo. The free kick is wide on the 
right - and Muntari wastes it by trying to whip the ball straight in at the 
near post. There wasno way he was going to score from there.

11 min: With Gyan showing an interest in a long ball, Ejide races out from his 
area to hoof the thing back up the pitch. That was well anticipated, because 
Shittu wasn't going to get ahead of the striker.

13 min: Muntari wastes another free kick, 35 yards out and central, 
belabouring it straight into the wall while going for goal. There wasno way he 
was going to score from there.

14 min: Muntari steals the ball off Nwaneri in the Nigerian box; Yobo nearly 
puts through his own net as he hacks the cross clear. That's a corner from 
which nothing comes, but Ghana are beginning to assert their authority here.

17 min: Sarpei twists and wriggles down the left and makes a fool of Nwaneri, 
who issues some payback with a ludicrous lunge on the wingback. He's booked for 
his trouble.

18 min: Ghana are pegging Nigeria back in their box. This is some pressure. 
Quincy takes a whack at goal after cutting in from the right. Then Paintsil 
flings in a long throw which causes Nwaneri to panic and concede a needless 
corner. Again, nothing comes of it, but surely it's only a matter of time 
before the hosts take the lead. Nigeria are doing nothing at all.

20 min: Quincy does that thing Steve Nicol used to do back in the 80s - an 
awkward shimmy - and skins Taiwo, nipping in from the right and attempting a 
curler into the top left corner. It's too high, but nice try. Nigeria really 
are on the ropes.

22 min: Quincy is the best player on the pitch so far: now he puts his head 
down and tears down the centre of the pitch, evading three challenges before 
finally losing control on the edge of the area under pressure from Yobo and 
Shittu. A purposeful run.

24 min: Quincy and Paintsil combine well down the right to give Paintsil a 
chance to cross; sadly for Ghana, that cross is shanked into the crowd.

25 min: A brilliant effort from Gyan, who pulls down an Essien through ball 
with ease and races towards goal. He unleashes a shot which crashes off the 
right-hand post. So unlucky.

26 min: And now it's the turn of Agogo to race clear. His touch is far heavy, 
though, and he jiggers the chance.

29 min: More brilliant play from Quincy, who dances down the left and plays a 
wonderful reverse ball in towards Agogo in the box. The striker fails to 
control an easy pass; once again a chance is spurned. Ghana are playing 
brilliantly.

31 min: And yet after all Ghana's brilliance, it's Nigeria who should have 
taken the lead, Uche breaking clear into Ghana's box and fluffing his shot 
woefully: with only Kingson to beat, he tries to stroke it into the bottom 
corner with the outside of his left boot, but succeeds only in rolling the ball 
carefully into the keeper's hands. A dreadful miss.

33 min: PENALTY TO NIGERIA! Yakubu looks to have been felled in the box after 
being held by Addo, but the penalty's not given. No matter, because two seconds 
later Odemwingie is hacked down by (I think) Mensah. It looks less a foul than 
the one on Yakubu, but this time the referee gives the nod and points to the 
spot. Yakubu steps up to take the kick and...

34 min: GOAL! Ghana 0 - 1 Nigeria. ... calmly whacks it into the bottom-left 
corner of Kingson's net, giving the keeper no chance. That was so against the 
run of play it was untrue.

37 min:  The trumpets have stopped playing. The crowd are stunned. As are 
Ghana, who suddenly look aimless. They need to snap out of this quicksmart, 
because they have been the better team so far.

38 min:  The panic continues: Essien tries to convert a free kick from nearly 
40 yards out. That is totally ridiculous.

39 min:  And that should have been 2-0, as Odemwingie fires a brilliant low 
cross into the box from the left towards Yakubu - but the Everton striker takes 
his eye off the ball and allows it to fly under his foot. What a chance. This 
is a very exciting game.

40 min:  Ghana get their gamefaces back on at last, Quincy picking the ball up 
on the right, cutting inside as he does, and dragging a low shot just wide of 
the right-hand post of Ejide's goal. This is fantastically end-to-end, the sort 
of entertaining football that puts the Premier League to shame.

42 min:  Nigeria are enjoying much, much more possession now. The shift in 
confidence between the two teams is stunning.

45 min:  Gyan is booked for whacking Shittu upside the head with his elbow.

45 min +3: GOAL!!! RIGHT ON HALF TIME!!! Ghana 1 - 1 Nigeria. Quincy whips 
over a cross from the left which Essien meets with his head. He sends an effort 
off the left-hand post and spinning into the goal in what seems like super-slow 
motion. A shocked Ejide, head in hands, stares at the ball as it nestles 
apologetically in the net. What drama!

Half time: Ghana 1 - 1 Nigeria. Well well. "Speaking of Steve Nicol," writes 
Stephen Armson, which we weren't, not really, "does anyone else seem to 
remember the strange running style of that 80s Liverpool team? I think Nicol, 
Hansen and Venison were the biggest offenders but everyone was at it, even 
McMahon. They would jog back with their hands in the handlebar position, but 
tucked into the chest - touchingly vulnerable, but somehow not effeminate. 
(Except in Venison's case, but what wasn't?)"

And we're off again! If the next 45 minutes are even half as good as the 
first, we're in for a treat. This has been a brilliant match so far.

46 min: What an effort from Yakubu! Kingson comes out of his box to head 
clear, but the ball only reaches the Nigeria striker, who loops an effort 
goalwards from 40 yards. It was going in as well, because Kingson has to 
scamper back and tip the ball over the net. (Seeing we've been on a Liverpool 
1980s tip, think Grobbelaar's save from Graeme Sharp in the 1986 FA Cup final.) 
"Now this is a much better match thanthe one you had to cover earlier 
<http://football.theguardian.com/News_Story/0,,2251747,00.html> isn't it?" asks 
Ibster Ibstein. Yes. "I suppose it is to be expected after all Eagles are more 
spectacular than Magpies, right? Anyway, I am writing in to let you know that 
EJIDE IS IN THE EMPLOY OF THE GHANAIANS! Why else would he repeatedly give the 
ball to Kingson? Why else would he just stand and watch while a header goes in 
from about 30 yards out? You will see, in the next half he will score an own 
goal by throwing the ball into his own net."[Guardian Unlimited Sport legal 
disclaimer: We are sure Ejide is not in the employ of the Ghanaians, and that 
he will not throw the ball into his own net]

49 min: Nigeria have started this half strongly. Odemwingie nearly breaks 
through two challenges but can't quite wriggle clear into the box. Number of 
emails so far sent in wondering whether Quincy has "an interest in the world of 
forensic science": 7.

51 min: Another great run from Odemwingie, who latches onto a long ball and 
turns Paintsil inside and out before unleashing a daisycutter which Kingson 
does well to field.

53 min: Muntari stands over a free kick, 35 yards out. This time he doesn't 
take a witless thrash at it, but his dink into the box isn't much smarter, and 
it's easily cleared by Shittu.

56 min: After a lungbursting run from his own box into the centre circle, 
Quincy lofts a majestic crossfield hump towards Gyan, screaming down the 
inside-right channel. If the striker controls the pass, he's clear in the box - 
but all he can do is clank it into touch with his shin. A shame, because that 
would have been a beautiful goal.

58 min: RED CARD! Ghana skipper John Mensah is sent packing for a cynical 
challenge on Odemwingie, who is sent clear on goal by a brilliant through ball 
from Mikel (who in turn was found after a Beckenbauer-style romp forward by... 
Danny Shittu!). Mensah cuts across the back of his legs - and the ref has no 
option.

61 min:  The resulting free kick, just outside the box, is shifted left: Taiwo 
drops a shoulder and crashes a spectacular shot towards the top left corner. 
Kingson parries brilliantly. The ball then drops to Shittu, who juggles the 
ball awhile a la Matthew Le Tissier before his shot is blocked. Shittu, 
Beckenbauer, Le Tissier: there are some things you never think you'll ever 
write.

63 min:  Kingston replaces Gyan for Ghana.

65 min:  Understandably, this is now all Nigeria. Yakubu bursts down the right 
and nearly gets the better of Addo. But not quite.

66 min:  A lull, as a couple of players are down with cramp.

68 min:  Now Etuhu is down with cramp. This game has to all intents and 
purposes stopped.

69 min:  A deflected Agogo strike wins Ghana a corner - which they 
inexplicably take quickly. Seeing they're down to ten men, that's a fairly 
ridiculous decision, and sure enough there's nobody up in the box and Quincy's 
eventual cross into the area is easily mopped up.

73 min:  Quincy is replaced by Dramani.

75 min:  Annan pokes Mikel in the eye after being upended by him. If the ref 
has seen that, Ghana will be down to nine men. Mikel (!) is booked for his 
trouble; Annan gets away scot free.

77 min:  A brilliant run by Dramani into the area: he pulls the ball back 
towards Agogo, but Shittu finally hacks clear. That's the first time Nigeria 
have had cause to panic for quite a while, though.

80 min:  Shittu turns on a sixpence on the edge of the area and drags a shot 
across the face of goal. If someone had been thinking quickly... but they 
weren't.

81 min:  What a chance for Agogo, who takes a long ball down on the edge of 
the box with his chest, turns, and stands with only Ejide to beat. Sadly for 
the hosts, he shanks his shot.

83 min: GOAL!!! Ghana 2 - 1 Nigeria.  Not that Agogo cares now! Out on the 
left Dramani rolls the ball into Muntari, who whips it across the face of goal: 
Agogo, racing in from two yards, can't miss. The Ohene Djan Stadium erupts!

84 min: Agogo is booked for taking his shirt off in celebration. Mikel is 
replaced by Nsofor.

85 min: Ghana stream forward. Kingston takes a potshot from just outside the 
box; his screamer is only just over the bar. This is bedlam.

86 min: Amazing skills from Paintsil and especially Kingston, who juggle the 
ball between them in a Jim Baxter style. It's not just showboating for its own 
sake either: the move ends with a brilliant volleyed cross which Ejide does 
magnificently well to claim under pressure from Agogo.

88 min: Shittu gets on the end of a long Nigerian free kick and heads across 
the Ghana goal; Muntari does well to clear with a diving header.

89 min: There are going to be three added minutes. Paintsil gives away a 
needless corner. Can Nigeria rescue themselves? Possibly, because nervous Ghana 
are rocking violently. They slash and hack the ball clear, but it keeps coming 
back. Another corner, which is wasted.

90 min +2: Ghana are just hacking everything towards row Z now. A minute to 
play, but Nigeria aren't applying any pressure.

Full time: Ghana 2 - 1 Nigeria. Annan gives away a free kick 30 yards out, 
just to the right. The ball falls to Yobo, five yards out! And with history 
beckoning he... takes a fresh-air swipe at the ball then falls over. Oh dear. 
And that's it! The hosts are in the semi finals!

Short and to-the-point conclusion: That match was an absolute joy to watch.

Email: scott.murray@theguardian.com <mailto:scott.murray@theguardian.com>
 