
Ghana have called for stiff action against the African Cup of Nations hosts, 
Equatorial Guinea,after Ghanaian supporters were injured in attacks by home fans
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/05/africa-cup-nations-ghana-equatorial-guinea-violence>
 during Thursday’s semi-final between the two countries.

“It’s a pity that this dark cloud overshadows our success and we really need 
to see some stiff action taken by the Confederation of African Football,” said 
Kwesi Nyantakyi, the president of theGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> Football Association and who is 
also a senior Caf executive.

Caf will meet on Friday to discuss the incident, which follows swiftly after 
violent scenes at the weekend in which Tunisia players tried to attack a referee
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/03/mauritian-referee-banned-for-awarding-controversial-equatorial-guinea-penalty>
 after they were eliminated by Equatorial Guinea in the quarter-final.

About 500 Ghanaians had flown from Accra on chartered planes to watch their 
team and were placed in a section on the side of the stadium, away from the 
rest of the 15,000-capacity crowd at the Nuevo Estadio de Malabo. Home 
supporters aimed bottles at Ghana players and supporters, however, and the 
visiting team were forced to leave and re-enter the pitch under cover of riot 
police shields either side of half-time as the hosts went down 3-0. The game 
was halted again after 82 minutes and did not resume for another 40 minutes as 
the crowd was largely dispersed.

Ghana 3-0 Equatorial Guinea | Africa Cup of Nations semi-final match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/05/africa-cup-nations-ghana-equatorial-guinea-violence>
Eventually the game was restarted in front of near-empty stands before the 
Gabonese referee, Eric Otogo, blew for full time five minutes early.

The Ghanaians were then held back at the stadium for several hours while home 
supporters went on the rampage outside the stadium, upturning vendors’ goods 
and placing concrete boulders on the road. The Ghanaians were eventually bused 
back to Malabo airport.

The Ghana coach, Avram Grant, praised his team’s attitude, saying: “I spoke a 
lot to the players about mentality. One of the things that is important in 
sports and in life as well, is to recover after you lost a game.

“We spoke about what would happen if we win because we were in a tough group. 
They called our group the group of death, I call it the group of living.”

Ghana now play Ivory Coast, who defeated the Democratic Republic of Congo on 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/04/dr-congo-ivory-coast-africa-cup-of-nations-match-report>
, in Sunday’s final. “This is part of life, you need to look for a solution to 
pick yourselves up,” Grant added.

“I was looking for this from players and they did it well, they picked 
themselves up and they showed Ghana that they could count on them.”

Trouble was ignited shortly before half-time when Ghana were awarded a penalty 
after 41 minutes, Jordan Ayew scoring after the Crystal Palace striker Kwesi 
Appiah had been fouled.

Equatorial Guinea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> 
contested Otogo’s decision and were angered further when their attempts to 
restart the game while Ghana celebrated were pulled back. Bottles were hurled 
towards the visiting players and dugout, forcing the Ghana substitutes to seek 
refuge on the pitch beyond the crowd’s range.

Shortly before half-time Wakaso Mubarak doubled the lead, whereupon the area 
around the tunnel was peppered again and Ghana’s players were made to wait for 
police to assemble before departing the pitch.
 Stewards take a supporter off the pitch. Photograph: Sunday Alamba/AP 
Tannoy announcements attempted to calm the crowd when the players re-emerged 
for the second half but the situation descended into lawlessness 15 minutes 
from full-time.

The prompt was a third Ghana goal, tapped in by André Ayew from Appiah’s pass. 
It led their segregated pocket of supporters, situated in the north-western 
corner of the stadium, to be attacked by adjacent home fans.

The Ghana fans made a break for safety via a gate at the front of the stand 
and police attempted to lead them around the pitch. The scheme failed as they 
were trapped behind the goal, effectively flanked by uncontrollable crowds on 
three sides.
 Bottles are scattered over the pitch. Photograph: Sunday Alamba/AP 
A police helicopter then swooped within 30 feet of the crowd in the west 
stand, forcing the majority to scatter because of the noise and power of its 
rotors.

It returned three more times, making its point firmly while smoke bombs were 
deployed in other areas of the stadium. A South African photographer was grazed 
by a rock thrown from the east end of the stadium. Ghana’s official Twitter 
feed described the scene as “like a war zone”.

Other injuries occurred among officials, police and home supporters. “This 
kind of behaviour is just unacceptable,” Nyantakyi said.
 A Ghana supporter is led off the pitch after being injured in the match 
against the hosts Equatorial Guinea in Malabo. Photograph: Sunday Alamba/AP  