
As leading shares moved higher for the third day, engineering group GKN was 
among the biggest risers.

The company, which supplies parts and systems for cars and aircraft, added 
11.1p to 194.7p after a buy note from Evolution Securites followingthe start of 
the Frankfurt motor show 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/gallery/2011/sep/13/frankfurt-motor-show-2011-in-pictures?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Putting a 330p a share price target on GKN, analyst Harry Philips said:
 Our assessment of the mood out of this week's Frankfurt auto show is one of 
resilience with growth in global auto production still a sensible planning 
assumption. Lear's presentation on September 13 laid out a compound annual 
growth rate of 9% in BRIC production to 2016, 3% in Europe and 5% for North 
America. If this becomes a reality then global component suppliers with 
commanding market shares are going to do well and in this context, we are 
reiterating our buy on GKN.

The current price is factoring a repeat of the two profit warnings within five 
weeks in late 2008 – while understandable on one level, the view ignores a very 
different global inventory position, a very different and more positive mix 
profile in Europe in what is set to remain a flat market through 2012, GKN's 
additional momentum from market share gains most notably with Ford in North 
America and the accelerating momentum in aerospace. 
Markets were in positive territory from the off, with investors encouraged by 
France and Germany's comments on Wednesday, suggesting they would not let 
Greece default. News in the afternoon of a co-ordinated move by central banks 
to pump more dollars into the struggling financial system helped the mood stay 
positive despite some mixed economic data from the US, not to mention the $2bn 
loss suffered by UBS thanks to a rogue trader.

By the close the FTSE 100 had climbed 110.52 points to 5337.54, while 
Germany's Dax and France's Cac were both up by more than 3%. Wall Street was 
around 100 points higher by the time London closed. Joshua Raymond, chief 
market strategist at City Index, said:
 One cannot help think that the coordinated central bank action shown today to 
plug any liquidity crisis flies in the face of much of the rhetoric we have 
seen lately that there is no liquidity crisis at Europe's banks. Today's action 
appears to contradict that but nevertheless, the action has thus far been seen 
as a positive by investors.

Much of the lift we have seen in European markets will now be dictated by 
market confidence that European leaders can rally behind Greece and prevent the 
indebted nation from a default.

The day's speculative story revolved around RSA Insurance, up 4.1p to 113.9p 
on talk of a possible bid at around 180p a share. Zurich Financial - which was 
also recently linked with Aviva - was one name mentioned, as was Australia's 
QBE. TheSydney based company <http://www.group.qbe.com/About-QBE/Insurance.html>
 was last suggested as a buyer of RSA almost exactly three years ago.

Banks moved higher following the central banks' move, also helped by a 
positive note from analysts at Nomura, which said this week's report from the 
Independent Commission on Banking took some of the uncertainty out of the 
sector. It said:
 We find it difficult to see this level of valuation as anything other than 
attractive and the shares as oversold. We therefore advocate a positive stance, 
particularly within a European bank sector context. UK banks are significantly 
less exposed to the current eurozone risks and have recapitalised. 
It moved its recommendation from neutral to buy on HSBC, up 19.6p to 521.1p, 
andBarclays, 6p better at 158p. Meanwhile Lloyds Banking Group added 2.41p to 
35.91p andRoyal Bank of Scotland rose 0.92p to 23.72p.

But as investors moved into riskier assets and away from safe havens, gold 
lost more than $55 to $1775 an ounce. SoRandgold Resources lost 205p to £67.30, 
Fresnillo fell 20p to £19.07 and African Barrick Gold dropped 21.5p to 595p.

On another busy day for retailers, B&Q owner Kingfisher pleased the market 
with a better than expected 24% jump in half year profits and news of the 
creation of 1,200 jobs. It shares ended 11.5p higher at 251.1p. Meanwhile 
homewares retailerDunelm rose 24.8p to 451.9p after a 9% increase in full year 
profits to £83.6m.Booker, the cash and carry wholesaler, added 5.45p to 74.55p 
after it reported a 7.6% rise in second quarter revenues, boosted by strong 
fruit and vegetable sales.

Elsewhere chip designers Arm added 11.5p to 610p and Imagination Technologies 
11.5p to 399p as Alex Jarvis and Paul Morland at Peel Hunt tipped them as 
possible takeover targets. They said:
 We believe that some of the arguments around why neither is a take-over 
target could start to be undone. Given the massive shifts in business models 
that the IT industry's old and new giants are going through, the 'fear in their 
eyes' and the steps they are willing to take to secure a future, we would not 
rule out the acquisition of Arm or Imagination, even by companies with no 
history in chip design. 
Lower down the market Gable Holdings, a European non-life insurance company, 
added nearly 13% to 18.75p after first half profits rose 52% to £2m. House 
broker Panmure Gordon issued a buy note, saying:
 We think Gable is well placed to benefit from new product initiatives and any 
upturn in non-life rates if/when they finally occur. With the shares trading on 
2011/12 operating PEs of 5.8 times and 3.6 times respectively, we maintain our 
buy recommendation and 36p target price.  