
A gaggle of world leaders, diplomats, NGOs, corporate representatives and 
thinktanks will descend on aMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> 
City conference centre this week to continue their search for new solutions to 
old problems.

According to the UK's international development secretary, Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, the first high-level 
meeting of theGlobal Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC) 
<>, represents an "incredibly important opportunity" to ensure that poor 
countries receive the skills and investment needed to end their dependency on 
aid.

While few would disagree with her assessment, little is expected of the Mexico 
meeting.

The partnership, created in Busan, South Korea, three years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/25/busan-explainer-aid-effectiveness>
, aims to bring together aid donors and recipients, emerging economies, civil 
society organisations, private sector companies and foundations in the hope of 
eradicating poverty through better cooperation.

It is based on five principles intended to make aid more effective: ownership; 
alignment; harmonisation; mutual accountability; and results. Central to its 
philosophy is the concept of ownership: letting developing countries set their 
own strategies for poverty reduction, improving their institutions and tackling 
corruption.

So far, 161 governments – including key emerging nations such as India, China, 
Nigeria, Indonesia and Turkey – have declared their support for the 
partnership. Some 1,500 development leaders are expected to congregate in 
Mexico.

Despite the cheers that greeted Busan, however, there are fears that the 
partnership may not meet its self-imposed targets for 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/aug/15/apathy-over-busan-aid-effectiveness>
, which include increasing transparency, boosting country ownership and untying 
aid.

The GPEDC's own progress report – released at the beginning of April – 
conceded that the results were mixed 
<http://effectivecooperation.org/2014/04/04/progress-in-implementing-the-busan-commitments/>
.

"Longstanding efforts to change the way development cooperation is delivered 
are paying off, but much more needs to be done to transform cooperation 
practices and ensure country ownership of all development efforts, as well as 
transparency and accountability among development partners," it said.

The report found that commitment to the Busan principles remained strong, 
despite the global economic situation and individual countries' domestic budget 
problems. But it was blunt in its conclusions: "More needs to be done … to meet 
the targets that the global partnership set for 2015."

Greening, who co-chairs the GPEDC, is calling on those involved to make sure 
that the momentum acquired at Busan is not squandered.

"We must agree a new partnership with emerging nations and private investors 
to make sure every pound, yuan, peso or dollar spent on development has the 
greatest possible impact," she said.

"Countries like China have made remarkable progress and they are now turning 
their resources to help other countries. At the same time, the finance and 
skills of the private sector have tremendous potential for tackling global 
poverty."

Campaigners such as Publish What You Fund <http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org> 
argue the GPEDC report shows that donors are dragging their feet on promises to 
act as openly as possible, which does not augur well for the partnership's aims.

"This is a timely wake-up call that more is needed for donors to fulfil their 
original commitments," said David Hall-Matthews, director of Publish What You 
Fund.

"All donors must accelerate their efforts to publish high-quality aid data, 
which the report confirms is not yet happening."

A lack of proper donor information, Hall-Matthews said, would serve only to 
hinder partner countries' efforts to plan effectively.

Some, however, discern a more basic and ideological tension at the heart of 
the partnership.

According to Dr Alex Shankland of the rising powers in international 
development programme at the Institute of Development Studies 
<http://www.ids.ac.uk/idsresearch/rising-powers-in-international-development-programme>
, the success of the Mexico meeting will depend on the degree to which the big 
northern donors are prepared to listen to and engage with the new powers of the 
development world, the Brics (Brazil, Russia, India and China) and the Mints 
(Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey).

"I think the real test is whether the traditional aid players have learned 
their lessons from the post-Busan period, when there was an initial euphoria 
about the Brics signing up, and then it sort of reverted to business as usual," 
he said. "The countries that are increasingly important players in development 
cooperation – the Brics, Mints, the rising powers in development – are coming 
from their own historical tradition of south-south cooperation, they have their 
own way of doing things and don't particularly see why they should sign up to 
someone else's way of doing things."

It was vital, Shankland said, to have a genuine dialogue about the different 
ways of achieving development cooperation.

"Once you've got that going, you might have something worthwhile," he said. 
"But if the steering committee and the organisers are looking for a headline 
that everybody's signed up to a single deal, then I think they might be heading 
in the wrong direction."

Equally important, he said, was the need to ensure that the increasing rush to 
engage the private sector in development did not result in the exclusion of 
civil society organisations (CSOs).

"I'm hopeful there will be a regeneration of the CSO partnerships for 
development effectiveness [in Mexico] and a new energy in the discussion around 
civil society," Shankland said.

"The private sector's got a big space – there's a whole session on the role of 
the private sector, which is very much UK-led – so the question is: what about 
other non-state actors?"

Enduring concerns aside, though, that so many delegates are travelling to 
Mexico suggests that the spirit of Busan lingers on.

"A few months ago, everybody thought it was going to be a washout and nobody 
was going to turn up," Shankland said.

"It's not: people are going – sceptically – but they're going. And that's 
probably the right place to be."
 