
The fight to end poverty is at "a critical juncture" and will require greater 
collaboration and stronger political will, delegates at a high-level meeting in
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> have warned.

The first meeting of the Global Partnership for Effective Development 
Co-operation <http://effectivecooperation.org/> (GPEDC), which ended on 
Wednesday, called for the alliance's disparate members to work together more 
closely if the targets setat a meeting in Busan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/25/busan-explainer-aid-effectiveness>
 almost two-and-a-half years ago are to be met.

Although delegates hailed the meeting as a successful reaffirmation of the 
partnership's commitment to increasing transparency, boosting country ownership 
and untying aid, they were blunt in their appraisal of the challenges ahead.

"The possibilities for human development are immense and we have at our 
disposal the means to end poverty at global scale in the course of one 
generation," said the communique issued at the end of the two-day conference in 
Mexico City. "But to achieve this, we must muster our political will for bold 
and sustained action for shared development, improved gender equality, and the 
promotion and protection of human rights."

The partnership, which brings together aid donors and recipients, emerging 
economies, civil society organisations, private sector companies and 
foundations, has pledged to try to eradicate poverty through better 
co-operation.

While its establishment was billed as a sea-change in development thinking and 
practice, recently the GPEDC has been accused of failing to live up to its 
aspirations. This month, the partnership'sown progress report noted that much 
more needed to be done 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/apr/14/global-partnership-mexico-scepticism-missing-targets>
 to improve transparency, country ownership and accountability.

The communique – which recognised the pressure to generate "tangible results" 
– stressed the importance of south-south co-operation, the need for the proper 
mobilisation of public and private domestic resources, and acknowledged that a 
more flexible development approach was required for middle income countries 
(Mics).

Affording countries Mic status on the basis of income-per-capita, it said, 
failed to take into account the litany of problems they faced, such as 
inequality, climate change and vulnerability to natural disasters, as well as 
economic shocks and institutional weakness.

The communique also noted that Mics were home to the largest number of people 
living in poverty in the world. "Global development co-operation would not be 
effective if support to them were to be phased out," it said.

Justine Greening <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, the 
UK international development secretary – who co-chairs the GPECD – said the 
meeting had underlined the necessity for greater transparency and for getting 
all partners talking.

"I think we'd like to see civil society engaging with the private sector and 
organisations like DfID [Britain's Department for International Development] to 
find that common ground that we can work together on," she said. "There is a 
common agenda there but it's going to take people coming together if we're 
going to unlock the opportunities."

Among the 38 new initiatives launched at the conference were "concrete 
commitments" to strengthen tax administrations in developing countries to 
ensure they keep more of their own money, and guidelines to help the 
philanthropic sector engage with governments and others.

Oxfam welcomed the renewed commitment to the spirit of the Busan agreement, 
but said it was time for action.

"Southern countries are moving forward to make progress to end poverty; donors 
need to catch up in implementing their commitments," said its Mexico director, 
Carlos Zarco. "Donors must act to disclose aid data, work through country 
systems to strengthen them, and fully untie their aid. Ultimately, this is a 
question of political will: are donors ready to step up to the challenge, and 
take action to change how they do their business?"

Luca de Fraia, of ActionAid, said he applauded the recognition of the part 
played in development by small and medium businesses, but the partnership had 
much more to do.

"The Mexico meeting has failed to clarify the standards that any aid to and 
through the private sector must follow to be effective," he said.

"This includes making sure that aid involving the private sector prioritises 
growth which benefits everyone, and does not replace publicly funded services 
such as schools and hospitals."

Helen Clark, the administrator of the UN Development Programme, said the 
meeting had left her feeling quite positive – not least because of the 
increasing role in proceedings of countries such as the "Mints" (Mexico, 
Indonesia, Nigeria and Turkey).

"If the aim was to put some energy and momentum into the partnership, I think 
it's achieved that," she said.

But the former New Zealand prime minister also sounded a note of caution. 
Despite the rising levels of Official Development Assistance (ODA) after the 
decreases of recent years, Clark said the figures masked worrying trends and 
deserved careful scrutiny.

"Yes, it bounced back up but how much of it has gone into areas like asylum 
seekers' support and services – which is not what anyone ever really envisaged 
ODA to be about?" she said.

"You have this apparent anomaly that spending goes up, but spending to 
sub-Saharan Africa and the whole continent goes down – and quite significantly. 
So don't congratulate too soon on what looks like a lift in aid levels. What is 
the composition and the disbursement? I think there needs to be more focus on 
that."
 