
A History of Violence
(96 mins, 18)
Directed by David Cronenberg; starring Viggo Mortensen, Maria Bello, Ed 
Harris, William Hurt

Canadian film-maker David Cronenberg is mostly associated with so-called 
'body-horror' movies, such pictures as Shivers, The Fly, Dead Ringers and 
Crash, involving mutilation, physical transformation, cloning, extreme 
gynaecology and strange prosthetics. His excellent new film, however,A History 
of Violence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-history-of-violence>, is a 
seemingly orthodox thriller that takes him south of the 49th Parallel and the 
title refers both to the problematic background of its hero and to the role of 
violence in American society and popular culture.

The pared-down narrative centres on Tom Stall (Viggo Mortensen), a quiet 
family man in his early forties who runs a diner on the main street of a small 
town in Indiana, the Midwestern state traditionally identified by social 
observers and Hollywood writers as the most typical part of America. Tom's 
sweet six-year-old daughter has to sleep with a night light because she's 
haunted by monsters. His 15-year-old son retains a pacifist stance in the face 
of school bullies and mocks their machismo. His wife Edie (Maria Bello) puts on 
her high-school cheerleader outfit to play sex games with Tom as a way of 
inventing a teenage romance they never actually experienced.

A certain unease is sensed beneath the family's placid surface before the film 
moves into two subtle reworkings of The Killers, Hemingway's classic story of 
two wisecracking hitmen coming to a Midwestern diner in search of a mob 
traitor, the tale which inspired Edward Hopper's Nighthawks. Cronenberg, 
incidentally, played the sinister hitman who comes to kill Nicole Kidman in Gus 
Van Sant's To Die For.

First, a pair of ruthless criminals take over Tom's diner, but when the lives 
of his waitress and short-order cook are threatened, he suddenly turns on the 
intruders, killing both and getting wounded himself. It's an exhilarating 
moment, as sudden and exciting as Alan Ladd first pulling his gun in Shane, 
former CIA man Gene Hackman revealing his lethal skills in Arthur Penn's 
Target, and one-armed former soldier Spencer Tracy turning on his tormentors in 
Bad Day at Black Rock.

Tom becomes a reluctant local hero and to his alarm, which we take to be 
modesty, his face gets on TV. We then have a second variation on The Killers as 
three menacing men arrive in the diner, a sardonic man in a black suit and dark 
glasses called Carl Fogarty (Ed Harris) and two rougher henchmen. Fogarty has 
watched the TV news and identifies Tom as Joey Cusack from Philadelphia. Tom 
denies the claim, saying he's never been there and orders them to leave.

The sheriff's investigations reveal that Fogarty is a mobster on the East 
Coast. When the crooks return, Fogarty tells Tom's wife that her husband is an 
underworld enforcer who left him for dead some 15 years before during a dispute 
between rival gangs in Philadelphia, the town founded by Quakers as 'the city 
of brotherly love'.

Is this a case of mistaken identity or is Tom really Cusack? And, if so, has 
he changed his nature and found redemption? This is a classic western plot, the 
tale of the reformed bad man starting a new life and then being confronted by 
his past. One thinks especially of Gary Cooper in Man of the West and Clint 
Eastwood in Unforgiven.

What Cronenberg does here is to strip the story down to essentials, while at 
the same time locating it in a convincing present-day world. He makes us 
question not merely the behaviour of the characters but our own attitudes 
towards violence in life and on the screen.

There is a great deal more mayhem after these initial killings at the diner 
and one particular instance sees Tom's son, encouraged by his father's new 
heroic reputation, turning the tables on his persecutors at school, putting one 
of them in hospital. When Tom's wife becomes aware of his possible past, there 
ensues a terrifying replay of their innocent sex games, but now as a potent mix 
of sex and violence with all tenderness gone.

In the heady Sixties, Black Power leader Rap Brown called violence 'as 
American as cherry pie' and this ready acceptance of physical conflict in 
everyday life, in entertainment and as an agent of public policy, lies at the 
heart of the movie. A History of Violence is a thoughtful film that provokes as 
it entertains. The performances are uniformly excellent, with Mortensen and 
Harris particularly good, and the film is superbly lit by Cronenberg's regular 
cinematographer, Peter Suschitzky. There are odd implausibilities, but the film 
moves at such a pace that we don't dwell on them.
 