
Gold miner Centamin lost 18.2p to 34.5p after it suspended operations at its 
only producing mine in Egypt. It said due to a dispute with a supplier it did 
not have enough diesel for the mine, while working capital was also showing a 
short-fall after gold shipments were halted by customs officials. Michael 
Stoner at Edison Investment Research, said:
 Centamin is operating in a difficult political environment and the decision 
to put its operations on care and maintenance is one of necessity, not choice. 
With the ongoing dispute over its extraction rights creating what appears to be 
a politically complex operating environment we would expect to see some 
diversification of its asset base away from Egypt.

Investec kept a hold recommendation but said:
 Centamin has suspended its operations, following what the company believes is 
an illegal $65m retrospective claim from the local fuel corporation, which is 
refusing to authorise fuel sales to Sukari until the claim is paid. At the same 
time, it appears to be unable to sell its gold production due to customs 
issues. We do expect that these issues will be resolved, as previous issues 
have, but the on-going flow of negative news and negative political overlay are 
more than offsetting the value upside that Centamin offers. 
Meanwhile Capital Drilling, which supplies rigs and counts Centamin as a key 
customer, is down 35% at 17.25p. Liberum Capital said:
 We expect Capital Drilling to take action to reduce both costs and capital 
expenditure. If they do not receive a holding fee we would expect management to 
look to redeploy the drills elsewhere, although we note that moving drills is 
expensive and would further impact margins in 2013. It is too soon for 
management to give any guidance at this stage.

We stress that there is a huge level of uncertainty. We do not know when (or 
whether) Centamin will resume operations, what costs will be taken as an 
exceptional and it is impossible to quantify the potential mitigating action. 
It should be noted that the drills will continue to be depreciated even though 
they are not being utilised. We initially reduce our 2013 earnings per share 
estimate by 55% and our 2014 estimate by 50%.

Elsewhere African Barrick Gold has added 8.8p to 423.8p on talk of possible 
Chinese bid interest, with a price of 520p a share mentioned.
 