
England cricket, licking its wounds after the thrashing in Australia, has 
recruited the leading golf administrator Ken Schofield to rake over the Ashes.

The former executive director of the European Tour has been given the task of 
isolating the reasons for the 5-0 whitewash. Schofield said: "I've been 
appointed as an independent voice and I'll do the job without fear or favour. 
We have access to all areas and we know we have to think quickly on our feet." 
He will be joined in his quest by the former England captains, Mike Atherton 
and Nasser Hussain, and the former England pace bowler Angus Fraser, plus two 
others as yet unnamed.

It is a daunting task for Schofield but one to which he brings no little 
expertise, having been in charge of the European Tour from its darkest days of 
Ryder Cup drubbings by the United States to the dominant force it has now 
become.

"I liken England's current loss of the Ashes to what happened when the 
Americans won back the Ryder Cup in 1999," said Schofield, who was in charge of 
European golf for 30 years. "They had lost the trophy two matches in a row and 
just had to win it back. I think we saw a similar thing during the Ashes, where 
the Australians regrouped impressively.

The 60-year-old Schofield loves his cricket and has been a Surrey member for 
many years. "My passion for cricket is almost as strong as it is for golf and 
I'm honoured to have been asked," he said. "Two of the proudest moments of my 
sporting life came at The Oval when I saw David Gower captain the side that won 
back the Ashes in 1985 and Michael Vaughan's triumph just 18 months ago."

Schofield's remit is to review the whole England Ashes process from the 
preparation, or lack of it in the opinion of some, to the way the tour of 
Australia was conducted. There were three main areas that drew the most 
criticism of the England coach Duncan Fletcher and his squad.

These were the rest period given to the players after the Champions Trophy 
when they were allowed to return home to spend time with their families before 
departing for Australia when many argued that they should have been preparing 
for the tour. Then there was criticism of the limited number of warm-up games 
for the players to regain match fitness. And finally there was the presence of 
families throughout the tour.
 