
In his eulogy to the baroque splendour of the church of the Val de Grâce in 
Paris, Molière contrasted it with "... the dismal taste for gothic monuments, 
hateful monstrosities vomited up in torrents by barbarians throughout the 
centuries of ignorance." That, in 1669, was still the popular opinion 
of gothic architecture.

The word "gothic" was initially a term of propagandist disdain. Though he did 
not coin it,gotico, like rinascimento (Renaissance), was popularised in the 
mid-16th century by Giorgio Vasari – urbanist, architect and eloquent champion 
of the classical aesthetic derived from Greece and Rome.

Gothic – in its multiple variations the predominant European architectural 
idiom between about 1150 and 1500 – was made to stand for everything that 
Renaissance architecture (between 1400 and 1600) wasn't. Thus it was supposedly 
disordered, accretive, fantastical, superstitious, uncouth, violent and 
symbolic of the dark ages. It had only a figurative connection to the Goths, 
who came from Scandinavia or Pomerania or somewhere else in the benighted north 
and who attacked Rome in the fifth and sixth centuries. But it was a connection 
that stuck, and its legacy was an art-historical bias towards southern Europe 
and, particularly, Italy.

A later aesthete, also besotted by Roman grandeur and pomp, Adolf Hitler, 
derided the gothic as "Asiatic". A near miss: the earliest efforts in what 
would in the 12th century become the quintessential architecture of Christendom 
are in the ruined city of Ani in Armenia, in Muslim north Africa, in Andalucía 
and Sicily. The last is the most significant in the gothic style's development, 
for the Normans invaded Sicily soon after they had conquered England.

The Normans' attempt to foist their language on their subjects would 
eventually result in the mongrelism of Middle English (which explains modern 
English's glut of synonyms). Similarly, the gothic architecture synthesised in 
the Ile de France (primarily Saint Denis) 60 years after the invasion, 
flourished only briefly in England before its "purity" was contaminated 
by local influence.

The rapidity of the gothic's mutations are testimony to the energy and 
ingenuity of its makers. The notion of the dark ages' barbarism is quashed by 
the sheer invention and disparity of its great cathedrals: Salisbury's chapter 
house and spire, Exeter's and Wells's west front, Gloucester's cloisters, the 
mighty bulks of Ely and Lincoln. But perhaps that notion of barbarism is 
equally reinforced by these monuments to the vast and corrupt power of the 
unreformed church. The gothic may be a gamut of disparate architectural styles, 
but what ties it together is its sacred purpose.

The majority of gothic buildings that have survived were built to the glory of 
God. The homes of the church's flock, on the other hand, were built of less 
staunch materials than limestone, flint and brick: they often literally 
dissolved. Grander dwellings, while better made, were still constructed 
according to regional precedent and resource; the first great era of 
unfortified, style-conscious domestic architecture occurred in the wake of the 
dissolution of the monasteries, by when the taste for the gothic had passed.

Extant gothic buildings other than churches are rare. And they were nearly all 
connected to churches: the link between gothic and God is stubborn. The purpose 
of (the much altered) Vicar's Close at Wells is self-evident. It was, probably, 
unprecedented – and is very likely the origin of the English terrace. The 
precincts, closes and liberties of cathedrals abound in subsequent detached 
houses, which take their cue from the great house of God in their midst. 
Hospitals and almshouses – supreme among them St John's Hospital, Lichfield – 
also borrowed ecclesiastical devices and symbols. Even tithe barns of the 
period – the finest of these, at Tisbury, Bradford on Avon and Great Coxwold – 
feel like sacred structures that acknowledge God's provisions of rain and sun.

It was not for nothing that the 19th-century religious revival was entwined 
with the gothic revival (a lot more of the stuff was built that time round, 
including holy town halls and sacred railway stations).

The link between these great medieval buildings and their purpose is 
inescapable. Every exquisite rib vault proclaims a theological idea; every 
blind arcade a shrine to faith. Perhaps best to think of it as just another 
instance of that human perennial: enlightened technology serving a questionable 
end.

Jonathan Meades is a writer and broadcaster, and an honorary associate of the 
National Secular Society. He is currently making a three-part series for BBC4 
about the seldom-seen side of France

Three era-defining events


1215: Signing of the Magna Carta

King John's despotic rule leads powerful barons to revolt. They force John to 
put his seal to a document that restricts the powers of the monarchy in return 
for renewed loyalty. The Magna Carta becomes the first, if embryonic, bill of 
rights.

1337–1453: The hundred years war 

The prolonged battle for supremacy between England and France. Both reach 
their pinnacles of nationalistic architectural design between the battles of 
Crecy (1346) and Agincourt (1415).

1347–1351 :The black death 

A third of Europe's population is wiped out. Peasants seek work wherever 
available, leading to wage inflation and whisper ofnascent social liberation.
 