


1. St Mary, West Walton, Norfolk 
<http://www.ely.anglican.org/parishes/westwalton>

The soaring detached bell tower, built around 1250, seems like an 
overcompensating afterthought to the low-slung, dumpy church thought to be 
built about 10 years earlier. According to local legend, the devil tried to 
steal the tower off the church but didn't get far. But it's a fine example of 
the early English style – not yet reaching for gothic heights, although the 
pointed arches and lancet windows mark a clear departure from Norman style. The 
arcaded interior of the church is a happier story. Bathed in soft light and 
decked with carvings and paintings, it is a soothing space. Look out for the 
beautifully carved south window – the only original one left.



2. Lincoln Cathedral <http://www.lincolncathedral.com>

You can see the Norman turning into the early English before your eyes on the 
west front of the cathedral. Its builders incorporated the ruins of the 
11th-century church into a new facade after it was damaged in 1192, clashing 
simple round arches with baffling runs of blind arcading. Nor, in contrast 
to French cathedrals of the time, does this front have much to do with the 
interior, where the experimental vaulting is taken to decorative extremes. 
But the sinewy system of ribs and slender marble-shafted columns was much 
imitated in later buildings. Before its spire blew down in 1549, it was 
reputedly the tallest building in the world.

01522 561600



3. Salisbury Cathedral <http://www.salisburycathedral.org.uk>

In many ways, Salisbury is the ideal English cathedral – stately and 
harmonious where so many others are more chaotically assembled. Salisbury was 
built from scratch from 1220 onwards. Although it looks more like a collection 
of buildings, with its articulated porch and double transepts, the entire 
composition is united by a disciplined architectural order – a coherent system 
of horizontals and verticals. The perfectly flat lawns around it only add to 
the illusion of completeness. It's a picture of lightness, too. The lady chapel 
at the eastern end, for example, rests on elegantly slender marble shafts – a 
marked contrast to the thick pillars and arches elsewhere.



4. St James's church, Louth, Lincolnshire <http://www.stjameschurchlouth.com>

This Lincolnshire market town clearly had some status issues in the early 16th 
century. The chancel and nave of St James's were built around 1435, while its 
spectacular, four-stage rocket of a spire was the tallest structure in Britain 
when it was completed in 1515, standing at 90m. It is still impressively sharp 
and dynamic, set off by flying buttresses, crockets and turrets – it was surely 
the inspiration for Thunderbird 3. The interior is also grand, but austere by 
comparison. In 1536, the vicar also had ideas above his station, leading the 
Lincolnshire Rising against Henry VIII, for which he was executed.



5. King's College chapel, Cambridge <http://www.kings.cam.ac.uk>

Less complex than the great cathedrals, King's is a simple box, made of 
repetitive elements. But it is also one of the most refined and powerful 
buildings of its age (built over a century from 1446). It is dripping with 
ornament, yet there's a lightness to it. The fan-vaulted ceiling feels nothing 
like a solid stone roof, while the walls supporting it seem mostly to be made 
of stained glass (external buttresses carry the weight of the roof discreetly). 
Its glory has been celebrated by Wordsworth, Turner, Canaletto and a million 
Christmas card manufacturers. The best way to appreciate is to visit during 
evensong.

01223 331212



6. Tattershall Castle, Lincolnshire 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/tattershall>

One of the earliest examples of a show of private wealth, this was built in 
1440 by Ralph Cromwell, treasurer to Henry VI. As the traceried windows 
suggest, it was less a defensive structure than a six-storey mansion built on a 
castle theme – truly an Englishman's home. Still, as a testament to the 
versatility and novelty of brick, it's a marvel. If the French-influenced 
exterior didn't impress visitors, the huge public rooms would, with their vast 
stone fireplaces, brick-vaulted corridors and huge tapestries. There is 
basically just one room per floor, though.

01526 342543



7. Caernarfon Castle, Wales <http://www.caernarfon-castle.co.uk>

Edward I's intended stronghold in Wales. The 20-foot thick concentric rings of 
walls, multiple towers and gatehouses, heavily protected by portcullises and 
drawbridges, all testify as to how he expected his style of governance to go 
down with the locals. Begun in 1283, it was the climax to one of the most 
ambitious building projects of medieval times: an "iron ring" of castles along 
the Welsh coast, most of which incorporated or dictated the layout of their 
host towns. Despite Caernarfon's brute strength, there is some artistry in the 
different-coloured bands of stone and the angled towers. Edward was doubtless 
inspired by the walled city of Constantinople, which he passed through on his 
return from the crusades.

01286 677617



8. Hales Hall Farm Barn, Hales, Norfolk <http://www.haleshallbarn.co.uk>

The largest surviving brick-built medieval barn in the country, whose grandeur 
suggests it was built for more than just storing straw – as does the fireplace. 
It was built around 1470 by Sir James Hobert, attorney general to Henry VII, 
whose impressive estate (the hall also survives) was defended by a triple moat 
– a reminder how lawless medieval Norfolk must have been. The exterior 
brickwork is of distinguished blue diapering and Dutch-influenced crow-step 
gables, but the cavernous, miraculously preserved timber roof structure is the 
main draw, with 10 bays of queenpost trusses supporting it – engineered to last.

Viewing by appointment only, 01508 548 507



9. Wells Cathedral, Somerset <http://www.wellscathedral.org.uk>

All the hallmarks of the early English style are here, but with a distinct 
West Country eccentricity. Begun in about 1175, the cathedral stretches along 
the ground rather than straining for the heavens, and the statue-racked west 
facade is wider than it is tall. It's a similar story inside, with the emphasis 
on rows of arches dividing the space horizontally, rather than vertical shafts 
soaring from the floor. But there are mouldings and carvings wherever you look, 
and the medieval glass is some of the best-preserved in England. Another 
bizarre touch is the heavy, upside-down strainer arches, inserted when the 
piers of the crossing were found to be sinking under the weight of the tower. 
More romantically, the worn steps of the chapter house show the building's true 
age beautifully.

01749 674483

Key architect of the age: Henry Yevele (c1320-1400)


Yevele, pronounced "Ee-ve-lee", is one of the first British architects we know 
by name. We also know much about his career, if not his personality. Yevele 
gave us some of the most memorable of all English buildings, including 
Westminster Hall, begun in 1394, the intricate tombs of Edward III and Richard 
II, both in Westminster Abbey; and soaring above these is the gothic nave – at 
nearly 31m, the tallest in Britain – supported by flying buttresses, and all 
done in a decidedly French manner.

Yevele's equally famous nave for Canterbury cathedral, begun in 1380, could 
hardly be more different, or more English: a bravura display of perpendicular 
gothic, the last phase of the medieval style as British architecture wandered 
eccentrically into the classical landscape of the Renaissance. Yevele was born 
in Derbyshire, coming to London in 1353 where he was taken up by Edward of 
Woodstock, the "Black Prince". He transformed Edward's Kennington manor into a 
palace, long since vanished; Geoffrey Chaucer was clerk of works. A master of a 
variety of styles, Yevele comes across as a brilliant pragmatist with a fine 
eye, and great social connections.
 