
The government's handling of the Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> affair has been criticised by a 
select committee after the government was found to have ignored its own 
independent adviser on ministerial interests.

A report by the public administration select committee expresses regret that 
the then independent adviser Sir Philip Mawer was not consulted in the events 
leading up to Fox's resignation.

It says the decision suggested an unwillingness by David Cameron to refer 
difficult cases to the adviser, who is supposed to oversee the ministerial code 
of conduct. Two Labour members of the committee have called for the prime 
minister to be investigated for breaching the ministerial code by ignoring 
Mawer.

Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chair of the committee, said public 
confidence relied on the adviser on ministers' interests demonstrating 
independence from the government. In practice, the role cannot be deemed 
independent, he said.

"We are therefore recommending strengthening the powers of the adviser and 
opening up the recruitment process for the post," he added. "Without these 
changes, the role must be renamed to remove the word 'independent' from the 
title, reflecting the nature of the role as an adviser to the prime minister."

The committee's report was commissioned last year in the wake of Fox's 
resignation over the blurring of the roles of his best man,Adam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

As allegations that Fox had breached the ministerial code mounted – it was 
alleged that Werritty was improperly using business cards claiming he was an 
adviser to Fox, and had gained access to high-level meetings – an inquiry was 
launched by the Ministry of Defence's permanent secretary and by the then 
cabinet secretary, Gus O'Donnell.

Cameron did not call upon Mawer, even though he was appointed to offer 
independent advice on possible breaches of ministerial codes. Mawer, who had 
been in the post for three years, announced his retirement shortly afterwards.

The committee suggests that his retirement, shortly after the resignation of 
Fox, should have given the prime minister "a timely opportunity to demonstrate 
the value he places on having complaints against ministers investigated in a 
demonstrably independent way".

This opportunity was missed, and a recently retired former senior civil 
servant, Sir Alex Allan, was appointed through a closed recruitment process, 
which only became public knowledge after the event.

The committee concludes that the independent adviser lacks independence in 
practice, as he is appointed personally by the prime minister, is supported 
from within the Cabinet Office, and cannot instigate his own investigations.

It finds that the way Allan was appointed – through a closed process – was 
unsuitable, and questions Allan's appointment.

"At present, the title of independent adviser is a misnomer," the report 
states, adding: "We do not in any way question Sir Alex's integrity, ability or 
commitment, but neither he nor the role to which he has been appointed is 
independent of government in any meaningful sense."

In evidence, Sir Christopher Kelly, the chairman of the committee on standards 
in public life, told the committee he believed Cameron had probably broken the 
ministerial code in not using Mawer.

He called for a change to allow the adviser on ministerial interests to launch 
inquiries on his own initiative rather than having to wait for the prime 
minister to ask him. "On this occasion, I think [Mawer] should have been 
employed. Indeed, I think it was almost certainly a breach of the ministerial 
code that he was not employed," he said.

An alternative draft of the report, written by the Labour MP Paul Flynn, 
called for further investigations of the prime minister's decision to bring in 
O'Donnell to run the inquiry.

"There is powerful evidence that using Sir Gus O'Donnell to carry out the 
swift investigation was a decision taken to hide the whole truth in order to 
satisfy political expediency and avoid political embarrassment to the 
coalition," he wrote.

That was rejected by a majority of the committee. A Cabinet Office 
spokesperson said: "We will respond in detail in due course but we disagree 
with the committee's understanding of the role of the independent adviser. This 
is a personal appointment by the prime minister to advise him on the 
ministerial code. It needs to be somebody who understands the workings of 
government and has the prime minister's trust."
 