
In addition, the financial savings to government as a result of its green ICT 
strategy introduced a year ago is at least £7m, Smith told a conference in 
London on 15 September 2009.

She was speaking as the Cabinet Office published a report entitled Greening 
Government ICT. Key achievements set out in the report include the Crown 
Prosecution Service saving £2.35m by replacing 9,500 computers and 2,500 
printers every five years rather than every three; and the Home Office saving 
£2.4m a year by removing unused ICT equipment and improving efficiency.

"All departments have risen to the challenge of cutting their IT carbon 
footprints and countries from around the world are now looking to us for advice 
on how to follow our lead," Smith said. "But it's not just about the 
Government. I hope that private companies and individuals will also recognise 
the savings that can be made and get on board."

The report says that the Department for Work and Pensions estimates it will 
save 200m sheets of paper a year through cutting down the number of printers in 
the department and changing the default setting to double-sided printing.
The Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) is 
replacing mixed PCs with a corporate laptop device which provides a power 
saving of some 60% over the old desktops. For 4,500 staff this is the 
equivalent to some 160 tonnes of CO2 emissions saved each year, equivalent to a 
£40,000 saving in power bills.

At HM Revenue and Customs the introduction of programme to put PCs into low 
power mode when they are not in use is under way. It expects to reduce CO2 
emissions by 12,000 tonnes and save £2m a year.

Internet protocol telephony is being introduced for 500 users across three 
locations at the Department for Communities and Local Government. The new 
service includes energy efficient handsets and switches which should provide a 
power saving of some 60% over existing equipment. Once deployment is complete, 
this will translate into a saving of £21,000 in power bills and more than 100 
tonnes of CO2 emissions per year.

Some 10% of the Department of Health's 450 file servers are being targeted for 
virtualisation onto a small number of energy efficient devices, as a 'proof of 
concept' for potential wider use. The department has also replaced 1,500 local 
and networked printers, scanners and fax machines with 330 energy efficient 
multifunctional devices. A 'Think Before You Print' campaign has running for 
three months to drive down print volumes by about 15% and encourage sustainable 
best practice for printing.

The report says that since the green ICT strategy was introduced, model 
government ICT contracts have incorporated sustainability requirements. A Green 
ICT Scorecard pilot has been completed, with eight departments measured against 
32 key metrics. The scorecard collected data on areas including energy 
efficiency, waste management and procurement.

Many public sector organisations have produced Green ICT Action Plans. The 
plans have established ways of improving the energy consumption and carbon cost 
of ICT using 22 specific actions, which include using thin client technology 
and timer switches on non-networked printers and ICT.

The report says that more than 80% of the "actions" have been delivered, are 
under way or being planned by some 60% public sector bodies. More than 75% of 
Whitehall departments have completed or have in progress 11 or more of the 
recommended "actions".

Smith said that in 12 months the government has saved enough carbon dioxide to 
fill almost 2,500 Olympic-sized swimming pools. "All departments have risen to 
the challenge of cutting their ICT carbon footprints and countries from around 
the world are now looking to us for advice on how to follow our lead," she said.

Further work in 2010-11 will include:
- identifying green ICT standards and measurement criteria to define common 
measures and reporting at both a UK and European levels;
- encouraging the use of ICT to help reduce energy consumption in other parts 
of an organisation and the wider community, including reducing occupancy, 
minimising travel and ending the need to print documents;
assessing the carbon impact of delivery, support and project development of 
ICT services;
- mandating central government departments to deliver a minimum of 10 
recommended actions;
- promoting the Greening Government ICT Strategy best practice into local 
government and the wider public sector;
- refreshing the strategy in line with carbon neutrality guidance from the 
Department of Energy and Climate Change and DECC and Defra's voluntary 
reporting guidelines.

The Cabinet Office says that ICT is responsible for up to 20% of carbon 
emissions generated by government offices, amounting to 460,000 tonnes a year.

Will Day, chair of the Sustainable Development Commission , said: "Our work on 
sustainable development in government found that government electricity use is 
still rising, and the proliferation of computers, laptops, chargers and the air 
conditioning of server rooms is likely to be behind much of this.

"So greening the government's ICT is an urgent priority, which can save money 
as well as minimising energy use and emissions."
 