
The earliest artworks I can remember feeling really pleased with were a series 
of comic strips I drew when I was about 12. In these Boy's Own adventures I 
unconsciously charted my kinky adolescent sexuality, as innocent stories of jet 
pilots and spies segued into tales of bondage and cross-dressing. People know 
me best for my pots but I have never been solely a ceramicist. Twenty years 
after those pubescent stories, in 1992 I revisited the medium and produced a 
graphic novella called Cycle of Violence. It is the story of a man driven to 
kill by childhood demons and a satire on psychotherapy. Looking back at this 
slim volume a further 20 years on, I feel like the psychiatrist Martin Dysartin 
Peter Shaffer's Equus <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2007/feb/28/theatre1> 
who is envious of the all-consuming passionate "worship" in the troubled 
behaviour of his patients. What I see is a still-seething cauldron of anger, 
self-doubt and sado-masochism. This book is a glimpse into the psyche of my 
pre-therapy self, before I became "happy". I feel slightly nostalgic for the 
ease with which I seem to mine the seam of my dark side. I was at the mercy of 
my internal weather and starting to think about my childhood more as I was on 
the brink of becoming a father myself. Comparing it to my work now, the humour 
is there and I am surprised how many of the psychological insights still ring 
true. I had obviously picked up a lot from my wife [the psychotherapist 
Philippa Perry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2010/apr/18/philippa-parry-couch-fiction-interview>
] as she was training to be a therapist at that time, though I remember 
mercilessly mocking the jargon and earnestness of her fellow trainees. The 
drawing is OK, it has a sort of clunky authenticity. I find the sexual violence 
in the book uncomfortable to look at now. I used such imagery a lot in my work 
at the time and was probably inured to it. The most striking aspect of Cycle of 
Violence is the unwitting prescience of its setting and the spooky coincidence 
of its central character. The book is set in the 2020s and society has gone 
green; everyone cycles and recycles. In this eco-culture, cycling has become 
the most popular sport. The hero is a British Tour de France-winning cyclist 
who sports sideburns; his name, and this is the freaky bit, is Bradley Gaines. 
(I write this on the day a certainMr B Wiggins pulls on the yellow jersey on 
the Champs-Élysées <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J5MyprKXJ90>.)
 Freaky ... Grayson Perry's Cycle of Violence features a British Tour de 
France winner called Bradley Gaines  