
Difficulty: Moderate
Distance: 6.3 miles
Typical duration: 3 hours
Start and finish: St Mary’s Church, Tetford
Map: OS Landranger 122
Step-by-step details and maps ramblers.org.uk/tetford 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/go-walking/find-a-walk-or-route/about-ramblers-routes/route-detail.aspx?routeUID=10545>

In a nutshell

A scenic walk through part of the Lincolnshire Wolds area of outstanding 
natural beauty, taking you past poet laureate Alfred Lord Tennyson’s former 
home. This is the English countryside at its quintessential best, with rolling 
hills, babbling brooks and unspoilt farmland. Visit in May to see the Tetford 
and Salmonby scarecrow festival – a trail of scarecrows running through the 
village, many made up to look like famous characters.

Why it’s special

Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> lovers may gain inspiration 
as they retrace the steps of one of our most famous writers, or recognise the 
landscapes described in his poems. The walk starts at St Mary’s Church and 
follows winding lanes with lovely views over the countryside. You pass the 
church in Somersby where Tennyson’s father was rector and where he was baptised 
in 1809. It’s well worth having a look inside to see the exhibition on the 
poet’s family background and life. Beyond the church is the cream coloured 
former rectory(now a private home) where Tennyson was born and grew up. The 
walk leads you along quiet lanes, across brooks and through woodland – a 
peaceful and pretty meander at any time of the year.

Reward yourself

Carry on the Tennyson tour at the 16th-century White Hart Inn 
<http://whiteharttetford.co.uk> in Tetford. As well as enjoying good food and 
real ales you can sit in the oak settle used by Tennyson himself

Get there

The nearest mainline rail station is Lincoln from where buses run to 
Horncastle. Bus service 6C runs from Horncastle to Louth via Tetford, four 
times a day, Mon-Sat. By car from Lincoln, take the A158 to Horncastle and on 
to Tetford.
 