
Douglas Adams

1952-2001

Where did the idea for The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy come from?

DA: Various different places. The actual title came when I was hitchhiking 
round Europe in 1971. I was lying drunk in a field in Innsbruck – I've now told 
the story so often, I can only remember the story and I can't remember the 
event any more, so I have to take my own word for it that it's true – I was 
lying drunk in this field in Innsbruck and I had with me a copy of the
Hitchhiker's Guide to Europe. And it occurred to me as I stared up at the night 
sky that somebody ought to write a hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy. I think 
this is largely because I thought that Innsbruck was dull.

But had you been keen on science fiction before, was it your thing?

DA: Yes and no. I've started most science fiction books but only got to about 
page 10, I'm afraid, usually.

So Hitchhiker's got rather more to do with Monty Python than it has Asimov?

DA: In a way I think so, yes. Python was a huge, huge influence on me. Python 
sketches would create a new world, with a new set of rules. That really was the 
line I was taking. Let's start out with a world that has certain rules and just 
see where that goes in the long run. Something that starts out as a silly idea 
actually has to have consequences in the real world.

Did the names of the characters mean anything – Arthur Dent, Ford Prefect, 
Zaphod?

DA: They were just made up. I used to be a great fan of doing crosswords. When 
you're fiddling around with anagrams, you get wonderful jumbles of syllables 
that become interesting.

It was one of the most perfect radio creations, wasn't it? Because it leaves 
an awful lot to the imagination, although you're leading the listener there.

DA: Absolutely. To be honest, the reason I did it on radio to begin with was 
because at that point I was too junior to do television. But that was the best 
thing that could possibly have happened to me, because I discovered what a 
wonderful, extraordinary medium radio is.

Let's talk about computers, how many have you got?

DA: I haven't counted them recently I'm afraid.

An awful lot?

DA: A lot, yes.

What do you imagine the computer is going to do for us in the 21st century – 
how much more?

Well I think one of the major effects it has had is in changing the whole way 
in which we do science. Ever since Newton we've done science by taking things 
apart to see how they work. What the computer enables us to do is to put things 
together to see how they work, we're now synthesised rather than analysed. I 
find one of the most enthralling aspects of computers is limitless 
communication. I mean, I now use a great deal of the internet, 20 million 
different computers in the world are all connected together via this thing 
called the internet and it means you can exchange ideas, letters, programs, 
music, anything you like, just from your computer keyboard.

But when you begin to talk about the machine almost replacing the human brain, 
then one begins to think is the human brain outdated? Is that what you're 
saying?

This phrase "virtual reality" needs to be explained, because in fact we all 
live in virtual reality. We think that the world is a solid, vivid place, full 
of shape and colour and solid objects like this table and this microphone and 
so on, but we actually create that in our heads out of the bits of information 
that hit the back of our eyeballs, or hit our eardrums, or hit our tongues, or 
whatever. It's very raw data, and we have wonderful pattern-matching systems 
inside our head that we use to synthesise the world, which we then move and 
walk through. But there are all sorts of things we don't see, we don't hear, 
patterns we fail to respond to, things that get filtered out because they were 
not appropriate to cavemen. What the computer in virtual reality enables us to 
do is to recalibrate ourselves so that we can start seeing those pieces of 
information that are invisible to us but have become important for us to 
understand.

Isaac Asimov

1920-1992

Time magazine described you as an incurable explainaholic. Is that the most 
important part of your work, understanding things and passing that 
understanding on to other people?

IA: Yes, it is. Everything I write is intended to enlighten, even my science 
fiction. That doesn't mean, you understand, that it does enlighten, but that's 
its intention.

Obviously you've got a way of explaining things. Is that something that just 
came naturally to you, or do you have to work at it?

IA: Apparently, it came naturally, because I followed the great principle of 
trying to explain something sufficiently simply so that I could understand it. 
My feeling was that if I could, anyone could.

How many books have you written now?

IA: It bothers me a lot, because I've become really freakish. My total number 
of published books right now is 444. And a few more on the stocks I suppose. A 
couple of dozen.

Science fiction is probably the thing for which you're most famous, and among 
your science fiction writings the Foundation series is perhaps one of the 
favourites. Could you very briefly sketch the background to that?

IA: Back in the 1940s I decided to write a series of historical stories of the 
future, a tale of the fall of the galactic empire and the interregnum that came 
before the rise of the second galactic empire, and I'll tell you frankly, I got 
the idea from Gibbon'sDecline and Fall of the Roman Empire. So I wrote story 
after story for about eight years, then got tired and quit. They put them 
together into three books,Foundation, Foundation and Empire and Second 
Foundation in the early 50s, and I felt that was it. I went on to other work. 
But little by little the pressure has built enormously and Doubleday, my 
publisher, insisted I write another one. So, in 1981, I wrote another 
Foundation novel, the fourth, and it was a huge success – and after that I was 
sunk because Doubleday insisted I keep on going.

The thing that comes out of the Foundation series is this science – I suppose 
you can call it a science – of "psychohistory". Can you explain that?

IA: I got that idea from the kinetic theory of gases, which I was studying 
when I first started the Foundation series. You can't tell what an individual 
molecule is going to do, but if you deal with trillions and quadrillions and 
quintillions, you can tell very accurately what they're going to do on average. 
I thought maybe you could do that with human beings too. You could tell what 
huge masses of human beings would do, provided they didn't know what the 
predictions were so they couldn't distort their own behaviour, and provided you 
had a large enough number, and I felt that with the galactic empire you'd have 
a large enough number. I don't really believe it's going to work, but it made a 
good background for the stories, and I was always able to use my 
"psychohistory" to show how things became inevitable, economically or 
sociologically and so on. It made for interesting historical novels.

I think a few people will be disappointed to hear that you don't really 
believe that "psychohistory" will work. Is it just that there aren't enough 
people on Earth?

IA: Not only are there not enough people, but actually their behaviour is far 
too complicated. They're not like individual molecules. Molecules have limited 
modes of behaviour and human beings are far less limited, so that human history 
is more chaotic. In fact, so chaotic that it probably can never be predicted, 
and in my later Foundation novels I dragged this in. But of course when I first 
started I didn't know anything about this new theory of chaos.

Do you think that we're going to overcome the problems of overpopulation and 
the environment?

IA: That's hard to say, but if we do – let's say we do – we're going to 
develop a space-centred civilisation. We're going to expand throughout the 
solar system. We're going to have a kind of computerised world in which the 
concept of work will change, the concept of education will change. Things will 
be so completely different that it will seem to us that with the beginning of 
the 21st‑century humanity ceased being children and became adults.

Arthur C Clarke

1917-2008

What was the first branch of science to interest you?

ACC: Originally, I think, palaeontology. I collected fossils and had a small 
collection. I had a mammoth's tooth.

What was your first job when you left school?

ACC: I went straight into the civil service, into the exchequer and audit 
department, and came to London and worked first in Whitehall, at the old Board 
of Education, and then went to the Post Office, and then the war began and we 
were evacuated. I was then with the Ministry of Food. We were evacuated to 
North Wales and then I went from there into the air force.

In 1945, while still in uniform, you wrote a piece about communication 
satellites.

ACC: Yes, this was the paper which started the com sat business. I wrote it 
early in 1945 and it was published in Wireless World in October, just after the 
war had ended, and it laid down the principles which now determine the world's 
communication system, the idea that you'd have satellites poised at such a 
height above the earth that they remained stationery in the sky and so-called 
synchronous, or geostationary, orbit.

Did anybody take your idea up and get excited about it?

ACC: A few people got excited about it. I know that the Americans did first 
and I have reason to believe that this was one of the stimuli which started the 
American satellite programme off.

What happened to you when you left the Royal Air Force?

ACC: I decided not to go back to the civil service, but to take a degree, and 
I went to Kings College London, and I took my degree in physics and pure and 
applied maths and some postgraduate work in astronomy. I then became a science 
editor and worked with the Institute of Electrical Engineers as editor of 
Science Abstracts, the chief scientific abstracting journal.

Who were the pioneers of science fiction – HG Wells of course.

ACC: And Jules Verne, and in this country particularly Olaf Stapledon, who 
wrote a magnificent history of the future calledLast and First Men, which I 
discovered soon after it was published in 1930. This book, the history of the 
next 2,000m years, had more influence on me than anything else I'd ever read. 
It opened my mind to the possibilities of time and space, and directly 
influenced many of my early books.

With scientific progress moving so fast, it must be a job keeping in advance 
of the real thing.

ACC: It's almost impossible. Many of the things that I've described have 
become history – not in the way that I said, because I wrote a book in 1948 
about the first landing on the moon, which I put in 1978. I thought it was 
ridiculous putting it only 30 years in the future, but in fact my deadline 
was beaten.

You commentated for American television on some of the Apollo missions, 
including the moon landing.

ACC: Yes, I was actually at Cape Kennedy for the launch of several of the 
missions, including the historic Apollo 11, the first landing on the moon, and 
I was with Walter Cronkite during the commentary and that of course was an 
unforgettable experience. I've met about half of the American astronauts and 
quite a few of the Russian cosmonauts.

Your most celebrated work of course is 2001: A Space Odyssey, the story of the 
film. How did that project start?

It started with a letter that Stanley Kubrick wrote to me, soon after Dr 
Strangelove had been released, saying that "I've been interested in doing the 
proverbial good science fiction movie and do you have any ideas on this 
subject?" And I did have one or two ideas, and we got into correspondence and 
it so happened that I was coming to New York to work for Time Life on a book 
about space. I met Stanley and I moonlighted, or moonlit, with Stanley while I 
was working at Time Life. When that job finished, I went over full-time with 
Stanley and2001 the novel was written actually in New York.

JG Ballard

1930-2009

As I wrote Empire of the Sun I could see the way in which the landscapes of 
Shanghai had permeated all my previous novels in disguised form, and it always 
struck me as odd that I should have waited 40 years to write about my wartime 
experiences. But I realise now that I probably was writing about them all the 
time, and that one of the reasons I chose to write science fiction at the 
beginning was that it offered me a way in which I could remake the landscapes 
of the England I knew in the 1960s and 1970s, in the way that the surrealists 
worked, to make them resemble unconsciously the landscapes of wartime Shanghai. 
I could flood London and the drowned world, I could reshape the everyday 
reality of Britain, western Europe and the United States.

You talk about science fiction and the way in which it gave you a form. 
How consciously did you look for it? Did you read it as a child in Shanghai, 
for example?

JGB: I had a very mixed kind of childhood reading. I read the childhood 
classics likeRobinson Crusoe, Alice in Wonderland, Chums Annual. At the same 
time I read an enormous number of American comics because Shanghai was an 
American zone of influence. It was Coca-Cola, it was American cars, commercial 
radio stations pumping out Superman serials every hour of the day and night. So 
it was a very mixed sort of cultural diet, rather similar to that which, say, a 
10-year-old has in England today.

Were you writing as a child?

JGB: I started writing in a rather curious way. At the school I attended, the 
clergyman who ran the cathedral school in Shanghai would give lines to the boys 
as a punishment. They expected you to copy out say 20 or 30 pages from one of 
the school texts. But I found that rather than laboriously copying out 
something from a novel by Charles Dickens, it was easier if I made it up 
myself. I remember handing in this bundle of paper to the master, who after 
glancing through it overnight called me to the front of the class the next day 
and said: "Ballard, the next time you pick a book to copy from, don't pick some 
piece of total rubbish." He didn't realise that this piece of mock GA Henty –
Adventure on the Spanish Main – was my own entire invention. That set me off, 
and probably all my writing has been done within the same seditious framework. 
No, I was writing through my teens at school.

There have, of course, been a whole tradition of English writers who've used 
science fiction forms – George Orwell and Aldous Huxley, also HG Wells at the 
beginning of the century. Do you see yourself as related to that tradition of 
writing?

JGB: I'd like to think so. I read Wells as a child. It's impossible to write 
science fiction without being aware of the shadow cast by Wells. What those 
novelists show is that one must think of science fiction as something not 
limited by the narrow definition it's been given byDr Who, Star Trek, Star Wars 
and so on, and by the American writers of commercial SF in the 1950s and 60s. 
The scientific romance has long been part of English fiction, going back two or 
three centuries. Very few of the great British writers of the past have not at 
some point written something very close to science fiction. I think of science 
fiction as being part of the great river of imaginative fiction that has flowed 
through English literature, probably for 400 or 500 years, well predating 
modern science.

You are the first writer I know of to have prophesied Ronald Reagan as 
president. Do you feel that's a genuine function of science fiction?

JGB: I think science fiction always has had a predictive role, and many of its 
prophecies have come true. I don't think now, oddly enough, that the predictive 
function is the main task of SF – in the sense of the nuts and bolts of our 
lives. I don't think it's the job of the science fiction writer any more to 
predict a new kind of air travel or a new kind of washing machine. I don't 
think it's on the level of technological change that science fiction has its 
greatest value. I think it's the psychological realm where SF is most valuable 
in its predictive functions, because what it does is to put the emotion into 
the future. It looks at our conscious and half-conscious responses to all sorts 
of trends that are flowing out of the future towards us. I think in its 
anticipation of this strange mental environments of the world of tomorrow that 
it has its greatest value now.

Throughout your work there is an emphasis on psychological metamorphosis, on 
the way in which human beings change, first of all in relation to natural or 
manmade disasters and then in the work in the 1970s in relation to image 
society. How far do you think you're describing real psychological 
metamorphosis and how far is this a sort of metaphor?

JGB: It's used metaphorically. Crash is a metaphor for what I see as the 
dehumanising elements that are present in the world in which we live. We're 
distanced by the nature of the society we inhabit from a normal human reaction. 
We're crossing some complex flyover in our cars, we perhaps see an accident on 
a lower level – people clustered around a fallen victim. We feel a moment's 
pity, but we're swept on by this elaborately signalled highway landscape. We 
have no time to stop and express our normal human feelings. AndCrash is an 
extreme metaphor of the dangers that I see lying ahead of us.

Kurt Vonnegut Jr

1922-2007

Your first novel, Player Piano, is set in the future although it seemed very 
much like your present, but what it did do was to tag you as a science fiction 
writer. Brian Aldiss said of your relationship to science fiction that you sped 
right out of the field as soon as you had the price for the gasoline, but 
that's not entirely true, because you do keep returning to it. What is the 
attraction of science fiction as a place to visit, if not a place to live, for 
you?

KV: Well I actually live there, I just decline to say I'm from there, because 
there are social consequences. We have the mainstream, and this is some little 
backwater.Science fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/science-fiction> 
writers customarily have written very fast and have not cared much about 
literary niceties or have not usually spent much time on drawing characters.

How did the science fiction element come to be in Slaughterhouse-Five?

KV: It's essentially an irrational act, as is skiing, and if you have to think 
about it, forget about it. You have to be lucky, and you have to be intuitive. 
And in order to be lucky you need a lot of time. Most people don't have it. 
That's why it's so tough to be a storywriter at night or on weekends, you need 
a continuous concentration. So I don't know why I did it, but it seemed like a 
good idea. I've tried all kinds of things which the world had never seen – you 
know, [I thought] this is not a good idea and threw it in the wastebasket. And 
onSlaughterhouse-Five again and again and again I said, "So it goes". If I'd 
decide that was a bad idea, as many critics did, nobody ever would have seen 
it. I just would have crossed them out, you know, without asking anybody about 
it.

Most of your novels, such as Hocus Pocus, seem to offer a kind of ironic 
commentary on America, or at least what America's become. Somewhere in you 
there seems to be a civics teacher.

KV: I hope so. One thing I put in Hocus Pocus [was] about the Alamo, which is 
one of our great monuments. This is when a bunch of white men, Yankees, went 
down there and took property and were part of Mexico and operating under the 
Mexican government. Then they – our guys, the white guys – revolted and became 
an independent country, and after they became independent their first great 
battle was lost at the Alamo, which is this great monument to freedom. Well, 
the reason they stopped being part of Mexico was that Mexico said it's against 
the law in our country to have slaves. All you're ever told is that Davy 
Crockett and Jim Bowie, the inventor of the Bowie knife, and all these other 
guys, fought to the death. It's never said what the hell they fought to the 
death for. It was for the right to own slaves!

But how seriously should we take literature? You've said on the one hand that 
it's harmless, but you've also said that literature is like the canary in the 
coalmine. It keels over first as a warning.

KV: The primitive Baptists and the lunatic right are right to be afraid of 
books with regard to children. If you think of yourself as a child, there's a 
period where you have no immunity to ideas. You develop that immunity later on. 
So I say that literature is a slow-acting poison, because a person will become 
infected when he or she is unable to defend himself against this infection. But 
then it's 20 more years before this person has any power in adult society. I 
was infected by the essentially socialist writers of the 1930s, Steinbeck and 
Upton Sinclair and so forth, and so that's what I am. It's in my bones. If it 
had been a disease, it would be a mortal disease. I have tried to infect young 
people with humanity – an unwillingness, a great reluctance to kill.

It seems to me there's another horror in the books, and that is the America 
that you portray is an America without any sense of a real culture or real 
community. It's a fragmented world.

KV: It is. America's a very lonely society, because it's so mobile and because 
it's a nation of immigrants who don't have extended families, so there are all 
these people that, no matter what their trouble is, can only call the police 
department or the fire department. There's nobody else to ask for help.

But if America is fragmented, so is your prose style. How come you chop it all 
up into sections instead of letting it flow?

KV: Because I'm a teacher and I want people to pay attention. I don't want 
them to turn on the automatic pilot. If you deliver a classroom lecture, if 
you're a silver-tongued orator on any subject, and famous for this in the 
university, and other people come to listen, they'll listen to your voice. 
They're there for the music and not for the content. In order to make students 
pay attention to content you have to suddenly bang on the desk with your fist 
or get up and write on the blackboard, and if you're lucky the chalk will 
squeak, and the people will wake up and pay attention. It's a teaching problem.

Of course, reviewers get old and realise this is all they've done all 
their lives. They have read book after book after book and they do want to turn 
on the automatic pilot and just go through this thing as fast as possible. It's 
a gruesome job they have now, and so if I put in these impediments intended for 
book enjoyers, then for them it's a terrible inconvenience as they've got to 
get on to another book right away. But I do this in order to make people pay 
attention. The big question is: "Am I worth paying attention to or not?" – and 
that's for God to say. I don't know.

Excerpted from Science Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> 
Writers(BBC/British Library, £10.20), which also includes interviews with Brian 
Aldiss, Doris Lessing, Ray Bradbury and Ursula Le Guin. To order a copy for 
£8.16 with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846 or go to 
theguardian.com/bookshop
 