
Wolves v FK Austria Vienna
European Cup Winner's Cup quarter-final, 1960-61

Remember the Cup Winners' Cup? Well, you should, because it was only swallowed 
up the Champions League leviathan four years ago. But back in 1960-61 it was 
very much a competition in its own right, full of useless teams who had fluked 
victory in their own domestic knockout.

In fact, it was the first year of its existence, and when Wolves were drawn 
against FKAustria Vienna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria-vienna> 
in the quarter-finals, the excitement could be felt from the Black Country to 
the Tirol. Possibly. Wolves travelled to Vienna for the first leg on October 12 
1960 and went down 2-0, which left them with a mini-alpine mountain to climb 
(if any existed in the midlands).

But on November 30, they dished out a 5-0 revenge thrashing with two goals 
apiece for Jimmy Kirkham and Peter Broadbent and one for Bobby Mason. That, 
though, was as good as it got, and Wolves were knocked out in the semi-finals 
by Rangers, who themselves went on to lose to Fiorentina in the final.

Burnley v Hamburg
European Cup quarter-final, 1960-61

In the days when Europe's premier club competition was no more than a twinkle 
in the money-men's beady eyes, Burnley stood on the verge - that's right, 
Burnley stood on the verge - of European glory.

On a January evening at Turf Moor in front of 47,000 seething northerners (and 
a few Burnley fans), they raced into a 3-0 lead over Germany's finest with two 
goals from Pilkington and one from Robson. But Hamburg hit back with a crucial 
away goal to take back for the return leg in March.

This time, 71,000 seething Germans (not to mention a few etc) turned up and 
watched their boys power to a 4-1 lead and a 5-4 aggregate advantage. Jimmy 
McIlroy hit the post in injury time, but Burnley were out.

Tottenham v Gornik Zabrze
European Cup preliminary round 1961-62

OK, so it doesn't sound very glamorous, but wait until you get a load of this. 
A year after Spurs had completed the first league and cup double of the 20th 
century, they travelled to Poland for what looked like a routine warm-up for 
the real thing. But with 20 minutes to go in Zabrze, they were trailing 4-0.

Two late goals, however, gave them something to play with at White Hart Lane - 
and play with them they most certainly did. In front of a crowd of 57,000, 
Spurs took an early lead with a Danny Blanchflower penalty, and drew level 
overall thanks to a Cliff Jones goal minutes later. Jones gave Spurs an 
aggregate lead with a left-foot drive, before completing a first-half hat-trick 
after just 33 minutes. The Poles didn't know whether they were coming or going, 
and Spurs ran out 8-1 winners, for a 10-5 aggregate triumph.

Derby County v Real Madrid
European Cup second round, 1975-76

"Derby are good enough to win the European Cup," wrote an understandably 
excited local reporter after the Rams had battered Spanish pride with a 
stunning 4-1 win in the first leg at the Baseball Ground. "But," he cautioned, 
"the feeling is that the tie is by no means over... Real could still make Derby 
sweat it out before they go through to the next round."

Derby never did make that next round. They arrived in Madrid without the 
suspended Francis Lee and the injured Bruce Rioch, and lost 5-1 after extra 
time. Our intrepid reporter was forced to concede that Real were "too quick, 
too clever and too good for the English champions". But not too quick, clever 
or good for the German champions: Bayern Munich knocked Real out in the 
semi-finals and went on to lift the trophy.

Watford v Kaiserslautern
Uefa Cup first round, 1983-84

Until they reached the final of the 1984 FA Cup, Watford's greatest moment was 
their first appearance in Europe, just a year after they had played their first 
season in the top flight (and come second). Little matter that they lost the 
first leg 3-1 in Kaiserslautern - the Hornets were still buzzing at the novelty 
of it all.

And back at Vicarage Road, with Watford missing seven first-team players 
through injury, the Germans were well and truly stung. Richardson latched onto 
a Barnes flick-on after ten minutes to pull a goal back, before Palmer's cross 
rebounded into the net after the Kaiserslautern keeper palmed the ball onto one 
of his own defender's knees. Watford led 2-0 at half-time with the cushion of 
an away goal to keep them comfy, but when Richardson volleyed home Jobson's 
cross after the break, a little part of north London/south Hertfordshire/take 
your pick erupted. Watford were through 4-3 on aggregate and went on to dispose 
of the Bulgarian side Levski-Spartak in the second round before going out 7-2 
to Sparta Prague.
 