
On my first night in Rio Branco, I asked a young cab driver to take me to the 
best nightclub in town. Without hesitation he drove straight into the 
rainforest. Soon we were surrounded in darkness, the car's headlights barely 
illuminating the lush greenery by the side of the road. After 10 miles, we 
turned left down a track. At the end was a simple house with its own swimming 
pool and a dozen prostitutes.

I climbed the wooden stairwell and found there were rooms upstairs that could 
be rented by the hour. What struck me was neither the openness of the operation 
nor the boredom on the girls faces, but the pride of the taxi-driver in showing 
me this exclusive den and his uncontroversial assumption that any visitor 
wanting to go out for a drink would be looking, inevitably, for hookers.

"This place is just for the most important local figures," the cabbie confided 
with barely-concealed awe. "The MPs, the judges, the police chiefs, the 
businessmen. They all come here."

Rio Branco is the most inaccessible of the Amazon's jungle cities. It is the 
capital of Acre, Brazil's most westerly state, squeezed into a buttock-shaped 
nook by the borders of Bolivia and Peru.

The international image of the Amazon is of a romantic green wilderness, 
fraying at the edges where loggers are chopping down trees. This is only half 
true. Over the last two decades the Brazilian Amazon has witnessed an 
immigration boom that has seen its population more than triple to 19m.

In 1970, Rio Branco had 36,000 inhabitants. Now it is an ugly brown sprawl, 
home to over a quarter of a million. Its expansion has been faster than it 
could reasonably be expected to cope with, and the jungle city suffers from 
severe urban problems.

The dream of achieving fortune in Brazil's western frontier which leads so 
many people to head for the city turns into a reality for very few. Crime 
levels are high and so endemic that a local MP was jailed recently for cutting 
off a man's limbs with a chainsaw. Corruption and prostitution are rife. Social 
indicators such as illiteracy and access to running water pipes are among the 
worst in the country.

On top of this, the equatorial climate means that tropical diseases thrive: 
10% of the population have the hepatitis virus, and the number of leprosy cases 
are nearly on a level with India.

On my second night in Rio Branco, I went to a church called Little Boat. 

I took a cab to an outlying suburb where the houses are made of wooden slats 
and built on stilts because of flooding. Before I entered the service I drank, 
like everyone else, a muddy liquid in espresso-sized cups on offer at the front 
door. The substance is called "daime", and contains natural hallucinogens that 
Indians have used for generations. I sat inside the church ­ where everyone was 
wearing white and in a trance-like state ­ and waited for the drug to kick in.

By the altar was a Christian cross and many porcelain figurines ­ of old black 
men, mermaids and a ginger-haired man in a ship captain's uniform. Religion 
here is a mix of indigenous beliefs and Christianity, and so widespread in Rio 
Branco that it is not uncommon for parents to put a dab of diame on newborn 
babies' tongues as a form of spiritual initiation.

My daime was not working. So I went outside and swigged another cup. Seconds 
later I flipped. I stumbled around like a drunk and began a hallucinatory trip. 
I became scared of the church and tried to leave, but members of the 
happy-clappy congregation said that I should stay since my spirit would be 
protected.

Weird things started happening to my body. I drank several pints of water but 
my mouth stayed dry. Then my jaw began to move uncontrollably. I doubted my own 
identity and momentarily I forgot if I was a man or a woman.

The experience lasted for about five hours, until well after I had returned to 
my hotel room. I kept on all the lights because otherwise my bed seemed to be a 
raft floating into darkness down a river.

I had come to the Amazon's remotest corner expecting luscious greenery and 
painted Indian tribes. Instead, I found a city life of cheap sex and dangerous 
drugs.
 