
In 1991, a survey carried out by the American Library of Congress and the Book 
of the Month club declared Ayn Rand's novel, Atlas Shrugged, "the most 
influential book on American lives after the Bible". It has sold more than 6m 
copies in the US alone and continues to sell at a rate of about 130,000 a year.

Rand and her books were the embodiment of right-wing libertarianism and 
laissez-faire capitalism, which advocated the complete deregulation of business 
and finance and opposed any form of state welfare. She described her philosophy 
as "objectivism" or "the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own 
happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his 
noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute".

Atlas Shrugged, which was published in 1957, was Rand's fourth and final 
novel. It was more than 1,000 pages long and when Rand was asked by her 
publishers for suggested cuts, she apparently responded: "Would you cut the 
Bible?" It received a chilly response, with Time magazine asking, "Is it a 
novel, is it a nightmare?", and most other mainstream publications mocking it. 
But it sold and sold.

At its heart is a mystery story: about why so many of the world's most 
brilliant brains are disappearing and about who invented a new kind of motor. 
It tells the tale of Dagny Taggart, a railroad executive, and Hank Rearden, a 
steel magnate, and their struggles as society collapses at the hands of an 
oppressive government and its parasitical bureaucrats. In the book, the best 
minds in terms of business, science and the arts are, in effect, on strike - 
the book was originally called The Strike. It espoused the essential Rand 
philosophy of "rational self-interest".

Throughout her writing life, she promoted the idea expressed in the book: 
"Until and unless you discover that money is the root of all good, you ask for 
your own destruction. When money ceases to become the means by which men deal 
with one another, then men become the tools of other men. Blood, whips and guns 
or dollars. Take your choice - there is no other."
 