
Nine year-old Domitilia has never smiled. As she faces the ceiling of the 
Guatemalan children's clinic, her cheeks bulge with oedema fluid normally seen 
amongst the elderly or pregnant. In the cot three feet away from her, lies 
little Gricelda. Her small, frail frame and severe difficulties breathing have 
brought her to a rehabilitation clinic several miles from where her mother and 
five siblings live in the Mayan village of Quajarwalten. As she lies wrapped in 
white cotton in an iron cot sterilized with bleach, her swollen legs appear 
dislocated from her rattling body.

"I felt guilty,' says Gricelda's mother Maria Pérez. 'I felt guilty when she 
was taken away."

One dollar a day buys Maria the seeds to plant beans and corn to make 
tortillas or buy rice imported from the US. There is no money for proteins like 
milk and meat.

Gricelda and Domitilia are both malnourished – Domitilia from severe acute 
malnutrition known as kwashiorkor, and Gricelda from chronic malnutrition.

Rehabilitation clinic Casa Jackson 'para ninos desnutridos' (for 
undernourished children) run monthly field clinics in order to reach out to 
malnourished children isolated in rural areas. Gricelda, says Luke Johnson, the 
clinic founder and manager, was just 'weeks away from her organs shutting 
down.' Gricelda has chronic malnutrition and is 'stunted'. Children suffering 
from stunting are a few inches shorter than the global average height of a 
child the same age.

While in other parts of the world images of starving children adorn headlines, 
in Guatemala the story is a different one. It's not that Guatemalan children 
'go hungry' as such, but often they are not the right kind of diverse nutrients 
needed for them to grow into healthy adults.

Undernourishment causes anemia in pregnant mothers and their children and 
means that children are more prone to diseases through their weakened immune 
systems. Symptoms like oedema, the swelling of legs or face to make children 
look fat, or thin hair that is easily shed, may be overtly recognizable. 
Sometimes, the physical symptoms are hidden, leaving mothers like Maria unaware 
that anything is wrong.

Back in Quajarwalten, Gricelda's older sister Liliana has had to drop out of 
school at just 13, because, as Maria says, "she can't remember things".
For Liliana, willpower alone will not suffice. She literally hasn't the energy 
to grow (tall) and wise: "Quiero aprender a leer, pero no puedo," she says. (I 
want to learn to read but I can't).

A healthy diet isn't just a physical or bodily need. Malnutrition may lead to 
reduced mental capabilities such as weak memory, significantly reducing 
potential for improved economic well-being and social status in adulthood. 
Children suffering from stunting are destined to have a lower IQ throughout 
their life. This is all biologically determined before they even reach nursery 
school.

Claudia Nieves of Save the Children USA has worked in Guatemala for more than 
a decade. She says:"It is very difficult to make them (affected families) 
realize that being low height and low weight is a health problem, they believe 
it when kids start getting chronic diarrhea, or acute respiratory infections, 
then they worry, but just on a normal day they don't believe there's a problem."

Spontaneous demand for services from Guatemala's rural inhabitants remains 
weak.

"It is difficult to convince families to leave their children here. Most of 
the children we see are real emergencies," says Luke Johnson.

The first 1000 days of a child's life are the most crucial for good nutrition 
but they are also the most sensitive for separating a child from their family. 
Casa Jackson is one of few clinics to address openly and actively a problem 
marginalized by its own society.

With challenges such as climate change, volatile food prices and financial 
uncertainty facing the country, it is estimated that hundreds of thousands more 
children will continue to be malnourished. And this in a 'low middle income' 
country where 67% of Guatemalan's over 15 are overweight, 29% of whom are obese.

Guatemala is a tale of two types of community in a two-tier country. The 
poorest areas, worst affected by the country's civil war which ended only in 
1996, see the highest rates of malnutrition. Mayan (indigenous) children like 
Gricelda and Lilliana are twice as likely to be malnourished as 
'non-indigenous' children.

These children's faces and bodies tell the story of Guatemala's lack of social 
and economic development for all of its society. According to the most recent 
agricultural census published by the World Bank, only 2.5 percent of 
Guatemala's farms control 65 percent of the agricultural land.

Guatemala needs to recognize on a national level the socio-economic inequality 
that sees it stumble at the very first of the UN Millennium Development Goals: 
to end extreme poverty and hunger.

Change is underway, in as much as it is rooted in communities and individuals. 
Save the Children Guatemala offer community support both to primary- and 
pre-school children, but focus on improving educational capacities rather than 
on nutrition in isolation. Steps need to be taken to fuel greater nutrition 
awareness.

One outreach project, run by Casa Jackson, is to encourage mothers to 
breastfeed their children. Breastfeeding, less common since more mothers seek 
part-time work in nearby towns, provides the whole range of nutrients that help 
babies thrive. Older children are provided with basic nutritious food 
supplements.

As Guatemala produces corn, beans and beef for export, its children continue 
to lag several feet behind their neighbours. Growth won't happen overnight. 
Fighting malnutrition takes small but stable steps.

For Gricelda, there is hope that she will one day crawl.
 