
Alexander Payne is the quiet man among American directors. His films Citizen 
Ruth (which lambasted every side of the pro- and anti-abortion debate) and 
Election (a leading candidate for the smartest high-school movie ever) aren't 
flashy. He works in a measured, novelistic manner, relying on precise 
observation of character and locale - he always films in his hometown of Omaha, 
Nebraska, the very middle of Middle America - and his perfect feel for social 
minutiae. So where his contemporaries (Steven Soderbergh, Paul Thomas Anderson, 
Spike Jonze) make movies that are often philosophically inch-deep and 
stylistically mile-high, Payne is a watcher, content to let the action do the 
work. The result is that his movies feel much more thoughtful and penetrating.

This week Payne returns with About Schmidt, starring Jack Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jacknicholson> in his biggest role since As 
Good as It Gets. He got an Oscar for that, and if there's any justice he should 
get another for his performance as Warren Schmidt, a just-retired insurance man 
who asks himself plaintively: "What kind of difference have I made? How is the 
world better because of me?"

We meet Schmidt in the last 15 seconds of his working life. Buttoned-down, 
uptight, he looks as if he is about to be thrown out with the pile of boxes 
containing his defunct files. At his goodbye party, his friend Ray promises 
that retirement will mean "riches far beyond the monetary kind", but Schmidt, 
at home with his wife Helen, begins to suspect that his life is one of 
emotional and spiritual poverty. "Who is this old woman living in my house?" he 
asks himself irritably - but when Helen suddenly dies, Schmidt's life almost 
falls apart.

Within a fortnight, his home is filthier than a frat house; and, while going 
through Helen's stuff, he finds 30-year-old love letters to her, from Ray. 
Meanwhile, his daughter Jeannie (Hope Davis) plans to marry Randall (Dermott 
Mulroney), a feckless waterbed salesman hot for pyramid schemes and tonsured in 
the worst Metallica mullet-and-goatee combo ever. Jeannie doesn't want to hear 
any of her father's myriad objections to her fiance, and it looks as if he 
might alienate her out of his life.

His only fulfilment is in sponsoring a starving Tanzanian orphan called Ngudu, 
to whom he writes embarrassingly private and clueless letters, bitching about 
his job, his marriage and life in general, while offering idiotic fatherly 
advice: "I strongly recommend you join a fraternity when you get to college." 
But it's not until he travels in his Winnebago motor home to Jeannie's wedding 
that Schmidt comes alive again.

Payne is always able to find tragedy in humour, and vice versa, and there is 
no moment in the film that doesn't somehow mingle the two, which makes for 
wonderfully complex and contradictory responses in the audience. He has also 
extracted a marvellous - and sad - performance from Nicholson, who says he had 
to subtract every iota of his essential "Jack-ness" in order to construct his 
character from the bottom up. Schmidt is deeply, richly conceived, humming with 
discontent and confusion, as the realisation that he is on the downward part of 
his journey starts to overwhelm him. It's among his very best performances.

Maid in Manhattan is the new Jennifer Lopez movie, a queen-for-a-day flick 
about a hotel maid mistaken for a lady by Ralph Fiennes's starchy, 
Kennedy-esque politician. The leads are utterly miscast - neither has any oomph 
- and the only mystery is how Wayne Wang ended up directing it.

Star Trek: Nemesis made no impact on this reviewer's cranium, possibly because 
he's never seen an entire episode of Star Trek. The Hot Chick, Rob Schneider's 
third comic outing, marks no improvement on its predecessors Deuce Bigalow: 
Male Gigolo and The Animal, although the sight of the deeply unprepossessing 
Schneider all dolled up for girlie-business is good for a few shallow chuckles.

Finally, Drumline, about a Harlem kid stirring up a sedate southern 
university's marching band, promises to be one of those awful, against-all-odds 
"uplift" movies, but turns out to be much more concerned with chasin' booty and 
the shapeliness of cheerleaders' asses. Naturally, I found reasons to love it.
 