
I have never struggled with a book as I did with The Angel of Grozny. Compared 
to this, my other books were written with ease. But the stories of Chechnya are 
even more hidden than those of Afghanistan. It's a more inaccessible place than 
Iraq, and when you get there, people have horrifying stories to tell. To begin 
to write about them is tough; to finish them tougher. Because where does a 
story end?

Parts of the story were already in me, in memories of the first war I covered, 
the First Chechen War of 1995-1996. Aged 24, I was finishing my degree in 
Russian at the University of Oslo while working as a freelance journalist in 
Moscow. Alongside Russians from every corner of the vast empire, I sat 
petrified in front of the TV during the first days of 1995, watching as the 
Russian army attacked the Chechen capital, Grozny, and was met with fierce 
resistance. After just a single day, 1,000 Russian soldiers were dead. In the 
decade to come, over 100,000 civilians would be killed in the conflict.

During those early days and weeks, I covered the conflict from Moscow, but the 
Russian capital was a fog of words, and I couldn't find my way through or 
around it. My thoughts began to spin disconcertingly: to go, or not to go; to 
go, to not go; to go ...

On my first trip to Chechnya, I hitchhiked with a Russian military plane. I 
was paralysed by what I saw. The devastation. The dead, rotting in the mass 
graves. The children who had had their legs blown off. The mothers looking for 
their sons. I lived with the civilians, I lived among the fighters; in hidden 
locations I met with guerrilla commanders who in the years to come would one by 
one be killed by the Russian forces. We travelled in and out of the bombed-out 
republic. The Russians didn't mind us; this was the era of Boris Yeltsin.

After the 1996 presidential election, I left Russia to cover other conflicts - 
but I never entirely forgot about Chechnya. Its people had crept under my skin: 
almost 10 years later, they itched. I realized it was time to go back. But this 
was easier said than done. Vladimir Putin was president now, and he understood 
something that Yeltsin never cared about: the power of the free word.

On a freezing day in January 2006, I found my way back to Moscow. To go south 
to Chechnya was next to impossible. In order to report, you needed journalist 
accreditation from the ministry of foreign affairs in Moscow, as well as a 
special card granting permission to stay in "zones of anti-terror operations". 
To get that, you had to travel in a group administrated and guided by the 
Russian authorities. Who would speak freely to me under such conditions? I 
needed another way. I found one. Her name was Zaira.

"You need makeup", she told me. "Our women want to be beautiful". My eyebrows 
and eyelashes had already been dyed black. More colours were applied before a 
dark scarf was knotted firmly at my neck. I looked down at my long skirt and 
coat belted at the waist. Pointed high-heeled boots completed the outfit. "Most 
important of all," Zaira told me, "don't look around as you usually do. Don't 
smile, it gives you away immediately. Keep your head down. Frown. Look 
unfriendly."

And so I made it into Chechnya on several trips in 2006 and 2007 disguised as 
a Chechen woman, hiding from the Russian authorities - the only way a 
journalist can work without supervision in this part of Russia.

Initially I travelled around with the human rights organization Memorial. It 
was an odyssey of human horror: the disappeared, the tortured, the maimed, the 
revenged. Slowly I discovered the extent of the devastation - social, moral, 
mental - to which Chechnya had been subjected since I left in the mid-90s. I 
met families from which all the men had been taken, one by one. In one family, 
the last in the line had disappeared just before I got there; a week later he 
was found in a nearby wood, missing one leg, one arm and one eye. Putin had got 
the brutal local president, Ramzan Kadyrov, to do the dirty work for him: it 
was now Chechen against Chechen. Under Kadyrov's rule, there were families 
nobody spoke to or visited; they were on the wrong side, outcasts. Either you 
were with Kadyrov, or he was against you.

The risks were great. I could never stay long in one place, as the families 
were being watched, and I could seldom go back to where I'd been visiting. My 
notebooks were filled with stories, each worse than the last. But the cruellest 
truth is that stories of horror, torture and grief come, in the end, to 
resemble each other. I felt I was in danger of compiling an Amnesty Report; a 
collection of anonymous stories of human rights abuses. Where was my book in 
all of this?

After six months in the region, I found myself back in Moscow on a stormy 
night when trees were being knocked down and lightning flashed through heavy 
rain. I was sleepless; my project seemed hopeless and I wanted go home, live my 
own life, leave the horror behind, forget about Chechnya again. But then I 
remembered a film I had seen about an orphanage in Chechnya, and decided that 
before I gave up, I wanted to meet the children who have lost everything, who 
grow up with the war inside of them. It was this decision that led me to 
Hadijat - the "Angel of Grozny" - a woman who had saved hundreds of children by 
dragging them out of cellars or ruins, approaching them as they were begging in 
the markets, and given them a safer place to live.

These children are the true victims of the conflict, of any conflict. One whom 
I came to know well is Timur - a boy who grew up on the streets and is so 
filled with pain and anger that the only thing calms him is killing - dogs, 
cats, pigeons. I call him the little wolf. Getting to know him and hearing him 
talk of the "terrible fire" inside him was hard, and harder still to write 
about. How to describe the mind of a child of war?

I took me several attempts to work out how best to get the children's stories 
down on paper. For the first, introductory chapter, I adopted the novelistic 
style I used in The Bookseller of Kabul, describing a person from the inside, 
his thoughts, his feelings. Some people ask, how can you know what's going on 
in this little boy's head? How can you know the colour of the sky when he was 
throwing stones into the river? And how do you know exactly how the river 
looked like?

I don't. I have to rely on his accounts. We had 10 long interviews; he showed 
me the place he had lived, the riverbank where he squatted. And he told me 
about what he had thought, how he felt, how cold he had been, how the sky had 
looked when the sun set.

In truth, of course, it is not possible for us to creep into a little street 
boy's head. But I want us to try. I want to invite the reader into Timur's 
story, just as Timur invited me into his life; the life of a boy who has seen 
little good, and who can't get rid of his memories.

Timur is just one among the millions of children trapped and hurt in wars and 
conflicts. I have tried to write down their stories as accurately as I could.

· Åsne Seierstad <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asne-seierstad> has worked 
as a correspondent in Russian, China,Serbia, Afghanistan and Iraq and is the 
award-winning author of The Bookseller of Kabul. The Angel of Grozny: Inside 
Chechnya is published on March 6 by Virago
 