
Welcome to La Fabriquilla, Almería.

Population: four.

(And a dog called Rocky).

Actually, make that three and a dog called Rocky. This morning on the deserted 
western stretch of the Cabo de Gata National Park coast, one of the inhabitants 
is preparing to move out. Packing his bags, piling 7,000 books into boxes, 
sifting through his videos, and bundling up that complete collection of Don 
Balón. He is 45 years old, his name is Juanma Lillo, he is known as something 
of a philosopher – the man who says: "human beings are entities deposited in 
time" – and he is the coach at Union Deportiva Almería. Or at least he was 
until Saturday night when they suffered the worst home result inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> history, losing eight-nil 
to Barcelona, and he was sacked. For the fifth time in his five-team First 
Division career.

As he packs his bags, Lillo might reflect on the fact that he was right: the 
Lillo Effect became the Lillo Defect with indecent haste. Appearing ashen-faced 
in the directors' box, Almería's president Alonso García Gabarrón could hardly 
have been more explicit if he had been slapped with a parental advisory – and 
not just because he'd already publicly spoken out a week before. "We have the 
players to perform better than this," he snapped, "I don't like the way Lillo 
coaches or the way he prepares games." Not long ago he did. Not long ago, he 
handed out a new contract and raved: "I love Lillo's methods." The seeds of 
destruction, though, had already been sown.

When Lillo took over at Almería in week 15 last season, they'd just sacked 
Hugo Sánchez. Sanchez had taken over from Gonzalo Arconada,given the impossible 
task of following Unai Emery in the summer of 2008 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2008/feb/04/europeanfootball.sport1>. 
Arconada was sacked during the winter break with Almería three points above the 
relegation zone; it was week 16 and they were 16th. Under Sánchez, Almería 
improved, collecting 30 points in 22 weeks and climbing to 11th. But the 
following season, 2009-2010, a solitary win in ten left them 17th in week 15 
and the winter break again brought a sacking. If Sánchez hadn't spent all his 
time talking about coaching Real Madrid, they might have been sorry to see him 
go. But he did and they weren't. Instead, Spain welcomed back an old friend. Or 
foe, depending on which side of the divide you occupied.

Although Lillo did reach the First Division as a fútbol sala player, he never 
made it as a professional. As he put it: "my head and my feet could never 
agree, but I already felt like a coach"; as his coach put it when he was 15: "I 
have got good news and bad news: the bad news is that you're rubbish, the good 
news is that you have something. Your team-mates listen." Innovative and 
thoughtful, a pioneer with strong claims to have invented 4-2-3-1, obsessed by 
positioning and a disciple of Johan Cruyff, even César Luis Menotti raved about 
him, telling Jorge Valdano: "I've met someone madder than us, who talks about 
playing football the right way."

He admits he would give it all away for 15 minutes as a player but Lillo was 
always a coach. He became the youngest ever coach in the First Division when he 
won two successive promotions, bringing UD Salamanca up in 1995 at the age of 
29.

Trouble is, that's where the success ran out. Lillo can talk a good game. 
There are no moons for him to be over, no t'riffics, no parrots vomiting in the 
corner. Instead,as one website handily reminds us 
<http://www.queremosunblogdeLillo.blogspot.com>, there are football teams as 
"contextual beings"; coaches who, "like God, are everywhere and nowhere", and 
footballers who are "a flame waiting to be ignited." Lillo is the man who says 
that Leo Messi "represents the systematic and contextual paradigm. We are all 
in the context and the context is in us." But his critics insisted that while 
he could talk a good game, he could not play one. He was, they said, a 
charlatan – a "smoke seller."

They said he was all style over substance; counter-productively obsessed with 
the aesthetic over the effective. His rejection of athleticism and aggression 
as the corner stone of the game jarred. There were suspicions that his 
discourse was too highbrow for players to capture. Some in the game dismissed 
him as a "bluff". Even those who liked him wondered if the moral horse he rode 
was not too high, his approach unrealistic. Salamanca found themselves four 
points off salvation with ten weeks to go and he was sacked – to protests from 
players and fans, who loved him. Sackings followed at Real Oviedo, Zaragoza and 
Tenerife. From Juanma Lillo he became Juan Mallillo (Bad Little Juan). And then 
he departed. He maintained a high profile in the media and worked in the Second 
Division and in Mexico, but he didn't return to the First Division for a decade.

It was too long. He was missed. When he returned last year, called back by 
Almería, the impact was huge. "Lillo," said AS, "gives La Liga a romantic 
touch". At last, someone who could say something worth hearing: no wonder 
everyone wanted an interview. Photos of Lillo strolling across the deserted, 
windswept beach of La Fabriquilla, his own haven of solitude, appeared in the 
media.

But his detractors were waiting for him too. His purity was seen as pointless. 
His eloquence counted against him; all those books did too. "Intellectual" 
became suspicion. And, big-hearted, generous, sensitive, it got to him. As 
Lillo put it: "they attack you with compliments. I am going to have to dumb 
myself down." For all that possession and position were the foundation stones 
of his approach, he insisted that his supposedly blinkered "obsession" with 
artistic football was not true: "I'm not asking them to paint pictures with 
their feet," he insisted. The football world had changed too. "The garnish has 
ended up eating the steak," he complained. "There is no decency left." "A 
journalist," he added, "can make a Nobel Prize winner look like an imbecile and 
an imbecile look like Nobel Prize winner."

Nothing, though, counted against him like cold, hard results. This was the man 
who had been relegated time and again.

Except that Lillo had, despite popular perception and some deliberate bending 
of the facts, never been relegated. In fact, if anyone had bothered to analyse 
it, his teams had invariably got worse after his departure, not better. 
Relegation was clinched by others, not him. Besides, this time the results were 
on his side. From one win in ten, Lillo took Almería to just one defeat in 11 – 
andthat was thanks to a puddle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2hzHGtSDvnM>. 
That freak goal cost them but it also defined their style: a determination to 
play the ball out from the back, with goalkeeper Diego Alves banned from 
hoofing it long. It also underlined Lillo's most famous point: "football is 
unscientific; chance plays such a huge part." But, he insisted: "Taking no 
risks is the riskiest thing of all. So, in order to avoid risks, I will take 
risks." With a solitary defeat in 11 it was working.Then came Barcelona and 
Almería drew 2-2 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/mar/08/real-madrid-ahead-barcelona-la-liga>
, having twice been in the lead. They climbed to tenth and safety was assured. 
Maybe Juan was not somalillo after all. The talk was of The Lillo Effect.

Always quick to dismiss simplistic cause-effect equations, the assumption that 
results are the inevitable conclusion of process, Almería's coach rejected the 
tag. "The Lillo Effect," he warned, "will soon become the Lillo Defect."

Very soon. This summer, Almería held on to Albert Crusat and Pablo Piatti but 
sold Chico, Soriano, and Cisma. In all, eight players departed. They spent just 
€1.3m on new signings. As Lillo himself admitted after an impressive draw at 
the Vicente Calderón four weeks ago: you'd have to be mad to seriously expect 
them to compete with the bigger sides in La Liga. Their football remained neat 
and tidy, and they had the third best defensive record in La Liga, but the 
results were not following. In the opening 10 weeks, they had won just once, 
and that was away.

García, the classic provincial, personalist president, was getting twitchy. 
Privately, he began bitching about his coach. When they were beaten 1-0 in 
Bilbao against a nine-man Athletic side last weekend, only the intervention of 
a couple of directors prevented García from sacking Lillo on the spot. At the 
same time, the players got together and told Lillo and their president that 
they were behind him. The president gave his coach one last chance.

Some chance. Still, at least it was a friend who finished him off. When Lillo 
coached in Mexico, one of his players was Pep Guardiola. Guardiola made no 
secret of the fact that he considered Lillo his "master", the "best coach" he 
had ever had. In 2003, Lluis Bassat ran from the presidency of FC Barcelona 
with Guardiola as sporting director. The man he had chosen as coach was Lillo. 
Bassat lost, Guardiola would take another four years to return – as coach of 
Barcelona's B team, where not only did he take some of his ideological 
inspiration from Lillo but some of his practical ideas too: much of his work 
had been prepared with his assistance. But if once Guardiola was the 
apprentice, now he is the master. Now, he was about to stick the knife in. 
"This is not easy for me," Guardiola said on Saturday night. It was even harder 
for Lillo.

After 15 minutes, Messi made it 1-0 with a wonderful shot from the edge of the 
area after a neat flick from David Villa. Two minutes later, it was 2-0, a 
dreadful mistake allowing Andres Iniesta to score. Eight minutes after that, an 
own goal made it three. They got the fourth after 34 minutes and the fifth 
straight from Almería's kick-off. Then they made it six, then seven, then 
eight. It was the joint highest away victory ever and the biggest score in 
Spain in 15 years. Barcelona were devastating. But even if Lillo quite rightly 
reminded people that Barcelona had scored six at the Bernabéu, he had no 
defence. Much like his team: Almería had been powerless, lacking the 
competitiveness and edge Lillo had so often been accused of lacking. Not once 
had they even been able to foul Leo Messi.

In the stands they were chanting for Lillo to be sacked. Under the stands, as 
Guardiola and Lillo embraced before heading their separate ways - Guardiola to 
the clásico having completed the best away run in history with six successive 
wins since the opening day; Lillo to La Fabriquilla to pack his bags – the fans 
were getting their wish. "I know why coaches get the sack," Lillo once said. 
"What I don't know is why they hire us in the first place."

Talking points

• One man not too impressed with Barcelona's 8-0 win was Cristiano Ronaldo. As 
he was making his way off the Santiago Bernabéu pitch on Saturday night, he 
scoffed: "Barcelona's eight goals don't mean anything to me. I'd like to see 
them score eight on Monday". He was of course talking about the clásico next 
Monday. And it has been presented virtuallyas a season-decider already 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2010/writers/sid_lowe/11/15/clasico.monday/index.html?eref=writers 
season-decider>. "It is as if this is the only game of the season, like the 
world will end after it," Guardiola complained. Thing is, it is quickly 
becoming exactly that. Well, one of two anyway. Ronaldo called it a 
six-pointer; the risk is it might become a 96-pointer.

Madrid and Barcelona have now won their last six. Between them they have lost 
just once in 24 matches. Messi and Ronaldo have got 13 and 14 goals 
respectively. Nineteams have fewer than Ronaldo. Both got a hat trick this 
weekend. Madrid and Barcelona have 33 goals each so far this season. They have 
conceded just 14 between them. This weekend's aggregate score between Madrid 
and Barcelona and their opponents was 13-1. Madrid beat Athletic Bilbao 5-1. 
And that's despite the fact that Athletic actually played pretty well at the 
Santiago Bernabéu. Fernando Llorente in particular was fantastic and Madrid's 
best player might even have been Iker Casillas. Athletic had as many shots as 
Madrid but scored a fifth as many goals.

When Madrid break they do so with such pace and precision that they're 
irresistible and Ángel Di María in particular is playing brilliantly. Once they 
get the first goal it's virtually impossible to see anyone beating them. On 
Saturday, they were aided by two penalties and a free-kick from Ronaldo that, 
while struck, was more goalkeeper error than a Tomahawk (and, yes, that's what 
they're calling it.) Ronaldo would have got four too, but for Sergio Ramos 
taking a penalty off him – something that left Jose Mourinho spitting blood 
down on the bench. Well, virtually on the bench, anyway. His two-match ban must 
be just about the most pointless punishment ever.

• The Community of Valencia derby ended up with a 1-1 draw that means 
Barcelona's lead over third is seven points, Madrid's eight. It also ended up 
with trouble on the pitch and in the directors' box. Valencia coach Unai Emery 
went to shake hands with Villarreal's Juan Carlos Garrido only for Garrido to 
walk off, leaving Emery doing a gesture that can only be described as "screw 
you, then". Meanwhile, up in the stands Paco Roig and his son, both of whom 
were reportedly a little the worse for wear, tried to start a fight with 
Valencia president Manolo Llorente. Roig is the brother of Villarreal president 
Fernando Roig (who immediately apologised). But more significantly, he is also 
the ex-president of Valencia.

• They couldn't be happier in Mallorca, the club where they love nothing more 
than to really, really hate their former coach Gregorio Manzano (actually they 
hated him when he was their current coach too 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2009/dec/07/mallorca-managerial-magic-sid-lowe>
).They beat Manzano's new club Sevilla 2-1 at the Sanchez Pizjuán last night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/oct/04/sevilla-ditch-mother-in-law>
.* Defeat for Sevilla allowed Espanyol to climb back into a Champions League 
place. Their incredible run continues: they've won six out of six at home.

• Levante scored while Racing Santander had a player down on the floor. Have 
said this before 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/soccer/fifaworldcup/blog/2010/03/players-taking-advantage-of-good-sportsmanship.html>
 and will say it again: good.

• Lillo is the second coach this week to get sacked: José Aurelio Gay was 
ditched by Real Zaragoza in mid-week. Javier Aguirre is back – and becomes the 
seventh coach they have had in three years.

• Palma conspiracy theorists might want to note: that's Manzano's new club 
Sevilla, who donot actually play in England.

Results: Villarreal 1-1 Valencia, Almería 0-8 Barcelona, Madrid 5-1 Athletic, 
Osasuna 1-0 Sporting, Espanyol 3-0 Hércules, Levante 3-1 Racing, Deportivo 3-0 
Málaga, Sevilla 1-2 Mallorca, Real Sociedad 2-4 Atlético. Tonight: 
Getafe-Zaragoza.

Latest La Liga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 