
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has launched a 
secure platform for whistleblowers to securely submit confidential documents to 
the newspaper’s reporters.

The launch comes a year to the day since the Guardian posted the first of a 
series of NSA documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/nsa-phone-records-verizon-court-order>
 leaked by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, sparking a worldwide debate on 
surveillance, privacy, and civil liberties.

Free speech and privacy groups alongside popular sites including Reddit, 
BoingBoing and Imgur, are marking the day with a Reset the Net campaign, 
encouraging internet users to take direct action to secure their privacy 
online. Several technology companies are also expected to announce new steps to 
protect users’ privacy over the course of the day.

The SecureDrop open-source whistleblowing platform provides a way for sources, 
who can choose to remain anonymous, to submit documents and data while avoiding 
virtually all of the most common forms of online tracking.

It makes use of well-known anonymising technology such as the Tor network and 
the Tails operating system, which was used by journalists working on the 
Snowden files.

The New Yorker, the US not-for-profit investigative newsroom ProPublica, and 
the Pierre Omidyar-backed startup The Intercept are among the newsrooms already 
making use of the SecureDrop system.

The SecureDrop platform was initially developed by the US developer and 
activistAaron Swartz <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>, who 
killed himself in 2013 when facing charges under the Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act for the mass downloading of academic articles.

The platform was finished after Swartz’s death, and is now maintained and 
promoted by the not-for-profit Freedom of the Press Foundation.

Sources who wish to consider using the system to contact the Guardian can find 
information on how to use the SecureDrop platform at
https://securedrop.theguardian.com <https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>.

This page is hosted on a separate server from the main Guardian site, includes 
no tracking cookies, and takes no logs. Like almost all other news 
organisations, regular Guardian webpages use tracking cookies to keep track of 
users’ login details and to serve advertising.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
“Protecting sources is at the core of journalism, and as the Guardian’s 
revelations from the Edward Snowden documents over the last year have shown, 
it’s getting ever more difficult,” said Alan Rusbridger, the editor-in-chief of 
the Guardian.

“We’re pleased to be able to use the best technology available to make sure 
we’re doing everything we can to let sources talk to our journalists securely, 
and hope as many other outlets as possible do the same”

The Guardian’s SecureDrop system is installed outside of the UK. Last year, 
the UK government was criticized by international press freedom organisations 
for applying pressure to the Guardian over its publication of the NSA documents 
leaked by Snowden, leading to the news organization relocating its reporting on 
the files to the USA, and destroying all copies of the documents stored in its 
UK headquarters.

Trevor Timm, the director of the Freedom of the Press Foundation, said the 
development of SecureDrop was part of a wider response to government crackdowns 
on journalists and whistleblowers in the US and across the world.

“In an age where governments are increasingly using surveillance to uncover 
sources and chill investigative journalism, technology can help whistleblowers 
and reporters safely get important stories to the public,” he said.

“SecureDrop is designed specifically for news organizations so they can 
receive tips and documents in a much more anonymous and secure way than email 
or phone calls.”

SecureDrop was given an extensive security audit by a team of cryptographers 
in July 2013, and updated in response to many of the concerns raised at the 
time. The system was also updated to address the widely reported Heartbleed 
security vulnerability.

While the system is far more secure than, for example, emailing information to 
a reporter, SecureDrop specifically does not promise 100% security.

“[A]ny organization or product that promises 100% security is not telling the 
truth,” says the Freedom of the Press Foundation website. “SecureDrop attempts 
to create [a] significantly more secure environment for sources to get 
information than exists through normal digital channels, but there are always 
risks.”

The steps taken by the system include secure browsing advice to potential 
sources, making use of the Tor network, which anonymises internet traffic by 
bouncing it through a series of intermediate computers, requiring “air-gapped” 
– a term mean disconnected from all networks – computers to open documents, and 
use of secure operating systems to analyse any documents.

The system also allows for secure two-way communication between sources and 
journalists after the initial contact is made, if the source so wishes.

• Find out more details of how to securely contact the Guardian at 
https://securedrop.theguardian.com <https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>.
 