
The Guardian has been named newspaper of the year at the Press Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/awards> for its reporting on 
government surveillance.

The prize was one of a host given to Guardian News & Media and its journalists 
at the ceremony held by the Society of Editors in London, with Guardian website 
theguardian.com winning the digital award and writers Rob Evans, Paul Lewis and 
Patrick Kingsley all honoured for their reporting.

The judges said the Guardian "broke a story of global significance that went 
to the heart of the debate on press freedom. The fact that the coverage 
polarised opinion even within the press showed how important it was.

"The job of a newspaper is to speak truth to power and the past year has seen 
the Guardian do this with will and verve."

Collecting the top prize, Alan Rusbridger, editor-in-chief, Guardian News & 
Media, toasted whistleblowers and dedicated the newspaper of the year award to 
former Guardian deputy editor Georgina Henry, who launched Comment is Free in 
2006 and died this year aged 53.

Rusbridger said: "It's a great honour for the Guardian to be named newspaper 
of the year by a jury of our peers. The story was not, in the end, publishable 
out of London and I want in particular to thank colleagues on ProPublica and 
the New York Times for collaborating with us. The support of editors and press 
freedom bodies around the world was also crucial.

"I want to acknowledge the personal cost to Edward Snowden involved in his 
decision to become a whistleblower. I must thank a team of extremely talented 
colleagues on the Guardian. And I dedicate the award to our friend and former 
deputy editor, Georgina Henry, who died recently."

The digital award was accepted by network editors Emily Wilson and Clare 
Margetson, who also dedicated the prize to Georgina Henry.

As well as its coverage of the Snowden revelations, the judges were impressed 
by theguardian.com's innovative reporting of the Holmes family's desperate 
attempts to escape the Tasmanian firestorm, among other projects.

Other Press Awards accolades for Guardian News & Media

- Newspaper of the year - the Guardian
- Digital award - theguardian.com
- News reporter of the year - Rob Evans and Paul Lewis for their work on 
undercover policing , including the revelation that police spied on the family 
of murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence and that police spies stole the 
identities of dead children.
- Young journalist of the year - Patrick Kingsley, for his work as Egypt 
correspondent. He reported on accusations of war crimes against the country's 
military, and the men behind the Muslim Brotherhood, which was central to the 
Arab Spring, but later became the target of violent protests.
- Broadsheet Columnist of the Year - The Guardian's Ian Jack was highly 
commended.
- Critic of the Year - The Observer's architectural critic Rowan Moore was 
named winner for making a difficult subject accessible to general public. 
Guardian film critic Peter Bradshaw was highly commended.
- Cartoonist of the Year - The Observer's Chris Riddell was highly commended.
- Supplement of the Year - Observer Tech Monthly was highly commended.
- Scoop of the Year - The Guardian was highly commended for its Edward Snowden 
Files revelations.

Further information about all the winners is online here 
<http://www.pressawards.org.uk/page-view.php?page_id=741&parent_page_id=0&news_id=69&numbertoprintfrom=1>
.
 