
Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> coach 
Guillermo Amor will serve an additional A-League ban of one game plus another 
two suspended for making “intentional contact” with a match official.

Football Federation Australia’s independent disciplinary and ethics committee 
handed down its decision on Wednesday, two days after hearing Amor’s 
explanation for touching fourth official Adam Fielding in the wake of a 
controversial decision during the Reds’ round-seven 3-1 loss to Perth.

From A-League champs to chumps: what’s awry at Adelaide United? | Richard 
Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/a-league-champs-whats-awry-adelaide-united>
Last season’s A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> coach 
of the year was visibly frustrated after referee Jarred Gillett awarded Andy 
Keogh’s 68th-minute goal straight after Glory captain Rostyn Griffiths was 
perceived to have fouled Reds goalkeeper Eugene Galekovic.

Amor’s subsequent contact with Fielding prompted Gillett to banish him to the 
stands at nib Stadium.

The usually mild-mannered Barcelona legend served his mandatory one-match ban 
in last weekend’s goalless draw with Sydney FC, and will now miss Sunday’s home 
clash with Wellington.

Should he be expelled from any future match this season his suspended 
two-match ban will be activated.

“The committee has zero tolerance for intentional contact with a referee or 
other match official,” the determination read. “In this case the committee 
finds there was contact of a kind which should not have occurred.

“Whilst there is a dispute about exactly what happened, it is clear that Mr 
Amor left the technical area to remonstrate with the fourth official as to what 
he regarded to be an error in the awarding of a goal against Adelaide United.”

With no video evidence available nor witnesses, testimonies from each of the 
protagonists were key in deciding Amor’s punishment. Fielding submitted a 
report stating “the feeling of the contact was not a tap, it was also not 
enough to push me over. It was sufficient to make me take a step forward”.

At his hearing on Monday night, Amor strongly denied pushing Fielding or 
intending to assault him in any way, arguing he merely touched him to gain his 
attention so he could alert Gillett to the apparent error.

Nevertheless, the committee found “the contact was more than a tap on the 
shoulder”.

“Mr Amor frankly conceded that he is not in a position to deny that he may 
have used two hands and that he may have placed them on the back of the fourth 
official,” said the determination.

“He says he only ever intended to obtain the attention of the fourth official 
but seemed to accept that his actions were perceived by the fourth official as 
having gone too far.”
 