
Rick had once been a successful, self-employed tradesman, working hard, 
playing hard and spending his disposable income on upmarket cars, caravans, jet 
skis and other expensive toys. But, following a family trauma his drinking 
escalated and he became increasingly isolated. When I met him he was living in 
a small, rented flat and spending his savings on cider – usually 24 cans a day, 
more than 50 standard units daily compared to the recommended healthy weekly 
limit of 14.

Obviously his health – both physical and mental – had suffered as a 
consequence. He was often too anxious to leave his flat and would give taxi 
drivers his credit card and pin number to buy alcohol for him. He had been 
diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver and pancreatitis. His skin had a waxy 
yellow pallor and his abdomen was distended by ascites – the retention of fluid 
in the abdominal cavity. To be blunt, his chances of long-term survival were 
slim.

I opened my home to a heroin addict – she's family now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/apr/01/-heroin-addict-drugs-volunteering-recovery>
At a small charity in West Yorkshire, my job is to support people like Rick 
and help dependent drinkers who have been admitted to our local hospital to 
take charge of their addiction and recovery. That moment in hospital is often a 
turning point for people and we try to take advantage of that.

I had been working with Rick for a couple of months when one Friday afternoon, 
following a cancellation, I found myself at a rare loose end and for some 
reason I just couldn’t shake the feeling that I should visit him. He lived 
nearby, so I told my colleagues where I was going and left the office. When I 
arrived I could see immediately that Rick’s health had taken a turn for the 
worse; his eyes were clearly jaundiced, he was confused and anxious and 
experiencing severe abdominal pain.

Despite his protests, I called an ambulance and stayed with him until I was 
sure that he was on his way to hospital. I then called the office, told them 
what had happened and went home. On Monday morning my manager’s first words 
were “good work on Friday, Rick has been in intensive care all weekend”. This 
was his turning point, he spent over a month in hospital where I visited him 
regularly and after he was discharged he attended our recovery centre to 
complete a 12-week structured recovery programme.

Volunteers and charity workers: tell us about the day you made a difference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/02/the-day-you-made-difference>
Rick has now completed over two years of sobriety, he has returned to work and 
remains a passionate advocate of our service – a month seldom goes by when 
someone doesn’t come into reception saying, “I know Rick and he says you can 
help me”. From a personal point of view, Rick’s story gives me hope – he 
reminds me that no one is a lost cause and I must never stop trying to make a 
difference; their turning point might be today.

Rick is a pseudonym and other identifying features have been changed.


The day I made a difference is the Guardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.
 