
Hackers in China attempted to access more than 20m active accounts on Alibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> Group Holding Ltd’s Taobao 
e-commerce website using Alibaba’s own cloud computing service, according to a 
state media report posted on the internet regulator’s website.


Yahoo abandons plan to sell $31bn stake in Chinese e-commerce site Alibaba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/09/yahoo-abandons-plan-sell-alibaba>
 Analysts said the report from the Paper led to the price of Alibaba’s 
US-listed shares falling as much as 3.7% in late Wednesday trade.

 An Alibaba spokesman on Thursday said the company detected the attack in “the 
first instance”, reminded users to change passwords, and worked closely with 
the police investigation.

 Chinese companies are grappling with a sharp rise in the number of 
cyber-attacks, and cybersecurity experts say firms have a long way to go before 
defences catch up to US counterparts.

 In the latest case, hackers obtained a database of 99m usernames and 
passwords from a number of websites, according to a separate report on a 
website managed by the ministry of public security.

 The hackers then used Alibaba’s cloud computing platform to input the details 
into Taobao. Of the 99m usernames, they found 20.59m were also being used for 
Taobao accounts, the ministry website said.

 The hackers started inputting the details into Taobao in mid-October and were 
discovered in November, at which time Alibaba immediately reported the case to 
police, the ministry website said. The hackers have since been caught, it said.

 Alibaba’s systems discovered and blocked the vast majority of log-in 
attempts, according to the ministry website.

The hackers used compromised accounts to fake orders on Taobao, a practice 
known as “brushing” inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and used 
to raise sellers’ rankings, the newspaper said. The hackers also sold accounts 
to be used for fraud, it said.

 Alibaba’s spokesman said the hackers rented the cloud computing service but 
declined to comment on security measures designed to stop the system being used 
for the attack. He said they could have used any such service, and that the 
attack was not aided by any possible loopholes in Alibaba’s platform.

 “Alibaba’s system was never breached,” the spokesman said.

 The number of accounts, 20.59m, represents about 1 out of every 20 annual 
active buyers on Alibaba’s China retail marketplaces.
 