
You would usually find the unsung hero of a team in defensive midfield, or 
maybe at full-back. They are the players who are a crucial part of that side’s 
success but are out of the spotlight, the water carriers. They are not normally 
the centre-forward, the traditional glory boys of football whose dirty work is 
usually done by others.

For Hal Robson-Kanu, the man who has made the lone striking role for Wales his 
own, that does not quite apply. The success of the team, who need only a point 
from their final two qualifiers – against Bosnia-Herzegovina and Andorra – to 
seal a place in next summer’s European Championship, could easily be put down 
to themhaving the most expensive player in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/01/gareth-bale-real-madrid-tottenham>
, handily backed up by one of the better midfielders in the Premier League. 
However, while Gareth Bale andAaron Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/aaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview>
 take the headlines, players like Robson-Kanu are in many ways the embodiment 
of the Wales team.

This is a collection of players who, a couple of high-profile exceptions 
aside, are playing beyond their theoretical capabilities, and certainly above 
their reputations. And so it is with Robson-Kanu, who on the face of it might 
seem like a strange choice to lead the line for his national side given that he 
scored just one league goal for Reading last season, and has notfound the net 
for Wales since October last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/13/wales-cyprus-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
.

However, the recent 1-0 win in Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/03/cyprus-wales-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
 was a good example of why Robson-Kanu is so valuable. Bale scored the winner 
with a magnificent battering header, but Robson-Kanu was man of the match. His 
running was tireless and unselfish, but it was how he made those runs, plus his 
neat flicks and smart use of the ball, that made him such an effective lone 
striker.

“I think you have to play a role in your team,” says Robson-Kanu. “It’s about 
work-rate and a lot of people might not see the set-up work that players do. 
Sometimes all the focus is obviously on Bale being the world’s most expensive 
player, but it’s an honour to play with players like that. You’d prefer to be 
playing with them than against them. It’s about linking the play, and about 
occupying defenders, and that’s what I’m good at.”

One of the keys to Wales’ success seems to be the club-like mentality fostered 
by the head coach, Chris Coleman, and his staff.

“They’ve knitted the group together really well,” Robson-Kanu says. “There’s a 
fantastic bond between the whole group now and everyone is willing to fight for 
each other and die for each other, and put everything on the line for getting 
results for our country. I think, in the past, getting called up and going to 
squads was a bit of a chore, but now it’s an absolute honour … everyone has 
been playing with each other for a long time now so we have that sort of club 
mentality and club feel.”

From an outside perspective, it’s always tempting to think of team spirit as a 
bit of myth, merely a symbol of success; it’s easy to believe you nurture 
spirit by winning games, rather than winning games because of the bond within 
the camp. However, Robson-Kanu thinks otherwise.

“I think if you’re winning games you will naturally have a good team spirit,” 
he says, “but the key to having good team spirit is when you face adversity, or 
when its not going your way you have to dig deep. In the Belgium game at home 
[Wales won 1-0] we were under immense pressure, and it was the team spirit that 
got us over the line. It was almost a nation’s spirit in the last 10 minutes, 
when the whole stadium began to sing the national anthem. We felt that.”

What’s even more unusual about Robson-Kanu’s role as a central striker with 
Wales is that it is not the one he plays every week for Reading. With players 
like Nick Blackman and Orlando Sa this season, plus last term Yakubu Ayegbeni 
and Pavel Pogrebnyak to compete with at club level, Robson-Kanu is often asked 
to perform a variety of roles, but withWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> he has a consistent job.

“With Reading there’s a lot more positional rotation, so sometimes I’ll be up 
front and sometimes I’ll play on the left and sometimes I’ll play on the right, 
and the gaffer [Steve Clarke] utilises me in that way. I think all the top 
players are flexible enough to be able to play in a number of positions and 
having that flexibility adds another string to your bow … but I know that my 
best position is as a striker and I know that’s where I’m most effective.”

It is almost as if Robson-Kanu has two careers running in parallel; at Reading 
he is usually in Clarke’s first-choice XI but is a pseudo-utility man, and last 
season he spent much of the time trying to stave off the vague threat of 
relegation. Yet with the national side he is a fixed part of it, a team that is 
on the verge of an achievement, about to achieve something that no Wales side 
have since 1958.

Gareth Bale calls on Wales to seal Euro 2016 place ‘as soon as possible’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/06/gareth-bale-wales-euro-2016-qualification>
“International football is very different because a lot of teams sit in and 
you have to break them down, whereas in club football, teams can be a lot more 
open,” he says, noting that this has become more pronounced as Wales have won 
more games.

“They’re definitely not as willing to go head-to-head with us any more. Israel 
away is a prime example where they sort of sat in for the whole game and it was 
difficult to break them down. I think it’s just that respect that team will 
give us now, especially having beaten top teams like Belgium.”

You hesitate to use the phrase cult hero, but the Welsh fans seem to recognise 
what a big role Robson-Kanu plays. He even has his very own song, his name sung 
to thetune of Salt n’ Pepa’s Push It, to show for it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfwmU3Cn1No>. The song was started by the 
Barry Horns, a brass band who attend Wales games and, it seems, are very much 
appreciated by the players.

“For that song to be sung the way it was, at home and every game, is 
absolutely unbelievable,” says Robson-Kanu. “I mean, there was talk about it 
being like a cult. All the players were aware of it and have spoken about the 
band because it creates a great atmosphere, and in particular the last few 
games they have really showed their support. When we were against Israel at 
home I think they sang my name for almost 10 minutes straight.”

Robson-Kanu’s contract is up next summer and as Reading have not offered him a 
new one yet, it is possible that he will leave the club he has been with since 
he was 15.

As shop windows go, Euro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> 
will take some beating.
 