
Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> have 
one hand on the A-League premiership after a confrontational 2-0 victory over 
Melbourne City that teetered on the edge of violence.

Isaias scored with a fourth-minute free kick and Bruce Djite followed up 
Thomas Sørensen’s moment of madness to convert a penalty in first-half injury 
time in a deserved triumph for the Reds.

A-League needs to reconsider staggered last round, says Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/a-league-staggered-last-round-review-needed>
But a half-time spat that involved almost every player from both sides looks 
set to be just as big a talking point as designs on a premiership.

Things heated up just before the break when experienced City keeper Sørensen 
produced an AFL-style bump to knock ex-City midfielder Stefan Mauk into touch 
with the ball already out of play.

Referee Strebre Delovski pointed to the spot, from where Djite rolled the ball 
home to double Adelaide’s advantage. Mauk then gave the City bench an 
inflammatory 2-0 salute on his way back for the restart of play.

The spark was lit and the two sides then came together for a push and shove 
spat as they went down the tunnel. Marcelo Carrusca and Bruno Fornaroli shared 
tense words and soon it got physical, with firebrand forward Harry Novillo 
kicking out and Mauk at the centre of the tussle.

Novillo and Mauk were cautioned – among 10 players to receive yellows for the 
night – and assistant coach Joey Didiluca was sent to the stands.

The result means Adelaide face an anxious wait to learn if they will be 
crowned premiers, with Brisbane able to overtake the ladder-leader Reds with a 
win at AAMI Park against Melbourne Victory on Saturday night.

Along with City, third-placed Western Sydney Wanderers were knocked out of the 
premiership race by the result. United can at least lock-in a top two position, 
and a week off, giving them a fortnight to prepare for a semi-final.

The Reds are a match away from a first grand final since 2009, but City are 
still as far away from silverware as ever. John van ‘t Schip’s side led the 
league as recently as two rounds ago but defeats to Perth and Adelaide have 
seen them slip down the table.

A return to Perth for an elimination final now looms if Glory beat Sydney FC 
on Sunday, with City otherwise likely to host Kenny Lowe’s side.

 