
Alistair <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> and I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-brownlee> have been competitive for as 
long as I can remember – in fact most of our childhood was one big competition 
to be the best. Throughout our lives, these challenges have taken many forms – 
from a game ofPoohsticks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/28/in-praise-of-poohsticks-editorial>
 in our local woods to the podium at the Olympics.

As a kid, it can be tough being the younger brother, and Alistair usually got 
the better of me, though now I can certainly give him a run for his money. I 
wish I'd known, when I was continually losing the battle for the TV remote, 
that I'd one day be training to go head to head with my big brother at Rio 2016.

Mum and Dad always made sure our school holidays were packed with activities 
in the great outdoors. We used to go hiking or mountain biking in the woods, 
always with a lot of brotherly rivalry thrown into the mix. That healthy 
passion for the outdoors is still very much with us – and it's the outdoors 
that helps me get through training now. It's amazing to see the view of the 
Yorkshire Dales change every day.

As we got older, our competitiveness became less about the everyday activities 
and more focused on sport – I attribute this to why we have had so much success 
as triathletes. Without a doubt, the best thing my brother did for me was to 
inspire me to push myself in sport – without him, I wouldn't be where I am 
today.
 Jonathan and Alistair Brownlee have plans for your half term ... 
Having your big brother as your training partner is the best way to keep you 
on your toes. We're always pushing each other to be better – and anyway, there 
would be no point getting too big for my boots in front of Alistair, he will be 
the first to put me in my place.

We know what each other is going through and have been there for each other 
every step of the way. Even though we're both very competitive we'll never let 
that get in the way of the fact that we're brothers.

Alistair and I are great believers that kids activities don't need to be 
expensive, or involve memberships to organised sports, so we have compiled our 
top 20 activities to help get kids get out and active this half-term. It was a 
lot of fun casting our minds back to all the hilarious stuff we got up to 
playing together as kids, including games such as apple bobbing, tree houses or 
dens and creating obstacle courses in the back garden.

So, here are the Brownlee brothers' top 20 half-term tips:

Get outdoors 


1. Mini Olympics course: Let the kids raid your cupboards and create their own 
outdoor obstacle course. Sofa cushion hurdles, shoe slalom … Make things 
competitive with the addition of a stopwatch.

2. Bicycle nature trail: Head to your local park or woodland with a list of 
flowers, birds, insects and so on. The winner is the first member of the family 
to tick off every item on the list.

3. Go-karting: Organised go-kart tracks are an amazing adrenaline thrill in a 
safe and supervised environment. This half-term, let the kids take the driving 
seat while you sit back and relax.

4. Hide and seek in the great outdoors: Get your kids into the great outdoors 
with a giant game of hide and seek. Even if the British weather stays true and 
it pours with rain, the game can easily be brought indoors.

5. Treasure hunt: Fill a box with treasure – toys, treats, books etc – then 
hide it in your local park, woodland or at home if it's raining. Then leave 
clues that lead step-by-step to the treasure.

Rainy days


1. Indoor obstacle course: If the weather takes a turn for the worse encourage 
your kids to get creative by making an indoor obstacle course. Lay a ladder on 
the ground to hop through, throw a ball into a washing basket etc.

2. Design an Olympic torch with vegetables: Relive London 2012 by getting your 
kids to create an Olympic torch with vegetables. Challenge them to create a 
striking torch that people might even mistake for the real thing.

3. Sandwich-making competition: See who can make the most wild and wacky 
sandwich. Encourage the kids to use their loaf and think outside the box. You 
have to eat the results, of course.

4. Make a marble run: Instead of buying expensive plastic ones, make the base 
of the run with a large sized box, creating holes with dipped egg cartons for 
the marbles to fall into and using toothpaste boxes as shields for each hole.

5. Breakdancing competition: Taking Inspiration from street-dance troupes such 
asDiversity <http://www.diversitystreetdance.net/> and Flawless 
<http://flawlessofficial.com/#/page/47d9/services/>, challenge the kids to 
organise a breakdancing competition with their friends.

For the garden


1. Den building: The ultimate childhood game – making a half-term hideout with 
pillows, sheets, chairs and so forth. Make it more exciting with challenges, 
such as seeing how many people they can squeeze inside.

2. Tug of war: With kids and adults split evenly between two teams, find a 
spot on the ground to mark as the middle with a rope between the two. First 
team to pull their competitors over the mark wins.

3. Water balloon tag: Water balloons are cheap to buy and make the game of tag 
so much more exciting for your active kids. Just make sure you pick a warm day 
and don't get stuck in the firing line.

4. Make a tree house: This childhood classic can be built in the back garden, 
a nearby park or even indoors with some rugs, pillows, chairs and a touch of 
imagination.

5. Bobbing for apples: Fill a bucket with water and apples then hone your 
skills ahead of Halloween by seeing who can catch the largest number of apples 
in their mouth, while keeping their arms behind their backs.

Old-school classics


1. Pogo stick race: See who can bounce on their stick the longest without 
toppling off. And why not create a racetrack with obstacles, such as pillows to 
jump over, chairs to dodge and objects to catch?

2. Hose limbo: Turn your garden hose on full blast and put your thumb over 
half the top to create a jet stream. Then each time the group walks under the 
water you lower it. The losers are the ones who are wettest.

3. Poohsticks: Everyone lines up along one side of a bridge and, on the call 
of "'Poohsticks", drops their sticks into the water. The winner is whoever's 
stick is first to float under the bridge and emerge on the other side.

4. Conker Wars: Two players, each with a conker threaded on a piece of string 
or shoelace, take it in turns to hit each other's conker, until there is only 
one conker left. Kids will enjoy hunting for the conkers outside too.

5. Paper aeroplane competition: Get the kids to decorate their creations with 
coloured pens and maybe even some glitter – then you can score the planes for 
their design as well as how well they fly.

• The Brownlee brothers are ambassadors for Warburtons Half & Half range. 
Visit their scrapbook atwww.facebook.com/warburtons 
<http://www.facebook.com/warburtons> for half-term inspiration
 