
Fourteen years after his biggest sleeper hit was shaken from its slumber by 
Jeff Buckley,Leonard Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> 
saw Hallelujah claim the No 1, No 2 and No 36 spots in the UK's Christmas top 
40 yesterday.

As expected, Alexandra Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke>, winner of this year's X 
Factor, stormed into the top spot after selling 576,000 copies of her cover of 
Hallelujah in the last week.

In second place - a mere 495,000 copies behind Burke - was the late Buckley's 
interpretation of the song, which was propelled past Leona Lewis's cover of 
Snow Patrol's Run by an internet campaign masterminded by music fans who feared 
that Burke would desecrate Cohen's 1984 anthem.

Thirty-four places behind Buckley, at an appropriately elder-statesman-like 
pace, marched Cohen with his original, at No 36 in the charts.

According to the Official Chart Company, two versions of the same song have 
not taken the top two spots since Tommy Steele and Guy Mitchell managed the 
feat with Singin' The Blues, in January 1957.

Cohen's triple success was all the more remarkable, given that Hallelujah had 
never before charted in the UK top 40. Burke, too, has pulled off a few firsts, 
with Hallelujah becoming the fastest-selling single by a solo female artist, 
comfortably outstripping the 571,000 copies that Lewis - who won ITV's X Factor 
in 2006 - sold of A Moment Like This in December 2006. Burke's cover also 
doubled the weekly download record that Lewis set then, selling 289,000 digital 
copies.

Burke has now enjoyed the biggest one-week sale of any single this year - and 
the largest since Shayne Ward took theChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> No 1 in 2005 by selling 
742,000 copies of That's My Goal.

Take That are also likely to be brimming with festive cheer after claiming the 
No 1 spot in the Christmas album charts with The Circus, which has had 1.13m 
sales in the three weeks since its release.
 