
Ghana's president, John Kufour, has been in Italy all week for a conference 
with the world food programme. But that didn't stop him hooking up with his 
country's football team for a lengthy video chat that was broadcast ad nauseam 
on GTV, "the station of the nation". With the entire squad and backroom staff 
gathered in front of a giant screen, the president assured the Black Stars: 
"Know that if there is anything you need, you will get it. All Ghana expects of 
you in return is to beat Cameroon soundly."

 The players whooped, then Michael Essien overcame a fit of the giggles to 
reply: "Your Excellency, thank you very much, we are ready to do the job. We 
will make the nation proud". There followed 15 minutes of singing and dancing, 
President Kufour clapping along when not twirling a Ghana flag like a parade 
baton.

 This is what Cameroon are up against today: a host nation that believes it is 
its destiny to lift the trophy for the first time since 1982. French 
authorities projectedLa Victoire est en Nous on to the Arc de Triomphe after 
their World Cup win in 1998 - Ghanaians, by contrast, have basically been doing 
the same thing since the start of the tournament.

 Their refusal to let this destiny escape them was a big factor in Ghana 
overcoming the concession of an early goal and the expulsion of captain John 
Mensah against Nigeria in the quarter-final. And beating their biggest rivals 
with just 10 men further bolstered the Black Stars' belief that this is their 
year - both because it was a fine feat in itself, and because the last time 
Ghana beat Nigeria in a competitive match was in 1982, when they also came from 
a goal down; and that was in the ACN quarter-finals too. And Ghana went on to 
become champions for the fourth and, as things stand, last time.

 If there's one Black Star who personifies what can be achieved with drive and 
determination alone, it is Junior Agogo. His touch is diabolical, but through 
mighty willpower and, in fairness, huge physical power, he has led the Ghanaian 
line effectively, scoring twice in the tournament so far and becoming a 
national hero in the process - and a sex symbol! 'JUNIOR THROBS GHANAIAN 
WOMEN', roared one local headline this week, and the evidence comes before each 
match: when the players' faces appear on the giant screen as the teams are 
being announced, thunderous cheers greet Essien and Sulley Muntari - but when 
Agogo appears, squeals of pleasure resound around the ground. When he 
celebrated his winner against Nigeria by removing his top to flash his rugged 
torso, ladies swooned - and men harrumphed. Agogo's dynamism is sure to trouble 
a decidedly ropey Cameroon defence. As will Asamoah Gyan's speed.

 Thing is, Ghana's defence is suspect too. With Mensah suspended, Claude Le 
Roy really only has one specialist centre-back in the squad and he, Shilla 
Illiasu, has been out injured for weeks. He resumed training a few days ago but 
is he ready to be cast straight into an African Cup of Nations semi-final where 
he'll have to mark Samuel Eto'o, the most prolific scorer in the competition's 
history? That's what Le Roy must decide.

 Slotting Essien in at centre-back may be a better bet, though that is 
obviously not his best position. Against Nigeria he was excellent there, while 
Sulley Muntari and Laryea Kingson both showed they can orchestrate matters well 
and Anthony Annan confirmed that he has been one of the finds of the tournament.

 As for Cameroon, who knows what Otto Pfister will do? He has some 
high-calibre midfielders in Achille Emana, Jean Makoun and Stephane Mbia, but 
his erratic placing of them means it's impossible to be sure that he won't 
nullify their strengths. What we can be almost certain of, however, is that 
Cameroon will continue to try to get the ball to Eto'o as fast as possible, 
aiming punts and long throws to Mohamadou Idrissou's head and hoping their star 
man picks up the pieces.

If they do take that approach, rather than one that's more likely to pull a 
makeshift defence out of shape, they'll be playing to Ghana's defensive 
strengths. And not to those of Samuel Eto'o. The fact is that though he's the 
top scorer, Eto'o has been peripheral to most of the matches he's played so 
far, alienated by base tactics. Use the speed of Epalle (especially on John 
Painstil) and slipperiness of Eto'o, Emana and Makoun, and Cameroon have a 
chance.

 Cameroon finished their quarter-final against Tunisia clinging on for dear 
life. Though it was they who scored in extra-time, it was the Tunisians who 
looked fitter and stronger. That is almost unheard of for a Cameroon team and 
suggests that the disjointedness borne of their lack of preparation for the 
competition has sapped their strength. This has probably been exacerbated by 
the mandatory arguments over bonuses which broke out yesterday. In such a 
state, galvanised Ghana are the worst possible opponents right now.
 