
Angela Smith, who appears poised to resign from the government over plans to 
abolish the 10p tax rate, is a hard-working but not attention-seeking MP who, 
before today's events, seemed to be heading towards a junior ministerial post.

She was parliamentary private secretary to the chief secretary to the 
Treasury, Yvette Cooper, an unpaid post, but one that often leads to early 
promotion as a fully fledged minister.

Smith, 46, the MP for Sheffield Hillsborough, was born in Grimsby and spent 
her early life there. Subsequently she attended Nottingham University, gaining 
a first in English.

From there she went to Cambridge, working towards a PhD, but moved to 
Sheffield before the course was completed.

In Sheffield she became a lecturer at Dearne Valley college, teaching English 
to 16-year-olds, before leaving in 2003.

Smith joined the Labour party at the age of 16 and campaigned for Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in the 1979 general election.

While at Cambridge she stood twice, unsuccessfully, for a seat on the council. 

She had more success in Sheffield. In the mid-1990s, she took the Broomhill 
ward from the Conservatives, and in 1998 she became chairman of the finance 
committee, guiding the city through difficult years.

When Labour lost control of the city in 1999, she became opposition 
spokeswoman on education, and in 2002, when Labour regained control, she was 
appointed cabinet member for education.

Under her leadership, Sheffield became regarded as one of the leading 
education authorities in the country. She was a member of Sheffield council for 
18 years.

She entered parliament in 2005, winning Hillsborough with a majority of more 
than 11,000.

Smith is recorded as having voted in 84% of divisions, a figure considerably 
higher than the average.

Her abilities were quickly spotted and she soon became parliamentary private 
secretary to Cooper, who was then minister of state for housing and planning.

When Cooper later entered the cabinet, Smith continued to be her PPS. 

She lives in the constituency, and is married with a stepdaughter. She is a 
keen supporter of Sheffield Wednesday.
 