
One of the questions Lost in Showbiz is most often asked is: do all 
celebrities know each other? The answer, of course, is yes. And, with the odd 
exception,Elton John <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> is 
godfather to all their children. He also organises all interventions. Gordon 
Ramsay does the cooking (except at the interventions, where they send out 
for Mr Chow).

It’s like Karen says in GoodFellas: “We always did everything together and we 
always were in the same crowd. Anniversaries, christenings. We only went to 
each other’s houses. … And when we went to the Islands or Vegas to vacation, we 
always went together. No outsiders, ever. It got to be normal.”
 Models reunited … Cara Delevingne, Gigi Hadid and Kendall Jenner at Harry’s 
do – as posted on Hadid’s Instagram account. 
Swiftly, then, to the 21st-birthday celebrations of One Direction’s Harry 
Styles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/harry-styles>, which were held in the 
city of Los Angeles at the weekend. They attracted people known to be Harry’s 
friends – your Alexa Chungs, your Kelly Osbournes, your second-tier Kardashians 
– as well as a whole host of people known to be celebrities: your David 
Beckhams, your Chris Martins, your James Cordens, your Tom Morellos out of 
Audioslave and Rage Against the Machine (raging at it from within it that 
night, presumably), your Courteney Coxes, your Cindy Crawfords. Even that 
weirdo blogger whom Tulisa was found to have punched last year (“The reasons, 
we understand,” remarked a judge) was there. I imagine Elton sent his apologies.

In fact, given the reports that Harry FaceTimed his mother so she could watch 
him blow out his candles,  the only omissions I could make out were Simon 
Cowell, Salman Rushdie, Stephen Hawking, and Bono – who presumably have their 
monthly movie club on that night, and were ensconced round Simon’s watching The 
Sorrow and the Pity. Don’t even countenance the idea that Bono wasn’t invited, 
because such a snub would surely have prompted him to cast a spell putting all 
of us to sleep for 100 years.
 Harry’s birthday cake, taken from Rita Ora’s Instagram feed. 
Thus the notices for Harry’s party were suitably admiring: “Harry Styles’s 
 21st birthday was the most A-list event,” panted Grazia. “Now THAT’S a party!” 
judged the Daily Mail. “EVERYONE rocked up,” ruled the Mirror.

Well, quite. In fact, so comprehensive and exaltable is the social circle of 
theOne Direction <https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> star that I 
wonder whether that GoodFellas quote really does Harry Styles the justice he 
deserves. On reflection, we’ll ditch it in favour of something Clive James 
wrote of Stefan Zweig. “Everyone who mattered  in the European cultural world 
knew [him]. It was one of his gifts. He believed in the sociability of  the 
civilised.”

Let us believe in the sociability of the celebrified, and accept that old 
friends are nothing more than a civilian affectation.
 