
Paul Puopolo has played the game of his life and led Hawthorn to another AFL 
great escape. Puopolo was best afield with five goals, including three in the 
last quarter, as the Hawks stole a three-point win overAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> in a Friday night special. The 
17.10 (112) to 17.7 (109) win is their third three-point win in as many weeks.

Hawks re-sign coach Alastair Clarkson until the end of 2019 AFL season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/22/hawks-coach-alastair-clarkson-signs-three-year-contract-with-afl-club>
Puopolo is still somehow an underrated player and has never had a Brownlow 
Medal vote. That will almost definitely change after Friday night. The Hawks 
were 15 points down with seven minutes left and Adelaide looked to have done 
enough.

But Puopolo soccered through a goal, Cyril Rioli snapped truly and then a 
speculative Sam Mitchell kick went inside 50m. It ended up with Puopolo, who 
won a free kick for in the back, and he kicked truly to put the Hawks in front. 
Adelaide won the centre bounce with 18 seconds left, but the Crows could not 
take a mark in the frenetic last few seconds.

Puopolo had 23 disposals – 17 of them contested – and six tackles. Adelaide 
captain Taylor Walker took an outstanding mark at 26 minutes against two 
opponents, but he crucially hit the post.

While the Crows will rue a lost opportunity, they lost no friends with a 
strong performance against the league’s benchmark team. Adelaide’s defence in 
particular was outstanding. First, the Crows opened upHawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> out the back and then nearly 
strangled them in the second half.

It quickly became apparent this would be no repeat of the last time they met, 
when the Hawks smashed Adelaide by 74 points in a semi-final. Eddie Betts, 
whose struggles against Hawthorn were well-documented this week, kicked the 
opening goal in the first minute and had three for the quarter as the Crows 
broke the game open.

They led by 24 points during the opening quarter, achieving the rare feat of 
opening up Hawthorn’s defence. The Hawks predictably hit back and there were 
seven changes in the first half, with 10 goals apiece. First Hawthorn and then 
Adelaide had the lead in the third term as the scoring dried up and team 
defence dominated.
 