
An Egyptian airstrike has killed the head of the Islamic State affiliate 
behind scores of deadly attacks on security forces and thesuspected of downing 
a Russian airliner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/isis-possible-culprits-suspected-plane-attack>
, the army has said.

A posting on the Facebook page of the Egyptian military’s chief spokesman, 
Brigadier General Mohammed Samir, said Abu Duaa al-Ansari was killed in an 
operation south of the Egyptian coastal city of el-Arish.

Several senior aides and at least 45 other militants were killed in an 
operation carried out jointly by the air force and the anti-terrorism squad, 
according to Samir’s statement.

Since Egypt’s military overthrew the country’s Islamist president, Mohamed 
Morsi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi>, in 2013, jihadis have 
led an insurgency against the army and police involving daily attacks in north 
Sinai.

Most of the attacks, which have killed hundreds of policemen and soldiers, 
have been claimed by “Sinai Province”, the Egyptian branch of Isis. A military 
source said that Ansari was the group’s “number one” leader.

The name of Abu Duaa al-Ansari is not widely known and had not been previously 
mentioned as that of the leader of the Sunni militant group, which was known as 
Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, or Soldiers of Jerusalem, before it swore allegiance to 
the Isis group fighting in Syria and Iraq.

The army’s statement said dozens of others were “targeted with precise hits” 
in the operation against the group’s strongholds in the south and south-west of 
the Sinai city of el-Arish. The operation destroyed depots where weapons, 
ammunition and explosives were stashed, it added.

The military has poured troops and armour into the peninsula where security 
forces have been battling a jihadi insurgency since the former army chief who 
became Egypt’s president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, ousted Morsi more than three 
years ago. But the jihadis have remained defiant and kept up attacks mostly 
against the security forces using roadside bombs and ambushes. They have also 
targeted Egyptian Christians and have claimed attacks on foreigners and 
diplomatic missions, including last year’s attack on the Italian consulate in 
Cairo

In 2015 they the group also claimed to have beheaded Tomislav Salopek, a 
Croatian man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/isis-egypt-affiliate-posts-image-purporting-show-beheading-croatian-tomislav-salopek>
 who worked for French geoscience company CGG, after abducting him on a road 
running from the west of Cairo.

The group also claimed responsibility for bombing a Russian airliner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/egypt-plane-crash-bomb-jet-russia-security-service>
 carrying holidaymakers from an Egyptian resort last year, killing all 224 
people on board. The group said it had smuggled a bomb on board at an airport 
in the south of the peninsula.

The army has regularly announced the death or capture of jihadis, who have 
often claimed their attacks were in retaliation for a police crackdown that has 
killed hundreds and left thousands in jail since Morsi’s removal from power.

The arid and rugged Sinai peninsula borders Israel and the Palestinian Gaza 
Strip. El-Arish is the provincial capital of North Sinai where the jihadis are 
active.
 