
Lucky stands back from his patient, flashes a big smile in my direction then 
laughs "Yes I suppose I am lucky, but maybe my patients are not". Located in 
the north of Malawi, Embangweni District Hospital serves a population of over 
100,000, yet has a solitary doctor. Lucky works as one of only eight clinical 
officers in the hospital, a job similar to a junior doctor in the UK, and has 
moved to the area from the capital city. When complimented on his commitment to 
this rural community a smile again dances across his face. "This isn't rural" 
he says "some people travel for hours to reach this hospital".

Malawi, like many African countries, has suffered from poor health service 
delivery for decades. It is difficult for residents in the UK to imagine 
travelling for hours via public transport, or days if this journey is 
undertaken by foot, just to arrive at an understaffed medical facility. In 2011 
Malawi employed only two doctors per 100,000 of its population. Compare this to 
the 250 doctors per 100,000 of the British population and the limits of 
Malawi's health system, both for practitioners and patients, are put in even 
more stark contrast.

In Embangweni, even once patients have arrived at the hospital the chances of 
seeing a doctor are remote to say the least. Lucky, struggling to work through 
an ever expanding clinic says "If you do see the doctor you will not be awake, 
even the clinical officers spend most of their time in surgery". Achemwemwe, 
heavily pregnant, was able to afford the bus fare to travel from her local 
village to the hospital. However, she has been sitting in the "waiting room", a 
cluster of people under a mango tree, for hours. She glances at the hospital 
and without a trace of frustration explains "If I do not see the doctor today 
then I will have to stay in Embangweni and hope my time will come tomorrow". 
Glancing down at her gravid abdomen Achemwemwe exclaims "Zimachitika!" which 
loosely translates 'it happens' reflecting the de facto attitude to healthcare 
in Malawi.

Clinical officers across Africa have improved service delivery in areas such 
as obstetric surgery and anaesthesia but they are not the silver bullet. Their 
prominence in African health systems came in part as a response to the "brain 
drain" in which doctors and nurses trained locally, moved to the West for 
employment. Clinical officers complete a three year training programme and 
although part of the medical profession, have no formal equivalent position in 
the West, resulting in higher domestic retention.

There are disadvantages in employing medical personnel with less training 
however. Lucky explains "We are seen as doctors and when we are busy there is a 
big pressure to act like doctors". There have been reports of misdiagnosis, low 
motivation due to a narrow career progression, or of referral bottlenecks where 
clinical officers, unable to diagnose adequately, simply represent an 
additional level of referral. Achemwemwe, who appears ready to give birth any 
second, after finally seeing a clinical officer says "I have now seen one 
doctor, but he says that I must wait for another".

Health programmes for diseases such as malaria and TB are in vogue, but 
investment in health workers remains insufficient to meet the needs of local 
populations. Lord Nigel Crisp, former Chief Executive of the NHS and now a 
prominent adviser on international health, advocates a response to what he 
terms as the "Health Worker Crisis". He writes, "About 135,000 trained health 
workers have left countries in Africa in the last 35 years. 1.5 million are 
needed there today. If every African health worker returned home it wouldn't 
even deal with 10% of the problem". The World Health Organisation have 
estimated that 4.3 million extra health workers globally will be needed if the 
UN's Millennium Development Goals are to be achieved.

One solution to this problem could be from task shifting the roles of health 
professionals beyond the medical profession. The training of advanced nurse 
practitioners is shaping healthcare delivery in the UK; however in Africa where 
this practice could fill necessary gaps, it has been chronically nascent. 
Unlike in the case of clinical officers, training nurses serves to increase 
their motivation by broadening their scope of practice, but the problem of the 
brain drain is a continuing complication. Plus, with only 46% of nursing posts 
filled at Embangweni it is hard to see how staff could be released from their 
current duties for further training. Many western countries have developed 
bilateral agreements with African countries in an effort to encourage 
retention. One good example is the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) agreed in 
2004 between the UK and South Africa towards this aim. Since the MoU was 
agreed, stories of success are emerging with hundreds of South African nurses 
having returned from the UK to practice again in the country of their birth.

In Mpasazi, a remote village in the Embangweni catchment, small changes are 
making the biggest difference. Joyce, a community health worker, does not get 
paid, but receives a wholesome meal for her day's work. She is one of a growing 
number of voluntary health workers carrying out vital tasks in rural areas. On 
a trip to the village you are greeted by hundreds of voices singing in distinct 
African harmony. This is not a form of entertainment but is spreading public 
health messages. Community health workers in rural African settings have been 
increasing for several decades, and creativity in the tasks that they do and 
the roles they fulfil have led to countless improvements in public health 
delivery. Community health workers like Joyce who are seemingly indefatigable 
are oiling the cogs of weary health systems across Africa. Nurses are ready to 
expand their practice, but the opportunities are limited. And for clinical 
officers like the ever smiling Lucky, if he is to progress in his career he 
needs to continue living up to his name.
 