
I wish I could tell you the title of the book that changed me, but I can’t. In 
fact, I’m hoping that you can tell me. My searches over the years have revealed 
nothing. Did I imagine it? Could I have written it in my own fevered head? No, 
I remember it as clearly as anything from my childhood.

One of the functions of private boarding schools is to insulate their pupils 
from the world, ensuring that they remain embedded within the culture and 
interests of their caste. They sustain a political milieu so consistent that 
there is little chance of escaping from it. The children inducted into this 
system absorb the dominant mores without becoming aware that there might be an 
alternative.

Were these schools to do otherwise, I expect that the parents would ask for 
their money back: I doubt that anyone sends their children to such places in 
the hope that they will emerge fluent in the tenets of socialism. We should not 
be surprised to discover that the products of this system sometimes seem to be 
crassly insensitive to the lives and the needs of other people; it is not 
difficult to emerge from such schools with the conviction that other classes 
(and the other gender) are an alien species. Until the moment at which I read 
the book whose name I don’t know, there were no countervailing influences in my 
life.

At my first boarding school, which I attended from the age of eight, all the 
books had to pass through the hands of the headmaster before they were returned 
to the boys. If they survived his scrutiny, they reappeared with his initials 
on the inside page. I still possess one or two of them, including my worn copy 
ofLaurie Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/20/laurie-lee-centenary-birth-english-travel-writer-walking-robert-macfarlane>
’s As I Walked Out One Midsummer Morning, and one of theRomany books by George 
Bramwell Evens <http://www.valleystream.co.uk/romany-bbc.htm>, both of which 
also had a profound effect on me. I don’t know what criteria the headmaster 
used; the only books of mine that were confiscated were someWilbur Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jan/15/wilbur-smith-portrait-artist> 
novels my father mistakenly sent me when I asked forWillard Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jul/20/conservation-willard-price-adventure-books>
.

It is not difficult to emerge from such schools with the conviction that other 
classes (and the other gender) are aliens

But there was one place where, through some oversight, the writ of the censor 
did not run: the school sanatorium. The boys named this place Egypt, after the 
seven plagues. (It turned out to be appropriate, as the entire school twice 
went down withbacillary dysentery 
<http://www.healthcommunities.com/diarrhea/what-is-bacillary-dysentery-shigellosis.shtml>
, probably due to the disgusting conditions in the kitchens. After the 
sanatorium filled up, the dormitories were commandeered as sick rooms; then, on 
both occasions, the school had to be evacuated.)

Egypt was run with the utmost austerity by a sister who appeared to have 
learned her bedside manner in a prisoner-of-war camp. All patients were starved 
for the first 24 hours, to weed out malingerers. But somehow the books that 
Egypt contained had slipped past her. She was not the reading type, and I doubt 
she had ever noticed them. In a dusty box in the sanatorium cupboard there was 
an eclectic range of literature, some too young for us, some too old. But among 
them was one that, I believe, helped to change the course of my life. And I 
have no idea how it ended up there.

Written, perhaps, by an Italian communist, the book told the story of a boy in 
a plush apartment in Rome, who became dimly aware of the people, far below, on 
the streets. Among them was a boy of his age, who survived by collecting 
cigarette butts to extract scraps of tobacco.

Somehow the boys got to know each other. Together they absconded, and ran away 
into the country, where they lived off the land, stealing grapes and sweetcorn. 
The pair exchanged the stories of their lives, and the rich one discovered that 
while he enjoyed great material privilege, he also lacked freedom. When he 
returned home, he emptied his father’s cigarettes out of the window of the 
apartment.

I soon came to see myself as the boy throwing the cigarettes out of the window.

The book was illustrated in watercolours, beautifully evoking the canyons of 
the city, the streets submerged in blue shadow, their inhabitants reduced to 
ghosts, and the sere, sun-baked countryside that seemed so appealing in the 
throes of a winter fever in that cold white sickroom.

I first read it when I was eight, then again every time I was sick. I soon 
came to see myself as the boy throwing the cigarettes out of the window. 
Perhaps, being ill, hungry, lonely and vulnerable, I was especially 
susceptible. It was the first glimmer of political awakening I experienced.

Of course, it took me a long time to make sense of that awakening, to step out 
of the isolation in which we had been kept, and to begin to recognise and 
respect other people. But I wonder if I would ever have done so had it not been 
for that book. Would I have been equally receptive to political challenge had 
it arrived in a different form, at another time?

Or did that nameless book, appearing at a moment of nakedness, arouse 
something that would otherwise have remained dormant? If you recognise the 
description of the book, please let me know.
 