
Before my son Christopher became addicted to heroin, I never imagined I would 
lose him to an overdose. I knew of heroin only through television and movies, 
and Christopher was not the same asthose addicts – glassy-eyed, gaunt, 
desperate.

No, Christopher was handsome – he looked and smelled like an Abercrombie 
model. And he was my best friend. Once addiction grasped hold of him, though, 
he became somebody else. And one symptom of his disease is that he didn’t even 
seem to care.

How opiates became the love of my life | Alisha Choquette
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/how-opiates-became-the-love-of-my-life>
When he was in high school, Christopher had routine surgery and was prescribed 
opiate medication to manage his post-surgical pain. He took them. When that 
prescription was gone, he said he was still in pain, so the doctor wrote a 
second prescription. We didn’t realize then that the pain was from withdrawal, 
not surgery.

He broke his nose later that year and had to have yet another surgery, 
followed by another 10-day opiate prescription. That’s when his true addiction 
started. From there he started buying pills off the streets. When things 
started disappearing from our home – he was stealing to support his habit – he 
moved in with my mother. It started a pattern: he would come back home while he 
was sober but once he relapsed he would have to move out again. That meant that 
he had periods of homelessness.

He also had periods of sobriety. After his first trip to rehab, he was sober 
for almost 10 months. Then he overdosed. I found him in his room unresponsive 
and performed CPR on him myself. He went to rehab 22 times, and was brought 
back from overdose five times. Every time he relapsed, I watched a piece of my 
child die.

His longest sober period was about two and a half years. He was doing great. 
He was working two jobs, had a girlfriend and a beautiful apartment near the 
beach. While at work during his third shift, he suffered a panic attack and 
passed out. He was taken by ambulance to the ER, and they pumped him with 
Xanax. That made him relapse – again.

Throughout Christopher’s 15-year addiction, I often found myself yearning for 
the boy he was before this disease took hold. His once sun-kissed face was now 
burnt from his stints of homelessness, when his only refuge from the sun was 
shading himself under trees. Summer had been his favorite season, but now it 
caused him to suffer.

If we want to end the opiate epidemic, prisons are a good place to start | 
Chandra Bozelko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/08/opiate-epidemic-prisons-drugs>
It stayed warm into autumn in 2014. Christopher had been sober for seven 
months, and he always called me before and after his meetings, which he 
attended twice a day. The evening before I was going to pick him up to take him 
to the first day of a new job, though, he didn’t call.

I called him numerous times that night, thinking, maybe his phone is dead. I 
called the next morning hoping to hear his voice, but he never picked up. So I 
drove like a madwoman to the sober house.

I waited outside for what seemed like a million years. When a resident came 
out, I ran up to him and kept screaming: “Is he dead, is he dead?” He wouldn’t 
answer me. His face was blank. I sat vigil on the sidewalk for over three hours 
waiting for the coroner to put my son in a body bag and carry him away. They 
refused to bring him out until I left.

My son did not want to die, but he knew it was coming. He told me I would 
outlive him. He was 33 when he had the fatal accidental overdose.


My son is both the love of my life whom I’ll never see again and a statistic 
of a bad system. He wanted and begged for recovery, but he was set up to fail.

In the state of Connecticut, where I live, there are not enough beds in the 
facilities to serve the number of people who need treatment, and an addict has 
to relapse after a 30-day treatment three times before being eligible for a 
longer-term placement. Christopher did, but “longer term” meant just three to 
four months, and that’s not even close to being long enough to fix all that is 
broken inside the mind, body and soul of an addict. Christopher was again on a 
three- to four-week waiting list for a bed when he died.

Christopher’s struggles aren’t unique. Some 44,000 Americans die from drug 
overdoses annually and, in 2013, about 316,000 people tried –and failed 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2015/05/24/addiction-treatment-shortage/27181773/>
 – to get treatment. This shortage has led to widespread government efforts to 
devote more money to addiction treatment, including the Comprehensive Addiction 
and Recovery Act, which the US Senatepassed 
<http://www.providencejournal.com/news/20160310/us-senate-passes-drug-addiction-treatment-bill-co-sponsored-by-sen-whitehouse>
 on Thursday. If passed into law, it would authorize the government to give 
states more grants for treatment. That needs to happen as soon as possible so 
that no other mothers have to endure what I went through.

The last happy memory I have of Christopher was from four days before he died. 
We had a picnic at the beach. It was a bright, windy day, and the seagulls were 
stealing our food. We laughed and laughed, and I remember staring at his 
beautiful dimples as though I were snapping a photo, trying to memorize every 
subtlety of their curves.

I remember them most strongly every morning when I wake up and face anew that 
I will never get to see him again.
 