
On 30 June 1978, my brother Georgie died of a presumed heroin overdose in a 
hallway in West Harlem. He was 40.

The day he died wasn’t only my 12th wedding anniversary, but also the last day 
of my medical internship at Harlem Hospital. I was filled with a sense of 
relief; no more routinely spending 100 hours in the hospital each week. I was 
one day from starting my residency and not being the lowest person in the 
medical hierarchy.

Street opioids are getting deadlier. Overseeing drug use can reduce deaths | 
Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/26/street-opioids-use-deaths-perscription-drugs-fentanyl>
The relief evaporated when Georgie was brought in and I had to go to the 
morgue to identify his body. Yes, it was one of those days – you know: the best 
of times, the worst of times.

By now, the statistics are nauseatingly familiar to many of us: an estimated 
2.1 million Americans are addicted to opiates, a half million to heroin alone, 
and opioid overdose has become the number one cause of accidental death. Unlike 
in the 1960s and 70s, when opioid use was often dismissed as an inner-city 
sociopathy, today four out of five heroin users started out by misusing 
prescription opioid pain medication. Healthcare providers in the US wrote 259m 
prescriptions for opioid pain medication in 2012 alone. But heroin is cheaper 
and easier to obtain over the long-haul.

As the 38th anniversary of my brother’s death approaches, I can’t help but 
reflect on that cold summer day in the Harlem Hospital morgue, a day I had long 
dreaded but expected – and an experience that still happens to far too many 
families of users.

Georgie started experimenting with heroin when he was about 13, first 
snorting, then skin popping (subcutaneously) and finally main-lining 
(intravenous use). Thereafter followed a life of recurring imprisonment and 
so-called rehab. In 1970, when I worked as a social worker in lower Manhattan, 
I was able to help Georgie get on the Methadone Maintenance Program, which was 
beginning to expand in the US at that time.

In my non-professional life, I was a major collector of jazz and R&B albums, 
but Georgie stole many of them to buy drugs. While he was on methadone, 
however, instead of stealing my stuff, Georgie and I would spend a lot of time 
drinking a little wine, smoking a little ‘erb, talking about jazz and attending 
outdoor concerts during the summer. My brother even found work in construction, 
and our mother always knew where he was at night – he never left home except to 
go away when he was using street drugs. It was the season of light, the spring 
of hope.

One day we were in our mother’s apartment and Georgie was, as usual, being the 
good natured playful nuisance. My mother, exasperated, said, “Georgie stop it, 
will you. What are you going to do when I’m dead?” to which he replied, “Well 
I’ll just jump in the grave behind you.”

Little did I know at that time how prophetic these comments were. In 1976, my 
mother died, and Georgie lost his principal source of support. A two-year 
period of increasingly self-destructive behavior followed. He soon got off the 
methadone program, began drinking heavily and eventually returned to heroin, 
with the accompanying return to the criminal justice system.

Here's what it's like to lose your child to heroin addiction | Lisa Cote Johns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/heroin-addiction-drugs-death>
 In that era, unlike today’s, there were few politicians talking about heroin 
addiction as a disease needing treatment rather than punishment. The 1970s was 
the time of Nixon’s misguided War on Drugs and the punitiveRockefeller laws 
<http://www.npr.org/2013/02/14/171822608/the-drug-laws-that-changed-how-we-punish>
. There was little talk of thepain and heartache of opiate addiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/heroin-addiction-drugs-death>
; tragedy was only perceived by the friends and family members of the junkies.

Now, unlike when Georgie struggled with addiction, lawmakers are pushing to 
alleviate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/opioids-bipartisan-issue-now-white-people-use-epidemic>
 opioid addiction. Obama hascalled 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/03/29/fact-sheet-obama-administration-announces-additional-actions-address>
 for 540,000 providers to complete opioid prescription training within the next 
two years. His executive order this past March also includes specific actions 
to improve access to treatment, form partnerships between pharmacy, provider 
groups and college and professional sports organizations to increase 
educational messaging, as well as doubling the number of doctors throughout the 
country who are certified to prescribe buprenorphine maintenance treatment. And 
a proposal to nearly double funding for the issue is poised to go up for a 
Senate vote.

This is, at the very least, a step in the right direction to reduce the death 
and suffering from opioids. Because it is clear that the popularity of pain 
killers is due to their efficacy – they work. Whether the pain is from cancer, 
bone breaks or whether it’s psychological in nature, it is likely to be forever 
a part of the animal experience. As long as there are substances to relieve 
that pain, they will be used. That’s why our historical emphasis on prohibition 
will never work.

And those policies have had very personal consequences. When Georgie died, I 
lost a brother, friend and confidante. But I still see him everywhere, through 
the person of similarly addicted, similarly damaged, if not broken, men and 
women. This has enabled me to develop the empathy which is required to have a 
positive impact on those who come to me seeking care. But it’s also endlessly 
heartbreaking.
 