
The global car rental industry is speeding into a hostile takeover battle as 
rivals Hertz and Avis tussle to snap up their lower cost US competitor, the 
Dollar Thrifty automotive group. Avis has slapped down a $1.3bn (£833m) bid in 
an attempt to thwart a deal struck in May under which Hertz agreed to buy the 
business for $1.2bn.

Based in Oklahoma, the Dollar Thrifty group was originally part of the 
Detroit-based carmaker Chrysler but became an independent entity in 1997. The 
Dollar brand is particularly strong in North America, but its Thrifty division 
has 983 locations in 75 countries, including Britain.

Analysts say surging second-hand car prices and a rebound in travel activity 
as the global economy recovers have made Dollar Thrifty attractive. A 
specialist in the leisure market, the company tends to target holidaymakers and 
rents out vehicles at cheaper rates than the Hertz or Avis brands. "Avis and 
Hertz are very similar in going after higher-end business clients," said Fred 
Lowrance, an analyst at Avondale Partners in Nashville. "Dollar Thrifty caters 
to leisure, price-conscious travellers."

Hertz's original deal was worth $41 a share, while Avis's offer came in at 
$46.50 in a mixture of cash and stock. The battle has sent Dollar Thrifty's 
shares soaring from $25 at the start of the year to just over $49 today. "The 
recovery is helping everybody – we've seen a return in all sorts of travel," 
said Lowrance, adding that cutbacks in Detroit's car output have pushed up 
second-hand car prices, helping rental firms that sell vehicles after a few 
years of use. "Dollar's earnings have really benefited from a surge in used car 
values."

Avis has cried foul over lock-up provisions in Dollar Thrifty's deal with 
Hertz, including a $44.6m break fee and a clause giving Hertz the right to 
match any competing offer. Both potential combinations are being scrutinised by 
the Federal Trade Commission on competition grounds – Hertz is America's second 
biggest car rental company, Avis ranks third and Dollar Thrifty is fourth. All 
are smaller than the market leader, Enterprise.

If successful, both buyers would see savings in combining back-office 
functions and pooling the fleets of various brands. Chris Agnew, an analyst at 
MKM Partners, said Hertz and Avis tended to have spare vehicles at weekends 
that could be useful to Dollar Thrifty's leisure market.

Agnew said competitive concerns could be overcome: "Car rental companies 
compete directly at the point of sale and they have very transparent pricing on 
the internet. If you go down to three big companies that control all the big 
brands, I don't think it becomes uncompetitive."
 