
A high court judge has criticised the Metropolitan police for failing to 
adequately investigate allegations of phone hacking by theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>.

Mr Justice Vos made the comments at a pre-trial hearing for the legal actions 
by former Sky Sports commentator Andy Gray and actorSteve Coogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/coogan>. They allege that the tabloid 
ordered private investigator Glenn Mulcaire to hack into their mobile phone 
voice messages.

"The Metropolitan police had not done an appropriate job in analysing 
phone-hacking... information in their possession," Vos said. "They didn't 
disclose highly relevant information."

He added that Scotland Yard had failed to fully comply with court orders 
requiring it to produce copies of Mulcaire's notes relating to the two men.

The Met reopened its investigation last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/26/phone-hacking-investigation-reopened-by-police?INTCMP=SRCH>
 after fresh evidence emerged about the extent of phone hacking at the paper.

Vos also criticised the News of the World for doing "absolutely nothing" to 
shed light on which journalists at the title might have worked with Mulcaire.

"They may have been hacking into Mr Gray's phone for months and months," he 
said. "I don't know. We just don't know the full extent of it."

He said the paper's publisher News Group, part of Rupert Murdoch's media 
empire, had failed to hand over any material, including reporters' notebooks, 
in the course of the police investigation.

News Group argued in court that the case bought by Gray and Coogan is 
"speculative" because it cannot be proved Mulcaire listened to voicemail 
messages belonging to either of them. The company concedes he made notes of 
their numbers and account details.

"To say the whole case is speculative is frankly nonsense... to say there is 
not a shred of evidence is going too far," Vos said.

He cited evidence handed by the Met to Gray which showed Mulcaire kept 
detailed notes of his mobile phone account number, pin number and password.

Vos said: "Give me one possible reason why Mr Mulcaire would have held those 
pieces of information for any other reason [than to hack into Gray's phone]."

Mulcaire was jailed for six months in January 2007 for illegally intercepting 
voicemail messages belonging to members of the royal household and several 
other well-known figures.

The paper's former royal editor Clive Goodman also received a shorter jail 
term after pleading guilty to the same charge.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 