
My favourite rock photograph was snapped through the window of the control 
room at CBS’ studios in New York in 1965. Most of the people in the picture are 
clean-cut, Kennedy-era technicians. Standing in front of them is a curly-haired 
young man wearing shades and sporting a harmonica holder, who seems to have 
come from another dimension. The young man isBob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> and he, the musicians, management 
and technicians are listening back to Like A Rolling Stone, which is the song 
they’ve just recorded.

If ever a picture deserved the caption “What did we just do?” it’s this one. In
Highway 61: Fifty Years On (Sunday, 1.30pm, Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4) Andy Kershaw re-examines the Bob 
Dylan album that changed popular music and his life. He talks to the surviving 
musicians who played on it, most of whom had only the foggiest notion of what 
they were expected to do. Famously, when Al Kooper played that organ part – 
which musicians ever since have attempted to imitate – it was the first time he 
had played a keyboard on a session. Kooper thanked his lucky stars that the guy 
who played it before him had left the thing on, otherwise he wouldn’t have had 
the remotest idea how to fire it up.

If this week comes up with a comic drama better than the first episode of John 
Finnemore’s Double Acts (Friday, 11.30am, Radio 4), I shall be amazed. It stars 
Celia Imrie and Charles Edwards as strangers on a train travelling between 
Paddington and Oxford in the 1930s. He is a buttoned-up, tweedy Englishman on 
his way to deliver winter underwear to his young son at his boarding school. 
She is an effusive American academic who considers silence an abomination. Both 
the story and the way that it’s delivered amply illustrate how certain 
attitudes of mind can magically conjure something from nothing.

In The Loss Of Lostness (Saturday, 10.30am, Radio 4) Stephen Smith wonders 
whether in our connected world we’ve lost the ability to go off the grid, 
whether for a couple of hours in an old record shop with musician Graham 
Gouldman or for a couple of days into the Empty Quarter of Arabia with Will 
Self. Gouldman is so inspired by the idea he writes a song about it, which is 
the way he has greeted every fresh experience since writing No Milk Today in 
1966. Stephen Bayley remembers going for aimless drives with his father back in 
the days when it was still known as “motoring” and you actually did it for 
pleasure. Bayley gets my Word Of The Week award for describing the old car as 
“bimbling away nicely”.

Arthur Miller’s father Isidore came to the United States from Europe alone at 
the age of six. He never learned to read and write but had his own chauffeur 
until the depression took everything away. The first part ofThe Life And Times 
Of Arthur Miller (Monday, 2.15pm, Radio 4) – a collaboration with LA Theatre 
Works – recounts these events as the BBC marks the centenary of Arthur’s birth. 
There’s also a series ofThe Essay (Weekdays, 10.45pm, Radio 3) in which 
playwrights, directors and actors talk about what’s involved in staging his 
plays. At a recent Radio 3 press event,David Suchet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-suchet>, who plays Miller’s 
best-known character Willy Loman in a new production ofDeath Of A Salesman (
Sunday, 9pm, Radio 3), talked about how at drama school he was encouraged to 
put more expression into his voice by rehearsing radio plays while sitting on 
his hands. A good tip. Zoë Wanamaker plays his wife Linda and Howard Davies 
directs.
 