
What, actually, is the moral of all this social atomism – this isolation of 
human beings from one another which I've been suggesting is Thomas Hobbes's 
central theme inLeviathan 
<http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/phl302/texts/hobbes/leviathan-contents.html>? 
How does it tell us to live?

That question has been answered in a lot of different of ways, some of which 
would have surprised Hobbes very much Among these answers, perhaps the most 
politically influential one today is, depressingly enough, that given byAyn Rand
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayn_Rand>, the American prophetess who, in the 
mid-twentieth century, preached extreme individualism as the gospel of 
laissez-faire capitalism. Her message is "the concept of man as a heroic being, 
with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life". Rand's books strike 
many people as crazy, yet they have unquestionably had great influence, no 
doubt because she simply carried ideas already active in the US to their 
logical conclusion. Apparently Alan Greenspan was her ardent disciple, so was 
Ronald Reagan, and a survey in 1991 declared her bookAtlas Shrugged 
<http://www.librarything.com/work/2791688> "the most influential book on 
American lives after the Bible". And the recession has again shot her books to 
the top of the best-selling list.

Her theme is the rugged excellence of "men of the mind" - certain grand 
individuals such as tycoons and inventors - and the need to prevent the state 
from ever interfering with them by regulation. Clearly identifying herself, and 
her readers, with these people, she writes that they should never to be 
expected to consider the rest of the populace, who are "parasites" and 
"mindless hordes".. She denounces all altruism as evil. "The man who speaks to 
you of sacrifice is speaking of slaves and masters, and intends to be the 
master.'

Thus she shares Hobbes's belief in a war of all against all which is 
essentially about power, but she reacts to it in exactly the opposite way. 
Hobbes, who had some experience of actual literal warfare, was chiefly struck 
by the thought that wars can kill you. So he stressed above all the need to 
keep alive by supporting the social contract. He thought firm government so 
necessary that he advised people to accept their sovereign's imperfections 
rather than make things worse by revolt.. Thus (as several commentators on this 
series have pointed out) he really has no useful advice for how to deal with an 
intolerable government.

Rand, by contrast, reacts to the idea of a universal war by saying "OK then, 
let's win it". She counters Hobbes's over-confidence in despotic government – 
which belonged to the age of the Sun King - by an even greater overconfidence 
in the modern American myth of the heroic individual. This may have something 
to do with her having been originally an immigrant from the USSR, but it also 
clearly feeds on the kind of paranoiac anti-government resentment by which 
unlucky people often relieve their feelings, rather than trying to find 
effective ways of political action. Noam Chomsky has called her deeply evil. 
This may seem like taking her too seriously, but we surely do need to take 
seriously the ideas that she stands for.

Here, then, are two individualistic prophets recommending quite opposite 
paths. Politically, they represent the two ends of the spectrum of 
Enlightenment social thought, the totalitarian end and the anarchistic one. 
Rand, however, adds to the anarchistic end something peculiarly American – an 
apparently infinite faith in the market's power to produce good out of 
disorder. Today, of course, this is beginning to expose the craziness of the 
doctrine as market mechanisms explode all around us. Nobody knows whether 
Rand's many readers today have noticed this or whether they still simply take 
her books to show that the government is always wrong.

What chiefly emerges here is surely how important it is, when we are 
confronted with these extreme and simple doctrines, to understand the guiding 
visions behind them and in particular, just what danger they aim to protect us 
against. Rand's guiding vision is clearly what used to be called infantile 
omnipotence – the childish hope of total control – and her doctrines have great 
influence because that hope is still always strong in the depths of our hearts. 
The fear that haunts her is the fear of having to obey someone else. This fear, 
intelligently disciplined, does indeed lie at the root of our emphasis on 
liberty, but there is nothing to be said for erecting it on its own into a 
"heroic" stance of self-admiration.

Hobbes too touches a deep and legitimate chord in invoking our fear of death 
and destruction. Both these themes have a real and serious place in our lives. 
But neither of them can possibly rule us altogether, as these prophets want it 
to. And the notion of a war of all against all which underlies both of them is 
really quite unrealistic. Yet it still seems to be quite influential – a point 
which we will have to discuss further later.

For Mary's previous blogs on Thomas Hobbes, visit the How to believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/how-to-believe> series page
 