
His fans portray him as a plucky leader defending his small country from 
Russian aggression. The Kremlin depicts him as an unstable madman, fond of 
chewing his own tie. But now Hollywood is to give its own take on Mikheil 
Saakashvili, Georgia's controversial pro-US president, in a new movie set 
during last year's Russia-Georgia war.

The leading US actor Andy Garcia <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-garcia>
 plays Saakashvili in the film, which began shooting in Georgia earlier this 
week. Directed by Renny Harlin – whose previous credits include the 
testosterone-filled blockbuster Die Hard 2 – the movie follows the fortunes of 
an American journalist and his cameraman caught up in last August's fighting.

The PR-savvy Saakashvili has given the project his full support and on Monday 
even loaned Garcia his cosy presidential office in Tbilisi, complete with 
leather armchairs, books and a Georgian flag.

Garcia, as Saakashvili, discusses tactics with his aides amid Russian 
invasion. The Georgians have also lent the Hollywood producers fighter planes, 
helicopters, and tanks.

Observers suggest that Garcia – who starred in The Godfather: Part III – bears 
a striking similarity to Georgia's dark-haired 41-year-old leader.

"Garcia does it very well," Zaza Gachechiladze, the editor-in-chief of the 
Georgian Messenger newspaper said.

"He's taken on some characteristic features of the president, like when he 
moves he walks in a very hasty manner."

Asked whether the film would bear any resemblance to the real events of August 
2008 – when Georgia's ill-fated attempt to recapture the breakaway province of 
South Ossetia led to a punitive Russian invasion – Gachechiladze said: "It 
depends how the film ends. We are a defeated country. We should admit that."

He added: "The ruling administration has hinted it wants this film to be shot."

Saakashvili is still locked in a bitter propaganda battle with his Kremlin 
enemies over who bears responsibility for the war. A much-publicised EU report 
by the Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini last month blamedGeorgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/georgia-news> for starting it. But it also 
chastised Russia for supplying passports to the South Ossetians, as well as for 
other misdeeds. Earlier this year Russia's state television premiered its own 
film about the August war, reflecting the official Russian version of events.

Speaking in August, Harlin described his so-far untitled film as an anti-war 
drama. "I've waited a long time to find something with substance and reality," 
Harlin said. "I want to make a film that says something about the human 
condition, and even if only a few people see this and feel its impact and its 
anti-war message, then I will have done something that's important and I will 
be proud of it."

"Our main concern was to show war as a bad thing," executive producer Michael 
Flannigan said, according to Reuters. "We had an opportunity to make a really 
anti-war film."

He said the budget was "pretty restrictive", in a departure from Finnish-born 
Harlin's previous big-budget action thrillers which include Die Hard 2, 
starring Bruce Willis, as well as Cliffhanger, starring Sylvester Stallone.

Writing in his blog <http://rennyharlin.wordpress.com/>, Harlin last week 
described the film's screenplay as "brilliant", and said he was busy casting 
local Georgians for several roles.

"Spent today with fighter-jets, and make up effects. Things are getting better 
and better," he said.

The young and upcoming British actor Rupert Friend plays the lead as a US 
journalist caught between compassion for the war's victims and telling the 
truth.

Yesterday downtown Tbilisi ground to a halt as the filmmakers recreated a 
patriotic rally on 12 August 2008, marking the end of the war. Demonstrators 
celebrated Georgia's victory – even though it wasRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> that actually won. The leaders of 
several eastern European countries appeared with Saakashvili in front of 
Georgia's parliament building in a show of solidarity against Russian attack.
 