 Sitting outside a cafe in London's Holland Park and peering down the street, I 
barely recognise Ashley Jensen when she comes breezing along like a girl from a 
Sixties Ryvita ad in a summer frock and bobbing blond curls and sunglasses on 
top of her head. I only know her as the dumpy and socially gormless Maggie in 
Extras, Ricky Gervais's sitcom about struggling actors, so not surprisingly I 
have been looking for someone dressed as a Bosnian refugee. Plus, this is the 
woman to whom, in one episode of the last series, Gervais's character Andy 
awards a not very morale-boosting six out of 10 for looks, and who in another 
is turned down for a part on the grounds that her breasts aren't up to the job.
So it takes some moments - hovering in the no-man's-land between saying hello 
and working out whether it would be gallant, crass or just plain creepy to tell 
her I was expecting someone a bit less gorgeous - before I manoeuvre us to an 
indoors table, order her a mineral water, and ask more cravenly whether she 
ever gets spotted by fans in the supermarket.

'Absolutely not. Which is brilliant. I suppose that's because I don't look 
like the character,' she says in the gentle accent of her native Dumfries. 'I 
don't have her mannerisms. She's a bit like ...' She assumes Maggie's unhopeful 
expression, mouth turned down, shoulders collapsed in defeat. Now that is her.

She smiles a smile less toothy than Maggie's as she cites the benefits of 
playing an unglamorous character, chief of which, she says, is that you don't 
have to hold your stomach in when you're filming after lunch. Needless to say, 
she doesn't look as though she has to.

Jensen was the surprise hit of Extras, written by Gervais and Stephen Merchant 
following their massive success with The Office. She won two British Comedy 
Awards and a Bafta nomination for her portrayal of Maggie, a girl in need of a 
nice man but with none of the guile required to catch one. And though the big 
awkward laughs come from those familiar Gervais-Merchant triggers of race, sex 
and disability (Maggie trying to extricate herself from a date with a man with 
a club foot was especially excruciating), it's the unusual interplay between 
Maggie and Andy that sets the mood. 'It is unusual,' she agrees. 'To have a 
male-female double act in comedy is rare. And for them to have a relationship 
and not to have some kind of unrequited love or sexual undertone is also rare.'

Theirs is the chemistry of unequal underdogs (Gervais has compared them to 
Laurel and Hardy), a companionship in which folly and failure are suffered not 
just with brute candour - Andy's response of first resort - but empathy and 
even tenderness. Wasn't there a bit of hand-holding at the end of the first 
series? 'That was almost changed at the last minute because we thought it was a 
bit schmaltzy. But that's why I love working with Ricky. He's not afraid of a 
wee bit of schmaltz or romance. And there is a kind of softness about some of 
the writing. Even in the way they've written Maggie. A lot of people can't 
believe it's two men who wrote that character.' I ask whether, in the wake of 
The Office, it was daunting to come into a series that carried so much 
expectation. It should have been, she says, but it wasn't. 'The nice thing was 
that there was absolutely nobody from The Office involved. It was an entirely 
new crew, so we were all starting off from the same point. There were no 
cliques. There was none of that "Oh, remember the times we had in The Office! 
Wasn't it fun?"'

It helped too that Jensen had done time as a jobbing actress in the years 
after studying drama at Queen Margaret University College Edinburgh in the late 
Eighties (she's now 37). Her first part was at the Citizens Theatre in Glasgow, 
playing 14-year-old Betty Paris in The Crucible. 'I only got it because I was 
cheaper than employing a child with a chaperone,' she says. Since then she has 
appeared in dozens of TV series and stage plays - even so, one of her two 
Comedy Awards was a prize last year for 'Best Newcomer'. 'I've served my 
apprenticeship. I've done the thing where you all pile into the back of a van, 
go to a wee village hall in the middle of nowhere, put the set up, do the show, 
take it down, get in the van and go somewhere else. And I've done going on to a 
TV set for a day, where you're entering a world where everyone else knows one 
another and you've got to walk on to Prime Suspect and shout at Helen Mirren. 
So I've done that. I've built up gradually to where I am now.'

Did she always expect a 'breakthrough' part one day. 'No, I really didn't. I 
was never ambitious. I didn't feel I needed that kind of affirmation. I wanted 
to be an actress because I enjoyed acting, playing different parts, having an 
audience's reaction. Then on television, doing something like Clocking Off and 
watching it and seeing how they've edited it.'

She came to London in 1997. 'After three years of working in Scotland I wanted 
to be a bit scared. I quite like scaring myself from time to time, putting 
myself in an environment I'm not entirely sure of.' Extras is famous for its 
A-list celebrity cameos - Ben Stiller and Samuel L Jackson last year, and in 
the new series Orlando Bloom, David Bowie and Chris Martin. Is that scary 
enough for her? 'Sometimes when you meet these people, you're thinking - please 
don't let me down, please don't be awful.' But everyone loves it and enters 
into the spirit. It's so relaxed. And at the end of the day, they are just 
people. There are moments when I go [gulp] ... David Bowie! Or when I'm 
standing at the bus stop next to Orlando Bloom's huge Pirates of the Caribbean 
poster, and I'm thinking, "My God I was talking about dogs with him just 
yesterday.'

Now Jensen has found something new to scare herself with. Between the two 
series of Extras she landed a part in a new American sitcom, Ugly Betty, and is 
heading for Hollywood. The show, adapted from a Colombian TV soap and produced 
by the actress Salma Hayek, follows the fortunes of a dowdy but efficient 
secretary surrounded by fashionistas at a glamorous New York publishing house. 
It is already an international phenomenon, with scores of countries - India, 
Germany, Russia among them - buying up the format and creating their own Betty.

Jensen, who plays the heroine's confidante, still can't believe her luck. She 
happened to be travelling in California with her boyfriend, and her agent 
thought it a good idea to say hello to a few people. 'Extras was on HBO at the 
time, and in my naivety I hadn't realised the impact in America of Ricky and 
the show - which they loved. So when I met people, they were saying, "Oh my 
God, I'm so obsessed with you!" And I'm like, "Who me? I'm just here on my 
holidays."'

She acquired an American agent ('Samuel L Jackson's, I hasten to add'), who 
summoned her back in January for the pilot season. 'It was frantic,' she says. 
'We were getting scripts at, like, nine in the evening, and my agent would be, 
"You got a meeting at one o'clock, you gotta go to CBS, you gotta meet blah, 
blah, blah and blah, you gotta try to learn the script ..." And so they'd send 
me the script and I had to rush around to all these meetings, and I can't even 
drive very well, and I'm like, "Oh my God", because I had to get all these taxi 
cabs, and I got to know all the drivers ...' She mimics their rapid-fire 
conversation in hilarious Mexican and Russian accents.

Anyway, she says, Ugly Betty was one of the scripts she was shown. And she 
gets to play a Scot. 'God knows how they got away with that. It was supposed to 
be American but then we met, and they said: "We love your accent. It's so 
exciting!"'

So that was it. She did a screen test ('terrifying'), met Salma Hayek 
('lovely') and shot the pilot. Now they have 12 episodes to film. It airs in 
the States in October, and if the big guys like it, they get to make another 
10. Or is it 12? She's already finding the mechanics of American TV production 
totally baffling. But the show has been sold to Channel 4, and for the first 
time she's feeling the momentum of the project.

'All of a sudden I'm on this rollercoaster. It's really exciting. I never even 
thought I'd be going to Hollywood, and this show ... it's so colourful and 
glitzy and fun. I've seen the pilot. I look like I've been superimposed on to 
it. I'm like, what the hell am I doing there? I'm from this wee town in 
Scotland! It was weird enough being in EastEnders ...'

'It could be huge,' I say. 'You could be a big star.'

'Or it could go tits up ...'

Does she think about success? 'Not really. I was taken by surprise with Extras 
- the whole fuss around it. But nothing's really changed in my day-to-day 
living. Everything is just another step.'

Until now, 'day-to-day living' has meant working 'civilised hours' on Extras, 
pootling around Portobello Road market on Saturdays, walking her dog Barney in 
Hyde Park and living the regular life with her boyfriend Terry Beesley, a 
fellow actor whom she met in King Lear at the Royal Exchange in 1999. Now the 
two of them (along with the dog) are off to LA.

'We're not very actorly actors. Not hugely indulgent. Though speak to me in a 
year's time when we get back.' She laughs. 'On the other hand, we could be back 
by December.' She smiles. 'Things are always possible, but even now I think, I 
might never work again. With me, it's always, what's the next job? I'm still a 
bit like that. I probably always will be.'

Extra time

Born Dumfries 11 August 1969; grew up an only child in Annan.

University Speech and drama diploma at Queen Margaret College, Edinburgh.

Career before Extras Two feature films, 28 TV dramas and 23 stage appearances.

Career after Extras Two British Comedy Awards; nominated for a comedy Bafta; 
starred in Eleventh Hour, an ITV drama, with Patrick Stewart.

On her Extras character Maggie 'She's basically a woman from 1955 dropped into 
2005. Which makes her a great part to play.'

Fiance Fellow actor Terry Beesley. 

Coming Up Moving to LA for a part in US TV series Ugly Betty.

· Extras starts on Thursday on BBC2.

· Phil Hogan's latest novel, All This Will Be Yours (Abacus £7.99), is out in 
paperback this week
 