
Newly exposed by Pulse  
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/commissioning/commissioning-topics/long-term-conditions/investigation-the-luxury-goods-purchased-with-nhs-money/20010961.article#.Vem1z2RVhBd>
 magazine, the shopping habits of some NHS patients, using their personal 
health budgets, recall nothing so much as the MPs’ expenses scandal. True, 
nobody seems to have suggested buying a duck house with public funds, or 
pornographic videos – or cleaning out a moat, like the latest ornament to our 
upper house, Douglas Hogg. But to judge by what patients were authorised to 
buy, there seems no reason why MP-style amenities would not also qualify, 
supposing a patient could make a plausible case for duck or moat therapy. One 
patient, after all, used the budget to build a summer house.

Other investments included horse riding, a satnav, computer games, a holiday 
with a dog, theatre tickets and music lessons. Patients funded by NHS Kernow 
clinical commissioning group spent £2,080 on aromatherapy. Nene and Corby 
funded Indian head massage therapy. Although personal health budget funds have, 
as anticipated, largely been used to pay for personal assistants and 
conventional care provision – and it is, in any case, a scientific fact, 
confirmed by some of the world’s leading garden centres, that the right summer 
house can be a marvellous contributor to general health and wellbeing –Pulse’s 
revelations have aroused clinical concern, as well as some derision.

The scheme is alleged to be draining money from conventional services, at a 
point when NHS England estimates it needs to make£22bn of efficiency savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/23/nhs-miss-22bn-efficiency-target>
. But even if the NHS were rolling in money, or now intent, as a matter of 
policy, on empowering all patients to self-medicate with consumer goods and 
pampering treatments, there would surely be a case for these innovative health 
aids to be subject to same kind of evidence-based scrutiny that Nice applies to 
orthodox treatments, such as cancer drugs.

Dr Richard Vautrey, the deputy chair of the BMA’s general practitioners 
committee, toldPulse: “We continue to have real reservations about this scheme 
and the inappropriate use of scarce NHS money on non-evidence-based therapies.”

In defence of the scheme, however, NHS England cites an early, independent 
evaluation, suggesting that personal health treatments are cost effective. And 
although this is, in turn, challenged by anotherstudy  
<https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/personalization-of-health-care-in-england(cb184b0c-03fb-4cea-b9ed-93fc4e36cb6e).html>
, champions of garden shed and satnav therapy could surely argue that, so long 
as NHS England persists in funding a single homeopathy practitioner, it is 
unfair to pillory personal health budgets for, among other things, waste, 
wishful thinking and the adoption of commercial consumer values.

There is no denying, after all, that, correctly used, an NHS-funded satnav 
will help a patient get about. An NHS-funded horse can be told to giddy up. NHS 
homeopathy, although this probably needs no rehearsing here, supplies patients 
with preparations so dilute as to have no active properties. Were they to 
contain active ingredients, these would, anyway, be pointless, poisonous or 
both, thanks to homeopathy’s founding principle, “like cures like”.

For insomnia, the remedy might be owl. Because owls stay up at night. Though 
the approach can equally be compensatory. One homeopathic remedy for emotional 
distress is human placenta. In the case of insomnia, if I understand this 
correctly, preparation by the NHS’s homeopathy suppliers involves diluting owl 
with water until no owl remains, the theory being that the water still carries 
the curative memory of owl. The “remedy” was recently investigated by theGood 
Thinking Society 
<http://goodthinkingsociety.org/good-thinking-investigates-homeopathic-pharmacies/>
, founded by Simon Singh, which is currently campaigning, with considerable 
success, to end NHS protection for homeopathy.

Even at this reduced, but alas not homeopathic level, as Good Thinking argues 
of NHS support, “its symbolic value cannot be underestimated”. At a time of 
financial difficulty and alleged scientific rigour, NHS England reserves a cosy 
corner for magical thinking, justified only by consumer choice. Why, in the 
circumstances, shouldn’t the anonymous Nene or Corby patient have his or her 
Indian head massage? While superstition thrives within the NHS maybe it is 
equally unfair to ridicule the police for wasting time on psychics.

That homeopathy, having been repeatedly discredited  
<http://edzardernst.com/2015/03/the-final-verdict-on-homeopathy-its-a-placebo/> 
in academic studies and dismissed by both the chief medical officer and theBMA, 
which called it “witchcraft” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/jun/29/ban-homeopathy-from-nhs-doctors>
, should still be funded by NHS is less about owl feathers, more a commentary 
on ignorance and interference at the highest level. Publication of Prince 
Charles’s “black spider” memos confirmed that Charles had, as suspected, been 
pressurising ministers to spend on homeopathy. It is a mercy, given the 
effectiveness of his interventions, that Charles has not, so far as we know, 
conducted similar operations on behalf of haruspication for use in military 
planning or, for the benefit of the Treasury, alchemy.

He got a smarmy reply from Andy Burnham in which the current leadership 
contender volunteered – why? – to come and discuss complementary medicine. He 
signed off: “I have the honour to remain, Sir, your Royal Highness’s most 
humble and obedient servant.”

Charles finds an instant ally in Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/08/jeremy-hunt-homeopathy-studies-chief-medical-officer>
, who asked the chief medical officer, Dame Sally Davies (who describes 
homeopathy as “rubbish”), to commission expert reviews of commercial homeopathy 
studies. And in the Conservative MP David Tredinnick, Charles has an 
astrology-loving homeopathy fanatic embedded, as if by some ancient Hahnemannic 
curse, on the Commons health select committee. Alas, he also haunts the 
chamber, howling untruths that would endanger public health if most people were 
as credulous or “lunatic” (Lord Winston) in their views as he. “Macular 
degeneration,” he once told an unimpressed Yvette Cooper, “can be treated by 
using homeopathic remedies, by herbal remedies and by using acupuncture.” It is 
one of the joys of the discipline that no disease, not even Ebola, is ever too 
challenging for homeopaths to admit defeat. Snake venom, apparently.

In one respect, a person’s support for state-funded homeopathy has enormous 
practical use, as an immediate signifier of gullibility, fiscal 
irresponsibility and scientific illiteracy, to the point of disqualifying them 
from public office. For some critics, the irrationality is “typically Tory”. 
Either way, any weakness for Hahnemann has been unforgivingly portrayed in the 
cases of Charles andHunt 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn22241-hail-jeremy-hunt-the-new-minister-for-magic/>
. For many of us, these boobies might as well agitate for a Loch Ness monster 
tsar, an inquiry into alien abduction, a state astrologer, in the mould of 
Nancy and Ronald Reagan’s.

It is intriguing, in the circumstances, how many sceptics must, in the case of 
another NHS homeopathy enthusiast, Jeremy Corbyn, have made a different 
assessment. Perhaps his many good points should protect him from thederision 
aimed 
<https://statsdontlie.wordpress.com/2007/11/19/responses-from-signatories-to-homeopathy-motion/>
at fellow signatories to early-day motions composed by David Tredinnick. One in 
2007, calling for recognition of NHS homeopathy hospitals; another effort in 
2010, asserted its effectiveness. Asked about the latter, Corbyntweeted back: 
<https://leftoutside.wordpress.com/2010/03/06/> “I believe that homeo-meds 
works for some ppl and that it compliments ‘convential’ [sic] meds. They both 
come from organic matter.”

“I believe”. For those who can accept this justification for pouring precious 
NHS funds into the cognitive vacuum that is homeopathy, the first thing on 
Corbyn’s agenda, even before he expresses our regrets for the Iraq war, must be 
an apology, on behalf of all flexible sceptics, to his long-suffering fellow 
believer, Prince Charles.
 