
Cinemagoers around the world are lining up to see the new, highly acclaimed 
version of Roald Dahl’s children’s classicThe BFG from this Friday.

Now Britain’s tourism chiefs hope it will bring a surge in foreign visitors 
keen to travel to the film’s locations across the country. VisitBritain, which 
promotes the country to overseas visitors, believes thatThe BFG is one of a 
batch of new films, plays and experiences based on classic titles that will 
help sell the UK abroad. Thenew film version 
<http://media.visitbritain.com/?service=feature&action=show_content_page&language=us&feature=11891>
, which will be shown in cinemas from this week, is already the subject of a 
major promotional push to attract visitors from countries as diverse as 
Australia and Russia.

Directed by Steven Spielberg, and starring Mark Rylance as the Big Friendly 
Giant and Penelope Wilton as the Queen, the film, released on the 100th 
anniversary of Dahl’s birth, is expected to attract more visitors to locations 
where it was filmed, including the Angel of the North, Big Ben and the Isle of 
Skye. The film is also expected to see an increase in visitors to the Roald 
Dahl Museum and Story Centre in Buckinghamshire and to Cardiff, Dahl’s 
birthplace. The Welsh capital city will host a special theatrical event in 
September –“The City of the Unexpected” 
<http://www.roalddahl.com/blog/2016/april/roald-dahls-city-of-the-unexpected> – 
when its streets are given over to Dahl’s favourite characters. The weekend is 
part of 100 Dahl-themed events taking place across the UK this year.

David Rudd, professor of children’s literature at the University of 
Roehampton, said Dahl’s popularity had not waned since his books first came 
out. “We’re a couple of generations on now and people want to take his stories 
onward to share with their own kids and grandkids,” he said.

“Those who weren’t keen on reading stories to their children don’t mind 
reading Dahl because his stories are so rewarding in terms of the response they 
get from their child audience. The vulgar words and the rollicking, fast-paced 
stories are a dear to read.”

VisitBritain is spending £350,000 on a social media campaign to promote BFG 
locations to audiences in France, Canada, Australia and Russia and to sell the 
UK’s “giant” credentials to be a family-friendly destination.

Among new giant-themed visitor attractions being showcased this summer are the 
world’s highest trampoline – Treetop Nets in North Yorkshire; the world’s 
longest and tallest tunnel slide at the ArcelorMittal Orbit slide in the 
Olympic Park; the world’s tallest moving observation tower – the British 
Airways i360 in Brighton; and the world’s biggest bouncy castle at Camp 
Bestival, Dorset.

A more sedate celebration of England’s landscape is planned to coincide with a 
new film version of Arthur Ransome’s classic novelSwallows and Amazons, set to 
be released next month and starring Andrew Scott and Rafe Spall. VisitEngland 
is partnering with the film’s producers, Studio Canal, to promote the film, set 
in the Lake District, in a campaign that aims to celebrate the great British 
outdoors and encourage families to reconnect with the countryside. “We used to 
be embarrassed to look back at Englishness, but now we seem to think it’s OK,” 
Rudd said. “Ransome is opposite to Dahl – his books are quite a long read, 
nothing much happens in them – but it’s all based on character interaction and 
companionship. He looks at everyday life and brings specialness to it – 
cooking, sailing across a lake. It draws on similar themes toRobinson Crusoe.”

The Lake District is also the setting for the 150th anniversary of the birth 
of Beatrix Potter, best known as the author ofThe Tale of Peter Rabbit. The 
anniversary is expected to draw thousands to the World ofBeatrix Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/potter-beatrix> Attraction now staging a new 
musical,Where is Peter Rabbit?

On top of that, a spinoff from the Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> franchise – JK Rowling’s 
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them – will come out in November and is 
expected to trigger another wave of Pottermania.

“We know that just under half of our potential visitors to Britain say they 
are enthused by seeing Britain on film – it’s a really powerful driver,” said 
Patricia Yates of VisitBritain. “Those images you see of locations really make 
you want to go. With the films that we’ve worked on we’ve seen a real, tangible 
benefit.

James Bond’s Skyfall saw an upturn in visitors to Scotland while the Harry 
Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> franchise has had drawn 
crowds to Alnwick Castle in Northumberland. ThePaddington film has also done 
much to promote London abroad.

Tourists are coming from a number of unusual markets. The number of Chinese 
visitors to the UK has risen 46% year-on-year while the number of tourists from 
Saudi Arabia has increase by 24%. However, US tourists remain the key market. 
They are now worth £3bn to the British economy and are back at numbers not seen 
since 2001. Yates suggested that the falling value of the pound against the 
dollar is likely to increase their numbers this summer.
 