
Trawling the net for somewhere in Yorkshire, it looks as though a web designer 
with a penchant for out-of-focus thumbnail pictures and curly green type (which 
any editor knows is a no-no) has done a job lot for local hoteliers. I need 
divine intervention, but reach for the next best thing, an Alastair Sawday 
guidebook.

The Traddock (apparently a contraction of horse "trading paddock") is a 
10-room hotel with an organic restaurant on the edge of the Dales. It comes 
over as wholesome in the Sawday book but looks sumptuous when I check out its 
own website. They have definitely used a different web designer.

It's a mild late-summer evening when Tom and I pull up in the car park of this 
substantial Georgian house in the village of Austwick, four miles from Settle. 
Guests with dogs, welcomed here, are pottering on a large lawn next to the car 
park. Through the sitting room we go, busy with William Morris lemon trees. A 
sizeable curved sofa hugs a table strewn with glossy mags and a fire sizzles 
quietly. Tables are being laid in the dining room beyond - white napery, good 
glasses; it all looks a bit serious. Wish I'd packed more carefully - or just 
packed more.

Beyond the polished wooden reception is a tiny bar and another sitting room. 
As usual it's Tom's suitcase that gets carried upstairs, while I'm left to 
struggle with my small rucksack. Honestly, it's like going away with Zsa Zsa 
Gabor.

His room is blue and white, gently swagged and very pretty. Mine is pale gold 
and girly, with a rolltop bath at one end, shower room and walk-in wardrobe the 
other, a scattering of antiques, a decanter of sherry and, most exciting of 
all, a copy of autumn Vogue.

I make an executive decision to devour Vogue over Molton Brown foam in the 
bath later, hog the sitting room sofa after dinner, and enjoy the evening sun 
outside now in the best possible way - holding a G&T.

Yanking on a top long enough to disguise the fact I only have jeans, I collect 
Tom and we position ourselves at an outside table overlooking the lawn. Soon 
we're munching canapés and sipping drinks, brought in a trice as soon as staff 
have spotted us.

If you have ever wondered whether organic food really tastes any better, all I 
can say is eat here. No one cares about my jeans, they're concentrating on what 
we would like to eat. Every mouthful's a joy, from an amuse of beetroot and 
cucumber jelly with a little salty smoked salmon, to dark baked pigeon breasts 
on a bed of puy lentils ("Is that to represent the shot?" quips Tom).

From a pan-fried beef fillet with a scoop of watercress puree, finely chopped 
chestnut mushrooms and a potato cake to a cold soup of summer berries with 
basil panna cotta. We cheerfully nick stuff from each other's plates all 
evening while knocking back an organic cabernet sauvignon which is left for us 
to pour. "Just lovely," says Tom, polishing off pudding by - horror - licking 
his plate.

Waking early, I watch a mist lifting through the windows. By the time we hit 
the breakfast room, sunny and with painted panelling, it's clear we're in for a 
blazing day's walking (there's plenty of that round here - see The Grumpy 
Green, opposite).

Space prevents me extolling the virtues of breakfast or of the people who own 
this place - Jane and Bruce Reynolds - who are charming and dedicated to 
bringing their guests the best organic produce they can find - which even 
includes spirits at the bar. You'll just have to discover breakfast for 
yourselves.

· 01524 251224, austwicktraddock.co.uk <http://www.austwicktraddock.co.uk>. 
Small doubles from £95 B&B, £145 for standard double B&B (at weekends).

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>

• This article was amended on 27 April 2012 to update the prices
 