
Thanks to travel blog Holiday Pad, whose editor Garri Rayner has sent me 
details of a "decadent townhouse in York". Finding city-centre accommodation 
which doesn't cost the earth and is not part of some identikit hotel chain is a 
challenge, so I can't resist 10 George Street. But how good are selections on a 
travel blog?

Heather Robinson, the owner of this three-bedroom self-catering house in a 
pleasing street of Georgian terraces off Walmgate, is there to meet me when I 
arrive. The Robinsons are in the house renovation business, but this is their 
first foray into holiday letting.

I don't know if Heather normally does those bland magnolia backdrops that are 
paraded every day on TV property auction programmes, but if so, she's certainly 
gone off-piste this time.

Chatting in the dining room, which is knocked through to the sitting room on 
one side and, in classic terrace style, leads to the kitchen on the other, I 
reckon I can sum up this house in just three words: camp, Victorian and gothic.

Oak panelling, rich velvet cushions and silk drapes are joined by chandeliers, 
candles, baubles and trinkets. Forget minimalism, this is decorated in deep 
shades and bursts of bold wallpaper.

Upstairs, the bathroom has a sunken tub with a faux bookshelf surround 
(leather spines bought by the metre - clever) and a big walk-in shower, though 
I don't recognise the toiletries. A twin bedroom has cream metal beds and 
Kidston prints, the double a bateau lit beside a tailor's dummy in Victorian 
costume. It's sheer theatre, and there's more. Another flight leads to the 
attic, extended by a dormer housing a loo and free-standing rolltop bath (be 
warned, it's open-plan) and a carved four-poster.

Heather leaves, and I pick an unmemorable local bistro at which to eat - 
though I see plenty of other places to try. The highlight is sinking into one 
of the baths later to watch a crescent moon by candlelight as it hovers over 
the distant church tower of St Denys. But when I climb into the four-poster 
later, I hear crisp packets. Uh-oh. I know that sound. There's really no point 
buying expensive beds then ruining the effect with plastic mattress covers 
which guarantee a sweaty night. Confident I'm past the bedwetting stage, I whip 
it off.

It's so quiet in my luxe garret next morning (especially since the bed no 
longer crackles) that I can't quite believe I'm in a city. I try out the 
Whittards teas in the kitchen, wishing the bowl of plastic fruit was real and 
the M&S sliced was a fresh loaf from the local deli instead (some sausages 
wouldn't go amiss either, as Scott's, the famous butcher, is two minutes away).

Sitting by the open French windows to the courtyard garden I flick through the 
information leaflets, determined to find somewhere other than the Minster and 
Shambles to visit. I decide on the Treasurer's House, as it's easy to find.

Bought in 1897 by rich bachelor Frank Green to house his antiques collection, 
it's a treasure trove of tapestries, clocks, paintings and stunning English 
furniture. So I eschew the audio handset and chat to the volunteer wardens, who 
bring each room alive with their knowledge.

On my return, George Street now strikes me as a modern outpost of Frank 
Green's colourful creation, and one which, with a bit of fine tuning, could 
well achieve a commensurate level of luxury.

· (01484 841330, 10georgestreet.com <http://www.10georgestreet.com>). 
Two-night minimum stay, sleeps six, from £560. Also check outholidaypad.net 
<http://www.holidaypad.net>.

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>
 