
This week's B&B comes recommended by a reader who heaps praise on the 
breakfast and is clearly better at finding places than me. We drive in and out 
of the village of Brearton several times, having wilfully ignored my friend's 
satnav. By the time we discover the gadgetry is accurate, I've given in and 
phoned for help.

Next we're haring down a little road on to an estate, distant lights twinkling 
across fields shrouded in darkness. At the end of it we reach the illuminated 
homeliness of North Dockenbush.

Our host, Oliver Whiteley, shows us the dining room, sitting room and 
bedrooms. Plum, it says in gilt letters on my bedroom door, and Blue on that of 
my friend, Angela.

"My room has the first overhead lighting I've ever approved of," she says, 
leaving her pale haven of toile de Jouy to nose around the dark-walled expanse 
of Plum.

"That is a bed and a half," she says admiringly, counting no fewer than seven 
pillows. Mine does indeed seem to be the plum room. Nice bathrobe - plain 
cotton with a waffle lining and perfectly folded. Homemade biscuits accompany 
(Twinings) tea and coffee things, but Angela's far more interested in the cut 
glass and silver clustered in a corner. "Ooh this smells wonderful," she says 
opening a decanter of port.

We descend to sit on big brown sofas, in front of an impressive blaze, while 
Oliver brings tea and wine and tells us he has only been here a year and that 
the house, leased from a country estate, was "bloody horrendous" when he took 
it on.

He used to manage the Beaufort Polo Club in Gloucestershire before returning 
home to Yorkshire, and now keeps chickens and pigs (the dry-cured bacon at 
breakfast is from his traditional Saddlebacks) and breeds dogs. In stables out 
the back are his competition horses that guests - if sufficiently competent - 
may ride. Oh, and in his spare time he runs an events company with his sister.

"I've never stayed in a B&B ever," he tells us. "I don't give a monkey's what 
anyone else is doing."

He doesn't need to - he's getting it right. We're so cosseted it's a strain to 
go out, but the proximity of a foodie pub, the Malt Shovel, means Oliver 
doesn't do dinner (members of the Wolsey Lodge scheme, which he is, often do). 
Instead, he lays on transport - dropping guests off, while the pub staff (a 
family of opera singers) bring them back.

No impromptu singing at the Malt Shovel tonight (it can happen, we're told), 
and Angela's underwhelmed by her food, but not by my platter of smoked fish and 
meat from their own smokery and a fantastic lemon posset.

Brown fields, stark trees, a neat vegetable plot and snowdrops huddled against 
the hedges are revealed next morning. My bathroom is, well, just a bathroom, 
but there are nice big bottles of Molton Brown. Down in the dining room we're 
greeted by easy listening and a crackling fire. "I love this colour," says 
Angela, admiring restful green walls. She's not the only one. In the visitors' 
book someone has written: "My poor husband will now have to redecorate our 
entire house."

What of breakfast? From cut glass and refreshingly unclunky white china we 
sample fresh OJ, fruit salad and toasted bread from Betty's of Harrogate. When 
the cooked platefuls arrive Angela pronounces the bacon "delicious - what bacon 
used to taste like. Great sausage too." Scrambled eggs are perfectly soft and 
creamy. "What a good cook," she says, with a little sigh of contentment. "He 
really ought to think about doing dinner as well."

Remote enough to switch off completely, but only 10 minutes' drive from 
Harrogate.

• North Dockenbush, Brearton, Harrogate (01423 797 650, northdockenbush.co.uk 
<http://northdockenbush.co.uk>). Doubles from £85 B&B when you stay two or more 
nights, or from £90 for one. A member of Wolsey Lodges (wolseylodges.com 
<http://wolseylodges.com>)
 