
We miss the turning to the Woodlands Hotel, in Sandsend, on the wonderful 
coast between Scarborough and Staithes, because the only words we can catch, in 
the darkness, as we flash past signs on the road north of Whitby, are Valley 
Cafe, not Woodlands Hotel.

Eventually we nail the turn-off into a rough lane and a hidden valley, where 
the hotel has had new life breathed into it by the Clarke family who bought and 
refurbished it in 2008 and opened its restaurant (then the Valley Cafe, now 
simply the Woodlands restaurant) one year later. The Woodlands Cafe Deli opens 
in March.

Wow – I never knew North Yorkshire could be so colourful in winter. From the 
hallway we can see a dining room and bar – brilliant white splashed 
with powerful hues, from pink and orange Veuve Cliquot ice buckets to Designers 
Guild walls, served up to a mellow Paul Weller soundtrack. Beyond this, 
glimpses of a turquoise and gold sitting room.

Lizzie Clarke and daughter Natasha welcome us in. We're the only guests 
tonight – would we like to choose a room? The five bedrooms are not themed so 
much as lightly brushed with a style. We go for "Jasper" – Moroccan kilims, 
rattan blinds, an Eames chair and a supremely comfy bed. There's something of 
the B&B about being handed a breakfast form to fill in, though.
 Woodlands Hotel and Bistro in Sandsend, North Yorkshire. Photograph: Dominic 
Shaw - Shawimages 
In the absence of other guests, I cannot tell you about sound insulation, or 
service when things get busy, so let's cut to the chase. Dinner is served by 
the fire in the homely glamour of the sitting room. Chef Alex Perkins (who 
happens to be Natasha's fiance) attended the same catering college as 
celebrated chefs Andrew Pern and James Martin, we learn, as an amuse bouche of 
beetroot jelly with horseradish cream arrives. It's so good my bloke says, 
"ditch the spoon and just pour it in."

Then comes soused halibut in a tiny kilner jar studded with red chilli and 
carrot, sourdough and creamy artichoke, a juicy, delectable chicken pot au feu 
and 12-hour roasted lamb shoulder with "divine" mint sauce. The table is 
beautifully set, from the butter sprinkled with salt to the candle in a 
Billecart-Salmon bottle. Food presentation is faultless, and we love the winter 
wine list. It is a whistles blowing, klaxons blaring, corker of a meal and 
nothing short of a crime that on this November night, we have this dining room 
to ourselves.

I've been sitting on news of this little gem, in an area which is hardly 
brimming with enticing hotels, since November, because The Woodlands is shut in 
December and January. I have to query the wisdom of that – for one thing, it 
means no one enjoyed Alex Perkins' wonderful food over the festive season. 
Something is amiss with the branding too – a five-roomed property that calls 
itself a hotel. Do people know there is great food on offer to non-residents 
here? It was nothing short of a crime that we had the restaurant to ourselves. 
Wouldn't it make sense to come clean about the star turn – the food – call this 
a restaurant-with-rooms and stay open all year?
Gastrofile Try a helping of Victorian gothic drama in the tea room at La Rosa 
<http://www.larosa.co.uk/hotel/> hotel in Whitby.
• The Valley, Sandsend (01947 893438, thewoodlands-sandsend.com 
<http://www.thewoodlands-sandsend.com>. Double rooms £110 per night B&B. Expect 
to pay around £29 for three-course dinner, excluding drinks.

sally.shalam@guardian.co.uk

• This article was amended on 27 April 2012 to update the contact details and 
price
 