
"I think we go up there," says Tim, pointing up a muddy track. "They never 
mentioned that," I say, grumpily. "I'm right," he cries, spotting a tiny 
painted sign stuck in the ground (it's like a cartoon sign, which usually says 
"Mind the cliff", before a character hurtles over it).

Instead of a cliff we find stunning gardens, a tall house and, across a carpet 
of lawn, outbuildings beside a smooth, asphalt car park. Clearly we should be 
over there, but Clow Beck's award-winning garden is in the way.

We leave the gardens and spot a "reception" sign. Now we're in a restaurant 
with a stone fireplace, and set tables of encouragingly different sizes. Not 
just couples sitting in sepulchral silence here, then.

The owners, Heather and David Armstrong, appear. "You didn't come in that way? 
Oh, no ..." They explain with amusement that we've missed the proper driveway 
and taken the old one. "Satnav?" David asks. "Not exactly," I reply, shooting 
Tim a look.

Although Clow Beck House ("Clow" is pronounced as in "how" and the beck runs 
into the river Tees), calls itself a small hotel, it feels homely, like a B&B. 
The Armstrong family live in the main building, the 13 guest rooms are in the 
original house - a 30s bungalow - and those rustic-looking annexes across the 
garden (in fact, they are purpose-built).

We bring the car round. David whisks bags into our room, Heather's offering 
tea, though we have tea things - ooh, and biscuits - in our ground floor twin. 
I like our arched stone porch - rather continental - and the Chinese bedheads. 
We also have a small sofa and telly, well-proportioned bathroom (shower over 
the bath) with plentiful Penhaligon's toiletries and even an inflatable bath 
pillow. Hang on, what's through the other door? A tiny dressing room, with an 
iron, mini fridge, cotton wool and nail polish remover.

Despite having man flu, Tim's been quick off the mark with a tiny gold box 
which says "Welcome to Clow Beck House". By the time I spot it, the contents 
are one chocolate down.

Leaving him to his Lemsip, I walk along the beck to its confluence with the 
Tees. What a heavenly spot.

Then it's dinner. "I'd like all of it," says Tim nasally over a menu which 
seems to dare us to make utter pigs of ourselves. "If it's too fancy, plain 
food's no problem," says a line at the bottom. We'll take the fancy stuff, 
thank you, like creamy sweet red onion soup and hot smoked salmon and crayfish 
tails with prawns in seafood sauce. "In winter we serve braden rost with a 
whisky sauce," Heather tells us.

"They love their food here, don't they?" says Tim over "amazing" rack of lamb 
with minted port wine sauce. My fillet steak is from Northallerton, where the 
butcher hangs his beef for three weeks. Then blackcurrant and raspberry 
sorbets, which zing with homegrown fruitiness. Wish they sold these in tubs.

At breakfast, there is unusual triangular black pudding - from a small 
producer in Thirsk - on Tim's plate ("I'm feeding a cold"), along with 
Wensleydale back bacon and sausages from Skipton. Teas are from Bettys in 
Harrogate. It all adds up to a sense of place, of having travelled and finding 
things you can't at home, which is surely the whole point of going away.

· 01325 721075, clowbeckhouse.co.uk,  <http://wwwclowbeckhouse.co.uk>, Croft, 
near Darlington. Doubles £135 per night B&B. Expect to pay around £34 per head 
for dinner, excluding drinks. Further info atenjoyengland.com/stay 
<http://www.enjoyengland.com/stay>

• This article was amended on 27 April 2012 to update the room price
 