
We know that subscription video on demand (SVOD) is big business, but so many 
of the facts and figures are hazy. Netflix and Amazon reveal so little about 
their audience data – unsurprisingly, as big data is power in this world. 
Netflix's audience insights have led to confident and successful series 
launches, such as House of Cards and Orange is the New Black, where full series 
commissions were made from the outset, without a pilot. Similarly, audience 
insights were used by Netflix to target market House of Cards to its 
subscribers via10 different trailer cuts 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fgigaom.com%2F2013%2F02%2F12%2Fnetflix-ratings-big-data-original-content%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEHtnvnrx-_sVO3UO09ESkRbGlePg>
, depending on your past viewing habits on the platform. For example, people 
watching Bridesmaids or The Heat saw trailers featuring the show's female 
leads. Kevin Spacey fans were shown trailers focussing on him, while cinephiles 
had a version highlighting director David Fincher's influence on the show.

But new research from GfK reveals on Wednesday, for the first time, 
consumption data at a title level for programmes viewed on SVOD services in the 
US and UK – as well as key facts about why people sign up to the platform.

The pilot research consisted of parallel surveys conducted with 2,749 UK and 
2,866 USA SVOD subscribers, who kept a weekly diary of all viewing onNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>, Amazon Prime Instant Video and 
Huhu Plus in the UK and US, with fieldwork running between December 2013 and 
March 2014. Given the relatively small sample size, the results need to be 
taken with a pinch of salt but clearly demonstrate some trends that up until 
this point have been conjecture.

In the UK, Breaking Bad is a very clear winner as the most streamed programme 
during the 13 week survey period, with Dexter and Prison Break taking second 
and third, followed by Netflix's original commission, House of Cards, fourth. 
In the US, the top places are more closely fought, withHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> coming in just ahead 
of Breaking Bad, and Dexter taking third place.

Insight director for media and entertainment at GfK, Julia Lamaison, believes 
"broadcasters and distributors have, for some time, wanted audience data for 
OTT viewing of video content – particularly for SVOD services such as Netflix 
and Amazon Instant. The data shows the importance of drama series to these 
services, with six out of the top 10 titles driving consumption similarly in 
the UK and US."

The research also reveals that the top five reasons for subscribing are the 
same in both markets. In contrast to pay TV services, it is access to large 
libraries of content coupled with the ability to watch at any time and to watch 
multiple episodes in one sitting that is driving sign up.

Also of note is how these services have moved from niche to mainstream, 
appealing to young adults in particular.

I spoke with some online video experts for their take on the findings.

Alan Wolk <http://www.alanwolk.com/>, global lead analyst at Piksel 

"While Netflix has long claimed that shows like Orange Is the New Black and 
House Of Cards were hits, their unwillingness to provide actual information has 
left the industry sceptical. This study shows that those series are, indeed, 
the most popular on Netflix. It's also interesting to see what else is on the 
list: there are shows likeBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> that have benefited 
greatly from catch up on Netflix to then drive live tune in as well as shows 
like Family Guy and Parks and Recreation which don't need to be seen 
sequentially and can be enjoyed on their own, with viewers selectively picking 
their favourite episodes.

This indicates a dramatic shift in behaviour: people will watch TV as catch up 
(Breaking Bad) to discover new series, as binge – to discover series they 
missed while they were on air (Dexter), and series they loved whose appeal is 
evergreen (Family Guy). All three are equally valid ways people will consume TV 
content in the future and the same person may engage all three behaviors 
depending on their mood.

It's fascinating to see the degree to which the desire to binge watch has 
become a factor in people's decisions to pay for streaming services. Watching 
multiple episodes of a series on your own timeline is such a liberating 
experience and I suspect that it will only become more popular over time. There 
will be many instances where the linear schedule is still the preferred option, 
but having the ability to binge watch will remain a huge consumer preference.

Iddo Shai <https://twitter.com/iddoPoP>, director of product marketing, media 
and entertainment at Kaltura

Iddo believes that three key lessons come out of the survey:

1. Believe the hype, Netflix is hot 
"Hulu, Amazon, Crackle and Netflix have all been producing original content in 
last few years. Out of the four, only Netflix made it to the mainstream with 
not one but two shows. This is evidence of its ability to bet on the right 
pilots and also market them well to their audience. For a while now Netflix has 
wanted us to think of it as an HBO equivalent. It seems it's finally there."

2. SVOD could be Hollywood's new revenue stream 
"Hollywood has been mourning the downfall of DVDs for years. This once vibrant 
market used to be a great revenue stream for Hollywood. This survey shows that 
old shows like Prison Break (ended in 2009) and 24 (ended in 2010) are still 
drawing significant viewership. If these properties can be monetised with 
subscriptions or (better yet) with dynamic ad insertion, Hollywood might be 
able to once again monetise the long tail."

3. SVOD is a big market for US cable networks 
"This research reinforces the trend that cable channels are producing the 
hottest shows on TV. Looking at the shows in both lists, Parks and Recreation 
and Family Guy are the only broadcast shows (NBC and FOX, respectively) that 
are still in primetime today. While many of the cable shows are very popular 
only after 1-2 seasons. Without reality and sports – the large US broadcasters 
would have a big problem."

Debbie Mason of MasonMediaMatrix

Unsurprisingly, given that the main providers such as Amazon Video and Netflix 
came out of distributing movies on DVD and had huge film customer bases, the 
top reason for signing up is still to access movie back catalogue, in both UK 
and US. However in the US, television back catalogue has almost caught up and 
it will be interesting to see how quickly these percentages shift with a 
massive young audience that grew up on iTunes and has no conception of anything 
except instant gratification.

The significant difference between the UK and US top tens is that at least 
half of the UK series, including Dexter and Prison Break, started on free to 
air and then disappeared behind a paywall, so presumably part of their success 
was based on existing viewers catching up on what they missed.

The US top ten has three young-skewing comedy series, which are likely to be 
repeat (and repeat again and again!) viewings.

Alex Zambelli <http://alexzambelli.com/blog/>, principal product manager at 
iStreamPlanet

"This confirms the old adage that content is king by showing that regardless 
of whether it's original new programming or back catalogue they're looking for, 
viewers will happily sign up for SVOD services if enough quality content is 
made available at a reasonable cost. The international success of Netflix 
produced shows is particularly significant because it vindicates Netflix's big 
bet on original programming and demonstrates to the rest of the industry that 
broadcast and cable networks no longer have a monopoly on producing quality, 
premium content. The days of SVOD services operating merely as second run, 
catch up services are over."

Michael Berliner is content coordinator for the Guardian Media Network. Follow 
him on Twitter@michaelberliner <https://twitter.com/michaelberliner>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 