
More than 650,000 people in England have dementia and that figure is expected 
to double 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN07007>by 
2040. Withwildly differing standards of care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/16/new-care-atlas-reveals-disparity-in-dementia-care-across-uk>
 across the country, there is growing interest in the role technology could 
play.

When Robert Armstrong was admitted to The Uplands care home in Shrewsbury, he 
had a habit of waking up in the middle of night and wandering about. At first 
staff thought he was just a poor sleeper, but the 68-year-old would become very 
aggressive when care workers tried to guide him back to bed. He would often 
need medication to calm him down. It wasn’t until care workers started working 
more closely with the family to map his life history that they discovered 
Armstrong had been a milkman for 40 years and thought he was getting up to go 
to his job. “So when he woke up at 3am, the night staff gave him a cup of tea 
and biscuits and then he did his ‘rounds’,” says Mandy Thorn, managing director 
at Uplands. “Robert had a milk crate in his room and he went round leaving milk 
bottles outside all the residents’ doors. At 6am he had breakfast and went back 
to bed, while staff picked up the bottles and put them back in his crate, ready 
for the next day.”

The more that you know about an individual, the easier it is to care for them

Thorn says the effect was instant and transformed Armstrong’s quality of life 
until his death in early 2015. “We had no more aggression and no need for 
medication to calm him down. And he was really happy until the day he died.”

Thorn hopes the delay in finding out such crucial information will soon be a 
thing of the past. From September, Uplands will be usingRemindMeCare 
<https://www.remindmecare.com/>, an app that uses reminiscence therapy to get 
people with dementia talking about their memories. Its software automatically 
creates content that matches the person with dementia’s life story. In addition 
to photos, the system pulls images of events, favourites places, films and 
music from the web to create a detailed multimedia profile of the person. This 
is then used to help stimulate conversation and memories enabling carers to 
build a better relationship with the individual. For group activities, the 
software can work out shared interests and help several residents to take part. 
And family members can upload relevant information to their relative’s profile 
and be actively involved in their care. “The more that you know about an 
individual, the easier it is to care for them,” says Thorn. “It will transform 
our business, make us more efficient, so staff spend more time with our 
residents, not on paperwork. With ReMindMeCare you have a digital record [of 
activities and interventions], you don’t have to worry about writing it all 
down.”

RemindMeCare is the brainchild of Simon Hooper and Etienne Abrahams, who both 
had family members with dementia. When his mother got dementia, Hooper started 
to put her life story on to a tablet for her carers to use. “I realised that 
early memories were the key to communicating with those with dementia and to 
improving person-centred care, and that it needed tech to record them, so that 
the memories would not be lost and would be available to each carer in turn,” 
he says. On meeting Abrahams at a party and discovering that he was building 
software to store his grandmother’s memories, photos and favourite music, they 
both realised there was a gap in the market and decided to develop a business. 
After a year’s planning, they raised money from care experts and crowdfunding 
and RemindMeCare was born in November 2015.

Samir Patel, owner of Oaklands Rest Home in the New Forest, Hampshire, which 
has been using the system since May, says: “It’s had a huge impact on our 
residents. It’s a nice way to engage with your loved one. You can still 
contribute to their life in a really positive way.”

Not all dementia apps are designed for use in care settings. This month saw 
the launch of two new apps that people with dementia can use independently (as 
well as with a carer, if they choose).

Book of You <http://dementiacitizens.org/book-of-you/> and Playlist for Life 
<http://dementiacitizens.org/playlist-for-life/> use photos, words and music to 
enable those with dementia to reminisce with carers, family and friends, about 
things that were important in their lives. These apps are part of adementia 
citizens <http://dementiacitizens.org/> project run by the innovation charity 
Nesta <http://www.nesta.org.uk/>. Both apps also aim to foster in-depth 
research on how technology can empower people with dementia to lead more 
fulfilling lives. Academics at Bangor and Glasgow Caledonian universities, who 
developed Book of You and Playlist for Life respectively, will conduct regular 
surveys with 500 users of the apps. “We want to show that technology improves 
the lives of those with dementia,” says John Loder, head of strategy at Nesta’s
health lab <http://www.nesta.org.uk/health-lab>. “Who do these apps really work 
for and how?”

The data may also challenge stereotypes. Early testing for Playlist for Life 
found that dementia patients did not necessarily want to listen to West End 
musical hits or the Beatles. “It is very easy to make assumptions about people 
with dementia and what they are going to like. The only thing they really 
wanted to listen to was Adele,” says Loder. “They liked the fact that they are 
listening to the same music as their children and grandchildren.”

Some names have been changed
 