
I’m proud to be chief exec of St George’s Bristol 
<http://www.stgeorgesbristol.co.uk/>: an intimate concert venue (previously a 
church) that plays host to some of the world’s best artists. Key to our success 
is our very special sound. According to leading names such as Michael Morpurgo, 
Julian Lloyd Webber and Sir Simon Rattle, our acoustics are some of the best 
around.

It’s enough to make a CEO blush. But we’ve got our hands full; a new £5.5m 
extension project, calledBuilding a Sound Future 
<http://buildingasoundfuture.co.uk/>, will bring the 1823 building into the 
21st century. Acoustics experts are helping ensure our sound will not be 
compromised by the plans. Their tests confirm that it’s the building’s unique 
qualities that give music played in it such clarity. You see, St George’s was 
not designed as a concert venue, but its narrow dimensions, modest size, lack 
of soft furnishings, smooth walls and texture of the plasterwork all contribute.

It’s these kinds of insight that can help venues create a better sound, so we 
quizzed our experts – Byron Harrison and Ian Stickland from theatre and 
acoustics consultantsCharcoalblue 
<http://www.charcoalblue.com/index.php/company.html> – about how venues can 
create the sweetest sounds. Their tips below will hopefully be useful for any 
space, whether big, small or pop-up.

Listen

It sounds obvious but listen to your space. Go into the room and listen when 
you think it’s going to be quietest. What can you still hear? Think about 
unwanted sound, such as air conditioning, traffic noise, computer fans, 
fluorescent lights or people working nearby. How much of this noise can you 
control? If air conditioning is an issue, you could pre-cool the space and turn 
the fans off during the performance. If crowd noise is a problem, think about 
swapping the uses of rooms to avoid nearby noisy people and activities.

Consider loudspeakers as a sound source rather than a way of fixing a poor 
acoustic
Byron Harrison and Ian Stickland 
Another tip: turn all the lights out. Look for where light is coming in. Any 
place that light can penetrate, sound will be able to as well. Try to fill 
these gaps.Mineral wool <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mineral_wool> can be 
useful for this along with a more rigid outer layer such as plywood. Pay 
particular attention to making doors and windows airtight.

Pay close attention to the detail 

 Can you hear the detail of the music and lyrics? Stand on stage and imagine 
all the surfaces from which your sound could reflect. Which of them are close 
by? Are they sound-reflective, such as stone, concrete or glass – or 
sound-absorptive, such as carpet or curtains? Carpets should be avoided under 
seats if possible. But curtains and other soft finishes are not all bad, as 
they can help scatter and absorb unwanted sound reflections.

Echoes and problems

 Clap in the room and listen. If you can hear two distinct sounds, try and 
locate the surface that the sound is reflecting back from and work out if there 
is a way to absorb, block or reorient the sound from that reflection by 
covering it with a drape or a textured reflective surface

For unamplified sound, a narrow room is a good room. A flat ceiling also helps 
because it provides a large surface for sound to reflect back down to the 
audience. If the room isn’t narrow and doesn’t have a flat ceiling, consider 
adding some reflective screens to help direct sound towards the audience.

The audience

 Your audience has a role to play in getting the acoustics right. A steep rake 
absorbs more direct sound than an audience on a flat floor, which is great for 
amplified concerts and cinema, but not great for acoustic music. The sort of 
seats are also important and some manufacturers have created seats that are 
equally absorptive with or without a person sat in it.

On stage

 Don’t forget about the performers. The sound paths between performers enable 
them to play together and in tune. Musicians will do this instinctively. If 
they can see each other, that should help them hear one another. Consider the 
stage too. Again, avoid carpet and ensure there are some sound-reflective 
surfaces close to the performers. In a particularly wide space, you could add 
portable timber panels to the side of stage to assist with this.

Loudness

 Is the sound of the performance loud enough to be heard clearly? If the 
architecture absorbs too much sound, this may reduce loudness. If the room is 
too noisy, the sound of the performance might be masked by the noise. If the 
room is very large, the sound might be dissipated and sound-reflective surfaces 
might be too far away to help the performance to be heard, so consider adding 
more reflective surfaces closer to the listeners. One solution is to hang an 
acoustic canopy from the ceiling to effectively reduce the height of the room 
and provide a surface for the sound energy to reflect back down to the audience.

Loudspeakers

Consider loudspeakers as a sound source rather than a way of fixing a poor 
acoustic. In very sound-reflective spaces (eg typical churches and tunnels) try 
to get the loudspeakers as close to the audience as possible and consider using 
multiple loudspeakers distributed over the audience.


Orchestras are broadening their scope for the better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/aug/13/robert-ziegler-orchestras-broadening-their-scope-film-rock>
Highs and lows

 Can low-pitched noise be heard along with high-pitched noise? Does the room 
sound “boomy”? Or are low frequencies weak? Thin wood panelling and plaster can 
act like a drum and absorb low-pitched sound. Low-frequency absorption helps 
make amplified sound and speech more clear.

However, for unamplified music, we want to hear the low-pitched sound equally 
well. In St George’s, the high-pitched frequencies are equal to the low-pitched 
ones, which gives the hall its special clarity and means audiences and 
performers can hear every note and word.

Suzanne Rolt is chief execuctive of St George’s Bristol 
<http://www.stgeorgesbristol.co.uk/>

Byron Harrison and Ian Stickland are from theatre and acoustics consultants 
Charcoalblue <http://www.charcoalblue.com/index.php/company.html>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.



 