
Algeria does not court tourism. It doesn't need to. It has vast crude-oil 
resources, equal to Libya's. Its infrastructure does not accommodate tourists, 
and there is precious little visitor information - hardly any in English. The 
French, of course, have a longstanding relationship with the country. Harsh 
colonisation, a very bloody independence war and lingering withdrawal caused a 
rift that is only now healing, and slowly at that.

The descendents of that French imperialism, pilgrims to the homeland of their 
pied-noir kinsfolk, are the vanguard of Algeria's tourism. Some Italians visit 
the Christian sites of St Augustine. Few others venture here. Algeria, the 
second-largest country in Africa, has been dogged by terrorism. But while 
dangers remain, they are far outweighed by the hospitality of the people.

I was visiting Algeria not as a tourist, but as one on a quest: researching 
the history of the olive tree for my latest book. As a woman alone in this 
undeveloped Islam-dominated country, I was apprehensive. A sound knowledge of 
French stood me in good stead, facilitating travel arrangements and 
communication, but if yours is not up to scratch, don't be disheartened. 
Algeria is striving to shrug off its French connections, and the young are 
learning the Anglo-American of the internet.

Also, a substantial percentage of the country's inhabitants are tribal 
Berbers, with their own dialects and identities. They converted to Islam in the 
seventh century but consider themselves Berbers first and Algerians second. I 
was surprised how keen they were to interact with the West, share their culture 
and be accepted into the international community. Berbers are historically 
nomadic people, well practised in the art of hospitality. Many of the most 
generous human beings I encountered on my 16-month odyssey round the 
Mediterranean were Algerians.

I began with the Unesco World Heritage Site of Tipasa, 60km west of the 
capital, Algiers. Founded by the Phoenicians, it was transformed into a 
military colony by the Romans. Today, it is a glorious stone forest of tumbled 
walls and columns spilling across a trio of hills that crown the crescent round 
the Bay of Tipasa.

Visible in the distance are the humped shoulders of the Chenoua mountains. 
Enchanting, wave-lapped, modern Tipasa sits on the Mediterranean. It has a 
French feel and is known for its open-mindedness. Several of its outdoor 
restaurants and bars serve alcohol. It may be surprising to learn now, but 
Algeria is one of the oldest wine-producing countries in the world.

It had been raining when I arrived, and the scent of herbs and absinthe hung 
in the air. The water was a troubled turquoise as it beat fruitlessly against 
the ancient ruins. I was in the company of an Arab-Algerian historian, 
listening to his potted history of "a troubled land, a country in transition, 
seeking its identity" while his daughter gathered wild flowers of startling 
hues.

Algerian-born writer Albert Camus was fond of this spot and wrote: "In the 
depths of my darkest winter I found within myself an invincible summer."

The beaches thereabouts were stunning and neighbouring Cherchell, once a 
twin-harboured Roman city, with mournful statuary in the Place des Martyrs 
gazing out to sea, was well worth a stop. I headed back east in a series of 
smoke-belching Mercs - public taxis jam-packed with men in brown djellabahs 
freighting anything from boxes of tomatoes to a pair of newborn kids. They 
found me a curious companion but smiled politely, respectfully suggesting I sit 
up front beside the driver.

Tizi-Ouzou is the capital of Kabylia and makes an excellent base from which to 
explore these culturally untapped and very beautiful mountains. Conquerors from 
time immemorial have driven the Berbers inland from their coastal settlements 
and these mountains have become one of their strongholds. I spent remarkable 
days in the company of olive farmers and beekeepers. I listened to songs sung 
in the fields by tattooed women gathering olives. Ideqqi is their clay pottery. 
Hand-made and fired in the open air, these pieces tell the women's tales. 
Collectors' treasures, each plate is unique and rarely if ever sold.

From Sétif, a very Muslim city, where there are comfortable hotels and where 
lies the body of Scipio Africanus, outstanding military commander of ancient 
Rome, I continued to Timgad (another World Heritage Site) which was bathed in 
sunlight, and deserted. It was built by the Romans at the end of the first 
century for keeping an eye on rebellious hill tribes. Buried by sand for 
centuries, protected by altitude and dry winds, it stands in the middle of 
nowhere, its network of roads and columns bearing witness to the genius of 
ancient Rome.

From Timgad I looped back to Djémila, to Constantine, back to the coast at 
Annaba, where forest-rich mountains sweep dramatically into the sea. The French 
built upon the Phoenician and, later, Arab port-city and christened it Petit 
Nice; today it is falling apart at the seams, but oozes seaside charm. Then it 
was south into the desert, alone with taxi driver, Mohammed, in a boneshaker 
barely fit to undertake the monumental trip that lay ahead: past St Augustine's 
birthplace at Souk Ahras (and the olive tree beneath which he meditated) to 
Tébessa near the Tunisian border and then, off the map.

I found myself entirely alone. Not a guide, not a traveller, no one besides 
the occasional couple, she swathed in black, canoodling illicitly within the 
shadows of vast stones or a Berber strolling with his sheep. I came upon 
colossal Roman offerings not listed in any book. Blown by Saharan winds, 
sand-cloaked for centuries, they are monuments to oblivion. Off all beaten 
tracks, I pretended I had discovered these classical jewels myself.

I was obliged to rough it more than a little. Algerians cannot offer what they 
do not have themselves. Many homes have running water for just an hour a day. 
In the cities and towns there are hotels, even resorts, and in the southern 
Sahara, where the rock art is second to none, organised tours are available.

I had not known what to expect. Camels and sand dunes, of course, but the 
hand-beaten jewellery, the tattooed tribeswomen, the bridges of Constantine, 
the breathtaking landscapes, the generosity, the fine classical ruins and the 
silence of the Sahara made this one of the most intoxicating experiences on 
earth. To see this extraordinary country before tourism imprints, one visit 
will simply not do.

• "The Olive Tree" by Carol Drinkwater is out in paperback this week. To order 
a copy for £7.99 with free UK p&p go toobserver.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.observer.co.uk/bookshop>
 or call 0330 333 6847.

Algeria: the 60-second guide

Is it safe?
Last month, the Foreign Office downgraded its advice against all but essential 
travel to Algeria. However, it does note that Tizi-Ouzou has been "the focus of 
sustained terrorist activity over the past three years" and still advises 
against travelling there and to the districts of Boumerdès, Bouira, Béjaia and 
Blida, Medéa, Chlef and Ain Defla. More information atfco.gov.uk 
<http://www.fco.gov.uk>.

Getting there
British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) has daily flights from Heathrow 
to Algiers, with fares from £259 return. A visa costs £28 from the embassy in 
London (020 7589 6885) and takes five working days to process if you apply in 
person, or 10 days by post.

Getting around
Tourism is not well developed and is centred on the Mediterranean coastline. 
Easy to reach, especially by bus from Algiers, Zéralda and Tipasa have notable 
Roman, Punic and Christian ruins. To the east of Algiers, the Turquoise Coast 
has resorts on sandy beaches and rocky coves. The El Djazair hotel (
hoteleldjazair.dz <http://www.hoteleldjazair.dz>) in Algiers (formerly the 
Saint George) has doubles from £179 a night. Find more tourist information at
ont-dz.org <http://www.ont-dz.org>. 

Tour operators
The Traveller (020 7269 2770; the-traveller.co.uk 
<http://www.the-traveller.co.uk>) has several tours to Algeria. A seven-day 
walking tour, taking in Djémila, Constantine and Timgad, costs from £1,875. 
Other operators include Wild Frontiers (020 7736 3968;wildfrontiers.co.uk 
<http://www.wildfrontiers.co.uk>).
 