
From the custard pie guns of Bugsy Malone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bugsy-malone> to the legwarmers of Fame; from 
the prison brutality of Midnight Express to the unalloyed musical joy of The 
Commitments – the career of Alan Parker in all its variety and brilliance is to 
be celebrated by a Bafta fellowship next month.

Parker, 68, follows in the footsteps of Martin Scorsese, Stanley Kubrick and 
Elizabeth Taylor in receiving the honour. It is the British Academy of Film and 
Television Arts' equivalent to a lifetime achievement award, but the director 
is not worried about the signals that accepting such an award might send.

"I'm honoured by the award – flattered, really," he said on Tuesday. "A lot of 
people deserve it more than I do. I know film-makers who have refused these 
sort of things, thinking it means they're never going to work again.

"But in the end, you get to a certain age, you've made a number of films, and 
your time comes along."

Parker grew up as a working-class boy in Islington, north London, and shot to 
prominence in the mid-70s after a successful career writing and directing TV 
commercials, including the award-winning Cinzano series featuring Leonard 
Rossiter and Joan Collins.
 Director Alan Parker, whose directorial work includes Evita, Mississippi 
Burning and Angela's Ashes. Photograph: Michal Dolezal/AP 
But it was with his first big-screen feature – the 1976 children's gangster 
classic Bugsy Malone, complete with its pedal-powered cars, custard pie machine 
guns, catchy 20s-style tunes and precocious performances from Scott Baio and 
Jodie Foster – that he broke directly into Hollywood, gaining finance for the 
film in the US after it was rejected by backers in Britain.

Parker wears his film-making achievements modestly, saying: "I always argued 
against the auteur theory, in that I think cinema is a collaborative art form.

"I've had some fantastically good people help me make the movies. On the other 
hand, there is an identity to the films, which is as much mine as anyone 
else's, and I'm pleased with that. I can say honestly I'm proud of my work."

After Bugsy Malone, he then went on to make a string of Hollywood pictures. 
The Turkish-set prison drama Midnight Express, scripted by Oliver Stone and 
which secured Parker an Oscar nomination for best director, was followed by the 
musical Fame (1980) and the intense marital-breakdown drama Shoot the Moon 
(1982), starring Albert Finney and Diane Keaton.
 The cast of The Commitments, the film Parker directed in 1991 
Later achievements include the civil rights crime film Mississippi Burning, 
for which Parker received a second Oscar nomination, and the Bafta-winning 
Irish musical comedy The Commitments.

Never one to be pinned down, he also directed the experimental rock musical 
Pink Floyd – The Wall (1982), featuring Bob Geldof as a troubled rock star, and 
the anarchic colonic irrigation comedy The Road to Wellville (1994), with 
Anthony Hopkins.

But as the British film industry underwent a commercial revival in the 
mid-90s, Parker returned from Hollywood and went from poacher to gamekeeper, 
moving firmly into the film establishment by becoming chairman of the British 
Film Institute in 1998, and then chairman of the UK Film Council in 2000 for 
its first five years. In 1995, Parker was given a CBE for services to the 
British film industry and he received a knighthood in 2002.
 Mississippi Burning, the film for which Parker was nominated for a second 
best director Oscar Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext Collection/Sportsphoto 
Under Parker's stewardship, the film council evolved into a credible 
distributor oflottery funds and other government monies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2010/nov/29/bfi-film-council-arts-funding>
 after previous experiments – via the Arts Council and short-lived "film 
franchises" – were deemed to have failed.

The film council, however, was scrapped in 2010 as part of the then-new 
coalition government's so-called bonfire of the quangos. "I was very proud of 
what we achieved [with the film council], and very angry that this government 
abolished it. It was a petulant, political act: we were seen as very much a 
product of New Labour, and that was anathema to a rightwing ideologue like [the 
then culture secretary] Jeremy Hunt."

He added: "The film council was the best support agency the British film 
industry has ever had: a board of the very best practitioners overseeing a 
highly professional staff. It resulted in an unprecedented decade of stability 
and growth."

Parker's involvement in film industry governance took an inevitable toll on 
his creative work. His most recent film was a decade ago: the 
anti-death-penalty drama The Life of David Gale, in 2003.

The fellowship will be presented at the British Academy film awards on 10 
February.
 