
Anideepa Begum - microentrepreneur and mother of five has just received her 
fourth loan from Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) – a microfinance fund 
disbursement organisation working with local partners in Bangladesh. Two years 
ago Anideepa struggled to put food on the table for her and her children. 
"[They] would cry for food" she says, "as I could not earn sufficient money to 
feed them or myself...and as a mother it was very difficult to bear". She 
joined the credit and savings cooperative after her husband died to help her 
"save some money and use small loans to support [her] family". These loans have 
now enabled Anideepa not only to buy items for her business in cash, cheaper 
than taking credit, but also given her the opportunity to pay it back slowly 
and at a low interest rate.

It is easy to imagine that those living on less than $2 a day, the World 
Bank's measuring stick of poverty, don't need access to financial services. But 
the truth is far from that. Access to coherent, reliable and affordable 
financial services, such as insurance, local money transfers and short and 
long-term credit, play a pivotal role in a country's development process. Even 
the most basic financial services such as savings accounts present families 
like Anideepa's with opportunities to lift themselves out of poverty, 
facilitate economic growth and improve financial stability and livelihoods.

According to World Bank estimates less than 10% of the 2.5 billion people 
living on less than $2 a day worldwide have access to financial services of any 
kind. Many of the rural poor live far from banks, and making day-long journeys 
to make a deposit or withdrawal result in loss of a day's pay. In addition, low 
and irregular income streams, frequently dependent on seasons, further thwart 
their efforts to enter the formal financial system.

Addressing these issues is therefore a complex, but by no means new challenge. 
Greater innovation and recent improvements in the capacity of technology to 
reduce the cost of providing sustainable financial services have enabled 
millions of people to increase their resilience to economic shocks and build 
assets. Some of the more successful innovations, like branchless banking and 
mobile money, have enabled millions to access banking services on their 
doorstep, at low cost and on a much wider scale through post offices, 
neighbourhood shops and other convenient locations.

The use of mobile money services has increased exponentially. M-Pesa, for 
example, Kenya's largest mobile money transfer system, is used by over 70% of 
all households, successfully reaching more than half of all of Kenya's 
previously unserviced households. As phone coverage continues to increase 
around the world, it will provide more people with opportunities to access 
funds and services previously unthinkable.

But the problem is not yet resolved. Impact analysis and due diligence in this 
sector is limited and frequently uncovers adverse loan terms including 
excessively high interest rates. Issues concerning inadequate legal and 
financial structures, as well as lack of an appropriate framework that protects 
the poor and pays close attention to the regulatory and policy regime need to 
be addressed. Improving the regulatory environment of the sector will 
undoubtedly serve to increase faith in the formal financial system as well as 
assist in promoting healthy competition and better products for consumers. It 
is therefore imperative that the creation of new financial products meets not 
only the needs and budgets of the poor but is also complemented with rigorous 
financial education.

The UK's Department for International Development (DFID) launched its £40 
million Prosper programme five years ago in Bangladesh to help women like 
Anideepa. The programme, working in five northern districts, is promoting 
greater access to diversified financial services to the extreme poor and micro 
and small enterprises. DFID is working in collaboration with multiple local 
partners, like PKSF, private entities and NGOs to offer training and hands on 
experience with policy, regulation and supervision to community members. The 
training received enabled her to "utilise the loan funds in the best possible 
way", maximising the return on her investment and encouraging her to think 
about future possibilities.

Working together to improve financial awareness and innovation and casting a 
wider net around financial inclusion has undoubtedly assisted economic growth 
and helped millions of people like Anideepa hoist themselves out of poverty. By 
equipping the poor with the relevant skills and capacity, policy makers can 
enhance their ability to support themselves beyond the initial microloan. 
However, the fight is far from over, and much still needs to be done to ensure 
that Anideepa's children enjoy the financial stability of those in the Western 
world.
 