
My kids don't especially like jelly as a pudding. The wibble-wobble just 
doesn't appeal. A jellied sweet, however, is quite another thing. Dense, dark, 
chewy fruit pastilles, sparkling with sugar, are a favourite if any pocket 
money comes their way on a Saturday morning.

The sweet shop near our house is spectacular, magnetic in its appeal, and 
usually I wouldn't dare to suggest that homemade sweets are a realistic or 
practical substitute. But last week, while dragging the kids past the sweet 
shop and towards some blackberry bushes, I found myself striking a deal: we'd 
attempt to make our own version of their favourite sweets at home and, if these 
failed to pass muster, we'd head to the sweet shop after lunch.

And why not? Late summer's glut of soft fruit means there is plenty to cook 
with. We used blackberries for our pastilles, but plums, greengages and 
raspberries have all been priced attractively in my local veg shop these past 
few weeks. Sure, it would be far easier to buy a packet of fruit pastilles and 
be done with it. But cooking with my kids is an activity I cherish, and a skill 
I am keen for them to learn.

Not only did the pastilles work, but both kids liked the task of cutting the 
firm jelly into cubes and then pressing them into the sugar. If you avoid this 
step, these little jellies are especially flattering eaten alongside cheese – 
akin to Spanish membrillo (quince paste). Damsons work very well, too.

Blackberry fruit pastilles
 Homemade fruit pastilles. Photograph: Mike Lusmore 
500g blackberries
2 medium-sized cooking apples
½ lemon
150ml water
300g sugar (plus extra for dusting the cubes)

Wash the blackberries and peel and dice the apple.

Put them into a saucepan and add the lemon juice and water.

Bring to the boil, reduce the heat, cover and simmer until the fruit is tender.

Sieve the mixture over a large bowl, using the back of a wooden spoon to push 
it through. You should have about 600-700ml of fruit puree.

Return the puree to the pan, add the sugar and stir frequently until it has 
dissolved.

Bring to the boil, reduce the heat and continue cooking and stirring until it 
is very thick (mine took about 20 minutes). As it thickens, be very careful 
that it doesn't catch and burn.

Pour into a deep-sided tray, lined with greaseproof paper.

Allow to cool completely before cutting into pieces and pressing the cubes 
into more sugar.

• Follow Claire Thomson on Twitter <https://twitter.com/5oclockapron> or get 
more recipes at5o'clockapron.com <http://5oclockapron.com/>.
 