
In a landmark study, the first of its kind, the networking and development 
groupSound Women <http://www.soundwomen.co.uk/> has found that only one in five 
solo voices on UK radio is female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/12/women-solo-radio-broadcasters-20-percent?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

As a one in five myself, I can't say I'm surprised. I've worked in radio for 
more than 15 years, battling the widely held belief that people, especially 
women, don't like to hear women on the radio. As my good friend Emma Caldwell, 
a presenter on the Capital Network, was once told: "Who wants to hear a woman 
screeching on the radio while you're eating your breakfast?"

It's a big problem and one that needs addressing. Women's voices are massively 
under represented at peak listening times; solo women represent only 13% of 
total breakfast hours and just 12% of total drive-time hours.

It was with the steely determination of youth that I rallied against the 
pressure to be the breakfast show sidekick or the laughing woman in the 
background. I politely declined roles at much bigger stations than the one I 
eagerly accepted at £13,000 a year as host of my own drive-time show. I went on 
to host the same show at Horizon in Milton Keynes with a male sidekick who 
became my co-host and I loved every second of it. Two years later, I landed the 
dream job at 1 Golden Square, the station I'd always wanted to work for … I've 
now been here more than eight years.

I was inspired to fly solo by a brilliant presenter I had the pleasure of 
working with in the late 90s, Debbie Mac, who's gone on to host shows for 
Capital London, Galaxy and now Real Radio. Debbie staunchly believes the 
perceptions of women in radio are based on outdated research, commenting: "I've 
never seen evidence of audience figures dropping off when a woman hits the 
airwaves. Unfortunately, with less space for solo females per station, it 
leaves less opportunity for good talent to break through. Providing a presenter 
is easy on the ear, savvy and brand aware, it shouldn't matter what sex they 
are."

The founder of Sound Women, Maria Williams, says having more female voices on 
air is hugely important both to female radio audiences and to aspiring female 
presenters. In direct response to the Sound Women study,Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> are now holding demo days 
designed to inspire and foster creativity with particular emphasis on finding 
new female talent. We'll be advising how to make a great demo and hosting an 
open listening session for group feedback.

I'll be there and hope to inspire in the same way I was inspired. Starting out 
in radio isn't easy. There's the obligatory voluntary work, answering phones at 
5am for close to a year for me … local radio roadshows are fun but I can't 
pretend I've not been slightly humiliated dressed as a "sexy santa". There's no 
pay, then low pay and the hours can be incredibly unsociable … so is it worth 
it? Absolutely. I love what I do. I'm passionate about the music I play; I love 
interacting with our listeners and interviewing some of the world's biggest 
bands and watching them in session. I look forward to finding new female talent 
who'll feel exactly the same way soon.

Sarah Champion <http://www.absoluteradio.co.uk/djs_shows/djs/champion.html> 
presents Sunday Night Music Club On Absolute Radio every Sunday evening from 
10pm. She is also a member of networking and development group Sound Women
 