
Australia

Declan Scott

Schoolboy, Sydney

I'm 10 and I started playing cricket in the backyard when I was five. Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> is very important to me because if 
I get to play for Australia I could become famous like Ricky Ponting. My dream 
is to score a hundred for Australia in the Boxing Day Test. Aussie rules is 
also a great game but I want to score a hundred for Australia more than I want 
to kick a goal in the Grand Final. If you are a good cricketer then people know 
you all over the world but Aussie rules is only played in Australia.

Patricia Robertson

Grandmother, Melbourne

The reason why Australia are so good at cricket is because young people love 
playing the game. It can be played by rich and poor alike because it doesn't 
cost anything to play on the street with an old bat and a rubbish bin for 
stumps. We played cricket on the street and in the backyard as kids and we see 
cricket as a family game. Australians see cricket as a symbol of their national 
pride that has become ever stronger, with so much of it being shown on 
television.

Ann Raynolds

Nurse, Braidwood, NSW

School sports were all about 'having a go'. All children had an afternoon once 
a week at which we tried various team sports and track-and-fi eld events. The 
school also hosted two sports carnivals - one for track and field and another 
for swimming - and a three-day interschool carnival every year. There is no 
escaping sport in Australia - we all learn to swim, we all learn to play 
sports. There are often very good facilities - even for the tiniest schools.

Daniel Schiefendecker

Foreign student, Melbourne

It's easy to see why Australia are so good at cricket. They work hard to 
promote the game by encouraging children to play from an early age. I'm from 
Dresden and it's very similar to the situation with the old East Germany. East 
Germans were very successful at sport: for them winning was everything. 
Australians are just as passionate about sport.

England

Alex Milton

Schoolboy, Marlborough

I love my cricket and play league games for two village under-13 sides in 
Wiltshire. But at my state school there's cricket in only one term and we play 
a maximum of two hours, an hour's lesson and an hour after school, which I 
don't think is nearly enough. We play with a soft ball and no pads, which is 
dull if you're used to playing proper cricket with a hard ball. I don't mind if 
the school find out what I'm saying, perhaps it will make them do something 
about it.

Caroline Biggins

Grandmother, Totnes

Who are the Ashes between? It's five countries isn't it - or is that rugger? 
Selling off playing fields has been extremely bad. There's nowhere else for 
children to play. Wherever you go now it says 'No ball games'. There are so 
many fat children. They ought to have fat children's cricket. And when they do 
play games at school they don't do anything in depth. At one of my 
granddaughters' school they do six weeks of that sport, then six weeks of 
another. It's very odd.

Katie Dailey

Fashion writer, London

Physical education was timetabled but was fairly easy to duck out of. 
Attention was focused on those already proficient. Anyone not on an A team had 
no chance of getting on to tennis courts at lunchtimes to practise, so the bad 
never got better. There was no opportunity for improvement. It did become 
increasingly attractive to join the smokers at the end of the field rather than 
the hockey players on the middle of it.

Alex Ramirez

Foreign student, London

Before I came here six years ago from Brazil I had heard of the game but 
nothing else . Now I know what cricket is because I once watched a game. The 
players all seemed to be about 50 years old. Football is the main sport , 
though, isn't it? It's definitely more popular. Maybe that's because of the 
Wags - that could be what cricket needs to involve younger people. The 
impression I have is that it's more for the older generation.

The difference in numbers

10

Percentage of state schools in UK that offered competetive cricket before 2005 
Chance to Shine initiative.

0.4m

Government figures in the UK show nearly 400,000 have given up club cricket 
since 1994.

0.6

Percentage of adults playing cricket regularly (ie, at least once a month) in 
England, placing cricket in seventeenth place, behind weightlifting and 
basketball.

5

Minimum requirement of organised matches for UK schools to play each year 
under Chance to Shine scheme.

0.5m

Australia'a target of more than half a million registered players by next 
Ashes in 2009.
 