
In any debate on how to address the challenges of an ageing population, the 
design of our places, products and services has a critical role to play to 
ensure that extended years are full of life rather than extended life being 
full of years.

Age-appropriate design that helps, rather than unthinking design that hinders 
and stigmatises, can make a huge difference to quality of life; and this was 
never more so than in considering access to work and the workplace for older 
people.

As governments around the world raise the retirement age, we are being asked 
to work longer. Population ageing is a global phenomenon.

In the workplace, this trend is colliding with under-performing pension funds, 
which prevent many people from retiring, and, more positively, new legislation 
introduced to combat age and disability discrimination.

But is the design of the workplace really being tailored to the needs of older 
people? How can we improve the environment for extended working lives? And why 
are so many large corporate and government organisations in the UK in 
particular failing to retain people aged over-55, in a knowledge economy that 
is supposed to prize expertise?

My research in this field has revealed that while older knowledge workers may 
well be compromised in the office environment by the inevitable effects of 
ageing on vision, hearing, posture, memory, balance and dexterity, they tend to 
compensate cognitively in terms of wisdom, experience and decision making. They 
are also, contrary to popular myth, flexible learners – they have adapted to 
several waves of business and technological change over lengthy careers.

When I led an in-depth study (Welcoming Workplace 
<http://www.hhc.rca.ac.uk/cms/files/welcomingworkplaceguidance.pdf>, pdf) of 
office workers aged over-50 in three knowledge-intensive industries – 
pharmaceuticals, technology and financial services – a clear picture emerged. 
The RCA collaborated with academic partners in Japan and Australia to engage an 
international group of senior workers – research chemists, process engineers 
and financial analysts – whose early departure from their organisations would 
leave a hole in the knowledge base.

What we learned was that this demographic group did not wish to draw attention 
to itself through the provision of special needs design for older workers. The 
challenges they faced in the workplace – noise, distraction, frustrating IT 
systems, general discomfort and a dispiriting lack of wellbeing – were 
precisely those shared by people of all ages working in large, modern, open 
plan offices.

We therefore identified an inclusive design approach as a way forward, 
promoting the multi-generational idea of a better workplace for all ages and 
abilities. We focused on the three main activities seen as most important in 
terms of design – concentration, collaboration and contemplation – and 
developed experimental settings to test interventions in user-controlled 
lighting, ergonomic furniture, natural soundscapes and other humanising 
features.

We discovered that young workforces have far more in common with their 
greybeard colleagues when it comes to the physical workspace than is commonly 
believed. It isn't just older workers who crave quiet and privacy when they 
want to concentrate on solo tasks – or dedicated tools and spaces for 
collaboration when they want to work in a team. Everybody does.

We advocated concentration spaces that are governed by strict protocols for 
working (for example, no mobile phone calls or loud conversations, as in a 
library). These spaces should be located away from noisy facilities such as 
kitchens and cafés, print-rooms or social spaces. They should be equipped with 
different types of furniture and adjustable settings to allow for a range of 
working positions, as poor ergonomics and uncomfortable posture will adversely 
affect the ability to get into "flow".

Natural light should beused in concentration spaces wherever possible, with 
fabric curtains and blinds to diffuse light. Task lights at the desk are an 
important consideration for ageing eyes and for reading printouts off-screen, 
and a lower and more pleasant level of general ambient lighting within the 
concentration space. We also suggested the use of sound-masking systems that 
can reduce distracting noise.

Our research indicated that dedicated collaboration space within the work 
environment should be provided so older people who have honed their skills in 
the pre-digital era can spread out sheets and data, and not worry about 
confidentiality or tidying away before the project is completed. This type of 
space should be able to be reserved by the day, week or month, and there should 
be a mix of digital and traditional display media. Bigger desks to spread 
things out and bigger backdrops to pin things up will enhance collaborative 
modes of working for older people.

Finally, all generations get sick and tired of work at certain times and would 
like somewhere to go to recuperate briefly from the stress and noise of the 
normal work environment.

The provision of contemplation space that can provide a calm environment free 
from distraction and surveillance is important to making ageing workforces more 
productive – and evidence suggests it would be popular with everyone. Here we 
advocated strong natural and organic elements, rich with plants, water, fabric 
banners and adjustable lighting, giving a different feel to the office 
atmosphere elsewhere.

However, contemplation remains the missing link in office design, particularly 
so in the aftermath of the financial crash, which has depleted workplace design 
budgets. It seems we still have a long way to go to make our workplaces more 
welcoming and comfortable. Right across the age range.

Jeremy Myerson is director and chair of the Helen Hamlyn Centre for Design 
<http://www.rca.ac.uk/research-innovation/helen-hamlyn-centre/> at the Royal 
College of Art, London, and the co-author of New Demographics New Workspace 
(Gower 2010)
 