
With the number of over-65s set to double by 2030, the UK’s ageing population 
has never been higher on the government’s agenda.

During the course of the last parliament, however, politicians were accused of 
failing to plan for the growing numbers of older people and the possible impact 
on public services and society. AHouse of Lords inquiry concluded last year 
that Britain is “woefully under-prepared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/14/britain-unprepared-elderly-people-lords>
”.


Although a growing ageing population is a challenge for the health and social 
care services, a more skilled and experienced workforce can provide a valuable 
contribution to society. Charities can also harness older people’s skills in 
volunteer positions.

How can the government plan for future generations of older adults? What 
should it be putting into policy? What are the issues that ministers should be 
addressing? How can the government harness older people’s skills? What does a 
society fit for ageing look like?


The Guardian’s Big Ageing Population Debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/ageing-population> series has 
explored these issues and as an extension to the project, we’re hosting an 
event in London on Tuesday 7 July 2015. The event, chaired by Patrick Butler, 
the Guardian’s editor of society, health and education policy, will feature an 
expert panel who will discuss the above questions and more.

Speakers include:
Baroness Joan Bakewell
Sarah Harper, professor, Oxford Institute of Population Ageing
Halima Khan, director, innovation lab, Nesta

Ryan Bourne, head of public policy, Institute for Economic Affairs

Lord Michael Bichard, crossbench peer and chair of the Social Care Institute 
for Excellence

Patrick Butler, editor of society, health and education policy, the Guardian 
(chair)


Date: Tuesday 7 July
Time: 6-8.30pm
Location: Battlebridge Room, King’s Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU

Your chance to attend
There are a limited number of spaces for this debate. Please register here for 
your chance to attend. We will be in contact shortly to confirm attendance.
 