
My dad was a passenger on the Empire Windrush ship when it famously sailed 
into Tilbury in June 1948 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/25/bank-holiday-celebrate-windrush-generation>
 and, according to many, changed the face of Britain for ever. My mum came to 
England on a Jamaica Producers’ banana boat. It sailed into the West India 
docks on Guy Fawkes night in the same year, under a shower of fireworks that my 
mum believed was to welcome her.

My dad was an accounting clerk in Jamaica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> for, among other companies, Tate & 
Lyle. My mum was a teacher. They were middle class. They had grown up in large 
houses. They had even had servants.

My dad did not have trouble finding work. He was employed by the Post Office. 
But my mum was not allowed to use her Jamaican teaching qualification to teach. 
In England, the fabled mother country that they had learned so much about at 
school in Jamaica, my parents were now poor and working class.

My family is fair-skinned. In Jamaica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> this had a big effect on my 
parents’ upbringing because the class system there, inherited from British 
colonial times, took the colour of your skin very seriously. My parents grew up 
to believe themselves to be of a higher class than any darker-skinned person.

This isolated them from other black Caribbeans who came to live here – my 
parents wanted nothing to do with them.

My mum once told me how back in Jamaica her father would not let her play with 
children who were darker than her. She said wistfully: “But I had to, or I 
would have no one to play with.” So when she came to England she was pleased to 
be bringing her children up among white children. We would always have 
lighter-skinned children to play with. I was expected to isolate myself from 
darker-skinned people too, and it seemed perfectly normal to me that the colour 
of your skin was one of the most important things about you.

White people, of course, never had to think about it. But if you were not 
white, well then, how black were you? I accepted all this as logical. That was 
how I would be judged.

Light-skinned or not, still we were asked: “When are you going back to your 
own country?” “Why are you here?” “Why is your food so funny?” “Why does your 
hair stick up?” “Why do you smell?” The message was that our family had no 
right to be here. When a member of the National Front waved one of their 
leaflets in my face and started laughing, I felt I owed some sort of apology. I 
wanted them to like me. It would be years before I realised I could be angry 
about it.

The racism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/race> I encountered was rarely 
violent, or extreme, but it was insidious and ever present, and it had a 
profound effect on me. I hated myself. I was ashamed of my family, and 
embarrassed that they came from the Caribbean.

In my effort to be as British as I could I was completely indifferent to 
Jamaica.

None of my friends knew anything about the Caribbean. They didn’t know where 
it was, or who lived there, or why. And they had no curiosity about it beyond 
asking why black people were in this country. It was all too foreign and 
therefore not worth knowing.

As I got older my feeling of outsiderness became more marked, as did the 
feeling that nothing in my background – my class or my ethnicity – was really 
worth having. At art college I encountered middle-class people for the first 
time. Keeping all those origins of mine a secret became paramount. Few people 
at my college knew I lived on a council estate.

I got a degree in textile design and worked as a designer for about 10 minutes 
before I realised it was not for me. I then worked for a brief while as a shop 
assistant, a dresser at the BBC and the Royal Opera House, and a receptionist 
at a family planning clinic.

Then something happened. I was working part-time for a sex education project 
for young people in Islington. One day all the staff had to take part in a 
racism awareness course. We were asked to split into two groups, black and 
white. I walked over to the white side of the room. It was, ironically, where I 
felt most at home – all my friends, my boyfriend, my flatmates, were white. But 
my fellow workers had other ideas and I found myself being beckoned over by 
people on the black side. With some hesitation I crossed the floor. It was a 
rude awakening. It sent me to bed for a week.

By this time I was scared to call myself a black person. I didn’t feel I had 
the right qualifications. Didn’t you have to have grown up in a “black 
community”? Didn’t you need to go to the Caribbean a lot? Didn’t your parents 
need to be proud of being black? Didn’t all my friends need to be black? My 
upbringing was so far removed from all of that, I felt sure I would be found 
out as an imposter. I was not part of the black experience, surely? It was a 
life–changing moment.

Fortunately I had recently enrolled on an afternoon-a-week writing course at 
the City Lit, just as a hobby. Writing came to my rescue. The course had an 
emphasis on writing what you know. So I nervously began to explore what I knew 
– my family upbringing and background, and my complicated relationship with 
colour. Thinking about what I knew, and exploring my background with words, 
began to open it up for me like never before.

I soon came to realise that my experience of growing up in this country was 
part of what it meant to be black. All those agonies over skin shade. All those 
silences about where we had come from. The shame. The denial. In fact I came to 
see that every black person’s life, no matter what it is, is part of the black 
experience. Because being black in a majority white country comes with a myriad 
of complications and contradictions. It was writing that helped me to 
understand that.

A few months into the course I had the urge to visit Jamaica for the very 
first time and stay with the family I had never met. I went for Christmas. It 
was an amazing experience. I discovered a family I never really knew I had. I 
realised that I meant something to people who lived on the other side of the 
world. I met my aunt and cousins and saw where my mum grew up. It seems odd to 
say, but I realised for the first time that I had a background and an ancestry 
that were fascinating and worth exploring. Not only that, but I now had the 
means to do it – through writing. The more that I began to delve into my 
Caribbean heritage, the more interesting Britain’s Caribbean story became for 
me.

But the British Caribbean is a forgotten history. There are still countless 
young Britons today of African-Caribbean descent who have as little 
understanding of their ancestry and as little evidence of their worth as I did 
when I was growing up. And there are countless white Britons who are unaware of 
the histories that bind us all together.

Britain made the Caribbean that my parents came from. It provided the people – 
black and white – who make up my ancestry. In return my ancestors, through 
their forced labour and their enterprise, contributed greatly to the 
development of this country.

My heritage is Britain’s story too.

• This is an edited extract from Andrea Levy’s essay, Back to My Own Country, 
from Six Stories & an Essay, published this week by Tinder Press
 