
As the Premier League season draws to a close, £166m 
<http://blogs.independent.co.uk/2013/08/26/premier-league-shirt-sponsors-pour-record-166m-into-top-flight-bank-accounts-with-arsenal-seeing-the-biggest-rise/>
 has been spent by brands to sponsor football shirts over the 2013/14 season. 
The nature of big sponsorship deals of this kind is changing, however, to 
account for the impact of changing media consumption habits. One example of a 
growing sophistication towards commercial sponsorship agreements comes from The 
Football Association (FA).

The FA and digital advertising platform RadiumOne have agreed a deal to allow 
FA sponsors targeted advertising opportunities across various web properties, 
which include its 873,000 Twitter followers and 3.6m England fans. It's not the 
first time a media owner has used technology to provide targeted advertising 
opportunities, but this added layer of marketing technology on top of the 
sponsorship gives a marketer access to real-time data, extended reach and 
instant feedback.

According to group director of digital Rob Ray, the deal will change how the 
FA communicates online and ensure content stays relevant to fans. "We have an 
active audience of over 18 million consumers, accessing content on multiple 
devices at all times," he says. "This partnership ensures we understand our 
digital audience everywhere, so we can target them with relevant content. This 
significantly maximises fan engagement, increases exposure for our partners and 
ultimately creates more commercial opportunities."

Partnerships between sports companies and marketing technology firms are 
becoming more prevalent, according to Abeed Janmohamed, RadiumOne's European 
commercial director. He explains the approach they took in building a Fan 
Activation Platform for The FA: "Identifying the fact that sport and 
entertainment are key consumer passion points was critical to [this 
partnership] – as well as the fact that sponsorship and acquisition marketing 
are intrinsically linked.

"We [then] pieced together a number of moving parts to help create the Fan 
Activation Platform and re-engineered the commercial model to reflect 
sponsorship rather than digital. A number of rights holders and sports teams 
such as TeamSky Cycling, Omega PharmaQuickstep (OPQS, Mark Cavendish's Team), 
The Football League and of course The FA partner with us in this way."

The traditional sponsorship model is being challenged and disrupted by brands 
who are looking to rights holders to deliver more value. Janmohamed says that, 
much like the early objections to programmatic adoption from traditional 
publishers, rights holders have shied away from programmatic for fear of 
calling the value of sponsorship deals into question. In his opinion, this 
attitude is beginning to change.

"While it's never going to replace the shirt or stadium deal, digital 
engagement is growing exponentially and the ability to access a digital 
audience significantly enhances the rightsholder's available rights packages. 
In addition 'programmatic sponsorship' enables global sponsorship activation in 
markets where the rights holder, team or club has no physical asset – as well 
as enabling the rights holder to provide their commercial partners with 'always 
on access to fans', not merely when the game is on.

"Most CMOs would love to both understand how to leverage their sponsorship 
activity where they aren't 'actively selling', merely looking to drive a brand 
action/engagement, as well measure the effectiveness of engagement through 
content as an acquisition channel in real time. 'Programmatic sponsorship' 
provides the opportunity to help both parties to identify the value that their 
partnership brings."

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 