
Snail bread is so-called by my daughter Ivy because of the whorly, snail-like 
form of these little cinnamon buns. They're a loose interpretation of a chelsea 
bun and a copycat attempt at a breakfast cinnamon roll, and they satisfy a 
three-year-old's fondness for raisins, brown sugar and squidging bread dough.

Making bread is a fantastic activity for children to master in the kitchen. 
They're surprisingly good at pushing and pulling the dough, which will improve 
the finished bread's elasticity. As a mother who is also a chef, I've come to 
terms with the fact that when children want to help out in the kitchen, it pays 
to not be too precious or finicky with the methods you choose.

Have your helpers get in among the flour and water in a deep-sided bowl, and 
begin the messy, tactile business of forming the dough. Heaving their body 
weight through scrunched-up fingers in and out of a dough's beginnings is no 
bad thing. The grownup on standby can then give the bread dough strong, 
rhythmic kneads to really "work" it, and also provide dexterous hand work for 
any shaping needed.

The recipe given is for a simple yeasted bread dough. It has very many uses in 
our house: small balls flattened with the palms of our hands and rolled thin to 
make pizza bases. Pushed out into a tin, dimpled with fruit and slathered with 
olive oil for a fruit focaccia. Shaped into a loaf, slashed along the top and 
given a dusting of flour to be baked as a breakfast loaf. And also this, rolled 
out and spread with a beaten cinnamon sugary butter and sprinkled with raisins, 
then rolled (as young children might go about a block of plasticine), chopped 
with a knife and popped in a baking tin.

I've substituted spelt flour for some of the bread flour, in the name of 
experimentation (and also because I ran out of strong white flour). The 
finished buns were just as lovely, but with a denser crumb and nuttier taste.

Baked as you would a bread loaf and brushed with sugar syrup on their exit 
from the oven, these cinnamon "snail" breads are a brilliant recipe for 
children to follow with a little adult tuition. My children like to unfurl the 
whirl while it is still warm from the oven.

Snail bread
 Best eaten straight away … Photograph: Claire Thomson for the Guardian 
350g strong white bread flour
150g spelt flour
5g fast-action yeast granules
5g salt
1 tbsp olive oil or melted butter
300ml warm water
75g unsalted butter (left out of the fridge to soften)
75g muscavado sugar, plus 2 tbsp for sugar syrup
1 heaped dessertspoon cinnamon powder
100g raisins

In a large mixing bowl, combine the flours, yeast and salt. Add the oil and 
warm water and use a spoon or your fingers to form a rough dough.

When cohesive enough, turn out on to a lightly floured work surface. After 10 
minutes of relatively vigorous kneading, it should be smooth and elastic and 
should not tear when rubbed with your thumb.

Place the dough in a clean and lightly oiled bowl, cover with clingfilm and 
leave in a warm place for 1-1.5 hours until it has almost doubled in size.

Turn the dough out on to a lightly floured surface and roll with a rolling pin 
into an oblong shape, roughly A3 in size and 1cm thick.

Cream the butter, sugar and cinnamon together. Spread this mix over the 
surface of the dough and evenly distribute the raisins.

Roll into a swiss roll shape along the long length of the oblong. With a 
knife, cut the roll into roughly 4cm lengths.

Oil a baking tin with a little olive oil and snugly fit the cut-off individual 
rolls, cut side up, alongside each other in a honeycomb pattern. Cover again 
with clingfilm and leave for a second prove – 45 minutes should do.

When you are ready to bake, preheat your oven to 220C/gas mark 7. Bake for 10 
minutes and then turn the oven down to 180C/gas mark 4 for a further 25 minutes.

Meanwhile, make your sugar syrup. Add equal parts sugar to boiling water (I 
used two tablespoons of sugar to two tablespoons of water), stir and leave to 
cool.

When ready, take your buns out of the oven and brush all over with the sugar 
syrup. Turn out and leave to cool slightly on a wire rack. They are best eaten 
the day they are baked.

• Follow Claire Thomson on Twitter <https://twitter.com/5oclockapron> or get 
more recipes at5o'clockapron.com <http://5oclockapron.com/>.
 