
"Real-time bidding" (RTB) describes the automated way in which advertising 
inventory (mobile or desktop) is bought and sold via technology platforms such 
as ad exchanges or supply-side platforms (SSP). It's a relatively new 
technology and as a result we find that many people in the wider industry 
aren't sure how it works, or what the benefits are.

One way of thinking about it is to look at how the financial markets operate. 
Ad exchanges or SSPs (such asMoPub <http://www.mopub.com/> and others) can be 
compared to the likes of the NASDAQ or NYSE. Stocks are akin to ad impressions, 
sellers of the stocks are publishers and the demand-side platforms (DSPs) such 
asE*Trade <https://us.etrade.com/home> are most closely related to the buyers.

So why does RTB matter?

The introduction of RTB technology into the mobile ecosystem has helped 
address a number of challenges that both publishers and DSPs are faced with. Ad 
exchanges leverage RTB to address issues with scale, inefficiency and control 
that plague both parties, so it is worth taking a moment to understand what it 
means and how it can apply to your digital marketing efforts.

By aggregating and automating access to demand, RTB can address the 
inefficiency publishers are faced with by having to work with all of these 
partners directly. So a publisher can now access more than 100 DSPs through a 
single integration with an ad exchange or SSP.

Additionally, tools within ad exchanges allow a publisher to implement a set 
of business rules that automate who can access and purchase the inventory and 
at what price, providing added control for publishers.

How it works

For how this works in practice, let's consider a hot gaming application 
developer that supports in-app advertisments. Let's assume that the publisher 
has quickly risen to the top of the app store rankings, and is now seeing 
explosive growth in its user base.

Inbound inquiries come from marketers, advertising networks and agencies, all 
interested in buying ads in their latest application. The challenge is that 
they aren't staffed up to support each one of these requests individually, but 
at the same time, don't want to turn away a clear revenue opportunity.

This is a great example of a publisher who might look to an ad exchange that 
supports real-time bidding as a way to scale monetisation, connecting them 
through a single point of integration to hundreds of advertisers.

Advertisers can benefit from RTB too. With publishers consolidating their 
inventory into fewer sources, DSPs no longer have to tackle the fragmentation 
of supply, a historical point of friction and inefficiency. DSPs leverage 
automation, technology built within the DSP allows the marketer to dictate in 
real time what they are willing to pay for a particular ad impression. Gone are 
the days of "spray and pray". With precision, marketers can ensure that they 
are serving the right impression to the right audience at the right time.

Let's continue with the gaming app example above, but approach the scenario 
from an ad buyer's perspective. A large telecoms marketer has been keeping a 
close eye on the explosive growth of this publisher's latest application and 
identifies that the audience is a spot-on match for an upcoming advertising 
campaign.

The marketer pulls together the parameters and goals for their upcoming 
campaign and reaches out to their DSP partner who is connected to the ad 
exchange this publisher leverages. After the campaign details are communicated 
and entered into the DSP's tool, within minutes the telecoms marketer's ads are 
now appearing in the hot gaming publisher's latest application.

So if you're a publisher or an advertiser, it's worth taking a little time to 
understand how RTB might apply to your business. For many parts of the online 
advertising industry, there's a more efficient market to be discovered and a 
great opportunity to capitalise on economies of scale.

Janae McDonough is director of exchange at Twitter <https://twitter.com/>. You 
can follow her@janaer64 <https://twitter.com/JanaeR64>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 