
There are certain signs you are getting older – a growing preference for 
comfort over style, the feeling that eating a toffee might dislodge a tooth, 
the dawning realisation that you have never met a nymphomaniac, that sort of 
thing. Most definitive among them, however, is the powerful urge to write an 
angry letter to the newspapers whenever a word or phrase suddenly comes into 
common usage.

"Lost his mojo" is one of them. Once the prerogative of Delta blues singers, 
this summer it has been used to describe just about anyone who's suffered a dip 
in performance – many of them, frankly, the sort of people who were about as 
likely to have had a mojo in the first place as Howlin' Wolf was to don a Laura 
Ashley frock and sing Annie's Song.

Five-for is another. To start off with it seemed to be used only by Dave 
Podmore but this summer five-for has gained such acceptance that the Guardian 
style council has formalised the hyphen and even Christopher Martin-Jenkins is 
saying it (though in fairness to CM-J he does pronounce it so that you can 
clearly hear the inverted commas).

All in all, I don't suppose there's anything much wrong with five-for beyond a 
Phillip Hughes-like inelegance. For starters it saves the bother of typing the 
word wickets, or remembering how many runs the bowler conceded. I'm not sure if 
the full implications of its use have yet been worked out, however. Saying 
somebody took a five-for doesn't tell the full story. At Kingston in 1930 the 
West Indies spinner Tommy Scott took a five-for against England. Unfortunately 
for him England scored 849 and 266 of them came off his bowling. Perhaps 
Duckworth and Lewis can be prevailed upon to come up with some universally 
acceptable wickets-to-runs ratio after which five-for can no longer be used?

Five-for, as I say, saves a whole lot of typing. Sadly the fashion for using 
players' given names rather than just their initials takes up the seconds it 
conserves. The move away from initials seems to me a great pity. Initials used 
to play a very important part in cricket. The placement of them, for example, 
told people whether a cricketer was a gentleman or a player, leading to the now 
infamous Lord's PA announcement: "On today's scorecard FJ Titmus should read 
Titmus FJ."

The players' initials were a source of fascination to juvenile cricket fans of 
all ages, too. During my teenage years I wasted many hours that might more 
profitably have been spent vandalising phone boxes, poring over the Playfair
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Annual. I have forgotten 
much that I learned during my adolescence – how to calculate velocity, the 
names of the bones in the ear, where I put the keys to my grandfather's shed – 
but I will go to my grave knowing that the T in JRT Barclay (Sussex) stood for 
Troutbeck and that had Gordon Greenidge opted to be called by his first given 
name rather than his second we'd have known him as Cuthbert.

Trivial stuff, you may think. Perhaps, though I should say that my in-depth 
study of cricketers' initials also led me to a striking conclusion on how an 
Ashes series is won and lost, a conclusion England's latest victory does much 
to confirm. I will spare you all the details, suffice to say that when an 
English XI takes the field with fewer initials than its Australian opponents it 
generally wins, while if it has more it is, by and large, on the end of a sound 
thrashing.

Take the controversial 1932-3 series for example. DR Jardine's team, featuring 
no fewer than five sturdy northerners with just one initial each plus the Nawab 
of Pataudi who had dispensed with them altogether and, shaking off the 
inclusion of LEG Ames (the E stood for Ethelbert), easily defeated WM 
Woodfull's men. Some will put that down to bodyline bowling but I believe the 
fact England had just 18 initials while Australia frequently started with 24 
tells its own story.

By contrast, in 1958-59 England sailed southwards with a side many considered 
to be the finest ever to leave these shores. Unfortunately PBH May's starting 
line-up boasted 24 initials while an Australian team marshalled by the 
splendidly minimalist R Benaud had 23. The Aussies won easily. Some will say 
that was all down to fast bowler I Meckiff's controversial action. I say it had 
more to do with the fact that Mr and Mrs Meckiff couldn't be bothered to give 
their son more than one forename.

1970-71: R Illingworth, G Boycott, K Shuttleworth and co 21 initials, 
Australia 22. Result – England win. 1974-75: KWR Fletcher, APE Knott, RGD 
Willis etc 23 initials, Aussies 22. Result – England hammered.

Naturally there have been exceptions. Under SR Waugh Australia often had more 
initials than England yet still won. There is, however, a simple explanation 
for that – their players were far, far better than ours.

And this time around? Well A Flintoff and G Onions have clearly played their 
part in our victory but the biggest factor must surely have been the injury to 
B Lee. It wasn't Brett's fast bowling Ponting's side missed so much as the fact 
he was the only Australian who could balance the appellative extravagance of 
MEK Hussey.
 