
News that American Apparel has banned office romances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/07/american-apparel-bans-work-romances>
 made me think back to my own. Being a nervous, controlling type (form an 
orderly queue etc), I made sure mine took place when I had nothing to lose. I 
was in my teens and temping at Marks & Spencer. I had no interest in the job, 
which was working mainly in the food department. My sole ambition was to get 
enough drinking money for two rounds. So the stakes were fairly low.

The girl I ended up seeing – let’s call her Chrissy – was just marginally 
superior to me: she was full time, and in her 20s. We did our fair bit of 
sneaking around, probably because it made the job at hand – mostly 
shelf-stacking and checking the best-before dates – more interesting. Here are 
five rules I have for those embarking on a work romance.

1) The toilets are now Valentino’s bedroom

Where do young hearts run free? Well, sadly, your choices are very limited. 
There is no mythical stationery cupboard you can retreat to. Really, the sole 
place of privacy is the toilets. You’ll have to deal with the fact you have 
some dusty old cans of Febreze and a rusty mirror for company. And you’ll have 
to train your eyes to not look at the floor tiles too much in case you vomit 
when you see the state of them. Chrissy and I also had the “cold room”, where 
all the frozen meats were kept. It was dark and not particularly populated, but 
also freezing. I found this romantic until I thought I had arthritis in my 
immobile knuckles from the cold.

2) Accept that everything becomes euphemistically loaded

Linguistically speaking you become your idiot brother. Tragically, your 
language descends into the kind of desperate euphemisms you only get in panto. 
The most common-or-garden phrases become filled with heavy double entendres. In 
our relationship there were lots of unrepeatable, cringe-making comments 
involving various fruit, vegetables, three-for-two meal deals and, for some 
reason I can’t quite remember now, taramasalata.

3) Make cigarettes your new buddies

Previously a nonsmoker, I took it up when I was seeing Chrissy. Necessity 
dictated that we spent as much time together as we could, and there was no 
better, more acceptable time to do that than the fag break. We held hands as I 
took the occasional puff, secretly hoping I wouldn’t cough my guts out and the 
ruse would be up. Long-suffering asthma condition be damned!

4) You are living in cheap romantic fiction. Roll with it.

At the beginning of my office relationship, I was filled with an exhilarating 
sense that I was living a grownup life for the first time. I felt rebellious 
but also strangely alive. There was also a sense that my life had turned into 
the plot of a limited-release romcom. I was living cheap fiction, and I loved 
it.

5) Prepare for loneliness

When the break-up comes, the aftermath is made even more difficult because no 
one knows about your relationship. I’ve never felt more lonely than when we 
split, and I shamefully realised that I had no colleagues to chat to because 
I’d spent months ignoring them in favour of spending time with Chrissy. My 
advice? Don’t forget about the other people in your office environment who 
could help you when times get tough. Otherwise you’ll end up spending your 
lunch breaks alone listening to lots of Alanis Morissette – and no one needs 
that.
 