
It has a fair claim to be the ugliest philosophy the postwar world has 
produced. Selfishness, it contends, is good, altruism evil, empathy and 
compassion are irrational and destructive. The poor deserve to die; the rich 
deserve unmediated power. It has already been tested, and has failed 
spectacularly and catastrophically. Yet the belief system constructed byAyn Rand
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayn_Rand>, who died 30 years ago today, has 
never been more popular or influential.

Rand was a Russian from a prosperous family who emigrated to the United 
States. Through her novels (such as Atlas Shrugged) and her nonfiction (such as 
The Virtue of Selfishness) she explained a philosophy she called Objectivism. 
This holds that the only moral course is pure self-interest. We owe nothing, 
she insists, to anyone, even to members of our own families. She described the 
poor and weak as "refuse" and "parasites", and excoriated anyone seeking to 
assist them. Apart from the police, the courts and the armed forces, there 
should be no role for government: no social security, no public health or 
education, no public infrastructure or transport, no fire service, no 
regulations, no income tax.

Atlas Shrugged, published in 1957, depicts a United States crippled by 
government intervention in which heroic millionaires struggle against a nation 
of spongers. The millionaires, whom she portrays as Atlas holding the world 
aloft, withdraw their labour, with the result that the nation collapses. It is 
rescued, through unregulated greed and selfishness, by one of the heroic 
plutocrats,John Galt <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Galt>.

The poor die like flies as a result of government programmes and their own 
sloth and fecklessness. Those who try to help them are gassed. In a notorious 
passage, she argues that all the passengers in a train filled with poisoned 
fumes deserved their fate. One, for instance, was a teacher who taught children 
to be team players; one was a mother married to a civil servant, who cared for 
her children; one was a housewife "who believed that she had the right to elect 
politicians, of whom she knew nothing".

Rand's is the philosophy of the psychopath, a misanthropic fantasy of cruelty, 
revenge and greed. Yet, asGary Weiss <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gary_Weiss> 
shows in his new book, Ayn Rand Nation, she has become to the new right what 
Karl Marx once was to the left: a demigod at the head of achiliastic 
<http://www.thefreedictionary.com/chiliasm> cult. Almost one third of 
Americans, according to a recent poll, have read Atlas Shrugged, and it now 
sells hundreds of thousands of copies every year.

Ignoring Rand's evangelical atheism, the Tea Party movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tea-party-movement> has taken her to its 
heart. No rally of theirs is complete without placards reading "Who is John 
Galt?" and "Rand was right". Rand, Weiss argues, provides the unifying ideology 
which has "distilled vague anger and unhappiness into a sense of purpose". She 
is energetically promoted by the broadcasters Glenn Beck, Rush Limbaugh and 
Rick Santelli. She is the guiding spirit of the Republicans in Congress.

Like all philosophies, Objectivism is absorbed, secondhand, by people who have 
never read it. I believe it is making itself felt on this side of the Atlantic: 
in the clamorous new demands to remove the 50p tax band for the very rich, for 
instance; or among the sneering, jeering bloggers who write for the Telegraph 
and the Spectator, mocking compassion and empathy, attacking efforts to make 
the word a kinder place.

It is not hard to see why Rand appeals to billionaires. She offers 
them something that is crucial to every successful political movement: a sense 
of victimhood. She tells them that they are parasitised by the ungrateful poor 
and oppressed by intrusive, controlling governments.

It is harder to see what it gives the ordinary teabaggers, who would suffer 
grievously from a withdrawal of government. But such is the degree of 
misinformation which saturates this movement and so prevalent in the US is 
Willy Loman syndrome (the gulf between reality and expectations) that millions 
blithely volunteer themselves as billionaires' doormats. I wonder how many 
would continue to worship at the shrine ofAyn Rand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ayn-rand> if they knew that towards the end 
of her life she signed on for both Medicare and social security. She had railed 
furiously against both programmes, as they represented everything she despised 
about the intrusive state. Her belief system was no match for the realities of 
age and ill health.

But they have a still more powerful reason to reject her philosophy: as Adam 
Curtis's BBC documentary showed last year, the most devoted member of her inner 
circle wasAlan Greenspan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Greenspan>, former 
head of the US Federal Reserve. Among the essays he wrote for Rand were those 
published in a book he co-edited with her calledCapitalism: the Unknown Ideal 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capitalism:_The_Unknown_Ideal>. Here, starkly 
explained, you'll find the philosophy he brought into government. There is no 
need for the regulation of business – even builders or Big Pharma – he argued, 
as "the 'greed' of the businessman or, more appropriately, his profit-seeking … 
is the unexcelled protector of the consumer". As for bankers, their need to win 
the trust of their clients guarantees that they will act with honour and 
integrity. Unregulated capitalism, he maintains, is a "superlatively moral 
system".

Once in government, Greenspan applied his guru's philosophy to the letter, 
cutting taxes for the rich, repealing the laws constraining banks, refusing to 
regulate the predatory lending and the derivatives trading which eventually 
brought the system down. Much of this is already documented, but Weiss shows 
that in the US, Greenspan has successfully airbrushed history.

Despite the many years he spent at her side, despite his previous admission 
that it was Rand who persuaded him that "capitalism is not only efficient and 
practical but also moral", he mentioned her in his memoirs only to suggest that 
it was a youthful indiscretion – and this, it seems, is now the official 
version. Weiss presents powerful evidence that even today Greenspan remains her 
loyal disciple, having renounced his partial admission of failure to Congress.

Saturated in her philosophy, the new right on both sides of the Atlantic 
continues to demand the rollback of the state, even as the wreckage of that 
policy lies all around. The poor go down, the ultra-rich survive and prosper. 
Ayn Rand would have approved.

Twitter: @georgemonbiot <http://twitter.com/georgemonbiot>

A fully referenced version of this article can be found at www.monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 