
At the beginning of my sophomore year of high school, a close family friend 
passed away. The day of the wake, I went to school and informed my friend that 
I was feeling extremely anxious about having to go to one for the first time. 
That friend handed me two pills, telling me that they would help me get through 
it.

This was the day I met the love of my life, opiates.

I can remember the feeling I got from taking those two small pills: it was a 
feeling of complete elation. All of the anxiety that normally consumed me 
disappeared. It was as if I was having an out-of-body experience and I somehow 
morphed into a different person, one who no longer cared about anything. This 
was a feeling I wanted to feel for the rest of my life. The next day I remember 
waking up wondering where I could find more of these pills.

Heroin crisis: presidential candidates forced to confront issue on campaign 
trail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/10/heroin-crisis-new-hampshire-2016-presidential-candidates>
When somebody makes the decision to take a drug, they do not intend to become 
an addict. Still, it wasn’t long before I was skimming through the medicine 
cabinets of every residence I entered to see if they had any narcotic pain 
medications. Getting high became more of a priority to me than going to school, 
and I started leaving after I checked into homeroom. Since I managed to make up 
all of my missed school assignments, my teachers passed me. By the end of my 
senior year, in order to make it through the school day, I would have to stand 
my textbook up on my desk so I could hide behind it and take pills without 
being noticed.

When high school ended, finding and using drugs became my main focus. I 
decided that college would have to wait.

I learned how to support my habit by stealing anything I could get my hands 
on. My family was pretty well off, so this was a great way for me to obtain 
money. My mother would send me to the bank with her ATM card and ask me to 
withdraw money from her account for her, and I would take out whatever amount 
she asked and obtain the receipt from the initial transaction. Next, I would 
put her card back into the machine and take out whatever I needed for myself. 
Then I would give her the first receipt and dispose of the second one.

Eventually she would catch me, and I always managed to convince her that I 
didn’t do anything wrong and she must have forgotten about a bill that she had 
paid. I stole jewelry from family members and pawned it. I had a close relative 
who was on pain medication after getting hit by a drunk driver and breaking 32 
bones. I would visit her and break into her safe to steal her pain medication, 
not caring about how she would feel when she ran out.

I did whatever I needed to do to feed my addiction without a second thought 
until, at age 20, I became pregnant with my daughter.

I would lay awake in bed at night rubbing my belly and crying to my unborn 
child, promising that I was going to do better and stop taking pills. The next 
morning I would wake up with every intention of not taking drugs, but the 
craving would take over and eventually I would give in. I loved my unborn baby 
more than anything in this entire world except for opiate pain pills.

I promised myself that once my daughter came into this world I was going to 
change my life around. Instead my addiction just grew stronger – and it was 
becoming increasingly harder to feed.

The thought of not having pills consumed my entire being. I would lay in bed 
at night wondering where I could get more pills from the next day. I would wake 
up in the morning and immediately begin looking for drugs. I had already 
exhausted robbing money from my family. I had taken every single pain pill I 
could find from people’s homes. I had developed a name for myself with the 
local physicians, and they refused to write me narcotics prescriptions.

My heroin addict friend: 'As her rehab story collapsed, my anger increased'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/02/heroin-addiction-drugs-shelly-new-york-rehab>
It soon dawned on me that if I just started to write my own prescriptions I 
would never have to worry again about how or where to find more. I visited the 
doctor, stole a prescription pad and began to write and fill my own 
prescriptions.

I was visiting a friend’s house one day and he used my car to run to the 
pharmacy to fill a prescription that I had written in his name. Soon after he 
left, the police called to tell me that my friend had been arrested for 
possession of marijuana and they found my pocketbook in my car. They told me 
that I would need to go to the station to retrieve my belongings.

As soon as I walked in, I was handcuffed, arrested, charged with fraud and 
taken into a room for questioning. I told the police everything that they 
wanted to know about the prescriptions I had been filling in two separate 
states.

The judge in the fraud case offered me a diversion program that would allow me 
to have my felony record expunged if I maintained one year of sobriety. That 
one year turned into three years because I had several relapses along the way.

It was while I was in that program that I was introduced to heroin, a much 
cheaper alternative to opiates. Although designed to help addicts seek out 
recovery, for many diversionary programs become a way to share tips. Once I 
learned from my comrades who sold it and started shooting heroin, I overdosed 
numerous times.

I would often wake up in the hospital with a sore throat from the intubation 
that had, unbeknownst to me, helped save my life. After several admissions into 
treatment facilities and several incarcerations, eventually I was able to stay 
clean for long enough to complete the drug court program and expunge my 
criminal record.


I decided to go to college and pursue a degree in substance abuse so that I 
could help others like me. I started seeing my daughter, then five years old 
and living with relatives, regularly, and eventually I was permitted to have 
her on the weekends. I began working as a substance abuse counselor. Things 
were really beginning to turn around for me.

Then, in November 2013, I was sitting outside of my daughter’s school when I 
received a phone call telling me that my father had unexpectedly passed away. I 
was raised by my stepfather, so, at the time, didn’t feel too emotional. But 
about a month later, I began having anxiety attacks.

I went to the doctor and I was offered a prescription for Xanax. As an addict 
in recovery, I knew the dangers associated with putting any controlled 
substances in my body. But considering how well I was doing, I thought it was 
safe for me to take. Before the end of the following day, the one-month supply 
of Xanax was gone, and I was once again chasing a feeling that took over my 
life.

Rapid rise of heroin use in US tied to prescription opioid abuse, CDC suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/08/heroin-use-overdose-deaths-us-prescription-opioids>
Within three months from when I first received the Xanax prescription, I 
obtained and took so many pills that I was pulled over and charged with four 
DUIs within a month.

After the fourth arrest, I was once again sitting in a cell, about to be 
sentenced to a year in prison. I remember thinking about how I went from 
working, going to school and having my daughter back to losing it all within a 
month.

When I began my sentence, I called my mom to tell her that I would not be 
returning home for a while. My stepdad answered my mother’s phone and informed 
me that the cough my mother had, which was believed to be bronchitis, was 
actually stage four lung cancer. I dropped the phone, fell to my knees and 
broke down.

How, I thought, could this possibly be real? Here I was in prison, ordered to 
serve a year for a relapse to drugs. I’d lost everything that I had worked so 
hard to regain. I let my daughter down once again. My father had passed away 
four months earlier. And now the closest person to me – the one who always 
stuck by my side – just found out that she has stage four lung cancer, and I 
wasn’t even there to help take care of her.

Over the next month, I would call to check on my mother, and my stepfather 
would tell me how she was doing. She seemed to be getting better after starting 
chemotherapy. But after that month I was called out of my cell and brought into 
a room with the jail minister, where he told me that my mother had passed away. 
The news rekindled my determination to construct a program of recovery for 
myself that would enable me to help others.

After getting out of prison, I immediately went back to school to finish my 
degree in substance abuse. I became a volunteer for Shine a Light on Heroin 
(Saloh), a grassroots organization intended to bring awareness to the growing 
drug epidemic in my community. I was able to complete my degree and start a job 
as a drug counselor at a men’s residential drug treatment facility in Rhode 
Island. My daughter, now eight, still resides with her grandparents. Although I 
am permitted visitation with her, I will never be able to regain custody of her 
due to my addiction.

There is an analogy we use in recovery: once a cucumber has turned into a 
pickle, it can never be a cucumber again. Once a person becomes a drug addict, 
everything is different. I hope that my story can help people to think before 
they pick up that first drink or drug.


There are precautionary measures we can take to try and prevent individuals 
from doing so: dispose of any narcotic medications after you are through taking 
them to prevent them from ending up in the hands of loved ones. Educate doctors 
about different pain management techniques; physical therapy, acupuncture and 
non-narcotic pain medication are all things they can order for their patients 
before writing them opiate prescriptions. Make detox centers and drug treatment 
facilities more accessible by spending more tax dollars on helping to fund 
recovery efforts throughout the nation.

And we need to stop being so afraid of the stigma associated with addiction so 
that more individuals feel empowered to come forward and bring light to the 
devastation addiction has caused. Recovery is possible, but trust me: it’s 
better if you stay a cucumber and avoid becoming a pickle.
 