
When non-blind people think of blindness, they tend to think of a tragic, 
life-limiting condition that reduces people’s interactions with and 
appreciation of the world. But for me, as for many blind or partially blind 
people, blindness is not a tragedy; it’s simply a different way of being in the 
world. Sure, it can be inconvenient at times, but it’s certainly not a fate 
worse than death.

I organised the Blind Creations conference 
<http://blindcreations.blogspot.co.uk/> to dispel this blindness-as-tragedy 
myth by celebrating blindness’s artistic potential and destabilising sight’s 
position at the top of the hierarchy of the senses. Attended by 116 delegates 
from around the world in June – around half of whom were blind – this 
conference and micro-arts festival was a forum where blind and non-blind people 
shared inventive ways of experiencing the world, from tactile books and 
photographs to haptic art.

Here are two key areas, discussed at the conference, in which art by or about 
blind people can, and indeed should, help us change society’s negative 
presumptions about blindness.


Alternative formats

Formats such as Braille and audio are often used to give blind people access 
to printed material. The sighted public’s recent enthusiasm for the audio book 
has meant that blind people can now listen to more books than ever before. But 
Braille’s perceived difficulty, as well as its voluminous nature and the fact 
that such an insignificant percentage of books published in the UK are also 
available in Braille, means that this ingenious reading system remains the 
preserve of a tiny, and diminishing, minority of blind people.

Several artists at the conference discussed how they use Braille to engage 
both blind and sighted audiences. For example, in his tactile art installation 
Too Big to Feel, blind artist David Johnson created and installed giant 
concrete Braille dots to show that the writing system is a creative means of 
expression that teaches non-blind people about autonomy and communication. It’s 
a piece that suggests print is only one, and perhaps not the best, way of 
accessing information.

Will artistic engagement with Braille lead to a renewed popularity among 
readers, writers and publishers? Realistically, I doubt it. However, even if we 
don’t see a renaissance in the Braille publishing industry, artists who 
incorporate it into their works nonetheless encourage us to question our 
privileging of sight over the other senses by celebrating blindness’s potential 
for subverting opinion.

Audio description

Audio description (AD) is increasingly available in mainstream cinemas and on 
television, but unlike audio books it remains virtually unknown outside the 
blind community. Much more than a neutral account of events on screen, the 
conference showed that AD, like Braille, is an art in itself, where the 
describer makes deliberate and subjective choices about what to mention or 
ignore.

In mainstream cinemas, blind users can access audio description through 
headsets. While this enables them to receive additional information about 
characters, plot and so on, they’re also, simultaneously, isolated from sighted 
experiences of the film. Problematically, blind cinemagoers are reliant on 
choices made by sighted describers.

We made the unusual decision at the conference to screen Across Still Water 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HSdgBw0mfZw>, Ruth Grimberg’s 2014 documentary 
about sight loss, with its audio description track so that non-blind viewers 
could experience this “blind” kind of cinemagoing.

In the film, the protagonist’s refusal to use a white cane is central to our 
understanding of his feelings about his progressive blindness. But a shot of a 
white cane lying folded on a table is not mentioned by the sighted describer. 
Blind viewers are therefore denied knowledge of the director’s decision to 
include the unused cane and unable to appreciate its dramatic symbolism.

Our discussions revealed that it’s important to engage critically with audio 
description as an artform if blind people are to experience the poetic 
subtleties of film.

Braille and audio description were created to give blind people access to a 
sighted world, but perhaps it’s time to consider them more creatively. Doing so 
could help improve not only public perceptions about blindness, but also issues 
around blind people’s access to art.

Publishing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/publishing> and film industries, 
take note!

Dr Hannah Thompson lectures in French at Royal Holloway 
<https://www.royalholloway.ac.uk/home.aspx>, University of London and is author 
of theBlind Spot blog <http://hannah-thompson.blogspot.co.uk/>

She organised the Blind Creations conference 
<http://blindcreations.blogspot.co.uk/> with Vanessa Warne

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 