
The list of requirements for a mini-rugby coach is long. You need to be 
patient. You need to be energetic. You need to be alert. Most of all, at the 
very least you need to have a basic understanding of what rugby is and how you 
play it. This, I find, is where I fall down.

I'm standing in the Old Alleynian rugby club 
<http://www.alleynian.org/OARugby/Home.php> grounds, surrounded by children. 
They're tiny. None of them even come up to my elbow. I'm stronger than them, 
faster than them and more intelligent than them. And I'm bricking it. All they 
need to do is ask how many points you get for a try, or why they're only 
allowed to pass backwards, or why the ball is even shaped like that, and I'd be 
stuffed. I haven't got a clue. I don't think I've ever so much as watched a 
rugby match all the way through, let alone played in one.

But I did used to work as a kindergarten teacher, which at least taught me the 
three main rules of looking after kids. Rule one: be approachable and 
enthusiastic. Rule two: naughty kids fall in line if you count down from five 
to zero at them. Rule three: one day the kids will discover that you're 
essentially powerless after you reach zero, and that will be the end of us.

I'm here, pretty much, because a bloke from my gym is the academy director of 
youth rugby at Old Alleynian, and was looking for volunteers. I agreed to go 
along because I like the bloke and I miss working with kids. Plus, if you're 
struck by the same terrible affliction as me, in which you spend every Sunday 
lying face down in bed with the curtains drawn, it's a great way to get you up 
and doing something active that's actually, as uncool as this sounds, rewarding.

It's something anyone can do, provided they're willing to be subjected to a 
criminal record check. The Rugby Football Union estimates that 50,000 people 
volunteer at clubs around the country and the volunteers at Old Alleynian – who 
number more than 100 – include first aiders, managers, referees, tea-makers and 
coaches. There's a great sense of everyone pitching in together, so it doesn't 
matter if – like me – you're slightly haphazard. A bit of enthusiasm gets you a 
long way.

It's a good set-up. Every Sunday morning, rain or shine, dozens of kids turn 
up for a runaround. Although Old Alleynian is the swanky Dulwich College rugby 
club in south London, thanks to its community schools outreach rugby coaching 
programme, it actively recruits kids across Southwark, so there's a big mix of 
backgrounds. Genders, too. One of the most indomitable members is a pigtailed 
little girl called Connie, who very openly refused to take any nonsense from 
any of her peers.

The kids were already in session when I arrived, running up and down the field 
with abandon. After that, the head coach took a register and set up a game of 
tag rugby, where the kids yank Velcro tags off each other in lieu of tackling. 
My job was to oversee one of the teams: making sure everyone was in the right 
place, wearing their bibs, paying attention and not just standing in a corner 
spinning around uselessly, like I used to do in PE.

It was fascinating to see the mix of kids – the squat little brutes who 
clearly loved rugby, the floppy-armed daydreamers who didn't want to be there – 
and how you have to modulate your attitude towards each of them. Also, as a 
born-and-bred floppy-armed daydreamer myself, you quickly learn not to stand 
still for too long, unless you want a muddy five-year-old to clatter into your 
shin at the speed of sound. And, for the love of all that's holy, learn to keep 
score. Apparently it really, really matters to kids that they're winning 6-5 
and not 5-4.

One of the phrases I heard most from the adults is "cat-herding". That's a 
painfully accurate description of what the task entails. You're constantly 
counting heads, but the heads are all tearing around as fast at they can and 
shouting at each other and wandering off to their dads on the sidelines to eat 
a banana. It can be exhausting.

But it's also completely worthwhile. As our session wrapped up and the kids 
scattered away to the car park, the head coach asked if I'd fancy volunteering 
more regularly next season, and I said yes. I suppose this means I should learn 
how rugby works.

Stuart volunteered with Old Alleynian Mini-Rugby 
<http://www.alleynian.org/rugby/mini_rugby/>. If you'd like to volunteer at 
your local rugby club,click here 
<http://www.rfu.com/managingrugby/clubdevelopment/volunteers>.

Stuart's tips: how to be a successful kids' coach


Keep control. Prepare for your coaching session by trying to herd a swarm of 
flies into a plastic cup

Don't worry about the rules. For now, just be enthusiastic and energetic

This isn't about you. Don't spend the whole session showing the children how 
brilliant you are at rugby

You are an adult. Do not let the children intimidate you, no matter how many 
times they call you names

When all else fails, high-five the kids. High-five like the wind!
 