
Kendall Ciesemier is the founder of charity Kids Caring 4 Kids 
<http://www.kidscaring4kids.org/>, an organisation she created after seeing an 
Oprah Winfrey special on the plight of Aids orphans in Africa. Despite battling 
her own chronic liver disease, Ciesemier was inspired to try to change the 
lives of those affected by the Aids pandemic and to encourage other children to 
do the same. She tells us of the power her personal story has in showing others 
they too can make a difference.

You saw Oprah’s show on Aids orphans when you were 11 – do you remember how 
you felt?

When I saw the show I was stunned. I couldn’t believe I had never heard of the 
Aids pandemic before and was upset that kids were growing up without parents 
and no one had bothered to tell me about it, or ask for my help. I kept 
thinking: “okay, they said that $10 (£6.21) can buy a uniform for kids to go to 
school, I have $10. I can help.”

I wanted to create a venue for kids to get involved and a place where their 
small contributions would be valued and celebrated. I also felt that I needed 
to take immediate action myself, so that night I went on Google to search for a 
way to help. I found an orphan sponsorship program online and an eight-year-old 
girl from Mauritania who needed my help. I started there and Kids Caring 4 Kids 
grew from that experience.

How do use storytelling at Kids Caring 4 Kids to inspire others? 

The mission of the charity is to inspire and empower young people to help 
provide basic human needs for children living in sub-Saharan Africa. We use 
storytelling in order to meet the mission of the organisation. We work to 
recreate the same experience I had at 11 when I first heard about the problem.


Through storytelling, we are able to expose young people to issues that put 
other kids like them in a vulnerable position. We are able to empower these 
kids to act by sharing the story of how my charity started, by one 11-year-old 
girl wanting to help another eight-year-old girl. Storytelling is so entwined 
in the fabric of the organisation. Nothing we do would be possible without it.

How has your own illness inspired you to help others?

Growing up with a rare pediatric liver disease made me feel different, which I 
think attracted me to others who were different and those struggling with 
something. I knew how I felt and I wanted to help alleviate that feeling for 
someone else. Far before Kids Caring 4 Kids, I took it upon myself to find 
people who were struggling with something and befriend them. I always wanted to 
support people. Growing up with an illness gave me empathy for others.

How does your own story inspire others?

My own personal story is evidence that people can give from anywhere. I 
started Kids Caring 4 Kids from a hospital room. I started by helping one 
person and it snowballed from there. When I share my story, I think that’s what 
affects people the most – the fact that I started all of this during a time of 
personal struggle and weakness. If I could do that, then they can do something 
too.

What do you hope to do when you leave university?

I am pursuing a career in journalism. My dream job after college is to host a 
documentary series highlighting the problems in our country that impact young 
people in the US. I really like long-form storytelling because that’s where I 
feel I can make the most impact. Often we see experts on television talk about 
issues that they are really far from and have never experienced. I want to 
change that. I want to give a voice to people who are dealing firsthand with 
issues like immigration, poverty, sexual assault and police brutality.

What will you be talking about at the Transformational Media summit?

I will be sharing my own story in starting my charity and how the power of 
seeing one story propelled me to take action, resulting in a movement of kids 
taking action. My own personal story and experience is evidence of the power a 
story can have. Then I’m going to talk about how we try to create that 
experience for other young people. We try to tell one story that will change 
their lives and move them to action.

Kendall Ciesemier will be speaking at the Transformational Media summit in 
Washington, DC – find out morehere <http://www.tmsummit.org/>


More like this

• Roots of storytelling and media
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/oct/16/why-mtv-is-using-a-teen-drama-and-tech-to-tackle-hiv>
• Why MTV is using tech and teen drama to tackle HIV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/oct/16/why-mtv-is-using-a-teen-drama-and-tech-to-tackle-hiv>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox, sign up free forMedia Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>. 

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Brought to you by’. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>



 