
In a smoky bar, teenagers loll on sofas. The girls' high-street finery, a 
Lycra mishmash of tat and glitter, sparkles feebly under red, yellow and purple 
neon strip lights. Boys play arcade games, deal drugs and ignore the girls. 
This could be any small-town nightspot, although the setting is actually rural 
south Wales. As in most clubs a few hours into the night, the heat is crushing.

At the edge of this scene a young woman has taken a hairdryer to her armpits. 
"Hiya!" she chirps, brassily. This is the film set for A Way of Life, a British 
teen movie exploring youth subcultures and childhood friendship. But the 
subject matter is chiefly race hate, with teenage pregnancy, abuse and the 
failings of social services in the mix. "A heartwarming British comedy," 
someone jokes, grimly.

On paper the plot is bleak. It begins with a murderous attack on a Turkish man 
by a group of teens whose leader is a young single mother. The film then 
backtracks through the days leading up to the attack, exploring the gang's 
lives. Trapped in poverty and deprived of a voice, they have taken up racism as 
their language for expressing rage against the world.

A Way of Life features acting heavyweights Brenda Blethyn (as a meddling 
grandmother) and Oliver Haden (as the British-Turkish Hassan, victim of the 
assault), but the actors who carry the film are a group of Welsh unknowns. 
Eighteen-year-old actress Stephanie James, as the ringleader Leigh Anne, is in 
almost every scene, and with armpits dry shows no signs of flagging. Her 
19-year-old co-stars, Nathan Jones (playing her brother Gavin) and Dean Wong 
(friend Stephen), bounce around with enthusiastic zing. If the story is 
downbeat, you wouldn't know it. "I met my arresting officer over lunch," pipes 
Dean referring to his character's tragic demise. It is the last day of shooting 
and spirits are high.

With the cameras rolling, the mood hardly changes. Just teenagers on a night 
out at their local haunt. Leigh Anne laughs with a friend while Gavin eyes up a 
dark-haired girl. Suddenly, Leigh Anne's tone hardens as she warns Gavin to 
remember the "Pakis" in the smart housing that they weren't entitled to. "But 
Julie's not a Paki," protests Gavin, defending his Turkish girlfriend. "She 
might as well be," Leigh Anne spits.

Tackling race issues in Britain has thrown up plenty of problems for 
film-makers. Recent offerings such as East Is East and Anita and Me have 
skirted around the contemporary relevance of their subject matter by being set 
in the past. "I really hope A Way of Life doesn't fall into that," says 
first-time directorAmma Asante <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amma-asante> 
over the din in her trailer, which is rocking from side to side as the cast 
yell and jump around next door. "I started writing this during the 
Bradford-Burnley riots. You'd listen to the Asian kids and they'd say one 
thing, and then you'd listen to the white kids and they'd say exactly the same: 
'We have no future, we're frightened.' I wanted to say, 'It's all of us.'"

In fact, there could scarcely be a more relevant issue to the current 
generation of teenagers than racism. In 2001-02, nearly half of all racist 
crimes in Greater Manchester were committed by 16-25-year-olds, and Oldham in 
particular has seen some of the nastiest racist conflict of the past 15 years. 
For Asante, setting her film outside London is essential to its modernity.

"There is this idea that if you're talking about the modern UK, a film should 
be set in London," she explains. "But these are Valleys kids. They don't know a 
lot of black people and that, to me, represents the majority of the UK. London 
is another country. I listen to talk radio a lot. It gives me the views that 
the rest of the UK might be thinking. I hear things like, 'It was Stephen 
Lawrence's friend who killed him.' Nobody would get away with saying that in 
London.'"

Asante started out as a child actress in Grange Hill, moving into 
scriptwriting at the age of 23. At 28 she became the first black woman in the 
UK to write and produce her own drama series, BBC2's Brothers and Sisters. She 
had planned for an established director to take on her script for A Way of 
Life. Eventually, though, and with encouragement from the Film Council (which 
has been under fire for its failure to back black talent in the industry), it 
became clear that Asante was the right person for the project. For one thing, 
it was her story. She grew up in the 1980s in Streatham, south London, and is 
no stranger to racial tension.

"Streatham is such a diverse area now. It wasn't then," she remembers. "We 
were one of two black families living on a very long street when I was down 
there. Hassan ain't got nothing on me when it comes to the kind of language 
that was chucked at us."

Although Asante is aware of the implications of being labelled a "black woman 
director", and understandably wants to avoid the niche of telling only black 
stories, she is keen not to bash an audience over the head with black and white 
interpretations. Wong puts the teenagers' point of view. "We don't mean these 
things. We're growing up and we smoke some blow once in a while to get happy. 
But we don't mean any harm to anyone," he says. Gary Sheppeard, who plays 
another of the gang, agrees. "It's as if we fell into the racial hate. We've 
been pushed into a corner by our community. And the community's brought it on."

Asante's decision to make her central character an 18-year-old racist white 
girl was inspired by the rise in girl gang crime a few years ago. She cites 
"the Ladbroke Grove rape [in 2001 when an 18-year-old woman was found guilty of 
rape], along with girl-led muggings, and a murder in south Wales led by a girl 
gang", as a source of inspiration. And with the release of Thirteen and the 
recent showing of Channel 4's Pleasureland, this vision seems part of a new 
focus in film on the lives of teenage girls. "I'm black and I'm a woman, and I 
can identify with other human beings," Asante says matter-of-factly. "But for 
me to be able to identify with a character who ultimately was going to express 
quite racist views, the easiest way was to make her fairly young and a woman."

Stories examining the make-up of a racist are sticky subjects, and it's easy 
to see why film-makers and financiers have often shied away. The 20-year-old 
Feltham prisoner Robert Stewart, who murdered his 19-year-old cellmate Zahid 
Mubarek in 2000, had cited Romper Stomper, the cult Australian film about 
skinhead violence, as inspiration. Similarly, American History X, in which 
Edward Norton plays a pin-up boy neo-Nazi with a superhuman body, used a 
plethora of Nazi imagery in its promotion. "It's a concern," says Asante. "I 
hope A Way of Life works on several levels, so even those who aren't going to 
look at the intellectual side of this film will look at the emotional side and 
see that the kids are not happy. Complete self-destruction - I hope that 
teenagers will get that."

Racism is clearly an issue that needs addressing with fresh eyes, though 
whether it's a subject the A Way of Life generation are ready for is a source 
of debate among the cast and crew. "To be honest with you, I don't think they 
will go and see it," reckons Sheppeard. "It's not action sequences and special 
effects." Jones, on the other hand, is an unabashed optimist, asserting: "This 
is the film that's going to put Welsh film on the map. Strong statement, I 
know."

Whatever the public response to her film, Asante knows the significance of the 
teenage underclass. "They have a world that exists within our world, which is 
something all teenagers can identify with. They could be anyone."
 