
The speed at which we all produce and expect things in 2014 is incredible. 
Most of us no longer have the virtue of patience. But then why do we need this 
when most things in the 21st century are instant? It has been found that 47% of 
consumers expect a webpage to load in two seconds or less and up to 87% of us 
will abandon a site if we experience this full delay. It seems we can't spare 
seconds, let alone minutes.

Similarly with design, creatives are no longer cutting and sticking 
letterforms in the dead of night in order to send them by post the next day. Of 
course not, we have Macs, CMD+Z and email. But not only are we expected to 
design more quickly we're expected to produce killer ideas and concepts faster. 
The question is, what's the effect of a speedy outcome?

Take a leaf out of Paul Smith's book

A while ago I listened to a talk by Paul Smith at the Design Museum, where 
he's currently holding his exhibition: Hello I Am Paul Smith. That evening it 
became clear just how he had got to the top – and stayed there. He isn't 
greedy; he isn't narrow-minded; he simply loves what he does. Everything 
inspires him – a bird, a building, a binman, you name it. He thrives on 
experiences and capturing moments on camera you know, instead of Googling them, 
and he understands people – his designers, his customers and the people he 
collaborates with; and that's because he gives them time. He works in his 
office every weekday and in his shops every weekend.

Thinkers and makers

We live in a world of thinkers and makers. Thinkers tend to produce at speed 
because they want instant growth and profit. They are the ones behind bands 
such as JLS, for whom there was never a long-term plan. There didn't need to 
be, as bands such as these can be reproduced easily. The only problem is, they 
start from the top and work their way down.

Makers, on the other hand, are all about doing what they love, not for the 
money or recognition, but for pure joy and contentment - people like Paul Smith.

The catch

Unfortunately, time is not an indulgence creatives are afforded. Because of 
consumers' increasing impatience, brands are under pressure to deliver 
everything quicker – including content and campaigns. Over the past few years 
the rise of social media and reactive campaigns – such as Oreo's campaign in 
response to the blackout at the Super Bowl, has started to slip into regular 
campaigns. Brands now expect creatives to deliver at a similar pace.

Processes have had to change

Processes have had to change to enable creative departments to keep up with 
the expected pace, and there's always going to be the odd job that needs to 
literally be thrown out of the door and couriered, but what about the jobs that 
have far too much potential to rush?

I picked up a book a few weeks back called Do You Want It Good or Do You Want 
It Tuesday? by Ruth Artmonsky. This hit the nail on the head. Of course I can 
deliver this deadline, but there's going to be compromises, and what's the 
point in that? Inevitably, doing the right work takes time because it relies on 
feedback to grow, and is a team effort. To ensure longevity in a design – or 
indeed anything, you need to work with people to grow from the bottom up.

Emma Benyon is a junior designer at creative engagement agency Rufus Leonard 
<http://www.rufusleonard.com/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 