
After many years of working closely together, HSBC and NGO, Earthwatch, 
decided in 2007 to extend their partnership and design the world's largest 
employee engagement programme focused on the issue of climate change.

The aim over five years is to engage a third of HSBC's a staff – some 100,000 
people – in learning about climate change and building the skills to help 
reduce the bank's carbon footprint, while increasing efficiency and cutting 
costs.

The programme is using online learning and one-day environmental volunteering 
projects to inspire staff.

HSBC's climate champions also get the chance to make two-week residential 
visits to Earthwatch's five research centres in the US, UK, Brazil, India and 
China. Here they are working alongside scientists to study how human activity 
is affecting the way temperate and tropical forests are responding to climate 
change.

The hope is that by giving staff the chance to take part in intensive learning 
programmes and to work in vital scientific research in the field, they will 
become effective agents for change both in the workplace and the wider 
community.

The field trips give the HSBC champions a chance to gather vital scientific 
data and, by 2012, they will have contributed nearly 100,000 hours of research. 
They also attend intensive interactive classes on the ecological and 
socio-economic impacts of climate change – including how it will affect the 
bank's own bottom line.

On their return to work they are asked to devise a project that helps to 
develop HSBC's approach to sustainability.

One champion developed an e-advice service for customers, saving more than 10m 
sheets of paper and $400,000 a year. Another devised a night-time switch off 
the computer campaign, which has saved 4.5m kWh of electricity since 2008.

To date, 38,000 HSBC staff have taken part in local environmental volunteering 
and the aim is to get 100,000 taking part in the online classes.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 