
The England & Wales Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board 
has confirmed that Hugh Morris is to leave his position as managing director of 
cricket.

He has accepted the combined position of chief executive and director of 
cricket with Glamorgan, the county he captained as a player, but it is 
understood he will remain with theECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> 
until the conclusion of this winter's Ashes Down Under.

Alan Hamer, Glamorgan's current chief executive, confirmed his own departure 
on Sunday.

The ECB has started its recruitment process but there are two very prominent 
names already linked with the role.

The team director, Andy Flower, was reported on Sunday to be ready to step down
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/25/england-andy-flower-future> 
from his day-to-day involvement with the side and it would be a huge coup for 
the ECB to keep him involved with England's long-term strategy.

Asked at a press conference on Monday whether he was interested in the role, 
Flower said: "I don't look too far ahead with regard to my own personal 
situation and now have the challenge of an away Ashes."

The former England captain Andrew Strauss has also been mooted for the role 
after working for Sky television this summer and Morris saw no reason why he 
should not succeed him.

"I've not spoken to Andrew about it because I only handed my resignation in on 
Sunday, but he is an incredibly capable man," he said.

"He is a really likeable man, he has fantastic skills and the knowledge and 
experience of the game at all levels.

"If he wanted to do it and if he got the job he'd be great but I'm sure there 
will be a lot of good candidates.

"I'd be happy to talk to the board [about the recruitment process] and the one 
thing I can say is it's a fantastic job.

"Whoever is going to sit behind this desk in future has a terrific job."

Barry O'Brien, the Glamorgan chairman, said: "We are delighted to have been 
able to appoint a person with the calibre of Hugh Morris who has achieved so 
much as managing director of England cricket.

"Hugh is also steeped in Glamorgan history having been appointed as our 
youngest ever captain in 1986 and during his second term as captain he led the 
county to the Sunday League title in 1993.

"He was also one of our most reliable and prolific batsman scoring almost 
20,000 first-class runs at an average of more than 40, but in addition to being 
a very fine player he has demonstrated in his many roles at the ECB that he is 
also an administrator of the highest ability."

Flower, who has now overseen three successive Ashes successes following the 
confirmation of England's 3-0 series win at The Oval, has been the subject of 
increased speculation.

Newspaper reports on Sunday suggested the Zimbabwean would be stepping back 
from a day to day role with the team once the return series against Australia 
is completed down under in January.

The ECB distanced itself from such suggestions when pressed to comment, but 
Flower himself was evasive when asked for a clear answer on Sky after the final 
Ashes Test. "We've got to enjoy the moment and don't look too far ahead. We 
have to really enjoy this evening," he said.

Flower relinquished responsibility for the one-day and Twenty20 sides late 
last year, ostensibly in a bid to prolong his career with England, handing the 
reins to Ashley Giles.
 