
App: hungryhouse 
<http://itunes.apple.com/za/app/hungryhouse-order-takeaway/id400227047?mt=8>

By: hungryhouse

Price: Free

Available on: iOS

What is it?

From Bangladeshi to Vietnamese, hungryhouse puts local takeaway food menus at 
your fingertips. You might remember founders Tony Charles and Shane Lake on 
Dragons' Den a few years back securing a £100,000 windfall from James Caan, 
only for it all to fall through. Doesn't seem to have worked out too badly for 
them in the long run, though.

What does it promise?

"The official free iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> app 
from hungryhouse.co.uk – putting thousands of live restaurant menus at your 
fingertips. The most convenient way to find a local restaurant, access the 
menu, and order a delivery."

Is it easy to use?

Yes. The app uses your postcode or GPS position to find participating local 
restaurants and hungryhouse lets you browse their menus and have food delivered 
to wherever you are.

You simply click on "My order", select an address for delivery (you can save 
multiple locations or ask the app to find you), select your preferred cuisine 
and away you go. Hungryhouse even gives you an estimated delivery time which, 
in our trial run, was accurate to within five minutes.

You need to register your payment details with the hungryhouse website; the 
app then lets you order and pay at the click of a button. Hungryhouse doesn't 
charge you a premium and makes much of its "environmental" potential for doing 
away with paper menus – but your favourite local takeaway will only be listed 
if it agrees to pay a 9% surcharge to hungryhouse on every order via the system.

Is it fun?

About as fun as ordering a takeaway can be. It makes it easy to experiment 
with delivery services you might not have heard of, while user reviews give an 
indication of what to expect. It's brilliant if you're lost in a major 
conurbation and in desperate need of a lamb dhansak, but (by the site's own 
admission) coverage can fall short outside cities.

Is it pretty?

It's functional rather than flashy, but what more do you want when ordering a 
takeaway? Dancing hamsters?

Should you download it?
 Hungryhouse QR-code 
Definitely. Hungryhouse is a practical and useful little app to have tucked 
away on your iPhone, and an Android version is expected within months. But if 
you're on friendly terms with the people who run your local takeaway, it might 
be best not to order from them via this app – remember, you'll be costing them 
9% on whatever you buy.
 