What is the name of the pirate who buries the treasure Jim Hawkins searches for 
in Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island?  Captain Bluebeard  Captain Flint  
Captain Hook  Captain Long John Silver What is the colour of Wally's trousers 
in Where's Wally?  Red  White  Blue  Black During the treasure hunt in Gone 
Girl, Amy directs Nick to the hometown of which famous author?  Robert Louis 
Stevenson  Ernest Hemingway  Mark Twain  Harper Lee During the witch-hunts in 
Arthur Miller's play The Crucible, which of the 10 Commandments does John 
Proctor forget when questioned?  Thou shalt not bear false witness  Thou shalt 
not steal  Thou shalt not commit adultery  Thou shalt not covet In Tess of the 
d'Urbervilles by Thomas Hardy, where is Tess cornered by police after going on 
the run?  Stonehenge  Big Ben  Hadrian's Wall  Arthur's Seat In the first Lord 
of the Rings book, The Fellowship of the Ring, how does Elrond stop the Nazgûl 
pursuing Frodo?  He frightens them with a stern look  He uses magic to banish 
them far away  He sets them on fire  He washes them all away with a giant wave 
In Tom Clancy's novel The Hunt for Red October, what is Red October?  A foreign 
spy  A ship  A submarine  A nuclear weapon In No Country for Old Men, Anton 
Chigurh is hired to kill Llewelyn Moss and recover the money he stole. How much 
money was it?  $2.4 million  $3 million  $5.6 million  $10 million What object 
does Ralph try to take back from the other boys before they start hunting him 
in The Lord of the Flies?  His shoes  His trousers  His conch shell  His glasses
Finally, we're going on a bear hunt. We're going to catch a big one. I'm not 
______?  Hungry  A bear  Pro-hunting  Scared  You got…  What a beautiful score! 
Well done.  What a beautiful score! Well done.  The hunt for perfection is not 
an impossible one – try again?  The hunt for perfection is not an impossible 
one – try again?  The hunt for perfection is not an impossible one – try again? 
 You could go under this and you could go over this. Try again?  You could go 
under this and you could go over this. Try again?  You could go under this and 
you could go over this. Try again?  Oh dear. Keep hunting for a better score.  
Oh dear. Keep hunting for a better score.  Oh dear. Keep hunting for a better 
score.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  