
App: i192

By: i-CD Publishing

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPod 
touch (requires iOS 3.0 or later)

What is it?

An app promising free directory enquiries and information on businesses, as 
well as access to electoral roll records.

Who is it by?

i-CD Publishing was founded in 1997 and offers search tools for finding 
information on people and businesses.

What does it promise?

"Search over 4m businesses at the touch of a button and 11m people for free. 
Premium data costing £1.19 in the UK per search reveals 24m edited Electoral 
Roll records and 5m Director Records, putting the UK in your pocket."

How does it work?

Use one-tap icons to access phone number and location details for hotels, 
petrol stations, banks, shops and other outlets near you. Users can also search 
for people and businesses near them. Searches throw up free and premium 
results, and include integrated maps.

Is it easy to use?

The search tools are quick and helpful, particularly for things such as petrol 
stations when speedy results might help fuel-starved drivers. But the results 
are less useful if you are looking for a particular place. If, for example, you 
want to find a certain shop you would probably be better off searching via 
GoogleMaps or using your internet browser.

Fatally, it's not straightforward how you search for people or businesses 
anywhere other than your current location. If the app cannot find anything near 
you it tells you to change your search criteria, but I could not immediately 
find a way of doing this. I could only switch between searching for "people" or 
"businesses" rather than location. The i192 creators told me there is a 
separate search box that allows you to do this – had they not, I might not have 
spotted it.

The app claims that users can swipe between daytime and evening screens to 
access the most relevant icons, but there are only two differences between the 
screens with the daytime "cafes" and "shops" categories swapping to "bars" and 
"entertainment". This is at best confusing and at worst pointless.

Is it fun?

You would have to be a serious nerd to enjoy searching for phone numbers and 
addresses – or perhaps auditioning for a new series ofYou Bet! 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_Bet!>.

Is it pretty?

While it won't win any design awards, the one-tap icons are nice enough and a 
pleasant yellow and blue theme runs throughout.

Should you download it?

Despite it being free, I'm not convinced. I think the app misunderstands what 
mobile means. A mobile device needs to be simple to use – and the search 
interface on i192 is far from that. It should also allow you to quickly perform 
functions you might ordinarily do at a fixed computer, such as look up a number 
or address. But I struggled to find out how to search for people or businesses 
anywhere other than where I was – and when I did spot the location search box, 
the app crashed on me.

I am also unconvinced that ordinary consumers will get much out of this, 
unless they are desperate to discover someone's home phone number. Bog-standard 
business details can be found via a browser using Google and/or LinkedIn.

But maybe I'm not the target market for this. Business users are clearly a big 
part of this app's focus and I am sure the ability to search "Director Records" 
is catnip for them. People who regularly use directory enquiries might find it 
equally seductive.

Recent reviews on iTunes are generally enthusiastic, ranging from "very 
impressed" to "I love this app, much better than Yell". But there are negative 
reviews too, one of which states: "Does not find anything you type, does find 
surrounding businesses though".

The latter echoes my underwhelming experience perfectly. Until future releases 
of this app include the ability to refine results better and improves its 
functionality, I'll stick to what I know best: Google and LinkedIn searches.
 