
Amelia and Russell Kent own Kent Farms and run beef cattle in south Louisiana 
andMississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi>. They are 
primarily a cow/calf operation, but also raise and sell replacement heifers and 
source product to local restaurants in New Orleans and Baton Rouge. They are 
part of a new generation of American farmers and agreed to open up about their 
life and profession for a summer series the Guardian is doing on working 
America.Leave more questions for Amelia and Russell in the comments and they 
will answer them later today and tomorrow during breaks in their "chores".

1. What's your typical day like?

There isn't a typical day. We have to check all of our cattle several times a 
week throughout the year. It's is a chore in itself as we have over 300 head of 
cows and replacement heifers on seven different locations within a 60-mile 
radius.

In the winter, the cows are calving, so we have to check them daily. We also 
have to put hay out regularly and limit grazing the cattle on winter ryegrass. 
In the spring and summer we perform our herd-health measures, cut hay and 
perform pasture maintenance. The majority of our calves sell through auction 
and leave mid-August. A few are sold throughout the year to restaurants. We 
continue work in the hayfield in the fall, which quickly transitions into 
planting our winter forages. By November, we start our cycle over again with 
calving.

2. What's the biggest mistake you've ever made while working? 

One of us routinely gets a truck stuck in the mud when we know we shouldn't be 
driving in wet conditions. Especially this past winter in record-rainfall 
conditions, we got stuck at least weekly!

3. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while 
on the job?

The most unexpected thing we've experienced is the sheer camaraderie amongst 
our friends and neighbors in the farming community. The willingness of people 
able and wanting to help each other is humbling, whether it is assistance 
throughout the year, during sale day, or simply watching out for one another.

There is a real sense of community in the Clinton (Louisiana) area we are 
privileged to live and have our farm. My husband grew up in it, but it's new to 
me. I grew up on family farms and ranches in both Colorado andLouisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana> where we had help, but it often 
came at a price.

4. There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. 
Does your job provide that?
 Kent Farm 
Absolutely! When you do something you love, it isn't work. We put in really 
hard days on a regular basis, but whether we're sitting on a tractor, building 
a fence, working with the horses and cattle, or any other tasks we face, we 
enjoy most of our "chores". It also helps that no day is ever boring or 
"routine". Having grown up on farms, I can also say that it's a great way to 
get the entire family outdoors and doing things together.

5. What makes for a really good day on the job?

A really good day entails the two of us working together and substantial 
progress made without any major breakdowns of equipment. The most rewarding 
part of our job is at the conclusion of a productive day when we check on the 
cattle and are almost able to see the calves growing. There is something really 
neat about watching our calves mature and progressing through the different 
cycles and seasons in our year. I have been trying to share some of these 
milestones on aFacebook page <https://www.facebook.com/KentFarmsla> and on 
Twitter <https://www.twitter.com/KentFarms_la> for our farm. I know many people 
are not as connected to where their food comes from these days, but I hope they 
get a glimpse of modern farming.

6. What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

We don't have an annual salary given that our farm income is entirely derived 
from the commodity market. Russell's off-farm career grants us benefits in the 
traditional sense like healthcare, but the benefits derived from the farm are 
intrinsic in our daily responsibilities carried through to the end of the 
product year as we are proud of the cattle we sell.

The truth is we inherently enjoy a rural lifestyle including working outdoors 
with animals and equipment, working with the land and mother nature, and 
contributing to the local economy. We know some young people want to leave the 
farming life, but there's still a lot of joy and satisfaction in our profession.

• The answer to question 1 was amended on 16 July 2013 to clarify that most of 
the Kent Farm calves are sold at auction.

• Do you have an interesting day job? Want to be featured on the Guardian? 
Have a tip or suggestion for someone we should feature? Email 
ruth.spencer@guardiannews.com
 