
Jack Paulden is a commercial truck driver from Ohio and a Guardian reader. He 
agreed to open up about what life is like on the road in the United States as 
part of a summer series the Guardian is doing on working America. Leave more 
questions for Jack in the comments, and he will answer as many as he can 
tomorrow when he has a break from driving.

1. What's your typical day like?

A typical day is to get up between 5 and 6am. Walk into the truck stop and do 
the morning rituals. Get some coffee, walk around and inspect the truck and 
trailer and then check messages, do the logs; perhaps check weather and any 
safety conditions on the Qualcomm regarding route of travel and get rolling. 
Drive to a shipper or receiver and either "drop and hook" or "live load" or 
"live unload". If it is live then you may be sitting for hours and not making 
any money as I get paid by the miles I drive. If time is on my hands, then I 
will use this down time to plan the trip route. Planning fuel stops and dealing 
with weigh stations and weather and road construction are also daily events to 
deal with.

Meals on the go or time to eat at a restaurant is a variable thing. Towards 
evening you keep an eye on the Department of Transportation time clock so as 
not to violate any rules which can be costly. Once you pick your place to park, 
which can be a truck stop, an on or off ramp of an interstate, a receiver or 
shippers property, or any place you can fit a truck and trailer without 
breaking any rules; then you shut down and shower and eat, and/or shut down and 
call home and hit the sack.

2. There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. 
Does your job provide that?

If you want a balanced life I think you have to get home most nights. There 
are truck driving jobs that allow that, but most of us "over the road" haulers 
do not have a balanced life in my opinion. However, who knows what people 
consider as balanced. It is subjective

3. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while 
on the job?

I guess you could say it was getting into the trucking business. In 2011, at 
the age of 58 and "on the dole", I was desperate to find work. My local 
employment office provided a lead about becoming a truck (aka lorry) driver. I 
applied online and was accepted the next day. The outcome, after agreeing to 
pay $3,000 dollars to a truck driving school for an intense 16-day "learnin'", 
left me feeling a little crazy.

I let my ego convince me, a 58-year-old rookie, that I could lease a brand new 
truck and make a living as a solo driver. Six months later after driving 63,400 
miles across the highways and byways of the USA trying to make a living, I 
realized that I had really just gained experience, but not made a living. I had 
lived in a truck and provided the leasing company the means to continue to make 
millions from fools like me. I have learned my lesson now and drive for a 
company.

4. What makes for a really good day on the job?

A really good day on the job for me is lots of miles, "drop and hooks" instead 
of live loading and unloading, and being able to get to the truck stop early to 
find a spot and have a nice clean hot shower followed by a good meal. What 
makes it a really, really good day is if I am going to make it home that night 
after perhaps 12 to 19 days on the road.

5. What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

I get paid 40 cents a mile. I have days I turn in over 600 miles and days I 
turn in less than 200. I assume this year I will make perhaps what an average 
teacher with tenure makes in the US. However, because I am paid by the mile I 
don't really know until the end of the year what I make. Many drivers get paid 
what is referred to as "paid miles". Without going into detail it is not the 
miles you actually drive but more a, "how the crow flies" from zip code to zip 
code type mileage. In some cases you may drive a hundred miles for which you 
are not paid that day during a run in which you actually put in 500 to 600 
miles total. Some drivers get paid "practical miles" which amounts to 
practically every mile driven, unless you detour without cause or get lost or 
perhaps detour for a quick stop by home. I have also met guys who live on $100 
weekly advances from the company they work for, while being not much more than 
a homeless person living in a truck. They are not lesser people, just people 
who have less.

Benefits vary from company to company. I am a military veteran so to save 
money, I use the VA (Veterans Administration) hospitals on the rare occasion I 
have medical needs. Not to get political; but it is my opinion that although 
the new healthcare policies are a step in the right direction; it would have 
been deceptively simple to just give the whole country Medicare (not Medicaid) 
coverage. I never hear our retirees complain about Medicare. It is a single 
payer (the government) paying private medical practitioners and private 
hospitals (both for profit and non-profit hospitals) to provide care anywhere 
that retiree needs medical care in the country.

6. What's the biggest mistake you've ever made while working?

The biggest mistake occurred immediately after getting my class A CDL 
(commercial driver's license). I had to gain experience, and the school wanted 
15,000 to 20,000 driving miles during a 30 day trainin' period. This meant I 
had to live with a stranger in that "truck space" environment for a month 
making a mere $65 a day. Learning to drive, while sleeping and eating in a 
truck that seemed to be constantly moving between shippers and receivers would 
have been perhaps more acceptable at a younger age. Doing it in cramped 
quarters with a person you barely know is even less of a joy.

I would drive up to 11 hours a day during my shift and turn in mileages of 550 
to 640 miles a day. My trainer and I had many an argument during our time 
together. I wish there had been another way. I realized my mistake after 
talking to a woman student and her female trainer from another school who said 
she, the trainee, was required to put in 275 hours of driving as a "trainee" 
but there was no 30 day requirement to meet those hours. A softer more sane 
"easier way" perhaps. These two women were sitting in the truck stop and having 
a meal together. What a contrast that was to my situation. My last week as a 
trainee I could hardly stand being in the truck with my instructor, let alone 
sitting together to "break bread".

• Do you have an interesting day job? Want to be featured on the Guardian? 
Have a tip or suggestion for someone we should feature? Email us
ruth.spencer@guardiannews.com <mailto:ruth.spencer@guardiannews.com>
 