
Jerome Hardy is 52 and still living with his parents because he makes so 
little my at his job that he struggles to pay bills and support his teenage 
son. He serves food at the Pentagon's Courtyard Café, where he has made $9 an 
hour for the past eight years. Most people at the Pentagon work directly for 
the US federal government, so they earn a decent salary with benefits, but 
Jerome is employed by a contractor. He's opening up about his job and life 
today in the hopes that President Obama will make good on his promises to help 
struggling workers in America by starting with something the president can 
control: giving federal government contractors like Jerome a decent wage.

While news has leaked the the president intends to make an announcement about 
contract workers tonight 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/obama-to-raise-minimum-wage-for-government-contract-workers/2014/01/27/f7994b34-87cd-11e3-916e-e01534b1e132_story.html>
, the executive order would only apply tonew government contracts, meaning 
workers like Jerome might not benefit.

Leave questions for Jerome in the comments and he will answer them later 
today. Obama delivers his state of the union address tonight.


1. What is your typical day like?

I get there at 8am in the morning, but winter time is slow, so I come in at 
9am now. I cook in the morning. I go straight on the grille. I cook until about 
1:30 or 2pm. I clean, cook, wash pots, a little bit of everything in the 
Courtyard Café at the Pentagon. We serve breakfast and lunch. There are 
typically two or three of us on duty. It varies when we get off, likely 4 or 
5pm. We close at 3pm.

2. What is your salary? Do you get benefits?

I live check to check. I have made $9 an hour for eight years. I started at 
that, and I still make the same. As far as I know, nobody gets a raise. People 
have been there longer than me, and they haven't gotten a raise. It pays a 
little bit of the bills, but not much. I live with my son, my mother and father 
and a few days a week my grandson. I help my son while he is trying to find a 
job, and I'm helping my parents out as they are in their 70s and 80s now. $9 
doesn't stretch far. I wish I got healthcare. My teeth are decaying. I can't 
afford to do anything about it. If you take time off, you don't get paid for 
that day.

3. Why did you strike last week? 

I did the strike for more money and benefits. For annual leave, sick leave, 
something to better my life for my son and my grandson. I am trying to help my 
family out. The strike was on Wednesday. I got a call on Thursday morning and 
they said do not come in. Then they called me Friday morning and they told me 
to back in.

4. What do you hope Obama says in his state of the union speech tonight?

I would like President Obama to do an executive order – for everyone who works 
in federal buildings for private contractors to get some type of benefits and 
better pay. He can do it via executive authority. I am trying to do this for 
myself, but also for other people who work in federal buildings, all the 
private contractors. There are about 2 million of us – janitors and cooks and 
the like.

I have been at the Pentagon job eight years. I work hard every day. And I 
haven't even gotten a quarter raise. I will be watching the speech tonight. I 
hope he signs an executive order. I am a cook. I would think at least $12 or 
more would be fair. That's what I really hope for. Bust heck, just a dollar 
more would show some appreciation that every day I work hard. But I don't get 
anything. I ask for a raise every year. My manager says he will, but then 
there's nothing.

5. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that has happened to you on the 
job?

I met many famous people when at my job. Actor Gary Sinise from Forrest Gump 
was out there once. Mrs Obama was out in front of my store one day. Another 
basketball player came one day. A lot of stars come to the Pentagon.

6. What makes for a really good day on the job?

I serve a lot of military people at the Pentagon. I work hard to serve 
American heroes, but I shouldn't end up with zero. That's my favorite quote. 
Everyday they love my food. They always say "Call Jerome". They want me to cook 
for them. They know me. The military people know me. If they don't see me, some 
of them will even walk away. They want my food on the grille. They tell me that.

7. What do you wish people would understand about low-wage workers in America?

Someone said if you don't like making $9 and hour, find something else. But 
it's not that easy to go out and find something else. I've spent a lot of time 
here – 8 years. I like what I'm doing. I know everyone. I know many people in 
the Pentagon. It's like family. The customers are nice to me. I love everybody 
out there. I just need a little more money and benefits.
 