
I have a slightly disorientated feeling as my alarm sounds. I open an eye – 
there is a hotel phone by my bed. Then I then sluggishly remember I’m away with 
work.

Suited and booted for breakfast at 7am, I compare quality of sleep with 
colleagues and discuss the day ahead. I never have a cooked breakfast at home, 
but on inspection extra stamina is required.


We are visiting a local authority, inspecting services for children in need of 
help and protection, looked after children and care leavers. I have been 
working as an inspector for 18 months now and no two days have been the same.

For this inspection I am deputy lead, and today will mostly involve talking to 
social workers about the difference they are making to children. Apart from 
spending time with young people, this is the part of my job I most enjoy. I 
miss my friends and colleagues from the local authority where I worked, but in 
this role I am able to understand and influence frontline practice on a bigger 
scale.
 Steph Murray, who inspects children’s services for Ofsted. Photograph: Ofsted 
Our link person, the brave individual nominated by the local authority to 
organise the inspection, greets us cheerily as we arrive at the office. These 
unsung heroes spin a hundred plates at once and we would be lost without their 
calm and organised presence. Perhaps not surprisingly, she seems a little 
tired, as does the director of children’s services, but both are upbeat. It’s a 
demanding schedule for everyone.

My first meeting with a social worker is at 9.30. I was a social worker and 
manager for nearly 20 years and remember how daunting being inspected can be. 
And while I have made the transition to the other side I am still a 
practitioner at heart, so before we discuss the case I try to put her at ease 
by finding out what it’s like working for the council.

We then review a case file. Having read about this child’s life I have some 
challenging questions to ask. We talk for an hour, then her manager joins us. 
We discuss how the child, who has communication difficulties, could be more 
involved in decisions about her life. I am impressed by their care for this 
family and their willingness to reflect and take on board what we talk about. 
Tomorrow I will visit the child and her family to hear about their experiences, 
because analysing if (and how) children’s lives are changed through the support 
they receive is central to what we do.

The afternoon is a succession of meetings with social workers and managers and 
phone calls to parents. I have a few minutes between each to process my 
thoughts, record a summary and run through my notes for the next meeting. At 
6pm I leave the office for a bite to eat and catch up with the team.

After dinner I head to my hotel room, get into my pyjamas and type a summary 
of my day. The lead inspector will compile all of these and share them with the 
director of children’s services tomorrow.. I email my findings by 10pm and prep 
for the next day before ringing my husband and flopping into bed just after 
midnight.

The social worker who changed my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/17/the-social-worker-who-changed-my-life>
Today I have talked about six children, heard first hand from parents about 
their lives, explored how child sexual exploitation is being tackled locally, 
and considered how managers recruit and retain social workers. Tomorrow I will 
meet two young adults with care experience who now work with the council to 
improve the lives of looked after children.

All these things matter. Good social work, strong relationships with parents 
and young people, healthy organisations and effective partnerships make a 
difference to children. I didn’t choose this career to be popular, but I am 
proud of what we do atOfsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>. 
Through inspection we really can make a difference to children’s lives.
 