
Nancy Brenner's life isn't too far off from the TV show Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>. She does PR for 
Fortune 500 companies, a job that involves everything from chasing reporters 
into bathrooms to schooling some of the world's top executives on how to talk 
to the press. Every day is different in the PR industry, which has evolved a 
lot with the rise of 24/7 news and social media.

Nancy has agreed to open up about her job for the Guardian's series A Day's 
Work. Leave questions for her in the comments and she will check in throughout 
the day.

1. What's your typical day like?

I'm a lot like a matchmaker. I track trends overnight by reading newspapers, 
blogs, industry trades, and watch broadcast news, searching for stories that 
may have a connection for my clients. I then identify a company's expert (who 
could be speaking at a presentation two time zones away) and link him or her 
with journalists on deadline. These days, PR people are also constantly 
searching for material that can be used on social media such as an infographic, 
research for a speech, or tips to help improve a product or service.

You have to enjoy balancing numerous deadlines and projects at once. I have 
had to exit a meeting training a C-suite executive in order to handle a 
breaking issue for another client. I have chased reporters into the women's 
bathroom to try to get their attention. I have run through crowds to place a 
bottle or can of a client's product in the right hands. You have to be fast, 
sometimes literally!

The job also involves lots of networking, from early morning power breakfasts 
to late night dinners, often back-to-back. I've taken clients to sample sales 
in the New York Garment District, Broadway shows, and invited them to dinners 
to introduce them to their peers in the insurance, banking and asset management 
industries so they can learn best practices from each other. I still keep in 
touch with my first major client at an accounting firm, although she is now my 
mentor. This is not a profession for wallflowers.

2. There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. 
Does your job provide that?

I sometimes compare working in PR to an emergency room. There's always a new 
project, and you need to do triage and assess which ones need instant 
attention. Opportunities can arise and fall as quickly as a Federal Reserve 
announcement or jobs report. Some of my best thoughts bubble up when I take a 
break, whether it's watching an episode of NCIS, or going for a quick walk. You 
need to set your boundaries, and saying no is hard in a client business where 
response time is measured in minutes.

3. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while 
on the job?

August is considered the "dog days" in my industry, since everyone is on 
vacation, but one year I managed to land three major new business opportunities 
then. A former client at AlliedSignal had invited my team to pitch their 
business. One day, I spent a few hours waiting outside of the Joseph Papp 
Theater waiting for free tickets to "Shakespeare in the Park", a New York 
summer tradition. I had reams of research with me and wiled away the time 
outlining objectives and solutions for the new business proposal. All three 
prospects came on board. I didn't get a summer vacation that year, but it was 
the good kind of busy.

4. What makes for a really good day on the job?

When someone takes the time to say thank you, either in writing or by phone. 
When all the planning and execution results in what you promised your client 
and another goal is scored. I was handling press for one of the most 
competitive trade events: Toy Fair. I needed to find someone willing to suit up 
as Raggedy Ann & Andy in the freezing cold, for a minimum of money, and parade 
outside of the legendary building north of New York's Madison Square Park to 
capture the attention of news vans. Competing with action figures and the 
latest "must-have" toys, was a challenge. But when I heard the Raggedy Ann & 
Andy toys mentioned as "a hot little Redhead" on television that night, I knew 
that I helped the client cut through the clutter and raise awareness for their 
product. A sigh of relief, a sense of accomplishment and onto the next 
challenge.

5. What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

It starts off low – $25,000 to $30,000 is not uncommon, but it can take off 
fast. Not surprisingly, landing PR jobs at banks can be the most profitable. I 
know some people who earn $1m, although that's rare.

The key to your compensation is knowing you're value on the open market based 
on your skill set, speciality (ie right now social media is hot), and your 
reputation. You know the value of your home; you need to know the value of your 
career. The best advice I got was to cultivate relationships with everyone 
internally, starting from the mailroom staff on up inside your company, and 
your external network such as clients, journalists and competitors you may meet 
at industry functions. And if a headhunter invites you to breakfast, go and 
find out what you're worth. Don't hesitate to ask  former colleagues what they 
were earning at their last position and what increases they got when they 
shifted.

6. What's the biggest mistake you've ever made while working?

Not double-checking an address for a key new business opportunity for JP 
Morgan. Someone handed me the location, scribbled on a piece of paper. It was 
wrong. When I got to the pitch, I realized that no one else on the team was 
there. I called around to possible locations in Manhattan where JP Morgan had a 
sizable presence. Fortunately, I got to the appointment just in time for my 
turn in the presentation. It was a close call, but I got to win a key client 
and then led the business for more than a decade. Since that day, I look up the 
addresses myself.
 