
Among the many inviolable rules of film criticism - that Nic Cage is a genius; 
that Terminator 2 was better than the first Terminator; that Kevin Costner will 
never, ever not be absurd – the most inviolable of all centres on Martin 
Scorsese,Robert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> and Al 
Pacino, the holy trinity that, whether you like their films or not, must be 
bowed to as towering luminaries.

There’s no question that we owe these guys a debt of gratitude, not only for 
the mob movies of the last 40 years, but for the equally strong tradition of 
name-dropping Marty or Bob as a sign a young actor has made it. Old guys whose 
paths they once crossed nurse the anecdotes like gold. Cameras at awards 
ceremonies close in on their faces, which are often baffled in the manner of a 
monarch so grand he can’t make sense of the mortals around him.

I’ve had cause to think about this reverence twice in the last week: first 
when Kyle Smithwrote a piece 
<http://nypost.com/2015/06/10/sorry-ladies-youll-never-understand-why-guys-love-goodfellas/>
 in the New York Post claiming that women, to their detriment, don’t get 
Goodfellas; and then again after a run-in with De Niro, the star of that movie, 
who is promotinga new film <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2361509/>. (Our 
interview was brief. De Niro was either out of sorts, or, after a lifetime of 
being toadied to by everyone he meets, is simply too celebrated to conduct a 
normal conversation.)

Smith’s piece was roundly mocked 
<http://jezebel.com/man-says-women-dont-get-goodfellas-goodfellas-writer-d-1710719198>
 for being silly and reductive, and, sure, lots of women love Goodfellas. After 
re-watching it, however, I’m not one of them – and if I never have to sit 
through the Godfather again, either, I’m pretty sure I’ll survive.

These films, so often cited in best-of lists and lip-synched to by legions of 
fans, are long-winded, dimly lit and over-rated. And while their narrative arcs 
might be great (guy kills other guy, gets killed by first guy’s friends, who 
kill each other ad infinitum until the Feds yell “Stop!”) and the acting 
convincing, they are also jerk-off movies – in this case, for the kind of man 
who mourns the end of the age of machismo – passing themselves off as profound 
or insightful.

I don’t want to be too much of a buzzkill about all this: mobster tales are 
fun in the way that cartoons are fun. What I struggle with (which, like the 
verb “ to find problematic”, has become the polite way to say “loathe”) is the 
way that mobster movies invite us to believe that they are deeply meaningful in 
a way that excuses the heroic portrayal of their gratuitous, male-centered 
violence. Years ago, I remember running into a friend after she’d been at her 
boyfriend’s for dinner. “He made me watch Once Upon A Time In America”, she 
said miserably of the Sergio Leone love-letter to New York’s violent past. 
“That horrible rape scene seems to go on forever.”

All actors become proxies for the roles that they play, and so Pacino and De 
Niro are, one suspects, loved less for their acting ability than for their 
status as men who pound heads into tables. The wives in these movies always get 
pushed down at some point, too, without in any way denting the likeability of 
the hero. (This happened in the recent James Brown biopic, Get On Up, in which 
the soul singer casually batters his wife and goes on to win the movie.) But 
presenting a slightly more complex understanding of violence – let alone 
domestic violence – doesn’t have to be limited to a Movie of the Week or a Ken 
Loach vehicle, and actors worth universal acclaim and admiration should be able 
to portray violent characters as anti-heroes, not just heroes.

Calling out movie stars for self-importance is like asking a dog why it 
scratches its fleas - it’s the nature of the beast. But in the case of 
Pacino-De Niro-Scorsese, do we have to collude with them in such slavish 
devotion to the work? Because even if you love Goodfellas and the Godfather, 
Little Fockers and Grudge Match should act as a natural break to hero worship 
and bring you resoundingly back to your senses.
 