
It’s 7am and I’m in my garage loading an assortment of toys, glue and paint 
into my old Volvo – not for a car boot sale, although that’s what the 
neighbours probably think! I’m a play and filial therapist, and I have a number 
of appointments today.

As a social worker, I realised that abuse and trauma can freeze a child’s 
development and take away their voice. I knew there had to be another way to 
help them. On discovering that children harmed in relationships can heal 
through play with an attuned adult, I decided to train as a play therapist.

At 9am I arrive at Cassie’s foster home. This is her fourth placement. She is 
61 months old – I often think in months, it helps me to remember how much life 
experience is packed into so little time.

I have been practising the skills of filial therapy with her foster carers so 
that they can offer her special play time supported by me. Filial therapy is a 
powerful intervention, putting the parent-child relationship at the heart of 
the healing process. It helps parents structure their child’s time, remain 
playful, set limits and use empathy in daily parenting. Today, we are 
rehearsing these skills together with toys on a play mat. Cassie’s carers are 
beginning to see how special play time can help them to understand her inner 
world. Cassie is four months into placement with them, and they are exhausted, 
but no longer stressed and distressed. This placement has to last.

It’s now 1.30pm. I’ve cleared up and reset the play room for my last session 
and Jack has arrived. He is 11 and lives in a children’s home. He has been 
coming to therapy for over a year and his progress has been fantastic. He no 
longer enters rooms backwards, does not fear zombies sucking out his insides 
and will actually let me help him get play sand out of his shoes. Play therapy 
gives Jack the opportunity to experience a relationship that is attuned, 
unconditional and nurturing. Having experienced a therapeutic relationship, 
Jack is now ready for a loving family and we will soon part ways. This makes me 
sad and glad at the same time. Who says you can’t feel two things at once!

Social care careers: an interactive guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/ng-interactive/2014/aug/26/social-care-careers-an-interactive-guide>
Jack’s session finishes and I have a huge amount of sand to clear up! I take a 
picture of the play scene on my phone as a prompt when writing my case notes 
later. After a quick coffee, apple and Ryvita, I catch up on calls, cross check 
a referral discussion, and resolve a mini crisis from a new filial parent.

It’s nearly 3.45pm and I set off to complete a closure and review with Tony 
and Andrew, who have adopted Angus, now seven, Rose, five, and Michael, four. I 
have supported their ongoing filial process since they were first placed. 
Today, I am saying goodbye; I’m sad and glad again. A good ending is important 
when children have had many losses and transitions. The children know me well 
and I know their play themes, so I have chosen a small gift especially for each 
child and a personalised card for the whole family.

Our discussion reveals the parents feel more competent and because of the 
weekly special play sessions, can witness the experiences the children process 
in their play. The increased empathy helps parents stay regulated as they in 
turn regulate their children’s behaviour, giving them the experience of being 
soothed and calmed. There are still challenges, but they are not multiple daily 
challenges. There is some joy. Result.

Goodbyes are said, and as I leave Michael runs forward to give me a hug. He 
asks, “Berni – are you Nanny McPhee?”

I’m honoured and carry that feeling home, where I think about the children I 
will see tomorrow. Then I head to the park with my dogs, review my emails and 
finalise a report. Then, at last, it’s time to unwind, and I tune in to watch 
Coronation Street.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 