
September is always a busy month for me. I’m a children and family worker for 
the charityHestia <http://www.hestia.org/> in London, and we support women and 
children in our refuges who have experienced domestic abuse. After a summer of 
activities, we’re focusing on getting children settled in to a new year at 
school. My job is to help women and children improve their health and wellbeing 
and recover after abuse, and education and routine are vital for children 
recovering from trauma.

My role

When children or young people have experienced domestic abuse, either directly 
or through witnessing it, the psychological damage can often result in them 
feeling guilt, shame and anxiety. They may also have behavioural problems, such 
as eating disorders, bedwetting, depression or outbursts of behaviour that get 
out of hand. Much of my work is restoring and supporting the relationship 
between mother and child so they can heal together after domestic abuse.

Get families involved to protect children from domestic violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jul/23/domestic-violence-family-group-conferences>
Our main aim is to ensure the safety of the families, so I work as their 
advocate. I accompany them to relevant agencies, support them in court cases, 
write reports on the child’s welfare, and help in police interviews. I also 
attend child protection conferences, correspond with social services, liaise 
with schools, and book health visitors.



We provide a controlled environment to help mothers with their parenting 
skills and give them the confidence to feel at home in their new surroundings.

A typical day 

Although there’s no such thing as an average day, our team is always busy! Now 
the summer is ending, we are working to provide families with fun educational 
activities around London. We might take a train trip to the seaside, visit 
sports events, funfairs, aquariums or the cinema as a family event.

Over time, you see the families getting over their anxiety and forming 
positive relationships. Up until now, these families might not have had many 
opportunities to form happy memories to get them through the tough times. We 
hope these positive memories stick; everyone should have a childhood free from 
violence and abuse.

Observing families on trips lets me see how they interact with each other to 
get a clearer insight into family dynamics, much more effectively than if I was 
just in a room with them in the refuge. And as well as being enjoyable, the 
outings help our families appreciate their new communities while they gain 
self-confidence.

Families new to the refuge often have feelings of isolation and loss. It’s 
very usual to feel isolated in a new area, particularly if English is not your 
first language. So that I could welcome families in their own language I 
recently took night classes in Bengali, as one of the refuges I work in is a 
specialist one for South Asian women.

What I love about what I do

When we give the families time to play together, it allows their often 
fractured relationships to heal after the abuse. One great success was a 
swimming trip with a mum in her 30s and her family; it was the first time 
they’d ever been to a pool and they loved it. One of my other favourite 
memories is of a little boy at a Halloween party we’d organised, telling us it 
was the best day of his life.

I have 44 children and young people to support, ranging in ages from a 
two-month-old baby to a 19-year-old woman. It’s wonderful to see their mental 
health and behaviour improve as they adjust to their surroundings and develop 
new relationships.

Domestic violence: are Maracs making a difference to victims' lives?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jul/07/domestic-violence-are-maracs-making-a-difference-to-victims-lives>
Issues affecting my work

We’ve just launched a campaign called Hidden Child 
<http://www.hestia.org/hiddenchild/>, focusing on the needs of children in 
refuges. We want there to be specialist therapeutic programmes for children 
living in refuges to help with any behavioural or psychological problems they 
may have as a result of abuse. And we need to ensure all children living in our 
refuges are back in school as soon as possible. Recently a child living in a 
refuge had to wait four months to be given a place in a new school, so we want 
to do everything we can to stop this happening again.

Many of the past experiences that the families share with me can be very 
traumatic. I’ve realised that to do your best with the families, you have to 
switch off after work. So I do a lot of things to relax, such as swing dancing 
and learning to play musical instruments.

There’s a sign on my door in the playroom that sums up our whole work style 
and how we interact with families. It says: “Excuse the mess – we’re busy 
making good memories.”

* Due to the confidentiality of Hestia’s work, Jessica’s name has been changed

For more information about Hidden Child, or to see how you can assist Hestia 
help these families, please visit:www.hestia.org/hiddenchild 
<http://www.hestia.org/hiddenchild>

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 