
I’m part of the holidays team at the deafblind charity Sense 
<http://www.sense.org.uk/>. We organise holidays and short breaks for people 
with multi-sensory impairments and other complex needs. Our short breaks give 
people the chance to get away from it all, try something new and have a lot of 
fun. They also give a much-needed break to families who support a deafblind 
person.

Sport and safeguarding: keeping children safe on and off the pitch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/05/safeguarding-protecting-children-in-sport-cspu-nspcc>
As a holidays and volunteering assistant, I help with the logistics of the 
programme, everything from organising venues to booking transport and 
co-ordinating volunteers. I usually start my day replying to emails, and then I 
might move on to researching new venues and experiences for our next short 
break.

At around 11am we have a team meeting to discuss progress with the 
organisation of a youth-hostel city break in Manchester, as well as a 
horse-riding holiday in Kent for a group of young people with multi-sensory 
impairments and complex needs.

At Sense, no two holidays are the same and I love this aspect of the job. We 
build the experience around the needs and interests of the individuals. 
Activities could include swimming, horse riding, visits to local attractions, 
canoeing, dry slope skiing, meals out, nights in the pub – the possibilities 
are endless!

In the afternoon I spend time planning and co-ordinating a volunteer group for 
our next short break. Our volunteers are a vital part of what we do and without 
them we could not provide such a person-centred service. Each group includes a 
leader with plenty of knowledge and expertise, complemented by volunteers who 
support our holidaymakers one-to-one. This personalised approach means that we 
can support people to do what they want to do – however simple or complex this 
seems. Occasionally, holidaymakers might have particular areas of interest, 
such as life skills (dressing, cooking and so on) or building relationships. 
Our short breaks are an ideal place to focus on such things in a fun, 
supportive and engaging way.

The short breaks are amazing experiences for everyone involved. Our volunteers 
often comment on the range of communication that people use, such as 
hand-under-hand communication, which is when a person with multi-sensory 
impairments rests their hand on the volunteer’s hand and uses it to explore 
their immediate environment. It’s so simple and the results are incredible 
because that individual is taking control of the situation. You see them gain 
confidence, interact more with their surroundings and take the initiative to 
explore.

My favourite part of the job is seeing the results of all our preparations. On 
our last short break, one memorable moment for me was supporting a holidaymaker 
to drive a pedal-powered go-kart. We weren’t sure whether he had ever been on 
one before, but we thought we’d give it a try. I perched next to him and 
propelled us along, up and down the path, while he giggled at the rush of wind 
on his face. I was breaking into a bit of a sweat when, after about half an 
hour, he placed his feet on the pedals and began to push. I was so pleased I 
couldn’t help telling the other volunteers at dinner.

'One person had her housing benefit stopped while in hospital giving birth'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/19/one-person-had-her-housing-benefit-stopped-while-in-hospital-giving-birth>
That pretty much sums up our whole approach to providing holidays and short 
breaks at Sense. A parent explained it best: “You see the person first and the 
disability second.”

I never really thought about working in this area but I’m glad it’s something 
I’ve become involved in. Having studied English literature at university I went 
on to teach English as a foreign language. My journey with Sense started as a 
support worker under the Access to Work scheme: two members of staff at Sense 
were visually impaired and I came into the office to support them with 
accessing materials. I was then lucky enough to move into the holidays team.

After work, I like to read, explore new places in London and play the guitar. 
I’m in a band so I spend time writing or rehearsing songs in the evenings. On 
Tuesdays, I head straight from work to my British Sign Language class. I’ve 
nearly finished my level one qualification, which is really useful for my job. 
I’m also learning to cook, and I try to make something new each week – with 
mixed success!

If you’re interested in volunteering on a Sense holiday or short break, please 
contactholidays@sense.org.uk <mailto:holidays@sense.org.uk>

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 