
My day starts early, between 5am and 6am. I have five children and while, on 
the whole, they are not all home at the same time, my youngest has special 
needs so usually I help him get ready for the day. I do my own ironing, too, so 
that’s a morning task!


I quit a fantastic job as Mum has Alzheimer's. It was an easy decision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jun/10/quit-jo-mum-alzheimers-care-home>
If I’m the first to arrive at the office I open up the centre and get it ready 
for clients and staff. I like to reflect on my priorities for the day and check 
my task list. Then I’m usually on the phone, following up with carers to make 
appointments, or having an initial conversation to work out what their needs 
are. My role, specifically, is to help carers towards employment, set up their 
own business or provide advice for those in work who struggle to balance their 
job and caring.

As well as the one-on-one advice I also provide group workshops focused around 
skills training, interview coaching and other employment-related themes. The 
carers I work with are often apprehensive about returning to work, or in some 
cases they might not have had a job before; much of the work I do revolves 
around building confidence and raising aspirations while remaining realistic 
about what’s achievable.

If I’m not running a workshop, I’ll be reviewing or planning specific 
projects. We’ve launched a pilot project aimed at helping employed carers stay 
in work. The knee-jerk reaction when thrust into a caring role might be to give 
up work immediately, but this project offers carers coaching support on how to 
juggle caring and their work responsibilities. It advises them on how carers 
might approach an employer to discuss flexible working and other creative work 
options. I want to develop this to include training for employers to help them 
understand carers and their challenges.
 Clive Brooks, who works at the carers’ centre in Bath and north-east 
Somerset. Photograph: Carers' Centre 
If I’m honest, lunchtime doesn’t always happen. There really is no normal 
routine in the work that I do, so I may find myself having lunch at 3pm some 
days! In the afternoon I usually have a number of one-on-one consultations with 
carers. An issue that frequently presents itself at these sessions is the 
question of benefits and Carers’ Allowance, and in some cases whether returning 
to part-time employment will actually cost them money. This is a difficult and 
complex issue concerning benefits as a whole, so I will often link carers up 
with the Citizens’ Advice Bureau or Job Centre to find the right answer.

In some cases I’m able to support carers into work, or it may be that we 
uncover other entitlements to allow them to care and still survive financially. 
I’d like to run more sessions on benefits – I often come across carers who are 
just overwhelmed by the complexity of the system, but there are others who have 
battled through and have a great deal of wisdom on navigating this area.

My pathway into this career was definitely not the norm. I am a biological 
scientist by education, and I worked as a fish biologist in Papua New Guinea 
for several years. I travelled and worked on a trawler, managed a fish farm and 
a stack of other things in between! When I came back to the UK I decided I’d 
rather work with people than fish, which I think was the right decision. I did 
a postgraduate degree in career guidance and worked in the local authority 
before starting my own career management business. As my wife and I are both 
carers, when a part-time post became available at the carers’ centre it seemed 
a natural choice to apply. I was brought on board to deliver a career guidance 
project working with carers in rural areas and those struggling financially, 
which developed into the role I now hold.

Preparing carers for the Care Act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/20/preparing-carers-for-the-care-act>
In terms of career goals I wouldn’t like to think that this is it for ever. 
For me it’s incredibly important for everyone to be all they can be, so in some 
ways I’m just getting started. When I am not at work I enjoy DIY projects and 
working with wood. Although I’m not an avid reader, when I have a book on the 
go it’s nice to know it’s there waiting for me when I do have some time to 
myself. I also enjoy a good coffee and appreciate a glass of wine in the 
company of family or friends.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 