
For 50 years now, all my adult life, Amnesty International 
<http://amnesty.org.uk/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_content=brand&utm_campaign=brand>
 has been there keeping watch over the injustices and cruelties we inflict on 
one another, reminding us urgently that in this oh-so-smug world we live in 
there are horrors unimaginable being perpetrated on innocent people the world 
over. Amnesty doesn't just prick our collective conscience and raise our 
awareness, it doesn't just talk, it is proactive, righting wrongs, campaigning 
tirelessly, fearlessly, to expose abuses of human rights whenever they are 
uncovered, wherever they occur.

But there is a problem with Amnesty. After 50 years, it has become established 
worldwide as the most effective human rights watch we have. Where there is 
injustice, wherever human rights are being denied or simply ignored, it is all 
too easy to believe that Amnesty is on the case on our behalf, so that's all 
right. We dip into our pockets, beat our "Bravo, Amnesty" drums, indulge in 
heated conversations around the dinner table and get on with our lives.

What we should be doing is taking the responsibility ourselves, to play our 
part in protecting the human rights of others. Maybe we do it sometimes, but 
not enough. If we did, if all people of goodwill did this, then the tsunami of 
protest would roll on into the corridors of power and sooner rather than later 
the bastions of tyranny, the walls of division and oppression and prejudice 
would come tumbling down.

And this is happening. The cry of "Freedom now!" is being heard all over the 
Middle East and north Africa, the Arab Spring is bursting into bloom. It began 
with a single voice that cried out and made itself heard, just as Peter 
Benenson, the founder of Amnesty, cried out 50 years ago, a voice in the 
wilderness then, but a worldwide chorus now.

I've been teaching children and writing books for them for more than 40 years 
and of one thing I am sure: stories and poems can play a part in all this, an 
essential part. We are constantly being told, and rightly so, of the right to 
education and the importance of literacy. Without it, our children cannot 
prosper, cannot fulfil their potential, cannot pass all the tests they will 
need to pass if they are to succeed in life.

All this is, of course, missing the point. Literacy, if we aren't careful, can 
become just a means to an end, a kind of "must have" product our children must 
acquire if they are to make it in our world.

But developing in young children a love of poems and stories (fiction and 
non-fiction) is vital for another reason altogether. It is through literature, 
not simply literacy, that we learn to understand and empathise. As readers, we 
learn about the lives of others, other places and cultures, other ways of 
seeing the world. We find out about the past, understand better how it made our 
today and how our today makes our tomorrow. We learn we are not alone in our 
feelings, that joy and pain are universal, that humanity is to be celebrated 
for its diversity but is ultimately one humanity. Through literature, we can 
find our place in the world, feel we belong and discover our sense of 
responsibility.

Amnesty understands this very well and it seeks out, encourages and endorses 
literature that it believes can help children develop this great skill of 
empathy, a skill that is vital for tolerance to grow, hatred to diminish and 
human rights to flourish.

I have written a great deal about war and conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michaelmorpurgo>, largely because I grew up 
in the 1940s, in the aftermath of the worst conflagration the world has known. 
At the heart of my books, you will often find an animal – a cavalry horse inWar 
Horse, a sniffer dog in Shadow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/05/older-children-fiction-morpurgo-higson>
 – or a child, as inFriend or Foe or I believe in Unicorns or The Kites Are 
Flying. In each case, it is a story of suffering seen through the prism of 
innocence. Each in its own way is a story of war, but each is also an anthem 
for the peace and reconciliation – and hope – that may one day lead to a world 
in which Amnesty is no longer needed. That may be far off, but we and Amnesty 
together must live for the day.

© Michael Morpurgo <https://www.theguardian.com/books/michaelmorpurgo> 
 