
Jessica Barder is no stranger to a "polar vortex". She's a production cook at 
McMurdo Station <http://www.nsf.gov/geo/plr/support/mcmurdo.jsp>, one of three 
research stations operated by the National Science Foundation's US Antarctic 
Program (USAP) and the largest on the continent. This is her second summer in 
Antarctica, and she will spend the winter on the continent as well at the USAP 
station at the South Pole. Prior to Antarctica, she worked in restaurants and 
catering. She blogs about her experience atCooking on Ice 
<http://jbarder.wordpress.com/>. Leave questions for Jessica below and she'll 
answer them before her next shift.

1. What's your typical day like in Antarctica?

A typical day very much depends on where you work – in addition to the 
research scientists, there are a variety of other support staff on station who 
work as carpenters, plumbers, IT techs, and waste handlers. The kitchen where I 
work prepares four meals a day (breakfast, lunch, dinner, and a midnight lunch 
for people working night shift) for a summer population of around 850 to 900. 
We are the only place to get meals on station so we're kept busy!

I work the dinner shift, which starts at 10:00 and goes until 20:00, so here's 
how my day goes: I wake up around 7am and shuffle across the street to the 
galley for coffee and maybe some cold cereal. Then I'll head to the "gerbil 
gym" for a run or a bike ride on the stationary equipment. I come home for a 
little yoga and then shower and change and head back to the galley to start my 
shift.

Every work day starts with a production meeting – the four production cooks 
and the one sous chef for our shift gather together and have coffee and discuss 
what's on our menu for the day, who will make which dish, and what prep we need 
to get done for the days ahead. Every meal offers 1-2 entrées, a separate 
vegetarian entrée, a starch, a vegetable, and any sauces or extras we have time 
to make that we think would enhance the meal. Our shift also likes to put out 
any leftovers we have from previous nights to reduce waste since EVERYTHING we 
throw away must be shipped off the continent and that costs money.

When I head home, I usually nap for an hour and then get up, shower, put on 
nice clothes and head to one of our two bars or our Coffee House to meet up 
with friends, and even though it'll be after 9pm, the sun is still blazing. We 
have trivia nights, karaoke nights, open mic nights, live bands, science 
lectures, and some people take fencing or Latin from other people on station – 
there's quite a bit to do in your off-hours.

2. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you on 
the job?


There's an emphasis placed on environmental stewardship here, and for the 
USAP, that stewardship is guided by the Antarctic Conservation Act (ACA) and 
ensuing laws. Among other things, like requiring that all our waste be shipped 
home, it also protects all wildlife from human interference of any kind. We are 
not allowed to approach the penguins or seals and, worst of all, we can't shoo 
away the skuas.

Skuas are large scavenger birds – a bit like seagulls or pigeons but they can 
be the size of a turkey. I've been dive-bombed by a skua while walking from the 
galley to my dorm because I was eating a pastry, and it's pretty terrifying. 
The only thing I'm allowed to do to protect myself is put an arm over my head. 
I can't wave at it or scare it away, or I'll find myself with a quick ticket 
home and a hefty fine to the US government. Unfortunately, these birds know the 
galley is where the food is and the back dock, where we dump our food waste, is 
a pretty good grazing area for them. One day last year, I went to dump a bag of 
food waste into our huge, plastic lined wood crates. Someone had left the lid 
open so I lifted the can and dumped the bag in, only to hear a loud squak and 
an eruption of feathers as an enraged skua flew out, scaring the life out of 
me, both because I was startled and because I had just interfered with 
wildlife. I immediately conferred with my boss who confirmed that I wasn't 
going to be fired or fined since I hadn't intentionally tried to hurt the bird, 
but you can bet I now always check inside the waste crates before I take out 
the garbage.

3. What are your best cold weather tips?

I could give you all the standard answers – stay healthy, wear layers, drink 
lots of fluids, keep your metabolism up – and they're certainly all valid and 
applicable across the board. But I knew all those tips before I came to the 
most hostile environment on earth – where our midsummer temps typically average 
just below 32F (0C) but the windchill drops it to the low 20s (-6C).

Tips I've learned since being here? Carhartts are amazing! We get issued 
coveralls – particularly support staff who spend a lot of time outdoors – and 
they're comfortable, easy to move in, and keep you very, very warm. Also, cold 
weather wreaks havoc on batteries – computer, camera, iPod – so stick a 
hand-warmer in the pocket where you carry those items. I've also learned a lot 
about sleeping warm, since our dorms are quite old and the rooms on the first 
floor get pretty cold and drafty. The most important point there is to preheat 
your engine before you get in bed – do situps, jumping jacks, anything to get 
your blood moving BEFORE you get into bed. And if your room is just so cold in 
the morning you don't want to get out of bed to put clothes on, stick your 
clothes underneath the covers at the foot of your bed the night before.

4. Tell us about the food in Antarctica. What do people love? What just 
doesn't work?

Because the ACA forbids the introduction of foreign species, nothing grows 
here, nor can we have animals from which we could get by-products, so fresh 
fruits, vegetables, eggs, and dairy products are a commodity here. Due to the 
cost involved in flying down the cargo planes that can bring substantial 
quantities of these products, our large "freshies" deliveries are pretty few 
and far between. Last year, we had to go about eight weeks or so without 
anything fresh – not even parsley or garlic. This year, our management has been 
able to coordinate a few smaller "freshies" deliveries with the smaller, 
ski-equipped planes that make the flight every other day or so from 
Christchurch, New Zealand, so it hasn't been quite as bad as last summer, but 
apples and oranges are definitely still considered valuable currency down here, 
and you can trade them for favors.

Food that is always popular down here falls under the category I think of as 
"the worst of American-style fast food": burgers, pizza, fried chicken, and 
tater tots – although we're actually completely out of those this year, thank 
goodness.
 Jessica Barder during her sea ice training in Antarctica. 
5. How did you hear about the job in Antarctica and how did you get there?


I first heard about this job on a message board about travel for alumnae of my 
alma mater,Wellesley College <http://www.wellesley.edu>. A friend of an alumna 
had worked as a prep cook here, and when the alumna found out I'd always wanted 
to go to Antarctica, she mentioned it, knowing I had a culinary background. I 
applied in early May and didn't hear anything until August when I was 
interviewed over the phone by the executive chef. Along with my offer letter, I 
received a letter from the medical department instructing me on how to go about 
"PQing" or physically qualifying for the job – routine bloodwork, eye exam, 
dental exam, and an EKG, among other things, were required to prove I'm healthy 
enough to work on the harshest continent. This year, because I will also be 
spending a winter at the South Pole, where it will be dark for six months and 
no planes can fly to evacuate me in an emergency, I had to also pass a 
psychological evaluation. The program goes to great lengths to prevent any 
emergencies as much as possible.

6. What's your salary? Do you get health benefits?

As a production cook, I make about $15.50 per hour, based on a 10-hour day, 
and 6 day weeks, which is the minimum my contract obligates me to work. There 
is no overtime, however, so if I work 14-hour days or 9-day weeks – and I've 
had to do that – the pay stays the same. On the plus side, I do get benefits 
and there is very little to spend money on. My food, housing, electricity and 
garbage collection are all covered, and it's not like we have shopping malls, 
restaurants, or movie theatres here. The bars and Coffee House operate on a 
cash basis but even then, drinks are reasonably priced so I get to bank most of 
what I earn.
 