
The beauty of case management is that no two days are ever the same. My 
clients are of all ages, locations and backgrounds, but they each have one 
thing in common – they’ve been catastrophically injured in some traumatic way, 
whether that’s from birth, medical negligence, a car accident or even assault.

The behaviour specialist: ‘My wife has told me never to analyse her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/06/day-in-the-life-behaviour-specialist>
As a director and senior case manager for Complex Case Management in Bury, I 
help individuals and their families deal with the aftermath of such incidents 
by managing rehabilitation and care packages. These support those affected to 
maximise their independence and quality of life.

My day usually begins with visiting clients or liaising with team members, 
solicitors and families. Most of my clients are referred from litigation 
solicitors, so the first step is always initial assessment. Each case is very 
different from the last, but they all require case management to be delivered 
as soon as possible, which means quickly coordinating all the necessary 
specialists.

To ensure people receive the most suitable care, most of my day is spent 
working with care providers, many of whom are doing such inspirational work 
that doesn’t receive anywhere near enough recognition. One such company is 
Community Life Choices. The specialist homecare provider is helping a client in 
Lancashire to live independently in their own home, giving them more choice and 
control over how they are supported.

Over 30 years of working in this sector means I have a network of contacts and 
can easily bring specialists on board. These include physiotherapists, 
occupational therapists, psychologists and dieticians, who work alongside the 
care teams and help them develop the technical skills needed to cater for each 
individual.

My involvement with clients doesn’t come to an end once the legal teams have 
settled the case. Most people require care and support for the rest of their 
lives, and I love that I get to see the progression and development that takes 
place as a result of great health and social care.

Later on in the day, my role tends to involve more general case work. In 
addition to case management, I help to secure statutory funding for clients. 
This includes meeting with commissioning groups to source funding they don’t 
already have, as well as gaining additional funding from the NHS or social 
services.

After work I love spending time with friends and family to unwind. I’ve 
recently gained the companionship of a gorgeous Chihuahua and she’s a great 
source of fun and gives me an excuse to walk around the gorgeous countryside.

I’m also a keen fundraiser, having completed the Great North Run for both the 
Spinal Injuries Association and Headway, which are charities closely associated 
with my clients.
 