
My role

As an independent domestic violence worker, I have trained doctors and nurses 
in A&E departments across Greater Manchester in how to spot the signs of 
domestic violence, and worked one-to-one with patients in hospital with visible 
injuries. I am a trained to facilitate thefreedom programme 
<http://www.freedomprogramme.co.uk/>, a 12-week awareness-raising course on 
domestic violence. I deliver this programme to women of all ages who have 
experienced abuse. I also go to schools to teach girls about healthy and 
unhealthy relationship.

A typical day

I make a rough plan for my day, but know from experience that I cannot 
anticipate the issues that may come up. Last time I was in a school, I received 
a disclosure about child sexual exploitation. A young girl told me she was 
being labelled as “the biggest charge sheet going”. I had no idea what this 
meant so I asked her. “You know,” she said, “it’s the sheet the guy gets off 
the police when you’re underage.”

Domestic violence: are Maracs making a difference to victims' lives?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jul/07/domestic-violence-are-maracs-making-a-difference-to-victims-lives>
When I trained doctors and nurses in hospitals, each session was sidetracked 
with someone telling me about their own experience of domestic violence. One 
nurse told me she had been thrown down the stairs. Another was being threatened 
by her ex-partner each time she went to work. A session I delivered in a 
children’s centre was diverted by a 19-year-old girl telling me the level of 
domestic violence she had suffered was so high that the police had built a 
panic room in her house to protect her and her children from her ex-partner 
when he was released from prison. She said she still didn’t feel safe, so we 
spent the session going through safety planning techniques.

The issues affecting my work at the moment.

There isn’t enough awareness about the different types of domestic abuse and 
the various tactics perpetrators use. With some professionals I have come into 
contact with there is a fear of the phrase domestic violence, and a 
misunderstanding about what it is.

Many young people I work with have no idea that they are experiencing domestic 
violence, and so many young girls tell me the same kinds of stories again and 
again. If more education about domestic abuse was given in schools, then young 
girls wouldn’t be under such pressure, and they would not have to go through 
these debilitating anxieties about relationships by themselves.

The moment I’ll always remember

The time I was called to A&E to work with a woman who had been beaten so badly 
by her ex-partner and his friend that I could not make out her face. The first 
thing she said to me was “It’s my fault”. I spent the first part of our meeting 
convincing her that it was not in any way her fault.

What I love about what I do

Domestic abuse: how can services protect children in violent homes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/feb/09/domestic-abuse-protect-children-violent-homes>
I love teaching young people. It is satisfying to know that I am arming them 
with information about domestic abuse at a young age. It’s rewarding to see 
their confidence increase as they realise they can do what they want, when they 
want, that it’s not their fault if their partner calls them a “slag” or a 
“whore” and that they’re not fat, no matter what their partner says. Most 
importantly, it is satisfying to teach them that it’s okay to say “no” to their 
partners, and to anything, whenever they want.

One thing I wish I’d known when I started out

I wish I’d known that completing my freedom programme training would change my 
whole outlook on life. I see things differently now. I’m aware of every tactic 
– emotional abuse, physical abuse, financial abuse, sexual abuse – and because 
of this I see it everywhere.

If there was an extra hour in the day ...

I would call into more schools, and explain to headteachers what a difference 
it would make to girls’ lives if they put just a couple of hours a week aside 
to teach teenage girls about domestic abuse and the difference between a 
healthy and an unhealthy relationship. It would be so great to arm all girls 
with the knowledge that could protect them from abuse, rather than dealing with 
the aftermath.

Kelly Mattison is an independent domestic violence worker. You can follow her 
on Twitter@kellymattison7 <https://twitter.com/kellymattison7>

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>
 