
Two years ago, I came to New Hampshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-hampshire> to rediscover America. I 
drove from the Republican primary in Manchester to the Balsams resort in 
Dixville Notch to witness for myself the famous midnight vote that launches my 
country's primary process to select presidential candidates. This is our 
"political groundhog day", marking the start of the long and ugly fight that 
culminates months later with the election of our president.

The vote that night wasn't remarkable, and yet, the spirit I sought was there. 
The flurry of reporters that pressed in for the result created a scene more 
theatrical than political. Visitors and seasoned "Granite Staters" alike wore 
smiles as we observed them clamoring to deliver the results. As hot chocolate 
and bubbly warmed our bellies, you could see a mutual knowledge in each other's 
eyes, a hint that we were fulfilling a promise that could only be realized 
through this peculiar journey alone. In brief communion with conservatives and 
radicals alike, my heart was warmed by the solemnness on display. This is what 
I drove through freezing weather to find: a reaffirmation of our unique 
American system.

I will forever be in the debt of the good folks of New Hampshire who extended 
their hospitality to me that evening. To those who were there that cold January 
night, I say this to you without exaggeration: you restored my faith in our 
republic.

But readers, you had to be there.

You had to be there, because otherwise you are more likely to be among the 
hundreds of millions of other Americans who feel that there is nothing 
affirmative, or hospitable, or solemn, about the system we now suffer with. In 
fact, you're likely one of the 77% of Americans 
<http://www.judicialwatch.org/press-room/press-releases/new-judicial-watch-breitbart-poll-shows-77-of-americans-concerned-about-government-corruption-majority-see-it-getting-worse/>
 who recognize the importance of reducing the ever-expanding influence of 
legalized bribery that has infected our republic. Much sadder still, you are 
almost as likely to believe that this situation is getting worse and won't 
change.

And there is our poison. We are awash in the misery of hopelessness.

As a young man, a conservative evangelical boy in a Rhode Island household, I 
often observed New Hampshire license plates with distinct envy. Proudly posted 
in four words on every car and truck was the most powerful declaration a simple 
tag could deliver: "Live Free or Die <http://www.nh.gov/nhinfo/emblem.html>". I 
remember looking at our own, tiny state motto with disdain. "Hope" was just not 
nearly as cool.

Now I'm back in New Hampshire, and this time I'm walking with the NHRebellion 
<http://www.nhrebellion.org/>. With new friends, I've started right where I 
rediscovered my country, back in Dixville Notch. I've come here by way of 
military service in Afghanistan and Granny D, Occupy and Aaron Swartz, and 
mostly because of the personal struggles we wayward children tend to have. I'm 
here because I wish to support a man (Lawrence Lessig) who had his friend Swartz
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/11/aaron-swartz-death-first-anniversary>
 stolen from him by an unjust system. I'm here in memory of a woman (Granny D)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jan/17/uselections2000.usa>who, when 
nothing else would do, walked 3,200 miles to remind us all that there is still 
indeed something sacred worth fighting for. I walk because we all walk in the 
shadow of a bloated system that has stopped serving its citizens. I walk 
because my short 31 years has taught me the power of crossing the great divide 
and observing the humanity of my enemy. I walk to reaffirm the transformative 
power of hope when there is no other power left in us to muster.

I care not at all whether you look like me or not, live and love like me or 
not, believe like me or not, or vote as I do, either. So, if you must, consider 
me a fool for the faith I have in you. However, if you can not hope at all to 
bring this system to account, a system of corruption which is bankrupting our 
very spirit, stealing the birthright of our children, then what remains? 
Perhaps all that is left now is to watch helplessly as the mortar of our 
community crumbles. Maybe all we can do is turn our eyes from our neighbor's, 
such is the depth of our despair and the divide of our differences.
 Members of the New Hampshire Rebellion walk together to protest government 
corruption in America on 15 January 2014. Photograph: Richard C Pollock 
But for me this week, there is a great hope. It is why I walk for no one 
reform or policy. I walk not on one side of the aisle or another, for term 
limits or for public finance of campaigns. Indeed, this walk of ours has one 
aim: to get the attention of the very people for whom I now owe my love of 
country, for the good people of New Hampshire, two short years from now, to ask 
one simple question of the stream of candidates who seek to be our public 
servants: "what will you do to end the corruption in Washington 
<http://www.nhrebellion.org/petition>?"

For me, it is the only question left worth asking.
 