
A recent visit to one of my doctors started out in the usual way, with a 
review of my current medications. I have rheumatoid arthritis, an incurable 
autoimmune disease, so my list of medications is fairly long. The doctor paused 
when she reached Tramadol, a mild opioid I use sometimes before bed when pain 
threatens to steal sleep.


“You need this every night?” she asked. This caring doctor I’d trusted for 
years stiffened as if on alert. I could practically read on her face theMarch 
2016 recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control 
<http://www.latimes.com/science/sciencenow/la-sci-sn-most-chronic-pain-patients-should-avoid-opioids-cdc-20160315-story.html>
 and Prevention that accused doctors of creating the opioid crisis and 
recommending that the “vast majority of patients” with chronic pain not be 
treated with opioids.

Curbing pain prescriptions won't reduce overdoses. More drug treatment will | 
Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/prescription-drug-abuse-addiction-treatment-painkiller>
I looked down and mumbled that I only took it sometimes, and that my 
rheumatologist had prescribed it. But I couldn’t erase her piercing look from 
my mind.

Chronic pain patients like me are not the cause of the opioid crisis; only 22% 
<http://www.samhsa.gov/atod/opioids> of those who misuse opioids are prescribed 
them by a doctor, and only13% 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/69973436e1894caeba9d146c6e2a93a5/death-raises-questions-did-prince-die-overdose>
 of ER visits for opiate overdoses were chronic pain patients. Most chronic 
pain patients are rule-followers who just want to function.

If there is a cause of addiction for patients with chronic pain, it is the 
desperation induced by searing pain itself, combined with isolation, lack of 
support, and the resulting deep depression and anger that come with seeing 
one’s life slip away.

Still, I take precautions. Because I never want to appear to be seeking pain 
meds, I minimize my pain, rarely ask for pain relief, and only to confess to a 
severe problem when I’m desperate. But I’ve been desperate. I have been in 
intense pain every day for over five years. I am no novice, and the pain is 
significant and real enough that I have been forced to try everything.


I am on a gluten-free, egg-free diet that is much more expensive than normal 
fare. I pay out of pocket for acupuncture and my chiropractor. I take a host of 
supplements, and I’m always trying new concoctions. I wear a Quell unit that 
gives me zaps to disrupt pain signals, which I paid for out of pocket and 
learned about through my own research. I meditate and, do yoga and go to 
therapy. I walk on the treadmill and float in a salt-water tank. I use topical 
balms and take good bacteria for my gut. I spend a lot of time giving myself 
the support that the medical establishment cannot provide.

In addition to my roles as wife, mother and full-time professor, managing the 
pain has become my second occupation. But millions of people in pain do not 
have these options.

A person with chronic pain can become trapped in a downward spiral – pain 
destroys sleep, and then without sleep the body cannot stay healthy, and the 
pain escalates to crushing levels. For autoimmune conditions, the medicine of 
last resort for these flares is prednisone, a steroid that calms flares but 
that, for me, further impedes sleep, caused a cataract to develop in one eye 
and comes with a host of other side-effects.

Sleep was the reason I turned to Tramadol. My doctor took me off a 
benzodiazepine, which has recently beenlinked to dementia 
<http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/771934>. After the benzo I switched to a 
high-powered decongestant, only to find that that also had been linked to 
dementia risk. Hence the Tramadol – and now that seemed to be a problem.

As a friend with chronic pain says, “I won’t need to worry about dementia; I’m 
not going to make it that far.”

 I don’t blame individual doctors for the opioid crisis, or for responding to 
it with an increased sense of caution. I blame a system that stigmatizes and 
limits care without offering real alternatives.

If the US had a comprehensive healthcare system, I would be sent to a real 
pain clinic, where my pain symptoms would be addressed by experts that would 
help me manage flares and to manage sleep and stress. Such clinics could offer 
a wide range of therapies as needed, including responsible use of opioids in a 
non-shaming manner.

The reality, however, is that our diseases are seen as important, but our pain 
is merely a symptom. There are very few pain centers in this country. One about 
45 minutes away from me offers treatment to fix back pain and injury-related 
pain, but nothing on their website mentions the invisible chronic pain that is 
most intractable because it is caused by incurable conditions.

I will be living with chronic pain for the rest of my life. I don’t have the 
mobility, energy or life options I used to have. I work hard to manage the 
pain, and I want the medical system to be a respectful and effective partner, 
not a jailer. The opioid crisis is not my doing.
 