
Scott Barbour has worked and overseen security at luxury hotels in Hollywood 
for 25 years. He's seen plenty of NBA players, boy bands and actors. He's 
opening up about life behind the cameras and doors as part of ourA day's work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/a-days-work> series. Leave 
questions for Scott in the comments and he'll answer as many as he can later 
today.

1. What's your typical day like?

There really is no typical day in hotel security. We are the law enforcement, 
fire and EMS for the hotel. We respond to emergency situations daily. At one 
hotel I worked at, we had a great rooftop venue for weddings and parties. Along 
with the hotel guests, we also had to protect the 300 to 500 additional guests 
attending events. The London West Hollywood Hotel also hosted several VIP 
Events, such as the NBA All Star week, several MTV events and wrap parties for 
television shows. We had to keep the celebrities and guests safe while keeping 
the public and paparazzi away. We hadOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> stay at the hotel for a week. 
We had several hundred teenage girls standing around the hotel trying to gain 
access to the guest floors. It reminded me of my days at the L'Ermitage Beverly 
Hills Hotel in 1998 when 'N Sync, the Backstreet Boys and the rap artists 
started getting big. The reason that I enjoy working in hotel security is that 
you never know what your day will bring.

2. There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. 
Does your job provide that?

Work balance? What is that? A typical work day for me runs about 10 to 11 
hours a shift. Driving back and forth to my home take another two hours out of 
my day. The rest of the time I spend with my beautiful wife. We are able to see 
each other almost every day. When events are happening at night, my hours 
extend to perhaps 15 or 16 a shift. I do not take long vacations. I am never 
farther than an hour's drive to the hotel. California has earthquakes and 
although I would love to take a cruise somewhere or go to Las Vegas, I 
personally feel that if an emergency happens, I must be able to respond 
immediately.

3. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while 
on the job?

After working for the police department, driving an ambulance and working in 
hotel security, you can imagine that I have seen and done a thing or two. But 
top of my list is a story from my hotel industry days. It was a Sunday 
afternoon, and I had been promoted to Security Supervisor two days earlier, so 
I was totally responsible for the safety of our hotel guests. The hotel had 30 
stories with an independent restaurant on the first floor. I got a radio call 
from the dispatcher. He said that the restaurant just reported that someone had 
just jumped off of the restaurant roof. As I am going to the scene, I am going 
over situations in my mind. Since he jumped off of the restaurant roof, he may 
have a sprained ankle or some cuts. Should I get one of my officers to respond 
with the first aid kit? When I got to the restaurant, they showed me the 
direction that they heard the noise come from. I went out onto the courtyard 
with the ivy hill. There in front of me lay an obviously deceased male. After 
securing the scene and having the police and fire take over, I had to determine 
who he was and what happened. It turned out that he jumped from the 26th floor 
balcony and hit the restaurant roof before landing in the ivy. He had just 
broken up and took his own life. There were suicide notes and photos spread 
throughout the guest room. It was so sad. I will never forget that.

4. What makes for a really good day on the job?

Just about every day is a great day in the hotel business. Hotel employees are 
the most well behaved, willing to help and friendly people that I have ever 
met. We are constantly going out of our way to give our guests first class 
treatment. That treatment goes toward employees as well. I come from a luxury 
hotel background. Just walking through the beautiful property rather than in 
some concrete warehouse is relaxing. We also get complimentary meals every day.

I worked for a large convention hotel that held luncheons and dinner events 
daily. After serving the guests, the extra prime rib dinners, the salmon plates 
and 10 different desserts were brought down to the employee cafeteria. Those 
were great. Then there are the great flower arrangements. We had an average of 
60 to 70 tables for most banquet events. Each table had it's own beautiful 
flower decorations. The guests were allowed to take home the arrangements, but 
they were so huge that most guests left them behind. I surprised my wife one 
morning with 20 flower arrangements decorating our living room. Ahh, those were 
the days.

5. What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

The typical salary for a hotel security director is approximately $40,000 per 
year. Depending on the hotel, salaries can go up to $50,000 a year. That is for 
a typical security director. I opened two five-star hotels and have been a 
security director for three hotels. Opening a hotel, especially a first-class 
operation takes a lot of work. I wrote all of the security procedures manuals, 
the hotel's emergency procedures manuals and hired new staff. My salary started 
at $65,000, and I ended with a salary of approximately $70,000. We got some 
benefits. We received sick and vacation pay, discounts at sister hotels, and I 
was part of a bonus plan.

6. What's the biggest mistake you've ever made while working?

My biggest mistake was thinking that if you did your job well, took care of 
your team, gave your best every day and stayed out of trouble, you would be 
able to keep your job. My position at the London Hotel in West Hollywood was 
"eliminated" three days prior to my five-year anniversary. I got a call to go 
to Human Resources. When I got there, I was simply told that my position was 
eliminated today and to pack up my things immediately. My benefit package would 
have gotten much better after the five-year mark. I climbed the ladder twice to 
get to the position that I attained. I do not want to climb that ladder again, 
but it looks like that is exactly what I will need to do.

Do you have an interesting day job? Willing to share some details about your 
work on the Guardian? Have a tip or suggestion for someone we should feature? 
Email us!ruth.spencer@theguardian.com <mailto:ruth.spencer@theguardian.com>
 