
He's young and fit

From Nicola, age 37
I began a bit of fun with a much younger man a while ago, and six months later 
we are both as keen as ever. Although I don't necessarily feel I'm looking for 
a partner for life, he's probably one of the most amazing boyfriends I've ever 
had. The thing that makes him most special to me is that he places feelings and 
being caring higher than anything else, and I have spent many years struggling 
with my background of an over-intellectual, under-emotionally-functional family 
and gone through a slow painful process of re-learning emotionally.

I don't know if I am more rattled about our ages than I want to be (I am 37, 
he is 22). Would I be foolish to invest energy in a relationship with a guy who 
is potentially going to change a lot and the attraction of an older female wear 
off?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies
The game of life involves a series of trade-offs. I think the age gap issue is 
outweighed by the big plus in finding equilibrium with a personality type that 
suits your own.

The evolution of empathy probably contributed to the development of Homo 
sapiens' large and complex brain. From your description your boyfriend sounds 
empathic – if he were faking empathy you should have discovered this by now. 
Empathic humans are hard-wired to care for others, which is why females are 
attracted to males like this: they make good parents and committed long-term 
partners.

At 37, perhaps you should seize the day and discuss with your boyfriend 
whether you want to have children together.

Dickins, TE, et al (2006) Aggression, empathy and sexual orientation in males. 
Personality and Individual Differences; 40: 475-486.

Baron-Cohen, S, Wheelwright, S (2004) The empathy quotient: an investigation 
of adults with Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex 
differences. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, vol 34, issue 2, 
April.

Blaffer Hrdy, S (2006) The optimal number of fathers. Evolution, demography 
and history in the shaping of female mate preferences. 
<http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/119039270/abstract> Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, vol 907, issue 0, pages 75-96.

It's a vicious cycle

From David, age 39
I am a lifelong cyclist with a generally happy and well-balanced life. 
However, I have observed that if I am off the bike, or even only cycling to 
commute, I start to get depressed to the point where I "need" a good ride to 
sort myself out. This is even with a 40-minute commute each way and occasional 
lunchtime running.

Is this likely to be a symptom of longer-term depression or alternatively 
addiction to exercise? I am worried that with the imminent arrival of our 
second child my time is going to be so limited that I am going to end up unable 
to manage myself and end up a mess.
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies
Endorphins are opiate-like molecules that have an effect on mood and lessen 
pain. They may also be involved in social attachment and maternal bonding. 
Primates produce endorphins when being groomed and in flight or fight.

As a cyclist you may be experiencing the "runner's high", where endorphins are 
produced in large amounts to help the body cope with the stress of vigorous 
exercise, which in turn produces a euphoric effect that can become addictive, 
known as "exercise-dependence syndrome".

Humans and chimpanzees have at least 98% of their DNA sequences in common, but 
recent research on the evolution of gene regulation has shown that humans 
differ from other apes in the amount of endorphins produced. The expression of 
an endorphin gene was favoured in human evolution and various mutations have 
been selected for. Humans may produce 20% more endorphins than chimps, 
indicating that over the past seven million years, through natural selection, 
the human lineage has been significantly influenced by increased production of 
these molecules.

In addition, recent research has shown that when compared to lone experiences, 
such as cycling, greater amounts of endorphin are produced in humans when 
groups of people collectively experience intense, shared events, such as 
competitive rowing.

One might hypothesise that team-building exercises, such as constructing 
shelters and hunting game, or culturally shared experiences in large groups 
such as laughing and dancing are activities humans are driven to do.

If you are indeed suffering from exercise-dependence syndrome, you could try 
to slowly cut down on the amount of cycling and access endorphins via other 
experiences. How about team sports? Or you could squeeze your progeny into a 
baby sling and go speed-walking with them, which would also give their mum a 
break.

By organising allomaternal care (a babysitter) the two of you could set aside 
more time for mutual grooming and attending shared events such as aromatherapy 
massage, comedy clubs and dancing classes.

Sex and the consumption of chocolate have also been linked to the production 
of endorphins ...

Boecker, H, et al (2008) The runner's high: opioidergic mechanisms in the 
human brain. Cerebral Cortex; 18: 2523.

Dunbar, RIM, et al. (2009) Rowers' high: behavioural synchrony is correlated 
with elevated pain thresholds.Biology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/biology> Letters.

Wray, GA (2007) The evolutionary significance of cis-regulatory mutations. 
Nature Reviews Genetics; 8: 206-216.

You can email your questions to Carole by clicking here (they don't have to be 
about relationships). Please put "Ask Carole" in the subject line. 
<mailto:science@guardian.co.uk>

Carole is UK-based and as such any advice she gives is intended for a UK 
audience only.
 