
Deafblind people and their families are often among the poorest and most 
excluded members of society inUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>
. Without support, deafblind children often lead harsh, isolated lives. Many 
will die young.

My role is to train providers of services to deafblind people, including 
teachers, audiologists, ophthalmologists, physiotherapists, community 
volunteers and government officials. Training is also given to deafblind people 
and their families.

Being positive about my deafness inspires the deaf children I meet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/sep/11/positive-about-deafness-inspires-deaf-children>
I’ll wake up early in the morning and start the day with a heavy breakfast of 
corn flour porridge served with plantain or chapatti. The team and I may work 
as far as 130km away from the Ugandan capital, Kampala, so we often pack water 
and a snack for the day ahead as it is usually hard to find decent food in the 
villages.

Work normally begins from the regional deafblind centre, a school for the deaf 
with a unit for deafblind children, where I support the teachers and monitor 
school programmes. I’ll then travel to community schools where a mainstream 
teacher will take me to the home of a deafblind or multisensory-impaired child. 
In the home, I observe the teacher’s interaction with the family and the child, 
I’ll check that assistive devices are used appropriately and that the child is 
healthy. The home visit often lasts close to four hours. I usually visit around 
three children a day.

We strive to identify deafblind children as early as possible so they can 
receive vital assessments and support from medical and education professionals. 
I often feel saddened and distressed whenever I find a deafblind child 
malnourished, naked or dressed in rags due to intentional abuse or extreme 
poverty. I appreciate that we can never solve all a family’s problems, however 
additional funding is needed to provide further expertise and training to local 
organisations and persuade the government to provide support.

What motivates me most is seeing the slightest progress in a deafblind child. 
This might be learning how to smile, chew food, or identify a person through 
smell, to tasks such as meaningful communication, independent movement or 
acquiring independence in daily living skills.

One of our biggest challenges is that the Ugandan government has not yet 
adopted the rubella vaccination as part of national immunisation plans. Rubella 
can cause children to be born deaf and blind if their mothers catch the disease 
during pregnancy. Sense International is campaigning for the government of 
Uganda to immunise against rubella; I hope to see this commitment made in my 
working lifetime.

I wish I had had training on establishing the first contact with a deafblind 
person when I started my job. During my first contact with a deafblind person, 
a 10-year-old totally deafblind boy, my hands were scratched and shredded. He 
did this in self-defence because I had not introduced myself to him. I felt 
afraid but I was determined to win over his heart, which I did.

One of my proudest moments has been enrolling at the University of Birmingham 
for my diploma in deafblindness, this was a great landmark towards 
professionalisation of deafblindness work in Uganda. In five years’ time, I’ll 
be a trainer in deafblindness, both nationally and internationally. I envisage 
recording various sessions of my trainings in English and local languages to 
reach out to many people.

Adoption social work: 'I can't change the past for these children'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/sep/25/adoption-social-work-i-cant-change-the-past-for-these-children>
Following a long day, I usually arrive back at my accommodation exhausted at 
around 7pm. Often I’m asleep even before I have dinner and if I manage to stay 
awake I’ll call my family to chat through my day.

If there was an extra hour in the day, I’d search all corners of Uganda to dig 
out the fathers of deafblind children who deserted home after realising that 
their child has a disability. A high proportion of men fail to fulfil their 
responsibilities as parents. Roughly 80% of deafblind children live either with 
single mothers or grandmothers.

Before joining Sense International, I worked as a rehabilitation officer for 
Blind But Able, an institution providing rehabilitation for visually impaired 
adults. My responsibilities included training visually impaired adults to read 
and write braille and equipping them with the practical skills to participate 
in their communities.

While I was at Blind But Able, the organisation was selected to partner with 
Sense International to pilot a community-based rehabilitation project to 
provide hands-on services to deafblind children in Kampala district. I led the 
project, setting up structures of community volunteers working closely with 
families and a multi-disciplinary assessment team to improve the lives of 
deafblind children. After six months of the pilot project, Sense International 
recruited me to replicate the project in other parts of the country.

Sense International was the only organisation that was able to provide the 
expertise I needed to interact with deafblind people. Before this I only had 
skills to support people with visual impairment. I believe I was destined for 
this nature of work.


For further information about the work of Sense International visit 
senseinternational.org.uk <http://www.senseinternational.org.uk/>

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 