
I am often asked: how can I make sure I get home safe after I am pulled over 
by the police? Following the killings of Alton Sterling  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alton-sterling-shooting>and Philando 
Castile <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philando-castile-shooting>, I feel 
I should know the answer to that question – but I don’t.

You might think I’m the ideal person to answer: I served four years in the US 
Marine corps’ version of Swat, and 11 years as a Baltimore police officer, 
detective, sergeant and shift commander. I’ve participated in innumerable car 
stops, 400-plus arrests and every training event that I could. And yet, I have 
no idea how to respond to that basic question.

Following Castile’s death, my friend, Frank MacArthur tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/BaltoSpectator/status/751072910069100545>: “Brother got 
gunned down for no reason. He had a burned out tail light. Complied. Did 
EVERYTHING cop asked. STILL not good enough. For America.” He is right. Based 
on what we know from available reports, Mr Castile did nothing that could have 
jeopardized his life. There is nothing he could have done differently.

It is frustrating that I cannot offer foolproof advice on how to stay safe 
from taxpayer-funded state-sanctioned violence. You can run, or not run. Make 
eye contact, or avoid eye contact. Assert civil rights, or be submissive. There 
simply is no rule on how to stay alive when you interact with the police. And 
that is a problem.

Police and black Americans: a relationship worse than in the 90s | Al Sharpton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/10/police-black-american-relationship-reform-justice-al-sharpton>
Police legitimacy is built upon trust from the community and is what enables 
the rule of law. The very fabric of our society depends on all of us caring 
about the victimization of others. That is why I cannot answer the question of 
what the oppressed should do when engaged by the police to ensure they do not 
get killed. The question is irrational. It is up to the privileged and the 
oppressors to ensure the question is never asked.

The thin blue line is supposed to be what holds society together, but it has 
become what divides us. The country needs the good cops to make a stand. They 
swore, just like I did, to protect and serve. But too many fail to do that.

As a public leader for civilian-led police reform and an unapologetic 
participant in the fight for equal justice and Black Lives Matter, I have been 
fighting to actually fulfill that promise.

There are things police officers across the country can push for, right now. 
The thing that would have the most impact is an end to the drug war. This may 
not seem related, but the push for aggressive police actions escalated with the 
start of the drug war and continues to be enabled by it. The drug war is the 
main driver of the “us v them” mentality: it makes us an invading force.

We should join the call for civilian oversight. Police officers follow the 
direction of politicians and political appointments; this results in serving a 
few instead of the many. These things are easy to see with data and a little 
reason; what is difficult is changing the culture.

Ideas like “we don’t make the laws, we just enforce them” or “it is not our 
job to get hurt” or “there’s one gang and that’s us” – all these types of 
thoughts pit us against those we are serving.

Dallas shootings: the latest chapter in a painful racial history | Peniel E 
Joseph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/police-killings-dallas-shooting-racism-american-history>
We must fight the denial and see that it is our responsibility to protect the 
lives of all families and communities that we serve. We must see that 
throughout our criminal justice system, the overt and implicit bias factors of 
being black, brown, poor, Muslim, LBGTQ – to name just a few – invade and 
corrupt every aspect of justice. And police are the front line of this exchange.

In order to actually serve the community, we must combat these biases in our 
system that destroy justice. Focus our fight on the causations of crime, such 
as lead poisoning, public health, imprisoned communities, lack of resources, 
regressive taxation, marginalization and the other aspects of life that push 
people to crime. We must have our own version of the Hippocratic oath. We must 
understand that the hero is the one who hesitates to pull the trigger.

We have spent the history of American policing telling people what we will do 
to them for their own good. It should have been predictable that this model 
would lead to a tyrannical collection of power. I ask officers across the 
country to learn every family name, be honest, be human, see what their 
concerns and needs are. See what they need from you. Attend a Black Lives 
Matter protest, you are supposed to be serving them. Join me in integration, 
not occupation.
 