
Willio Lacomme of Cincinnati, Ohio is a fairly typical "behind the scenes" 
Walmart associate. He works in the receiving department, unloading trucks for 
$8.25 an hour.He answered these questions on his way to work yesterday and has 
agreed to answer Guardian reader queries and comments later today as part of our
A day's work series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/a-days-work>. Please post 
your questions below the line.

1. What's your typical day like?

I work in the receiving department, unloading trucks and packing things. I 
often go to work at night around 4pm or 5pm. When we get to the store, we have 
to get the back room ready. We gotta pull everything already there from night 
before and get that stuff in one position and get our area ready so we can 
receive the product coming off the next truck. When you finish doing that, then 
we set up skids and jump on the truck and get all that done.

My store receives three trucks a day: one truck general merchandise. One of 
produce and one that is other daily products. We normally unload two of them.

2. What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

I get $8.25 an hour. When I first started two years ago, I was in maintenance 
and only got $7-something an hour. I kept saying, this is what you guys pay? 
They said, if you want more, we have this position in receiving. So that's how 
I got to $8.25 an hour. I'm still fighting with them because it is so much work 
for very little.

As a full-timer, you get benefits, but I am on part-time status, so I have no 
benefits. I don't have no full-time status. Even with part-time, they can still 
give you basically 40 hours a week, but no benefits. Recently, they cut a lot 
of people's hours. I'm technically at 32 hours a week, although I often work 
closer to 40. They don't want no one to have overtime, so they stop us at 40.

3. What makes for a really good day on the job?

Technically for me, there's no good day. It's just when you get there, you 
already know how it is and what it's going to be like. You know, it's a 
struggle every day. You don't get paid well. You never do exactly what you sign 
up to do. You finish doing what you're supposed to do and then they drop more.

If we finish the truck fast and think we're going to have a short day, they 
just say "ha ha". And then they ask you to do more. There's never a "good day" 
in that sense. No matter how hard you work, you have to meet the minutes. If 
they were paying a bit more, then you would at least know you get paid well.

4. Have you taken part in a protest or strike for better wages and working 
conditions?

I have not done any protests or strikes or anything like that. I did sign up 
for theOUR Walmart campaign <http://forrespect.org/>, but I haven't really done 
much. I have a family. I spend my time working or with them.
 