
Benjamin Gilmour is an emergency and rescue worker based in Sydney, Australia. 
He has travelled the world on medical missions.

As a part of our 'A day's work' series 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/series/a-days-work>, Benjamin has 
agreed to open up about his life and his work with Guardian readers, and answer 
questions throughout the day. So what do you want to know?

Leave your questions below and Benjamin will be online from 9am AEST to 
respond, and will pop up later in the day, his work hours permitting. 

What's your typical day like?

There’s no typical day for a paramedic. The unpredictability greatly appeals 
to me. I've always liked surprises. If a day starts well, it begins at the 
coffee shop. But it doesn’t take long for calls to come in. A man faints after 
getting out of the shower. Somewhere else, an old lady wakes to find her 
husband of 60 years dead beside her. We just never know what will come next.

Once, a guy choked on his toothbrush. Mornings can be deadly. Before lunch we 
might get a car crash, occupants trapped. We’ll work to free them, splint their 
fractures, give them morphine, run a drip, rush them to hospital. Or we might 
see a woman with a stroke, a man with a coronary, an injured pedestrian. Just 
as likely, an office-worker might call us, having a panic attack. They do that, 
office workers. All the stress, they tell us. If I worked in an office, I’d 
probably have a panic attack too. So I stick with multi-victim accidents, 
knife-attacks and cardiac arrests.

After lunch, we may end up in some back alley reviving a heroin addict. When 
they wake up we'll offer them a ride to hospital. They usually decline. We 
suspect we’ll see them again. Calls like that might leave us in a sombre mood. 
But later in the afternoon we might deliver a baby in the front of a car pulled 
over on a major freeway, traffic zooming past. That will cheer us up. 
Childbirths are a highlight of ambulance work. I suppose if we could start our 
shift with drinking a full cup of coffee and end our shift with delivering a 
baby, well, most of us would call that a pretty fine day. 

There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. Does 
your job provide that?

In my case it does. I currently work 12-hour shifts, with four days on, five 
days off, in Sydney. Not all paramedics around the world can say they work less 
than half the year. Around the USA, there are EMTs and paramedics who work much 
longer shifts and more days and nights on duty. When I rode with medics in 
Hawaii, they were constantly doing double shifts, and not always voluntarily 
either. It's even tougher for ambulance workers in developing nations. In 
Mexico for instance, some medics will only leave work once a week. They 
literally live on the ambulance station. 

What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while on 
the job?

It’s hard to single one out. Crazy/unexpected things happen daily to 
paramedics. Over 15 years I’ve had the pleasure of working as a medic in 13 
different nations. These experiences I recount in my new bookParamedico 
<http://paramedico.com.au/book.html>. From these adventures I would have to say 
my close shaves with death have been the most challenging, like surviving the 
Boxing Day tsunami in 2004 and a suicide bomb attack in Pakistan two years ago.

What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

At the moment I work in Sydney, Australia, where the annual income for a 
fully-qualified paramedic is about 50K. But this can end up well over 70K once 
penalties like night loading and overtime are added on. Unfortunately, our only 
benefit is a free ambulance ride if we ever need one. But Australian paramedics 
are stoic types, and would rather drive themselves to hospital with a limb 
hanging off than go by ambulance.

What's the biggest mistake you've ever made while working?

Telling a patient, "It’s okay," when things are evidently not okay. If a 
mother has lost her child to sudden infant death, that’s not okay. When 
someone’s partner has been killed in a car accident, it’s not okay. When a man 
is threatening to jump off the top of a building, it’s not okay. Most 
paramedics make this mistake early on in their career, but usually have their 
heads instantly bitten off by patients who invariably yell, "It’s NOT okay! 
Okay?!!"

In saying that, the biggest mistake any medic is likely to make is a 
misdiagnosis and the giving or withholding of treatment that possibly 
contributes to an avoidable disability or death. These mistakes can weigh on a 
medic’s conscience for a very long time, sometimes forever. Yet it’s 
universally agreed that mistakes are essential to perfecting skills. It just so 
happens that our mistakes can kill people. That’s why few EMTs and paramedics, 
or doctors and nurses for that matter, will ever admit in public to making a 
mistake, because questions will inevitably be asked. We’re generally very hard 
on ourselves anyway, without extra scrutiny. Just about every patient I fail to 
save will lead to a period of agonising reflection and self-examination. But I 
suppose that comes with the territory.
 