
Ibragim Gazdiev was driving his brother's car in Karabulak, in the north 
Caucasus republic of Ingushetia in southernRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, on 8 August 2007, when armed, 
masked men in camouflage surrounded the car, forced him to get into another car 
and drove him away.

Gazdiev, who was 29 at the time and worked as a shop manager, has not been 
seen since. His brother's car is also missing.

It has been almost four years since Gazdiev disappeared and it is feared that 
he is being held in secret detention, unable to contact the outside world, in 
danger of being tortured or killed.

Nobody knows why he was taken, but earlier in 2007 his family home was 
searched by Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) officers. Also, in the 
summer of 2004, Gazdiev gave a lift to a person called Kazbek, who was taking 
his family to hospital. On the way back, Gazdiev's car was shot at, allegedly 
by members of the security forces. Kazbek was killed and Gazdiev was detained. 
Police then told Gazdiev that Kazbek was on their most wanted list. He was 
released without charge later the same day.

Gazdiev's father, Mukhmed, thinks that his son's name may have been added to a 
police database because of his contact with Kazbek. Nothing else had occurred 
since to suggest he was in trouble with the authorities.

Mukhmed reported his son's disappearance to the prosecutor's office on the day 
he went missing. They started a criminal investigation, but it has been 
repeatedly suspended on the grounds of "failing to establish a suspect".

Shortly after Gazdiev disappeared, the family met the then president of 
Ingushetia, Murat Zyazikov, who allegedly told them that Gazdiev had been taken 
by members of the FSB and would soon be released. However, almost four years 
on, there has been no further news of his fate or whereabouts. The authorities 
deny that they are holding him and Zyazikov has reportedly refused to be 
questioned by the investigator.

If Gazdiev was abducted by a state security agency that is refusing to admit 
it is holding him or tell his family where he is, then he is a victim of 
enforced disappearance.

The investigation into Gazdiev's whereabouts is currently suspended. However, 
the Gazdiev family believe that international support could prompt 
investigators to continue looking into his case, as it has worked on previous 
occasions.

To demand that Ibragim Gazdiev's disappearance be effectively investigated 
without his family being harassed, please email the Russian president, Dmitry 
Medvedev, byclicking here 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-campaign/clientcampaign.do?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=8635>
.
 