
Ilham Aliyev, the president of our country, Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>, is in Washington DC, attending 
a meeting with democratic leaders from around the world. But our country is not 
a functioning democracy.

We are now home with our families, but that was only a recent development. Two 
weeks ago, all three of us were behind bars with sentences of between six and 
seven-and-a-half years, prosecuted under trumped-up charges. Two of us were 
pardoned in the amnesty of Novruz holiday on 17 March, when 12 other political 
prisoners were also set free. A third,Inti gam Aliyev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/azerbaijan-detains-human-rights-activists-fresh-crackdown>
, had his sentence reduced to five years on probation on 28 March.

We were not the last political prisoners. Many journalists, politicians, 
activists and bloggers are still behind bars. The most prominent,Khadija 
Ismayilova <http://www.occrp.org/freekhadijaismayilova>, investigated the 
personal wealth of Aliyev and his extended family. She was detained in December 
2014 and is now charged with embezzlement and abuse of power, and is serving a 
seven-and-a-half year sentence. She is locked up, but not broken: her mother 
says she is singing opera arias and she has translatedChildren of the Jacaranda 
Tree by Sahar Delijani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/12/children-jacaranda-tree-delijani-review>
 into Azeri. Ilgar Mammadov is also in jail for seven years for daring to be a 
candidate in the 2013 presidential election. He is head of the Republican 
Alternative opposition movement. His wife says that his spirits are high and 
indeed he continuesa blog from behind bars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/azerbaijan-detains-human-rights-activists-fresh-crackdown>
.

Our freedom is a result of the whimsical pardons of Azeri courts, not 
inalienable rights that we are born with

Those, like us, who have been released, cannot fully enjoy our own freedom 
until the other political prisoners are released. The rule of law must be 
respected in our country and criminal charges should not be used as a cover up 
for politically motivated detentions of the regime’s opponents.

A few hours before Rasul Jafarov was pardoned, the European court of human 
rights (ECHR) declared his detention to be “politically motivated”. The same 
verdict is expected for Aliyev, whose case is at the ECHR. This is all 
theoretical, though: the detention of Mammadov had already been declared 
illegal by ECHR back in May 2014. The Azeri government paid no heed to that 
verdict.

If there is no respect for the rule of law, if we cannot enjoy basic human 
rights, then our freedom is subject to the whimsical pardons and arbitrary 
decisions of Azeri courts, not inalienable rights that we are born with. We are 
all active in different areas of civic society, and all of them are perfectly 
legal in a functioning democracy. If Azerbaijan is to be considered as such, 
the government must stop interfering with our work.

Aliyev wants to continue defending his clients without being targeted with 
absurd false charges such as tax evasion and fraud, which bear absolutely no 
relation to his legal work. He has defended more than 200 clients in the ECHR, 
and won more than 50 of his cases. He has continued from behind bars, 
representing dozens more clients. In a functioning democracy, there are no 
political prisoners – this is Aliyev’s aim.

Rasul Jafarov wants to continue leading his human rights organisation and 
campaigning without fear that his activities will be condemned as a challenge 
to the integrity of the Azeri state, resulting in his charge of “illegal 
entrepreneurship”. Teaching about the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is 
not a crime in any country with functioning democracy.

Anar Mammadli wants to continue educating the population about civic rights, 
to enhance voter education and to work on the reform of the electoral system. 
Last time he tried to do this, he was charged with tax evasion and using his 
office to falsify [presidential] election results. Any functioning democracy 
should allow such activities without fear that it is being undermined.

Only once all Azeri political prisoners are released, there is proper respect 
for the rule of law, and NGOs are allowed to operate in a truly independent 
fashion, will we be able to consider our country a functioning democracy.

• Intigam Aliyev is a lawyer, Rasul Jafarov is a human rights activist, Anar 
Mammadli is the head of an election monitoring group
 