
In the last two decades of his life, Nelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> was celebrated as a model of 
how to liberate a country from the colonial yoke without succumbing to the 
temptation of dictatorial power and anti-capitalist posturing. In short, 
Mandela was not Robert Mugabe, and South Africa remained a multiparty democracy 
with a free press and a vibrant economy well-integrated into the global market 
and immune to hasty socialist experiments. Now, with his death, his stature as 
a saintly wise man seems confirmed for eternity: there are Hollywood movies 
about him – he was impersonated by Morgan Freeman, who also, by the way, played 
the role of God in another film; rock stars and religious leaders, sportsmen 
and politicians from Bill Clinton to Fidel Castro are all united in his 
beatification.

Is this, however, the whole story? Two key facts remain obliterated by this 
celebratory vision. In South Africa, themiserable life of the poor majority 
broadly remains the same as under apartheid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/24/anc-faustian-pact-mandela-fatal-error>
, and the rise of political and civil rights is counterbalanced by the growing 
insecurity, violence and crime. The main change is that the old white ruling 
class is joined by the new black elite. Second, people remember the old African 
National Congress that promised not only the end of apartheid, but also more 
social justice, even a kind of socialism. This much more radical ANC past is 
gradually obliterated from our memory. No wonder that anger is growing among 
poor, black South Africans.

South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> in this respect 
is just one version of the recurrent story of the contemporary left. A leader 
or party is elected with universal enthusiasm, promising a "new world" – but, 
then, sooner or later, they stumble upon the key dilemma: does one dare to 
touch the capitalist mechanisms, or does one decide to "play the game"? If one 
disturbs these mechanisms, one is very swiftly "punished" by market 
perturbations, economic chaos and the rest. This is why it is all too simple to 
criticise Mandela for abandoning the socialist perspective after the end of 
apartheid: did he really have a choice? Was the move towards socialism a real 
option?

It is easy to ridicule Ayn Rand <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-19280545>, 
but there is a grain of truth in the famous "hymn to money" from her novel 
Atlas Shrugged: "Until and unless you discover that money is the root of all 
good, you ask for your own destruction. When money ceases to become the means 
by which men deal with one another, then men become the tools of other men. 
Blood, whips and guns or dollars. Take your choice – there is no other." Did 
Marx not say something similar in his well-known formula of how, in the 
universe of commodities, "relations between people assume the guise of 
relations among things"?

In the market economy, relations between people can appear as relations of 
mutually recognised freedom and equality: domination is no longer directly 
enacted and visible as such. What is problematic is Rand's underlying premise: 
that the only choice is between direct and indirect relations of domination and 
exploitation, with any alternative dismissed as utopian. However, one should 
nonetheless bear in mind the moment of truth in Rand's otherwise ridiculously 
ideological claim: the great lesson of state socialism was effectively that a 
direct abolition of private property and market-regulated exchange, lacking 
concrete forms of social regulation of the process of production, necessarily 
resuscitates direct relations of servitude and domination. If we merely abolish 
the market (inclusive of market exploitation) without replacing it with a 
proper form of the communist organisation of production and exchange, 
domination returns with a vengeance, and with it direct exploitation.

The general rule is that when a revolt begins against an oppressive 
half-democratic regime, as was the case in the Middle East in 2011, it is easy 
to mobilise large crowds with slogans that one cannot but characterise as crowd 
pleasers – for democracy, against corruption, for instance. But then we 
gradually approach more difficult choices, when our revolt succeeds in its 
direct goal, we come to realise that what really bothered us (our un-freedom, 
humiliation, social corruption, lack of prospect of a decent life) goes on in a 
new guise. The ruling ideology mobilises here its entire arsenal to prevent us 
from reaching this radical conclusion. They start to tell us that democratic 
freedom brings its own responsibility, that it comes at a price, that we are 
not yet mature if we expect too much from democracy. In this way, they blame us 
for our failure: in a free society, so we are told, we are all capitalist 
investing in our lives, deciding to put more into our education than into 
having fun if we want to succeed.

At a more directly political level, United States foreign policy elaborated a 
detailed strategy of how to exert damage control by way of rechanneling a 
popular uprising into acceptable parliamentary-capitalist constraints – as was 
done successfully in SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
after the fall of apartheid regime, in Philippines after the fall of Marcos, in 
Indonesia after the fall of Suharto and elsewhere. At this precise conjuncture, 
radical emancipatory politics faces its greatest challenge: how to push things 
further after the first enthusiastic stage is over, how to make the next step 
without succumbing to the catastrophe of the "totalitarian" temptation – in 
short, how to move further from Mandela without becoming Mugabe.

If we want to remain faithful to Mandela's legacy, we should thus forget about 
celebratory crocodile tears and focus on the unfulfilled promises his 
leadership gave rise to. We can safely surmise that, on account of his 
doubtless moral and political greatness, he was at the end of his life also a 
bitter old man, well aware how his very political triumph and his elevation 
into a universal hero was the mask of a bitter defeat. His universal glory is 
also a sign that he really didn't disturb the global order of power.
 