
My friend Ilse Aichinger, who has died aged 95, was an author who wrote 
powerfully about theHolocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>.

Ilse was born in Linz, Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria>, 
the twin daughter of a Jewish paediatrician, Berta Kremer, who converted to 
Roman Catholicism, and her husband, Ludwig, a Christian teacher. After the 
early divorce of her parents, Ilse grew up in Vienna, where the Nazis 
persecuted her Jewish relatives and treated her as a “Mischling” or “half-Jew”. 
Her mother lost her job and her flat. Her grandmother and her mother’s younger 
siblings were deported and murdered.

During the second world war Ilse lived partly with Berta, and partly in two 
convent schools, until they were shut down. After the war, she started to study 
medicine in Vienna, but abandoned her course to devote herself to writing full 
time.

With The Fourth Gate (1945), Ilse was the first Austrian writer to address the 
issue of the concentration camps, but came to wider attention with her 
political manifesto An Appeal to Doubt (1946), in which she called upon her 
contemporaries to question the new, postwar certainties. She developed The 
Fourth Gate (1945) intoHerod’s Children  
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Herods-Children-Ilse-Aichinger/dp/B0006AYT38>(1948), 
an early Holocaust novel, now newly translated into English as The Greater Hope 
(2016).

In the remarkable short story Mirror Story (1949), in which time is reversed 
and which earned her the Gruppe 47 prize, the central event, scandalous in its 
day, is an abortion, inspired by Ilse’s visiting a hospital in Bethnal Green, 
east London. She had travelled to Britain on a literary tour and to visit her 
twin sister, Helga.

For a while she worked as an editor at the German publishing house S Fischer 
Verlag in Frankfurt and then taught at the School of Art and Design in Ulm, 
which had been founded by her friend Inge Aicher-Scholl in 1953.

Ilse’s later writing was marked by experimentalism, surrealism and dreams, as 
in Bad Words (1976). Several short but intriguing volumes followed. She 
continued to write into old age, refining and deepening her vision with In 
Praise of England (2004). She also became a film buff, racing from one cinema 
to the next by taxi to view up to three films a day, and writing vividly about 
cinema in her short book Film and Destiny (2000).

Ilse married the German poet Günter Eich in the early 1950s, and they had a 
daughter, Mirjam, and a son, Clemens. They lived near Salzburg, until Günter’s 
death in 1972. After Clemens’s death in 1998, Ilse retired from public life.

Her companion, the journalist Richard Reichensperger, died in 2004. Ilse is 
survived by Mirjam and Helga.
 