
Imperial Tobacco has ended the week on a strong note after a volatile few days.

Its shares were boosted on Wednesday by talk of possible bid interest from 
Japan Tobacco, but they fell back once analysts poured cold water on the idea.

However they finished Friday 36p higher at £22.89 as a couple of brokers 
issued positive notes ahead of the company's first quarter update next 
Wednesday.

In a buy note, Adam Spielman at Citigroup edged up his price target from 
£25.50 to £25.70 and said:
 We expect the statement to be brief, with few hard numbers other than "white 
stick equivalent" volumes and organic growth of tobacco net sales. The first 
quarter statement accompanies the annual meeting, and last year Imperial used 
it to say it would increase its dividend. We think it is quite possible that 
this time it makes another, analogous announcement – perhaps an increase in the 
buyback – that it hopes the market will like.

In the second half, volumes were down 2% and sales up 2%. In this quarter, we 
expect a temporary deterioration to a 5% volume fall and a 1% sales decline. 
The comparisons are much harder (especially in Spain), and there are also two 
one-off issues: (1) UN sanctions have forced Imperial to stop supplying Syria 
and (2) there has been destocking in Ukraine.

With this note we are lowering our earnings per share estimates by about 1% 
but this is solely for the weakness of the euro. In organic terms we are making 
no changes at all. Tobacco profits depend principally on pricing, and Imperial 
has already locked in good price increases in the UK, Germany, Spain, the US, 
and France this fiscal year. One quarter's volume is of little significance.

In the past 10 years, Imperial has risen every single December, with an 
average a rise of 7%. However it usually falls in January (average decline: 3%) 
as investors start the year with a pro-cyclical tilt, before rising in the 
following months. This year the trend has been particularly marked, but we 
think it represents a good opportunity to buy into a company that's now at 
about 11 times 2012 PE and where earnings growth is both decent (about 8%-9% 
ex-currency) and very secure. 
Meanwhile Credit Suisse kept its outperform rating with a £25 target price, 
saying:
 Rotation out of tobacco stocks year-to-date, a difficult comparison base for 
first quarter, foreign exchange headwinds and softening volume trends in key 
European markets (confirmed by AC Nielsen data released yesterday) have not 
helped Imperial shares of late.

So why outperform? Pricing in core markets is looking good and momentum should 
improve as the comparison base will ease significantly in the next two 
quarters. Imperial's valuation and dividend yield look supportive and our 
expectations of low-teen dividend per share growth in 2012-2013 are unchanged.

Overall leading shares fell back as Greece's talks with its private 
bondholders dragged on and investors continued to worry about the rest of the 
eurozone, particularly Portugal. Mildly disappointing US economic growth 
figures did not help sentiment. TheFTSE 100 finished down 61.75 points at 
5733.45, up just five points since Monday although earlier in the week, as 
hopes of a Greek settlement grew, the index touched a new six month high.

Commodity prices continued to rise as the dollar weakened in the wake of 
Wednesday's comments from US Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke that the 
country's interest rates would remain low until at least 2014.

With gold climbing to $1726 an ounce - its best weekly performance since early 
December - it was a good time forAfrican Barrick Gold to announce an 11% 
increase in its total resources, thanks to the company raising the estimate of 
gold contained at its Nyanzaga project in Tanzania. Collins Stewart said:
 The resource expansion clearly demonstrates that African Barrick has 
undervalued growth opportunities within the company, partially countering the 
claim that the group does not offer growth. 
African Barrick added 26p to 515.5p. But profit taking hit some of the other 
miners, withKazakhmys closing down 34p at £11.60 after Credit Suisse put an 
underperform rating on the shares andAntofagasta falling 42p to £13.48.

Intercontinental Hotels lost 36p to £13.21 after UBS cut its rating from 
neutral to sell. Analyst Simon Whittington said:
 We remain relatively cautious on European hotel stocks for 2012. We currently 
expect modest positive RevPar [revenue per average room] growth in 2012-13, but 
uncertainty remains and the slowing occupancy growth
has often historically led to stock underperformance. 

We move Intercontinental to sell following its recent strong performance. The 
company is well placed geographically, reflected in our RevPar assumptions 
being ahead of peers'. Despite this, earnings per share are expected to grow at 
3%-4% over 2012-13. We believe there is a strong possibility of a special 
dividend in 2012, but this is more than priced in, and the company will have to 
accelerate its capital investment to achieve its target 3%-5% room count 
growth, given the low supply growth. 
Serco, the outsourcing group whose projects include London's cycle hire 
scheme, UK immigration centres and the Dubai metro, slipped 5p to 509p after an 
internal restructuring involving 500 job cuts, around 1% of its UK workforce. 
The company also announced a contract worth £55m over two years to provide 
training to the British Army. A larger recruitment contract for the army is due 
to be awarded before the end of February.

GKN, the automotive and aerospace group, lost 4.8p to 209.8p following lower 
than expected earnings from US car group Ford.GKN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gkn> also announced the dissolution of 
its joint venture arrangements with Jtekt in Thailand, at a cost of up to £9m.

Building materials group Wolseley was 55p lower at £22.19. Analyst Ian Osburn 
at ING Bank downgraded from buy to hold, but raised his target price from £20 
to £21.50. He said:
 Wolseley's shares have had a great run (up 53% in four months) driven, in our 
view, by improving sentiment in the US and margin growth. But we think the 
market is: 1) in danger of becoming over-optimistic about the US, where we do 
not see key indicators for a sustained recovery; and 2) missing that Wolseley's 
European countries appear universally negative.

Hopes for build.com <http://www.build.com/> could be overdone (the website 
hardly registers on Google compared with rivals) and copper price falls imply 
margin pressure from April. We think the shares have run their course for now.


Mothercare was steady at 197p on growing fears of competition in the UK, where 
the mother and baby retailer is already struggling and could take two years to 
turn around.

This week's news that supermarket group Morrisons, up 0.5p to 292.6p, has 
taken over ten former Best Buy stores to roll out its rival Kiddicare brand has 
just emphasised the struggle ahead forMothercare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mothercare> in the UK. The company - 
which is doing well internationally - is already reviewing its UK store 
portfolio and strategy.

On Kiddicare, analysts at Espirito Santo said:
 While the immediate threat to Mothercare should not be over-estimated, given 
that Kiddicare is coming from a small base, the longer-term potential is clear: 
Kiddicare is not starting with the baggage of a UK high street store portfolio 
and has an excellent online proposition already, supported by the backing of 
Morrison. 
They repeated their sell rating, as did Panmure Gordon analyst Jean Roche 
after a meeting with Mothercare.

Lower down the market, Creston fell 24% to 51p after the communications group 
said fourth quarter revenues would be below expectations and full year profits 
would fall short of last year's figure. It blamed a shortfall in new business 
in the final quarter, increased staffing levels to cope with an expected rise 
in revenues, customer project delays and start up costs.

Finally shares in jewellery maker Abbeycrest were suspended at 1.5p "pending 
clarification of the group's financial position."

The company has been hit by competitive market conditions, uncertainty at its 
retail customers and rises in precious metal prices. It had been trying to sell 
its business in Thailand to an overseas buyer to raise cash, but that could not 
be done in time to ease its working capital problems. It said:
 It is now clear to the board that there is no prospect of completing a sale 
of Abbeycrest Thailand within the time constraints imposed by Abbeycrest's 
funding position.  