
Nicole Kidman, Nicolas Cage and Renee Zellweger are among the Hollywood 
dignitaries who shall be attending this Sunday's Bafta ceremony at the Odeon 
Leicester Square. The event's presenters, too, offer a further taste of 
California, with the likes of Michael Douglas and Angelina Jolie lined up to 
hand out the awards. For the record, the Bafta awards are the British film 
equivalent of the Oscars.

Toni Collette will appear opposite Nia Vardalos, the star of My Big Fat Greek 
Wedding, in the musically inclined follow-up Connie and Carla. The Hollywood 
Reporter says the project is described as a cross between Some Like it Hot and 
Tootsie, a female buddy film about two working class performers who go 
undercover in LA as drag queens. The film is due to go into production later 
this year.

Matt Damon, Heath Ledger and Robin Williams are in negotiations to star in the 
fantasy adventure Brothers Grimm, for director Terry Gilliam. A re-imagined 
take on the life of the writing duo, Gilliam's film will cast the siblings 
through a host of outlandish folklore adventures. Damon is pencilled in to star 
as Jakob Grimm, with Ledger lined up for support as Will. Continuing his shift 
into darker territory following Insomnia and One Hour Photo, Williams will play 
the villain of the piece. Brothers Grimm, which shoots later this year, will be 
Gilliam's first production since his ill-fated Don Quixote project.

Alfred Molina has nabbed the role of Doctor Octopus in Sam Raimi's Spider-Man 
sequel, which begins shooting in April. As portrayed in the Marvel Comics 
strip, Doc Oc is a crazed scientist who has a set of steel tentacles 
artificially welded to his torso. Molina will join Tobey Maguire, James Franco 
and Kirsten Dunst in the movie.

Martin Sheen, Janeane Garofalo and Anjelica Huston are spearheading a campaign 
to deluge the White House and the Senate with anti-war missives next Monday. 
Described by organisers as a "virtual march on Washington", the campaign aims 
to flood government phones, emails and faxes during office hours on February 
24. "Our message to Washington will be clear: Don't invade Iraq," says Sheen. 
"We can contain Saddam Hussein without killing innocent people, diverting us 
from the war on terrorism and putting us all at risk."
 