
It may have started with a few botched home dye jobs, albeit in some very 
elegant bathrooms. Now it's out there. Fashionistas desperate for something new 
and bold, and whose colour palette is nearly exhausted, have faded to grey in 
an what they are calling "granny chic".

Kelly Osbourne has gone grey. Pixie Geldof is working it, unafraid of being 
mistaken for her grey-maned dad Bob, and talking of a dyeing experiment that 
went wrong but gave her new ideas. The modelsAgyness Deyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn> and Daphne Guinness and the 
pop stars Lady Gaga and Pink have been experimenting with skunk streaks, while 
Tavi, a 13-year-old "it" blogger and "fashion mascot", is accessorising her 
extreme youth with a grey bob.

Ageing women – and increasingly men – have fought a chemical battle against 
greying for generations. But now silvery streaks are turning up on models in 
runway outings at the spring shows of Dior and Chanel in Paris and New York. 
Manhattan's hairdressers are reporting a flood of requests for grey streaks. 
"When one gets on the bandwagon, they all do," said Victoria Hunter, a salon 
owner in West Village. Online suppliers are already advertising grey clip-on 
tresses.

The grey movement is causing excitement. When the New York Times interviewed 
Professor Rose Weitz, a gender studies expert at Arizona University, she told 
the paper: "These women are showing that they have the money and the 
inclination to make grey a fashion statement."

Others were less impressed, from the columnist Caitlin Moran, long-time 
possessor of a grey streak, who derided the models for hair "burglary", to 
bloggers who accused Kate Moss of looking as if she had talc in her hair.

The appearance of a silvery streak on a famous woman's head used to scandalise 
observers of celebrities. When actress Nicole Kidman let her grey shine through 
in 2008, at the premiere of her filmAustralia, the story went around the world, 
with one commentator accusing her of breaking the "last taboo". Jennifer 
Aniston declared in 2007 that she sobbed when she found her first grey hair.

But this 2010 trend is strictly for the young. Hair fashion experts agree that 
this is no Helen Mirren moment. Even Kate Moss – at a mere 36 – was frowned 
upon after presenting herself with cutting-edge grey streaks last month. She 
washed them out again within 24 hours. "Proper grey hair has no pigment in it 
at all," said hairdresser Stephani Paul from Glasgow, where the clubs are full 
of young grey-streaked heads. "To get steel grey you have to have pigment to 
dye, and it really looks better if you have other warmer tones to balance it. 
The older you are, the less flattering grey usually is, so I don't think the 
older women are going to stop coming in for their cover-ups."
 