
The A1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> series, launched by Sheikh 
Maktoum in 2004, regards itself as second only to Formula One in terms of 
global identity. It is a valid claim when the logistics are examined. A1GP's 
World Cup of Motor Sport raced in South Africa last weekend as it continued to 
demonstrate a wider reach than F1 while heading towards the conclusion of a 
championship that will have visited the Far East, New Zealand, Australia, 
Mexico and the Czech Republic before the final round at Brands Hatch on 29 
April. The only problem is that this well organised and entertaining 
international contest remains one of motor sport's best-kept secrets, not that 
you would have guessed as Durban claimed 114,000 spectators over the three days.

Motor sport <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/motorsports> has always been 
popular in South Africa thanks to F1 world championship races being staged, on 
and off, between 1962 and 1993. Yet none of the F1 venues in that country could 
match the streets of Durban and a fast but tricky track that is more difficult 
than Bahrain and Shanghai, F1's charmless but highly touted models of 
efficiency.

The A1GP concept is similarly unique. Each team represents a different 
country, 22 in all, ranging from Great Britain and Ireland to the USA, Pakistan 
and Singapore. Drivers must hail from the nation in question, Britain being 
adequately represented last weekend by Robbie Kerr as the Englishman finished 
second in the main race, a tense 70-minute battle that included a mandatory pit 
stop to change tyres. While Britain, New Zealand, Switzerland and Portugal 
fought relentlessly for second place, Germany's representative, Nico 
Hulkenberg, dominated the race.

One of the purposes of A1GP is to highlight young talent and it is succeeding 
because, on the basis of his speed and extraordinary maturity, 19-year-old 
Hulkenberg will be in F1 sooner rather than later. It was no coincidence that 
Willi Weber backs the German team, Michael Schumacher's manager travelling to 
Durban to oversee the moulding of his next world champion.

Paradoxically, Weber's support for A1GP highlighted its greatest weakness, the 
immaculately coiffured impresario signing autographs and proving to be more 
famous than the young drivers he might wish to represent in the future.

Perhaps the best thing Weber could do for the series would be to persuade 
Schumacher - when the inevitable boredom sets in during retirement - to take 
part in just one race. A well known name would trigger the media attention the 
series needs and provide the young stars with the best yardstick imaginable.

Schumacher, in the unlikely event of him taking up the challenge, ought to win 
thanks to the emphasis being on the contribution of drivers in cars that are 
identical. But it would not be as straightforward as he might think. The Lola 
cars are not sophisticated and the number of technical staff per team is 
limited to 10, all of which helps keep costs at a manageable level. A one-car 
outfit competing at the 12 meetings comes at the exceptionally reasonable sum 
of $5m, a tenth of the figure demanded by any self-respecting F1 team.

A lack of the excessive aerodynamic downforce, which dumbs down the raw 
excitement of F1, means A1GP cars are tricky to drive. The power from the 
500bhp V8 engine exceeds the capacity of the chassis to handle it; a 
combination that has always provided the best examination of a driver's talent. 
Throw in the uneven surface of a street circuit and concrete walls lining its 
edges and you have the ingredients for as tough a challenge that any driver 
could wish for.

Not that F1 cares particularly about the needs of spectators - mere 
second-class citizens when placed alongside the financial potential created by 
F1's world-wide television audience - but A1GP provides valuable lessons in 
respect for the paying punter. Each car is painted in national colours, thereby 
making it instantly recognisable, unlike an F1 car that carries a single number 
so insultingly small that the driver may as well give the crowd the finger as 
he speeds past. The A1GP website not only provides driver blogs but also 
invites participation by the fans. Sponsors' guests are invited to mingle on 
the grid 20 minutes before the start of the race, a novel idea that would cause 
Bernie Ecclestone to have a fit. When A1GP made its debut at Brands Hatch at 
September 2005, some observers wrongly assumed the series was attempting to 
oust F1. Nothing could be further from the truth since A1GP consists of many 
ex-F1 people who know the world championship is unlikely to be matched, never 
mind toppled from its position of authority. None the less, the return to 
Brands Hatch next month will demonstrate just how much A1GP has grown and 
deserves a place at the important end of the sport's hierarchy.
 