
Dressed in crisp white saris, 14-year-old Seema and 13-year-old Rumi giggle 
together outside the adolescent girls' club in their tea plantation village in 
Dibrugarh, north-east India. For the friends, the blue-painted clubhouse is 
more than just somewhere to socialise – it's where they are forging bonds that 
are transforming their futures.

After learning that Seema's family were planning an early marriage for her, 
Rumi and other club members began a concerted campaign of visits to her parents 
and grandmother. The teenagers' well-informed arguments convinced the family to 
let Seema complete her education and wait till she was emotionally and 
physically ready to become a wife and mother.

"Now it's not our time to get married," explains Rumi, a confident girl with 
dark wavy hair pulled back in a neat ponytail. "We'll not get to play. We'll 
not get to go to school."

Marriage under 16 is illegal in India, but a national survey last year showed 
almost half of girls were younger when married. Local police turn a blind eye 
to what is a commonly accepted practice, especially in rural areas like 
Dibrugarh.

The UN considers child marriage a human rights violation that curtails a 
girl's education and can condemn her to a life of poverty. Adolescent 
childbirth is dangerous. UN figures show that girls under 15 are five times 
more likely to die in labour than those in their 20s, while the child of a 
teenage mother is less likely to survive till their first birthday.

With limited power, young married girls are vulnerable to domestic violence. A 
2004 study in two Indian states found girls married before 18 were twice as 
likely to report beatings by their husbands and three times more likely to 
report being forced to have sex than older brides.

To spread the message that early marriage is unacceptable, NGOs including 
Unicef are working with regional government bodies across India to set up 
Adolescent Girls' Clubs Against Child Marriage. In Dibrugarh district alone, 
more than 16,000 girls are registered in 460 clubs.

Their influence is helping persuade traditional child marriage advocates such 
as Seema's grandmother of the value of postponing. "We now know difficulties 
can arise, like girls getting married at an early age may have problems giving 
birth," she says. "Before, such things were not discussed at all."

Unicef India's Child Protection Officer, Jose Bergua, says the clubs succeed 
because they get people talking more openly about early marriage and its 
consequences. "A harmful social practice like child marriage occurs for many 
reasons, but one of them is a taboo around debating it," he says. "Everybody 
believes the community expects them to behave a certain way, even if many 
individuals privately disagree. Breaking the silence around child marriage is 
vital."

Club networks offer a lifeline to girls facing early marriages, he adds, 
giving them the courage to resist family pressure. They also support parents 
concerned that defying community expectations will leave their daughters 
ostracised and branded 'unmarriageable'.

Many families believe early marriage will safeguard their children's future. 
"A post-puberty unmarried girl is usually viewed as a ticking time-bomb," 
explains Indian broadcaster and women's expert Mrinal Pande. "Most parents 
heave a sigh of relief if they can transfer the burden."

"One reason for early marriage in poor villages and urban slums is the 
constant threat of violence," she continues. "Unmarried girls left alone while 
parents work are highly vulnerable to being raped or coerced into sexual 
relationships."

"There's a pan-Indian custom that if one girl in the family brings dishonour, 
her sisters' marriage proposals will be turned down. Early marriage precludes 
that possibility, families feel."

Pande believes poverty is the main reason for child marriages. Marrying girls 
young is cheaper. Families can avoid paying high dowry fees that increase with 
age. In regions like Rajasthan mass-weddings of adolescent sisters are common 
as parents cut costs with a one-off ceremony. Girls from poor households are 
almost twice as likely to marry before 18 as girls in higher income homes, 
according to anti-poverty charity International Center for Research on Women 
(ICRW).

To counter this, an Indian government programme in northern Haryana state is 
offering poor families a long-term cash bond, to be redeemed if their daughters 
remain unmarried when they turn 18. ICRW's child marriage campaigner Anju 
Malhotra will evaluate how successful the new 'Apni Beti, Apna Dhan' (My 
Daughter, My Wealth) scheme has been when the first group celebrate that 
milestone next year.

"In a growing economy, there's good reason to hope the cash incentive will 
trump cultural and traditional concerns," she says. "It might be the nudge 
parents on the verge of making that mental shift need – especially as they see 
more girls at school and moving around the community and realise it's becoming 
acceptable to keep unmarried teenage daughters at home."  

"The idea is that as more parents begin thinking that way, fears about sexual 
exploitation, reputation and bucking custom start to recede.  The money could 
also allay worries over expensive dowries."

Malhotra believes educating girls and communities is helping to change 
attitudes, but too slowly. "We need big solutions to eliminate child marriage," 
she says. "National infrastructure, government incentives – things that will 
work repeatedly, benefitting millions of girls."

She hopes that if the cash pilot scheme shows the rupees are well spent, 
politicians will be convinced to roll it out nationwide. The Indian government 
is committed to eliminating child marriage, but Unicef's Bergua describes its 
response as "lukewarm", given low priority and limited resources.

But there's hope for India's child brides. Malhotra and Bergua agree that 
ending early marriage is entirely possible. "We know it can be done," says 
Malhotra. "Ideally within 15 years, certainly in 25." She cites countries like 
Taiwan where bold policies and heavy investment in education and health made 
child marriage virtually disappear within a generation.

"Every child who gets married is a tragedy," says Bergua. "But every child 
like Seema whose marriage is prevented is a tremendous victory for India. And 
more of those are happening every day."


This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 