
Otto Pfister packs a punch. "I've never given a damn what journalists think," 
railed the Cameroon manager yesterday when it was suggested that his team go 
into tomorrow's African Cup of Nations final against Egypt as underdogs. "What 
the hell do they know? They said Rigobert Song was too old - but during this 
tournament he's shown that he's still the best defender in Africa. They said 
Geremi was too old too, but has he looked tired? They said I was mad to pick 
Alexandre Song because he's just a kid - but he's been outstanding."

All fair points, particularly about Alexandre Song, whose composure and 
precise passing made him man of the match in the mostly scrappy semi-final 
victory over hosts Ghana. Song hobbled off the pitch at the end of that game 
and was still limping around the team hotel today, missing Cameroon's final 
training session this afternoon as a result. It means that Pfister's unsure 
whether he'll be fit for the final but he must know that if forced to forego 
the services of the 19-year-old Arsenal midfielder, Cameroon's chances of 
claiming a fifth continental crown are slim. But even if he does play, the 
Pharoahs are surely favourites.

Pfister insists the Pharoahs' 4-2 win over Cameroon in the first group game 
was freakish, but the fact is his side were utterly dismantled, the Egyptians' 
clever passing and movement making the Indomitable Lions look oafish. While 
it's true that Cameroon have improved since then, largely thanks to the 
emergence of Song, so too have Egypt - not least because of the return to 
fitness of Mohammed Aboutreika, the Al Ahly playmaker whose balance, 
intelligence and probing have made him the classiest player of the tournament.

With their slick five-man midfield and smart attackers such as Amr Zaky and 
Mohamed Zidan, Egypt are experts at pulling teams apart. They won't constantly 
lob crosses into the box the way Ghana did, instead they will create holes and 
thread their way through them. Andre Bikey's suspension will make that task 
even easier. Wael Gomaa will shackle Samuel Eto'o and Hassan Shehata will 
become only the second manager to win back-to-back titles.

The first, incidentally, was Ghanaian Charles Gyamfi. Which makes you wonder 
why African countries are so eager to appoint European managers.
 