Thrill rating 5/10 
Danger rating 4/10

Fitness rating 6/10

In a nutshell ...

An ever-changing arrangement of coloured hand-holds allows you to scale walls 
to giddy heights either by "top roping", using a rope fixed to an anchor at the 
wall's summit (reminiscent of a pulley system), or by "lead climbing" - 
attaching yourself to regularly spaced carabiners for protection as you ascend 
(a more advanced, but arguably freer, technique). There's also bouldering, 
where you climb smaller walls while ropeless.

What's the buzz?

Only around for 15 years, indoor climbing started life as training to keep 
climbers strong through the winter. "People get the bug inside nowadays, 
though," confirms Dean Plant, head instructor at the Castle Climbing Centre in 
London. This physically strenuous game of "3D chess" - with its endless 
permutations - is enough to keep many climbers happy without ever setting foot 
on a mountain.

Thrill a minute?

Thrills abound: there's the rock-in- stomach feeling of fear at looking up 
from the ground, the rush of starting out, the excitement of climbing higher 
and higher above the heads of your friends, the joy of reaching the top, and 
finally the excitement of abseiling back down.

Adrenaline peak

Reaching the top of a terrifying wall when you thought you couldn't; the sense 
of achievement on placing your hand on top of that wall is worth all the pain 
of getting there. Of course, there's also the constant feeling that you could 
fall (especially when bouldering), so attempting a difficult move - and making 
it - is a real thrill.

Where to do it

The Castle Climbing Centre in Finsbury Park is Europe's busiest, while further 
north, boulderers will love the new Climbing Works centre in Sheffield - a 
dedicated centre with the world's biggest bouldering wall. In Scotland try the 
Ice Factor in Kinlochleven near Ben Nevis - it has the UK's highest articulated 
climbing wall - and in Northern Ireland, check out the Tollymore Mountain 
Centre near Newcastle.

Who can do it

Absolutely anyone. Climbing has been known to cure a fear of heights (so no 
excuses there) and most pregnant climbers refuse to give up the sport while 
with child. Kids are also OK, and many climber parents soon get theirs scaling 
the walls (it really is a basic, innate instinct in many children).

What to take

Once you get into it, you'll need a decent pair of climbing shoes, and both 
top ropers and lead climbers will need a harness, a belay device and a 
carabiner of their own. When taking taster and beginners' courses, all gear is 
usually provided. Just bring along a strong dollop of daredevil confidence, as 
fear is all in the head (apparently).

Typical prices

Expect to pay £5-£10 for a session (after a one-off registration or membership 
fee) and about £50 a month if climbing regularly. Beginner sessions start at 
£20.

Impress your pals

Male indoor climbers used to outnumber women four-to-one - but times are 
changing and women now make up about 40% of indoor climbers. If you're female, 
impress your male friends by starting a beginners' course with them; women are 
more flexible so you'll probably improve quicker.

YouTube searchwords 'castle climbing centre'

Good links

castle-climbing.co.uk <http://www.castle-climbing.co.uk>

ice-factor.co.uk <http://www.ice-factor.co.uk>

climbingworks.com <http://www.climbingworks.com>

indoorclimbingwalls.co.uk <http://www.indoorclimbingwalls.co.uk>


Eight metres up on a pick and a prayer

Nursing a slight hangover (not very clever), clutching a takeaway coffee and 
with my heart in mouth, I arrive at London's Ellis Brigham outdoor store. The 
basement is home to an 8-metre-tall block of ice. I'm here to climb it.

It's only on seeing the block in all its icy glory that I realise how high 8 
metres is (26 feet for the EU refuseniks). There's also a big window on to it 
for spectators. Great. I'm still mentally preparing myself when Sherman, my 
instructor, arrives, looking suitably bright-eyed and bushy-tailed. He starts 
casually throwing around fear-inducing words like "ice axe" and "crampons" as I 
struggle into a pair of fetching mauve salopettes.

Kitted out in gear to make any action man jealous, we enter the giant fridge. 
The cold has a strangely calming effect as Sherman explains how to use all this 
terrifying-looking equipment. It sounds and even looks simple enough, but take 
it from me, this is not an activity for the flabby or weak-limbed.

A few minutes later, I've reached the grand height of 2 metres - and am 
exhausted. Finding a place for the axe to lodge is trickier than it looks and 
as for the feet, let's just say I spend more time hanging powerlessly from the 
rope than climbing. Any ideas I had of gracefully ascending the wall like a pro 
have gone right out the window - through which several spectators are now 
giggling at my pain and inelegance.

Then determination grabs me. I really want to reach the top of this endless 
block of ice! I grit my teeth, swing the axe again and yank myself up. My 
muscles may have something to say (or scream) about this tomorrow, but when I 
finally make it to the top and gleefully ring the bell, it's worth (almost) all 
of the pain.

· Vertical Chill, London & Manchester vertical-chill.com 
<http://www.vertical-chill.com>
 