
Interactive Advertising Bureau Europe's AdEx Benchmark research 
<http://www.iabeurope.eu/news/european-online-advertising-market-records-new-high-273bn>
 shows that online video advertising increased by 45.5%, to nearly €1.19bn, in 
2013. This growth is good news for all the players that have invested time and 
resources into making it a credible business sector, capable of providing 
advertisers and publishers with significant benefits.

However, as with any evolving industry, its success also makes it very 
attractive to illegal operators, many of them highly sophisticated. The result 
is that fraudsters deploy countless techniques to tamper with bona fide 
campaigns to divert revenues from advertisers to their own coffers.

Respectable publishers, keen to increase traffic to enhance campaigns for 
their advertisers and boost their own revenue, regularly extend their reach via 
third-party websites. This sees them, often unknowingly, enter into 
relationships with fraudulent sites that, whilst they appear highly 
professional, are anything but.

Malicious behaviour can take many forms, and these change frequently as new 
ways of making money illegally are discovered. Currently, tactics include but 
are not limited to botnets, or using bots to imitate human browsing behaviour, 
iFrame stuffing, which is the process of stuffing an ad into a non-viewable 1x1 
pixel within a browser page, and ad stacking, where multiple ads are played at 
the same time on a web page but only the top ad is viewable. Further, ads may 
appear on inappropriate sites, causing damage to the brand that is expensive 
and time-consuming to repair.

Closing these loopholes is difficult, made more so because the fast-paced 
nature of the sector means that yesterday's answer may not work today. But, to 
protect what it has achieved to date, the industry as a whole must exercise 
more control and assurance to safeguard the advertiser. Each player must be 
working towards the goal that it is a given that advertisers pay only for ads 
that they know have been seen, by a real human, and in the right place.

In general, the three core points to be considered are whether: a real person 
saw the ad (fraud prevention); the person had a chance to see the ad 
(viewability); and the ad ran in the place it was supposed to (verification). 
There is no silver bullet to ensure all of these; rather it takes a mix of many 
tools and processes.

Ongoing developments in advertising technology continue to help to prevent 
waste attributed to these issues. For example, the ability to block ads in 
real-time, so any illegal ads are not served, or deploying viewability 
detection at run-time is now a reality. To that end, it's important to continue 
supporting open technology platforms, enabling third-party solutions to be more 
easily deployed and to continue staying ahead of the latest games and tactics 
by bad actors.

But, while technology has revolutionised many elements of our day-to-day life, 
there is no substitute for the human element – and online advertising is no 
different. More tactically, this can be as straightforward as real people 
inspecting websites in depth to check they are genuine before they are 
permitted into the online advertising marketplace that matches buyers and 
sellers.

Meanwhile, campaign reports providing actionable insights enable anomalies to 
be identified and mined. Click-through rates of 5% are a clear indication of 
possible fraudulent behaviour, for example. Similarly, 100% of the clicks 
coming through one type of browser indicate a problem, as traffic should be 
across all of them. Human interaction ensures vigilance, a critical factor in 
guarding against illegal activity.

As publications tackle the challenge of making their digital editions viable 
business models in the face of declining print sales, it is essential that 
their online advertising is as effective as possible. That means building 
sustainable and long-term relationships based on trust with advertisers and 
agencies. This in turn requires an innovative online advertising technology 
industry that is consistently resolute and robust in standing up to the 
fraudsters.

Phil Duffield is senior vice-president of international at Adap.tv 
<http://adap.tv/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 