
Constitutional lawyer George Williams has described the Abbott government’s 
bill to strip citizenship from dual nationals as “one of the most poorly 
drafted” he has seen and warned it would catch many Australians who have 
“nothing to do with terrorism”.

The bill, which aims to strip citizenship from dual nationals for taking up 
arms against Australia, removes “natural justice” rights and allows for no 
public notification for stripping citizenship from dual nationals, he said.


“The first thing the person may know is when they get a knock on the door and 
in fact that’s probable if only because the authorities don’t have to alert a 
person beforehand,” Williams said.


“They may want the person to find out they’ve lost citizenship at the moment 
they are taken into immigration detention.”


Williams told the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security 
(PJCIS), which isexamining the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/04/proposal-to-strip-citizenship-criticised-by-human-rights-groups-and-legal-experts>
, that due to its poor drafting theAustralian Citizenship Amendment  
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22legislation%2Fbills%2Fr5507_first-reps%2F0001%22;rec=0>
 was in “no fit state to be passed”.

A professor of law at the University of NSW, Williams suggested the government 
“go back to the drawing board” and redraft the bill to withstand a high court 
challenge.

The bill, to which Labor has given its support in principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/21/tony-abbott-close-to-winning-over-cabinet-and-labor-on-citizenship-laws>
, lists three ways dual nationals can automatically lose their Australian 
citizenship. First, a person renounces their citizenship “by conduct” if they 
engage in terrorist activity. Second, if they go overseas to fight for foreign 
armies deemed enemies of Australia, or listed terrorist organisations. Third, 
if they are convicted of terrorism offences or “certain other offences” by an 
Australian court.

The government has also released a discussion paper to strip sole nationals of 
citizenship but no bill has yet been drafted.


“We have a bill providing for automatic citizenship revocation for 
circumstances that have nothing to do with terrorism,” said Williams.

He estimated that between four and six million Australians potentially have 
access to dual nationality, though many may not be aware of their dual 
nationality.

“Having read everyone one of the 65 now 66 pieces of legislation passed by 
this parliament dealing with terrorism, this is unfortunately one of the most 
poorly drafted that I have come up against,” said Williams.

“It shows evidence of being drafted in haste ... there are many unusual 
discrepancies between the explanatory memorandum and the bill, there are 
significant gaps in the bill, that are surprising oversights.

“For example the bill doesn’t deal with the simple issue of what happens if a 
person is convicted and on appeal their conviction is overturned. There is also 
missing information in the bill ... it points to the fact that this bill is not 
in a fit state to be passed.”

Williams said such drafting problems should have been “ironed out” prior to 
the bill being introduced to parliament by immigration minister Peter Dutton. 
He said the issues represented larger structural problems that suggest the 
bill, more likely than not, would be struck down by the high court.

Proposal to strip citizenship criticised by human rights groups and legal 
experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/04/proposal-to-strip-citizenship-criticised-by-human-rights-groups-and-legal-experts>
Williams said while he was mindful of the need to deal with non-state actors 
involved in terrorism, the bill could revoke citizenship for dual nationals 
such as:

 * a business person travelling to declared area to conduct “innocent 
business”, 
 * people who incite violence against other groups on the basis of race, such 
as those involved in the Cronulla riots, 
 * people who train others, even if they are unaware how the skills are used, 
such as computer teachers, 
 * the Red Cross providing humanitarian assistance in war zones, and 
 * those involved in minor property crimes such as graffiti artists or 
protestors “sitting in” on commonwealth property. 
Williams said he had already been approached by lawyers asking advice on how 
dual national bill, introduced prior to the winter recess, could be challenged 
in the high court.

He said he was confident there was a strong case against bill on three 
grounds. That is, the “inescapable aspect” of the separation of powers, the 
removal of voting rights from dual nationals and the fact that the bill renders 
Australian dual citizens as “aliens” when, in his opinion, the court would not 
see Australian-born citizens as “aliens”.

Originally, the government had drafted the bill to give the immigration 
minister discretion to remove citizenship from dual nationals but it was 
redrafted due to constitutional issues.

“This cures the ministerial discretion problem but in doing so it has created 
a whole new set of problems that give rise to a separate set of constitutional 
issues that require the structure of the bill to be altered,” said Williams.

“As I say, in my view, it is almost set up to fail.”


He said the bill effectively leaves decisions in the hands of government 
departments rather than ministers or courts, which makes decisions “effectively 
unreviewable”.

Williams suggested redrafting the bill using models suggested by himself or 
the Law Council. The council proposed a minister could request a court on 
evidence to decide whether citizenship could be revoked. Williams’ proposal 
involved revocation by a minister only after a serious conviction had been 
secured.

Peter Wertheim, of the Executive Council of Australian Jews, also gave 
evidence to the committee, raising concerns at the automatic nature of the loss 
of citizenship. Wertheim was also concerned that fighting with all 
organisations could see citizenship revoked, even when some groups were not 
hostile to western democracies.


Kim Rubenstein, a professor of law at the Australian National University, 
agreed with Williams that the bill would be challenged in the High Court in a 
number of areas. She also said the bill questioned the notion of dual 
citizenship and whether citizens can love two countries equally.


“Once you’re attacking citizenship, you are attacking the very rule of law you 
are seeking to protect,” said Rubenstein. “You get yourself in a bind in that 
respect because you are undermining the core of the rule of law.”

In defence of the bill, Philip Ruddock, the government’s special envoy for 
citizenship, said the current criminal law was having no impact on 
radicalisation as people were being convicted and then radicalised in jail.

“For me citizenship has those certain elements, of commitment to the rule of 
law, parliamentary democracy, accepting of people of different backgrounds, 
different faiths, different religions,” said Ruddock.

“The fact that you accept those differences doesn’t mean you forgo the common 
elements that bind us all together.”

 