
Company name: Brainient

Company age: 4.5 years

Number of employees: 40

Elevator pitch: Create, deliver and measure interactive video ads across any 
device.

How, when and where did you start out?

Brainient started out from a failure. About a year before I started Brainient, 
I founded an online TV channel called BrainTV – "TV for smart people". After a 
year of building a production studio, hiring presenters, editors and producing 
a number of web shows, I realised we were never going to build a big enough 
audience to be able to actually make money. BrainTV failed, but there was a 
feature that was very popular – the ability to interact with the shows using 
various interactive features. So I decided to build a company all about 
interactive videos. It worked out quite well.

What digital technologies and innovations have helped you to establish and 
grow your company?

One of our unfair competitive advantages has been that our engineering team is 
located in Romania, which has enabled us to hire brilliant engineers much more 
cost effectively than in London. We wouldn't have been able to do it if not for 
the wonderful collaboration tools out there – everything from Skype to 
Hangouts, Trello and so on. The world isn't flat, but the internet is and 
that's helped us a lot.

Are you a global company? And if so how have you been able to grow this side 
of your business?

We have customers that run campaigns in eight different markets, from Brazil 
to Singapore. We service all these clients from our two main offices in London 
and Bucharest, and have sales representatives or partners in many other 
locations.

Startups today can be both global and local from day one, thanks to things 
like the App Store (anyone in the world can buy your app from day one) or Skype 
In (create a physical phone number in Singapore that forwards to your UK 
mobile).

How and at what point did you begin to raise finance for the business?

We raised a seed round (£473,000) in 2009 and a Series A (£1.1m) in 2012. We 
raised the seed round when we knew we had product/market fit (had a product 
that the market wanted, for those uninitiated in startup slang) and raised the 
Series A when we were ready to scale our sales & marketing team.

Deciding when to raise capital for your business is a trick question that 
doesn't have a right or wrong answer. The best way to do it is to think in 
milestones, and always raise 30% more than what you think you need in order to 
reach the next milestone.

What one piece of advice would you give to a home business or startup wanting 
to gain a foothold in your space?

There's a wonderful speech Winston Churchill gave at a graduation speech in 
1941, in the context of the second world war. He ended his speech with: "Never 
give in, never give in, never, never, in nothing, great or small, large or 
petty. Never give in to nothing except to convictions of honour and good faith. 
Never yield to force. Never yield to the apparently overwhelming might of the 
enemy."

So, I'd say to never give in.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 