
Inspired by Tennyson's stirring words, I set out by Eurostar one drizzly 
pre-heatwave day to fulfil a childhood ambition and find the valley of the 
charge of the Light Brigade.

The Crimea turned out to be a gem. Ukraine's Soviet-era visa requirements have 
been abolished, the budget airline crowds have yet to move in, and it's easily 
reached by train. Twice a week, the "Kashtan" from Berlin to Kiev has a direct 
sleeping car which carries on to Simferopol. Painted in the blue and yellow of 
the Ukrainian flag, the sleeping car is elderly but comfortable, a home away 
from home for an epic two-night journey across Europe, with patterned carpet, 
frilly curtains and a corridor thoughtfully decorated with plastic plants.

Simferopol is Crimea's transport hub. The world's longest trolleybus ride 
takes a scenic but backside-numbing 2½ hours over the mountains to Yalta, where 
a statue of Lenin glowers across the road at McDonald's. Yalta's Livadia Palace 
was the Tsar's summer residence and inspired location for the 1945 Yalta 
Conference, where Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin were famously photographed 
side-by-side. I took a local train to Bakhchysaray to see the palace of the 
Tartar khans who ruled the Crimea until 1783, and on to Sebastopol, the naval 
base besieged by the British and French in 1854. Seven miles away, the little 
port of Balaclava was the British supply base for the siege, where I climbed 
the hill to the ruined fortress overlooking the harbour and the Black Sea.

The battlefield is utterly unsigned. I trudged inland for miles through the 
drizzle, trying to find it with the 1854 map in my history book. Disheartened, 
I eventually came to a roundabout, petrol station and the Ukrainian equivalent 
of a Little Chef. I asked for directions. Ignorant of the Ukrainian for 
"battle", I improvised, but my one-man impersonation of the battle of Balaclava 
proved too much for the girl on the checkout. She summoned the Heavy Brigade, a 
buxom woman from the kitchen who gesticulated wildly and repeated "Yalta". I 
took the Yalta road, and as if by magic the landscape assumed the features of 
the 1854 map. The shallow valley, the raised road with the hillocks used as 
redoubts, a row of poplar trees marking the line of Russian guns. I'd found it. 
Today, charging on horseback would be difficult, as Tennyson's valley of Death 
has become a valley of vines for Ukraine's wineries. I can't think of a better 
use for it.

· London-Berlin starts at £79 one-way with couchette, Berlin-Simferopol £96 
one-way with sleeper. Seeseat61.com/Ukraine.htm <http://seat61.com/Ukraine.htm> 
or call 0870 2435363.
 