
Doing battle with South Africa is not new to me because, while British sports 
fans will have been focusing on events in Paris this weekend, A1 Team Great 
Britain has already endured a tough clash with them in Brno last week. What had 
started out as another strong weekend for our team, with driver Robbie Kerr 
qualifying third for both races and claiming a strong second in the Sprint, 
ended in frustration following a collision with the A1 Team South Africa car 
while fighting for a podium finish in the Feature Race. The South African car 
knocked a tyre valve off one of our rear wheels, causing a puncture which ended 
our hopes of scoring more points. We were not too happy!

One of the great things about A1GP, however, is the good-humoured national 
rivalry, so I made time to watch the nail-biting England v France Rugby World 
Cup semi-final with over half the paddock on Saturday night. Before the match 
we agreed with A1 Team France that both teams would carry the score on our 
cars, and although France obliged by carrying the 14-9 score-line in a much 
smaller and far less prominent position that the proud display on our car, they 
were also a bit naughty by carrying a bold message of support for South Africa. 
After what happened to us in the race - and, sadly, last night's rugby - I 
certainly look forward to getting revenge on South Africa in Sepang, Malaysia, 
for the nextA1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> race.

Brno was definitely another successful event, particularly following the 
announcement that Ferrari will provide chassis design and engine technology for 
a six-year period starting next year. Ferrari is undoubtedly the most famous 
name in motor racing and the prospect of us running an A1 Team GBR car powered 
by Ferrari next season is very exciting. Great for the team, but also for the 
drivers, our sponsors and the media following the series.

With GBR's most recent race-winner Olly Jarvis testing with his Japanese F3 
team and Oliver Turvey racing in the final rounds of Italian Formula Renault in 
Monza, one of my key dilemmas ahead of last weekend was whether to find another 
rookie to represent the team or forgo the advantages of running in Friday 
morning's rookie session. My final decision was not to bring a new driver into 
the squad as I was confident Robbie Kerr's experience would be enough. This 
proved to be the case and Robbie's podium finish in the Sprint Race has given 
him the record for scoring the most podiums in A1GP - 15 in total.

Meanwhile it was fun to see our other race driver Olly Jarvis turn his hand to 
commentating and reporting for the A1GP TV crew. He flew in from Japan for 48 
hours to make his TV debut giving an interesting drivers' perspective. Olly now 
heads straight back to Japan to challenge for the Formula 3 title while Robbie 
heads to the USA for the final American Le Mans Series race.

I believe GBR's driver line-up this season is particularly strong. Robbie has 
demonstrated amazing consistency since entering A1GP and, with only six race 
starts to his name, Olly Jarvis has already achieved two podiums and two wins. 
I was again impressed this weekend with how closely they are working together 
and handling the shared drive - their common goal is undoubtedly for A1 Team 
GBR to win the title. It will again be tough to decide who to put into the race 
seat in Sepang, Malaysia on 25 November, but I will review our strategy with 
the team and decide very soon. It's never easy, but with two such talented 
drivers it's a nice problem to have.
 