
A prominent Azerbaijani investigative journalist has been released on 
probation after her detention was widely criticised by activists and human 
rights organisations.

Khadija Ismayilova, who had delved into the wealth of the country’s first 
family, was arrested in December 2014 andsentenced to seven-and-a-half years in 
jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/01/azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova-verdict>
 in September last year.


She was freed by the country’s supreme court on Wednesday after judges ruled 
her sentence would be changed to a three-and-a-half-year suspended term.

Speaking after she left court, Ismayilova said she would persist with her 
reporting and push for a full acquittal. “I will continue my journalist work 
with renewed energy,” she said. “I feel younger and more energetic, and I will 
fight until the end.”

A group of wellwishers gathered outside the court with balloons to celebrate 
the verdict, which has come two days before Ismayilova’s 40th birthday.

Her trial was widely seen as politically motivated, and revenge for her 
award-winning reporting. In her work for Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, she 
carried out a number of investigations that linked president Ilham Aliyev and 
his family to alleged corruption scandals.

On Wednesday, her lawyer, Fariz Namazli, said the supreme court had dropped 
charges of embezzlement and abuse of power charges but kept the charges of tax 
evasion and illegal business activity.

Under the terms of probation, Ismayilova is required to reside in Baku, the 
capital, and is forbidden from traveling abroad for five years without official 
permission.

At the same time as Ismayilova’s arrest, Azerbaijan’s authorities also raided 
RFE/RL’s Baku bureau and sealed it shut. The oil-rich country is run by Aliyev, 
who took over when his father died in 2003, and little dissent is tolerated. A 
number of other rights activists, journalists and lawyers have been imprisoned 
in the country on charges widely decried as politicised, though a group of them 
were released earlier this year.

In her initial trial, Ismayilova told the court it was ironic she was being 
charged with tax evasion. She said: “To accuse the person who investigated the 
presidential family’s stolen money stored in offshore accounts, its abuse of 
state deals and of contracts with offshore companies and groups, and its 
evasion of taxes, was very funny.”

Before her arrest, Ismayilova was subjected to a campaign of intimidation and 
harassment, including intimate footage of her, obtained using clandestine 
cameras, being posted online. She claimed she had been told the material would 
not be published if she desisted her anti-corruption investigations, but 
decided to go ahead with them.


She told the court she would not be broken by imprisonment, even if she had to 
spend 15 or 20 years behind bars, and issued a number of defiant statements 
from detention.

Ismayilova won the 2015 Pen/Barbara Goldsmith Freedom to Write award, and on 
Wednesday, Suzanne Nossel, executive director ofPen America <https://pen.org/>, 
said in a statement: “The release on probation of Khadija Ismayilova, an 
intrepid force exposing corruption in Azerbaijan, is a victory for journalists 
everywhere who go up against the toughest regimes bent on silencing those who 
dare challenge them.”

Human rights lawyer Amal Clooney drew the ire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/amal-clooney-azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova>
 of Azerbaijan’s authorities for taking on Ismayilova’s case at the European 
court of human rights.

Nina Ognianova, of the Committee to Protect Journalists, said: “Today’s ruling 
ordering Khadija Ismayilova freed is cause for celebration, but doesn’t erase 
the rank injustice of her imprisonment for a year and a half on retaliatory 
charges. We call on Azerbaijani authorities to remove the conditions on her 
freedom and to release all journalists imprisoned for their work immediately.”
 