
As sanctions were lifted this past weekend following Iran’s implementation of 
the nuclear agreement with world powers, PresidentHassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani> again called for Iran to 
rely less on the sale of oil and to reform the economy. But according to an 
analysis of Iranian politics based on game theory, economic reform is unlikely 
during the rest of his first presidential term, which ends in 2017.


Using the principles of game-theory, I evaluated the calculations and likely 
decisions of the main factions within Iran and determined the likely direction
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> is headed. Game theory is a 
subfield of micro-economics focused on the mathematical study of conflict and 
cooperation between decision-makers. Outcomes are determined by calculating the 
payoffs stakeholders incur for supporting or opposing differing economic 
policies.

I estimated the payoffs of the factions in Iran by ranking their known 
preferences over economic liberalisation, regional posture and domestic 
security. I calculated the range of combinations for these to estimate the 
degree to which the supreme leader,Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/15/legacy-iran-supreme-leader-ayatollah-khamanei>
, and hardline factions would support or oppose Rouhani’s agenda of economic 
reform.

The opening up of Iran will mean a return to barbarity as usual | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/iran-return-barbarity-end-nuclear-sanctions-repression-rich-american-democracy-human-rights>
The lifting of sanctions coupled with the release of up to $100bn in frozen 
Iranian assets as part of the nuclear agreement will reinvigorate the Iranian 
economy, removing a significant obstacle to growth. Nonetheless, the road to 
economic development remains rocky due to highly inefficient state-controlled 
enterprises and the lack of transparency resulting inhigh levels of corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/jun/02/iran-sanctions-business-culture-obstacles>
, as evidenced by Transparency International placing the country as low as 136 
out of 175 countries on its Corruption Perceptions Index based on “how corrupt 
a country’s public sector is perceived to be”.

These factors make the business environment unfriendly to foreign investment. 
Some might say Tehran’s hotels are today crammed with foreign business people, 
but a few full hotels in a country of 75 million people is no evidence Iran is 
welcoming to foreign business. The World Bank ranks Iran at 118, way down the 
list, on ‘ease of doing business’.

The Rouhani administration is attempting to change this by pushing for robust 
economic reforms, seeking to pull the Iranian economy out of isolation into a 
global market and to attract much needed investment from abroad. He says he 
wants to change a situation where Iran’s exports are almost entirely 
hydrocarbon commodities and where it is conducting import substitution as a 
policy to protect state-owned and quasi-state owned enterprises.

The prospects for substantive economic reform are poor. Using the rules of 
game theory to calculate the payoffs of the various factions within Iran, we 
find that not only is Rouhani unlikely to achieve significant change, but that 
the likely path for Iran following the lifting of sanctions will be a scaling 
back to cosmetic attempts at reform. Iran will remain a closed economy for the 
remainder of Rouhani’s presidential term.

How to succeed in Iran: lessons from Russia and China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/jun/04/iran-private-businesses-linked-regime-organizations>
We can determine the prospects of economic reform in Iran by analysing four 
factors to assess whether various factions will support President Rouhani’s 
economic policy agenda: these are security over the population, ideology, 
regional posture, and willingness to reform the economy.

Competing internal factions within Iran are broadly divided between hardliner 
camps, moderates led by President Rouhani, the bazaar merchants, and Khamenei. 
External players such asRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, 
China, the European Union and the United States also contribute to the 
government’s calculations over economic reform.

The hardliners seek an Iran that is highly authoritarian under a resistance 
ideology closing the country to the rest of the world, and a regional posture 
that is more militaristic than diplomatic. The leader’s preferences are close 
to those of the hardliners. Khamenei realises that minor cosmetic reforms might 
be necessary as a token concession for appeasing the influential bazaar 
merchants and the popular Rouhani administration, but he has not supported 
privatisation but has rather put state-owned enterprises in the hands of 
government and former government officials to give the illusion of 
privatization.

On the opposite side of the spectrum, the bazaaris and the moderate camp seek 
an Iran driven by economic liberalisation, a loosened security state that is 
more conducive to foreign investment, a less militaristic regional posture that 
is better for trade, and a non-resistance ideology that is open to 
globalisation.

The divergence of views among these competing factions reveals a political tug 
of war that according to my calculations will favour the more powerful 
hardliners and the leader rather than the moderates and bazaar merchants. 
According to game-theoretic calculations, economic reforms can take place only 
if several conditions change.

First, Khamenei would have to loosen the security conditions that have 
resulted in the arrest of several journalists and intimidation of foreigners 
seeking to invest in the country. He would also have to loosen his ‘resistance’ 
ideology that has produced policies that have economically isolated Iran from 
the rest of the world and that cannot be explained as a response to sanctions.

This means Khamenei would have to aggressively support changing Iran’s insular 
policies on import substitution, the replacing of cheaper or more desired 
imports with domestically produced goods through state-controlled enterprises 
and subsidies. Lastly, he will need to take a friendlier regional posture, 
which would be difficult given the current rivalry with Iran’s Arab neighbour, 
including Saudi Arabia, and Turkey, which is seen most intensely in the 
conflict in Iraq and Syria.

A country in conflict with its neighbours will not be able to open or reform 
its economy because the many secondary effects. First, part of the political 
capital needed for economic reform is diverted to conflict and 
conflict-rhetoric. Second, countries seeking business with Iran incur a larger 
political cost for doing so if they also do business with neighbours who are at 
odds with the country.Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, 
Italy, and Britain are well aware of these costs.

Short of the leader making a substantial shift in his actions, significant 
economic reforms could be implemented only if power in Iran were balanced more 
in favouring of the more reform-minded Rouhani administration. Iran remains an 
authoritarian state that is disproportionately driven by hardliners.

Iran’s hardliners may have opposed the nuclear deal, but Khamenei, who 
supported the agreement for financial and security reasons, is closely aligned 
to the hardliners over economic and social policies. This makes economic reform 
unlikely because the current balance of power leans in favour of the supreme 
leader and other hardliners, who are motivated not just by economic 
considerations.

The release of $100bn in frozen assets and the lifting of sanctions will give 
Iran a substantial increase in capital flow. According to the World Bank, 
economic growth will increase from 3% in 2015 to 5% in 2016. But the absence of 
significant reform means Iran will remain an austere environment for those 
seeking to invest in segments other than hydrocarbons and traditional 
quasi-state owned commodity products such as pistachios. Iran’s most valuable 
asset – its highly educated labour force – will not be utilised effectively.


The lack of economic reform will continue to place a heavy toll on the middle 
class and particularly its underemployed youth. Rising expectations will have 
to be met and increasing oil revenue, with sanctions lifted, will be enough for 
the economy to grow without forcing the issue of reform. This can end up 
providing more incentives not to reform the economy.

These circumstances are not unique to Iran. Developing countries with a large 
proportion of oil exports are at increased risk of instability through three 
mechanisms. Firstly, revenue from oil exports motivates groups excluded from 
the profits or benefits to oppose the government. Secondly, opposition to the 
government can be rewarding if it produces bribes or pay-offs. Thirdly, oil in 
particular can enhance inequality through the ‘Dutch disease’, in which 
currency inflow from the sale of hydrocarbons makes other products less 
competitive for export, so weakening manufacturing and increasing prices for 
consumers.

Although the nuclear deal will increase the flow of revenue to the Iranian 
government, it is at core an arms control agreement that will not lead to other 
reforms. It is true that a significant constraint on economic growth has been 
removed with the lifting of many sanctions. It might even provide the beginning 
of a long-term path forward for Iran in convincing western Europe, Iran’s 
neighbours, Argentina, Brazil and the US that it is no longer a pariah state.

But as John Maynard Keynes said: “In the long run we’re all dead”. Economic 
reform under the Rouhani administration is unlikely.

Amir Bagherpour <https://twitter.com/AmirPredicts?lang=en> is a partner at 
Global Impact Strategies. He formerly
 served at the US State Department, where he led an elite team of
 political scientists, game theorists, and intelligence analysts
 responsible for data-driven assessment of risk, modeling of complex
 negotiations, and anticipation of global crises. The Tehran Bureau is an 
independent media organisation, hosted by the Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau 
<https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 