
In a message of condolence for Saturday’s funeral of Ayatollah Abbas 
Vaez-Tabasi in Mashhad,Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, Iran’s supreme 
leader, said the departed cleric, who died the previous day aged 80, had been 
“a sympathetic brother…[and] comrade of difficult days”.


But Khamenei lost no time in appointing Ebrahim Raeisi, the 55-year-old 
national prosecutor-general, to follow Vaez-Tabasi as chairman of Astan Quds 
Razavi, the foundation that manages the shrine of Imam Reza in Mashhad.

Raeisi is a close ally of Khamenei, and his appointment will strengthen links 
between the leader’s office and the shrine, whose annual turnover – based on 
endowments, property and companies – is many billions of dollars. The leader 
has chosen another ally, Ahmad Alamolhoda, as his representative for Khorasan 
province, a second post left vacant by Vaez-Tabasi’s passing.

Vaez-Tabasi was close to former president Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, an ally of 
presidentHassan Rouhani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>. 
Back in the 2005 election, the shrine backed Rafsanjani in his unsuccessful 
presidential bid, as did three of the city’s five parliamentary deputies.
 Hojjatoleslam Ebrahim Raeisi, in black turban, with Ayatollah Jannati 
Raeisi, who holds the clerical rank of hojjatoleslam, is a different 
character. At last year’s 36th anniversary of the taking of the embassy 
hostages, which featured criticism of the Rouhani administration as well as 
denunciations of the United States as the “Great Satan”, Raeisi announced that 
the intelligence and security forces had “identified and cracked down on a 
network of penetration in media and cyberspace, and detained spies and writers 
hired by Americans”.

Two years ago, Raeisi accused the west 
<http://rasanews.ir/en/NSite/FullStory/News/?Id=999> of promoting homosexuality 
around the world in the name of human rights, and he has also reportedlydefended
 <https://www.iranhumanrights.org/2010/10/amputations-judiciary-official/> the 
amputation of the hands of thieves.

Since 2012 he has been prosecutor of the Special Court of the Clergy (dadgahe 
vijeh-ye rohaniyat), a body answerable to the leader that is outside the usual 
judicial process and has indicted several reform-minded clerics.

At the time of the 1988 executions of 3,000-5,000 political prisoners ordered 
by then leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomenei, Raeisi was deputy prosecutor in 
Tehran, a role he had held since 1984-5. On hiswebsite 
<http://raisi.org/page/biography> Raeisi says after Khomeini asked him to 
investigate certain provincial cases in the Iranian year 1367 (1988-89), he 
then handed him and Jaffar Nayyeri “important cases”.

Nayyeri is described in Tortured Confessions, the 1999 book by leading 
historian Ervand Abrahamian, as a special assistant to the Tehran special 
commission, set up alongside others, wrote Abrahamian, “with instructions to 
execute Mojaheds [members of the opposition armed group, Mojahedin-e Khalq] and 
leftists asmortads (apostates from Islam)…it was dubbed ‘the commission of 
death’. Similar commissions were set up in the provinces.”

 Ebrahim Raeisi (far left) with Ayatollah Khamenei in the 1990s (far right) 
As head of the shrine, Raeisi could play a huge role in the future succession 
to Khamenei, 76, as leader, especially as he is also a member for south 
Khorasan province of the Experts Assembly, the body that chooses the leader 
should a need arise.


The possibility of a succession to Khamenei in the next eight-year term of the 
Assemblyadded bite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/24/iran-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau>
 to last month’s election of the body on a day when Iranians also voted for a 
new parliament. The Experts Assembly poll saw a shift towards a “List of Hope” 
- drawn up by Rafanjani, Rouhani and former reformist president Mohammad 
Khatami – that found success in Tehran, encouraging tactical voting to 
successfully unseatAyatollah Mohammad Yazdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/mar/13/iran-supreme-mohammad-yazdi-leader-in-waiting>
, the assembly chairman, and the colourful Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi.

The appointment of Raeisi is a reminder that the politics of the succession to 
Khamenei will be shaped not just by the popular election. “Ayatollah 
Vaez-Tabasi was very close to Hashemi [Rafsanjani] and very powerful,” Saeid 
Golkar, senior fellow at Chicago Council of Global Affairs and lecturer at 
Northwestern University, told Tehran Bureau.

Golkar is sceptical of analysing the Experts Assembly through a simple divide 
between “hardliners” and “moderates”, preferring to distinguish groups based 
around the “three pillars” of state bureaucracy, the clerical establishment in 
Qom and the military-security apparatus.

“There are those close to the more traditional clergy in Qom – like Ayatollah 
[Mahmoud Hashemi] Shahroudi and Ayatollah [Mohammad] Emami-Kashani. Secondly, 
there are clergy close to the Revolutionary Guards and security apparatus, like 
Sadegh Larijani and [Mohammed Mehdi] Mirbagheri. And thirdly, there are the 
clergy close to the bureaucracy and the state, like Hashemi [Rafsanjani] and 
Rouhani.”

Golkar concedes that some straddle the pillars, regarding Yazdi and 
Mesbah-Yazdi as “traditional clergy” linked to the “military-security” camp. 
While Raeisi has no links to the state bureaucracy and little standing among 
the clerical establishment in Qom, Golar suggests Raeisi’s links to the leader 
could put him closest to the military-security pillar.

And while Khamenei is an arbiter within Iranian politics, he is also a 
factional player and most powerful decision-maker, with beyt-e rahbari 
(leader’s office) expanding its scope since he took office in 1989.

Golkar thinks Khamenei’s base has shifted over time: “When Khamenei was 
president [1981-89], he was a middle-rank clergy closely related to the state 
bureaucracy, but after he became leader he expanded his relationship with the 
Revolutionary Guards (IRGC), expanding the Guards to five branches. He also 
attempted, less successfully, to expand his influence in the seminaries through 
greater regulation.”

The jury is very out on how far last month’s election to the Experts Assembly 
will shape the succession.

“The election does tell us something about the sentiments of the majority of 
Iranians in wanting to have a say in who should be selected as the leader,” 
Farideh Farhi, of the University of Hawaii, told Tehran Bureau. “But while this 
sentiment was expressed, in stunning ways in Tehran, it is not yet clear if it 
was heard or, if heard, whether it will be acted upon…The campaign prior to the 
election saw plenty of accusations, even by the leader himself, against those 
who publicly questioned the over-the-top vetting of registrants, including 
Hassan Khomeini, for being British agents or duped by the ‘enemy’.”

Golkar agrees that the Assembly of Experts cannot be treated in isolation: 
“The Assembly somehow reflects the wider society – the bureaucracy, the 
clerical networks, the security – so the succession will reflect what’s going 
on outside the Assembly of Experts as well, including the power balance between 
the executive, the judiciary and parliament…After the appointment of Raeisi [to 
chair the shrine in Mashhad], Ayatollah’s Khamenei’s office will be more 
powerful, but all of these political events have an impact, so we have to wait 
and see.”

With conservative critics of last July’s nuclear agreement licking their 
wounds after the election, Golkar has been monitoring their reactions on social 
media. “The majority accept there was defeat to Rouhani and his administration 
but say this is not the end of the road. They draw a comparison with the 
Khatami period [1997-2005, when the conservatives lost several elections]. They 
say, ‘We need to go away, reassess, and come back with a new strategy’.”

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 