
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has secured a deal from 
its European partners on crippling bank debt that will save it at least €1bn 
this year and €20bn over the next decade.

Enda Kenny on Thursday told the Irish parliament the dramatic reduction in 
payments to bondholders of the now defunctAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> was "an historic step 
in our economic recovery". The taoiseach predicted the cut in bank debt 
payments would bolster global confidence in Ireland.

Anglo Irish Bank was the financial institution that almost bankrupted Ireland 
as it became the lender of choice for speculators who borrowed billions to play 
the global property market. When that market crashed in 2008 the bank had to be 
nationalised, costing the Irish taxpayer tens of billions of euros. The debt 
burden also included shoring up another toxic financial institution, the Irish 
Nationwide building society.

The deal, which seems to have the approval of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, involves tearing 
up the promissory notes (IOUs) to Anglo's bondholders and pushing back the debt 
payments to at least 2043. In addition, the plan entails the full liquidation 
by 1 July of the state-owned bank which was renamed the Irish Bank Resolution 
Corporation. This will result in the loss of around 1,000 jobs in the Republic 
and Northern Ireland.

The Fine Gael-Labour coalition said the deal would significantly ease the 
burden of the Republic's repayments on the money owed to Anglo's bondholders.

Before Kenny spoke inside the Dáil on Thursday to confirm the deal, the ECB 
president, Mario Draghi, hinted during a press conference in Frankfurt that the 
bank was backing the plan. Draghi said the ECB would "take note" of the Irish 
proposals, which officials in Frankfurt later said was code for its backing.

The taoiseach predicted that the deal to lower Ireland's bank debt would 
enable the country to restore economic sovereignty through the exiting 
IMF/ECB/EU bailout. "The promissory notes in Anglo Irish Bank and Irish 
Nationwide served as a millstone around the neck of the Irish taxpayer. This 
burden served to erode confidence and limit the economy's ability to grow.

"The new plan will likely materially improve perceptions of our debt 
sustainability in the eyes of potential investors in Ireland, leading to lower 
interest rates and faster growth than would otherwise be the case."

Micheal Martin, the leader of the main opposition party, Fianna Fáil, 
challenged Kenny, asking him to clarify if the savings of more than €1bn as a 
result of the bank deal would be re-invested into the Irish economy in terms of 
creating jobs and capital spending projects. Unemployment in Ireland is at 
14.6%.

Securing a deal to slash the country's bank debt with European support has 
been a major test of the coalition's economic competence. The deal to dissolve 
Anglo and at the same time win support for postponing the bank debt payments 
was called Project Red and was hammered out between the Irish Central Bank and 
the ECB.

Several of the leading executives in the Anglo are facing criminal 
investigations over alleged financial malpractices.

During the Celtic tiger boom of the late 1990s and first six years of this 
century, the bank loaned billions to business tycoons to buy up property 
portfolios across the world. The most infamous investor to borrow from Anglo 
was Ireland's one-time richest man, Sean Quinn, whose gambling with his 
successful cement and insurance businesses not only lead to bankruptcy but also 
a stint in Mountjoy prison in Dublin.
 