
Denis O’Brien, the Irish telecoms and media billionaire, has launched a 
scathing attack on his critics, saying he has never experienced such “venom and 
hatred”.

O’Brien, reputedly the country’s second richest man with a fortune estimated 
at £3.85bn, is incensed at attempts by the media and politicians to establish 
details of his relationship with the formerAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>, the institution whose 
failure helped trigger Ireland’s bailout in 2010.

“I have never experienced the level of abuse, venom and hatred resulting from 
taking a stand to protect privacy in relation to my financial affairs,” he said 
on Tuesday.

His affairs came under the spotlight 11 days ago when he was granted an 
injunction preventing broadcaster RTÉ reporting details of his banking 
arrangements with the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation, which houses the 
remains of Anglo Irish Bank.

Interest intensified on Thursday when an Irish politician, Catherine Murphy, 
used parliamentary privilege to suggest O’Brien had received preferential 
treatment from IRBC with an interest rate of 1.25% on loans of about €500m 
(£360m).

Murphy, an independent TD (MP), said in the Irish parliament: “IBRC could, and 
arguably should, have been charging 7.5%.”

What followed was an extraordinary battle, which involved international media 
including the Guardian and the Sunday Times reporting Murphy’s comments but 
local media deciding against doing so because of the injunction.

The Irish Times and RTÉ are due in the Irish high court on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/irish-media-seek-right-to-report-on-denis-obriens-ties-with-ibrc>
 to establish whether parliamentary privilege trumps a court order.

Writing in the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/denis-o-brien-i-have-never-experienced-this-level-of-hatred-1.2233858>
, O’Brien said he sought a court order against RTÉ because he expected 
“confidentiality in a fiduciary relationship”, whether the bank was bailed out 
or not, “in perpetuity”.

“Maybe I am old-fashioned but I operate on the basis that a client’s 
relationship with its bank is at all times confidential,” he said. O’Brien said 
the documents about his affairs had clearly been stolen.

The tycoon, who owns the country’s largest newspaper group and who has 
significant mobile telephone interests in the Caribbean including Haiti, said 
the first he heard of RTÉ’s investigation into his affairs was last month.

“I woke in Haiti on the morning of April 29th to a phone message saying that 
RTÉ had sent me a letter with questions regarding my confidential banking 
arrangements with Anglo Irish Bank/IBRC. My immediate reaction was astonishment 
that RTÉ could be used in such a way, so deliberately, to set out to damage 
me,” he wrote.

“What shocked me most of all was that someone would take files from a major 
Irish bank, tamper with them and leak them to RTÉ. In turn, RTÉ was seeking 
confirmation from me, via questions contained in a letter, to enable them to 
broadcast this information. In essence, this is what this whole storm and 
controversy is all about.


“Not for one minute did I ever allow external access to anyone to my private 
banking files. The only conclusion is that they were taken from Anglo Irish 
Bank/IBRC without the permission of the liquidator.”

He said Murphy’s claims about him were untrue and called on her to share with 
him the files she has received on him. He also took a swipe at the former 
attorney general Michael McDowell, who over the weekendsaid Murphy’s speech was 
in the public interest 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/controversy-over-d%C3%A1il-claims-raises-serious-issues-about-democracy-1.2231433>
.

O’Brien said McDowell’s remarks “needed to be taken with a grain of salt”. He 
said McDowell “always had something to say” about him and claimed he had an 
underlying agenda.



 