
A top banker with the financial institution that almost bankrupted Ireland 
boasted that he had picked the figure of €7bn (£5.9bn) they told the Irish 
government was needed to rescue theAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> "out of his arse".

Taped phone calls between two senior executives at Anglo Irish have compounded 
suspicions in the Republic that bankers lured the then Fianna Fáil led 
government during the crash of September 2008 into a costly financial trap by 
saving the debt-stricken bank with public money.

In the end the Irish taxpayer was forced to hand over €30bn to save Anglo 
Irish Bank from collapse and resulted in the state going cap in hand to the 
International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank and the EU to save the 
country from national bankruptcy.

The bank's audio recordings – obtained by The Irish Independent  
<http://www.independent.ie/insideanglo> – are of conversations between two 
senior Anglo Irish managers in September 2008, John Bowe and Peter Fitzgerald. 
Initially the bank had asked Ireland's central Bank for €7bn to prop up its 
parlous finances following the Irish property crash. Critics of the bailout 
have insisted Anglo Irish bank executives always knew that the figure would be 
far higher – ultimately more than four times higher.

On tape Fitzgerald asks Bowe how did he arrive at the figure of €7bn to which 
the latter replies: "Just as Drummer [the then Anglo Irish Bank CEO David Drumm 
now in exile and disgrace in Boston] would say, 'picked it out my arse.'"

The conversation also tends to back up the view that Anglo Irish bankers knew 
that €7bn would never be enough to save the bank but once they had hoodwinked 
the Dublin government the taxpayer would keep picking up the tab.

In their exchange Bowe says: "Yeah, and that number is seven, but the reality 
is that actually we need more than that. But you know the strategy here is you 
pull them in, you get them to write a big cheque and they have to keep, they 
have to have support their money, you know."

On the Irish government getting entrapped by Anglo, Bowe adds: "If they say, 
if they saw the enormity of it up front, they might decide, they might decide 
they have a choice. You know what I mean? They might say the cost to the 
taxpayer is too high. But ... em ... if it doesn't look big at the outset ... 
if it looks big, big enough to be important, but not too big that it kind of 
spoils everything, then then I think you have a chance."

The two bankers are also heard laughing and joking at a time when the bank was 
tottering on the brink of destruction. They are heard saying they hope the bank 
is nationalised so "we'd keep our jobs".

Bowe who was approached over the weekend about the 2008 conversations claimed 
the remarks were "off-the-cuff comments" and denied he was trying to mislead 
the state with underestimated figures.

Fitzgerald released a statement through his solicitor stating that "I am not 
nor have I ever been aware of a strategy or intention on the part of the Anglo 
Irish Bank to mislead authorities in relation to the forecasted funding 
position of Anglo Irish Bank."

Despite the pair's denials, the taped conversations at a critical time in the 
toxic bank's history will increase the pressure for a full parliamentary 
inquiry into the bank rescue deal which cost the taxpayer a further €30bn after 
two other debt-ridden banks, the Bank ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and Allied Irish Bank had to be 
saved from collapse.

Unlike the United States, no senior Irish banker has gone to jail or been 
found guilty in any court so far. The leading lights in Anglo, once regarded as 
masters of the financial universe who kept fuelling the Celtic Tiger, are now 
among the most hated figures in the Republic's history.

Anglo Irish Bank epitomised the rise and ignominious fall of the Celtic Tiger 
economy. It was the preferred lender for property speculators and builders. 
Among its stellar business clients was Ireland's one-time richest man Sean 
Quinn who borrowed hundreds of millions of euros from Anglo Irish to fund the 
building of a worldwide property which has since melted away. Quinn's gambling 
with Anglo Irish's loans resulted in him being made bankrupt and finally jailed 
for failing to hand over assets to the bank once it was nationalised.
 