
What a rollercoaster of emotions this week has been for Led Zeppelin fans. On 
Monday, the legendary 70s rock band made afive-star return 
<http://music.theguardian.com/live/story/0,,2225634,00.html> to a sell-out 
crowd 19 years after they last took to the stage together. The response was 
awesome, mainly, and fans had their fingers crossed that talk of a 2008 tour 
was more than just rumourising.

By Friday, they had their hopes and dreams crushed by one wicked woman: Alison 
Krauss <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alisonkrauss>.

For those not in the loop, Zep singer Robert Plant and country singer Alison 
Krauss duetted-up earlier this year on the album Raising Sands to (more)rave 
reviews 
<http://www.metacritic.com/music/artists/plantrobertandalisonkrauss/raisingsand>
.

Now the last thing you might expect is for musicians to spend a few months 
touring to promote their new release but, but being the crazy, wild people they 
are, Plant and Krauss are doing just that!

Which kind of jiggers a reunion tour, as the Mirror explains in no uncertain 
terms this morning. "He (Plant) and Alison are booked to play a series of dates 
across the UK and Europe in May, followed by expected US shows in the summer."

"Fans on the band's official website expressed disappointment, with one 
writing: 'Oh dear- no Led Zep tour in 2008.'"

"Another said: 'I'm sick.'"

"Others likened Alison to a Yoko Ono figure in keeping the band apart." Sadly 
and somewhat inevitably, the fans have started to turn on each other, perhaps 
already rattled by the sight ofLZ reunion clips disappearing from the internet 
<http://www.billboard.com/bbcom/news/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003684579>
 before their very eyes. Shebastjk, the blogger responsible for the "Alison 
Krauss=Yoko Ono" comment, was told by Jahfin: "You sound like a selfish 8 year 
old that needs to grow the fuck up and just accept the reality of the 
situation." To which ZeppelinIsGodToMe-My Life responded: "You sound like a 
prissy bitch...", continuing in this vein for some paragraphs. Then suddenly 
ZeppelinIsGodToMe-My Life appears to stop and take a deep breath, before 
writing: "Sorry for the looser geek fanboy reponse i just typed, i ended up 
giving you the whole deal. by the way i cried when i was writing the end of 
that last paragraph, thinking of how magical and tremendous it would be if I 
was at any LZ concert, thats how sad/grateful i am about zeppelin and whats 
been recently happening. Thank You Mr. Page, Bonham, Jones and Plant. You've 
changed my life in certain ways and i don't know what it'd be like without 
you..."

After all that, we're exhausted. One final word from the Mirror:

"However it is rumoured Led Zeppelin may play a small number of shows, 
including New York's Madison Square Garden and possibly Glastonbury."

And up we go again!!!

The Mirror also reports on another (potential) tour that has been going round 
the rumour mill since about 1908.

"Michael Jackson may be forced to go on tour to pay off his huge debts."

They turn to US commentator Roger Freidman for confirmation of this report.

"US showbiz commentator Roger Freidman said: 'The only real impetus for him to 
tour is money.'"

Which is not exactly the same as being forced to tour in the face of financial 
ruin, but the odds are stacked against Jacko, if the Mirror is right about his 
finances.

"He now has £160 million in loans and has defaulted on £147 million borrowed 
against his home."

Debt or no debt, the rumours continue to "hot up", as they say, but still lack 
that vital confirmation from Jacko's camp. Still, we can keep our fingers 
crossed that there's no duet with Alison "Yoko" Krauss in the pipeline.

We close In The News this week with two of our favourite things: Amy Winehouse 
and Bizarre's Minister of Kewl, Gordon Smart.

Ringo Starr <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ringo-starr> has been chatting 
to Time magazine about all sorts of things, almost as if Bizarre Gordon was 
there in person, pointing at clippings from his column.

So what has Ringo got to say for himself Gordon? Please tell.

On Amy Winehouse: "God bless Amy. She's a great talent and she's going through 
a situation right now. It's a very public destruction. The good news is that 
there's more help around now than before."

On Pete Doherty: "You can do it Pete. God bless you, Pete."

On Doherty's music: "I've no idea. I've only seen him coming out of a court."

On philosophy: "You can only be what you are."

On food: "Carrots."

Forget Led Zeppelin, we say: "bring back Ringo!"
 