
Saidi Mwema, Inspector General of the Tanzanian Police Force, enters a medical 
tent and takes a seat. The nurse sat in front of him pulls out a needle and 
draws blood. Saidi is undertaking an HIV test in one of Africa's worst affected 
regions- by doing so he encourages another 118 of his rank, followed by some 
9500 police offers and their families to undergo a test.

Tanzania's police force is more than twice as likely to have HIV/AIDS than the 
general population. As a study by Marie Stopes International (MSI), the leading 
organisation in family planning and reproductive health has revealed, this is 
likely to be linked to long periods away from their partners, contact with 
injured victims and the stigma surrounding HIV/AIDS which prevents people from 
getting tested, and dealing with the disease.

Increasingly, development organisations are recognising the link between poor 
family planning provisions, the spread of HIV/AIDS and sexual and reproductive 
health. The benefits of using family planning methods, to decrease unwanted 
pregnancies, are incontestable. Pregnancy-related health risks, infant 
mortality, the spread of HIV/AIDS to infants, unsafe abortions, teenage and 
youth pregnancies and the disempowerment of women to control their own bodies- 
are all directly linked to the lack of access to family planning methods.

The right to family planning, as identified and endorsed by the UN, includes 
access to contraception. There are 13 different forms of contraception, as 
identified by the World Health Organisation, and yet over 200 million couples 
in the developing world, who would like to be using family planning, are not.

Reasons behind these high levels are complex and interrelated, whilst also 
differing between regions and socio-economic status of those affected:

"The greatest obstacles to family planning are linked to the poor, the remote 
and the young. All of which centres to an extent around education" explains 
Michael Tirrell, spokesman at MSI.

Poverty, as a barrier to family planning is no more clearly identified than in 
the poorest areas of Africa. International Planned Parenthood Federation 
reports show little change since the mid-1990s as one in five women of 
childbearing age continue to have an unmet need for contraception. Figures for 
unmarried women, unable to access or use contraception are hazy- as little 
attention has been paid to this group. Nevertheless, as of 2008 reports show 
that an estimated 818 million women in developing countries want to avoid 
pregnancies.

Poverty creates practical barriers to family planning: healthcare costs money, 
but Michael also identifies socio-cultural factors:

"Unmarried people are often unwilling to discuss family planning and their 
reproductive needs with service providers, due to the common cultural attitude 
that unmarried people shouldn't, and so don't, have sex. This is not the case 
anywhere in the world, at any time in history."

Even if access to contraception is improved, without the necessary education 
into how to use it, it remains untouched. Confusion over contraceptive use, and 
what methods exist, is a world-wide problem, yet in underserved areas- this 
translates into myths and misconceptions:

"In Sierra Leone, there is one brand of condom which is offered for free, it 
comes in a white packet. Rumours, untruths and gossip have developed into the 
belief that this condom causes HIV/AIDS." Such rumours need dispelling, if 
change is to happen, he adds.

Although the majority of contraceptives are made for female use, family 
planning has to remain a concern and priority of both genders. Without male 
understanding of why family planning is intrinsic to the development of 
societies- then concerns over the status of a large family, coupled with 
concerns over side effects and changes to the body due to contraception- will 
prevail.

Political initiatives, entangled with socio-cultural beliefs, have a very real 
role in family planning. In the Philippines, where premarital sexual activity 
is increasing, there exists a complex political approach to family planning. 
The Arroyo government uses the national budget to provide modern natural family 
planning- approved by the Catholic Church but does not support 'artificial' 
contraception including the use of the pill, the injection, IUDs or condoms. 
Instead methods such as withdrawal and fertility awareness are advised- which 
are neither reliable nor do they protect from STIs.

The Philippines has also been negatively affected by the withdrawal of US 
funding to public contraceptive services, upon which the industry was greatly 
reliant. PhilHealth, the national health insurance programme which now exists 
covers very few methods: the tying of the fallopian tubes, vasectomy and the 
IUD. It is also made more available to the upper echelons of society, failing 
to address the link between poverty and poor family planning.

Although it is in the developing world that inadequate family planning has the 
worst affects. The failure to prioritise family planning, sexual and 
reproductive health in Western international development agendas is a failure 
to tackle poverty, and so a failure to tackle at least six of the Millennium 
Development Goals.

In the United States, 14 states allow some health care providers to refuse to 
provide services related to contraception, whilst 18 states allow some 
providers to refuse to provide sterilization services- reasons for refusal 
include religious objections. If the need isn't recognised as a real one in a 
home country, then it is unlikely that it will be budgeted for in international 
development.

By adopting a 'client-centred' approach through outreach teams in rural 
communities, inner city slums and with the underserved- alongside spreading 
knowledge and education across the West, MSI is working to improve access and 
understanding of family planning, to those who need it the most.

"We will travel in vans, on horses or motorbikes, to make sure our clients are 
at the forefront of our work" says Michael.

"It's important that development organisations don't just jump on a plane, 
deliver condoms and fly home again- it needs to be sustainable."

"Our work is staffed and run by local people, who work with respected members 
of the local community. It is invaluable to have a complete understanding of an 
area, before addressing cultural barriers to family planning."

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.

 