
It's hard work, expensive and it can deal a hammer blow to the toughest of 
management egos, but the master of business administration (MBA) continues to 
be one of the UK's most popular postgraduate programmes.

More than 8,000 new students enrolled at business schools in 2011 for courses 
accredited by the Association of MBAs. But if you are thinking of joining them 
in 2013, where should you start? Over the next few days, this series will guide 
you through the basics ofMBAs <https://www.theguardian.com/education/mbas>, 
looking at the different courses on offer, how to apply, the cost and job 
prospects once you have graduated.

Fees at the top end are £57,500 for a two-year full-time MBA at the London 
Business School, or £33,000 for a two-year part-time executive MBA at the 
Cranfield School of Management in Bedford.

So the question has to be asked: is there a return on investment? Quantifying 
an MBA's value is an inexact science but the Alumni Perspectives Survey of 
4,000 MBA graduates, conducted by the Graduate Management Admissions Council in 
2012, claimed that, on average, respondents had recouped one third of the cost 
of their studies within a year of graduation and the degree had paid for itself 
in four years.

Some schools, such as the London Business School, publish information on 
post-MBA salaries. Its 2012 MBA employment report shows the median base salary 
for its graduates going into consulting was £74,000; for corporate sector jobs 
it was slightly lower at £70,000; and for jobs in the financial sector it was 
£65,000.

A few colleges and rankings attempt to demonstrate the value of an MBA in 
terms of salaries commanded three or five years after graduation. The downside 
is that it is hard to know what the ambitious individuals would have been 
earning without the degree.

A lot depends on the attitude of employers. Phil Dunne, a partner at AT 
Kearney, the global firm of management consultants, says an MBA is not just 
about the topics you learn, but the people you meet and the networks you 
create. "We find graduates are equipped with very relevant, broad-based, 
team-oriented, problem-solving skills," he says.

Sarah Hernon, a principal consultant for Right Management, part of the 
ManpowerGroup, says encouraging "high-value staff" to do master's 
qualifications can be a creative way for employers to retain them when 
restructuring has reduced promotion prospects."An MBA makes people more 
marketable," she says.

But she adds a warning: "Working evenings and weekends is a huge commitment. 
But if you can get through it, the return on investment is vast."

Find out more: Association of MBAs <http://www.mbaworld.com/>; Graduate 
Management Admission Test <http://www.gmac.com/gmat.aspx>
 