
Is the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act the "worst law in technology", as Columbia 
Law School's Tim Wu calls 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2013/03/fixing-the-worst-law-in-technology-aaron-swartz-and-the-computer-fraud-and-abuse-act.html>
 the statute? I think there are worse laws for the technology industry and its 
customers, but the CFAA is more than bad enough – a vague, outdated and 
Draconian law, abused by the government in several high-profile cases – to have 
spurred calls for repeal.

As Wu and many others (including me) have pointed out over the years, the 
vagueness of the CFAA <http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/18/1030.html> has 
given prosecutors a tool that should worry everyone. This is because the 
government contends that the statute's ban on "unauthorized access" to someone 
else's computer is a felony, period, with potential penalties you'd associate 
with serious violent crime.

The late Aaron Swartz <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz> 
has been the highest-profile target of overreaching federal prosecutors relying 
in large part on the CFAA, in a case where he downloaded hundreds of thousands 
of academic papers from an organization that didn't want him prosecuted and 
ultimately decided to make the material freely available. There's little 
question that his suicide was spurred, in part, by the government's escalating 
threats, made possible thanks to prosecutors' ability to use the CFAA as 
sledgehammer.

But he wasn't the first. The Bush administration relied on the CFAA to 
prosecute the easy-to-dislike Lori Drew, who was among several people who 
created a bogus MySpace account of a fictitious teenaged boy who wooed and 
rejected the daughter of Drew's neighbor in suburban St Louis. The girl killed 
herself. When Missouri prosecutors said they had no relevant state law to 
prosecute Drew and her admittedly heartless helpers in this scheme, a federal 
prosecutor in Los Angeles hauled Drew there to face charges under the CFAA.

The case boiled down to Drew's misstatements in her MySpace profile. 
(Shamefully, MySpace supported the prosecution.) The jury convicted Drew of one 
charge, but the judge in the case wisely overturned it, pointing out that the 
government would have made everyone who's ever violated a "terms of service" 
agreement, no matter how minor the violation, at risk for criminal charges.

The threat of this law is not just from government prosecution. It's been 
stretched widely <https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20100305/0404088432.shtml> 
incivil cases, as well 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_Fraud_and_Abuse_Act#Notable_cases_and_decisions_referring_to_the_Act>
. Wu says the way to fix this intolerable situation is to persuade President 
Obama to fix it:

"The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act is egregiously over-broad in a way that has 
clearly imposed on the rights and liberties of Americans. With just one speech, 
the president can set things right."

But no, he can't. At least, not in a way we could trust.

First, presidential dispensation is useful, but it's not remotely permanent. 
White House occupants change. A more authoritarian chief executive than Obama 
won't be bound by what he does.

Presidents also change, or their positions do. That's the second big problem 
with Wu's suggestion: wishful thinking. Obama's record on civil liberties and 
executive power is simply abysmal – worse than George W Bush's in many ways, 
and better in only a few (such as gay rights).

Obama's Justice Department has made clear it believes the CFAA gives it the 
power to go after anyone. That includes you and me, assuming you've ever 
violated a terms of service in any way, as you undoubtedly have done.

Banana republics have lots of laws designed to be widely broken, providing 
leverage for prosecution of people either not liked by the government or who do 
otherwise legal things that annoy the leaders. So, even though you and I are 
exceedingly unlikely to become targets of the CFAA, wecould be – and that's why 
the law is intolerable as it stands.

Wu doubts, fairly, that this Congress in particular can be persuaded to act on 
almost anything. And it's no exaggeration to say that lawmakers are terrified 
in general of doing anything that might cause them to be accused of being soft 
on crime. But like it or not, this is ultimately an issue for Congress, which 
writes the laws.

The lawmakers' tendency to favor vagueness has some merit – it gives the 
people who carry out enforcement and make regulations the ability to adjust to 
changing circumstances – but in cases like this, where the abuse by the 
executive branch is blatant, Congress should take the risk of doing its job.
Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat, has proposed an "Aaron's 
Law" 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57564193-93/new-aarons-law-aims-to-alter-controversial-computer-fraud-law/>
 that would help redress the current imbalance.

Reforming CFAA is also an issue for the press – or would be, if we had more 
journalists who took seriously their duty to hold power accountable. 
Journalists in aggregate have two problems with this law: a superficial 
understanding, at best, and an ongoing deference to government positions on 
criminal justice and security. Even when journalists are directly threatened by 
overreaching, as they are in the WikiLeaks case, they still demonstrate a 
reluctance to take a stand.

If enough news organizations put the Obama civil liberties record under the 
spotlight it deserves, perhaps the American people would care more about what 
they're losing. Or maybe, we're willing to live in a more banana-like republic 
all the time; but I hope not.

I said earlier that the CFAA, bad as it is, isn't the worst law relating to 
technology. At least one, by my reckoning, is worse: the increasingly harsh 
copyright regime that has already turned countless millions of Americans into 
lawbreakers and deterred countless innovators.

Copyright in America started life in the US constitution as a way to promote 
innovation by giving creators of works strong rights for limited periods. It 
has metastasized into a system that has perverts the founders' intent and given 
giant corporations overwhelming – and increasing – power over not just 
entertainment but everything that contains information, including software, 
which is now part of almost everything.

In a rare defeat for the Copyright Cartel, the supreme court has upheld the 
"first sale doctrine" 
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/03/thai-student-protected-by-first-sale-supreme-court-rules/>
 – the principle that once you buy a book or CD, you can resell it – in a 
closely watched case. The court's rationale was that Congress didn't mean to 
create a different standard for works bought overseas as opposed to ones bought 
in the US. But the same court also just refused to hear an appeal of a 
Minnesota woman who's been ordered to pay more than $220,000 for downloading 
two-dozen songs – a testament to Congress' gift to Hollywood and its allies in 
the form of absurdly stiff penalties for minor infringement.

In the end, people who want change in bad laws have to work for it. This is 
doubly hard given Congress' pay-to-play system of legal bribery, where dollars 
translate into votes. Maybe that will have to change first, asthe "United 
Re:Public" coalition says <http://unitedrepublic.org>, but we need to get 
started or get used to a system that puts everyone at risk. We could begin by 
calling our legislators and insist they get behind "Aaron's Law".
 