
Six nights ago, 16.6 million people – more than half of those in Britain 
watching TV at the time – turned their sets to ITV1 to watch three 18-year-olds 
battle for their places onThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor>. Since the previous 
evening's broadcast, an undisclosed number of people – ITV does not reveal 
individual episode voting figures, but it is likely to be close to 1 million – 
had voted on their performances, leaving twins John and Edward Grimes and Welsh 
teenager Lucie Jones facing ejection on the Sunday results programme. In the 
end the Grimes twins, who perform as John and Edward, would triumph, leaving 
Jones sobbing onstage, but the manner by which that result was reached led 
3,000 people to complain to the broadcasting regulator, Ofcom – 10 times the 
number that complained about the BNP leader's appearance on Question Time.

At the very same time, on Radio 1, the top 40 singles chart was being revealed 
to those few pop fans who weren't watching ITV1. The results were instructive. 
Of the current top 10, no fewer than six are songs by artists who were either 
discovered by The X Factor (JLS, Alexandra Burke), have recently appeared on 
the programme (Michael Bublé, Westlife, Black Eyed Peas) or, in the case of 
Cheryl Cole, judged it. The top three albums, meanwhile (Cole, Bon Jovi – who 
also performed – and Bublé), might also thank the show for some of their 
success. Burke's album is at No 7, the Black Eyed Peas at 10. On Monday the 
second album byLeona Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonalewis>, the 
programme's 2006 winner, will be released, to almost certain chart dominance.

Six seasons after it premiered on British TV, the enormous popularity of The X 
Factor is hardly news. But while an audience increasingly familiar with the 
feints and tics of what remains, in essence, an old-fashioned talent show might 
be forgiven for starting to tire of them, its appetite for The X Factor and 
anyone associated with it appears only to be growing, and at a startling rate. 
Strictly Come Dancing, which the BBC hoped might be a potential threat to The X 
Factor's ratings supremacy, has been vanquished, with even its season's best 
audience share running 9% below its ITV1 rival.

Sunday's audience was the highest in the show's history – and given the 
controversy about John and Edward's victory (after judge and producerSimon 
Cowell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> in effect refused to 
cast his vote), and the runaway tabloid popularity that has given them the 
Brangelina-style nickname "Jedward", Cowell might reasonably hope for yet more 
this weekend. It is no coincidence that the English entrepreneur judge, who 
performs the same role on American Idol in the US, was this week revealed by 
Forbes magazine to be the biggest earner on American television, taking home 
$75m last year.

And yet if The X Factor's influence is familiar, so too is the fact that not 
everyone is delighted by its runaway success. This week Sting became the latest 
in a long line of those considering themselves authentic musicians to hit out 
at the show, describing it as a "preposterous" programme featuring judges who 
had "no recognisable talent apart from self-promotion, advising [contestants] 
what to wear and how to look" and a form of karaoke in which singers were 
permitted to conform only to narrow stereotypes. "They are either Mariah Carey 
or Whitney Houston or Boyzone and are not encouraged to create any real unique 
signature or fingerprint."

While some may argue that this may be precisely what has won the programme 
such an enormous mainstream audience, Sting's other argument, that The X Factor 
has "put music back decades", is more serious. Is he right?

Certainly the scale of the programme's dominance of the music chart is a new – 
and for those record labels with a new act to promote, potentially worrying – 
development. While the Christmas No 1 slot has been effectively ringfenced for 
the winner's single since the programme's launch, the fact that the show has 
arguably got better at picking talent means that this year's chart already 
features last year's winner,Alexandra Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke>, and runners up, JLS. 
Tomorrow sees the release on download of a charity single sung by the 
programme's contestants in aid of Great Ormond Street hospital, which is very 
likely to hold the No 1 slot until this year's winner is ready to take over, 
effectively locking up the top of the chart until 2010.

In a further innovation this year, the Sunday results show has been built 
around other artists promoting their own singles, leading to a previously 
unforeseen scale of chart dominance. "In an age when there are very few truly 
mass-audience platforms left, the X Factor has become pivotal for those labels 
and artists seeking to reach a family-based audience," says Gennaro Castaldo of 
HMV, one of the few music retailers that retains a high-street presence. "As 
soon as an artist goes on, almost overnight we tend to see a huge surge in 
demand for their single or album, initially via downloads, but then over the 
course of the following week via physical CD sales instore and online."

Album sales, he says, "can double or treble or increase by even more, so much 
so that a good chunk of our marketing and planning at this time of year tends 
to revolve around the show now".

"Does it impact on the signing and release schedules of other labels? Of 
course it does," says James Foley, music editor of industry news site 
recordoftheday.co.uk. "They will do anything to avoid being up against JLS and 
Alexandra Burke and Leona Lewis, because they know they have automatic access 
to a promotions platform that other labels don't have." Foley cites the example 
of Robbie Williams, at one point a star so huge that an album launch would have 
carried its own momentum. With his recent release, however, "EMI factored The X 
Factor directly into their promotional schedule. In previous years there were 
other TV options open to Robbie and EMI, but if you are releasing something 
that needs to come through a well-placed promotional avenue, it needs to be on 
The X Factor." Williams appeared on the show on 11 October to perform his 
single Bodies; several observers directly blamed its comparative commercial 
failure – it fell out of the top 10 last week to No 23 – on Williams's nervous, 
highly eccentric performance on the show.

And yet while the programme's influence on the charts is unquestionable, some 
argue that it is more helpful to consider it as a light entertainment monster, 
existing within its own very strange ecosystem, than as a functioning branch of 
the music industry. For Paul Williams, editor of Music Week, the issue is "a 
bit more complicated than whether X Factor is a good thing or a bad thing. It 
follows on from a long history of talent shows on TV. The only problem with X 
Factor, for its critics, is that it's executed much more successfully than its 
predecessors, but it is absolutely in that tradition. To criticise it for being 
successful is a bit odd."

Gladys Knight, he points out, was discovered on a talent show in the early 
50s, "and nobody could say she isn't a legend".

"The fact is that since there has been a music industry there has always been 
this issue of where the new talent is going to come from. When Elvis went into 
the army, people worried this was the end of rock'n'roll. The important thing 
is that the music industry makes sure that this isn't the only way in which new 
talent is discovered."

Other observers point out that very few contestants manage to forge lasting 
careers, so their long-term influence on the charts is hardly overwhelming. For 
every Leona Lewis, who became the first British solo artist to have a US No 1 
with her debut album, there is a Leon Jackson, who won in 2007 but has scarcely 
troubled the pop world since; one could name a very long list of previous 
contestants in the same category.

Jon Savage, who wrote perhaps the definitive history of punk, England's 
Dreaming, as well as editing the Faber Book of Pop Music, says The X Factor 
should be understood as "returning pop music to its light entertainment 
function. If you view it in those terms, as an industry, then it's a fantastic 
success; if you think making music is a strange mix of industry and creativity 
and oddity and lunacy, then obviously it's not that." In one sense, though, he 
does agree with Sting: "After the Beatles, you had the idea that people could 
write their own material and be in charge of their own destiny. What The X 
Factor does is return popular music to its pre-Beatles state."

The programme's audience, too, might be said to be smart enough to know 
exactly what they are watching. The lead single from Jackson's debut album was 
beaten to the No 1 slot last year by the spinoff single from Peter Kay's 
merciless X Factor spoof, which parodied the programme's cynical idiosyncracies 
without doing its reputation the smallest harm.

There are, of course, plenty in the music industry who maintain a healthy 
contempt for the programme – Alan McGee, who signed Oasis, managed the 
Libertines and now runs music website toocooltodie.com, says: "I think Paul 
Weller said it best 30 years ago: the public gets what the public wants. If you 
are stupid enough to watch it that is what you get, you deserve it. I have no 
pity for you."

But others argue that it might even produce a backlash of truly creative 
music-making. "I think X Factor might be good for alternative music, giving 
kids something to push against," says Billy Bragg. "Don't just complain about 
it – get out there and do something challenging that proves you don't need any 
input from people like Simon Cowell to be successful."

In any case, note observers, the music industry has plenty of other pressures 
to be concerned about without worrying about The X Factor. Woolworths, Tower 
Records and Zavvi are long gone, physical sales replaced by downloads which, 
even if legal, are priced at a fraction of the £15 at which record companies 
once flogged CDs. Illegal downloads worth many billions have stolen sales from 
the market, while fans can now access millions of songs through streaming sites 
such as Spotify or Sky Songs. While the diversifying market is good news for 
consumers – thanks to price competition, the current No 1 single, JLS's 
Everybody in Love, can be downloaded for 79p on iTunes and 29p on Amazon – the 
financial bonanza days for the wider music industry are, for the present at 
least, over.

In this context, notes Paul Williams, "it would be bizarre to describe 
something that was watched by 16.6 million, exposing music to a quarter of the 
British population, as a threat". One could argue, indeed, that The X Factor 
expands rather than replaces the market for music; millions of pre-teens, for 
instance, will have been introduced to a song made famous by Julie London in 
1955, Cry Me a River, thanks to Michael Bublé's performance on the programme 
three weeks ago. Savage calls the programme's audience "people who aren't 
passionate about music. And there's always been a huge market for people who 
weren't passionate about music."

"When it comes to the ills of the music industry, the blame is not to be laid 
at The X Factor's door," says Foley. "There is no one problem, and no one 
solution, but blaming X Factor is not the way. This is, after all, a 
21st-century, hyper-real Opportunity Knocks. It involves huge ideas, the 
supposed £1m recording contract and a lot of razzmatazz, and it's very cleverly 
done, but in its essence it's no more cleverly devised than Opportunity Knocks."

• This article was amended on 16 November 2009 to make clear that Simon Cowell 
"in effect" refused to cast his vote.
 