
The Islamist group Islam4UK, which planned a march through Wootton Bassett, 
and its "parent" organisation, al-Muhajiroun, will be banned under new 
legislation outlawing the "glorification" of terrorism, Alan Johnson announced 
today.

The order, which will come into effect on Thursday, will make it a criminal 
offence to be a member of either of the groups, punishable by up to 10 years in 
prison.

"I have today laid an order which will proscribe al-Muhajiroun, Islam4UK, and 
a number of the other names the organisation goes by," Johnson said. Other 
names are Call to Submission, Islamic Path and London School of Sharia. The 
group is already proscribed under two other names – al-Ghurabaa and the Saved 
Sect or the Saviour Sect.

Johnson said that proscription was "a tough but necessary power to tackle 
terrorism", adding that it was "not a course we take lightly".

The decision, based on months of monitoring the output of websites and 
comments by senior figures, will have to be endorsed by parliament.Al-Muhajiroun
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> was founded by Omar Bakri 
Muhammad and Anjem Choudary, and has been operating in Britain since the 
mid-1980s.

The group became notorious for praising the September 11 attacks in 2001. 
Bakri was banned from Britain by the former home secretary Charles Clarke in 
August 2005, on the grounds that his presence in the country was "not conducive 
to the public good".

At the same time, the Home Office announced its intention to ban the group but 
it disappeared from view before relaunching itself in June last year.

The Saviour sect and al-Ghurabaa were proscribed under the 2000 Terrorism Act.

Islam4UK has called off its planned march through Wootton Bassett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/11/islam4uk-cancels-march-wootton-bassett>
, the Wiltshire market town that has come to symbolise the fatalities sustained 
by British forces in Afghanistan.

It said it had "successfully highlighted the plight of Muslims in Afghanistan 
globally".

The group said that if their organisation and al-Muhajiroun were banned, 
"another platform with a new name will arise to continue to fulfil these divine 
objections until the sharia has been implemented".

Counterterrorism legislation passed in 2006 is designed to automatically ban 
any "successor" organisations set up by proscribed groups.

Home Office lawyers are drawing up the necessary parliamentary order 
implementing the ban so it can be debated by MPs within days.

The move came as MPs heard evidence of tensions within government over the 
direction of the official programme aimed at preventing violent extremism.

Written evidence from the Local Government Association (LGA) for a special 
Commons select committee held in a Birmingham mosque yesterday, confirmed that 
tension between the Home Office's office of security and counterterrorism and 
the Department of Communities and Local Government had been a problem at times.

The LGA said the heart of the disagreements had been the focus of the Prevent 
programme, with the communities secretary, John Denham, arguing that it should 
be part of the broader work on community cohesion and equalities. "Police and 
the security services will necessarily see things in a different perspective," 
an LGA memo said.

Its evidence said that the security services have moved away from developing a 
profile of a "typical extremist", to a more rounded analysis of potential risks 
and interventions.

Evidence from the Association of Chief Police Officers to the MPs' inquiry 
said that so far 228 young adults aged under 25 "who have been inspired by the 
al-Qaida ideology" have been referred to the Channel Project, which provides 
support to those believed to be vulnerable to radicalisation.
 