
An attempt to relaunch the controversial Islamist group Al-Muhajiroun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> ended in chaotic scenes after 
the management of the London venue that was to host the group's first meeting 
in five years cancelled proceedings, complaining "fundamentalist thugs" had 
tried to enforce the segregation of men and women.

Supporters of the group, which wants sharia law in Britain and has praised the 
9/11 terrorists as the "Magnificent 19", were ordered to leave Conway Hall in 
Holborn on Wednesday night when it emerged that Al-Muhajiroun had placed 
bouncers on the doors and were not letting women into the main hall.

Speakers who had been invited to share a platform with Anjem Choudary, the 
group's leader, accused Al-Muhajiroun of inviting them under false pretences.

Douglas Murray, director of the Centre for Social Cohesion, said the platform 
of the planned debate was "completely unacceptable". "I'm perfectly willing to 
debate Anjem Choudary and Al-Muhajiroun's ideas," he said. "His ideas are not 
difficult. They do not stand up. But it's very clear that this debate is not 
neutral. This was a segregated event, policed by Al-Muhajiroun's guards."

He said he had been invited to the event by a student society, Global Issues 
Society, but the Islamist group had hijacked proceedings.

Giles Enders, chairman of the South Place Ethical Society which runs the hall, 
took to the stage and explained that the terms and conditions of Conway Hall do 
not stipulate segregation. He then declared the meeting cancelled.

He was cheered by a small group of women sitting in the balcony, but was 
heckled by many of the 100 or so men in the main hall. Loud chanting and 
scuffles broke out before police arrived.

Choudary, who remained on stage during the scuffles and Enders' announcement, 
then grabbed the microphone. He led chants and said in reference to the row 
over segregation: "Jews and Christians will never make peace with you until you 
either become like them or adopt their ways."

As the chanting continued, including loud calls of "sharia for UK", Enders 
wrested the microphone away from Choudary and ordered everyone to leave.

Outside, Choudary criticised British society as "dirty" and predicted that, 
within one or two decades, Muslims would make up the majority. Asked why, if 
society was so bad, he was living here, he said: "We come here to civilise 
people, get them to come out of the darkness and injustice into the beauty of
Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>."

Al-Muhajiroun disbanded in 2004 but was succeeded by the Saviour Sect and 
Al-Ghurabaa, both of which were banned under the Terrorism Act 2006 for "the 
glorification" of terrorism. After the meeting there were calls for the 
government to ban Al-Muhajiroun.
 