 Each war and revolution produces its lost generation. Israel's lost generation 
are the middle-aged, those who came here at a time of their life which still 
allows them to remember Europe. Not the fleshpots of Europe; for most of them 
lived in penury. Not the safety of Europe; for they were persecuted. They do 
not plan or even yearn to go back, for their bridges have been burnt - either 
by their own free will or by the torches of their persecutors. They know that 
for them, as for the whole nation, there is no turning back.
Nevertheless they are a lost generation. They finger lovingly their Israeli 
passports, but they cannot get accustomed to the climate. They are proud of 
living in Israel's capital, but its provincial atmosphere oppresses them. They 
hebraise their names, but Hebrew remains an acquired language to them. The 
children in school take to the Biblical language like ducks to the pond, but 
the parents speak it haltingly and read it with even greater difficulty; they 
feel left out.

There also exists a lost generation in a different sense of the word, though 
the two overlap to some extent. They are the people who have spent years - 
sometimes as many as ten - in concentration and displaced persons' camps, and 
who only survived by becoming conditioned to circumventing the law, for the law 
for the Jew on the continent of Europe was deportation and death. Few can 
survive such pressure without some deformation of character, and a large number 
of the immigrants of recent years are psychological problem-cases, some of them 
with a marked asocial tendency.

The second main source of immigration, present and future, are the Sephardic 
Jews from Syria, Egypt, Iraq, Yemen, and North Africa, whose economic and 
physical existence is becoming increasingly precarious. They are Orientals both 
in character and appearance, and their colour varies from olive to dark grey; 
their main language is Arabic.

Already some 25 to 30 per cent of Israel's population are Oriental Jews; and 
by virtue both of their higher birth-rate and of increasing pressure in the 
neighbouring countries they will, in all probability, outnumber the European 
element in the not-too-distant future. This fact makes the cultural problem of
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> appear in a new light which 
as yet few of the political and intellectual leaders of the country are 
prepared to face.

In their ensemble these form the lost generation of Israel, a transitory and 
amorphous mass which as yet lacks the character of a nation. Only in the native 
youth, born and reared in the country, does the first intimation of the future 
profile of Israel as a nation begin to outline itself. The Palestine-born young 
Jew is nicknamed "sabra" after the prickly wild-growing, somewhat tasteless 
fruit of the cactus plant. In physical appearance he is almost invariably 
taller than his parents, robustly built, mostly blond or brown haired, 
frequently snub-nosed and blue-eyed. The young male's most striking feature is 
that he looks entirely un-Jewish. The girls, on the other hand, seem as yet to 
remain physically closer to the European Jewish type.

On the whole, there can be little doubt that the race is undergoing some 
curious biological alteration, probably induced by the abrupt change in 
climate, diet, and the mineral balance of the soil. It also seems that the 
female is slower in undergoing this transformation, more inert or stable in 
constitutional type. The whole phenomenon is a striking confirmation of the 
theory that environment has a greater formative influence than heredity and 
that what we commonly regard as Jewish characteristics are not racial features 
but a product of sustained social pressure and a specific way of life, a 
psycho-somatic response to what Professor Toynbee calls "the stimulus of 
penalisations".

In his mental make-up the average young sabra is fearless to the point of 
recklessness, bold, extroverted, and little inclined towards, if not openly 
contemptuous of, intellectual pursuits. The children are particularly 
good-looking; after puberty, however, their features and voices coarsen and 
seem never quite to reach the balance of maturity. The typical sabra's face has 
something unfinished about it: the still undetermined character of a race in 
transition.

The sabra's outlook on the world is rather provincial and hyper-chauvinistic. 
This could hardly be otherwise in a small and exposed pioneer community which 
had to defend its physical existence and build its State against almost 
impossible odds. One cannot create a nation without nationalism.

This, of course, is a temporary phenomenon. In a decade or so, with Israel's 
position safely established in the Middle East, the cessation of outward 
pressure will no doubt produce a corresponding change in the mentality of the 
young generation. But a change in what direction? What kind of a civilisation 
will Israel's be? Will it be a continuation of Western thought and art and 
values? Or the superficial veneer of Levantinism? Or will it go back to its 
ancient roots and develop out of them a modern but specifically Hebrew culture?

For the time being the intellectual leaders of Israel are determined to choose 
the third alternative. No doubt this "cultural claustrophilia" is also merely a 
passing phase. It will vanish with increasing security and self-assurance. What 
kind of civilisation will take its place one cannot foretell, but one thing 
seems fairly certain: within a generation or two Israel will have become an 
entirely "un-Jewish" country.
 