
I wonder whether Quentin Letts might, on reflection, view his description of 
Andrew Marr <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> as being in very 
doubtful taste.

In his Daily Mail column 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3580006/Pesto-s-breathless-batty-bound-hit-QUENTIN-LETTS-opening-shots-talkshow-war.html>
 about the rival Sunday morning TV programmes hosted by Marr and Robert Peston, 
he referred to “‘Captain Hop-Along’ Marr growling away on BBC1, throwing his 
arm about like a tipsy conductor.”

Sure, the after-effects of the stroke suffered by Marr in January 2013 are 
evident. But is it necessary to lampoon him for that?

I don’t want to come off all namby-pamby. I understand that no-one should be 
beyond criticism and that Letts was exercising his right to press freedom. But 
really Quentin, that was a graceless remark.

I was full of admiration for Marr (and for the BBC) when he returned to 
presenting his show some eight months after his stroke. And no-one can deny 
that he remains a first-class interviewer.

It may appear smart to poke fun, and I’m sure Marr will laugh it off. But I 
don’t think the rest of us should because it has wider ramifications about the 
press treatment of people in similar circumstances.

I think Letts overstepped the mark and should apologise.

Update 2pm: I have heard from Quentin Letts who told me he had received 
similar criticism from a reader. Here is his (very slightly edited) reply:

“Perhaps I should have been more cautious but I hope that Andrew will forgive 
it. He has been equally teasing about himself in my company. I admire him.

Perhaps I should have been more diplomatic but the sort of column I write is a 
sketch - ie, a verbal cartoon. Steve Bell in the Guardian, or Rowson in the 
Independent (RIP), can be a little brutal occasionally, too, but I would argue 
that it is understood as part of the territory...

I would say that Andrew’s post-stroke TV delivery has actually made him more 
watchable than he was beforehand. It has accentuated his explosive, emphatic 
manner. It has made him more unusual.

Telly is a visual medium. It seems, to me, impossible to ignore visual 
mannerisms if writing a sketch about it. But your stern response makes me 
wonder if I erred the wrong side of the taste line.”
 