
What a difference a year makes. Antony Jenkins was applauded by the City 12 
months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/13/barclays-antony-jenkins-reputation>
 when he set out his strategy for turning Barclays into the "go to" bank by 
restricting costs and rooting out the bad apples in the investment banking arm.

Remember, it was barely six months after the Libor crisis had shaken Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> to its core and forced out its 
top management, including Jenkins's predecessor, Bob Diamond. Jenkins had said 
enough to push the bank's share price up 9% by the end of the day.

Such was his status as the antithesis to Diamond – who was dubbed the 
"unacceptable face of banking" by Lord Mandelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/03/documents-back-mandelson-bob-diamond>
 – that Jenkins ended 2013 with the honour of guest editing the BBC's flagship
Todayprogramme. His halo was given a rub when Justin Welby, the archbishop of 
Canterbury, who also featured in the New Year's Eve radio show, supported 
Jenkins's attempt to clean up Barclays's act.

Last week the applause stopped. Even though Jenkins had personally tried to do 
the right thing by waiving his own bonus for 2013 – potentially as much as 
£2.7m – he stunned even the City with his failure to explain why the bank was 
paying out 10% more in bonuses in a year when profits collapsed by 32%. The 
boost was even harder to stomach in the investment bank, once better known as 
BarCap, where the bonus pot was up 13%, despite the unit reporting losses in 
the final quarter of the year.

So much for the pledge to change the culture of a bank which Sir Anthony Salz, 
the lawyer commissioned to review the organisation following theLibor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> scandal, had found employed 
bankers who "seemed to lose a sense of proportion and humility" as they chased 
enormous pay deals.

If he was hoping to make his audience understand why he was raising the pay of 
his key players, Jenkins really needed to drop the management-speak. But no, 
instead of saying "look, my best staff have walked and I can't afford to lose 
any more", he adopted the usual jargon. Barclays "had to compete in a global 
war for talent", he droned.

His answers pleased no one – not even the City, where bonuses are relished and 
accepted as the norm. The shares slid 4% on Tuesday, and by the end of the week 
had failed to regain their composure, losing 8% as investors scrambled to make 
sense of Jenkins's story. Erecting five huge glass blocks – one each for his 
buzzwords: respect, integrity, service, excellence and stewardship – in the 
cavernous atrium of Barclays's Canary Wharf headquarters has not proved enough 
to convince shareholders he means business.

And argue as he might that he was showing leadership by waiving his bonus, it 
didn't have the desired effect. The youthful new finance director, Tushar 
Morzaria, failed to follow his example – as did the other members of Jenkins's 
executive management team, after a year in which Barclays tapped shareholders 
for £5.8bn of fresh cash. Shame on them.

Shame, too, on the remuneration committee, led by City grandee Sir John 
Sunderland. Even without this pay debacle, Sunderland is already in a spot of 
local difficulty: under corporate governance etiquette he has now been on the 
board for too long – almost 10 years – to be deemed independent. He has a lot 
of explaining to do.

So too does Sir David Walker. Remember him? He is the big cheese who wrote the 
principles of good banking following the 2008 crisis, and was recruited by 
Barclays as chairman to stabilise the bank in the mayhem that followed the 
Libor fine.

He needs to do a lot of talking between now and the annual meeting of 
shareholders on 24 April if he is to convince the City – which after all loves 
bonuses – that it is worth throwing millions of pounds at investment bankers 
whose division is misfiring.

Salmond should try the Scottish krona


First it was left to Bank of England governor Mark Carney to state the obvious 
and point out that sharing the pound would force a newly independent Scotland 
to hand over some national sovereignty. Then last week George Osborne, Ed Balls 
and Danny Alexander followed up Carney's remarks byeffectively taking 
currency-sharing off the table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/11/main-parties-rule-out-scottish-currency-union>
, where does it leave first minister, Alex Salmond?.

Of course the merest glance across the Channel is enough to show that nations 
sharing a currency need to closely co-ordinate their budgets and the riskier 
parts of their economies – their banks, for instance. So where does that leave 
first minister Alex Salmond?The knee-jerk reaction was a counter-threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/13/no-currency-union-indpendent-scotland-george-osborne>
: no pound means no debt-sharing. But there are plenty of other things Scotland 
would lose in a tit-for-tat negotiation that make a battle of words 
unappetising.

So maybe accepting the logic of two separate currencies would be a better 
route. The euro is off the table because Brussels will only accept a country 
that has managed its own currency for a few years, which appears to leave us 
with a Scottish dollar, punt, or Celtic krona.

Senior figures in the yes campaign are believed to be lobbying hard for a 
switch in tactics. The Daily Record reported  
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/former-snp-deputy-leader-jim-3095958>
that former SNP deputy leader Jim Sillars, Yes Scotland chairman Dennis Canavan 
and Scottish Green party co-convenor Patrick Harvie have all urged Mr 
Independence to adopt a separate currency. But Salmond wants to avoid 
opposition jibes that quitting the UK comes with huge risks. When Scots report 
that they will reject separation if it costs them even a small dip in their 
standard of living, a purely emotional plea to their sense of self is off the 
agenda.

Yet without a switch now to full independence with a new currency, Salmond 
faces the prospect of going into the election offering the electorate a messy 
negotiation with an unknown outcome. He can dismiss London's scaremongering all 
he likes, but given the logic of London's position he needs to stop talking 
about separation as if it is some form of Devo Max, and be realistic about 
becoming a confident new country.

Private equity calling?


The private equity market suffered a drubbing during the credit crunch as 
buyout firms reaped the consequences of acquiring assets such as EMI with too 
much debt. But talk of mega-deals is reviving, with the sector sitting on 
unused funds worth more than $1 trillion (£600bn).

This means that buyout talk will inevitably dwell upon listed businesses that 
are publicly struggling with strategic quandaries under the baleful eye of the 
shareholder community. Last week it was the turn of Morrisons to be the subject 
of takeover speculation as it battles with the question of whether it is 
undermining its value credentials by being pricier than Asda, and whether it 
should spend millions on an online service rather than cutting prices.

Outfits like Morrisons must ask whether a debt-laden buyout is the kind of 
breathing space they need. For many companies post-2008, such a move was 
disastrous. But struggling listed firms should be prepared for the private 
equity call.
 