
"It is hard work" says Ravi talking about the long hot days pedalling his 
rickshaw around the streets of Dhaka, "but it allows me to provide for the 
family, so hopefully I will be well enough to return soon" and then looking at 
his children watching he says "I have no choice".

Ravi has been hiring a rickshaw and working the packed streets of the city for 
the past two years but just over a month ago he suffered a broken arm in an 
accident. "You fear every day that something could happen" he says, "so we 
always put a little money in the tin" and then once a month they deposited that 
with a local money guard. But when Ravi's wife went to withdraw some funds the 
money guard could not be found, "people say he had lost money lending it on, 
others say he just ran away". Whatever the reason, Ravi and his family now need 
that money.

Poor households do save. This is a surprise to many who believe that saving is 
a luxury of the rich. But as shown by a CARE study in Malawi, where over half 
the population live on less than $1.25 a day, savings rates are in excess of 
60%. Clearly the savings are small but they do occur. The issue is not, do the 
poor save? But, how do the poor save?

In the enlightening Portfolios of the Poor the stories demonstrate clearly 
that poor households do save and that they use a variety of techniques to do 
so. These include cash savings at home, with a neighbour or family member, in 
village savings groups and with formal institutions. In Malawi it was seen that 
83% of savings were kept in the home.

Why is this? Savings that are kept in the home are known to be insecure and 
likely to be dipped into more easily, than those that are kept away from the 
home. The key reason for saving in the home is reliable access. All too often 
people who have worked hard to save find that when they come to access their 
money the neighbour, friend or money guard has either spent the money for their 
own emergency, which may be repaid later, or in the worst cases like Ravi's, 
disappeared with little chance of seeing the money again.

Accessibility is another big issue. Many large towns and cities do have a full 
range of banks, credit unions and cooperatives but for many who live in small 
towns and rural villages the cost of travel makes those options unviable. For 
Ravi it was the cost of more formal banking that was a stumbling block, as most 
accounts have monthly charges that make saving small amounts seem unattractive.

There has been much debate within academia about whether microfinance, and 
microcredit specifically, is able to reduce poverty since Muhammad Yunus 
established Grameen Bank in the late 1970s. Early exuberance has been tempered 
in more recent times as questions have been raised about whether it is able to 
help the poorest in society and whether credit is used primarily for 
consumption rather than investment. Jonathan Murdoch of New York University has 
raised such questions, whilst continuing to support the industry for its 
ability to allow clients to reduce their consumption volatility.

But there has been less focus on the savings industry, with early assumptions 
about the poor's savings habits taking time to change. One project that is 
showing positive signs is the Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs) 
established by CARE in 27 countries, including Malawi, Tanzania and Uganda. 
Here saving is promoted ahead of credit as the way to begin building financial 
assets.

It is clear to see why there is potential for success, as VSLAs overcome some 
of the problems associated with saving in the home or with friends and 
neighbours. Access is reliable as weekly meetings are held to allow new 
deposits, withdrawals or borrowing; group accountability ensures money is not 
misappropriated; and there are no costs.

Other exciting opportunities lie in mobile banking, which has already become 
well established in places like Kenya, where according to the IMF M-PESA alone 
provide banking facilities to over 70% of the population. The service, which 
was only launched in early 2007, allows users to deposit and withdraw money, 
pay bills and transfer money to other users. The speed at which M-PESA has 
grown shows there is a desire for accessible financial services if the right 
mechanisms can be put in place.

Though, access to basic financial services, such as saving, credit and 
insurance do not necessarily allow people to move swiftly out of poverty, they 
do provide tools with which to manage risk and avoid the downward spirals that 
can occur when disaster strikes and that in itself is a reason why such 
services should be available to all who wish to use them.

With the children now playing across the street Ravi says the family have been 
given a loan by his wife's family that is allowing them to survive but this 
makes him feel embarrassed, "we planned and did the right thing, we shouldn't 
have had to ask."
 