
At least it will never be so tough again. Consolations might appear empty 
right now, but this young England side can be sure they will never again face 
such formidable opposition. Therefore, as long as some of the chastening 
lessons of this tour can be heeded, heart can genuinely be taken.

Take Alastair Cook, for example. His end-of-tour statistics are not 
particularly flattering - averaging just 27 - but to have scored an Ashes 
hundred at the age of 21 against two of the best bowlers of all time can have 
only enhanced his batting education. He still averages 43 in Tests, without any 
gimmes from Bangladesh or Zimbabwe. But he knows attention is required to his 
off-side game. Australia probed him relentlessly there, exposing his tendency 
to push hard - with head not fully over the ball - towards extra cover rather 
than straight down the pitch. He also needs to develop another run-scoring 
outlet against spin (hit over the top or sweep), but there is no doubting his 
strength of mind, considering the constant difficulties he encountered against 
Shane Warne during that century in Perth.

What Ian Bell would have given for a century. In general his technique - 
especially his use of bat in front of pad against Warne - stood up well after 
his travails of 2005, but the Australian bowlers were parsimony personified in 
this series and consequently Bell scored slowest of the recognised batsmen. 
Even the excellent Kevin Pietersen's strike rate (per 100 balls) was reduced 
from 71 in 2005 to 48 here.

Sadly Andrew Flintoff's batting has suffered, but not as embarrassingly as 
that of both wicketkeepers, Geraint Jones and Chris Read. Flintoff's clunking 
footwork found some lightness at Sydney but Jones' inside-out off-side driving 
and Read's inability to get forward to the quicker bowlers were fodder for 
Australia. Neither will play Test cricket again.

Sajid Mahmood will, despite the doubters. He is a more skilful bowler than the 
Australians (and some scything Sri Lankans last summer) have allowed to emerge. 
He still needs to work on keeping his wrist firmly behind the ball rather than 
letting it slip anti-clockwise but it needs to be remembered that bowlers can 
click suddenly. Simon Jones did, so can Mahmood.

Much bigger issues surround England's bowling. Flintoff's fitness is 
paramount. When that is in doubt, England lack a leader of the attack - even 
Matthew Hoggard is only a faithful follower. Which brings us on to the nominal 
spearhead, Steve Harmison. This is where we started back in Brisbane, when he 
bowled that horrible loosener straight to second slip. In truth, we are no 
nearer an answer. Justin Langer said Harmison had bowled his at his most 
hostile during Australia's final pursuit of 46. Coincidentally, some have said 
that his four second-innings balls at The Oval in 2005, before bad light 
confirmed England's regaining of the Ashes, were his quickest of the series.

The pressure was off in both circumstances. As it will be now when he returns 
to his beloved north-east. He can take a break for a while. And then? Much has 
been made of an interview Harmison gave on the third evening in Sydney, where 
he admitted bemusement as to what he was going to do then. Well, what he should 
do is phone Newcastle United and ask to train with them. That is what he did 
before the Caribbean tour of 2004, when he suddenly rose to being ranked as the 
No1 bowler in the world. Might not be a bad idea again.
 