
It is time for a collective reckoning, a moral accounting, a radical 
self-appraisal and calling out, fellow white Americans. Our explicit and 
implicit participation in crimes against black people has gone on for too long.


What allows us to justify murder? What selfish gene prevents us from 
intervening in the face of blatant injustice? What history of lies and 
distortions have we sold ourselves that keep us in our isolated boxes of 
superiority and denial? What truth would we have to tell about ourselves to 
unravel these strangulating tentacles of racism and violence?

I was a cop – but I still don't know how to survive a police stop | Michael A 
Wood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/11/i-was-a-cop-dont-know-how-survive-police-stop>
What systems would we have to abandon or lose or claim as bankrupt?

Which one of us hasn’t seen the outright slaughter going on in the recent 
videos of police shootings, and the videos before them, and the lynchings 
before them?

Who doesn’t know the history of the very intentional policies that created 
abject conditions that so many black people are forced to live in: the poverty, 
the lack of opportunities, education, jobs, the exclusion? Which one of us 
doesn’t understand the daily terror that occupies the lifeblood of every black 
woman, man and child in America which inhibits their ability to breath, live 
and thrive? Which one of us hasn’t noticed the prisons filled with millions of 
black folks who are held and incarcerated at a rate 14 times higher than whites?

And if we don’t see or know these things, why the hell don’t we? Why have we 
created and allowed such a distance between us and the black people around us? 
Why have we inured ourselves to their suffering, their sorrow, their fear, 
their desires, their dreams?

It’s time now to put our white asses on the line for the freedom of our black 
sisters and brothers – time to be willing to forfeit our privilege and status; 
time to admit the failure of a racist ideology and framework. Time to stop 
criticizing the tactics or methods or emotions of revolutionary movements that 
rise with bravery, heart vision, passion, patience and heroic kindness in 
response to the most grotesque atrocities, murders, degradations, terror, 
isolation and exclusion.

Because nothing will change until we are all willing to shut up and listen and 
serve, willing to stop making it about us: our feelings, our hurts, our guilt. 
Until we are willing to say this structure that we created and mastered has 
failed, to stop saying that agonizing and aggressive phrase “all lives matter” 
when we know full well they don’t, even to many of us.

Until we are willing to be wrong, willing to be lost, willing to be quiet. Can 
we be quiet? Can we shut up? Can we just shut up for one moment, shut up and 
stop talking about us? How the pain and righteous rage of black people affects 
us? How blamed we feel, how no matter what we do it stays the same, how they 
will never forgive us blah blah blah. Can we step out of the center of the 
picture for enough time for a healing to happen?

Dallas is a tragedy for all of us – and shouldn't shut down calls for justice 
| Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/dallas-shooting-tragedy-black-americans-justice>
Can we own our selfishness and fear and need for comfort and our desperation 
for power? Can we give ourselves in service without directing or determining? 
Can we walk behind black folks or beside them? Can we allow ourselves to get 
close, real close, and rub up against the burning pain of those we have abused 
and enslaved, raped, incarcerated, shot, lynched, ignored and degraded? Can we 
die that death and not make black people responsible for our guilt and neglect?

Can we stop punishing people we have harmed for reminding us we have harmed 
them? Can we be that honest, that generous, that vulnerable, that humble that 
we are able to provide support and kinship without being thanked or getting 
credit? Can we serve without expecting to be worshipped? Can we stop issuing 
instructions and offer our bodies for action instead? Can we make this terrible 
wrong of racism the center of our thought and moral occupation?

The truth is we are as much sinew as we are symbol. Our whiteness is our skin 
color, but it’s also a torn sheet draping the dead, a flag of privilege that 
will not surrender, a town called separateness. Our whiteness is that poisonous 
sky right before it rains, the color of shame.

So can we sit and be still for a minute and let the onerous truth and sorrow 
wash over us? Then, in that cataclysmic silence, when we have touched into the 
tidal wave of our responsibility, we will know what lengths we have to go, what 
risks we will have to take to dismantle this mad hatred – and how fiercely we 
will have to love to right this wrong.
 