
The runup to this election promises to be a mixture of daily boredom and 
entertaining gaffes.

When I returned to London after a seminar in Venice last weekend, the gaffe of 
the day appeared to be the responsibility of Stefano Pessina, acting chief 
executive of Walgreens Boots Alliance (plain old Boots to you and me), who told 
us that a Labour win would be “a catastrophe” for Britain.

On closer inspection, it turned out that a Labour win, if it forced the likes 
of tax exiles such as Pessina to pay their taxes, would be more of a 
catastrophe for him and his ilk.

There is a cynical campaign being conducted by some business leaders and City 
luminaries to discredit the leader of the opposition for being “anti-business”, 
when the driving force behind Miliband’s approach is simply the desire to 
combat the excesses of modern capitalism, some of which notoriously contributed 
to the crisis of 2007-09, from which, frankly, we are still trying to emerge.

The Labour party has not been anti-business since the reforming job done, at 
great cost to himself, by Neil Kinnock in the 1980s. It is fashionable to give 
all the credit to Tony Blair for reforming the Labour party, but the truth is 
that much hard work was also put in by Kinnock.

Indeed, if anything, under Blair and Gordon Brown, Labour, in its desire to 
please, became almost too pro-business and too pro-City; it was a sucker for 
consultations with the latter – which, curiously enough, often gave vent to 
advice and reforms that led to the feathering of the nests of those consulted. 
“Light-touch regulation” was one such example. And there were all manner of tax 
concessions for dubious enterprises (seePrivate Eye, passim).

Which brings me back to last weekend’s seminar in the country from which 
Pessina is a Monaco-based tax exile. Every year now, for 20 years, the Italian 
government has hosted a meeting of British and Italian journalists at which 
Italian ministers, officials and industrialists can speak under what is known 
as the Chatham House Rule – the information can be used but sources must be 
protected.

In my experience, at such events, there is almost always an obsession with 
what is going on somewhere else. Sure enough, on this occasion the big focus of 
interest was whether prime ministerMatteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> would see his candidate for 
president, the veteran Sergio Mattarella, elected, down there in Rome, over 
opposition from the egregious Silvio Berlusconi, who still calls a lot of the 
shots.

For decades the economy trundled along quite nicely, with a strong industrial 
sector and the ability to devalue the lira

The result was considered a triumph for Renzi with, it was hoped, good omens 
for his “reform agenda”: We shall see. I did not get where I am today by going 
too closely into Italian politics, although I once spent a memorable evening 
with Giulio Andreotti.

But my interest in the Italian economy goes back many years, and the word 
“reform” has come up so often – the subject of ambitious presentations at many 
a seminar – that one has to beware of “reform fatigue”, not weariness with 
reform (there seldom appears to be much in practice), but there is always a 
chance that something may actually happen.

You see, for decades, the Italian economy trundled along quite nicely, with a 
strong industrial sector, a great name for design, and the ability to devalue 
the lira from time to time, when wages got out of control and international 
competitiveness suffered. That is to say, for all its “structural rigidities” 
and “Italian practices”, the economy performed reasonably well.

In recent decades, it has been hit by a succession of blows, not least the 
financial crisis – which struck after great strides had been made in reducing 
the budget deficit – and the economic straitjacket of the eurozone. Membership 
of the single currency not only removes the freedom to devalue against, for 
example, Germany: it also subjectsItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> to the kind of fiscal sadism against 
which the Greeks have just revolted.

The many “rigidities” of Italy’s economy are highlighted in the film 
Girlfriend in a Coma <http://girlfriendinacoma.eu/>, made by Annalisa Piras and 
formerEconomist editor Bill Emmott, described by Le Monde as “a desperate love 
letter to Italy”.

Well, the Italians are having another go. One reform which might not be too 
popular with Pessina is yet another attempt to crack down on tax avoidance – 
generally considered something of a national sport.

They are trying to speed up the justice system as part of an effort to 
stimulate more inward investment, and – especially important for so many of the 
young, who are effectively excluded from the labour market – the Renzi 
administration aims to reduce the imbalance in labour contracts between those 
with a “job for life” and those desperate to get a job.

Meanwhile, rays of hope as the sun was setting in Venice last Saturday were: 
first, although Italy cannot devalue against Germany, the entire eurozone may 
gain some relief from both the European Central Bank quantitative easing 
programme – boosting money and credit – and the devaluation of the euro. Then 
there is the potential boost to spending from the lower oil price.

Nevertheless, macroeconomic policy in the eurozone remains far too 
restrictive. I think we are talking of alleviation of the Italian economy’s 
problems, rather than a cure.
 