
If it was a boxing match then the crowd might be asking for their money back. 
BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show took the first three rounds of his Sunday morning 
political face-offs withRobert Peston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/robert-peston> on ITV, and by the time you 
read this, in all probability the fourth.

Unlike the looming EU referendum, there was nothing close about it, Peston 
watched by 230,000 viewers last Sunday against Marr’s 1.2 million. At least 
it’s getting narrower –first time out  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/09/robert-peston-itv-andrew-marr-bbc-george-osborne>
Peston had 166,000 viewers against Marr’s 1.6 million.

As both channels never tire of pointing out, it’s not a head to head, because 
Marr’s 9am show is over by the time Peston starts at 10am. More nose to tail 
then, but ITV is behind whichever way you look at it. Peston’s show is also 
beaten by Nicky Campbell’s Big Questions which follows Marr onBBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>.

It was always going to be an uphill task for the BBC’s former economics editor 
who was given his own show when he signed a reported £350,000 deal to become 
ITV’s new political editor last year, memorablysaying he wanted to “humiliate” 
the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/17/robert-peston-bbc-itv-news> (and 
later regretting it).

Viewers are not used to watching politics on ITV on Sunday – it is 10 years 
since Jonathan Dimbleby’s show was axed and its replacement, The Sunday 
Edition, proved short-lived – and nearly 30 years since its Sunday lunchtime 
programme Weekend World.

More recently its Sunday morning schedule has been filled with Jeremy Kyle 
repeats and reruns of The X Factor. So Peston wasn’t just coming from a 
standing start; he was having to court viewers who had previously tuned in to 
watch Angela Lansbury in Murder, She Wrote.

Vicky Flind, series editor of Peston on Sunday, says: “We are realistic. I am 
not getting overly anxious too early on about the ratings. I am very aware that 
10am on Sunday morning on ITV has not been a political space for a very long 
time.”

Flind, former editor of BBC1’s This Week with Andrew Neil, says: “What I focus 
on is trying to create a really good and entertaining politics show that is 
distinctive in quite a crowded market. We want it to feel fresh and a little 
bit different, and to build it around Robert’s character and personality. 
Nothing has been said or done since we have been on air to doubt that we are 
there for the long term. If we are given the time to do it we will have a good 
shot.”

The rival shows’ impact can also be measured not only in viewing figures but 
how many quotes are generated online and in the following day’s newspapers. 
Flind, whose guests so far have included David Cameron, George Osborne and 
Jeremy Corbyn, says: “You’ve got to be noticed and we have been noticed.”

Former ITN chief executive Stewart Purvis says the Peston show is “all about 
the ITV brand. They are probably never going to win the ratings battle – they 
might not even accept they are in one – but what it does do is enhance the ITV 
brand in terms of the channel’s appeal to upmarket viewers. It is something 
they can be proud of.”

All the more important, he adds, after the “News at When?” saga and the axing 
of the Dimbleby show and World in Action. “The only shows MPs watch are news 
and current affairs programmes, so if you want to connect with policy makers 
you have to connect with them in terms of something they actually watch.”

ITV has used high-profile signings such as Peston and its latest, new 
economics editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/18/itv-news-in-talks-with-noreena-hertz-over-economics-editor-role>
 Noreena Hertz, to take the fight to the BBC, which it will never be able to 
match in terms of funding. Former political editor Tom Bradby’s switch to News 
at Ten was another example (although BBC1’s 10pm news bulletin remains 
pre-eminent).

The Andrew Marr <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> Show averages 
1.5 million in the year to date, up from 2014 (1.3m) but marginally down on 
2012, when it had 1.6 million. There is a similar pattern for Andrew Neil’s 
Sunday Politics, which averages 814,000 in the year so far, up on 2014 
(664,000) but down on four years ago (884,000).

Marr show editor, Rob Burley, says: “I used to work on ITV’s political 
programmes and I am genuinely glad ITV have decided to return to something they 
should be doing. It’s good to have someone else in the marketplace who might 
book the guests you want, and it makes you work extra hard. I don’t think we 
are competing, we are on at different times. We are a long-established show 
which is evolving.”

Both Purvis (“I think it’s really good. He is very conversational in his 
interviews, it really works”) and formerBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> executive Roger Mosey are fans of the 
Peston show. “Both Marr and Peston are very good shows,” says Mosey. “Marr is 
an indispensable part of Sunday morning, like Today on weekdays. Peston has 
made a confident, watchable start. He’s settling in and Allegra [Stratton, 
signed from BBC2’s Newsnight] is a good booking.”

Mosey would like to see Peston tackle the “big strategic choices that 
politicians have to make” rather than be tempted by the “relentless bombardment 
of the short term. Not quite Weekend World – it should definitely be modernised 
– but using Peston’s brain and intelligence, as we see all the time in his 
blogs, to get something that’s at a different level to everyday cut and thrust”.

But Sky News presenter Adam Boulton thinks the Sunday morning rivalry “a 
really rather tired debate. I did a Sunday morning programme for 17 years. 
Basically what they do is manufacture Sunday for Monday quotes for the written 
press.

“I’m not criticising Robert or comparing him unfavourably to Andrew, and I 
have great admiration for Vicky [Flind] … but I think this is a vanity exercise 
by ITV.

“They are trying to get back to the glory days of News at Ten when it was 
regarded as prestige news. Hats off for trying, but ITV deserted that land for 
a long time.”
 