
Preamble: Evening. Well there's added incentive for the victors tonight after 
Cameroon burst the bubble of expectancy surrounding Accra by dumping host 
nation Ghana out of the tournament with a1-0 
<http://football.theguardian.com/news/matchreport/0,,2254065,00.html> victory 
earlier this evening.

So whomever wins this one knows they can sleep easy in the knowledge that the 
final against Cameroon will be played on neutral territory. As for this match, 
let's hope that it isn't a repeat of the dull 0-0 
<http://football.theguardian.com/africannations2006/story/0,,1707406,00.html> 
draw in the 2006 final which Egypt settled 4-2 on penalties to claim a record 
fifth Cup of Nations title.

Ivory Coast will miss Kolo Toure's presence in the centre of defence after he 
failed to recover from a groin strain which he's carried with him since the 
second round. But in attack, the Elephants are potent with the Chelsea duo of 
Didier Drogba and Salomon Kalou in fine form. Both were on target as the 
Ivorians thumped Guinea 5-0 in the quarter-finals - so expect further goals 
tonight.

Egypt coach, Hassan Shehata, may have star striker Mohamed Zidan available 
after an ankle injury to exploit any weakness in the Ivorian defence. We'll 
know more when the teams are announced.

Meanwhile here's my charidee plug:

Yours truly will be running 233 miles from London to Liverpool on April 1st 
(although it may be May 1st due to shin knack) for MacMillan Cancer Support. 
I'll be running around 21 miles a day. If you can find it in your heart to 
sponsor me you can do so here <http://www.justgiving.com/greggroughley> and 
help a great charity which has offered wonderful support to me and my family.

Oh, and by the way, here's my prediction: Ivory Coast 3-1 Egypt.

The teams are in and Mohamed Zidan is the noteable absentee for Egypt. While 
Kolo Toure seems willing to play through the pain of a groin strain for Ivory 
Coast.

Egypt: Al Hadary, Shady Mohamed, Hany Mohamed, Ahmed Fathy, Wael Goma, Hosny 
Abd Rabou, Emad Mohamed, Said Moawad, Ahmed Hassan, Amr Zaky, Mohamed Aboutrika

Ivory Coast: Boubacar Barry - Emmanuel Eboue, Arthur Boka, Kolo Toure, 
Abdoulaye Meite, Didier Zokora, Yaya Toure, Kader Keita, Aruna Dindane, Salomon 
Kalou, Didier Drogba

Pre-match build-up: The teams belt out their national anthems with the 
incessant din of the fans in the background. I'd say Ivory Coast's players gave 
it a bit more effort in the singing stakes.

"I think Egypt could upset the odds tonight. They've been there done that, and 
I think the Elephants will be feeling the pressure of expectation and will 
wither under it. 3-2 to Egypt is my tuppence worth guv'nor," predicts Patrick 
who though the match had kicked off half an hour ago.

We're underway: Egypt look to have started with three in attack so let's hope 
there's some goals. It's a nervy start by Ivory Coast who struggle to get hold 
of the ball. Egypt patiently stroke the ball around in midfield.

3 min: Yaya Toure falls awkwardly in the Egypt penalty area after taking a 
snap shot which is well blocked. He clambers to his feet after the medics stick 
a wad of cotton wool in his mouth to stem some bleeding. Ah, he's a brave lad.

5 min: Drogba pulls off one of his amazing dives to the turf after taking a 
mysteriously absent elbow to the face. The resulting free-kick is swung in 
viciously but Egypt clear unconvincingly.

8 min: Egypt waste a decent free-kick wide on the left hand touchline. Ivory 
Coast have started to impose themselves on the game. Drogba wrestles away from 
Ahmed Fathy in the Egypt penalty area but is forced wide and can't get any 
power onto a shot from six yards.

GOAL! Ivory Coast 0-1 Egypt (Ahmed Fathy 11 min): Egypt win a corner which is 
mishit into the Ivory Coast penalty area. The defence fail to clear and Ahmed 
Fathy drives a shot at goal from 20 yards, which takes a deflection and sneaks 
into the right hand corner. Boubacar Barry should have done better in goal and 
the failure to clear the corner was a disaster.

14 min: That goal has stung Ivory Coast into action. Salomon Kalou picks the 
ball up with his back to goal and tries to find Drogba but Egypt clear. Kalou 
could have turned his marker and had a shot if he'd have had a look to his 
left. The Ivory Coast fans haven't been disheartened by that goal though, 
they're still making a right old racket.

17 min: Kolo Toure plays a raking cross-field pass to Kader Keita but it is 
cleared just before he can get a free run on goal. Egypt have forsaken their 
passing game and are content to hoof it clear at every opportunity - a 
dangerous tactic so early in the game, in my humble opinion.

20 min: Ahmed Fathy drives in a low cross, Amr Zaky turns his marker 
brilliantly but scuffs his shot, which trickles through to Boubacar Barry in 
goal.

24 min: Egypt mount a wonderful attack. Mohamed Aboutrika dribbles down the 
left hand side and finds Hassan inside him. He runs into a blind alley but 
finds Ahmed Fathy with a clever backheel, who drives a shot just wide from 20 
yards. Fathy has had a great game for Egypt so far.

27 min: Didier Drogba scuffs a volley into the ground and Al Hadary makes a 
great save in goal for Egypt to keep the match level. Drogba brought the ball 
down on his chest expertly from a Kader Keita cross, but he'll be disappointed 
that he didn't connect better with his shot.

30 min: "Hello. Avram Grant here, just wanted to wish luck to Egypt and 
err...that's it," says Nathan Woods, who isn't and never will be Avram Grant. 
Sorry Nathan, it makes no difference whether Ivory Coast go out or not as 
they'll have to play a third and fourth place play-off now, much to Rafael 
Benitez's relief. The match is still very much in the balance with Egypt 
seemingly content to play on the counter attack.

33 min: Egypt hold onto the ball with much more patient and precise passing. 
Said Moawad finally whips in a cross which Barry struggles to deal with at the 
back post. Barry collides with a team-mate and rolls around on the floor in 
discomfort. He's not the best goalkeeper in any case so if he has to go off I 
can't imagine the quality of his replacement.

39 min: Barry has had to go off injured so youngster Stephan Loboue has 
replaced him in goal for Ivory Coast. Egypt will shoot on sight now I expect.

 41 min: Ivory Coast haven't made the most of the possession they've had in 
this first half. Even when they have gone direct to Drogba they haven't surged 
through from midfield in support. Egypt work an opportunity on the edge of the 
box and Hosny Anbd Rabou hits a shot with all the power of a spider's burp, yet 
Loboue still does his best to mess it up as he struggles to keep hold of it at 
a second attempt.

45 min: The referee signals six minutes of injury time! Egypt play the ball 
around neatly in midfield but Zokora wins it back for Ivory Coast and finds 
Kader Keita on the right. The bullish winger beats Zaky, who hauls him down and 
gets booked for his trouble. Free-kick...

45+4: The free-kick is cleared for a corner. Drogba connects with a 
blockbuster of a header from 10 yards which Al Hadary parries expertly. Aruna 
Dindane throws himself at the ball to put Ivory Coast level but Hosny Abd Rabou 
makes a remarkable clearance with his left foot to save a certain equaliser.

Half-time emails: 

"My partner feels it's important to watch a re-run of Location, Location, 
Location so I've been relegated to following this match via some crappy, choppy 
feed on the world wide web. The quality of the feed is so bad it's giving me a 
headache. Do I risk waking up demented tomorrow?" asks Colin Greer. Never mind 
that Colin, with the economy looking so edgy at the moment make sure your 
partner doesn't get any ideas about moving and taking on a bigger mortgage than 
you can actually afford. Stick with this min-by-min too.

"If this score holds up then two teams, Egypt and Cameroon, that were a little 
under the radar will make the final as opposed to the always celebrated host 
nation Ghana and Ivory Coast, who were probably the other big favourite in this 
tournament. Funny how things work out," chortles George Templeton. Egypt have 
reminded me of Germany in the World Cup so far George. They have been there and 
done it when it matters so many times, that despite their weaker squad, they're 
playing without the weight of expectation of the West African powerhouses and 
looking comfortable.

On the subject of how I could detect a bona fide Avram Grant email: "Here's 
how a legitimate one would sound, says Mike Wilner: 'Well, ahhhh, mutter, 
mutter, grunt, mutter, good performance, ahhhhh, grunt.' Sort of like Sven, but 
in a lower register." I'll keep my ears open for those sounds drifting through 
the GU Towers breeze Mike, but to be honest I tend to just look at the email 
address. Just call me Sherlock.

"SpVgg Greuther Furth is the name of the club that Stephan Loboue plays for in 
Div 2 in Germany," says Patrick, in Ireland in a guttural sounding email. "He 
hasn't played all season - he's never played a competitive match for Ivory 
coast...drive on Egypt!" Having seen his attempt to save a shot that was so 
slow it was almost in reverse, I'd fancy the next telling shot from Egypt to 
burst the net.

We're back underway: Ivory Coast immediately attack and win a free-kick 35 
yards from goal. Yaya Toure whips it in and Didier Drogba struggles to connect.

A phenomenal save on 47 min: Kader Keita gets the better of Zaky on the right 
and floats in a ball to Drogba unmarked on the six-yard box. The big man heads 
the ball low and hard with tremendous power but Al Hadary somehow turns the 
ball around the post with brilliant agility. I can understand why many have 
said he's the best keeper in the tournament, as that was reminiscent of Dudek's 
save in the 2005 Champions League final for Liverpool.

50 min: Hadary makes another brilliant save as Drogba attempts to head home a 
Kader Keita cross again. The Egyptian No1 punches clear but connects with 
Drogba and the two pick up knocks for their trouble. Zaky needs to tighten up 
on Keita or Egypt will concede.

54 min: Keita plays a neat give-and-go with Yaya Toure who finds Aruna Dindane 
on the edge of the box. He works the ball to his right and opens up space for a 
shot on goal, but scoops a woeful effort high and wide to the right when it was 
asking to be spanked low and hard (erm, sorry if that sounds inappropriate). 
Ivory Coast are well on top of this game but need to make their chances count.

56 min: El Hadary is still limping a bit in goal for Egypt. He has kept his 
side in the game, so Egyptians will be hoping the magic sponge has done its job 
on his bruised thigh. Kader Keita manages to shrug Goma and Zaky off the ball 
on the right and wins a free-kick 20 yards from goal on the right. A great 
chance for a cross...

57 min: ...but Yaya Toure hits it straight at goal and Egypt's 
man-of-the-match Al Hadary tips it over the bar. He's having one of those games 
when you expect he could stop a cannonball if it was blasted at him from 10 
yards.

GOAL! Ivory Coast 0-2 Egypt (Zaky 61 min): Out of nowhere Egypt win a corner 
and Zokora fails to clear at the front post and flicks it into the danger area. 
Amr Zaky looks surprised as he connects with his head from 10 yards and scores 
as it bounces off the crossbar into the goal.

GOAL! Ivory Coast 1-2 Egypt (Keita 62 min): It's gone crazy. Ivory Coast 
immediately attack. Keita picks it up in space 30 yards out slightly to the 
left of goal, takes one touch and sends a howitzer of a shot angling into the 
top right hand corner of the goal. A wonder strike!

GOAL! Ivory Coast 1-3 Egypt (Zaky 66 min): Absolutely amazing! Al Hadary 
wallops it down the pitch and Ivory Coast fail to clear. Amr Zaky runs onto the 
loose ball and hits a shot across Loboue from 10 yards into the bottom left 
corner. The keeper should have done better. What a strange but wonderful game 
this has morphed into.

68 min: Amr Zaky almost scores a hat-trick with a vicious low shot from 20 
yards. Zidan has come on for Egypt, much to my surprise, as I thought he wasn't 
even in the squad.

72 min: Zidan has injected a bit of zest into the Egypt attack. In fact, Egypt 
look liberated by the two goal cushion. As if to prove my point Hassan almost 
finds the top left hand corner from 25 yards. Ivory Coast need something 
special to make it into the final.

75 min: Aruna is felled on the edge of the 18-yard box on the left. Drogba 
stands over it - shouldn't he be in the box?

76 min: Drogba wastes the free-kick but Ivory Coast go straight back on the 
attack. Keita turns on his heels on the edge of the box and side-foots a shot a 
yard wide. Unlucky.

 78 min: "The burp of a spider might not be very powerful, but a burp spider, 
a tool for enumerating web-enabled applications, now that has power." says Ian 
Copestake, who seems to know more about burping spiders than me. Egypt concede 
a free-kick on the right hand side of the penalty area. Ivory Coast need a goal 
quick.

80 min: Arthur Boka drills a shot low and hard on the edge of the Egypt 
penalty area but it bounces off a crowd of defenders and Egypt break with Zidan.

82 min: Two-goal hero Zaky gets his ankle stamped upon by Emmanuel Eboue. 
Egypt try to send Zidan clear but Loboue races out of his box and clears the 
danger. The match has increased in pace as Ivory Coast have become more 
desperate. Al Hadary punches clear a corner but the Elephants lay seige to 
Egypt's goal.

85 min: The Egyptians are throwing themselves down at every opportunity to 
waste time. Ahmed Hassan looks like he's been shot by a sniper as he clutches 
leg with nobody within five yards of him. Ah well, I'd call that 
professionalism - unless I was Ivorian of course.

88 min: Al Hadary makes another solid stop from Arthur Boka, who rasps a low 
shot from 10 yards out. Ivory Coast have had plenty of chances but Al Hadary 
has been the match-winner for Egypt.

GOAL! Ivory Coast 1-4 Egypt (Aboutrika 90 min): It's all over for the 
Elephants. Egypt clear and Zidan picks the ball up on the left of the 18-yard 
box. With the Ivorian defence at sixes and sevens, he squares to Aboutrika who 
blasts the ball into the roof of the net from six yards past the despairing - 
and hapless - Loboue.

90+2 min: Zidan almost makes it five as Egypt break again, but he blasts high 
and wide from six yards when he should have scored.

Full-time: The Egypt players dance around the pitch in joy after upsetting the 
odds and despatching the favourites. Egypt were clinical and made the most of 
every opportunity they had. The difference for me was the goalkeeping. Al 
Hadary was solid, assured and quite brilliant for the champions, while Boubacar 
Barry and his replacement Loboue looked as hopeless as each other. That's not 
to detract from the Egypt performance however, they used their experience and 
nous to counter with pace when Ivory Coast were out of position. I expect them 
to go on and win the tournament now - but I thought the Elephants would win 
tonight, so what do I know? Thanks for your emails.
 