 Is Jack Straw a widely-popular and successful home secretary? Or is he an 
authoritarian opponent of freedom of information and trial by jury, as painted 
by civil libertarians? The answer to these questions may decide whether he is a 
contender for the top job if Tony Blair stands down and Gordon Brown fails to 
unite the cabinet behind him.
The real answer is that Mr Straw, widely seen as a decent man in politics, is 
a sure-footed, practical improver and cunning tactician. Nowhere was this 
clearer than in his handling of the Pinochet imbroglio from October 1998 
onwards. The Tory right were seeking to canonise the Chilean ex-dictator while 
leftwing MPs hoped to crucify him. Mr Straw successfully got Pinochet off his 
hands and handed him back to Chile.

Part of his reputation as an authoritarian is hardly his fault. The 
short-lived Cabinet Office minister David Clark's liberating freedom of 
information white paper, published in 1998 and subsequently watered down, could 
never have got by the restrictive lord chancellor, Derry Irvine. But Mr Straw 
took the blame. He also brought in his own much more restrictive version, 
getting it on the statute books in 2000.

Mr Straw has shown similar determination in his effort to limit trial by jury 
for petty criminals who, he argues, are "playing the system" very expensively. 
He sees this as a practical reform, not a betrayal of principle. He took the 
same view about legislation allowing the security services to intercept private 
emails.

Mr Straw has been just as pragmatic in accepting cabinet decisions which run 
against his sympathies. Nobody who knows him doubts he still fervently supports 
first-past-the-post and had doubts about the closed list system of proportional 
representation. But he accepted this in Scotland and Wales as part of Tony 
Blair's "project" to cosy up with the Liberal Democrats, for whom he himself 
has no time.

He is not in the Blairites inner-circle but bides his time on its outer 
soft-left fringe. His views derive from a practical, pragmatic examination of 
his own experience and those of his constituents.

When Gordon Brown was worrying about the danger of a skills shortage, as made 
fashionable by US president Bill Clinton's adviser Robert Reich, Mr Straw 
privately pointed to the tens of thousands of skilled workers sacked in two 
recessions.

His ability to identify with his Blackburn constituents troubled by 
"neighbours from hell" on their council estates came from his own experience as 
a child on a council estate in Loughton, Essex. His father, Arthur, was an 
insurance clerk and conscientious objector who had met his mother, a teacher, 
in the peace pledge union. They were divorced when he was ten and he was 
brought up by a single mother. "We had very little money. There were five 
children and no father but we didn't get into trouble."

If he is strong on anti-racism, announcing an immediate inquiry into the 
Stephen Lawrence case, it is partly because of his experience at Brentwood 
school where he became deputy head boy but was bullied.

 An Aldermaston marcher at 12, a Labour party member by 15, he started on the 
sensible left as president of Leeds student union and the national union of 
students. His ambition for political office was whetted on Islington borough 
council.

He gave up the bar to become, at 27, special adviser to Barbara Castle at the 
Department of Social Security. He also met his wife Alice Perkins during his 
time there. She was a high flying junior civil servant, and is currently deputy 
to Richard Wilson, the cabinet secretary. The Straws are the most formidable 
power couple in Whitehall.

His time with Barbara Castle left him not only with a wife but also a 
deep-rooted Euroscepticism. This continued when she was sacked by James 
Callaghan in 1976. Mr Straw swiftly became adviser to Peter Shore, the 
Europhobe environment secretary.

With Mr Shore, he helped found the Labour common market safeguards committee, 
urging withdrawal from the EEC at Labour's 1980 Wembley conference. He was on 
Mr Shore's leadership campaign team too in 1980 and again in 1983.

When Barbara Castle decided to retire from safe Blackburn, she recommended 
Jack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, who had already 
contested hopeless Tonbridge, as her parliamentary successor, which he became 
in 1979.

 His party loyalism is of long standing. He tried to dissuade Tony Benn from 
contesting the deputy leadership against Denis Healey in 1981. He attacked both 
the SDP deserters and the radicals who provoked them into deserting. When 
Militant tried to unseat him at Blackburn, he secured 70% backing for the long 
procedure to expel the Blackburn Six. After Labour's 1983 defeat he warned that 
a majority of voters opposed its anti-nuclear defence policies. He later 
advised that London's loony-left councils were making the party unelectable.

 As Labour's education spokesman 1987-92, Mr Straw increasingly fought a 
two-front war against Kenneth Baker and the Tories facing him and against the 
Bennite hard-left "flat earthers" behind him. It was then that he formed an 
alliance with Gordon Brown and Tony Blair in opposition to a joint slate for 
the shadow cabinet linking the soft-left Tribune group and the hard-left 
Campaign group of Tony Benn.

As education spokesman, he kept the teachers' unions at arms' length and 
insisted on frequent testing, high educational standards, quality control and 
consumer choice. He was, after all, a teacher's son.

He was the first in the "reform Clause IV" field with his 1993 pamphlet, 
'Policy and Ideology', angering Labour's leader, John Smith, who thought it was 
a dead issue. He also advocated downgrading the monarchy to Scandinavian 
proportions.

When Tony Blair succeeded to the leadership in 1994, he handed over to Jack 
Straw his portfolio of shadow home secretary. Famously, Mr Straw attacked 
aggressive beggars and squeegee merchants. But he failed to make an expected 
triumph over home secretary Michael Howard's sacking of Derek Lewis, the prison 
services chief, because of Tory heckling and his own tinnitus. To his 
embarrassment Mr Blair even took to the despatch box to challenge Mr Howard. 
Yet only months later, Mr Straw was doing Mr Howard's job.

He has done it ever since, a reassuring figure in the New Labour pantheon: 
confident, able and modestly ambitious. These are traits which may yet put him 
in the running to enter Number 10.

Ask Aristotle about Jack Straw 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5038,00.html>
 