
Jack Nicholson's house on Mulholland Drive sits high above Los Angeles on a 
mountain he calls "Bad Boy Hill". Marlon Brando and Warren Beatty are 
neighbours. Right now the house is silent, as if poised for its owner to come 
home and fill it with his unmistakable presence.

Suddenly the front door flies open and Nicholson strides in. 

"Hey, baby, can you get me some coffee?" He is talking to the housekeeper. He 
walks into the living room, his hair askew, his bulky frame draped in a loud 
shirt and khaki trousers. He settles into an armchair facing a row of paintings 
by Picasso, Bonnard, Dufy, Magritte and Bacon and lights a cigarette. It's the 
first of many Nicholson, 65, will smoke during a three-hour conversation about 
his life, his career and his new film,About Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/about-schmidt>, which has just opened in the 
US.

The film, a dark comedy directed by Alexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne>, stars Nicholson as Warren 
Schmidt, a widowed Omaha insurance actuary who is forced to retire at 66 and 
decides to hit the road in a motor home. The role may be the biggest stretch 
yet for Nicholson. A three-time Academy award winner, he has specialised in 
scene-stealing eccentrics with more than a touch of lunacy, from the mental 
patient in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest to the axe murderer in The Shining. 
His public image, which Nicholson often refers to as "being Jack", has been 
equally flamboyant.

But Warren Schmidt is a colourless drone who never achieved the success he 
dreamed of; in contrast, Nicholson says that not a day goes by that he doesn't 
marvel that he began life as a beautician's son from Neptune, New Jersey. But 
there are parallels with Schmidt. Though Nicholson's career shows no signs of 
slowing down, he is becoming more conscious of his age. Great roles for men 
over 65, he says, are scarce. "If they're not melodramatically a general, a 
judge, a murderer, then they're about death, retirement and disillusionment."

But he tries to take the same advice that he gives the actresses who are 
ageing and complain to him about a lack of work. " 'Will you shut up?"' he says 
he tells them." 'This is a self-defeating piece of constant public relations. 
It's a negative self-hypnotic mantra.' For the first time, I'm feeling limited 
by my age in terms of I can't just play anybody. But the more you talk about 
this, the more self-fulfilling it is."

He is an indefatigable conversationalist; on one tangent he touches on the 
Magna Carta, terrorism, Fidel Castro, Thomas Jefferson, the death penalty, 
solar power, Enron, Nostradamus, Thornton Wilder and the movie Lethal Weapon. 
No topic is off limits. He brightens when talking about his young son and 
daughter by his former girlfriend Rebecca Broussard. He rolls his eyes with the 
angst of a teenager when the subject of Lara Flynn Boyle, the 32-year-old 
actress who has been his sometime companion and whose framed picture hangs in 
his bathroom, comes up.

Nicholson is most at home, however, when talking about acting. He can look 
back at a career that began in 1958 when he made his feature film debut in a 
low-budget quickie, The Cry Baby Killer, directed by Roger Corman, with the 
same enthusiasm that he has for his next movie, a comedy with Adam Sandler 
called Anger Management, which comes out next year.

Nicholson, who moved from New Jersey to Los Angeles and started as an office 
boy in MGM's animation department in the mid-1950s, worked almost exclusively 
for Corman for more than a decade because it was the only acting work he could 
get. He remembers scaling the fence at what was then the Chaplin studios to go 
read for the part of a sadistic dentist's masochistic patient in The Little 
Shop of Horrors (1960). He got the role, but he had to climb the fence because 
Corman was too cheap to pay the studio the cost of getting a guard to open the 
gate.

By the time Nicholson was cast in Easy Rider, he had almost given up hope of 
making it out of B-movies. "I hadn't dropped the pose of 10 to 12 years of 
failure," he says. "Like: 'You can use me or not. I can tell you my credits. I 
can charm you. But really, I'm the best actor there is in my age group.' This 
was the kind of form that I would get myself into when I would get those 
occasional interviews for jobs. False confidence, but you have to believe a 
certain amount of it."

Once Nicholson achieved stardom he was better equipped to handle it because of 
his long struggle. He saw his chance to build on his newfound prestige with 
Five Easy Pieces in 1970.

"I wanted to do a smashing follow-up to Easy Rider and hammer that nail in," 
he says. "I wanted to get even more distance from being somebody who had some 
kind of demand for their services versus somebody who is running crazy to try 
and keep up." Since then, Nicholson has not wanted for work, or the kind of 
roles most actors would kill for.

But he does not seem to have taken his iconic status for granted. In 1976, 
after he won the best actor Oscar for his turn as Randle McMurphy, the 
rebellious but doomed psychiatric patient in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, 
he began work on a western, The Missouri Breaks, with Brando. "I remember 
waking up one morning halfway through the movie, and I couldn't move because I 
thought: 'Wait a minute! I'm in a movie with Marlon Brando, the patron saint,"' 
he says. "I was practically immobilised by it."

He says is always nervous before filming: "There's a period just before you 
start a movie when you start thinking, I don't know what in the world I'm going 
to do. It's free-floating anxiety. In my case, though, this is over by lunch 
the first day of shooting."

In one case, it was not. In 1997, Nicholson was so convinced he was giving a 
bad performance as a curmudgeonly novelist in As Good as It Gets that he 
offered his close friend, the director James Brooks, the opportunity to replace 
him. "I didn't feel I was what he was after," says Nicholson, who went on to 
win his third Oscar for the film. "It was one of the toughest movies he and I 
will ever do."

Nicholson is pragmatic about how intimidating his own presence can be to other 
actors. He and Dermot Mulroney even had a conversation about it during the 
making of About Schmidt to resolve any tension. "I'm not there to use it," he 
says. "I'm not a power person. I like everyone to be on an equal footing. In 
the case of this picture, there's no use for me being Jack."

The only time he deliberately used it was when he took on the role of the 
tough-as-nails Marine colonel, Nathan R Jessep, in A Few Good Men in 1992. The 
movie also starred Tom Cruise, Demi Moore and Kevin Bacon. "I felt like the 
Lincoln Memorial walking into that first reading," he recalls. "There were a 
lot of wonderful young actors in that picture. I'm usually very uncomfortable 
with the Jack part of it all. I'm too in admiration of so many people who do 
what I do. But because of what this picture is, I walked into that reading 
differently. I went in there to get them. I went in there ready to read this 
damn part and you better all be ready."

Like many major stars, Nicholson knows what audiences want from him. But he 
sees himself a little differently. "I've always muted the sexuality that I 
always thought was my strong suit as an actor," he says. But when he got the 
starring role in the remake of The Postman Always Rings Twice in 1981 opposite 
Jessica Lange, he saw his chance to "do the most erotic performance of my 
life". He and the director Bob Rafelson, who had also directed him in Five Easy 
Pieces and The King of Marvin Gardens, collaborated closely, especially in 
choreographing a famous lovemaking scene on the kitchen table. Nicholson says 
he wanted the scene to be so authentic that he convinced Rafelson to show him 
fully aroused beneath his clothes. On the shoot, however, Nicholson found his 
anatomy would not cooperate. "That would have been something different," he 
says. "But I couldn't do it." He persuaded Rafelson to let him try again when 
they filmed Man Trouble in 1992, and this time Nicholson's attempt was a 
success, he says - though he adds that no one has ever said they've noticed it 
in the movie. In About Schmidt, the desire for realism took a more pedestrian 
turn. Nicholson questioned insurance actuaries about their profession. "They 
told me an actuary looks down at his own feet when he's talking to you and he's 
embarrassed," he says. "And if you ask an actuary what time it is they tell you 
how to make a clock."

Nicholson became Warren Schmidt in much the same way he prepares for all his 
roles: "What I have always done is not necessarily have to act but become the 
physicality of the person," he says. "For Schmidt I thought, what would I have 
been like if I had lived this sedentary kind of life. And I got into it enough 
to where I really didn't like it. I thought, am I ever going to be able to 
return to my regular self?"

The answer appears to be yes. When Adam Sandler shows up to visit toward the 
end of the interview, Nicholson greets him by yelling, "Hey, it's the Sandman!" 
He seems more boyish and youthful than the rather circumspect Sandler.

Unlike Warren Schmidt, who has been married for decades to a grey-haired woman 
(played by the actress June Squibb) whom he finds tedious, Nicholson freely 
admits he prefers to date women between 25 and 38, though he does see older 
women. "With all this about what's politically correct, I'd rather not touch 
it," he says. "But I have a view. I have a sweet spot for what's attractive to 
me. It's not just psychological. It's also glandular and has to do with 
mindlessly continuing the species."

Nicholson continues to be a fixture courtside at Lakers games and enjoys going 
to concerts. But his favourite spot is the home he has lived in for more than 
30 years. "I can't go out to dinner and think it's not going to be a job," he 
says. "If I go into a restaurant there's a very good chance that I'm going to 
spend my time being the mayor. If I want to have a good time, I'm happier 
having dinner here."

Nicholson speaks of his future with the same mix of bravado and worry that 
marked his early career. "I like to not care that much about criticism, but I 
do care about it," he says. "So that's always at stake. There's a real chance I 
could embarrass myself in this picture I just did with Adam because it's out of 
my comfort zone. I almost did it again to challenge that convention, to put 
myself somewhere where they can say, 'Jeez, he's overacting again.' Which I am, 
but damn, that's why I'm good!"

© 2002 New York Times. About Schmidt will be released early next year.
 