
McLaren yesterday scored a decisive victory over Jaguar in the struggle for 
Adrian Newey's services. Jaguar decided to withdraw from a potentially costly 
legal battle with their formula one rivals, after taking out an injunction last 
week to preventMcLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> from 
employing Newey when his contract expires in 2002.

Faced with the reality that European law would not force somebody - in this 
case the McLaren technical director Newey - to take a job against his will, 
Jaguar bowed to the inevitable. Instead they accepted apologies from Newey and 
the McLaren chairman Ron Dennis in addition to legal expenses of about £30,000.

Newey, who had apparently signed a contract with Jaguar then changed his mind 
and decided to stay with McLaren, said: "I regret this misunderstanding has 
occurred but am delighted it has been resolved and apologise for what has 
occurred."

Dennis said: "I would like to apologise for any misunderstanding that has been 
caused over what has become a confused and complicated affair."

Jaguar's Niki Lauda, representing Ford's Premier Automotive Group which 
controls the British luxury car maker, replied: "I'm glad the matter has been 
concluded, and it is gracious of Ron and Adrian to offer an apology, which is 
fully accepted by Jaguar Racing."

For Jaguar it was a bitterly disappointing end to what had been a rearguard 
action since they issued a statement 10 days ago saying that they had signed 
Newey.

McLaren had warned them the night before not to publish the release, on the 
grounds that their 42-year-old designer had changed his mind and decided to 
stay put for another three years beyond 2002.

The affair is a blow to the prestige of Bobby Rahal, the chief executive 
officer of Jaguar Racing and a long-time friend of Newey, with whom he had 
worked when he was racing on the Indycar circuit in the early 80s.

Rahal had gone directly to the Ford president Jacques Nasser to secure the 
reputed £3m annual salary which would have been needed for Jaguar to secure the 
services of Newey.
 