
James Magnussen's week just keeps getting worse. The man the Australians 
nicknamed the Missile came to these Games as the world champion in the 100m 
freestyle. Right now he is known, in the memorable words of one US columnist, 
as "the biggest Australian flop since Crocodile Dundee 3". In Thursday 
morning's heats of the 50m freestyle, Magnussen was only the 10th fastest 
qualifier. And then he was handed over to the Australian press for yet another 
roasting.

The previous night he had come second to the USA's Nathan Adrian by a single 
hundredth of a second in the 100m freestyle. Rarely has a silver medal sparked 
such a crisis. "To be totally honest the last thing I wanted to do was to get 
up and swim again," Magnussen said this morning. And after the hammering he has 
taken, who can blame him?

Moved to desperation by their need for an explanation, Australian journalists 
have even asked whether it was Magnussen's stubble that was slowing him down. 
"It's ridiculous," he replied. "I've always raced with it." Other theories 
being floated include the fact that the Australian Olympic Committee has banned 
their athletes from using certain brands of sleeping pills, because of the 
possible side effects. Magnussen says he has hardly slept a wink all week.

"All I wanted to do after the race is see my parents," Magnussen, sounding 
suspiciously soppy for a man who was supposed to be the alpha male of the 
Australian swimming team. He said that once again, he hadn't slept on Wednesday 
night, having stayed up stewing on his defeat and other thoughts, such as 
"what's important" in life. He is having a very public kind of breakdown.

It all started on Sunday, when the 4x100m relay team finished fourth behind 
the USA. Magnussen, 21, swam the second-fastest leg among the lead-off 
swimmers. But that didn't cut much mustard. The "biggest defeat since 
Gallipoli" was how one Australian newspaper described it. "A fizzer", "A big 
belly flop in the pool", "The swim was diabolical, the shellshock palpable."

It wasn't helped by the fact that Magnussen said that he hadn't slept for two 
days before the final, and that on the day of the race his "hands were shaking 
and my heart was beating out of my chest". Magnussen explained that he wasn't 
nervous, he was "just excited about how fast I let it get to me".

The Australians seemed to catch a whiff of Kim Hughes in all this. Hughes, who 
memorably broke down in tears <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vkKDQp9BeQY> in 
his final press conference as Australia's cricket captain, has been branded as 
soft ever since. An unforgiveable sin in an Australian sportsman, that.
 