
Heart 106.2's Jamie Theakston and Harriet Scott won presenters of the year at 
the Arqiva Commercial Radio Awards, withTalkSport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport> and digital station Planet Rock 
among the station of the year winners.

Classic FM's Darren Henley won programmer of the year at the commercial radio 
awards, with Star Radio Cambridge's mid-morning presenter Ryan Taylor winning 
the presentation newcomer award.

Theakston and Scott recently presented their 1,000th show on the Global 
Radio-owned London station. They beat Key 103's Mike Toolan and Boogie, Arlene 
and Dingo of 97.3 Forth One to pick up the prize.

While TalkSport won station of the year for stations broadcasting to a 
population of more than 1 million listeners, Lincs FM won the award for 
stations broadcasting to between 300,000 and 1 million people, and Star Radio 
Cambridge won for stations broadcasting to fewer than 300,000 people.

Awarding the prize to TalkSport, the judges said "huge resources and great 
courage" had been put into the station.

"The impressive array of on-air talent is supported by excellent production, 
and the sales team have brought a host of new brands to commercial radio," they 
added.

Among other prizes, the news award went to the Pirate FM news team, while 
Global Radio won the technical innovation award for its iPhone application.

GMG Radio, owned by the Guardian Media Group, which also publishes 
MediaGuardian, won theArqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> Gold 
Award for its investment in documentaries.

The judges said: "In an area where the BBC has a stranglehold, GMG proved that 
commercial radio can work well with independent production companies and 
achieve very impressive results."

Organised by the commercial radio trade body, the RadioCentre, the Arqiva 
awards are now in their 14th year. They took place at the Royal Lancaster Hotel 
in London on Friday and were hosted by Absolute Radio breakfast presenter 
Christian O'Connell.

RadioCentre chief executive Andrew Harrison said the awards "recognise the 
huge diversity of programming that commercial radio offers. These stations work 
incredibly hard day in day out to ensure their listeners hear great radio 
programmes – congratulations to all the winners."

Former GMG Radio chief executive John Myers was presented with the Arqiva Gold 
Award. Myers, who recently wrote an influential government-commissioned report 
on the future of local radio, accepted the award via video message. He is 
currently on holiday in Hawaii.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 