
My mother, Jane White Cooke, who has died aged 98, was a gifted and successful 
portrait painter. In her early 20s, she was awarded a prize by the National 
Academy of Design in New York, which included funds to spend a year studying in 
Florence, where she rented a big studio on the Costa San Giorgio and lived for 
art and fun. Soon after this dynamic take-off, Jane married Whit Hawkes, and 
she felt later that she never fulfilled her potential as an artist because 
love, family and children diverted her.

Jane was married, secondly, for 58 years until his death, to Alistair Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/31/pressandpublishing.broadcasting>
, the journalist, broadcaster and television presenter. They met in a lift at 
the Croydon hotel in New York, while Jane was married to my father, Whit. 
Alistair was smitten, and later, when Jane became a war widow (Whit died in the 
Phillipines in 1943), Alistair wooed and won her with his wit, glamour and 
charismatic cheek.

Marriage to a celebrity was not always easy for the beautiful and talented 
Jane. She needed to pursue her art, so she established her winter studio in a 
cheap tenement in New York and spent her summers painting in the Bauhaus beach 
house in Long Island that she and Whit had built during the war. Alistair 
relished his Fifth Avenue study with its view of the park and palatial hallway, 
where he practised his putting. He was a town mouse, but loved visiting his 
beloved at weekends and playing golf.

Giving each other this room to breathe strengthened their affection and 
respect for each other. Jane called him Cookie and he called her Tootsie. They 
loved visiting London together, always stayed in Mayfair and sat in the royal 
box to watch the tennis at Wimbledon. Jane adored France and Italy, so my 
generous stepfather sent the two of us on a continental jaunt each spring and 
was delighted to foot the bill. He was happy staying in London, hobnobbing with 
his cronies or watching golf on the TV.

My mother was born Jane White in Montclair, New Jersey, the daughter of 
William, an engineer with the General Electric Company, and his wife, Frances. 
When she was nine, the depression hit her family's finances, so her widowed 
mother took her three daughters to Tours in France, where they could live 
cheaply. There, Jane said, she saw one of the last guillotines to be erected 
for a public execution. Forbidden by her mum to watch the event, Jane 
nevertheless claimed she heard the blade drop. She loved telling the story to 
her children as much as they loved hearing it.

Her portrait of Alistair, who died in 2004, is in the National Gallery in 
Washington. She is survived by three children, Stephen, Susan and me, 10 
grandchildren and 12 great-grandchildren.
 