
Every one of the tens of thousands of survivors of Japan's tsunami disaster 
has a unique story to tell. Some are mourning the deaths of children, spouses, 
parents or friends. Most have lost homes and businesses. And all are united by 
a dignity that has struck visiting journalists, aid workers and the global 
audience watching every step of Japan's worst crisis in its postwar history. 
Over the coming months, the Guardian will follow seven survivors as they 
attempt to put the 11 March tragedy behind them and rebuild their lives and 
communities. From the elderly dance teacher who is caring for orphaned children 
to the inspirational businessman, they are ordinary people who, in a few 
terrifying minutes, saw their lives transformed by catastrophe.

 <>Kiwako Shimizu, teacher of Wada-ryu traditional dance, from Rikuzentakata


Within days of the tsunami, Shimizu, whose home was spared, had taken in four 
children orphaned in the disaster. Neighbours have urged her to reopen her 
school, located on higher ground, to bring relief to a community struck down by 
tragedy, but the 74-year-old has no appetite – yet – for the stage. Some of her 
students died and another remains missing. "I couldn't help thinking it would 
have been better if I'd also been swept away with the hundreds of other people 
in this area," she says. For now, Shimizu will not allow the children in her 
care to be interviewed and brushes off praise for her selflessness. "I'm only 
doing what anyone else would do in the same circumstances. These children need 
to be cared for, so I don't understand why anyone thinks I'm doing anything 
special," she says.

 <>Yoshiyuki Kumagai, fisherman from Ofunato

 Fisherman Yoshiyuki Kumagai, 52, stands above the port he refuses to look at 
in Ofunato. Photograph: Robert Gilhooly for the Guardian 
Three weeks after the tsunami swept through the town's Okirai district, 
Kumagai can still only bring himself to take a glimpse at the sea from the hut 
that has become a refuge for fisherman deprived of their livelihoods. Yet the 
wiry 52-year-old has vowed, along with a handful of other fishermen, to repair 
the few salvageable boats remaining and return to the ocean in search of 
sardines, mackerel, crab and squid. "At first I was so depressed I didn't even 
want to think about work," says Kumagai, who lives with his wife and their dog, 
Ash. "But now I'm determined to do something. I am so familiar with how the 
coast looked before that it's still hard to accept what has happened. The gods 
of the sea are angry."

 <>Kenichiro Yagi, seafood entrepreneur from Ofunato

 Businessman Kenichiro Yagi gets to work on the planned new headquarters for 
his business in Ofunato. Photograph: Robert Gilhooly for the Guardian 
Yagi, 34, sealed his reputation as an entrepreneur when he launched a 
successful online seafood business last year. The market and fishing boats on 
which he depended are now gone. But when we meet, Yagi and his employees are 
clearing the debris from a gutted convenience store, the only building left in 
the neighbourhood, which will serve as his new HQ. With nowhere to refrigerate 
or store produce, Yagi plans to provide real-time online updates on what is 
being caught, directly from fishing boats, enabling customers to collect their 
orders as soon as the catch is brought ashore. "Some people have told me it's 
too soon to think about the future," says Yagi, a native of centralJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> who decided to stay in his adopted 
home in the north-east. "But we have to do this while the will is there. The 
longer we wait, the less likely it is to happen."

 <>Michihiro Kono, president of a soy sauce company from Rikuzentakata
 Michihiro Kono, president of a soy sauce and miso soup maker, recovers the 
shop sign from the wreckage of his family's 207-year-old company in 
Rikuzentakata. Photograph: Robert Gilhooly for the Guardian 
Kono lost his home and business 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/18/soy-sauce-japan-determination-tsunami?intcmp=239>
, and his grandmother is one of the thousands of people who are missing, 
presumed dead. Yet with the support of a fiercely loyal clientele, Yagisawa 
Shoten, the firm his family has run for more than 200 years, is already taking 
tentative steps towards recovery. Kono, whose wife and three children have 
evacuated to Tokyo, has secured a temporary office, kept on and paid all 45 
employees and even welcomed two new workers. He gains inspiration from the 
words on a sign salvaged from the wreckage of his factory: "spreading gratitude 
through food". He says: "There is no doubt in my mind that we will be back in 
business. My family has been making soy sauce in Rikuzentakata since the Edo 
era and we owe it to our customers to get back on our feet."

 <>Kyohei Takahashi, doctor from Minamisoma

 Dr Kyohei Takahashi holds a consultation with a patient at his clinic in 
Minamisoma. Photograph: Robert Gilhooly for the Guardian 
Takahashi is one of Japan's small but growing number of people who evacuated 
after the disaster at the Fukushima nuclear plant but has now returned. The 
72-year-old gynaecologist left Minamisoma at the request of his family soon 
after the first explosion. Parts of his town lie within the 20km (12.4-mile) 
exclusion zone around the stricken plant. Days later, Takahashi returned to 
find deserted hospitals and patients in desperate need of care and drugs. At 
one point, the local population had fallen from 70,000 to just 10,000, but a 
few people, encouraged by Takahashi, are returning. Speaking from his clinic, 
which has become a temporary general practice, he has mixed feelings about 
Minamisoma's future. "It could be months before things settle down," he says. 
"Until then, all I can do is my job. If we all work together, we can make 
something of this town, even if it takes years. But it will never be the same 
again."

 <>Hiroko Iinuma and Miyoko Sasaki, sisters from Kamaishi

 Sisters Hiroko Iinuma and Miyoko Sasaki stand by the makeshift kitchen where 
they make meals for refugees outside Senjuin temple in the historic city of 
Kamaish. Photograph: Robert Gilhooly for the Guardian 
The sisters spent three days looking for each other after their homes were 
washed away by the tsunami. Now, as evacuees living in Senju-in, a temple 
overlooking Kamaishi, they are inseparable. Iinuma, 57, who ran a gift shop, 
and Sasaki, a 59-year-old soba noodle maker, have accepted that the temple will 
remain their home for weeks, perhaps months. They turned down pleas to live 
temporarily with their adult children in the Tokyo area, preferring to stay in 
Kamaishi and cook for their fellow evacuees, many of whom are elderly. "Lots of 
my neighbours died and, as I walked the streets looking for my sister, I was 
convinced she had been killed, too," says Sasaki. "I only believed she was 
alive when I saw her with my own eyes."
 