
Almost 40 years after they appeared in their first final,  hosts Tunisia won 
the African Cup of Nations for the first time, a second-half goal by Ziad 
Jaziri sinkingMorocco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco>.

Jaziri profited from an error by the Moroccan goalkeeper, Khalid Fouhami, who 
spilt a tame cross into his path. Fouhami failed to clear a cross by the 
Brazilian-born left winger Clayton, just getting a hand to the ball to set it 
up perfectly for the onrushing Jaziri to tap in.

Tunisia, roared on by an almost capacity crowd at the 60,000-seater stadium, 
begun at a frenetic pace and were ahead after five minutes when Francileudo dos 
Santos headed in a cross.

Dos Santos, whose nationality had been fast-tracked to allow him to play for 
Tunisia in the tournament, found space between the defenders to loop his header 
home.

Tunisia should have been further ahead soon afterwards but Dos Santos scuffed 
an easy chance and Jaziri was ruled offside when he broke away, although 
television replays showed the linesman's decision to be wrong.

The spurned chances almost proved costly as Morocco rallied to equalise 
through Youssef Mokhtari, whose fourth goal of the tournament was a diving 
header from Youssef Hadji's 38th-minute cross.

Hadji delivered a perfect ball from the by-line after a deft pass from 
Abdelkrim Kissi and Mokhtari finished from close range. The Germany-based 
Mokhtari had been a virtual unknown before the tournament and was playing in 
only his ninth international.

Morocco, who had played some of the tournament's best football going in 
progressing to the final, struggled to launch a second comeback, consistently 
playing the ball to the edge of the box but then running up against a tight 
defence.

As the game drew to a close, Tunisia missed several chances to add a third 
goal with quick counter-attacks, but they held out after four minutes of added 
time to spark wild celebrations.

Captain Khaled Badra, who had been suspended for the final, jointly lifted the 
trophy with midfielder Riadh Bouazizi, captain for the day and outstanding in 
midfield.

Tunisia were hosting the Nations Cup finals for the third time and had been 
runners-up in the 1965 final. They were also in the 1996 final in Johannesburg, 
two years after failing dismally on home soil in 1994, going out in the first 
round.

 TUNISIA (4-4-2):  Ali Boumnijel; Hagui, Jaidi, Trabelsi,Clayton; Nafti (Mnari 
46), Benachour (Ghodhbane 57), Bouazizi, Chedli; Jaziri (Mhadhebi 71), Dos 
Santos

 MOROCCO (4-4-2):  Fouhami; Roumani (Zairi 74), Ouaddou, El Karkouri, Naybet; 
Regragui, Kaissi, Safri (Yaacoubi 64), Hadji (Baha 87); Chammakh, Mokhtari.

 Referee: Falla Ndoye (Senegal).
 