 Politicians go to unusual lengths to avoid being seen as decent humans. When 
able Jeff Rooker announced that at 58 he would not stand again for Perry Barr, 
rumours spread that he was planning to become mayor of Birmingham. When I 
asked, the normally outspoken Mr Rooker dodged answering. I later found out 
that his wife was seriously ill.
It was typical of Mr Rooker not only to advocate but to do the decent thing. 
Or if he could not, to pay the penalty without complaint. This occurred in 1993 
when, as spokesman on higher education, he urged charging university students 
tuition fees, not yet party policy. He loyally accepted being sacked for being 
ahead of his time.

His straightforwardness has always endeared him, not least during his recent 
career when he has tried to explain what was being done to correct the 
inadequacies of Britain's pensions systems. Despite the fact that the platform 
lost the vote, he won many plaudits for a rousing speech which closed the 
pensions debate during the last Labour conference. He has never tried to hide 
behind civil servants' obscurantisms when taking on his opponents, always 
preferring blunt simple language in his Brummie accent.

It probably comes from not having been a lawyer. The son of a factory worker, 
he trained as a production engineer, working in various factories in and around 
Birmingham for 14 years before becoming a lecturer on the subject.

Having won a Birmingham city council seat at 25 in 1967, he was selected for 
his natal, Tory-held Perry Barr four years later, and captured it in February 
1974, thus helping to confirm Harold Wilson's second term as prime minister.

He has always been a soft-left loner, willing to rebel against a Labour 
government or faction when he thinks them wrong. He was one of the first to 
attack Harold Wilson's 'Lavender List' of honours recommended for the business 
friends of his secretary, Marcia Williams, latterly Lady Falkender. With the 
late Audrey Wise, in 1977 he secured the Rooker-Wise amendment to the Finance 
Act, ensuring an increase in personal allowances in line with inflation. In 
1980 he introduced a bill to abolish the House of Lords. Although on the left, 
he was one of the 30-odd soft-left MPs who abstained from voting for Tony Benn 
as deputy leader in 1981, preventing him from beating Denis Healey.

Although he became a Treasury and environment spokesman, and once filled in 
for Tony Blair at PMQs, Mr Rooker's progress was limited by his aversion to 
factions and slates. When Labour won in 1997 he was named food safety minister 
under agriculture minister Jack Cunningham. The job was initially seen as a 
safe backwater for his outspokenness, but the BSE crisis soon raised his 
profile. His handling of this thorny issue and of GM planting made him a widely 
popular minor hero, acclaimed on all sides for his bravery. Even the Daily 
Telegraph's sketchwriter, Quentin Letts, praised him for having "withstood 
criticism of the beef-on-the-bone ban where a weaker minister might have 
folded."

Ask Aristotle about Jeff Rooker 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4520,00.html>
 