
There is something about novels you encounter, unexpectedly, in foreign places 
that makes them rise above the comfortable books you curl up with at home: the 
thrill of discovery, and then the delight of unanticipated pleasure as a 
stranger becomes an intimate friend.

One sleepless night in my friend’s dorm room in Geneva, I got out of bed and 
stubbed my toe on something hard. Hours later, when sleep still evaded me, I 
sent an exploratory hand under the bed and examined the cover.Middlesex by 
Jeffrey Eugenides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/02/jeffrey-eugenides-middlesex-book-club>
, it said, and for a moment I thought it must be about London’s north-west 
hinterland, but the lush illustration under the title was ofSalmacis and 
Hermaphroditus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salmacis> grasping each other 
beside a stream.

The book rested on my chest with a meaningful weight and its pages had already 
taken on the colour of an aged manuscript. From midnight to dawn it held me 
spellbound: monsters, surgeons, sieges, riots, silkworms and Cadillacs, life 
crammed into page after page. At its heart is a tale of those who don’t fit 
neatly anywhere: neither male nor female, American nor Greek, narrator Cal is 
pitched about by a world demanding conformity to narrow identities.

Middlesex begins in Bithynios – a village on the cusp of Europe and Asia – in 
1922, with the story of Lefty and Desdemona, orphaned siblings who harvest 
silkworm cocoons and have sought comfort in each other’s arms from the violent 
tumult of those times. They become refugees and flee theGreat Fire of Smyrna 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Fire_of_Smyrna> on passports they have 
managed to scam from the French consulate, heading to America and a new fate 
where “whatever he seemed to be would become what he was”.

Lefty and Desdemona settle in Detroit and have a child, Milton, who grows up 
to marry his cousin, Tessie. Their child, Calliope, swoops through the whole 
narrative, bearing witness to the Great Fire as well as his (her) parents’ 
courtship, until he (she) is eventually birthed and the social, emotional and 
genetic consequences of his ancestors’ misadventures play out in his body and 
his life. From the sheltered elysium of suburban America, Cal is flung into a 
world of headless medical photographs, freak shows, peepshows and jail cells – 
all the striving of his antecedents for prosperity and respectability undone by 
secrets and errant chromosomes.

Based on elements of Eugenides’s own biography, the book cross-fertilises his 
own story with that of Herculine Barbin, a 19th century intersex convent girl 
who committed suicide at the age of 30; Eugenides wanted to “write the story 
that I wasn’t getting from[Barbin’s] memoir 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herculine_Barbin:_Being_the_Recently_Discovered_Memoirs_of_a_Nineteenth-century_French_Hermaphrodite>
”. Middlesex is indeed part-memoir and part-fiction, but it also strays from 
first person to third and puts Greek myth into the 20th century. Nothing seems 
to miss Eugenides’s omniscience – from camshafts on the Ford conveyor belt and 
compasses used for prayer in Nation of Islam temples, to the cry of “Opa 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=opa>, motherfucker” from the 
lips of a rioter as he throws a Molotov cocktail at a Greek-owned bar in 1967.

It’s the kind of novel that gets your blood racing and makes sleep impossible. 
I read its 528 pages in one sitting, and spent the next few days talking about 
it, pestering my poor friend, Lana – whose book it was – about the small 
details that burst like flares in my memory. Do you remember that bit where 
Desdemona opened a cocoonery with the Fruit of Islam? What about when Cal goes 
on his first date with Julie? It was full of the kind of discoveries and 
perception that you expect from a great novel.

A particular pleasure came from the exploration of Cal’s medical condition, 
specifically the education it gave me on5-alpha-reductase deficiency 
<http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/5-alpha-reductase-deficiency>, and how this 
genetic condition – which affects male sexual development – can lie dormant, 
waiting to wreak havoc on an individual. On Cal’s first visit to Dr Luce’s 
office, you can smell the latex and bleach and feel the lick of his gaze as he 
prods and scribbles, prods and scribbles.

The cause, frequency, variety and effect of intersex conditions constitute a 
fascinating subject, and experiencing it from Cal’s perspective – where each 
diagnosis and prognosis is like a mortar demolishing the future he saw for 
himself – is heartbreaking. Whether we are chauvinists or feminists, we take it 
for granted that society is made of two sexes, female and male, and we 
generally purge those who don’t fit into this mould, banishing them to the 
fringes. Even the discussion of intersex individuals is taboo in many cultures, 
and Middlesex examines what it means to leave normality behind and to become, 
without volition or warning, a living taboo.

I sometimes joke that every novel should be written just like Middlesex, but 
it is one of those works that never fails to impress me. It is extravagant, 
clever, open-minded and ever so slightly melodramatic. It took Eugenides a 
decade to complete, and its entwining intricacy is a sign of a book that was 
allowed to mature into fruition.

Middlesex gives me the courage to take risks in my own writing and to bite off 
more than I think I can chew. It also reminds me that there is much we don’t 
know about each other’s lives, however banal they may seem.
 