
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has invited 
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump to tour a north London mosque, 
ahead of a debate in parliament about whether the American businessman should 
be banned from the UK.

The Labour leader said it would be better to engage with Trump, who has made 
inflammatory comments about Mexicans, gay people, women, Muslims and other 
groups, than exclude him from the country.

“I decided to invite Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on his visit to Britain to 
come with me to my constituency because he has problems with Mexicans and he 
has problems with Muslims,” he told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show.

“As you know, my wife is Mexican and my constituency is very, very 
multicultural, so what I was going to do was go down to the mosque with him and 
let him talk to people there.”

Trump drew international condemnation when he called for a “total and complete 
shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country’s 
representatives can figure out what is going on”.

He later claimed that “we have places in London and other places that are so 
radicalised that police are afraid for their own lives”.

 Corbyn said he did not think Trump should be banned from the country for his 
“weird and off-the-wall” views, but should be educated about life in the UK.

“I think he should come here and he should have lessons in going to all our 
cities,” he said. “Why he can’t he go to Leicester, Birmingham, Newcastle and 
see we do have great diversity within our society.

“Take a walk round central Manchester, take a walk round any of our cities, 
and understand that, yes, we’ve got problems but we’ve also got a great 
community, a great society and cohesion. He might learn something, you never 
know.”

David Cameron also has said he does not support a ban, while condemning 
Trump’s comments about Muslims as “divisive, stupid and wrong”.

The proposal is being debated in the House of Commons by MPs after a petition 
calling for Trump to be excluded. More than half a million people signed the 
document calling for the exclusion of Trump, who has threatened to withdraw 
£700m of investment in Scottish golf courses if he were banned.

Alex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, the SNP 
foreign affairs spokesman in Westminster and former first minister, has 
suggested he would be in favour of excluding him from Scotland. “He wants to 
ban all Muslims from the United States. I want to ban all Donald Trumps from 
Scotland,” he said on Sunday.
 