
What's your favourite piece of technology, and how has it improved your life?
I would say the vibrator, and it's done wonders for my marriage! No, my 
favourite piece of technology is theiPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad>. My wife has one, and I'm 
foolishly waiting for the next one to come out. I love technology, and I love 
new gadgets. I can no longer figure out how to use any of them, but I love them.

When was the last time you used it, and what for?
When I tried to grab it away from my wife, to get her to pay attention to me.

What additional features would you add if you could?
I think they've got to put a video camera in there, which I have a feeling 
they will. And probably even a telephone – why not, you may as well carry 
everything in the one gadget.

Do you think it will be obsolete in 10 years' time?
Of course. It's Moore's Law, everything will be obsolete in 10 years – I'll be 
obsolete in 10 years!

What always frustrates you about technology in general?
The most frustrating thing is that I want to always buy the best thing, the 
thing that does the most stuff. But then when I get it I just don't have the 
patience to figure out how to do all these things.

If you had one tip about getting the best out of new technology, what would it 
be?
I would say to find someone who knows what they're doing, and get them to 
speak slowly while they show you how to use it. And don't use anything that's 
going to take more of your time than it's worth. With all these machines and 
stuff, we seem to have less time now – we're just doing more, and obsessed with 
all the technology. One needs to, at least occasionally, take a step back and 
free yourself from technology. My problem is that I like technology, but I 
always have to ask myself, "Now wait a minute, will I actually have any use for 
this?"

Do you consider yourself to be a luddite or a nerd?
I'm somewhere in between, as I guess everyone probably is, but I'm definitely 
not a luddite. I love gadgetry, so I think my basic personality is probably 
nerd. There was someone who said that everybody falls into one of two 
categories: either a nerd or an asshole. Hopefully I'm the nerd.

What's the most expensive piece of technology you've ever owned?
I have a screening room at my house, which is quite wonderful. But I have 
these two beautiful 35mm projectors, and they're now practically obsolete – 
everything's now digital.

Mac or PC, and why?
Mac, definitely – I'm a big Mac guy. First of all, it's more intuitive. And I 
love the style of the Macs. Any time something new comes out, I can't wait – 
it's really a lust thing.

Do you still buy physical media such as CDs and DVDs, or do you download? What 
was your last purchase?
I do a little of both, but I still do get hard copies. There's no question, 
though, that in a few years computers won't even have trays for CDs and DVDs 
any more. I think all your software and everything will be downloaded, and 
movies will be streamed. You won't need hard copies of anything. And I don't 
buy a lot of DVDs – I'll rent them. Also, I get a lot of movies from the 
Academy, because it's awards season. So right around now I'm starting to get 
all these movies sent to me, which is great, so I don't have to buy them. I 
don't remember the last movie I bought.

Robot butlers – a good idea or not?
I think that's a great idea, but I think they're a little way off.

What piece of technology would you most like to own?
Maybe a Virgin Galactic <https://www.theguardian.com/science/virgin-galactic> 
plane that goes up into space – that would be fun, I'd get a kick out of that.

• Writer and director Jerry Zucker was in London for a 30th anniversary 
screening of Airplane! as part of theLondon comedy film festival 
<http://www.locofilmfestival.com/>
 