 Jim Wallace, MP for Orkney and Shetland and MSP for Orkney, pulled off a 
treble in Scottish politics without raising an English brow. Maybe that under 
appreciation is why he's leaving Westminster politics. As deputy first minister 
of Scotland, minister for justice in Scotland, and leader of the Scottish 
Liberal Democrats he could hardly be more significant north of the border 
(unless he changed parties).
Genial and grey-haired, Mr Wallace has learned the advantages of being a 
Scottish (rather than an English) Liberal Democrat. Unlike his former leader, 
Paddy Ashdown, Mr Wallace does not have broken promises from Tony Blair to 
bemoan in his diary; he has real political and executive power.

He likes his new jobs so much he is giving up his seat as MP for Orkney and 
Shetland, saving thousands of rail and air miles going to and from Westminster 
from Scotland's most northern constituency.

Wallace earned his job as leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats when he 
coaxed his reluctant colleagues into coalition with Labour in Scotland. In 
doing so he invited attacks from anti-coalition Lib Dem MSPs who accused him of 
fudging the issue of student fees to achieve the coalition.

Jim Wallace has a legitimate interest in making the Scottish Parliament work. 
As a longterm supporter of devolution, he believes in a federal structure for 
the UK and for Europe. Admittedly, his enthusiasm for Europe is hard to square 
with his many attacks on the common fisheries policy as one time Liberal 
fisheries spokesman.

These attacks stemmed from his deep roots in his constituency, the national 
seat fifth most dependent on agriculture and fishing. With the exception of 
three elections, Mr Wallace's seat has been Liberal for more than a century. It 
was formerly the perch of Jo Grimond, the Liberal Leader, from whom Wallace 
inherited the seat.

Initially a Conservative who belonged to Pest (pressure for economic and 
social Toryism) at Cambridge, Mr Wallace switched to the Liberals, becoming 
chairman of the Cambridge Liberal club.

He unsuccessfully fought for his native Dumfries in 1979, but did save his 
deposit. He was then adopted for Orkney and Shetland in time for the 1983 
election and made his mark as a constituency man by urging that his seat's new 
oil resource be treated as a normal industry rather than a Treasury milch-cow. 
He came to favour a nuclear freeze. But, like most rural Liberal Democrats, he 
opposed banning fox hunting.

His hard work led to his becoming deputy chief whip by 1985 and chief whip by 
1987. In 1992 he became leader of the Scottish Lib Dems, arguing with Labour 
over its devolution tactics but not over its final reality. These arguments 
have now been resolved with the creation of the ruling coalition. Mr Wallace 
has established his position in Scottish politics and, in the aftermath of 
Donald Dewar's death in October 2000, he is likely to become even more powerful.

Ask Aristotle about Jim Wallace 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5359,00.html> 
 