
What's so fascinating about Logan Mountstuart, the hero of Any Human Heart, is 
that over his 85 years, as charted in William Boyd's novel and now in
Channel 4's film adaptation <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/any-human-heart>
, this chameleonic character seems to live so many lives. At school he is both 
a teacher's pet and a rule-damning deviant; in love he is a devoted husband 
sandwiched by great stretches as a scoundrel; during wartime he's a pampered 
emissary on the conflict's fringe then a daredevil spy in the thick of it all; 
in war's aftermath he becomes a depressive art dealer and even a fledgling 
terrorist. "Every human being is a collection of selves," is a significant line 
in the TV adaptation. "We never stay just one person."

But when you portion up a many-storied life between three actors, one just out 
of drama school, one in his middle-30s, one almost pensionable, the spoils do 
not necessarily divvy up very fairly. Matthew Macfadyen, ex-Spooks actor and 
sometime Mr Darcy who plays Logan in his fertile middle-years, gets to golf 
with royalty and plunge romantically into the Spanish civil war and the second 
world war. He falls giddily in love and experiences the great wound that 
bisects Logan's life.

Newcomer Sam Claflin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sam-claflin> gets Logan 
in his early, randy years. Stewarding the character from the end of his 
schooldays through to (one) marriage, the 24-year-old gets sloshed on absinthe 
with Ernest Hemingway and writes a hit novel. He experiences the first flush of 
wealth and has lots of sex. "I get Logan's 'wonder years'," says Claflin. "The 
chasing girls, making bets with mates, enjoying the good and the bad as you 
trundle along. Great fun."

Which leaves Jim Broadbent <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent>
, taking Logan "from his 60s through to the end". He gets the tapering libido, 
the extreme penury that requires him to eat dog food to get by, the gloomy 
discussions with heart doctors. "There's quite a lot of deterioration and 
illness and death in the characters I've played recently," admits Broadbent, 
himself 61. He smiles. "But each falling hair, I see as another casting 
opportunity."

Broadbent expresses great affection for the character of Logan, one he likens 
in richness to real-life figures he's played such as Lord Longford (inLongford) 
and writer John Bayley (inIris, a role for which he won an Oscar). "There was a 
great responsibility in playing those roles because they were real people, well 
remembered. But readers have a very set idea of Logan, too, even if every 
reader has a different one.

"He's not an angry man, nor bitter when he hits the bottom in the dog 
food-eating years. He's non-judgmental throughout, both of himself and of all 
the extraordinary people he meets."

Macfadyen agrees: "He's present through all these incredible events in the 
20th century and has the ability to talk to almost anybody on their level. It 
makes him very attractive." Despite meeting luminaries of the 20th century from 
Winston Churchill to Virginia Woolf to King Edward and Mrs Simpson, says 
Claflin, "he just floats through as an ordinary man".

To their regret, the trio had little opportunity to work together during 
filming, the downside of portioning up a lone character. "There was a pleasant 
day beside a lake when we filmed a dream sequence and we were all there," says 
Broadbent. Claflin, who had already worked with Macfadyen on another TV 
adaptation, Ken Follett'sThe Pillars of the Earth, recently broadcast on 
Channel 4, had been particularly looking forward to acting alongside Broadbent, 
a hero of his. "Heartbreaking," he says, "to realise that as we were playing 
the same character I'd barely get to meet him. Our filming weeks didn't 
overlap, and Jim's last day was my first."

Claflin recalls seeing Macfadyen reading the novel between takes while filming 
The Pillars of the Earth, "sitting in full medieval costume in the middle of 
Vienna, thick mud all around, avidly turning the pages of a paperback". It was 
a long shoot, and when Macfadyen had finished he passed the book to Claflin: 
"I'm not much of a reader, but I absolutely loved it."

"Fuck! Fabulous!" was Macfadyen's response, months later, when he discovered 
Channel 4 was plotting its adaptation and wanted him to play "middle Logan". 
When he heard producers were looking for somebody to play Logan in his teens 
and 20s, he suggested Claflin. "Much better-looking," says Macfadyen, "but I 
thought he'd be perfect as a younger me."

It was one element in a charmed year for Claflin, who left drama school in 
2009. He was considering a touring theatre job –Macbeth – when he got a part in 
The Pillars of the Earth as a swashbuckling knight. That led into Any Human 
Heart and there, while in a make-up chair having his prosthetic dimple applied, 
he received a call to tell him he'd been cast to star in the newPirates of the 
Caribbean film. He's spent the time since filming in Hollywood and Hawaii 
alongside Johnny Depp.

Broadbent and Macfadyen get a little misty-eyed thinking of themselves at 
Claflin's age. "I've just turned 36, that grand old age," says Macfadyen, 
currently "in green-screen hell" filming CGI scenes for his role as Athos inThe 
Three Musketeers. "Hopefully, I'm only halfway through my life and, as with 
Logan, there are a lot 'mes' to come."

Broadbent remembers being a young actor, "working in rep, which doesn't exist 
now, and in rough fringe theatre, which doesn't exist now". He didn't get his 
big-screen break until well into his 40s. "It's one of the advantages I have 
over Sam, who's young. I can recognise the sequence of different experiences in 
one's life."

Macfadyen thinks the clue to Logan's appeal is that he deals with these 
changing sequences – his portions of good and bad luck over 85 years – without 
complaint or resistance: "He doesn't try terribly hard, Logan, he's just sort 
of there. He's present. He believes that so much is luck, which doesn't mean 
you oughtn't work, or oughtn't try, but ultimately it's out of your hands and 
you should just ride the wave."

Has he re-read the book since playing the part? "I dipped in the other day. It 
makes you realise any adaptation is only an impression of the novel." All 
actors express disappointment – jokingly – at favourite sequences of the novel 
being excised from the screenplay, adapted by Boyd himself. Claflin misses 
early scenes that involved Logan becoming a suicidally enthusiastic rugby blue 
as part of a dare. Broadbent liked a later bit in which Logan (adopting yet 
another identity) became a lecturer in Nigeria, a sequence excised regretfully 
by Boyd for lack of time.

While filming an adaptation of Anthony Trollope's The Way We Live Now in 2001, 
Macfadyen abandoned his research-read of the novel. "My character was described 
by Trollope in totally different terms, a totally different person to me. You 
have to remember it's not the book, ultimately, that you're shooting, but 
rather the scripted adaptation. As an actor you can't play the book, only the 
moments – very simple moments – in the script. I've never enjoyed watching 
something as much as I've enjoyed reading it."

But Any Human Heart, boosted by being adapted for the screen by its author, 
transfers very well. Like the book, it clips along at great pace, eating up the 
century over four episodes and leaving the viewer – like Logan – wondering at 
how quickly a lifetime ebbs away. None of the trio has seen a final cut when we 
speak, but each is looking forward to a viewing.

They don't look hugely alike, and some effort was made to homogenise their 
looks. "Jim doesn't have any earlobes," chuckles Macfadyen, "so he got some 
fitted." Claflin was given blue contact lenses and even a prosthetic dimple in 
his chin to make him more like Macfadyen. They all recall long talks about 
developing a shared idiosyncrasy each would feed into his scenes, involving the 
choreographed twiddling of a Zippo lighter, but the idea was ditched. "We 
realised my version of Logan wasn't a smoker by the time I got to him," says 
Broadbent. "We didn't want it to seem like we were doing impressions of one 
another," adds Macfadyen.

In the finished film the moments of transition between the trio are 
unobtrusive. Macfadyen replaces Claflin on the eve of a wedding, and they make 
very plausible cosmic twins. Broadbent takes over from Macfadyen in the third 
episode, having hung over the previous films as a kind of narrator and spectral 
presence. He plays the final, haunted years of Logan with a terrific 
combination of fire and sadness. Ultimately, it is Broadbent's Logan that 
lingers.

"My favourite moment," says Macfadyen, "comes when Jim's Logan speaks to a 
visiting priest late on. He says something like: 'No plumbline can fathom the 
depths of my faithlessness – now fuck off.'" It is what Macfadyen ultimately 
loves about the character: "He doesn't buy any superstitious claptrap. There's 
life, and what you make of it."
 