
About 1,900 jobs have been saved after Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/adams> Childrenswear was bought out of 
administration by its former owner, the Northern Ireland businessman John 
Shannon.

The retail chain, which has 120 shops still open throughout the UK and 
Ireland, went into administration on New Year's Eve, one of a string of 
failures on the high street as Britain has fallen into recession. Since then 
147 outlets have been closed with the loss of about 1,100 jobs.

The administrator, PricewaterhouseCoopers, declined to say how much the 
business had been sold for.

Shannon, 58, has held positions in retailers including Country Casuals, Laura 
Ashley and Moss Bros. This is the second time he has bought Adams out of 
administration.

In February 2007 he paid £15m for the business, the move led to the closure of 
42 stores. He sold his stake in shoe retailer Stead and Simpson, where he had 
been chairman, to fund that deal.

Since then worsening sales have made it harder for the firm to shoulder its 
£30m of debt. Competition from supermarkets and other high street retailers has 
meant it has struggled to find a niche for itself.

Adams, based in Nuneaton in Warwickshire, is the largest independent 
childrenswear retailer in the UK and had an annual turnover of £150m before it 
went into administration. The firm sells babywear, school uniforms and clothes 
for children aged from two to 10.

"We are delighted to be able to secure this business sale and provide some 
much needed stability for customers, suppliers and employees alike in these 
uncertain times," said Rob Hunt, joint administrator.

The new company will continue to trade under the Adams name. The business was 
founded in 1933 by Amy Adams, who sold clothing for babies out of her 
Birmingham home.

The high street has been savaged by the recession, with retailers including 
Woolworths, Land of Leather, Zavvi and Whittard of Chelsea going into 
administration over the past few months.

A further 17,000 high street jobs are currently under threat at JJB Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jjbsports> as its lenders negotiate a 
debt restructuring for the retailer and 5,400 jobs are in the balance at 
stricken footwear chains Barratts and Priceless Shoes. There were reports 
yesterday however that Michael Ziff, chairman of the shoe chains' parent 
company, was preparing a bid for part of the business.

About eleven retailers will become insolvent in the first quarter of the year, 
trade body R3 recently warned.

"The official quarter four insolvency statistics will begin to show the 
business failures caused by the recession," R3 president Nick O'Reilly said. 
"Our survey shows that UK insolvency practitioners believe that we have not yet 
seen the worst. An overwhelming majority of insolvency practitioners believe 
that this downturn will be deeper than the 1990s recession; over two thirds 
think this one will last longer, and three quarters think more businesses will 
close this time around."

Corporate insolvencies will peak at 19,796 in 2009, slightly falling to 19,202 
in 2010, when the economy is expected to start recovering, R3 said.
 