
Joe Hockey <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey> is calling 
for a “sensible, mature debate” about tax reform options, including an increase 
to the rate or base of Australia’s goods and services tax (GST).

In a speech in Melbourne on Wednesday, the federal treasurer will also offer 
qualified support to digitally disruptive companies such asUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, saying governments should not 
“try to tax or legislate them out of existence”.

Hockey’s planned address to the PwC Tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tax-australia> Reform Forum 
canvasses six key principles of tax reform, but his comments about the GST will 
attract the most attention.

GST debate fires up again with proposal to distribute on per-capita basis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/23/gst-debate-fires-up-again-with-proposal-to-distribute-on-per-capita-basis>
The treasurer is seeking to prepare the ground for state and territory 
governments to “take responsibility for their own budgets” including hospital 
funding. All GST revenue is distributed to the states and territories, which 
have less capacity than the federal government to raise funds but are 
responsible for key frontline services.

Before the Council of Australian Governments (Coag) leaders’ retreat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/17/tony-abbott-talks-unity-but-was-colin-barnett-says-hes-angry-with-other-states>
 in Sydney next week, Hockey will say that “as best as possible, the revenue 
raising capacity of each tier of government should be aligned to 
responsibilities of funding and service delivery”.

“Our current federal system clearly fails this objective. Because of the high 
concentration of revenue raising capacity at the federal level, vertical fiscal 
imbalance is higher in Australia than in other federations,” he will say, 
according to speech notes distributed by his office.


“Not only do the states and territories raise considerably less revenue than 
they spend, around a third of their tax is from inefficient taxes: stamp duties 
on real and intangible property, insurance duties and so forth.

“Many submissions [to the tax white paper process] have called for the 
abolition of these taxes and a broadening of the GST base, or an increase to 
the rate, or both.

The states and territories raise considerably less revenue than they spend.
Federal treasurer, Joe Hockey 
“But when it comes to the GST, let me be very clear: no change will be 
considered without the unanimous agreement of state and territory governments 
and bipartisan support in the federal parliament.”

The federal Labor party and most state and territory governments have 
expressed opposition to increasing the GST, a proposal which Abbott ruled out 
before the 2013 election.

But state and territory leaders from across the political divide have also 
criticised Abbott for his 2014 budget decision to cut about $80bn from 
long-term projected hospital and school funding payments. Premiers and chief 
ministers argue this will place an “unsustaintable” crunch on their budgets. 
They are expected to raise the issue when they meet the prime minister, Tony 
Abbott, at the Coag event next week.

Hockey will call on leaders to use the Coag retreat to engage in a 
“constructive discussion about reforming our federation”.


“This must include the states taking responsibility for their own budgets in 
order to ensure they can afford their ever increasing expenditure – such as the 
costs of their public hospital systems as our population ages into the future,” 
his speech notes say.


“Thankfully, we have started to see some taxation reform at a state level. The 
state government in South Australia has engaged in tax reform, as has the ACT 
government. And the former South Australian and Victorian governments moved to 
a broad-based land tax to wholly replace inefficient insurance-based fire 
services levies in 1999 and 2013 respectively.

Joe Hockey asks treasury to calculate cost of dropping GST on tampon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/26/push-to-drop-gst-on-tampons-and-sanitary-pads-gets-labors-support>
“Surely it is not beyond the capacity of us as a country to have a sensible, 
mature debate about long term tax reform more generally.”

In an interview with the ABC on Wednesday, Hockey acknowledged a GST increase 
would have the biggest impact on poorer households and they would need to be 
compensated.

“If you were to increase the GST, it would be the federal government, through 
the income tax system or through the payment system, that would need to 
compensate low and middle income earners who would carry the greatest burden 
associated with an increase in the GST,” he said.

“So if you were to increase the GST and the benefit went to the states, the 
commonwealth would have to find the money to compensate people for the impact 
of that. Now, that is a very complicated equation, that is why we say 
emphatically the silver bullet in tax reform is not increasing or broadening 
the GST. It is about having a considered approach to the entire tax base.”

Hockey reaffirmed his previous comments about the need to address “bracket 
creep” – the phenomenon whereby people move into higher income tax brackets as 
a result of inflation.

Abbott said on Wednesday the government wanted to see “more efficient and more 
effective governance over time” including better schools and public hospitals 
with less interference between levels of government.


“That is very much what I will be canvassing with the premiers next week at 
the leaders’ retreat,” the prime minister said.

The government is developing tax and federation reform white papers, which 
will provide options for the Coalition to take to the next election.


A new paper from the Grattan Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/14/shift-from-stamp-duty-to-property-levy-could-raise-7bn-a-year-for-states-report>
 suggests state governments could raise $7bn a year by introducing a property 
levy that could eventually replace inefficient taxes such as stamp duty.


Defining his six principles, Hockey says tax reform should: align revenue 
raising capacity to government responsibilities; promote a stronger economy; be 
fit for purpose in the modern economy; encourage workforce participation and 
ensure families control their own money; avoid taxing people until they have 
earned the income; and encourage innovation and opportunity.


In his speech, Hockey will note the rise of companies such as Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, Uber, Airbnb and Alibaba. 
Governments are wrestling with how to treat such companies amid complaints from 
existing operators – including the taxi and hotels industries – that they are 
on an uneven playing field.

“One of the lessons of this digital disruption is that our tax system should 
not favour one type of economic activity or punish another, because what these 
businesses have shown is that digital disruption is real,” Hockey’s speech 
notes say.

“It simply won’t work if governments try to tax or legislate them out of 
existence.”
 