 There is nothing worse for an emollient political leader than to follow in the 
wake of a melodramatic figure, as uptight Clement Attlee discovered when he 
succeeded Winston Churchill in 1945. This has been proved once again in 
Scotland, where quietly spoken, pallid faced John Swinney replaced Alex Salmond 
as leader of the Scottish National party in 2000.
John Swinney has no taste for the highwire dramatics of Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>. Yet this may not matter. 
His job, as the leader of a party which is the official opposition to Labour in 
most parts of Scotland and in the Scottish parliament, is vastly different to 
Alex Salmond's when he emerged a decade earlier as top man of what many saw as 
a tiny sect of three or four Westminster MPs speaking for extremist nationalism.

Mr Salmond felt it necessary to treat his more numerous opponents with 
contemptuous disregard, operating as a political guerrilla force. His attacks, 
and his setting of impossible targets such as early independence, were meant to 
encourage the political warriors in the glens. It worked - to an extent at 
least. Scotland did not win independence but it did gain an effective devolved 
parliament thanks to Mr Salmond's decision to back Labour's demand for a 
"yes-yes" vote in a referendum endorsing devolution in 1997.

By the time John Swinney became leader in September 2000, the SNP's target had 
been scaled down by Mr Salmond himself to full autonomy for Scotland, and the 
party held 35 seats to Labour's 56 in the Edinburgh parliament. The SNP's focus 
had also moved away from Westminster.

John Swinney has the personality for this new era of Scots politics: a 
cheerful, reasonable man with an inclusive approach. "I want to make sure I am 
taking everyone with me" is his slogan. In fact, so unabrasive is his 
personality that he has risen within SNP ranks almost without friction. Even in 
the Westminster parliament, where Mr Salmond's sharp tongue and tactical mind 
created many enemies, Mr Swinney will leave at the next election with few 
enemies.

In many ways Mr Swinney is the child prodigy of Scottish nationalism. His 
father, Kenneth, was an apolitical Edinburgh garage manager. John seems to have 
been bitten by the SNP bug at Forrester high school in 1979 at the age of 15, 
even before he got to Edinburgh University and did an honours MA in politics 
there.

In 1986, at the age of 22, he became the SNP's youngest national secretary, 
successfully contesting the post four months before he had taken his university 
finals and beating an older and much more experienced activist. In 1992, he 
came within 3,439 votes of ousting the kilt wearing veteran Tory MP Bill 
Walker, from the Highlands' North Tayside, the Perthshire seat which includes 
the family home of the Bowes-Lyon family of the Queen Mother. He finished that 
task in May 1997, on the back of a pro-SNP swing of 8.4%, ending Bill Walker's 
18 year reign.

His entry into the Commons, in sharp contrast to that of Alex Salmond, was 
mild and constructive. He concentrated on bread and butter issues such as 
getting Scottish beef from BSE-free herds back into its European markets. He 
described Tory attacks on Labour's handling of the European beef ban as 
"barefaced cheek". Having helped make Scotland Tory-free he had no desire to 
see the party return, even if it meant abandoning soft words.

His attacks on the government focused on a complaint not unique to Scotland, 
that it based its decisions on the needs of south-east England, with its 
overheated economy, rather than the economically cool remainder of the country. 
He also tried to reduce the imposition of higher taxes on fuel, pointing out 
that Scotland had huge rural areas where motor cars were essential.

Without becoming bitter, he countered the argument that Scotland was being 
subsidised by quoting with approval a Treasury estimate that Scotland was a net 
contributor to the UK to the tune of £27bn. He opposed applying to Scotland 
Gordon Brown's 1p cut in income tax, preferring to spend the £700m involved in 
better public services.

This policy-centred approach seemed to satisfy his constituents. When the 
Scottish parliament elections took place in April 1999, he won his constituency 
with a majority of 4,192 on a 1% swing to the SNP.

In the Scottish parliament he became the SNP's spokesman on enterprise and 
lifelong learning. As such he ridiculed the decision of Labour's Henry McLeish 
to exempt university students from south of the border from tuition fees for 
their fourth year at Scottish universities.

When in July 2000 Alex Salmond made the surprise announcement that he was 
stepping down as the SNP's leader after a decade in the job, heavy betting 
pointed to Swinney as his preferred successor. At the Inverness SNP conference 
that September, he was elected leader by 67% of the votes to fundamentalist 
Alex Neil's 33%, and in his victory speech said: "I stand here as the first 
leader in the history of the SNP who has a hard headed opportunity to lead our 
party into government and our country on to independence."

Ask Aristotle about John Swinney 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5079,00.html>
 