
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight

At Camelot one New Year's Day the feasting knights are interrupted by a 
gigantic green knight who arrives for a trial of blows. Sir Gawain decapitates 
him, but he picks up his head and leaves, challenging Gawain to meet him next 
New Year's Day, when he will have to bare his neck for a return blow.

"The Old Year" by John Clare

Clare's poem either celebrates or deplores the oblivion that New Year's Day 
can bring. "Old papers thrown away, / Old garments cast aside, / The talk of 
yesterday, / Are things identified; / But time once torn away / No voices can 
recall: / The eve of New Year's Day / Left the Old Year lost to all."

In Memoriam by Alfred Lord Tennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/alfred-tennyson>

The first New Year in this mournful poem stirs hope. "Dip down upon the 
northern shore, / O sweet new-year delaying long; / Thou doest expectant nature 
wrong; / Delaying long, delay no more". The second rouses the poet to life. 
"Ring out the old, ring in the new, / Ring, happy bells, across the snow: / The 
year is going, let him go; / Ring out the false, ring in the true."

"The Chimes" by Charles Dickens

Dickens's story finds humble ticket-porter Trotty, on New Year's Eve, 
despairing of humanity. That night the church bells begin ringing, and the 
spirits of the bells and their goblin attendants tell Trotty that he is dead 
and present him with visions of life without him. His faith in himself is 
restored.

Middlemarch by George Eliot

The Vinceys throw a party on New Year's Day, and one of the guests, the kind 
vicar Mr Farebrother, sees the tensions that go unperceived by his jolly hosts. 
Rosamond has become bored by her husband; Lydgate is preoccupied by his money 
problems; Fred Vincey is jealous of Mr Farebrother's attentions to Mary Garth. 
Happy New Year.

A Doll's House by Henrik Ibsen

At Christmas, Nora and her husband talk about how everything will be better in 
the New Year: he will have a new job and all their money worries will be over. 
Nora tells the threatening Krogstad: "As soon as the new year comes, I shall in 
a very short time be free of the whole thing." So she is, but not as she 
imagined – slamming the door on her family as the new year dawns.

"New Year's Eve" by Thomas Hardy

On the brink of a new year, the speaker of this poem has a colloquy with God 
about the apparently "logicless" business of Creation. God finds all the 
questions a little baffling. "He sank to raptness as of yore, / And opening New 
Year's Day / Wove it by rote as theretofore, / And went on working evermore / 
In his unweeting way."

"New Year on Dartmoor" by Sylvia Plath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/sylvia-plath>

"This is newness". Plath introduces a child to the new year on a frosty day, 
but being Plath the maternal description has an edge of fear. "Only you / Don't 
know what to make of the sudden slippiness, / The blind, white, awful, 
inaccessible slant". The child is "too new" to cope with this cold world, and 
"too new" to share the mother's chilly apprehensions.

White Teeth by Zadie Smith

Smith's novel begins on New Year's Day 1975, with Archie Jones trying to kill 
himself. He fails and ends up at a New Year's Eve party that is still going 
from the night before. There he meets Clara, a vision of eccentric perfection, 
and before long he has another wife.

The Children of Men by PD James

Is this the glummest new year in recent fiction? On New Year's Day, 2021, "the 
last human being to be born on earth was killed in a pub brawl". He was 25, a 
significant age because, in James's dystopian tale, it has been 25 years since 
a pandemic made all human beings infertile. On the same day Theodore Faron 
begins his journal of humanity's last days.JM
 