
Arqiva, which handles TV and radio transmitters for most UK broadcasters and 
is a partner in the BBC-backedYouView 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/youview> video-on-demand venture, has hired 
former senior ITV manager John Cresswell as its new chief executive.

Cresswell takes up his new role on Monday at Arqiva, which also owns online TV 
venture SeeSaw. He replaces Tom Bennie, who has been chief executive ofArqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> since it was formed in 2005.

He was most recently held the role of ITV interim chief executive until 
handing over the reins to Adam Crozier, the former head of Royal Mail and boss 
of the FA, in April last year. Cresswell had held the role of chief operating 
officer and been a key lieutenant to former ITV executive chairman Michael 
Grade.

Arqiva is involved in a range ventures including owning much of the 
transmission infrastructure behind Freeview and is heavily involved in digital 
switchover and efforts to extend broadband to rural communities.

The company is also one of the founding partners of YouView, the BBC-backed 
venture to bring video-on-demand services to Freeview and Freesat households.

"The key attraction is that there are huge opportunities and massive potential 
for growth," said Cresswell. "The spectrum released from digital switchover 
means opportunity, look at the proliferation of mobile devices and handsets and 
the need for network upgrades. Tom Alexander [Orange's UK chief executive] is 
talking about 4G and 5G by the end of the decade ... and we are well placed for 
that".

Cresswell, who was a client of Arqiva during his time at ITV, said that he 
would need to "get up to speed" with the company's mobile operations.

After leaving ITV he took time out to do a short stint as volunteer teacher in 
two primary schools in Zanzibar to "get out of my comfort zone".

During his time at ITV Cresswell was heavily involved in Project Kangaroo, the 
broadcaster's ill-fated attempt to launch an online TV platform with BBC 
Worldwide and Channel 4.

The technology developed for Project Kangaroo was acquired by Arqiva and 
formed the basis for SeeSaw after competition regulators blocked the service. 
"It is on a list of things I need to look at," he said. "I should take a look 
and understand what the plans are for it. The Kangaroo technology was very 
good."

Arqiva is owned by a consortium of eight shareholders, the biggest of which 
are Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and Australian firm Macquarie. The 
company employs 2,000 staff in 80 sites across the UK, Europe and the US.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 