 John Prescott is a heavyweight politician with a thin skin and long toes. And 
anyone who steps on his toes or pricks his skin can expect an explosion.
Perhaps only in Tony Blair's case does the blast tend to take place behind 
closed doors - Mr Prescott was reported to have attacked Mr Blair as a "fucking 
Jesus Christ" for freezing cabinet salaries without consultation.

Despite his volatile personality, Mr Prescott can keep cabinet arguments over 
PR or allowing Liberal Democrats into government in the family. He knows he is 
the vital link between old Labour working class trade unionists and Islington's 
new Labour modernisers, who appeal to middle England.

The Blair-Prescott relationship is both crucial and possibly incendiary. As 
leader and deputy leader respectively, they have both been elected to their 
post, and thus both have a mandate within the party. Each appeals to a 
different, slightly overlapping, audience. Mr Prescott is aware that he could 
blow Mr Blair apart with a devastating denunciation but he also knows that this 
would also mean his own destruction, and that of the Labour government. So he 
keeps relatively quiet about his contempt for the "project", Philip Gould's 
focus groups, and the sadly departed Peter Mandelson.

Mr Prescott's indispensability is most obvious at Labour party conferences, 
where his rousing speeches complement those of Mr Blair, reassuring the working 
class section of delegates whom the prime minister cannot really reach. Even 
the best of these speeches contain some garbled syntax, much sneered at by 
press sketchwriters, but fully understood by his cheering audience.

His exaggerated verbal infelicities conceal his heavyweight contributions 
across the breadth of his vast domain which encompasses environment, transport 
and the regions. When he rather undiplomatically described his French 
counterpart at a key environmental conference as too tired to reach an 
agreement, it received 10 times as much publicity as his achievement at the 
preceding Kyoto conference. A crusading devolutionist, he is eager to divide 
England into regions with their own assemblies - but he has had to compromise, 
accepting regional development associations instead.

Although known as "Two Jags" for his love of cars, he is an enthusiast for an 
integrated public transport system. Having been blocked by the chancellor from 
renationalising Railtrack - or even keeping the tube or air-traffic control 
under decently-financed public ownership - he eventually settled for 
public-private partnership, and has been desperately defending the policy from 
Ken Livingstone ever since. Luckily for him, he has belatedly acquired the 
efficient Lord (Gus) MacDonald, once a young Trotskyite firebrand, as his 
transport minister.

On the environmental front, Mr Prescott has had Michael Meacher by his side 
from the outset. Once derided for his semi hard-left views, Mr Meacher has 
proved one of the most effective of Labour's ministers.

Mr Prescott was born in Prestatyn, north Wales, in May 1938. His mother's 
family were Wrexham miners and union officials. His truculent father, Bert, was 
a Liverpool-born railwayman who lost half a leg at Dunkirk.

Relations between father and son have not always been cordial. When John said 
that he had "a middle class income", Bert insisted to the Sun that his son was 
still working class. This was a silly spat but Mr Prescott has always been 
class conscious, not least because his first major job, from 17 to 25, was as a 
steward on the Cunard line. His servile status in that job is regularly 
referred to by toff Tory MP Nicholas Soames, who shouts across the Commons 
floor: "A whisky and soda for me, Giovanni. And a gin and tonic for my friend!".

Aboard ship Mr Prescott was an organiser for the seamen's union, much too left 
for its easygoing rightwing leader, Bill Hogarth. Blacklisted by three shipping 
lines, the captain of the Mauretania tried to sack him but was forced to sign 
him on again when the rest of the crew walked out in protest. Active in the 
1966 seamen's strike, he was in the Commons gallery when prime minister Harold 
Wilson attacked its leaders as "politically motivated".

By then Mr Prescott was studying at union-backed Ruskin College. "Ruskin gave 
me self-confidence in mobilizing my arguments. It taught me that I had no need 
to feel inferior to anybody," he has sid. He went on to complete a degree 
course at Hull University, under the Marxist professor John Saville, with 
Dennis Kavanagh as his tutor.

With no chance of a union job under Mr Hogarth, Mr Prescott was lucky to 
replace ageing commander Harry Pursey as the union sponsored candidate for safe 
Hull East. He beat Tory Norman Lamont by 22,123 votes in 1970.

It did not hurt his election campaign that he was accompanied by his beautiful 
wife, Pauline, a former hairdresser with an hourglass figure, who has always 
been proud of her looks. Mr Prescott protected her coiffure from the harsh sea 
breeze by driving her 250 yards from their hotel to the party conference hall, 
incurring the ridicule of the opposition as he is the minister responsible for 
trying to get the public to limit car use.

Ask Aristotle about John Prescott 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4254,00.html>
 