 Even the Tory MPs most shocked by William Hague's February 2000 sacking of 
John Redwood privately admitted to questions about his hardhitting behaviour. A 
man of undoubted high intelligence, his over the top attacks sometimes made one 
look for the men in white coats. By general consensus, Mr Redwood is a Tory 
version of Tony Benn: his approach is similar to Mr Benn's pseudo-Marxist 
mindset in its fondness for black-and-white theories expressed in prefabricated 
phrases.
It is his brilliance which carried him from his humble roots in a Canterbury 
council house to top jobs in City merchant banks. It was this same brilliance 
which enabled him to disguise the greed underlying Thatcherism in a series of 
books elevating it to a new philosophy.

And it was his enormous capacity for hard work which enabled him to rise as 
fast as he did. It is said that he wrote his PhD dissertation for Magdalen 
College, Oxford, on the tube, while travelling towork at merchant bankers 
Robert Fleming.

Despite these virtues, his somewhat patchy personality sets him apart. In 
normal discourse, he seems most intelligent and reasonable. But grasping a 
Commons dispatch box he can soar over the top like an unguided missile. His 
unblinking eyes, his jerky movements and the almost-mechanical perfection of 
his brain makes it clear, apart from the pointed ears, why he has been tagged a 
'Vulcan'.

Mr Redwood makes the mistakes of the out-of-touch brilliant. He thinks 
opponents will be persuaded by pure logic. When secretary of state for Wales, 
he failed to master the Welsh national anthem, and thought nobody would mind 
that he never slept in the principality. When chided, he was shocked that 
anyone could complain that he preferred sleeping with his wife in Wokingham.

His singlemindedness is evident from his belief that he can still capture 
enough Tory minds to consider become party leader, despite his setbacks in 
challenging John Major in July 1995, trying to succeed him in May 1997, and 
having been sacked by Mr Hague in 2000. He is not deterred by the fact that his 
"snobbish arrogance" put off even Europhobe Teresa Gorman. Nor by the success 
of Ann Widdecombe in appealing to Tory gut instincts.

His confidence is based on his rapid rise. The youngest ever Oxfordshire 
county councillor, at 21 in 1973, he urged the sale of council houses. Three 
years later he was arguing for privatising nationalised industries, and being 
invited to meet Mrs Thatcher. He had less sex appeal at the polls: fighting the 
1982 Peckham byelection against Harriet Harman, he lost his deposit despite the 
fact that the Tories were riding high in the polls. After becoming Mrs 
Thatcher's head of policy unit, her Tories found him his safe seat at Wokingham 
for 1987.

Although Mr Redwood has never reached high office, he has left a lasting mark 
on the political landscape. He worked with Mrs Thatcher as she created the 
dominant British political ideology of the last 30 years. More importantly, he 
effectively ended her successor's political career by picking up the gauntlet 
when John Major challenged the party to "put up or shut up" when he briefly 
resigned as leader of the Conservative party in 1995 and stood for re-election.

Ask Aristotle about John Redwood 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4356,00.html>
 