
Returning to the team hotel on Friday night after the fourth one-day 
international, England's cricketers were greeted by a sound more disturbing in 
its own way than the occasional boos and jeers that have accompanied the past 
12 weeks on tour. As they entered the atrium of the Hyatt Regency Perth there 
was a spontaneous ripple of applause from the well-heeled locals ranged around 
its open-plan bar, a good-natured, almost entirely non-sarcastic appreciationof 
victory finally for the team that could not win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/24/england-beat-australia-alastair-cook-captain>
. To their credit England's players and coach did exactly the right thing in 
the circumstances. They ignored it and stalked off to the lifts.

Privately though, England will be relieved and quietly encouraged by their 
57-run victory, and not just for the obvious fact of having avoided the 
prospect of that 10-match multi-format losing run. Never mind that Australia 
had four of their first-choice top seven absent at the Waca. This was arguably 
England's best day of an unrelentingly traumatic Australian summer, in part 
because it offered confirmation that even in defeat on this one-day leg they 
have been making some good decisions, perhaps even showing a flexibility that 
was absent during the unyielding paralysis of the Test series.

Cook and Ian Bell have very obviously been told to get on with it at the top 
of the order. Boyd Rankin has sensibly been allowed to recuperate on the 
sidelines (he may be back in Australia for next year's World Cup; then again 
Perth may also one day freeze over). And win or lose in the final match here on 
Sunday – and Brad Haddin, David Warner and Mitchell Johnson are likely to be 
missing for Australia – England have, even in defeat, looked like a team with 
some genuine talent seeded in among the old lags and might-yet-bes. They still 
need another convincing, aggressive middle-order batsman – perhaps Kevin 
Pietersen (don't hold your breath) or a rebooted and refreshed Joe Root – and 
they could do with another fast bowler. But there is reason to believe these 
are issues that can be addressed.

Promoting Ben Stokes to No3 was a bold and sensible decision, irrespective of 
his success in Perth, and was rewarded at the Waca by a controlled, risk-free 
display from a batsman who simply needs to play normally to score quickly in 
the powerplay. Stokes walked off smacking his boot with his bat after skying 
James Faulkner's slower ball, and was later fined 15% of his match fee for 
"using language or a gesture that is obscene, offensive or insulting during an 
international match", but he looked like a player who will score plenty of runs 
in this form. His 70 runs and four wickets adds up to one of the best all-round 
England ODI performances (Ronnie Irani remains the only Englishman to have 
scored fifty and taken five wickets against a major cricketing nation).

Stokes spoke to the press after the game and confirmed that England's 
management do not see him as a stopgap at No3: "They know I can bat." Beyond 
this it is hard not to share the conclusion that for all the surrounding trauma 
England have seen the emergence on this tour – or in Jos Buttler's case, 
further emergence – of two genuinely outstanding young internationals.

"The first time we played against each other was when we were about 14," 
Stokes said of a team-mate he knows well from junior cricket days. "Jos has 
always been good, but some of the shots he has come up with in recent years are 
ridiculous. His flicks and ramps are unbelievable. He'll hit you over the 
keeper's head for four and then smash you back over your head for six. Nowhere 
is safe and when a bloke does that it is very exciting to see."

Much more than just a novelty finisher, Buttler has been a hugely effective 
international short-form batsman in the past year, possessed of wonderful 
natural athletic gifts, a cold-blooded intelligence and a delightful sense of 
fast-twitch violence in those spring-loaded wrists. In his past 16 one-day and 
T20 internationals he has a combined total of 518 runs at 57.5, numbers that 
are less significant than his ability to affect the course of an innings.

The question now is what to do with him. In a less conservative nation it 
would be simple. One Test match wicketkeeping vacancy plus one breathtakingly 
gifted wicketkeeper-batsman equals problem solved. But this is England and 
there must of course be doubts, most tagged to Buttler's first-class average of 
31 (much lower away from Taunton). This, though, is old thinking. Australia and 
India have successfully taken players from short into longer forms, and for 
once it may be best simply to trust the obvious fact of vivid and compelling 
talent over stats and protocol. Should Matt Prior start the season well the 
temptation for England's selectors will be to return to someone who has had 
five excellent years as a senior player. But the notion that Alastair Cook 
should be encouraged to build his own England team has been widely floated of 
late, and if this is really the case Buttler is too talented, too resourceful 
and too much of a draw not to be a part of it in all forms.
 