
A prominent British-Lebanese journalist who hosted a talk show critical of the 
Egyptian president Abdel Fatah al-Sisi’s government has arrived in Beirut after 
being deported from Cairo, her lawyer has said.

Liliane Daoud, a former BBC reporter, could not immediately be reached for 
comment. But her lawyer, Zyad el-Elaimy, tweeted that Daoud planned to 
challenge her deportation.

There was no official explanation for Daoud’s brief detention and deportation 
from Egypt. But an Egyptian security official, speaking on Monday on condition 
of anonymity because he was not authorised to speak to reporters, said Daoud’s 
residency permit expired after her contract with the private ONTV station in
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> was terminated.

Website photographer is latest journalist jailed in Egypt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/17/website-photographer-is-latest-journalist-jailed-in-egypt>
“It’s the first time someone is deported in this fashion in Egypt,” said 
Elaimy, speaking by telephone from Cairo. Even criminals, he said, were asked 
to leave, not taken from their homes.

Late on Monday, eight plain-clothed men escorted Daoud from her home in the 
Cairo suburb where she has lived for five years, after she announced on social 
media that the network had ended her contract.

Her 10-year-old daughter, an Egyptian national, was present when the men took 
Daoud away, giving her no time to pack luggage. She was only able to call her 
family from the plane before it took off for Beirut, the lawyer said.

Elaimy said Daoud’s deportation representated a new low in the government’s 
crackdown on dissent. He said authorities were “not prepared to hear any 
diverse voices or to hear anyone who is supportive” of the 2011 uprising that 
ousted the autocrat Hosni Mubarak and ushered in a period of political 
instability in Egypt.

Since the military overthrow of Mohamed Morsi as president in 2013, the Sisi 
government has shown little tolerance for criticism, banning protests and 
taking programmes off the air.

Daoud’s abrupt deportation has shocked her colleagues and other public figures.

Al-Jazeera employees among six sentenced to death in Egypt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/18/al-jazeera-employees-among-six-people-sentenced-to-death-in-egypt>
Mohamed ElBaradei – a Nobel peace prize laureate and one of the Egyptian 
uprising’s spiritual fathers, who now lives in self-imposed exile – applauded 
Daoud for her professional reporting. “One day we may have enough 
self-confidence to understand the value of having different opinions,” he said 
in a subtle jab at the authorities.

Daoud formerly worked for the BBC, and lived in London before moving to Egypt 
with her daughter after the outbreak of the 2011 protests.

Her ONTV talk show, The Full Picture, aired critical views of Sisi’s 
government and hosted protesters and youth leaders as well as government 
officials. During the brief rule of Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood, she also hosted 
critics of the Islamist group.

Elaimy said Daoud had applied to renew her residency nearly a year ago but 
authorities did not respond, leaving her in limbo. He said Daoud had a right to 
return to Cairo because she had custody of her daughter.

The satirical TV host Bassem Youssef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/08/bassem-youssef-egypts-answer-to-jon-stewart-on-the-pressure-on-tv-satirists>
, whose programme was taken off air for his criticism of the government, 
suggested Daoud’s arrest was “just the beginning”.

“Egypt … can’t tolerate the rest of the world,” said Youssef, who has also 
left Egypt, on his Facebook page.
 