
The legal battle that exposed Adam Werritty's role at the heart of government 
has been settled by a high court judge.

The case brought by the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> and Dubai businessman 
Harvey Boulter against US Post-it note maker 3M ultimately forced Liam Fox, the 
former defence secretary, to reveal his reliance on Werritty, his best man and 
firm friend of 13 years.

On Monday the judge, Mr Justice Hambleden, ruled in favour of Boulter and MoD 
in the dispute over the development of MRSA detection technology, called 
BacLite, which the pair sold to 3M in 2007. The ruling found that 3M was in 
"material breach of its obligations" and awarded the MoD and Boulter's private 
equity firm Porton Group $1.3m (£800,000) in damages, significantly below the 
$40m they had sought.

The case was discussed at the now infamous meeting between Fox, Werritty and 
Boulter at a five-star hotel in Dubai this summer. The MoD's failure to account 
for that meeting on the 41st floor of the Shangri-la hotel exposed Werritty as 
Fox's unofficial adviser and triggered a possible blackmail lawsuit which could 
involve the former defence secretary giving evidence to a US court.

After Monday's ruling, 3M lawyers repeated the blackmail claims, alleging that 
Boulter "participated in an illegal campaign to extort more than $34m from 3M 
to settle the BacLite case prior to a final judgment or else Boulter and 
[Lanny] Davis would use their influence with recently resigned UK minister for 
defence DrLiam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> to interfere 
with 3M's business in the UK". Davis is Boulter's legal and PR adviser.

3M claims an email Boulter sent in the middle of the night after the meeting 
in Dubai on 17 June shows that Boulter threatened to seek Fox's help to have 
what he described as the "rather embarrassing situation" of a knighthood 
awarded to 3M's British-born chief executive Sir George Buckley discussed by 
the cabinet.

In the email, Boulter suggested that a settlement "at a headline of $30m-plus 
will allow MoD to internally save face".

William Brewer, a partner at Bickel & Brewer and counsel for 3M, said: "With 
the London matter now successfully resolved, 3M is anxious to press forward 
with its claims against Mr Boulter and his affiliates.

"In our view, the judgment in London demonstrates that Mr Boulter and others 
clearly were not entitled to the tens of millions of dollars that they sought 
from 3M."

Boulter said he would call both Fox and Werritty as witnesses if and when 3M's 
claims reach court. "We have got to get at the dark heart of the business and 
politics of lobbying," Boulter said. "They are going to be forced to tell us 
the truth."

3M's lawyers are also considering calling Fox to give evidence in the case 
currently pending in Washington DC. A trial could start as early as next year. 
Boulter and Davis deny the allegations.

With reference to the BacLite case, Boulter said: "I am delighted that we have 
been vindicated in our attempt to force 3M to face up to their 
responsibilities. But the victims here are those infected with MRSA. A weapon 
in that fight was wrongfully abandoned by 3M.

"This is a question of trust and honour which in my opinion seems to have been 
sadly lacking in 3M's behaviour. The judge has made it quite clear that 3M did 
not live up to its promises."

3M bought BacLite for £10m with an agreement for further payments of up to 
£41m depending on sales performance. The technology was originally developed by 
the MoD's science and technology laboratory at a cost of £15m. As it stands, 
having earned £5m from Ploughshare's half of the sale price, the taxpayer has 
been left £10m out of pocket.

It comes as one of Werritty's financial backers prepares to hand the police 
new evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/04/adam-werritty-police-evidence-duped>
 that he claims proves Fox's best friend and self-styled adviser duped him into 
handing over money. Jon Moulton, a multimillionaire venture capitalist who 
donated £35,000 to the "slush fund" set up to support Werritty's jetset 
lifestyle, has told the Guardian he will provide the police with documents 
proving he was misled by Werritty.

Werritty is not among those who has been interviewed by police, his lawyer 
said on Friday.

"Adam has not been contacted by the police, and it follows that he has not 
been interviewed by them," said the lawyer.

"I can add that he has also not been asked to provide a written statement to 
the police, nor has he done so voluntarily."
 