
The heat and humidity was rising in Accra yesterday and the air itself seemed 
to sweat. Yet there was a palpable crackle too, as the city, like the rest of 
the country, pulsed with passion and paranoia ahead of one of the most intense 
derbies in world football. Ghana meetNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> today, in the 
quarter-final of the African Cup of Nations to boot. For both teams victory 
would be as delicious as defeat would be ignominious.

At the Nigerian team hotel yesterday morning, anger burned as officials sought 
to thwart a perceived Ghanaian sabotage attempt. Originally scheduled to train 
at the Ohene Djan Stadium, the venue for today's clash, at 4pm, the Super 
Eagles received a phone call from the Ghanaian FA at 8am in the morning telling 
them that their session had been brought forward to 9am. "They knew very well 
that there's no way we could be ready and there within 60 minutes," barked one 
of the Nigerian delegation. Around him stood a phalanx of guards whose scowls, 
so at odds with Friday night's singing and smiles, testified to the mounting 
tension.

One Super Eagles supporter who was fluttering around outside the hotel 
reckoned he knew exactly what was going: "I've lived here for many years and 
it's obvious - they don't want us to use the stadium because they want time to 
lay down all their juju," he gnashed. Others scoffed, but he railed on: "I'm 
telling you, they want to curse us! They will do anything to beat us!" Well, if 
that was the plan it didn't work - after a lengthy pow-wow between the parties, 
Nigeria were given the go-ahead to train.

Ghanaians fear trickery too. Talk all week has been of the difficulty of 
finding tickets for the battle, with designated points of sale not receiving 
their allocations and riot police having to intervene to quell deprived fans. 
The Mystery of the Disappearing Tickets cost one Ghanaian administrator his 
job, but Friday night's evening news on TV peddled the suggestion that 
Nigerians were somehow involved - and that, humiliatingly, the hosts will be 
outnumbered in their own ground.

Ahead of the rumble, key protagonists have dispensed with the usual diplomacy 
and instead launched into boxer-esque bravado. "I am certain we will beat 
Nigeria and we will win the Cup," declared West Ham's Ghanaian defender John 
Painstil, neglecting to mention that he himself, as a right-back who so far 
this tournament has looked about as convincing as an electoral promise, 
constitutes a weak link that Nigeria may seek to exploit.

The Nigerians themselves, who'll each scoop a $15,000 bonus if they reach the 
semis, point out that Ghana have beaten them only once in the last 15 years; 
Ghanaians counter by pointing out that the Black Stars have the better overall 
record (having won 24 of the countries' 59 meeting, to Nigeria's 16) and that 
the last time the two sides met - last year in a London friendly - Michael 
Essien devoured Obi John Mikel as the Super Eagles were demolished 4-1.

"Essien had a good laugh the last time," admitted Nigerian midfielder Seyi 
Olofinjana. "But now I have the opportunity to prove to him how important this 
game is to my country. It will be an explosive game and we are very, very 
confident."

Austin Eguavoen, who was manager for the London debacle and is now assistant 
to Berti Vogts, expressed his determination for vengeance by vowing: "We have 
the plan to prick the eyes of the Black Stars to gather enough clouds to cover 
their glitter."

The Ghanaian media are equally confident. Headlines from the last two days 
include: "Black Stars to deliver! (The Ghanaian Times 
<http://www.newtimesonline.com/>)"; Black Stars to crush Super Chickens! ( 
Daily Graphic <http://www.graphicghana.com/>)" and "Disgrace Nigeria for us!!!" 
(Kotoko Express).

In the Kotoko Express, satirical columnist Kofi Amoako Duodu called on Ghana 
fans not to boo Nigeria but to heap pressure on their own players, reasoning 
that the Black Stars' improved performance against Morocco (following jittery 
displays against Guinea and Namibia) came after fans hurled so much abuse at 
striker Asamoah Gyan that he and his brother, midfielder Bafour, threatened to 
quit the team.

"The carefully-hidden-but-nevertheless-there 'we'll skin you alive if you 
slack on us' undertones came to bear on the whole team and they realised that 
what was being done to Asamoah could be done to them," reckoned Duodu. "This 
illustrates 'killer's' power to take hostages and makes people's liver quiver," 
he added, after explaining that fans needed to make sure that Ghana played as 
though "'killer', the villain from the movies, had kidnapped their mums, wives 
and children."

Duodu admitted such behaviour was "a below-the-belt move that must be 
condemned utterly", adding: "but do movie villains play by the rules?"
 