
US startup Justin.tv started life as one man livestreaming his daily life to 
the world, before evolving into a platform for anyone to broadcast video over 
the internet from their webcams – and more recently from their phones.

However, the company's future may lie more with its new Socialcam 
<http://socialcam.com/> iPhone app, which focuses on helping people upload 
short video clips and share them across social networks. Launched at the start 
of March, the free app sailed past 200,000 downloads in a couple of weeks, with 
claims that it does for video what apps like Instagram and Picplz do for photos.

Justin.tv CEO Michael Seibel certainly has grand ambitions for Socialcam, as 
he explained toApps <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apps> Blog in an 
interview. "We want to replace the camera app on the phone," he says. "That's 
our goal: to be used by almost everyone who's got a smartphone to store all of 
their media, and distribute that media wherever they like."

Which is what anyone would say when pitching their social video startup, 
although Seibel's talk of replacing the camera app – not to mention his 
deliberate use of the word 'media' – makes it clear that Socialcam's current 
focus on video will expand in the future, most likely to photos first.

Socialcam was born in response to feedback from the Justin.tv livestreaming 
iPhone app, which was downloaded more than four million times in the first six 
months after its release in March 2010. "We realised that more than 90% of 
views of those videos were not people watching live, but after the fact," says 
Seibel.

"What's more, the videos themselves were not broadcast as live videos: they 
were taken as video clips. So we wondered why people were using our live video 
app to take video clips – wasn't this a solved problem? And it turned out that 
it wasn't."

Seibel has a point. Smartphones like iPhone and Android handsets are good at 
uploading people's video clips to YouTube, but not so good at helping these 
videos to be shared on social networks such as Facebook and Twitter. Facebook's 
iPhone app does allow users to upload video clips directly, but the feature is 
somewhat hidden beneath the 'photo' button, while Twitter's is still photos 
only.

"The whole process was broken, so we're trying to solve the problem of sharing 
videos from the phone," says Seibel. Three months' development led to the 
launch of Socialcam, during which time photo-sharing app Instagram made its own 
burst to prominence, with two million downloads.

"Their success showed us there is a massive amount of room in this space to 
take on the big boys," says Seibel. "They're not scared of Facebook, and nor 
should they be. They're doing a really good job in their niche."

However, Seibel resists the label of 'an Instagram for videos' that has been 
applied to Socialcam in some early press coverage. "We think of ourselves as 
much more like a Facebook Photos for video". Hence the ability to tag friends 
in Socialcam videos.

Justin.tv has strong views about what its new app is and is not for. Seibel 
says it's focused on the personal – videos of people's friends, family and 
nights out – rather than a tool for people to broadcast to the world, as the 
livestreaming apps were intended to be.

"We don't see this as YouTube," he says. "This isn't people producing videos 
for general consumption. We don't even put a view-count on the videos. What 
we're really about is that there is a moment happening now with a small circle 
of friends, and all the people in that video would love to watch it later."

How to make money from this? Like many apps of this kind, Socialcam is 
currently going for reach – the maximum number of users – rather than 
monetisation. That said, Seibel says that in-app payments for additional 
features may play a role in the app's future, along with subscription-based 
pricing, and possibly charging for storage as Socialcam users build up a 
collection of videos.

Justin.tv is also looking at the new range of tablets, led by Apple's iPad 2, 
which come with front and rear cameras as standard. "For me, iPad 2 and tablets 
in general are really exciting from a front-facing camera perspective, making 
those short video clips where you're talking about where you are or what you're 
interested in, and your face fills up the entire screen," he says, while 
declining to give any specific details about a Socialcam app for iPad.

Meanwhile, Socialcam is already having a big effect on Justin.tv's approach as 
a company. "We are no longer iterating and improving on our live video app," 
says Seibel. "We are putting all our resources into solving this more basic 
problem. Live is much more of a niche case than video clips."

Which is when he comes back to the idea of becoming the default camera app for 
smartphone users. "YouTube could never control the ingestion point: they always 
had to use your phone or digital camera or Flip video or webcam," he says.

"But on smartphones, we suddenly get to leapfrog all those other devices and 
control the ingestion point, with the potential to reach many more people than 
Sony or Flip or Panasonic with their dedicated video creation devices. 
Smartphones should completely disrupt that market, except on the extreme high 
end."

The big challenge for an app like Socialcam will be the competition in trying 
to become that default camera app: competition from Facebook in particular, but 
also from handset makers, OS platform owners and other startups with VC money 
to fling at the social photos 'n' videos area.
 