
Kaneto Shindo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/kaneto-shindo>, 
who died last month aged 100, just before the start of a two monthBritish Film 
Institute <http://www.bfi.org.uk/> season dedicated to his career and that of 
long-term collaborator Yoshimura Kozaburo, spent a lot of time among the reeds, 
wading through mud, puddles and into woods of bamboo. He was most comfortable 
there, where life was reduced to its bare essentials. Shindo was born in 1912 
in Hiroshima. Japan modernised dramatically over his lifetime, but he observed 
it at a distance, with the knowledge that all this could disappear drummed into 
him from childhood after what had happened to his hometown. His subjects in the 
49 films he made, ranging from melodramas to horror stories to erotic fictions, 
were those society had rejected or brutalised, who were now struggling to 
survive, sometimes resorting to even more brutal methods.

Shindo's work has been eclipsed by his contemporaries, namely the "emperor" 
Akira Kurosawa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/akirakurosawa?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
and the folowing generation, with its New Wave rebels Nagisa Oshima and Shohei 
Imamura. This is not unjust: Shindo's work can be formally messy and his tales 
overly simplistic. But viewing the films today offers an insight into an oeuvre 
made entirely in the shadow of Hiroshima, and how this provoked feelings of 
guilt, paranoia and instability in survivors, but not necessarily rebellion, or 
a cold look at the events that led up to it.

Shindo grew up on a farm – his parents had been rich landlords but they went 
bankrupt, causing the family to break up – and left for Tokyo in 1928 where he 
entered one of the cinema studios. Eventually he progressed into the role of 
assistant director at Shochiku – one of the majors along with Nikkatsu and Toho 
– and also the home of the golden generation: Yasujiro Ozu and Kenji Mizoguchi, 
then at the peaks of their careers. Shindo's encounter with the latter was 
defining: Mizoguchi took him as assistant forThe Straits of Love and Hate 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0028558/> in 1937 and then in 1941 for The 47 Ronin
. He encouraged Shindo to pursue screenwriting as a first stage to becoming a 
director but the war intervened, and Shindo was drafted to the Imperial Navy. 
Out of the group of 100 men he served with, six returned. Shindo's hometown had 
also been destroyed when he came back and his older sister later died from 
radiation sickness.

One of Shindo's first screenplays, The Ball at the Anjo House 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0039154/> in 1947 was for his friend Kozaburo 
Yoshimura, who shares the BFI retrospective because the two men's careers were 
so intertwined – Shindo writing most of Yoshimura's scripts (as well as 
hundreds more for television and other directors) and Yoshimura producing many 
of Shindo's films.The Ball was inspired by Yoshimura's experience shortly after 
returning from his drafting in southeast Asia, but the story of an aristocratic 
family's decline and swansong party at their mansion – ending with a sad tango 
between daughter Setsuko Hara and her suicidal father – also drew from Shindo's 
heritage.

As he moved to directing, Shindo hit against the majors' increasing reluctance 
to back films with a so-called "dark outlook on life" when what they wanted, 
and what the US occupation also approved of, were morale-boosting comedies or 
escapist tear-jerkers. Rather than compromise as Ozu and Mizoguchi had been 
forced to do throughout their careers, Shindo and Yoshimura were among the 
first in Japan to found their own production company in 1950, Kindai Eiga 
Kyokai. This early phase is often misleadingly described as Shindo's 
"political" period, but while he always described himself as socialist, Shindo 
was never affiliated to any party nor involved in militant activities, and his 
political stance was very simple: follow those who have been left behind, 
whether they are prostitutes, farmers, migrant workers or serial killers. He 
took their side and filmed from their point of view. The 1950s was more 
appropriately the phase of Shindo's social dramas, as he used melodrama to 
explore issues and inequalities thrown up by Japan's class system, often with a 
female protagonist, from his first autobiographical film in 1951,Story of a 
Beloved Wife <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0043271/>, to Gutter three years 
later, which followed a troubled, desperate young woman and her bleak 
experiences as a geisha.

When the US occupation ended in 1952, Japan began a delayed confrontation with 
the atrocities of the war and Shindo was commissioned by the Japan Teachers' 
Union to make the first film about the atom bomb. ButChildren of Hiroshima – 
commercially released in the US only last year – was met with a tirade of 
criticism for failing to point the finger at America, and the JTU 
commissioned a second film, this time from Hideo Sekigawa. The resulting
Hiroshima, with its scenes of Japanese tourists buying victims' bones, went 
down much better, and was so popular it set off a wave of similar anti-American 
films.

The political muteness of Children of Hiroshima is startling. Shindo's young 
school teacher – played by his wife Nobuko Otowa, who took on so many different 
roles in his films, from vengeful woman, monstrous spirit, diligent farmer to 
desperate mother – returns four years after the atomic explosion and searches 
for the three survivors from her class. One is an orphan, another is dying from 
radiation poisoning and the last boy is the only child to have been saved, 
though his sister was badly injured. The dialogues have a deliberateness, so 
too the ponderous moments standing in front of rubble. The only moment of anger 
comes from an old man, now a disfigured beggar, who lashes out into the 
darkness, cursing "that damn A-bomb" and his bad luck.

Shindo's film was in part realist, as he used radiation victims in many of the 
roles, but essentially he turned the political into melodrama. In doing so, he 
captured the way Hiroshima was understood by many at the time – an 
inevitability, experienced and mourned as a natural disaster more than a 
planned political act.

In the 1960s, as opposition to the Security Treaty with the US intensified 
from a progressively radicalised student population, Shindo stopped making 
social dramas altogether. He filmed instead what became his biggest 
international success,The Naked Island, a film without dialogue, set on a 
barren island in the Inland Sea. Repeating the question so many faced after the 
bomb – what do you do when you lose everything? –The Naked Island was Shindo's 
answer. "It is a symbol of the world. Two human beings arrive and must make a 
life for themselves." The island has no drinkable water so twice a day the 
parents row across the sea to the nearest town, fill their buckets and head 
back, the wooden stick bending with the weight and digging into their backs as 
they carry it to the top of their hill. Through a succession of beautiful 
images we watch them, back and forth, farming the difficult land, surviving. 
The musical score is continuous, initially seeming to celebrate this simplicity 
but it becomes more sinister as the melody remains the same while the scenes 
start to tell a different story: one of their little boys dies, the wife 
buckles under the weight of the water buckets, tending to the crops she breaks 
down, sabotaging the plantations as her husband looks on.

After the success of The Naked Island, Shindo changed gear again: no more 
social dramas or stylised allegories but racy horror movies. His "erotic" 
period, continuing into the 70s with progressively diminishing returns, mirrors 
a turn many Japanese film-makers made, encouraged by or reacting to the 
emerging soft porn or "pink" films. The erotic and horror themes allowed Shindo 
to approach the instinct of survival from a different angle. "Political things 
such as class consciousness or social existence really come down to the problem 
of man alone," he explained. "I discovered the powerful, very fundamental force 
in man which sustains his survival and which can be called sexual energy." In 
the most striking works from this period,Onibaba in 1964 and Kuroneko four 
years later, Shindo was also at his most formally inventive, more playful than 
perfectionist with messy jump cuts and sound edits, and drawing obvious 
inspiration from the French New Wave.

From the 70s Shindo's inventiveness and daring had started to subside and he 
returned to old themes. He did not take the route of many once pioneering 
directors in Japan, such as Oshima or later Takeshi Kitano, whose recent films 
often do little more than mimic the Hollywood aesthetic. Shindo's work was 
always more marginal and less exportable. For his final film,Postcard, 
completed when he was 99, Shindo went full circle and returned to the origin of 
his cinema, taking a story from his experience in the navy, when nearly all his 
colleagues died before coming home. War marked his generation, and Shindo 
captured on screen one way Japan dealt with it, both obsessively and evasively..
 