
Frédéric Kanouté got his international career off to the sort of start the 
script demanded, scoring the two second-half goals that enabled his new side,
Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali>, to sweep aside Kenya. The 
French-born Tottenham striker, whose presence here in Tunisia so annoyed his 
club, was efficient rather than flamboyant but that was enough to present the 
Eagles with a deserved win.

"It was a very hard game," he said, "but we scored three good goals. For my 
two I tried not to panic and just make sure I scored. My baptism has been a 
successful one, but I am trying not to get overexcited. Our aim is to get out 
of the group and it won't be easy because we have two derby games to come, with 
Senegal and Burkina."

So far so good. His first came from Seydou Keita's dribble and pass and, if 
the finish was straightforward, his feint and run were classy. The second 
involved a sprint on to Djibril Sidibé's through-ball, then a shimmy and a calm 
prod.

That came after Mali had won, and then lost, the lead. Soumaila Coulibaly 
pulled many of the early strings while only Dennis Oliech offered hope for 
Kenya, but the teenage striker lacked composure on his foray into the Mali box.

If that was excusable, the next Kenyan mistake was of a different order. Two 
players dithered on the ball, leaving possession to each other. Mohamed Lamine 
Sissoko profited, running on to slot home the opener. For the 2002 
semi-finalists it was a thoroughly unsurprising head start. Nevertheless Kenya 
responded with character, a welcome sign for a young side making the country's 
first Nations Cup finals appearance since 1992.

Mike Okoth, a veteran of that campaign, was involved in the build-up to the 
equaliser, but then again so was nearly every attacking player. Most had shots 
blocked in a crazy 30-second spell before Titus Mulama struck a sweet left-foot 
volley into the corner of the net.

 Kenya (4-4-2): Onyiso; Kassim, Waweru (Opiyo, 88), Otieno, Shaban; Muiruri 
(Ake, 73), Juma, Mambo, Mulama; Okoth, Oliech.

 Mali (4-4-2): M Sidibé; Diamoutene (D Sidibé, 66), A Coulibaly, Thiam, 
Diawara; Traoré, Diarra, Sissoko, Keita (Touré, 88); S Coulibaly, Kanouté.

 Referee: H Tessema (Ethiopia).
 