
Kanye West made an impassioned tribute to Phife Dawg at a memorial service to 
theA Tribe Called Quest <https://www.theguardian.com/music/a-tribe-called-quest>
 rapper, saying: “Tribe made Kanye West. Made the kid with the pink Polo. Made 
it so I could dress funny.”

West was one of many paying tribute to Phife Dawg – real name Malik Taylor – 
during the four-hour service, which was held at New York’s Apollo theatre. 
André 3000, Chuck D and Busta Rhymes all offered recollections of the rapper, 
in front of an audience of fans, friends and family. There were also 
performances from D’Angelo, the Roots and Grandmaster Flash among others.

During his speech, as reported by Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/read-kanye-wests-emphatic-tribute-to-tribe-called-quests-phife-dawg-20160406>
, West recalled how A Tribe Called Quest’s The Low End Theory was the first 
album he ever bought and how listening to it at school often resulted in 
detention.

“I was sitting here thinking about how much these people inspire me and how 
powerful the influence of the music was and how it made that walk to study hall 
so short. How it meant everything. Itis everything,” said West. “Music was 
stolen from us and corporatised and anybody that spoke up was demonised. 
Anything I ever did wrong, blame Tip and Phife, ’cause y’all raised me.”

He added: “Y’all made it okay in a city of Al Capone – number one murder 
capital city – for me to be me. Tribe madeKanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>. Made the kid with the pink Polo. 
Made it so I could dress funny. I’m not sorry if I said something wrong.”

West also used his tribute to argue that hip-hop is still not given due credit 
as an art form. “Honour that work. That influence. That ability to chop that 
sample. That ability to put that rap together. Honour that,” he said, adding: 
“I’m picturing the Grammys right now, it’s going to be a real quick [tribute]. 
Short, like when the Michael Jackson joint was short. Or when you get to 
Michael Jackson status, somebody say, ‘Aw, you crazy ’cause you said the truth 
out loud.’ You get in trouble for the truth. Honour, man. They gotta honour us; 
honour what hip-hop is.”

West concluded his speech by saying: “I love y’all and I’m not sorry. Rest in 
peace to Phife Dawg.”

Phife Dawg died on 22 March as a result of complications related to diabetes. 
 