
I'm trapped by morality

From Michael, 40s, by email
I am a successful businessman in my early 40s. I am in good health and I am 
physically attractive. My wife, though, whom I selected for her good genes, has 
only produced one son for me and has now become infertile. There are a number 
of younger, healthier women available for me to choose from who could probably 
bear me more children and ensure the continuation of my genetic lineage.

However I am tied up with notions of "love", "duty", "responsibility", 
"morality" and "guilt", but I am aware that these are just irrelevant Christian 
social hangovers. What should I do?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies: 
You seem very confident of the number of healthy women available to you for 
fertilisation; it sounds like you have acquired a harem! Does your wife know? 
Younger women may be attracted to financial security but that's not all that 
attracts them. You are in your early 40s; your semen volume and your sperm 
motility (movement) will be falling as middle age spreads around the girth.

You have one son and I'm guessing he is of school age and thus he requires 
parenting. You are mistaken in viewing your status quo as a dilemma of 
moralities versus descendents. One child that is heavily invested in can do far 
better in evolutionary terms than five neglected children. Your best strategy 
is to support your wife enabling her to give her best to your son.

The sentiments of love and guilt are not Christian hangovers, they are 
evolved, higher cognitive emotions. These sentiments are adapted to best guide 
us through life. There is variation within species. These sentiments are not 
evenly distributed among all humans and neither are they fail-safe, but if you 
feel love when you think of your infertile wife and your only son then get 
happy quick! Why not spend some of your wealth on a family holiday?

Kidd, S, et al (2001). Effects of male age on semen quality and fertility: a 
review of the literature. Fertility and Sterility, Volume 75, Issue 2, Pages 
237-248.

Van Vugt, M & Hart, CM (2004). Social identity as social glue: The origins of 
group loyalty (2004). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 585-598.

De Waal, FBM & Bonnie, KE (2004). Primate Social Reciprocity and the Origin of 
Gratitude, p213, in The Psychology of Gratitude, Oxford University Press.

A mid-life crisis

From anonymous male, 50, by email
This is a classic mid-life crisis thing: guy reaches 50, falls radically out 
of love with wife and into insanely devastating love with Younger Woman, who 
turns him down because she's (sort of) happily married with three children, or 
four, depending how you count these things.

He's a nice guy at heart and reckons he should leave his wife out of honesty, 
to give her a chance to rebuild her life with someone who might really love 
her. But out of pure cowardice he lets himself be talked into staying, which is 
materially an easyish option. He's inevitably going to fall in love with 
another Younger Woman, so this time round is he capable of self-sacrifice and 
staying? Would this be a good idea? If he leaves, is guilt going to kill him? 
What do I do?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
You say you fell "insanely" for a younger, married mum with four children – 
this woman doesn't sound available to me. You say you were talked into staying. 
Was it your wife who talked you into staying, because she knows you better than 
you know yourself? Or did the other women do the talking because she didn't 
want you full-time? Do you want the excitement of love, the serotonin high and 
endorphin rush without making the life-change you speak of? You ask if guilt 
would kill you – would your wife's survival be threatened without you? You 
mention self-sacrifice – is your wife hard to live with? Or are you comfortable 
and bored? Your wife might manage very well without you.

Jane Goodall, among others, has observed the complex emotions of chimps and 
has noted that in times of stress, or when in need of quiet contemplation, 
individual chimpanzees take themselves away from the group to a beautiful spot, 
to rest and watch waterfalls, for example. These trips to areas of natural 
beauty are not for feeding, breeding or socialising purposes; rather they are 
occasions when chimps feel the need to take a break from the pressures of 
primate life.

Humans have an innate appreciation of natural beauty. If you can take a break 
I recommend you leave behind both work and domestic pressures and go 
travelling. Make use of your evolved, higher primate ability to self-reflect, 
and test your instincts in an environment unknown to you. You need to be up 
against the elements and relying on your intuition to discover what it really 
is that you want from the rest of your life.

Through a Window: My Thirty Years With the Chimpanzees of Gombe. Jane Goodall. 
Mariner Books (paperback) April 2010.

My fear of snakes

From Johnny Viper, ageless, by email
I have a bit of a problem with snakes. The weird thing is, I was born in New 
Zealand and have lived here all my life. But there are no snakes here so my 
phobia is a bit of a mystery. When running the other day, I jumped five feet in 
the air when I saw an old belt on the floor and mistook it for a snake. All 
kinds of tubular entities terrify me (though only temporarily, when I remember 
there are no snakes here). I consulted my priest about it, but he just mumbled 
a load of rubbish about the Lord working in mysterious ways before scuttling 
off to make a cup of tea. Can evolutionary theory offer any well-grounded, 
empirically testable hypothesis for my phobia?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
Your personal observation of being terrified by snakes or objects of a similar 
shape (congratulations on jumping five feet in the air, you are obviously a 
healthy male) is a phenomenon shared by millions of other Homo sapiens and all 
other primate species. The instinctive fear of spiders and other potentially 
venomous creepy-crawlies is an adaptation handed down to us from our ancestors 
whose fear reflex prevented them from succumbing to a poisonous bite just long 
enough to breed. The interesting thing here is that young infants, (who are at 
the life stage less impacted on by subsequent selection since the human lineage 
split away from old world monkeys some 20m years ago – meaning infants exhibit 
ancient simians reflexes) do not show a fear of snakes or spiders. This 
atavistic fear of potentially venomous critters is acquired in humans once the 
infant begins to walk. Prior to walking the suckling baby primate is carried by 
its mother and it is her reflex that protects them both.

Rakison, D (2009). Does women's greater fear of snakes and spiders originate 
in infancy?Evolution <https://www.theguardian.com/science/evolution> and Human 
Behavior, Volume 30, Issue 6, p438-444.

Carole is UK-based and as such any advice she gives is intended for a UK 
audience only.
 