
Carolina Munhóz’s Keeping up with Magic feels a lot like when you are watching 
a TV show and you need to wait for the next episode to know what happens after 
the cliffhanger. Writing about a reality show seemed perfect for this author, 
especially because this one has a fairy as its main character, her favourite 
fantastic creature.

In Munhóz’s third book, we meet Violet Lashian, a very different kind of 
fairy. She has bright purple hair and is fascinated by human beings and their 
behaviour, especially those related to pop culture like Kim Kardashian and Lady 
Gaga. Because of that, she has always been a victim of bullying and could never 
count on anyone from Ablach, her land. Showing us that any being can fall, the 
author gets her to reach rock bottom. When she is (literally) doomed, the fairy 
sees that the only way of turning things around would be doing what she always 
wanted to do: coming to the human world, the city of Los Angeles, intending to 
find a place among Hollywood stars.

On Earth, few minutes were enough for her to face many of the difficulties of 
living here. And this is shown with an unexpected humor that makes you laugh 
out loud. Violet is amazed by Coke, calling it “black water”, and is annoyed by 
the sound of a clock ticking, thinking it was some kind of animal. One of the 
best scenes is set at Hooters, when the fairy tries to give money to a waitress 
hoping she could stay at her house – can you imagine how puzzled and offended 
that waitress is? Even though things like that keep happening, Violet continues 
to pursue her dreams, and what a better way to reveal herself to humanity if 
not in a worldwide famous reality show?

Imagine yourself sitting on your sofa, ready to watch your favourite 
contestant sing and suddenly you get proof that we are not alone in the 
universe. The buzz is instantaneous, of course, and, in order to feed it, 
Violet Lashian wins her own TV programme so humans can know what she is up to. 
She then gets everything she always wanted: we see the fairy partying, dating 
millionaires, being interviewed, making loads of money, being the face of every 
major brand across the world, conquering power and doing everything else fame 
can bring.

When you read a synopsis like that, it is common to think this book is about a 
TV show and, oh, trifles only. But you are wrong!

With a similar structure to the Slumdog Millionaire, we keep up with her story 
through an interview she gives in a talk show much like the famous American 
ones we are familiar with. In each question we discover a bit more of Violet’s 
journey.

Like her character, Carolina has always been fascinated by reality shows and 
even participated in the Brazilian version of American Idol to see the behind 
the scenes. Today she is also a screenwriter in Hollywood after being 
considered an “Alien of extraordinary abilities” by the US government. She 
tried to convey to us everything she learned there and being friends with 
celebrities. Reading this novel I could totally feel the “UnREAL” TV show vibe. 
Watching these programs can be addictive, but producing them is a completely 
different reality. Nothing is what seems when glam is involved. Fake 
relationships arranged by agents, celebrities that are not allowed to expose 
their sexuality because of their careers, you name it.

The narrative has a Disney Channel/CW vibe, but the author talks about some 
taboos that need to be discussed with the young adult audience and are usually 
underrated. All in all, Violet discovers all our sins in a painful way.

Keeping up with Magic is funny, controversial and educational. Everything that 
a good reality show can be.
 