 Keith Vaz, the most ambitious and flexible of politicians, is an ideological 
weathervane, always ready to track the wind. In a decade he has crossed the 
political spectrum of his party, from membership of the hard-left Campaign 
group to ultra loyalism to New Labour. Throughout he has stood out for his 
energy, style and displays of political double-jointedness that have astounded 
even fellow politicians.
Early in his Commons career he called for Salman Rushdie's novel, Satanic 
Verses, to be withdrawn while defending the right of minorities to have their 
say. Later this once arch-Eurosceptic denounced those in his party critical of 
the European Union. And in 2001 he appeared to survive the controversy over his 
role in passport applications by two Indian businessmen, the Hinduja brothers, 
being cleared of wrongdoing by the Hammond report into the episode even as he 
came under heavy fire for failing to cooperate fully with an inquiry by the 
parliamentary commissioner for standards, Elizabeth Filkin.

This tendency towards over-exuberance masks Mr Vaz's real achievements. 
Elected for Leicester East in 1987, he was the first Asian MP since 1929 and 
the first ever Asian minister in the Commons. (Baron Sinha of Raipur preceded 
him in the Lords in 1919 - a fact forgotten by most newspapers.)

Mr Vaz is a Goanese Catholic born in 1956 in Aden, where his father was the 
correspondent for the Times of India. The family moved to Twickenham when he 
was nine. He went from Latymer upper school in Hammersmith to Gonville and 
Caius College, Cambridge, where he was a contemporary of the prime minister's 
spin doctor, Alastair Campbell, the BBC's political editor Andrew Marr and the 
novelist and Labour ally Robert Harris.

Like them he made his mark at the university. He secured first class honours 
in law, going on to study at the College of Law before practising first as a 
solicitor and then, from 1991, as a barrister.

He also grew up with politics. His widowed mother, Merlyn Lobo, is now a 
councillor in Leicester and his BBC presenter sister, Valerie Vaz, has 
frequently sought Labour candidacies as a leftwinger.

It was no surprise that Keith Vaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/keithvaz> should follow the same route, 
at first unsuccessfully, coming a poor third in 1983 as Labour's candidate for 
hopeless Richmond and Barnes, a year later losing Surrey West by 50,000 votes.

These disappointments made him an outspoken advocate of "black sections" 
within the Labour party, then a real cause of controversy. The stance may have 
helped him win selection for Leicester East - a seat with some 16,000 non-white 
voters, mostly Gujaratis - but if it did, his supporters must have been 
disappointed when he turned against black sections on entering parliament.

In the 1987 election, Mr Vaz took the Leicester seat from the sitting 
Conservative, Peter Bruinvels, a flamboyant rightwinger famous for offering to 
act as public hangman.

In parliament, he made his mark as an outspoken supporter of people who had 
lost money in the collapse of BCCI, many of them among his Asian constituents. 
He has settled down somewhat after his marriage in 1993 to fellow lawyer Maria 
Fernandes, a Kenyan-born Goanese Catholic. They have a son and a daughter.

In 1992 he became a Labour frontbench spokesman, a success which turned to 
disappointment when he became one of a dozen Labour opposition frontbenchers 
denied office in Tony Blair's first 1997 government.

Instead, he became a parliamentary private secretary serving Tony Blair's 
close friend Derry Irvine. Then came the magic endorsement: Lord Irvine said 
his PPS was "utterly brilliant", "the most incredible networker I have ever 
met".

This backing from so well connected a source must have assisted Mr Vaz's rapid 
ministerial promotion, from parliamentary secretary in Lord Irvine's Lord 
Chancellor's department to minister for Europe at the Foreign Office. In that 
job, Mr Vaz has not shone quite as brightly as some of his predecessors, who 
made the post one of the most important in the government outside the cabinet. 
But he has coped well enough, showing all the enthusiasm of a recent convert to 
the European ideal until hit by the passport controversy of early 2001.

Ask Aristotle about Keith Vaz 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5310,00.html>
 