
A "secret" judicial inquiry is to be held into the death of Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>, an unarmed 24-year-old black 
Londoner who was shot by a Metropolitan police marksman five years ago, the new 
justice secretary, Kenneth Clarke, has announced.

Rodney, a suspect in a major drugs investigation, was shot dead by an 
undercover team from Scotland Yard's CO19 armed unit on a suburban road in 
Edgware, north London, on 30 April 2005 – 11 weeks before the death of Jean 
Charles de Menezes at Stockwell underground station.

Clarke said the inquiry, to be chaired by Sir Christopher Holland, a retired 
high court judge, would look at the issues surrounding Rodney's death that a 
coroner's inquest would have determined, had it been possible to hold one.

Rodney's mother, Susan Alexander, has fought for an inquiry into her son's 
death since a coroner halted his inquest saying it was not possible to proceed 
because large parts of the police witness statements had been blanked out. 
Rodney had been the subject of covert intercept surveillance – including phone 
taps – which currently cannot be disclosed in court.

It is expected that parts of the inquiry will be held in secret to enable the 
retired judge to evaluate the covert surveillance evidence.

The justice secretary said: "It is now more than five years since Mr Rodney's 
death, and I very much hope that this inquiry will be able to satisfy the 
public need for deaths of this kind to be explained and to resolve matters for 
Mr Rodney's mother, Susan Alexander."

Daniel Machover, the family's lawyer, said he was disappointed that the 
justice secretary was going to subject Susan Alexander to an inquiry in which 
her legal team would most probably be denied access to "sensitive material".

"A secret inquiry in place of an open inquest with a jury is an affront to 
open justice and would be more in keeping in a police state than a modern 
democracy.

"I hope Mr Clarke is persuaded to change his mind before the courts rule on 
the lawfulness of this inquiry – maybe the reform of the law on intercept 
evidence will change his views," said Machover.

Rodney died when a Met police specialist firearms officers opened fire from 
close range at a car in which Rodney and two other men were travelling. His 
mother filed a case in the European Court of Human Rights last year saying the 
failure to hold a prompt and public investigation into his death was a breach 
of her human rights.

Senior Crown Prosecution Service lawyers studied the shooting incident and 
concluded that no criminal charges should be brought against the officer who 
shot Rodney or any of the other police involved.

The officer who fired the fatal shots, an experienced firearms specialist 
identified only as E7, said in a statement: "I felt that my colleagues were in 
immediate danger … I fired several shots in quick succession."
 