
"Look out to sea about a quarter of a mile," says Paul Jones with a sweeping 
gesture towards the waves that pound the new sea defences of Keta, which was 
once a thriving port and the second largest town in Ghana. "That's where the 
town used to be. It's all been eroded away in the last 60 to 70 years."

Behind him is a grim sight: the crumbling structure of Fort Prinzenstein, one 
of Ghana's most infamous slave forts from where thousands were sent to a life 
of hell in sugar plantations and cotton fields in the Americas, and where many 
died in appalling conditions.

The Danes built Fort Prinzenstein, which changed hands to Norwegian and 
British slave traders in the late 18th century, and 234 years later the Danish 
government has pledged to restore it. The people of 21st century Keta live on 
an average income of £3.50 a week, says Jones, a Liverpudlian who lived here 
for a few months after graduating from Oxford and is now a regular visitor.

Subsistence fishing and farming are the only prospects for most who live here 
in the Volta region that straddles the Ghana-Togo border. There are dreams of a 
beach village to draw in tourists. The main visitors now are African-Americans 
in search of their ancestors; several of them have found records of their 
great-great grandparents in the tattered 'stock' books in the fort.

In the area between the fort and the proposed site of the beach village is 
two-thirds of a football pitch on London Park, a dirt surface that was the 
original home of Keta FC. The other third has effectively been claimed by the 
sea, having been built up as part of the new sea defences.

Keta FC are no more. But the team that have taken their place, Keta 
Sandlanders, aim to make their name in the football world. The team want to 
become the first club to survive and thrive entirely on internet memberships 
from around the world. They want you to buy into the club - and, 
understandably, they will be targeting Denmark, Norway and Britain for football 
fans with a conscience. "We are proud to play for the people of Keta, they are 
our people," says the 19-year old club captain, Philip Tanasi. "And we will 
also be proud to play for our fans around the world. We want you to help us, 
and to join us."

It costs only £5 and is not another money-making scam from west Africa. You 
can track the team's progress, and see how the money is invested, on the club's 
excellent websitewww.ketasandlanders.com <http://www.ketasandlanders.com>. It 
is one of the best in African club football, despite the fact that Sandlanders 
are only a second division team, barely known outside their local area.

There is even an online club shop where you can buy Sandlanders merchandise, 
including an organic t-shirt made in the US. That item costs $22.99, which is 
slightly less than the players earn in a month, though they are given food and 
board on top.

A group of charity workers and senior executives here at the African Cup of 
Nations were highly impressed by the scheme. "It's brilliant, just brilliant," 
said Jochen Zeitz, chief executive of sportswear giant Puma, whose logo is worn 
on nine of the team shirts at the tournament.

The idea is that globalised 21st century technology can drive a scheme that 
will have huge benefits to a deprived community in a developing country. Of the 
£5 annual fee - only one seventh of the highly publicised members-only scheme 
at Ebbsfleet, the Conference team in England, and for a far more meaningful 
cause - £4 goes to the club, and the rest is split between a children's 
charity, Afrikids, and local projects in Keta.

The whole town wants the Sandlanders project to be a success. The team's 
manager, Desmond Apeku, who is an IT specialist and acts as counsellor to the 
younger players as well as an administrator, was a beaming host when The 
Observer visited for a pre-season friendly against another second division 
team, Junior Stars. As kick-off neared, there were a few hundred fans around 
the edge of the pitch at Keta School, who lend their pitch to the Sandlanders 
for league games. As soon as word was out that the game had started, more fans 
streamed in and the crowd peaked at about 2,000.

Drummers and dancers put on a colourful display, and although they kicked some 
fairly big holes in the playing surface it made no difference. The undulating 
pitch is mostly soft sand - just as well they train on the beach - dotted with 
pebbles and a few tufts of grass. The goals appeared to be about four inches 
too high, and when the ref wanted to check that the nets were properly attached 
he did so by hoisting a small boy on to his shoulders. There were no pies and 
Bovril, but plenty of sweets, biscuits and fruit on sale pitchside. There were 
no changing rooms either - everything is done al fresco.

The standard of play was pretty good, though on that pitch it's hard to say 
just how good. Sandlanders deserved better than their 1-1 draw and have high 
hopes for the forthcoming season, which kicks off in March.

The membership scheme is now officially up and running. So why not log on to 
www.ketasandlanders.com <http://www.ketasandlanders.com>, pay your fiver and 
follow their progress from afar?

Watch the video of the match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2008/jan/25/ghana.keta.sandlanders>
 