
I loved Annabel Pitcher's previous novel. I LOVED it, and I was absolutely 
desperate to love Ketchup Clouds, too. The blurb sounded great, the cover was 
great, all I had heard was that it was brilliant, but for some reason, I just 
didn't enjoy it as much as I thought I would.

Don't get me wrong, I really adored it, it just won't go down as one of my 
favourite books of all time, as I expected it to.

Before I get into talking about my opinions, I'll describe the storyline.
It is told as an epistolary novel; in other words, it is told entirely in 
letters, which I loved, and all the letters are addressed to Mr Harris 
(although as the letters go on, it ends in her addressing him as "My dearest 
Stu").

"Zoe" (as she calls herself) has done something bad, which you find out at the 
end. Enter Max and Aaron, a slight complication to the story.

Max manages to get half her clothes off the first time they meet, whereas 
Aaron is more dreamy. I won't tell you the complication with Zoe liking both 
the boys, and I won't tell you which she likes more, because that's all part of 
the story. But the plot is fantastically well thought-out, and unique, too.

I sort of knew, from the very first line that I was going to enjoy it, because 
it was immediately funny: "Dear Mr Harris, Ignore the blob of red in the top 
left corner. It's jam not blood, though I don't think I need to tell you the 
difference. It wasn't your wife's jam the police found on your shoe." It made 
me laugh at loud, and it's these kinds of first lines that I aspire to be able 
to do.

Here is my one negative point before I really get into it, everything else is 
positive: I think I would have enjoyed Ketchup Clouds a million times more had 
I connected with Zoe. But I didn't like her. I thought she was mean and I don't 
think either Max or Aaron deserved her, and that was difficult since the whole 
novel was written from her point of view.

At the beginning she comes across as shy, humble and young. I mean, she is 
talking about what she's done and how bad it was, but when you see what she did 
with Max practically the first time she met him, she seems so much older and 
more confident. I couldn't relate to her at all, and I didn't feel like her 
character sprung of the page, like the previous novel's narrator did.

Saying this, I still found Zoe very funny, so I enjoyed that part of her. I 
feel like some bits of the book were just unnecessary, particularly how much 
detail it goes into; it means that it cuts out a whole age-range of young 
people who could read it. I must giveAnnabel Pitcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annabel-pitcher> credit though, for how 
realistic it was, so it could be related to a modern day situation.

Aside from that major detail, I loved it all. The plot was fantastic, in 
general, and unique, and I couldn't put it down. It's a cliché, but it's 
genuinely true. The mystery of what exactly Zoe did so wrong, and who exactly 
she murdered keeps you reading – you get the occasional clue, but it's so 
frustrating when it doesn't help in unravelling what the mystery is, but that's 
what keeps you reading. I loved how it all linked up to Mr Harris' story, too. 
I'll admit, I was adamant I knew exactly who it was – one particular trick that 
Annabel Pitcher used, about the picture with the boy with the brown eyes, made 
me completely certain about the ending, so much so, that I considered putting 
it down right there and then.

I thought it ruined it. I'm not going to say what it meant, but I was 100% 
wrong, and it was tiny details like that that should have been unnoticeable but 
really stood out to me, and this was something so clever that apart from JK 
Rowling, few authors have managed to master, so this really impressed me.

Then we have the gorgeous Dot, who I loved a million times more than I loved 
Zoe. Dot was tenderly and sensitively written. Dot is Zoe's deaf little sister, 
and she is the cutest bundle of joy ever to be seen. The connection and growth 
that Dot makes throughout the book, and the discovery from her mother about Dot 
was unexpected, and a lovely addition the book.

What I mainly loved about the book is that it has so many stories wrapped in 
one. You have Zoe's modern life, with her problems with Sylvia (you'll find out 
who that is), the telling of her story of what exactly happened, there's the 
story with Dot, Mr Harris' story (although I would have loved, at some point, 
to have something from him – a diary entry perhaps, a letter he never sent, or 
something like that), and the love triangle.

I felt that Zoe's letters were sort of a way of freeing her from what she knew 
had happened. I think that the metaphorical image of the letters also 
represented Zoe trying to grasp hope, trying to grasp a sense of what happened, 
of whose fault it was. She blames herself, which really translates onto the 
page, the sense of guilt she has, and I commend the writer for this.

I've not got much to say about the ending, apart from that it was excellent, 
particularly the letter at the end, and the last line.

Overall, Annabel Pitcher has pulled it off. Maybe it was just me that Zoe 
didn't appeal to, but Pitcher has written this book with passion, emotion, 
poise, and a whole load of gut. It is great, really great. I've already lent it 
to someone, and plan on recommending it to many more.

Can I just please ask anyone who reviews it – the magic of Ketchup Clouds is 
not knowing what's going to happen – in your reviews, PLEASE do not spoil 
anything, like what happens or why Zoe is so guilty. Ketchup Clouds is magic, 
if you allow it to be, and don't look at it with a reviewer's critical eye, 
like I did. A 4/5 for this brilliant book. And, when reading, as Aaron says, 
"Just fly …"

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 