
Shakespeare wrote to put money in his pocket, food on the table and fire in 
the bellies of his audiences, not strike modern teenagers with fear. Most of 
Shakespeare's audiences were illiterate. His words were chosen to be spoken or 
heard, not to be read and deadened behind a desk – they wither when performance 
is removed.

Our schools are full of Shakespeare, but often in completely the wrong places. 
Old uncle Bill has become the relative that we invite to family gatherings out 
of habit, not because we actually want to. He sits there in the corner sharing 
his stories with anyone who'll listen; the adults lend a patient ear out of a 
sense of duty and most of the kids have no concept of the vitality of his youth.

Even before, and most definitely since, the recent plummet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/23/art-party-conference-bob-roberta-smith>
 in drama's status as a specialist subject in schools, many young people's 
first experience of Shakespeare is in an English classroom taught by 
enthusiastic purveyors of imagination, but primarily non-theatre practitioners. 
It's an English teacher's remit to analyse language, but pick apart every word 
of Shakespeare and you've dissected the butterfly – pretty in parts but a 
nonsensical whole and certainly unable to fly.

A well meaning English teacher can take a student through the meaning of every 
word in a sentence and it soon becomes a drawn out and confusing process. 
Shakespeare's audience didn't know the meaning of every word uttered (uncle 
Bill was busily making new ones up 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/lukelewis/words-you-didnt-realise-william-shakespeare-invented>
) but the sounds and pictures they created kept viewers enthralled for hours.

English teachers agree that Shakespeare's language isn't intended to be 
desk-bound; it's crafted for stage. Simple. Well, not so simple these days. 
Recent governments have decreed that Shakespeare is so key to our national 
identity and intelligence that he should be studied by all the children in a 
specific year group. Great, you might say, but it's not.

Over the past few years I've welcomed fewer and fewer school groups to our 
theatre. The planning and paperwork involved is prohibitive. Consider as well 
the amount of staff needed to accompany such a group and the knock-on cost of 
cover needed back at school. Don't forget the travel time to get to a theatre 
for what is often a three hour show, plus travel time back. Trips can rarely 
happen in a school day because of other "core" subjects missed, and teachers 
can't be relied upon to give up their evenings to deliver what has become a 
luxury.

If a teacher does manage to get kids to a theatre for a rare visit, it's not 
always useful. Students who are inexperienced theatregoers think that a 
particular director's version is how Shakespeare intended his play to be done, 
when actually the personal interpretations can be brave, boring or bad enough 
to put a child off theatre for life. So, a teacher keeps the class in school 
and tries hard to explain the play.

Teachers are supposed to have all the answers, but dramatic literature is a 
playground of opinions: why does Juliet say this? Why would Macbeth do that? 
The real answer is that we don't know, but teachers are not encouraged to say 
just that: "I don't know." Their own suppositions are often reported back in 
essays as facts. Plays aren't meant to be taught like this. They are meant to 
be explored on their feet. Actors and audiences are supposed to argue over 
meaning, finding multiple ways of delivering word and deed.

Our BTEC acting course has just started work on The Tempest. These are 
engaged, talented young people from a range of secondary schools who auditioned 
to be on the course, but the majority expressed disdain, dislike and hatred for 
poor uncle Bill. They had all experienced him separately in schools, behind 
desks. Shakespeare had made them feel stupid rather than empowered.

Let's give English teachers a break, give drama teachers a boost and give 
young people an important sense of equality.You don't need an expensive 
education to understand the words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/14/globe-theatre-julian-fellowes-shakespeare>
, but you do need the luxury of time, space and specialism to put his words on 
their feet and try them out.

Mark Powell is associate director at Salisbury Playhouse 
<http://www.salisburyplayhouse.com/> – follow it on Twitter @salisburyplay 
<https://twitter.com/salisburyplay> 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 