
Kily usually chugs up and down the right flank for the Spanish fourth-flight 
side Langreo. His chance of making it big in football seemed to have gone when 
Atlético Madrid released him – after 44 games for their B side – in 2008. But 
last week, he became the first hero of this year's Cup of Nations as he arced a 
last-minute 25-yarder into the top corner to giveEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> victory over Senegal, 
and take them through to Saturday's quarter-final, in which they'll meet Ivory 
Coast. Suddenly, he was a man in demand: there was talk of offers from teams in 
Russia and Saudi Arabia, while it's safe to say that, barring something 
astonishing at the weekend, he will remain his adopted nation's most celebrated 
player for some time.

David Alvarez Aguirre, to give him his full name, was born in Avilés, Spain. 
He has Equatoguinean blood, but he had given the country little thought until, 
in 2007, they asked him to play for them. "I didn't know anything about Africa 
before I started playing for the team," he said. "I had no real concept for 
what it was like. You do see things which affect you deeply. In Sierra Leone 
and Liberia we saw amputees, people living in very tough conditions, it's a 
shock and very moving.

"But many people have the wrong idea of Africa, they think it's all natives 
with spears and arrows, that everyone is dying of starvation. Of course, there 
is a lot of poverty but there's much more to it to than that. That's not the 
case in Equatorial Guinea: it's a very relaxed place, people are poor but 
nobody is starving."

There has been a feeling of alienation for Kily in this tournament too, but 
for rather different reasons. Rather than turning out in front of a few hundred 
fans in the Tercera División, he is playing top international players in front 
of packed crowds of, in Bata, almost 40,000. "You get nervous before, shaking 
the hands of the opposition and you suddenly realise that these guys play in 
the Premier League, in Serie A, but when they referee starts the game, you 
don't think any more about the personalities, you just get on with the game," 
he said.

After moving to Malabo for their final group game, in which they were beaten 
1-0 by Zambia, Equatorial Guinea initially stayed in Sipopo, in the same hotel 
asIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast>. "We took 
photographs with them," Kily said. "They treated us very well." That, clearly, 
was no preparation for Saturday's quarter-final, so Equatorial Guinea moved to 
a different hotel.

Now they are in the centre of Malabo, where the trickle of journalists (and 
the dearth of local media means it is no more than that) is regarded not as the 
hassle it is for most players, but as a source of amusement. Kily's lunch 
arrived mid-conversation; he was so apologetic had to be persuaded to eat it 
and let the interview wait (if he is to become a professional with a move in 
the summer, he clearly has much to learn). The feel is very like a cup tie 
between some plucky part-timers and a Premier League club.

But they couldn't do it, could they? Their chances are lessened by playing in 
Malabo, with its genteel 15,000-capacity stadium, rather than Bata, which can 
accommodate almost 40,000. "The supporters are hotter in Bata, but in Malabo we 
have lots of supporters also," the midfielder Juvenal said. "The Bata stadium 
is bigger, and for that reason, we'd have preferred [to play there] but no 
problem."

Surely not really, not against the Ivory Coast, who have been champions in 
waiting for an eternity? But perhaps that is their chance: few teams have ever 
been as burdened by expectation as this Ivory Coast side, who came close to 
winning the tournament in 2006 – when Didier Drogba missed a sitter in the 
final and Egypt ended up winning on penalties – and were expected to win it in 
2008 (a 4-1 semi-final humiliation to an Amr Zaki-inspired Egypt from which 
Kolo Touré seems never quite to have recovered) and in 2010 (a mystifying 3-2 
quarter-final defeat to Algeria).

As this great generation of players has aged, each new tournament is portrayed 
as a last chance finally to deliver: they are essentially having a lock-in in 
the last-chance saloon. In fact, even this probably isn't the last chance; the 
tournament's shift to odd-numbered years means even the oldest outfielders in 
the squad, Didier Drogba and Didier Zokora, should be around for another go in 
South Africa next year.

But even if this isn't absolutely the final chance, those past failures haunt 
this Ivory Coast side. Does Sol Bamba dream of the shaven dome of Madjid 
Bougherra heading that last-minute equaliser? Does he suffer flashbacks to 
Hameur Bouazza early in extra time? Does he even see significance – as some 
Ivorians apparently do – in the fact that Bougherra's goal was recorded as 
being scored after 90+2 minutes and Bouazza's after 92, and that Ivory Coast 
last won the Cup of Nations in 1992?

"Some of the players, and I was there, have that in their heads but we don't 
think about that," Bamba said in that weird French-inflected east of Scotland 
accent, picked up in his time at Dunfermline under Leith's John Hughes. That 
stint also apparently gave him the phrase that has served as a motif for this 
Ivorian side: "We go' a keep the ba' dooorrr shu'."

François Zahoui, Ivory Coast's coach, has admitted that in the past the 
Elephants have perhaps being guilty of underestimating opponents. That, he has 
vowed, will not happen again, and the result is this steely Ivory Coast, an 
Ivory Coast intent first and foremost on not conceding. "We've got some very 
good players up front so we know we're going to make some chances," Bamba 
explained. "We're just trying to keep a clean sheet."

Against Equatorial Guinea on Saturday, that should be enough. But then, we've 
thought that about Ivory Coast before.
 