
One of the most romantic manuscripts of the medieval ages, the stories of 
chivalry, treachery and passion of King Arthur, his knights and his faithless 
wife, is to be auctioned next month and could fetch up to £2m.

All the stories of Arthur, Merlin, and his knights of the Round Table, of the 
Lady of the Lake, Guinevere's fatal love for Lancelot, and of the quest for the 
Holy Grail, which inspired artists from Tennyson and William Morris to Indiana 
Jones and Monty Python, are in the three huge volumes ofthe Rochefoucauld Grail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2010/nov/11/heritage-history>.

The image of Joseph of Arimathea walking across the water to bring the Holy 
Grail to Britain, with the believers standing safely on his cloak and the 
doubters sinking to their doom, could have come straight from the Monty Python 
musical Spamalot.

The volumes with 107 jewel-like illustrations against backgrounds of pure gold 
leaf were probably made in Flanders in the early 14th century for the Baron de 
Rochefoucauld while he was a representative of the French king. The grail is 
seen as one of the greatest medieval manuscripts still privately owned.

"It is the most extraordinary thing, a manuscript of royal quality, on a 
stupendous scale – I put my back out twice carrying the three volumes," Dr 
Timothy Bolton, a manuscript specialist at Sotheby's, said.

"It would have taken 200 cows to get the vellum, and the illuminations are in 
rare and costly minerals, against a background of thick gold made from coins 
beaten flat. Are we selling it cheap compared to its 14th-century cost? Of 
course we are.

"The scenes have a riotous energy, and often stretch beyond the boundaries of 
the picture frames, with lofty towers poking through the borders at the top, 
and figures tumbling out of the miniatures onto the blank page as they fall or 
scramble to escape their enemies."

The huge book was made within a few decades of the first attempt to compile 
the entire English and French tangle of Arthur and grail stories. Most 
surviving early copies of the stories have been read to the point of 
disintegration, but this one seems always to have been kept as a trophy 
possession, rarely even opened, never read.

It survived the fate of many early manuscripts of being broken up and sold off 
sheet by sheet, remaining in the French family for almost 500 years. The final 
of the four original volumes is now divided between the Bodleian in Oxford and 
the John Rylands university library in Manchester.

These three volumes were acquired in the 19th century by Sir Thomas Phillips, 
whose extraordinary collection once held more than 60,000 medieval manuscripts. 
Since then it has been sold just twice.

It is now being sold by a Dutch businessman, J R Ritman, who has been 
collecting works of art and manuscripts since he was a teenager, to raise funds 
for the Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica, the library on the history of 
mysticism and alchemy he founded in his native Amsterdam.

"Who would buy such a thing?" Bolton said. "Who in their senses if they had 
the money would not?"
 