
Australian bosses are rushing to pay around $47,000 in fines so nine athletes 
caught using tampered Olympic accreditations can leave Rio as scheduled.

The “naughty nine” were busted with stickers on their accreditations when 
trying to enter an Olympic Park venue to watch the Boomers’ semi-final on 
Friday night.

Australian athletes released after questioning by Rio police over credentials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/australian-athletes-questioned-by-police-in-rio-over-basketball-accreditation>
The athletes knew they were using tampered accreditations but Australian chef 
de mission Kitty Chiller says it’s not their fault.

“Very disappointed that our athletes had to go through what they did go 
through last night,” Chiller told reporters on Saturday.

“I think it’s very important to note that the athletes were definitely not at 
fault.”

Asked how it could not be the fault of the athletes, Chiller replied: “We will 
complete our own internal investigation about how the circumstances arose that 
the athletes arrived in the venue with accreditations with a different access 
code to their own.”

Chiller gave a similar answer when asked if there were other people involved 
in the tampering.

She said accreditation tampering was a long-held practice at Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> by Australians and athletes 
from other countries.

“It’s unfortunately a practice that has been traditional not only in Australia 
but other countries as well for many Olympic Games, putting a sticker on your 
accreditation with another venue access code on it,” Chiller said.

The nine – cyclists Ashlee Ankudinoff and Melissa Hoskins, rugby sevens player 
Ed Jenkins, archers Alec Potts and Ryan Tyack, rowers Olympia Aldersey, Fiona 
Albert and Lucy Stephens, and hockey player Simon Orchard – were charged with 
falsifying a document.

Each of the nine was fined 10,000 reais (about $A4100) and placed on a 
two-year good behaviour bond after being detained by Brazilian authorities for 
10 hours.

Australian Olympic Committee chief executive Fiona de Jong, a lawyer, helped 
strike a deal with a Rio judge: instead of facing up to five years in jail, 
they avoided conviction.

The passports of the nine have been surrendered to Brazilian authorities until 
the fines are paid.

“Of course we’re making those steps to pay the fine quickly,” de Jong told 
reporters on Saturday.

The Australian Olympic team is due to depart Rio on a chartered flight on 
Monday night, Chiller said. “Hopefully they can all be on that charter with 
us,” she said.

Swimmer Josh Palmer will be free to join them after being interviewed by Rio 
police for nearly six hours on Saturday over his claims he was robbed at 
gunpoint in Copacabana.


Palmer was called in by police after initially refusing to take official 
action over his claims an armed man had forced him to withdraw $1000 from an 
ATM in Copacabana.


An Australian Olympic official said police accepted his version of events and 
no further action will be taken.

International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach rejected any suggestion 
of bad blood between athletes and Brazilian authorities.

“This I cannot see,” he told reporters on Saturday.

The athletes were charged after attempting to gain entry to Olympic venue 
Carioca Arena 1 for the Australian men’s basketball semi-final against Serbia 
on Friday night.
 