
I am the senior social worker on one of four busy teams in a local authority 
in north-west England.

I arrive at the office at 7.30am to plan for the day and collect information I 
need for court. The recent introduction of hot desking, following the council’s 
move to new premises, is taking its toll on already stretched workers. More are 
coming in earlier to secure a desk for the day. I find this time of day is 
useful to catch up on outstanding paperwork and read reports. The imminent 
arrival of Ofsted is on everyone’s minds.
 Beverly Lamb, a senior social worker. Photograph: Bev Lamb 


My first appointment is a short car journey into Manchester to attend court 
for a final hearing in an adoption case with a student who is shadowing me. 
Although it is listed for a full day, it concludes by lunchtime. The judge 
finds the local authority has fulfilled its obligations to support parents with 
learning difficulties with a joint approach from both children and adult 
services, and it is commended on this. I feel empathy for the parents and 
sadness that their child will not remain in their care, but I am happy in 
knowing the child will be placed with a “forever family” very soon.


As the case finishes early, I do an unplanned visit to a family on the way 
back from court. A child in need plan is in place but the mother is happy to 
see me because we have forged a good relationship over the previous 12 months. 
We discuss the possible closure of the case though the mother has mixed 
emotions, saying she will miss me coming, also referring to me as her “second 
mother”. The family have made excellent progress though and professionals agree 
on case closure. I feel lucky to have a good relationship with the majority of 
my clients and many still ring me years later for advice or to call at the 
office for a coffee.


Lunch, which is a rarity, is on the go and consists of a banana and a bottle 
of water, before doing a visit to undertake a risk assessment of a serious 
domestic abuse perpetrator. He has assaulted his new partner several times so 
child protection procedures have been initiated and plans put in place. Both 
mother and partner want to remain in a relationship and have asked for help 
with their relationship difficulties. Even though most of the abuse has not 
taken place in the presence of the children, research highlights the impact on 
children’s emotional welfare whether present or not. The plan highlights areas 
of concern and what support is needed to address them. I allocate two hours to 
do this and plan to follow up with another two visits. There is initial 
resistance from the partner as it evokes some deep emotions from his own 
childhood. The visit runs by an hour as a result.

I help deafblind people go on the holidays they've always wanted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/26/i-help-deafblind-people-go-on-the-holidays-theyve-always-wanted>
I arrive back at the office at 4.30pm and have a reflective discussion about 
the morning’s court case with my student; given its importance in dealing with 
parents who have learning disabilities.

I am then ambushed by several newly qualified staff wanting advice on cases. I 
agree to see them one at a time. We have five newly qualified staff on the 
team, of whom I supervise four, alongside more experienced staff. Issues 
include decision-making for current court cases to requesting financial 
assistance for families in need and the completion of their on-the-job training 
programme. I arrange to observe visits to ensure they meet the criteria to 
demonstrate their competencies so they can complete the programme on time.

I then make a hot drink and peruse emails. The office is quiet again as most 
of the staff have left for the evening. I collect papers for next week’s 
adoption panel to read over the weekend and have a sneaky peek at the agenda; 
only two matches and an approval, so light reading. Sometimes there can be 
seven matches resulting in a lot to read. I catch up on case notes from today’s 
events.

Finally, I email the adoption social worker to advise of the care and 
placement order made earlier in the day, and give the foster carer a quick call 
to bring her up to speed. It is now 6.30pm in the evening and following a quick 
look at my diary for tomorrow, I head home.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 