
When Sam, his mum and half-sister Tegan move to Cornwall from London, he can’t 
think of anything worse… until he meets his gorgeous neighbour Jade that is. 
Jade and her friends, a ragtag group of surfers, take Sam under their wing and 
Sam, infatuated with Jade, is desperate to lose his status as a “kook” (a 
beginner surfer). He spends hours out catching waves and getting more familiar 
with the brilliant rush that surfing gives you but Jade is focused on one 
thing, riding the legendary “Devils Horns”, a feat that will make her name as a 
professional surfer. The only problem is that nobody knows where these infamous 
waves are, but Sam is a self-confessed nerd for all things scientific and might 
be able to help her out.

The main thing that stuck out for me with this book was the character of Jade; 
from the beginning she seemed like a bit of a “manic pixie dream girl”, a 
shallow, quirky character whose only function seems to be to teach the 
protagonist, who is usually obsessed with her, to embrace life. When I realised 
that she seemed to fit this trope, I found her slightly annoying as it seemed 
as if she was completely crafted to suit the taste of teenage boys like Sam. I 
became more willing to like her as it became apparent that this image is 
probably due to the fact that we only ever see her through the eyes of Sam, 
whose narrative will naturally focus on her as some sort of “dream girl”. A 
comparison between Jade and Alaska from John Green’s Looking For Alaska jumps 
to mind as they both serve to “open up” the minds of the male protagonist while 
each having their own private issues that the protagonist wants to help them 
out of, giving a more deconstructed version of this trope.

This book was actually really fun to read. Sam is a really likeable character 
and it was full of fast-paced action. I was quite sniffy about it for a long 
way into this book because I was getting fed up with the recurring theme of Sam 
explaining fairly basic scientific concepts to Jade who just encouraged his ego 
by fawning over the fact that the Earth is actually moving. However as the book 
continued I actually felt myself growing to love these characters and the 
ending really hit me with unexpected emotion. This book has a huge heart to it 
and feels really well written throughout, particularly in any scene in which 
the characters go surfing. It’s evident that Chris Vick has a lot of experience 
and passion for this sport and this book will engage even those who would 
rather not spend an afternoon in the freezing British waters.

Kook is a hard book to define: it’s fun but also dark, fast-paced but still 
reflective and joyful with plenty of sadness interspersed. Surfing fans will 
love Kook but another part of its appeal for me was the introduction into this 
amazing world, which I had absolutely no knowledge of before, so I would 
recommend it to anyone who is curious about it. I was hesitant about it but 
Kook turned out to be a really enjoyable read.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385536/s/kook/>  