
London's rapidly expanding Canary Wharf may not be the most obvious place to 
look for innovative examples of sustainable building and design.

Yet when KPMG selected 15, Canada Square as the site of its new UK 
headquarters, it had a very clear vision – to go beyond the demands of 
environmental and building legislation to create the greenest building on the 
wharf.

Sustainability was built into the project from the start, with all competing 
contractors asked to work to a sustainability management plan. This addressed 
key requirements such as controlling impacts on neighbouring buildings, meeting 
demanding targets on energy, waste, water and building material use, protecting 
biodiveristy and achieving the Breeam "excellent" standard.

Thanks to that vision and planning, the 400,000 sq ft building that has 
emerged includes a long list of green features in both fit and function.

For example, some 1,300 tonnes of recycled materials were used in the fit out; 
the construction site was the first in London to have a plasterboard compactor; 
all carpets used are made of 40% recycled materials, while workstation screens 
are made entirely from recycled plastic bottles; a sedum roof promotes 
biodiversity and helps keep the building cool.

A building management system makes sure that energy and water use are 
monitored right down to room level, with energy readings taken every 30 minutes.

Daylight controls automatically switch off unnecessary electric lighting, 
water saving sensors shut off unattended taps and grey water is recycled to 
flush toilets, with a 30-40% saving in water consumption.

An innovative tri-generation system produces low-emission electricity and 
reuses heat to provide heating and cooling and chilled beams provide efficient 
air-conditioning. No waste goes to landfill, and is either treated 
biologically, composted or recycled.

Huge thought went into wider impacts, not least travel. Green travel plans 
encourage contractors and employees to make use of excellent, public rail, bus 
and river services. Some 200 bike parking spaces, over 400 lockers and showers 
have been provided for people travelling under their own steam.

The building also has a halo suite and six video conferencing rooms to reduce 
business travel.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 