
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has launched a stinging 
attack on the billionaire boss of high street chemist Boots after he accused 
the opposition party of promoting policies that would lead the country to 
catastrophe.

In a sign of rising tensions ahead of the general election on 7 May, Douglas 
Alexander <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/douglasalexander>, the head of 
Labour’s election campaign, described the comments by Stefano Pessina as 
“rubbish”, while Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, said the 
electorate was unlikely to listen to someone who does not live or pay tax in 
the UK.

Pessina lives in Monte Carlo, with a fortune estimated at £7.5bn. Boots was 
targeted by tax campaigners when it moved its formal tax residence from Britain 
to Switzerland following Pessina’s private equity-backed buyout in 2007. Last 
year whenPessina merged Boots with US group Walgreens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/19/pharmacy-walgreen-alliance-boots-merger>
, there were plans to move the headquarters from the US to Switzerland for tax 
reasons, although the idea had to be abandoned in the face of a US political 
row and a potential customer backlash.

The weekend row started with Pessina, the 74-year-old acting chief executive 
of the newly-merged WalgreensAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>, saying that if Labour 
politicians acted in the way that they spoke “it would be a catastrophe”.

In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, Pessina said: “The problem is would 
they [Labour] act that way or not? One thing is to threaten and to shout but it 
is completely different to be in charge and to manage the country day-to-day 
... [and if they did it would be] not helpful for business, not helpful for the 
country and in the end it probably won’t be helpful for them.”

Pessina, whose company has 2,500 shops and employs 70,000 staff in Britain, 
declined to say which policies he particularly objected to but there has been 
previous criticism by business executives of Labour promises to reintroduce a 
50p top rate of income tax, freeze prices in the energy sector and impose 
restrictions on the size of high street banks.

Alexander led the fight back, telling the BBC’s Andrew Marr show: “Honestly, 
it is rubbish. It tells you much more about the agenda of the newspapers than 
it tells you about the agenda of Ed Miliband and the Labour party. I’ll tell 
you what’s going on. We’re doing well, we’re going on to victory.”

Umunna later went further, saying it was important that the voice of business 
was heard during the general election campaign, not least on Europe. But he 
said: “The British people and British businesses will draw their own 
conclusions when those who don’t live here, don’t pay tax in this country and 
lead firms that reportedly avoid making a fair contribution in what they pay, 
purport to know what is in Britain’s best interests.”

The Conservatives insist they had nothing to do with Pessina’s comments but 
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> took the 
unusual step of providing a direct quote highlighting the businessman’s stance. 
The party has previously been known to approach business people to speak out on 
sensitive political issues such as the Scottish independence referendum.

“We are not going to stand a Tory analysis of our economic policy from someone 
who is worth £7.5bn and does not pay tax in this country,” a senior Labour 
source said, suggesting that Miliband would also address the criticism head-on.

The pre-election temperature will be raised further by a speech to be 
delivered by Marcus Bowman, president of the UK Chamber of Shipping, at the 
organisation’s annual dinner on Monday night in London, which will accuse 
political parties of engaging in anti-business rhetoric.

He will say: “The Labour party – seemingly more pro-Europe – is laying down a 
policy agenda that amounts to more tax, more spending and more regulation. To 
business, this is not an economic strategy but a political one. Again, they 
should think long and hard about the messages they are sending out, and the 
impact their policies will have.”

Bowman, a shipping lawyer, will not confine his criticism to Labour but also 
attack the Conservative party for engaging in anti-European rhetoric in a bid 
to head off its own criticism from Ukip.

“The institutions of the EU are flawed, the commission is often aloof, and 
less engaged with industry than it should be. The whole thing is in need of 
reform – but we should think long and hard about what reforms we need, and what 
leaving the single market would mean for our business, our workforce and our 
country.”

Bowman will say: “Some of the rhetoric from all parties is decidedly 
anti-business, and is causing deep uncertainty among those who would want to 
invest, create jobs and contribute more to the economy.”

As he fought back against the “agenda of the newspapers”, Alexander claimed 
Miliband was suffering negative coverage in the right-wing press because the 
party is on course for victory in May’s election. He declined to rule out doing 
a deal with the Scottish National party if Labour fails to win a majority but 
made it clear that his party would not contemplate abandoning Trident as the 
price for an alliance. This is one of the three conditions demanded by SNP 
leader Nicola Sturgeon in relation the possibility of a tie-up with Miliband.

A spokesman for Walgreens Boots Alliance said: “The comments made by Stefano 
Pessina were a small part of a much larger conversation and have been taken out 
of context. Stefano Pessina was expressing his personal views only and is not 
campaigning against Ed Miliband or the Labour party.

“Indeed, he previously held good relationships with the Labour governments 
under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, as well as the current coalition Government 
led by David Cameron and Nick Clegg.

“The UK remains a very important market for Walgreens Boots Alliance. Over the 
last eight years, and under Mr Pessina’s leadership, Alliance Boots contributed 
over £1.2bn to its pension funds, benefitting many of the 70,000 people it 
continues to employ in the UK, and invested a similar amount in transforming 
Boots stores across the UK, helping to ensure it is best placed to serve its 
customers and patients.

“Prior to completion of the merger with Walgreens in December 2014, the 
corporation tax paid by Alliance Boots was 40% higher in 2013/14 than in the 
prior year, at £90m. Cash taxes paid were also over 50% higher in 2013/14 than 
those paid in its last year as a publicly listed company. Overall, the total 
amount of tax paid in the UK, including business rates, national insurance and 
corporation tax, was around £550m in 2013/14.”
 