
Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> has become the 
second shadow cabinet minister in two days to announce he is to leave Jeremy 
Corbyn’s frontbench.

 Burnham said he was stepping down as shadow home secretary to concentrate on 
his campaign to be mayor of Greater Manchester. His announcement comes a day 
after Kelvin Hopkins said he wanted to step down as shadow culture secretary to 
return to the backbenches.

Labour faces terminal damage if fighting goes on, warns Andy Burnham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/andy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity>
 Burnham told the party’s conference in Liverpool: “It is time for me to turn 
my full focus to Greater Manchester. That’s why I can tell you all first today 
that I have asked Jeremy to plan a new shadow cabinet without me, although I 
will of course stay until it is in place.

“I have given my all to this party and always put its interests above those of 
factions and personalities. And I have given exactly the same loyalty to all 
four of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leaders I have 
served.

 “Out there, there’s a demand for big changes in the way this country is run. 
This party should be the voice for that change. So that’s why I am ready to 
leave Westminster. It’s time to make a change, to challenge the status quo from 
the outside. It’s time to get the voice of the north heard like it has never 
been heard before.”

 Burnham also used his conference speech to strike a different tone on 
immigration from Corbyn, just hours before the leader planned to address the 
issue in his conference speech.

 Earlier, Corbyn set out his view that people’s fears about immigration could 
be allayed by greater funding for public services in areas of high pressure, 
rather than controlling the numbers of new entries.

 Burnham did not join in the mass resignations that triggered the leadership 
challenge against Corbyn and has been supportive of the leader since losing the 
contest against him last year.

 However, his resignation leaves Corbyn with a big job to fill as he 
reshuffles his shadow cabinet in an attempt to bring greater unity to the party.

 Hopkins, who was appointed after the resignations earlier in the summer, told 
a fringe meeting of the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy that he had told 
Corbyn he wanted to leave the frontbench.

 “We must now have unity, even though it is difficult, and I’ve told Jeremy 
that I want to go back to the backbenches as soon as possible and support him 
from there. I have to say, I never expected to be shadow secretary of state for 
anything.”

 Corbyn and his team are meeting possible candidates for a return to the 
shadow cabinet in the coming weeks.

 One senior figure on the “soft left” centre of the party said he was thinking 
about returning but wanted a formal agreement with “terms and conditions” about 
policy and relations nailed down. A number were negotiating to return 
collectively and were still pushing for some elections to the shadow cabinet.

 However, Corbyn has said he believes he can fill a frontbench without a need 
for elections.
 