Thrill rating 8/10 
Danger rating 8/10

Fitness rating 8/10

In a nutshell ...

Landboarding, otherwise known as KGB (as in "kite ground boarding", not the 
allegedly disbanded Soviet secret service) is basically kitesurfing on land, 
with all the associated benefits of staying warm and dry. It was invented by 
frustrated snowboarders looking for something to keep them occupied in the 
summer months (other than dodgy substances).

The aim is to stand on a board not dissimilar to a skateboard but with bigger 
pneumatic tyres, place your feet in the foot straps and lean back as a traction 
kite pulls you across a beach or other flat stretch of land. Once you've got 
the knack, you can start to learn nifty tricks like letting the wind pull you 
into the air and careering down hills.

What's the buzz?

"Learning to control the kite is 80% of the deal," explains Mark Parker from 
Kitevibe. "Like any skills-based sport, the more you practise, the better 
you'll get." The aim, apparently, is always to stay within the "power zone" (or 
"wind window") so as to generate enough power to pull you along. As the wind 
picks up, you may have to change the height of your kite to avoid being 
overpowered.

Thrill a minute?

Transition Kiteboarding offers a landboarding taster day in which you learn 
how to handle a traction kite, and then how to "scud" (dropping the kite low 
into the power zone, using the kite to slide across the surface of the ground). 
Mobius Kite School offers one-to-one sessions with an instructor, teaching how 
to self-launch, set up safely and get your first ride. There are different kite 
sizes and setups to help beginners: Kitevibe offers a four-line course (two 
lines in either hand, controlled by a handle) as well as a two-line course to 
get you used to handling a kite before you think about jumping on the board.

Adrenaline peak

As per kitesurfing, using the kite to lift your landboard up off the ground 
for some big air. You may also, if you feel so inclined, want to come down "toe 
side" (you normally fly facing the kite, but in this case turn 180 degrees and 
land with your back to it).

Where to do it

Transition Kiteboarding runs its lessons from Whitstable in Kent, whereas 
Mobius is based on Perranporth Beach, 15 miles from Newquay in Cornwall. 
Kitevibe runs its lessons in Richmond Park (London's largest royal park, which 
is also populated by around 650 non-landboarding deer).

Who can do it

Transition Kiteboarding won't take children under the age of 13, while 
Kitevibe teaches children aged 10-plus. Note that, like kitesurfing, you need 
to be fit to do this - and being on wheels, the need to stay in control is even 
more important to avoid injuring yourself or others.

What to take

Elbow pads, kneepads and the all-important crash helmet will be provided. Come 
dressed in layers (which may or may not still be trendy) and bring shatterproof 
sunglasses, walking shoes which cover the ankles, and a stash of high-energy 
snacks. Hey, it's tiring work up there ...

Typical prices 

Two-hour courses cost £40 to £55, day-long sessions from about £95.

Impress your pals 

The Chinese city of Weifang is the self-styled "kite capital of the world". As 
well as hosting an annual festival, its kite museum is the largest in the world.

YouTube searchwords 'landboarding movie'

Good links

landboard.co.uk <http://www.landboard.co.uk>

kitevibe.com <http://www.kitevibe.com>

transitionkiteboarding.com <http://www.transitionkiteboarding.com>

mobiusonline.co.uk <http://www.mobiusonline.co.uk>

paracademy.co.uk <http://www.paracademy.co.uk>
 