

'I love, you know, kicking the ass out of society' ... The Human Spider 
(Channel 4)

Someone should probably tell Alain Robert <http://www.alainrobert.com/> it's 
so much easier to go up buildings if you go inside them first. They have these 
amazing little boxes with buttons that whisk you effortlessly to your desired 
level. Some even talk to you, if you're lonely, or blind. And if that's not 
your thing, there are staircases, by which height can be achieved in managable 
increments and at a reasonable angle. If you fall, you're likely to lose your 
dignity and possibly your latte, but not your life.

That's not Alain's way, though. Instead, he stakes out buildings for days, 
through binoculars. Then, like a tiger stalking his prey, he creeps up, getting 
as close as he can without being noticed - and suddenly he's off!

He runs at them, dodging security guards, then leaps, wedging his fingers into 
thin cracks between steel and glass, pulling his wiry body up with his enormous 
strength. Up and up, higher, colder, windier. He has no rope, just a bag of 
chalk dust and a pair of rubber-soled shoes to provide a bit of friction 
between himself and the smooth modern materials of the world's tallest 
buildings. If it rains, he'll probably fall. Oh, and he has epilepsy - he could 
have a seizure at any moment. Plus, he's scared of heights!

And the reward for Alain, The Human Spider (Channel 4), when he reaches the 
top? He's generally arrested and carted off to the nick in a police van. It's a 
thankless task, being an urban free solo climber, which is what he is.

He may be a headache to the authorities, but the public love him. They come 
out on to the streets in their thousands, to point and cheer. Look, there's 
Spider-Man - a real-life superhero. And from inside their air-conditioned 
offices they applaud as he passes, heading upwards, a refreshing human-shaped 
two fingers to health and safety.

It's not great for Alain's family: Daddy spends most of the time away, either 
hanging off skyscrapers or in jail, and when he does come home to theLanguedoc 
<http://www.languedoc-france.info/>, he's mostly hanging off the ceiling, 
practising for the next climb. I don't think you tell Alain what to do, though. 
He's a typical climber: single-minded to the point of selfishness, totally 
focused with a far-away and slightly scary look in his eye. And he has the same 
kind of screw-the-world Gallicness thatEric Cantona 
<http://www.red11.org/mufc/cantona.htm> had. "I love, you know, kicking the ass 
of the society," Alain says before taking on Shanghai's 1,380ftJin Mao tower 
<http://skyscraperpage.com/cities/?buildingID=9> dressed as Batman.

His teenage son seems to have already inherited some of Alain's attitude. "I 
don't like these questions," the long-haired lad says disdainfully to the poor 
interviewer. "They are stupid questions." The baby meanwhile isfree-soloing 
<http://www.rock-climbing-for-life.com/free-solo-climbing.html> a corner of the 
living room in a nappy.

Alain may be a bit of a cock <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alain_Robert>. And 
this isn't actually a brilliant film - there's too much bigging him up - he's 
so brave, it's so dangerous, he's such a rebel, blah blah blah. The sports 
psychologist banging on about how this is about as extreme as it gets is 
ridiculous. It would have been so much cooler just to let his climbing speak 
for him. But I'm still a sucker for anything that involves shots of people 
doing crazy things, and I loved it. The action is amazing. Alain's grace is in 
his climbing. It's beautiful to witness - measured, rhythmic, balletic almost.

And absobloodylutely terrifying. The bridge in Portugal is the hardest one to 
watch. There's something about a suspension bridge's delicate structure, and 
the long downward sweep of its cables, that suggest plunging acceleration, like 
a rollercoaster ride. And from the top of the towers, there's a double drop - 
down to the road, and then the water. I can't even think about it without 
feeling a bit giddy. But Alain just shins up a couple of vertical wires, climbs 
on to the main cable, and walks up the steepening slope to the top of the 
tower. Then it's a stroll down to the bottom of the central span, and the 
inevitable waiting police car. Easy. And beautiful.

On second thoughts, maybe don't tell him about elevators and stairwells. You 
wouldn't want to be stuck in a lift with him, but watching him climb up the 
outside of a building is a joy.
 