
In my final year at Bristol University, I wrote a play called White Feathers. 
It was produced in the studio theatre at the students' union in early 1999, 
when I was 21. It's 100 pages long: a very traditional play with an interval, 
about deserters in the first world war.

Looking back, that seems a slightly odd thing for a young writer to pick up 
on. But it was before deserters had been granted their posthumous pardons – 
that happened in 2006 – so I was clearly writing about something that I 
perceived to be very unjust.

I still have the play in a box in my flat. Reading it over again makes me 
cringe. It wasn't my first play – I had one produced in Sheffield before I went 
to university – but it's the first one in which I wrote about something 
entirely divorced from myself.

It's about a young upper-class officer who swaps papers with a dead man on the 
battlefield in France, and escapes to his village in Derbyshire. His mum, whose 
husband was a Boer war hero, is shocked that her son is letting down the family 
name. Then it all gets a bit Upstairs Downstairs: there's a housemaid who had 
been having a relationship with the young man before he went to war, but has 
since been handing out white feathers to conscientious objectors.

Looking at it now, it all feels rather neat: the subplot is very well behaved, 
throwing light on the main story, and ultimately bringing about a denouement. 
I'm still aware of that tendency to want everything neatly tied up with a bow 
in my writing now. It's also rather melodramatic – there's a lot of crying. I 
think I hadn't quite worked out yet that it's a lot more powerful to watch 
people trying not to cry. And the dialogue really makes me wince: all the 
characters' opinions come out perfectly formed, even when they're in the heat 
of an argument.

I guess I admire my past self for having written something full-length, with 
the kind of meticulous planning that's still very important to me now. There's 
also something funny about the fact that I wrote this at a time when all the 
plays in London were of the in-yer-face theatre school – Mark Ravenhill's 
Shopping and Fucking; Sarah Kane's work – and Bristol's drama department was 
all about devised work; you could barely find a playscript. White Feathers is 
about as far from that as you can get. I suppose it was my way of rebelling.
 