
Peace and stability cannot be assured in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> if the UK decides to leave the 
EU, the prime minister will warn.

As the referendum campaign steps up a gear this week following last week’s 
elections,David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> 
will use a speech in London on Monday to switch the focus from highlighting the 
economic risks of leaving the EU to winning over voters’ hearts and minds to 
staying.

He will draw on a pageant of historical episodes, from the Roman empire to the 
fall of the Berlin Wall to argue that Britain’s destiny is inextricably bound 
up with Europe’s, and voting to remain in the EU on 23 June is the patriotic 
choice.


Should we stay or should we go? UK businesses on the EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/brexit-according-to-uk-business-remain-or-leave>
But he will warn of dire consequences if the UK opts to leave. “Can we be so 
sure that peace and stability on our continent are assured beyond any shadow of 
doubt? Is that a risk worth taking? I would never be so rash as to make that 
assumption.”

And Cameron will argue that the UK’s destiny has always been tied up with 
Europe. “From Caesar’s legions to the wars of the Spanish succession, from the 
Napoleonic wars to the fall of the Berlin Wall. Proud as we are of our global 
reach and our global connections, Britain has also always been a European 
power, and we always will be,” he will say.

The prime minister will say that even Winston Churchill’s “lone stand” against 
Nazi Germany in 1940, “when Britain stood as a bulwark against a new dark age 
of tyranny and oppression”, was not by choice, and when the war was over, 
Churchill tried to bring Europe back together.

“In the postwar period he argued passionately for western Europe to come 
together, to promote free trade, and to build institutions which would endure 
so that our continent would never again see such bloodshed.”

Vote Leave campaigners frequently paint themselves as making a patriotic 
argument for a buccaneering, free-trading Britain to cut itself loose from the 
ties of the EU.

But Cameron will argue: “Whenever we turn our back on Europe, sooner or later 
we come to regret it. We have always had to go back in, and always at much 
higher cost.” The Stronger In campaign also released video testimony from 
second world war veterans.

The positive case for remaining in the EU will also be made by the Scottish 
National party’s foreign affairs spokesman,Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, on Monday, when he will 
condemn the warnings about the risks of Brexit as, “at best puerile and at 
worst outlandish scaremongering”.

Salmond will also reiterate the argument made by Nicola Sturgeon, who won a 
renewed mandate in last week’s elections, that the SNP would regard a vote to 
leave in the referendum as a “material change” in circumstances, which would be 
sufficient reason to call a new independence referendum.

“First minister Nicola Sturgeon has been clear that such a material change 
would bring about a groundswell of anger loud enough to trigger a second 
Scottish independence referendum. Politicians and parties seeking to deny that 
right would be swept away by the political winds that would then be blowing,” 
she will say.

While argument in the days ahead is expected to switch to security and 
Britain’s place in the world, George Osborne stuck firmly to the economic case 
against Brexit in an interview on ITV’s Peston on Sunday, warning that a vote 
to leave would cause a “significant” hit to house prices.

The chancellor is due to publish Treasury research about the short-term costs 
of Brexit in the coming days, and has revealed that one key finding will be 
that property prices could fall if voters decide to leave theEU on 23 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/07/eu-referendum-everything-you-need-to-know>
.

The chancellor said: “You will see the analysis we will do, but I’m pretty 
clear that there will be a significant hit to the value of people’s homes and 
to the costs of mortgages. That is one example of the kind of impact, economic 
impact, that we get from leaving the EU.”

Osborne also countered the argument of his colleague, the justice secretary, 
Michael Gove, who had said earlier on the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show, that he 
hoped Britain would leave the European single market.

“We’ve just had the leave campaign admit this morning that Britain would leave 
the single market – that is the largest free trade area in the world. That 
would be catastrophic for people’s jobs and their incomes and their 
livelihoods. Now, some people might think wrecking the economy is a price worth 
paying. I absolutely reject that,” the chancellor said.

Boris Johnson, one of Vote Leave’s key figureheads, will use his own speech on 
Monday to make what allies said would be the “liberal, cosmopolitan” case for 
leaving the EU.
 