
The legal aid system has long been regarded as the unofficial extra pillar of 
the welfare state. It flourished in the 1970s and 80s, when lawyers tackled 
housing conditions that were "unfit for human habitation", obtained urgent 
injunctions to protect women facing domestic violence, and defended rapidly 
expanding numbers of criminal suspects. But its origins go back to the second 
world war and are no stranger to austerity – the Commission which designed the 
legal aid framework was established just days before the D Day landings in 1944.

Sixty years after its creation, its budget is now £2bn, funding more than 2.5m 
cases a year. Despite the views of one judge in 1957 that "people able to 
afford a television set should not be able to qualify for free legal aid", the 
service has generally progressed towards greater access to justice, not less.

But few are happy with its current structure. A shift towards "high volume 
cases" where thousands of people are dispensed advice from call centres, is 
inevitably prompting the demise of the high-street solicitor and affecting 
vulnerable communities the most. Reducing fees has arguably reduced quality, as 
many good lawyers leave or shrink their legal aid practices. Years of tinkering 
have demoralised the profession and hampered access without achieving major 
cost savings.

Criminal cases suck up an astonishing amount of the legal aid budget. One per 
cent of the most expensive cases swallow one quarter of the entire budget. The 
costs of these cases must be ring-fenced and capped so that other areas of 
legal aid, which can prevent people from entering the criminal justice system – 
for example by addressing homelessness and debt, and ensuring access to 
adequate support for those with mental health problems and troubled domestic 
arrangements – are protected.

Legal aid <https://www.theguardian.com/law/legal-aid> in civil cases has been 
the poor relation, despite the fact that providing support for people with 
welfare, housing and public law problems can saves money down the line. The 
strengths of the current system – such as the extensive provision of advice on 
individual cases through law centres, Citizens Advice Bureaux and local 
authority services – need to be co-ordinated and far better organised.

The only way to really save costs on criminal legal aid is to invest more in 
preventing re-offending and intervening effectively with young people. Future 
governments may want to think about the sheer number of criminal offences – 
almost 4,000 introduced under New Labour – a level and complexity of criminal 
legislation that carries with it extra costs for an adequate defence.There is 
no question that public law family cases, especially those where at-risk 
children are concerned, cannot be targeted for savings. But should legal aid 
really pay to resolve private disputes between adults, such as the divorce 
cases that still take up a significant part of the budget? It is better to 
focus resources on the judicial review cases that drive social justice and 
change.

Afua Hirsch is the Guardian's legal affairs correspondent

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 