
The Jaguar formula one team yesterday fired the first shot in what could 
potentially be a protracted legal dispute over the contract which they signed 
with the leading car designerAdrian Newey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey> last week.

"Adrian Newey has a legally binding contract with Jaguar Racing and this has 
been confirmed by Queen's Counsel," said an official communique released from 
the team's headquarters in Milton Keynes.

"As things currently stand, Adrian Newey has indicated that he will not honour 
that contract. We are, therefore, considering legal action against both Adrian 
Newey andMcLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>."

Jaguar claimed they signed a watertight contract with the 42-year-old designer 
which would have seen him move from his current position with the 
McLaren-Mercedes team in August 2002. But two days later McLaren announced that 
Newey would, after all, be staying with them.

McLaren had no further comment to make on the matter yesterday. Newey was not 
available on the telephone and it is possible he will not attend this weekend's 
Canadian grand prix in Montreal in an attempt to keep him away from the media.

As far as the sport's governing body is concerned, this difference of opinion 
between Jaguar and McLaren is a purely commercial matter which does not affect 
the rule-makers. "We have no position on this," said Max Mosley, the FIA 
president.

"At the last formula one constructors' meeting at the Austrian grand prix the 
question of having a contract recognition board for senior employees, similar 
to the one that exists for drivers, was discussed. But nothing has been taken 
further."

Legal sources suggest it would be almost impossible to force Newey to work for 
Jaguar against his wishes as the law will not generally enforce contracts for 
personal services.

But it is conceivable that Jaguar could obtain an injunction preventing Newey 
from working for McLaren after August 2002 if they can prove to the court that 
he signed a binding agreement prior to his apparent change of mind.

Beyond that it is difficult to see what Jaguar might achieve by such an 
action, apart from embarrassing both McLaren and Newey into a public admission 
that the designer signed two contracts.

That would be damaging to Newey's reputation but would not alter the fact that 
he would remain in the role of one of McLaren's most valued employees until 
August 2005.

It is believed that he was offered a salary of around £3m a year for a 
three-year contract with Jaguar, a rise of over £500,000 from his terms at 
McLaren. In order to keep him, McLaren will have had to match those financial 
arrangements. In addition, it is believed that the team's chairman Ron Dennis 
has offered him the possibility of new, admittedly unspecified, high technology 
challenges outside formula one in the future.

Meanwhile, for McLaren the immediate priority is to ensure that David 
Coulthard can make worthwhile inroads into his deficit of 12 points to Michael 
Schumacher at the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve in Montreal, a track on which he 
has always excelled in the past.

Jaguar will be out to build on Eddie Irvine's strong third place in the Monaco 
grand prix nine days ago. As things stand, the closest the two teams are likely 
to get to each other is in the court room rather than the formula one paddock.
 