
The Abbott government has found $25m to reverse cuts to legal assistance after 
growing pressure about the likely impact on Indigenous people and victims of 
domestic violence.


The attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, said on Thursday 
the government would no longer go ahead with cuts to legal aid commissions, 
community legal centres and Indigenous legal service providers that were due to 
take effect from 1 July.

The two-year extension follows the announcement by the social services 
minister, Scott Morrison, on Monday of$230m to continue homelessness support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/23/last-minute-funding-commitment-welcomed-by-homelessness-groups>
 for the next two years.

The community legal sector welcomed the latest decision, saying centres had 
already been losing lawyers and winding back services, but called for a 
long-term funding boost to better protect vulnerable people.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> made the 
cuts in its first mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) shortly after 
the 2013 election because “the budget was a train wreck”, Brandis said.

But he said the government needed “to protect the most vulnerable people in 
our community” and “on due consideration” had decided not to proceed with the 
cuts.

That meant $12m would go to 61 community legal centres over the next two 
years, $11.5m to the commonwealth’s Indigenous legal assistance program, and 
$2m for state and territory legal aid commissions.

The government was facing growing criticism over the cuts, with state and 
territory attorney generals recently writing to Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/07/state-and-territory-attorney-generals-ask-george-brandis-to-better-fund-legal-aid>
 and the Australian of the Year, Rosie Batty, warning of the impact on domestic 
violence victims.

Michaelia Cash, the minister assisting the prime minister for women, joined 
Brandis for the announcement. She said the decision to restore the funding 
“builds on our significant commitment to reducing domestic violence”.

Brandis said he was revealing the decision now rather than waiting for the 
budget on 12 May because community legal centres had been preparing to arrange 
their affairs and lay off staff.

“I’m mindful of the fact that this legal assistance sector is resource 
constrained and in particular it deals with needy and vulnerable people,” he 
said.

“I have been close to the community legal sector all of my life. Many of my 
friends work in that sector. I needed no explaining how resource constrained 
that sector is.”

Asked why the government had made the cuts in the first place if he was aware 
of how constrained the sector was, Brandis said: “Let’s focus on the good news 
we are announcing today.”

Brandis declined to reveal where the money was coming from, but said it would 
be “offset from somewhere within the government”.

The government will not reverse cuts to environmental defenders officers or 
revoke restrictions on advocacy by community legal centres.

Brandis maintained this was a “moral decision”, saying resources were limited 
in the legal assistance sector and funding “should go to case work rather than 
causes”.

Victoria’s peak community legal body, the Federation of Community Legal 
Centres, called on the government to allow advocacy, saying it was “a vital 
task” aimed at “preventing legal problems that would otherwise increase the 
number of cases that walk into our centres every day”.

The federation’s executive officer, Liana Buchanan, said she welcomed “the 
reversal of cuts that were already impacting 13 community legal centres in 
Victoria and 60 nationally, and the recognition from government that centres 
play a vital role”.

“There remains that the Productivity Commission has recommended a funding 
boost of $200m to legal assistance services that were already chronically 
underfunded before these cuts,” she said.

The National Association of Community Legal Centres (NACLC) said the 
announcement would bring much-needed relief.

“In particular for women and children facing family violence, the legal 
support from their community legal centre can be a real lifeline and prevents 
the violence escalating, improving safety and support,” said the NACLC 
chairman, Michael Smith.

“It’s also vital for people with housing and employment problems, for people 
with debt and consumer issues and many struggling Australians with legal 
problems.”

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander rights advocacy organisation Antar said 
the government “should have been looking at increasing investment to this 
sector, not cutting funding, but the restoration of funding is positive”.

“Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander legal services play an absolutely vital 
role in delivering frontline legal services to society’s most vulnerable 
members,” said the organisation’s national director, Andrew Meehan.

The Greens senator Penny Wright said legal assistance services “were operating 
on a shoestring budget before the attorney general’s cuts” and the policy 
reversal was “extremely welcome, but this should only be the beginning”.

The chief executive of the Australian Council of Social Service, Cassandra 
Goldie, said: “This is an essential first step but only the beginning of the 
work the government needs to do to repair the damage caused by $1bn in funding 
cuts to community services across the country.”
 