
Cuts to legal aid are far worse than anticipated and are creating a “two-tier” 
system which denies the poorest people access to justice, warns a critical 
report byAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>.

The government should conduct an urgent review of the impact of the Legal Aid, 
Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders (Laspo) Act, which came into effect in 
2013 and has severely restricted funding, the study says. A review has been 
promised within three to five years but ministers have delayed.

The year before the act was introduced, legal aid was granted in 925,000 
cases, Amnesty points out. The year after, assistance was given in 497,000 
cases, a drop of 46%.

The report calls for all children to be granted entitlement to legal aid 
regardless of the issues at stake. Some teenagers, it says, are at risk of 
having to represent themselves in immigration cases where they may face 
deportation.

The report highlights the emergence of “advice deserts” across England and 
Wales where the provision of free legal advice is disappearing. Worst affected 
are said to be the south-west, parts of the Midlands and the north of England.


The Legal Aid Agency’s exceptional case funding system, which was supposed to 
provide a safety net for the most vulnerable claimants, is said to be 
inadequate and flawed.


Laspo has been blamed for a surge in the number of litigants in person, 
slowing court processes.Legal aid <https://www.theguardian.com/law/legal-aid> 
is no longer available in the family courts unless one partner can prove he or 
she was a victim of domestic violence.

One consequence has been that separating couples are not evenly represented. 
One woman told Amnesty: “When I go to court I have to cross-examine my ex. That 
terrifies me. I have so many sleepless nights. If I lose I know I will blame 
myself – it’s because I wasn’t good enough. But then I think, how can I be good 
enough when I’m up against a barrister?”

Legal aid for immigration cases has also been cut, exposing unaccompanied or 
separated children to having to make applications to stay in the UK on their 
own, unrepresented. The report says up to 2,500 children a year are claimants 
in their own right in such cases, according to MoJ figures.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> are at an “automatic 
disadvantage as the laws, processes and systems governing their circumstances 
are profoundly complex”, the report states. “They require specialist advisers 
that are experienced not just in immigration law, but also with working with 
children.”

 One lawyer told Amnesty: “The idea that children and young people can 
represent themselves just does not work. This is such a vulnerable group. It’s 
not just that they don’t understand legal processes and legal concepts, which 
they don’t, but it’s also that they have no idea how to fill forms out 
properly, what to write, where to send paperwork, where to get advice and who 
to speak to.”

A youth worker told Amnesty: “I had one young person I was working with who 
had to self-represent at the lower asylum and immigration tribunal. He had a 
good case, but no access to legal aid … I accompanied him to court, explaining 
that I wouldn’t be able to help him as I’m not qualified but could give him 
moral support.


“He was vulnerable, he didn’t know what to expect. I had to explain 
everything: what the court looks like, what the environment will be. He didn’t 
know, he hadn’t seen any of it before. All he could do was tell his story to 
the judge, he couldn’t argue the case law … We asked for an adjournment but the 
court said no. In the end his appeal was refused.”

Alice Wyss, Amnesty International’s UK researcher, said: “Cuts to legal aid 
imposed by this government have decimated access to justice and left thousands 
of the most vulnerable without essential legal advice and support. We are in 
danger of creating a two-tier civil justice system, open to those who can 
afford it, but increasingly closed to the poorest and most in need of its 
protection.

“If Theresa May is really determined to deliver a country that works for all 
then there needs to be a justice system for everyone, not just those who can 
afford it.The government must start by protecting the most vulnerable and 
launching a review of this failing system immediately.”

A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “We have a generous legal aid system 
- last year spending more than £1.5bn on legal aid. We must ensure legal aid is 
sustainable and fair - both for those who need it and the taxpayer who pays for 
it. That is why we have made sure support remains available to the most 
vulnerable and in the most serious cases, and are taking action to ensure 
people can access the help they need.”



 