
Police just outside Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> say 
a notorious 86-year-old jewel thief has struck again.

Doris Payne was arrested Tuesday at a Von Maur department store after she put 
a $1,995 diamond necklace in her back pocket and tried to leave the store, 
Dunwoody police spokesman Mark Stevens said in an email. She faces a 
shoplifting charge.

Notorious jewel thief Doris Payne, 85, charged in earring heist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/28/notorious-jewel-thief-doris-payne-85-charged-in-earring-heist->
Online jail records did not show any bond information, and it wasn’t clear 
whether Payne had an attorney who could comment.

An attorney who represented her last year, when she was accused of pocketing a 
$690 pair of earrings from a Saks Fifth Avenue department store at a mall in 
Atlanta’s upscale Buckhead neighborhood, didn’t immediately return a phone call 
and email seeking comment Wednesday.

Authorities have said Payne has lifted pricey baubles from countless jewelry 
stores around the world in an illicit career that has spanned six decades. The 
legend of Payne’s alleged thefts have long fascinated the public and media, 
with countless news stories and a 2013 documentary film, The Life and Crimes of 
Doris Payne, detailing her feats.

When asked about her exploits in an interview with The Associated Press 
earlier this year, she said simply: “I was a thief.”

Court papers in Atlanta reference six cases prior to the alleged theft last 
year, mostly in southern California, dating to 1999.

Payne was raised in West Virginia and moved with her family to Ohio when she 
was a teenager.

Authorities have said she has used at least 22 aliases over the years and 
probably got away more often than she was caught, though she has done several 
stints in prison. The Jewelers’ Security Alliance, an industry trade group, 
sent out bulletins as early as the 1970s warning about her.

A childhood incident when a friendly store owner let her try on watches and 
then forgot she had it on when another customer entered planted the seed in her 
mind that a simple distraction could make it easy to slip out with a fancy 
trinket in hand, she told the AP. She said that when she was in her 20s, she 
got the idea that she could support herself that way.

Payne, who appeared effortlessly elegant and spoke with calm deliberation 
during the interview with the AP, nevertheless grew cagey when asked about her 
methods.

“I don’t dictate what happens when I walk in the store. The people in charge 
dictate what happens with me when I walk in the store,” she said. “I don’t tell 
a person in the store I want to see something that costs $10,000. They make 
those decisions based on how I present myself and how I look.
 