
The innovative American writer, director and performer Lena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham>, the creator of Girls and a 
totemic figure for a generation of young women, has defended herself against 
claims that aVogue cover shoot has betrayed her feminist credentials.

Dunham, 27, is known for the nude appearances she makes on her acclaimed HBO 
show. Her tattooed body is neither honed nor thin, like most of the women shown 
on television, in cinema or in magazine shoots, so the revelation thatVogue has 
printed doctored images of her, taken byAnnie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz>, has caused 
reproach. The Photoshopped pictures present a glamorised and slimmed-down 
version of the star.

Dunham, who was in London last week for the launch of her third series of Girls
 on Sky Atlantic on Monday, initially shrugged off the attack,mounted on the 
feminist blog site Jezebel 
<http://jezebel.com/lena-dunham-responds-to-unretouched-images-from-her-vog-1503703786/@Jessica>
. But on Friday night she told online magazineSlate: "I understand that for 
people there is a contradiction between what I do and being on the cover ofVogue
; but frankly I don't know what the Photoshopping situation is, I can't look at 
myself really objectively in that way."

Jezebel, which offered $10,000 to anyone who could provide the original 
unalteredVogue images, has now revealed that the neckline of Dunham's gown was 
changed and her face, chin and hips trimmed. Another shot, taken on the street, 
appears to have been put together like a collage. The cover image, a head and 
shoulders shot, has been altered to increase the proportional size of Dunham's 
eyes.

The actress, who plays Hannah Horvath in the bleakly comic series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/apr/30/photography.women> about 
disillusionment and friendship in the fashionable Williamsburg area of 
Brooklyn, New York, said she had felt supported by theVogue team.

"I never felt bullied into anything; I felt happy because they dressed me and 
styled me in a way that really reflects who I am. And I felt that was very 
lucky and that all the editors understood my persona, my creativity and who I 
am. I haven't been keeping track of all the reactions, but I know some people 
have been very angry about the cover and that confuses me a little. I don't 
understand why, Photoshop or no, having a woman who is different than the 
typicalVogue cover girl could be a bad thing."

Answering back, a Jezebel editorial applauded her representation of "normal" 
women onGirls, but remained critical. "What is not a good thing is when the 
magazine decides to take that woman and tweak her appearance enough such that 
she's 'acceptable' for the cover. It undermines the decision to feature that 
individual in the first place."

Girls does not have an overtly campaigning message, but its four key stars, 
played by Dunham, Jemima Kirke, Allison Williams and Zosia Mamet, are portrayed 
as complex and difficult personalities rather than as conventionally appealing 
and kooky. As a result it was welcomed by critics and feminists when the show 
was broadcast in 2012.

The sex scenes in the show, as Dunham told London journalists last week, are 
rarely about pleasure, either for the characters or the television audience. 
"We usually work out the shapes beforehand in all those scenes," she said, 
revealing that she and her producer and co-creator Jenni Konner actually 
demonstrate the positions for other actors involved in such sessions. The show, 
Dunham argued this weekend, is a dark and honest enough look at sexuality and 
gender to allow her to have fun elsewhere. "A fashion magazine is like a 
beautiful fantasy," she toldSlate. "Vogue isn't the place that we go to look at 
realistic women,Vogue is the place we go to look at beautiful clothes and fancy 
places and escapism, and so I feel like if the story reflects me and I happen 
to be wearing a beautiful Prada dress and surrounded by beautiful men and dogs, 
what's the problem? If they want to see what I really look like, go watch the 
show that I make every single week."

Earlier this month Dunham was involved in a row in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/10/lena-dunham-girls-hbo-panel-judd-apatow>
 between a journalist and the American comedy producer Judd Apatow, who brought
Girls to HBO. At a promotional event a male journalist asked Dunham why she 
included so many scenes of herself having sex in the show. Dunham replied: 
"It's a realistic expression of what it's like to be alive. If you're not into 
me that's your problem." But Apatow, who made the filmsKnocked-Up and The 40 
Year Old Virgin, stepped in to ask the journalist whether he had a girlfriend 
and if so, whether she liked him.

Girls, which is made by a group of well-heeled white young women, has also 
been criticised previously for its lack of ethnic minority cast members. In 
response to those attacks, Dunham said last week, "We heard all of that and 
really felt it deeply," adding: "I really try to educate myself in those areas."

Jezebel, which is owned by Gawker, has conceded that Leibovitz is known for 
using composite images. When she photographed Elizabeth II she superimposed the 
monarch on a field. The photographeralso controversially shot scantily clad 
pictures of a 15-year-old Miley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/apr/30/photography.women> for 
Vanity Fair in 2008.Jezebel argues that while men are shown with flaws "women 
are supposed to be perfect". Especially, it now seems, when it comes to the 
political decisions they make in the glare of the media.
 