
The coalition’s higher education policies have been controversial. The 
tripling of tuition fees to £9,000 prompted the fiercest demonstrations of this 
parliament. Protesters filled Parliament Square, tried to invade Conservative 
party HQ and even attacked Prince Charles’s car.

Another provocative act was appointing Les Ebdon to head the Office for Fair 
Access (Offa). Nicknamed “Off-toff” by its enemies, Offa regulates fair access 
to higher education in England. Universities charging more than £6,000 a year 
must sign an agreement explaining how they will ensure their doors are wide 
open to all sorts of applicants.

Ebdon’s appointment split the coalition. It was not so much Lib Dems versus 
Conservatives as blue-on-blue combat. Tory MPs argued Ebdon’s appointment would 
put the quality of the whole university sector at risk.

Others weighed in. The Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2106232/Les-Ebdon-University-Bedfordshire-offers-breastfeeding-carnival-arts-courses.html>
 labelled Ebdon “the man who wants to dumb down Britain”. The cross-party 
Commons business, innovation and skills select committee, headed by a Labour 
MP, refused to rubberstamp the appointment.

As special adviser to the universities minister, I was in the eye of the storm 
and had responsibility for liaising with Number 10 on the appointment. I should 
have kept them better informed of the whole process so that they were not 
caught off guard by the warring factions. But the appointment was scrupulously 
fair and not all political furores are predictable. In many ways, the row was a 
synthetic one. People were playing the man not the ball because they knew Offa 
was there to stay.

Those opposed to Offa say it gives schools an excuse to underperform by 
encouraging universities to admit people with lower qualifications. Those who 
support Offa say a student’s potential should be recognised even when it is not 
reflected in their A-level results. Both sides have a point. But, until every 
school and college in the country gives each child the same opportunity to 
excel, an argument exists for Offa monitoring the overall landscape.

Ebdon has disproved the doubters. He has spent time talking to the whole 
sector, worked positively with the Higher Education Funding Council for England 
(Hefce) and provided wise counsel. The main statistics on under-represented 
groups in higher education are moving in the right direction.

No one should think the lack of bust-ups is evidence of quiescence. Ebdon has 
criticised any proposals for hacking away at Hefce’s widening participation 
budget and he has constantly sought to raise the challenge of falling part-time 
student numbers.

In early February, Universities UK, the vice-chancellors’ body, joined those 
calling for Offa to be folded in with Hefce to create a newCouncil for Higher 
Education 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/uuk-calls-for-new-council-for-he-to-become-main-sector-body/2018518.article>
. That would have some merit, including reducing duplication. But, as 
Universities UK are themselves the first to admit, this cannot happen without 
new legislation. A new higher education bill is not expected to feature in any 
of the parties’ 2015 election manifestos and would anyway take time to 
implement.

The future of Offa is also likely to depend on the colour of the next 
government. If Offa’s responsibilities are ever to be abolished, made 
mainstream or merged, this might be easier for a centre-left administration to 
do. Indeed, given that Offa monitors universities with fees above £6,000, it is 
not completely clear what their job would be were a Labour government to reduce 
the tuition fee cap.

This autumn, universities will be freed to recruit as many students as they 
like. That is the single best way to ensure more people from under-represented 
groups make it to university. Admissions tutors will no longer have to play a 
zero-sum game and can start taking every student they want.

This should reduce the political toxicity of Offa, which is sometimes really a 
fear that my kid with lots of A-levels might be kept out of a famous university 
by your kid with fewer qualifications but lots of innate talent. Yet, even if 
more people go to university overall, it still makes sense to monitor fair 
access to the most prestigious universities and to share knowledge of what 
works.

As Lee Elliot Major of the Sutton Trust recently warned 
<http://www.westminster-briefing.com/features/feature-detail/newsarticle/sutton-trust-evaluating-the-impact-of-widening-participation-initiatives/#.VOYk3RbS9iE>
: “We spend over £1bn a year on programmes to widen participation and broaden 
access into our academic elites; yet we know very little about what impact most 
of these efforts are having.” So there is undoubtedly still a job for Offa to 
do.

Before parliament shuts down for the election campaign, the two parties in the 
coalition could invite Ebdon to undertake a second three-year term. Given his 
record to date and the impending removal of student number controls, that 
should no longer be the controversial issue it once would have been.

• Nick Hillman is director of the Higher Education Policy Institute thinktank 
and was adviser to David Willetts as universities minister
 