
Elena Gonzales folds yarn between her fingers. Her tapestry is woven in an 
intricate pattern of ochre and indigo, with fibre that has been dyed using moss 
and bark, fruit and flowers. Here in the hills of Oaxaca, in southern Mexico, 
indigenous Zapotec communities have been weaving rugs for more than two 
thousand years. Elena spins the loom and the centuries fall away.

Like many Zapotec children growing up in the 1980s, Elena did not attend 
school. Faced with a primary curriculum that took no account of Zapotec 
language or culture, her parents decided that she should be educated by her 
community. She was taught to weave by her grandmother. Self-sufficiency is the 
historic norm in Oaxaca, but in recent decades as rural life has become 
increasingly entretejidos – interwoven – with the modern market economy, 
Zapotec children who have not gone to school are finding themselves on the 
wrong side of an urban-rural education divide that excludes them from 
employment and contributes to deepening poverty.

The Zapotec predicament is far from unique. According to the International 
Fund for Agricultural Development, indigenous people – that is to say, people 
rooted by history and language and by myth and memory to a particular place on 
the planet – make up one third of the world's 900 million extremely poor rural 
people. For indigenous people the foremost barrier to primary education is 
language.

"Our children may be bilingual or monolingual in any of the sixteen original 
languages that exist in Oaxaca," explains Fernando Bojórquez, founder of the 
National Congress of Indigenous and Intercultural Education, "but they are 
taught and evaluated in Spanish, sometimes via national standardized 
examinations, without taking into account their abilities or their linguistic 
and cultural rights."

For the people of Oaxaca, language is precious. More than just a collection of 
words or a set of grammatical rules, each language is a unique window to the 
world, a repository of cultural wealth. "Language preserves in every word the 
essence of our community," explains a Mixtecan school teacher.

Language is also a legally enshrined right. The Law of Linguistic Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples was passed by the Mexican Congress in 2003, granting 
indigenous languages the same legal status and validity as Spanish. Despite 
this, schools still offer a Spanish-centric curriculum, "a system of 
education," explains Fernando Bojórquez, "which itself contributes to the 
extinction of the languages and cultures of original peoples."

Oaxaca's linguistic diversity is born of its terrain: a rugged landscape of 
ravines, caverns and sheer jungle ascents. Pockets of pre-Hispanic culture have 
survived successive generations of colonisation and still thrive here. The 
Mixtecs are the second largest of these. They take their name from the Nahuatl 
wordMixtecapan – the place of the cloud-people – after their home, the 
mountainous Sierra Madre del Sur, which they callÑuñume – the land of the 
clouds. Land, language and identity are profoundly entwined in Oaxaca, an 
interrelation expressed ascommunalidad.

Communalidad is seen as the central concept in Oaxacan life, so deep-rooted in 
the local mindset that it resists translation into English. Gustavo Esteva, a 
public intellectual who works at the Universidad de la Terra (University of the 
Land) explains that "In indigenous tradition, people are knots in nets of real 
relationships… this iscommunalidad, existence formed by the interlocking of 
networks of real relationships that make up each person."

The people of Oaxaca understand themselves as interwoven threads in a cultural 
tapestry. The day-to-day act of weaving is namedcommunalidad.

Decades of organised protest centred on communalidad have seen indigenous 
movements evolve a powerful human rights narrative, in which the school system 
is shown to violate their rights to self-determination and freedom of 
expression. In May 2011, 70,000 teachers occupied the main square of the state 
capital in protest against the Alliance for Quality in Education (ACE) law, 
which would further violate the linguistic and cultural rights of Oaxaca's 
indigenous peoples by consolidating national standardised testing in Spanish.

Oaxacans have also initiated a series of alternative education projects 
focussed on the preservation ofcommunalidad. These include a network of 
Language Nests, an educational strategy imported from the Māori, original 
peoples of New Zealand, that see children of a pre-school age taught in the 
language of the community by grandparents, ensuring a bilingual upbringing.

For the indigenous people of Oaxaca the struggle is far from over, but for 
Elena there is hope and there is defiance. "In Oaxaca today, revitalization is 
possible." Her children attend the local Language Nest, where they are taught 
to yarn (in word and on loom) by their grandmother.

Oaxaca illustrates that human rights must be placed at the heart of 
development. The second Millennium Development Goal sets the target of 
achieving universal primary education by 2015, but in isolation this goal does 
not reflect the human rights obligations that states must adhere to in aspiring 
towards such a target, including the obligation to eliminate discrimination.

A 2009 UNESCO Global Monitoring Report found that of the 72 million children 
out of school globally, four fifths were rural. Discrimination against rural 
and indigenous peoples can only be countered by ensuring these people have the 
right to effective participation in decisions that affect their lives. The UN 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues has called for a "human rights-based 
approach to development to be operationalized by states, the UN and 
intergovernmental organizations." Such an approach would see indigenous peoples 
empowered to articulate their own definitions of poverty, development and 
education.

For the world's most impoverished and vulnerable, those for whom the future 
hangs by a thread, human rights are essential for sustainable and equitable 
development. Human rights are universal and interdependent, indivisible and 
interwoven. For those for whom school offers not a road out of poverty, but a 
slippery slope of assimilation and acculturation, Education to Extinction, for 
the indigenous children of Oaxaca, human rights are a source of hope and a 
voice of defiance. Defiance voiced against the silence of a language lost, the 
stillness of the unspun loom; nameless clouds upon the peaks ofÑuñume.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 