
What kind of Conservative government is David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> actually leading now? It 
says something about the blurriness of our second-term prime minister that, 
even after nearly a decade leading his party, answers to this question still 
vary so radically. Yet there is no more interesting or more important question 
in the new era of British politics.

David Cameron packs plenty into his one-party Queen's speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/27/david-cameron-packs-plenty-into-his-one-party-queens-speech>
Cameron says, almost ad nauseam these days, that this will be a “one-nation 
government”. He opened theQueen’s speech debate last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/may/27/queens-speech-2015-politics-live>
 offering a programme “for working people from a one-nation government who will 
bring our country together”. These phrases are in grave danger of becoming 
meaningless. But it would be a mistake to assume for that reason that they are 
simply a lie.

Nevertheless, Labour has already slipped back into that assumption. Shadow 
minister Angela Eagledescribed the Queen’s speech last week 
<https://twitter.com/angelaeagle/status/603847486961254400> as “a wolf in 
sheep’s clothing … a legislative programme couched in fluffy soundbites, barely 
disguising a triumphalist Thatcherite agenda”. A lot of people on the left will 
doubtless want to believe this is true.

But it isn’t so simple. The danger for too many is that they see only what 
they want to see. As a result they may miss the less bloodcurdling picture 
which those who are not so inclined to tribalism may be seeing. For all of us, 
the challenge is to look at the whole picture and try to take an objective 
view. The Tories won the 7 May election for a lot of different reasons, some 
positive, some negative. The critics have not even started to get their minds 
round most of them.

Take the hugely important issue of the health service. Labour still insists 
that it sees a government set on privatising the NHS. But they are simply 
wrong. Jeremy Hunt is essentially managing what he has inherited. He is not 
making the mistakes that his predecessor, Andrew Lansley, made. But that’s 
about all. There is no radical reform plan from the government. The NHS will 
still be very recognisably there in 2020 at the next election, better in some 
ways, worse in others, but still generally venerated.

It might be better if all of us started from the assumption that Cameron means 
what he says, rather than meaning something else, let alone the very opposite. 
Cameron’s one-nation talk may be a bit banal, but it is the non-Thatcherite 
language with which he is most comfortable. When he says he wants the economy 
to work for everyone, or to bring people together, cut him some slack and allow 
that he means it. On balance that’s good not bad. Get over it.

Part of the problem of trying to understand him is that he does not impose as 
leader. He is a halfhearted party manager

But what does it mean once you dig deeper? Cameron may now talk the language 
of good sense and common ground, but as head of the coalition he was not been a 
conspicuously reforming prime minister and he will get knocked off balance 
again at some point, as he did when Ukip began its rise. His leadership has 
lacked an over-arching story, never mind something grander like a moral 
mission. Even the long term economic plan was only long term or a plan in 
retrospect.

Now though, he has a majority and a term limit. He will be gone well before 
2020. No 10 is manifestly more important already in the power structure of the 
new government than it was in the coalition, when the “quad” had to sign off on 
everything. Cameron is much more firmly in the driving seat. But where is he 
driving? It still is not clear, but maybe that’s no sin.

Part of the problem of trying to understand Cameron is that he does not impose 
as leader. He is a halfhearted party manager. As a result, even now, he tends 
to hold a loose rein. His all-Tory government is itself a coalition, as they 
always are. But since it stretches from a very Hayekian libertarian, like the 
new business secretary, Sajid Javid, withhis admiration for Ayn Rand 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/parliament/2015/01/javid-i-read-the-courtroom-scene-from-the-fountainhead-to-my-future-wife.html>
, to a more traditionally social liberal like the education secretary, Nicky 
Morgan, it is all too easy for observers to pick and choose the piece of 
evidence that suits a predetermined case but misses the messier big picture.

A second part of the problem is that the government has landed itself with 
commitments it never expected to have to carry out and which it knows will be 
unpopular. Thecompletion of the Royal Mail sell-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/jun/04/cameron-writing-to-ipsa-demanding-rethink-over-mps-10-pay-rise-politics-live>
 announced by George Osborne today is a classic example. The extension of the 
right-to-buy to housing association tenants, in many ways an act of theft by 
the state, is another. It is hobbled further by Osborne’s taste (inherited from 
Gordon Brown) for laws that are designed primarily to embarrass Labour; 
examples here include the absurd “tax lock” bill (which Osborne sounded as if 
he regretted yesterday and the tightening of strike ballot rules.

The reality of Tory cuts is wicked and wrong | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/08/reality-tory-cuts-is-wicked-and-wrong>
But there is also a tendency to too much throat-clearing in many of the 
government’s pronouncements. Cameron is clearly more comfortable not imposing – 
and there’s nothing inherently wrong with that approach to being a PM. Clement 
Attlee ran his government that way, and left institutions like the NHS, revered 
to this day. But Cameron still evades classification a lot of the time. He is 
manifestly right wing in many of his stances, like the Human Rights Act, but he 
is equally manifestly progressive in others, like gay marriage and the aid 
budget. It’s not the worst mix, judging by the result of the election if 
nothing else. But it often feels like a collection of stances rather than 
anything that could be talked up as Cameron-ism.

This government will be remembered for the way it handles three issues: Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the (UK) union and public 
spending. All three are to some extent problems of the Tory party’s own 
creation, all made more difficult and dangerous as a result of decisions for 
which Cameron must take responsibility. On the first two, however, Cameron’s 
position – for staying in the EU and in favour of devolution to strengthen the 
union – is not just popular but right. On the last, government austerity 
spending to see off the fiscal deficit, his policy has just been upheld, sort 
of, at the election.

Britain did not vote for radical change of either the left or the right in 
May. Some of the things Cameron has done and said since the election could lead 
him and his party into the mire. Much of it seems quite well judged – and even 
worth thinking about. Whether it adds up to more than the sum of its parts 
still remains doubtful. But it’s all still to play for and to study. There is a 
bit more to it than soundbites and wickedness.
 