
Just over 12 months ago, on a visit to the National Theatre, a respected 
Labour minister asked the artistic director Nick Hytner what he had coming up. 
"Well," he replied, "David Hare's writing a play about the financial crisis." 
At once, the minister lowered his head into his hands and groaned. "Oh God," he 
said, "the financial crisis! I have an opinion about everything but I don't 
have an opinion about that."

I kept this minister's comment in mind all the time I was working on The Power 
of Yes. The bankers had pulled off a remarkable feat of blackmail. Not only had 
they convinced the public that some healing socialist balm was needed if their 
own hardcore practices were not to destroy the entire economy, but they had 
also had further success persuading our democratic representatives that, once 
they had coughed up the cash, they need not bother their pretty little heads 
about the implications of such a fundamental breakdown in the free market.

At a time when even Chicago economists are suggesting that it is time to go 
"back to the drawing board", andAlan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> is admitting "there is a 
flaw in the model", it seems odd that the Queen's helicopter has dropped out of 
the sky to signal the formal start of an election which is debating everything 
except what matters. Since 2008 politicians, picking up on the popular mood, 
have grown adept at anti-banker rhetoric, usually mouthed with their fingers 
crossed behind their backs. But does even the most ardent Conservative imagine 
that David Cameron and George Osborne, born, bred and suckled among bankers, 
have any serious perspective on the causes and consequences of the failure of 
the free-market model, or indeed on how to prevent it happening again?

Odd, this, because only nine years ago, when offered the chance of 
aggrandisement by responding to the attack on the twin towers, we had a Labour 
leader who stepped forward and announced his intention to "reorder the world 
around us".

In reaction to the convulsive events of the first decade of the new century, 
politicians took intense, sensual pleasure in thinking big. Already they are 
back in open competition to think small. If we are to judge by print acreage, 
we are going to spend five weeks arguing about efficiency savings in the civil 
service and whether to put 1% on national insurance.

It is a commonplace to say that no party is going to tell you the truth about 
its plans for fiscal rectitude until after the election. But nor, for that 
matter, do they seem very keen to offer new thoughts on the future of our 
nuclear weaponry; on the loss of trust in professional politics; nor, least of 
all, on how to conclude what Mark Danner calls "the forever war" in Afghanistan.

At a time when soldiers are dying to maintain a civic policy posited on a 
credible Afghan partner, it is clearly bad taste to point out that Hamid Karsai 
is unconvincingly cast in the role.

The Middle East has been delegated wholesale to the man with the orange tan 
and the fake American accent, who looked briefly as if, to the relief of 
everyone, he might annexe Europe as well.

The trend, meanwhile, is towards elected politicians who present themselves to 
be as powerless as we are ourselves. Or, in the case of fashionable 
independents, who present themselves as ourselves.

During the coming four weeks it is my intention to travel throughout the 
country and to speak to people who are keen to talk about the things the 
election doesn't look like being about.
 