
Stephanie Merritt highlights a country-wide problem to which there can be some 
relief (“Squeezing out arts for more ‘useful’ school subjects harms our culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/squeezing-out-arts-for-commercially-useful-subjects-will-make-our-culture-poorer>
”, Comment.

Here in Dorchester, Dorset, we have a free-standing charity – Dasp Music – 
which tries to augment what the public sector provides.

Dorchester area schools partnership comprises 17 schools – primary, middle and 
secondary. The charity, funded by local organisations and individuals, provides 
vocal workshops and instrument tuition, the latter currently at 903 lessons 
each week of term.

The senior school, the Thomas Hardye school, is large, vibrant and successful 
in all areas, being the outcome of progression through all the local schools.

Music is important to pupils and the town, the Thomas Hardye school choir 
singing in cathedrals around Britain and abroad.

It provides a platform for all Dasp children, with some parents, to perform in 
classical concerts with our local choral society and a large orchestra of 
gifted students from the Imperial College London Orchestra.

Next Sunday, Dasp Music will fill the Weymouth pavilion for its summer 
concert, showcasing progress through the year and raising income.

Funding worries will increase. By involving the parents of pupils – past and 
present – in choirs and concerts we can encourage them to donate, along with 
local businesses and a Friends of Dasp Music, to be established.

There is no point in sitting back and hoping. We must all get involved 
directly with our local schools to help arts of all types to enthuse our 
children. And show local authorities the values that the arts instil.
Alexina and Anthony Gannon
Dorchester
Dorset

Technical studies need a boost

I read with interest your various pieces about the arts diminishing in school. 
The arts are lovely things and make life pleasant for us and are an avenue for 
expression.

It is a good thing that fewer students are choosing arts subjects at GCSE and 
A-level as maybe we can move to bring about a little more balance in the people 
who leave school.

Our society is dominated by the arts, celebrity and media (look what 
proportion of arts, celebrity and media coverage there is normally in the pages 
of your paper).

We desperately need technical people and we desperately need more exposure of 
technical issues and those technical people who are actually shaping our world 
making it rather a fun place to be.

When was the last time a technical person appeared on Question Time? We have 
loads of spare arts and media people.
John Maxwell Webb
Stonesby
 

Leicestershire

Luther event needs sensibility

If it is true (see review of Martin Luther: Renegade and Prophet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/26/martin-luther-renegade-prophet-lyndal-roper-review>
 by Lyndal Roper, New Review) that Martin Luther was “an authoritarian scourge 
of popes and Jews” and preached: “The devil stuffs and squirts them so full 
that (satanic excrement) overflows and swims out of every place”, then 
Lutherans and others will need to be very careful in celebrating the 500th 
anniversary of the great Wittenberg event next year.

It is to be hoped that any celebrations will offer a candid critique of the 
great man who, in his eagerness to assert the values of the Protestant 
Reformation, seems to have gone right “over the top”. I hope, too, that his 
assertion about “scripture alone” will be contested.  He was eager that the 
church that had ignored scripture for years should recover proper respect for 
it. But, in so doing, he led some people into bibliolatry, which has plagued 
humanity ever since.

People are preparing big events for 2017. Fair enough.  But will they 
encourage Christian faith that honours experience and critical thought as well 
as scripture and tradition? 2017 could be a good year for religion. But it 
could also be an “annus horribilis”.
The Rev Paul King
Chesterfield

Turbine terminology



I just read the article on the London Array and wind power in general (“The 
wind in their sails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/wind-power-offshore-energy-london-array-turbine>
”, New Review. I found it very interesting and informative until the author 
described the electricians, mechanics and seamen as “labourers”, a term that 
must have gone down really well with the highly skilled technicians involved!
JA Haslett
Herne Bay, Kent

Alas, I’m too old now to rebel

“Suez, Iraq, and now this.” In listing the three most calamitous prime 
ministerial decisions since the Second World War, William Keegan also recalls 
my three moments of greatest despair (“First the Suez crisis, then the invasion 
of Iraq. And now this referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/referendum-david-cameron-suez-crisis-invasion-iraq>
”, Business). For the first two, I could do something – insignificant and even 
petulant acts, but they made me feel a bit better. In 1956, I tore up my letter 
of recall to stand by in the Z Reserve; in 2003, I left the Labour party.

But this time, I’m too old to move house to Scotland and one generation adrift 
in applying for Irish citizenship. Lowest point yet.
John D Walsh OBE
Swindon 
 