
Andrea Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy>, winner of this 
year's Whitbread and Orange prizes, has been awarded the 2005 Commonwealth 
Writers' Prize, thus scoring a literary hat trick for her novel, Small Island.

Her Windrush saga is told through the voices of Gilbert, a Jamaican RAF pilot 
who returns to Britain after the second world war, his wife Hortense, who comes 
to Britain to join him, their white landlady Queenie, who has a secret and 
close previous connection with the West Indies, and her husband. Levy, who 
receives a £10,000 cheque for the award, is the daughter of West Indian-born 
Londoners and has written three previous novels.

The chairman of the five-person pan-Commonwealth judging panel, poet and 
literary critic Professor Daniel Massa, said: "The excellence of Small Island 
lies not only with its thematic issues that are represented with insight and 
sensitivity, but also in Andrea Levy's consummate narrative skills in blending 
multiple voices in a framework resonant with humour, irony, understanding and a 
lot of fun."

Small Island was a surprise winner of the £30,000 Orange prize last June, in 
which it overcame strong competition from Rose Tremain and Margaret Atwood, but 
an expected recipient of the Whitbread book of the year award, also worth 
£30,000. Andrea levy's run of success may not yet be over - the book has also 
been shortlisted for the Romantic Novel of the Year award, to be announced 
later this month.

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, from Nigeria, won the Commonwealth First Book award, 
worth £3,000, for Purple Hibiscus, which was also shortlisted for last year's 
Orange prize. Adichie's feted debut tells the story of a 15-year-old girl 
outgrowing her father's tyrannical domestic regime against the background of a 
military coup.

"Chimamanda Adichie's work effectively portrays the cutting effect of the twin 
legacy of colonialism, evangelical Catholicism and a weak political 
infrastructure, at a time when Nigeria seemed to be falling apart under the 
pressures of a military coup," said Professor David Massa of Purple Hibiscus. 
"This is an impressive first novel that transcends national relevance."

The Commonwealth Writers' Prize was established in 1987. To be eligible, the 
authors must be citizens of one of the Commonwealth's 53 member countries. Last 
year's winner of the £10,000 best book prize was Caryl Phillips for A Distant 
Shore. The best first book prize went to Mark Haddon for A Curious Incident of 
the Dog in the Night-Time. Previous winners of the prize include VS Naipaul, 
Nadine Gordimer, Margaret Atwood, Vikram Seth, Louis de Bernières, Peter Carey, 
Rohinton Mistry, JM.Coetzee, David Malouf and Richard Flanagan.
 