
When a politician takes a poke at the modern media, as Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> did in his personal resignation 
statement to MPs, there's always a danger that journalists immediately focus on 
the affront to their dignity and motives.

Fox's attack on the media ("some sections") hounding of family and friends, 
together with the hatred he detected in some coverage, is not the most 
important aspect of the saga.

It's also likely to be half-true. The pack in full pursuit can be pretty ugly, 
though on this occasion it was chasing a legitimate target. It's what the media 
are for, not rummaging through footballers' tangled love lives.

Not that you would have learned much about that from Fox's statement. I 
thought it started well, albeit without much concession to the faults found – 
by the cabinet secretary as well as the media – in his conduct towards his 
department in relation to his chum,Adam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>. But he misjudged the next bit 
badly. "Oh no, he's another victim," MPs must have muttered.

Most of the "media frenzy" turned against him was not true, he insisted.

'"I have always believed in personal responsibility and I accept the cabinet 
secretary's conclusions. I am pleased at the explicit acknowledgement that I 
neither sought, expected, nor received any financial gain that was being widely 
and wrongly implied.

"I also welcome the clarification of the fact that no national security issues 
were breached, no classified documents made available, and no classified 
matters briefed. These accusations were also widely made and deeply hurtful."

Nope. All he'd done was breach the ministerial code of conduct. Perception, as 
well as substance, matters, he conceded – a touch ungracious there.

"And how," someone might have heckled. But the Commons tradition is that 
personal statements – usually about wrongdoing, sometimes about reasons for a 
principled resignation, sometimes a mess like this one – are usually heard in 
silence. A good rule in life anywhere.

It's understandable that a man who loved his job, and had sat for 17 years on 
the frontbench waiting to get it, is angry and disappointed – a "deep personal 
disappointment", he said – at losing it over what he clearly thinks is a bogus 
controversy. Imagine what Sir Alex Ferguson will sound like the day the Man Utd 
board decides to blow his final whistle!

He managed to be gracious again towards the end, thanking friends, family, 
political colleagues – includingDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> – as well as his Somerset 
constituents for their support.

"You do not turn your back on friends and family in times of trouble."

We can assume from that that Adam Werritty will be on the Fox sun lounger in 
future summer holidays.

"As I said in the house last week, I accept that it was a mistake for 
distinctions to be blurred between my professional responsibilities and my 
personal loyalty to a friend. I accepted then it was a mistake to attend a 
meeting with a potential supplier without an official present and, with 
hindsight, I should have been more willing to listen to those around me."

But Fox also sounded like a man who still doesn't quite get it. So many 
questions remain to be asked about what Werritty did on those foreign trips – 
and why he did it. Did he think he was a latter-day Lord Palmerston?

A James Bond or a George Smiley? A patriotic businessman? Or a smart hustler 
getting his bills paid by suckers? What about Israel? And Iran? What about 
lobbyists and financial backers who must have hoped to benefit at some stage? 
Not everyone is a noble patriot.

And what about the role of senior civil servants? Should they have done more 
to alert No 10? Or were they too timid, worn down by decades of politicisation, 
which started with Margaret Thatcher's "is he one of us?" question and was 
carried forward by Tony Blair.

In a government of pals Werritty sounds like a reprise of the Andy Coulson 
problem. Did no one warn Cameron properly? If not, why not?

We just don't know. But in time we may. Labour went immediately on the attack 
– as oppositions are meant to do (after all Labour had its scandals in office, 
as David Cameron pointed out at PMQs) – and the media will not let go a juicy 
and mysterious story with plenty of mileage left in it.

Fox pledged his total loyalty to the cabinet and to Cameron. But he isn't 
going anywhere, not after this.
 