
The former defence secretary Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> has revealed that he hopes to 
return to government after taking "personal responsibility" for his mistakes.

In his first interview since resigning earlier this month, the North Somerset 
MP told BBC Radio Bristol that sitting on the backbenches would be interesting 
because he would be "freer to say what I want".

But Fox made it clear that he does not believe the damage to his political 
career will prove fatal.

"I would certainly like to get back to the frontbench – how quickly is another 
matter and, for the moment, I will enjoy having a little bit of extra time," he 
said.

"There are one or two projects that I want to get involved in on the 
charitable side, and to devote some time to things that I have wanted to do and 
been unable to."

But Downing Street appeared to play down speculation of a Fox return to 
government. A spokeswoman said: "It is perhaps unsurprising that he has 
aspirations to return to the frontbench. He did good work while he was defence 
secretary, but he resigned only a few days ago."

Fox quit after revelations about his links to close friend Adam Werritty and 
prior to the publication ofa report from the cabinet secretary, Sir Gus 
O'Donnell <>, which found he had breached the ministerial code.

The report revealed that Fox had blocked civil servants from attending key 
meetings alongside Werritty, had failed to tell his permanent secretary that he 
had solicited funds to bankroll Werritty, and had ignored private office 
requests to distance himself from him.

Asked about the events that led to his resignation, Fox said he had taken 
responsibility for what had happened.

He admitted it had been a mistake to meet a defence supplier in Dubai without 
a Ministry of Defence official present, even though someone from his private 
office had offered to attend.

"We were sitting in a coffee lounge in a hotel – it was hardly a high-security 
meeting," he said.

"But nonetheless, given this was a potential defence supplier – not, as it 
turns out, an actual defence supplier – it still should have had somebody 
there. It's very easy to be careless, but you pay a price for it."

And he acknowledged that allowing Werritty, whom he met 40 times in the MoD 
and on trips abroad, to function as an independent adviser was a breach of the 
ministerial code, saying: "I should have kept a better separation there – with 
hindsight, it seems easy." 

He added: "You should be able to be at the highest level of government and say 
you have made a mistake.

"I take responsibility for it and I have always been very keen, all my 
political life, that people should shoulder personal responsibility. That is 
key to a decent society. If you say it, you should also be able to do it."

Fox reiterated his criticism of elements of the media coverage of his 
situation, which he said had been "quite disconcerting" and had made it 
difficult for him to do his ministerial job.

"One of my nephews, who is aged 14, was being doorstepped – and that was 
unacceptable," he said. "I do think that we need to understand that we have to 
have a free press … but a free press doesn't mean the press can do what they 
want."

He said he felt there was no rumour or innuendo that had not been written 
about him, but stressed he was only going to comment on "substantive issues", 
explaining: "Gossip is for gossipers." 

He defended his practice of arranging "downtime" with Werritty and other 
friends during official visits overseas, saying: "I would finish ministerial 
work and then we would very regularly, in places like Dubai, meet up with 
friends in the region. So there wasn't any lack of separation between 
ministerial and private time.

"Some of this coverage, you would think ministers weren't allowed to have 
private time which is, of course, absurd."

Asked whether he had embarrassed the government, Fox said: "Under this 
government, ministers make a mistake, ministers admit a mistake and ministers 
resign. That is quite different from clinging to office at all cost, which was 
what we saw under the previous government."

Jim Murphy, shadow defence secretary, said important questions relating to 
Werritty remain "unanswered".

"There's no-one to blame for Liam Fox's downfall but Liam Fox," said Muprhy.

"There remain many unanswered questions about this murky business. Before this 
case can be considered closed the government must reveal the full facts."
 