
Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, is expected to make a personal 
statement to the Commons on Wednesday after a critical report into his 
activities with close friendAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty> exposed a wide disregard for 
Whitehall rules.

It emerged in a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/18/liam-fox-damning-verdict-failure-judgment>
 published on Tuesday that the former defence secretary blocked civil servants 
attending key meetings alongside Werritty, failed to tell his permanent 
secretary that he had solicited funds to bankroll his close friend and ignored 
private office requests to distance himself from the relationship.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is expected 
to be grilled at prime minister's questions about how such a systematic breach 
of the ministerial code in Whitehall's most security-sensitive department went 
apparently undetected until the Guardian's investigation .

But Labour is expected to put the prime minister under pressure to make a 
statement about the embarrassing revelationsin light of the raft of questions 
that remain unanswered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/18/liam-fox-report-unanswered-questions>
. Jim Murphy, the shadow defence secretary, has described the report as shallow.

Sir George Young, the leader of the house, is to make a statement on behalf of 
the government following prime minister's questions. Young will try to focus on 
future changes in ministerial procedure, rather than why Fox felt determined to 
breach the rules.

But Labour is considering attempting to force the prime minister into making 
the address instead by triggering an urgent question in the Commons.

An attempt to trigger an urgent question on Tuesday failed after the Speaker, 
John Bercow, ruled there would be little point debating the report until it had 
actually been published. But he indicated he would be prepared to grant one on 
Wednesday.

The report by the cabinet secretary, Sir Gus O'Donnell, criticised Fox for 
ignoring the advice of senior officials over his links to Werritty. It also 
found that by giving his friend access to his diary, Fox created a security 
risk not only to himself but also to officials travelling with him on overseas 
visits.

In what amounts to a serious reprimand to the Ministry of Defence permanent 
secretary, Ursula Brennan, No 10 insisted no warnings about Fox's misconduct 
were passed to O'Donnell, Britain's most senior civil servant.

In a sign of the sensitivity of the issues, publication of O'Donnell's report 
was delayed for nearly eight hours as lawyers for the key actors pored over its 
contents, and last-minute changes were inserted.

In the 10-page report, O'Donnell stated: "Dr Fox's actions clearly constitute 
a breach of the ministerial code which Dr Fox has already acknowledged. This 
was a failure of judgment on his part for which he has taken the ultimate 
responsibility in resigning office."

No 10 made it clear that Cameron would have sacked Fox if he had not resigned 
last Friday, saying "his conduct was not consistent with remaining a member of 
the government". His chances of returning to a ministerial post in the medium 
term look minimal.

The report names six donors to a not-for-profit company set up by Werritty to 
bankroll his activities, including for the first time Mick Davis, chief 
executive of Xstrata, the FTSE 100 mining company. Davis is a close friend of 
both Michael Lewis and Poju Zabludowicz, two donors whose identities had 
already been made public.

The report found Fox exposed himself and his officials to security risks by 
giving Werritty access to his diary, and repeatedly left foreign powers with 
the impression that Werritty was part of the UK government, or was working for 
Fox in an official capacity.

It also found that Fox rejected officials' requests to be present at two 
meetings attended by Werritty, first with businessman Harvey Boulter in Dubai 
in June and then with senior Israelis in Tel Aviv in February.

"Private office attendance was offered for both visits and declined by Dr Fox. 
This should not have been allowed to happen. Ministers should respect the 
advice they are given, particularly where there are security or propriety 
implications for the decisions they take," O'Donnell found.

Fox also ignored concerns voiced in August by Brennan. "The risks of Dr Fox's 
association with Mr Werritty were raised with Dr Fox by both his private office 
and the permanent secretary. Dr Fox took action in respect of business cards 
but clearly made a judgment that his contact with Mr Werritty should continue."

One of Werritty's 22 visits to the MoD was dedicated to a discussion with 
Fox's special advisers on his improper use of business cards.

Fox also failed to inform Brennan of his financial links with Werritty. 
O'Donnell stated: "He should have declared to his permanent secretary that Mr 
Werritty was a friend who had a company, Pargav, which was funded by a number 
of donors, some of whom had provided funding to Dr Fox when in opposition."

The report says Fox facilitated an introduction between Werritty and a donor. 
"The links between Dr Fox and Werritty means that donations given to Werritty 
could at least be seen to be giving rise to a conflict of interest."

O'Donnell stated: "There is no evidence that Pargav sought to win contracts 
from the MoD or to influence procurement decisions. Both Dr Fox and Werritty 
are clear that Werritty never lobbied Dr Fox on behalf of donors."

No 10 insisted Werritty had co-operated with the inquiry, but some of his 
disgruntled financial backers, notably Jon Moulton, forced the pace by 
disclosing how much they had given to Werritty and how they had been unhappy at 
the way in which some of the money had been used.

Fox issued a brief statement on Tuesday night saying he was grateful the 
report found there had been no threat to national security and no suggestion he 
gained financially from allowing his friend into heart of government.

"I am pleased that the report makes clear that the two most serious 
allegations, namely of any financial gain sought, expected or received by 
myself and any breach of national security, have no basis. As I said in the
House of Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> last 
week, I accept that it was a mistake to allow the distinctions between 
government and private roles to become blurred, and I must take my share of the 
responsibility for this."
 