
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> went on the 
attack after being challenged to "show a bit of humility" and explain why he 
appeared to have no idea that his former defence secretary, Liam Fox, had an 
unofficial adviser who was funded by donors some of whom are close to the 
Conservative party.

The prime minister ducked a series of questions by Labour's Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> on Fox, including 
reassurances that no other minister was engaged in similar activities to those 
that have surfaced involving Fox.

It emerged in a report published on Tuesday that the former defence secretary 
blocked civil servants attending key meetings alongside his friend,Adam Werritty
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>, failed to tell his permanent 
secretary that he had solicited funds to bankroll his close friend and ignored 
private office requests to distance himself from the relationship.

In the first prime minister's question session since Fox resigned, Miliband 
said the revelations that had surfaced about what had been going on "in the 
most sensitive parts of the prime minister's government" were deeply worrying. 
They raised questions about Cameron's failure to ask tough questions of those 
around him, he said.

"The prime minister says he and Number 10 knew nothing about these goings on 
for 18 months. How did he allow this to happen?" asked Miliband.

He also urged the prime minister to give reassurances that no other minister 
had been involved in similar activities, and accused the prime minister of a 
"pattern of activity" in which he failed to ask "tough questions of those 
around him" and then ducked the blame when things went wrong.

Cameron said the allegations surrounding Dr Fox were "an important and serious 
issue", which is why he had set up a "full and proper inquiry", which led to 
the report.

He added: "I do think it is worth actually recognising that in this case the 
secretary of state for defence recognised that he had made a mistake, 
acknowledged that he broke the ministerial code and he resigned. That is not 
something that always happened in the last 13 years."

But Miliband chided him, saying that "in this week of all weeks", Cameron 
should show a bit of humility.

The Labour leader said the full facts of the case should be known. "The truth 
is we still don't know the full facts about this case, about the money trail, 
about who exactly in the government met Mr Werritty. And it is becoming clear 
that there are a network of individuals who funded Mr Werritty, some with close 
links to the Conservative party and other members of the cabinet.

"Given that you said you knew nothing about the arrangements, can you give a 
categorical guarantee that over the last 18 months no other government minister 
has been engaging in similar activities?"

But the prime minister shot back: "I think we should have a little bit of 
humility from the people who gave us cabs for hire, passports for favours, 
mortgages for mates, dodgy dossiers, smearing opponents, good days to bury bad 
news."

In a nod to the last PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> session, 
where Miliband focused on issues other than Fox, Cameron added: "These were the 
questions you were meant to ask last week. I've got a bit of advice for you: if 
you're going to jump on a bandwagon, make sure it's still moving."

An angry Miliband pressed him on his commitment to the ministerial code, by 
pointing to the resignation of his former director of communications, Andy 
Coulson, who has since been arrested over the phone-hacking scandal, and to the 
resignation of Fox.

Quoting Cameron's words that "it's not enough simply to make a difference, we 
must be different", Miliband said: "In the last three months, we have seen your 
defence secretary resign in disgrace and your spin doctor arrested. Is that 
what you meant by being different?"

Cameron quipped that Miliband seem to have failed to have noticed that the 
minister in question has resigned. "You're just a bit late," he said.

The Guardian revealed on Wednesday that another Conservative minister has been 
accused of blurring the role of a close adviser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/19/second-conservative-minister-accused-adviser>
 after an outside consultant with clients including BAA, Sky and Morgan Stanley 
was given a job in his department and handed out business cards bearing its 
name.

The exchange took place ahead of a statement to MPs by Sir George Young, the 
leader of the house, and Fox himself, who is due to make a personal statement 
to MPs this afternoon.
 