
The Liberal National party has cautiously endorsed some kind of 
truth-in-advertising provision, telling a federal parliamentary committee it 
should consider creating a mechanism to prevent the distribution of campaign 
materials that are “patently false”.


The Queensland representative of the Coalition has used a submission to a 
parliamentary inquiry into the conduct of the last federal election, and the 
adequacy of Australia’s donations and disclosure regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/turnbull-government-launches-sweeping-inquiry-into-donations>
, to argue in favour of expanding the authorisation requirements during 
elections to cover robocalls, texts and social media. It has also put a toe in 
the water about a truth-in-advertising regime.

“In relation to truth in advertising, while the voters should ultimately be 
the arbiters of truth in an election campaign, the committee should consider 
whether there should be remedies available to stop and prevent materials that 
are patently false,” the LNP submission says.

Turnbull government launches sweeping inquiry into donations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/turnbull-government-launches-sweeping-inquiry-into-donations>
Truth in advertising has been added to the terms of reference for the 
donations inquiry because that change is being sought by the crossbench 
kingmaker Nick Xenophon. Xenophon was unhappy with some of the advertising 
directed at his Nick Xenophon Team party in South Australia during the 2016 
federal election.

The federal Coalition has also complained volubly about Labor’s Medicare 
anti-privatisation campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/mediscare-campaign-didnt-worry-my-electorate-says-christopher-pyne>
 during the election campaign – complaints that are revived in the LNP 
submission.

Criticism is also directed at the campaign activities of progressive activist 
groups, such as “militant trade unions” and “so-called environmental groups”.

The LNP says Labor’s Medicare text campaign relied on the fact the ALP didn’t 
have to authorise the content. It says if the content was authorised, then 
voters would have known it was a “despicable” campaign.

The LNP also argues activist groups should be required “to abide by the same 
funding, disclosure and authorisation laws as registered political parties” and 
it has also put a question mark over giving some groups tax-deductibility 
status.

The party’s submission says activist groups are funding their political 
activities with member fees and “generous” tax concessions, and this is a 
“distortion of the intent behind affording these groups with tax-deductible 
status”.

Federal Labor argues strenuously in its submission against a 
truth-in-advertising provision, saying it has serious doubts about the 
constitutional validity of any legal regime and “grave concerns about the 
potentially chilling effect on democracy”.

Australia's political donations must be capped to fix 'broken' system, expert 
urges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/australias-political-donations-must-be-capped-to-fix-broken-system-expert-urges>
The ALP says a lot of statements made during elections are commentary, rather 
than fact, and a truth provision could become “a lawyers’ picnic”.

“The ALP believes that all Australians should have the same opportunity to 
participate in political debate, even if some may view their contributions as 
inarticulate or even irrational,” the party says.

Labor says it will countenance changes to the current procedures for 
authorising election material if the changes are format-neutral and do not 
interfere with the purpose of the advertisement, “which is to communicate with 
electors”.

Consistent with statements in the lead-up to the inquiry – which was triggered 
in part by controversy about the Labor senator Sam Dastyari accepting a payment 
from a Chinese businessman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
 – the ALP has flagged support for significant changes to the donations and 
disclosure regime.

These include reducing the current disclosure threshold from $13, 200 to 
$1,000, banning donation splitting, banning foreign donations, and banning 
anonymous donations above $50.

The party also proposes to link public funding “to genuine campaign 
expenditure to prevent serial candidates making a windfall from standing for 
elections” and to create new offences and increased penalties for abuses of the 
public disclosure regime.

Labor says it supports real-time disclosure of donations in principle, and it 
says consideration should be given to tighter regulation of associated entities 
such as the Free Enterprise Foundation and the Millennium Forum.

On activist groups, Labor says election campaigns need to be a level playing 
field where all participants face the same regulation.

It says there should be no distinction between groups such as GetUp!, unions 
or business associations – and if distinctions are imposed, they would be 
“anti-democratic and potentially unconstitutional”.

The Australian Conservation Foundation has used its submission to the inquiry 
to hit back against the Coalition’s criticism of third-party activist campaigns 
by progressive groups.

The ACF says all its activities during elections comply with the guidelines 
from the Australian Charities and Not-for-Profits Commission, and the 
organisation is non-partisan.
 