
An agonising scream rings out across the remote Liberian village of Genga in 
Lofa County, quickly swallowed up by the surrounding dense forest. It's the 
third day of excruciating pain and still Jaroben has not given birth. Her 
village is hundreds of miles from Liberia's capital, Monrovia, and far removed 
from any medical help.

Lying in her husband's hut, Jaroben has only a neighbour to help. She is 
pushing, but the baby is agonisingly lodged in the birthing canal and won't 
budge. Eventually, after a tormenting four days, Jaroben's neighbour makes the 
decision to tear the dead foetus from her body. With no medical training, 
severe internal damage is caused.

Jaroben survives the ordeal, but is left with a fistula, a small hole between 
her bladder and vagina. She will leak urine constantly.

Jaroben's eyes fill with tears as she describes the humiliating experience: 
"My husband and his family abandoned me. I was so ashamed; I had to return to 
my family."

"For 35 years I wasn't able to sit and talk with friends," she explains, "I 
tried to stay clean but I always smelt very bad."

The World Health Organisation (WHO) have described fistula as 'the single most 
dramatic aftermath of neglected childbirth.'

While over 365,000 women die in childbirth every year, WHO estimate that 
another staggering two million worldwide are living with the devastating 
reality of a fistula. 99% of these occur in developing countries. And each of 
these women has a similar story to Jaroben – obstructed labour, a dead infant 
and a future of incontinence. Jaroben's is not a unique case.

The 2008 report from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
says that in the UK 90% of women experience some tearing during childbirth; 
however more severe tears are immediately repaired.

Surgery to repair fistula is simple but life-changing. Yet in many developing 
nations the 90-minute operation is a far cry from reality.

Dr Steve Arrowsmith has dedicated 25 years to fistula care, living and working 
throughout Africa. His passion for the work is unabated. Today he is recognised 
as one of the leading fistula surgeons.

"Prevention and treatment are partnered, and people in both areas must work 
together," Arrowsmith explains. "Many births end in death or lifelong injury 
because there's a strong belief that nothing can be done to change this."

Arrowsmith believes that maternal mortality and injury during birth can be 
reduced if perceptions and gender attitudes can be changed. The vast majority 
of women suffering from fistula are married off and conceive at a young age, 
increasing the risk of obstructed labour as their bodies are not fully 
developed. Once pregnant, a lack of trained midwives means there is little or 
no access to ante-or post-natal care, nor anyone to recognise the first signs 
of an obstructed labour. Remote locations, lack of transport or access to funds 
can result in a woman not being taken to health services by her family during a 
difficult delivery.

As in Jaroben's case, the stigma associated with women suffering from fistula 
can result in expulsion from family units and as the topic is considered taboo, 
women often do not discover that their condition is largely curable given 
access to the right medical surgeons.

The African Medical and Research Foundation (AMREF) is one charity working 
across Africa. Their Stand Up for African Mothers programme is aiming to train 
an additional 15,000 midwives across Africa by 2015. As well as providing good 
quality ante-and post-natal care, these midwives work to challenge damaging 
community perceptions about sexual and reproductive health issues.

"Through the training of more midwives, AMREF is helping to deliver an 
immediate, sustainable solution," explains Dr Teguest Guerma, Director General 
for AMREF.

In Liberia today, maternal death is one of the leading reasons for the high 
female mortality rate. For women seeking medical assistance many factors can 
cause delay including their inferior status, lack of medical services, 
finances, transportation - even traditional superstitions.

On the outskirts of Tubmanburg, Liberia, the medical hospital ship, Mercy 
Ships has been playing a major role in reshaping gender attitudes and training 
up skilled midwives.

Jennah Paye – a local midwife – proudly stands outside her new maternity ward. 
The little hut contains a simple birthing table and a few implements, but it's 
safe and clean and with a trained midwife always on call, it's a great 
development for the women of the village.

"Before this I never had anywhere," Jennah explains, shaking her head. "I used 
to just put plastic on a mat and then the mother would lie on the mat in her 
own house and give birth. It used to be for hours or days at a time."

The Mercy Ship first came to Liberia in 2005 at the end of the bloody civil 
war. One crew member, retired midwife Elizabeth Hunter, set out to make a 
difference by teaching new and safer techniques to various groups of 
traditional birthing attendants. This included how to deal with prolonged or 
obstructed labour.

"Since the training, especially on difficult births, no mothers have died," a 
smiling Janneh explains.

As more energy is focused on developing community understanding of pregnancy 
and training up midwives, so maternal mortality and injuries will be reduced.

"If we can instill the belief that it is intolerable that any woman should die 
even in the most remote village," explains Arrowsmith, "then strategies can be 
put into place where local people look to maximise the effectiveness of any 
resource in getting a woman help when she desperately needs it."  

While maternal mortality rates and birthing injuries remain high, Arrowsmith 
continues to give his time to changing the lives of women living with fistula.

Jaroben is one of the lucky ones. After 35 years of humiliation she finally 
received the operation she had dreamed of.

"I never imagined I would be able to stand among people again," says Jaroben, 
her eyes filling with tears. "Or just sit and talk with friends. I can even 
wear real underwear now!"
 