
Liberal politicians across Europe should remind voters that patriotism is not 
at odds with pride in theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
if they want to win at the polls, the Austrian president-elect’s campaign 
manager has said.

The advice on how to fight Eurosceptic populism came a day after Alexander Van 
der Bellen, a Green-backed independent,decisively beat his rightwing populist 
rival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
, Norbert Hofer, in a rerun of the Austrian presidential election.

Martin Radjaby, managing director of the agency Jung von Matt, which 
coordinated the winning campaign, told the Guardian: “Van der Bellen’s success 
in Sunday’s election has shown that liberals can reclaim subjects currently 
occupied by populists and nationalists, such as tradition and patriotism.”

On Sunday, Van der Bellen managed to increase his majority from around 30,000 
to almost 300,000 votes, dealing a crushing blow to his opponent from the 
anti-immigration Freedom party (FPÖ). The 72-year-old retired economist had run 
a campaign which gave equal weight to a message of pan-European cooperation and 
the notion ofHeimat, meaning “homeland” or “spiritual home” in a broader sense. 

One poster showed Van der Bellen against the backdrop of his home town in the 
Tyrolean Alps, along with the slogan: “Wer unsere Heimat liebt, spaltet sie 
nicht” (“Those who love their homeland do not divide it”).

Radjaby said that far from emboldening Austria’s rightwing populists, 
Britain’s vote to leave the European Union and Donald Trump’s win in the US 
election had played into his team’s hands. “Brexit intensified the debate about
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and allowed our 
candidate to become a unifying figure,” he said.

Austria defeated the far-right Norbert Hofer – finally, some hope for Europe | 
Julia Ebner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
After the country’s constitutional court in July annulled the narrow outcome 
of the run-off due to irregularities in the count of the vote, Van der Bellen’s 
team started using the colours of the Austrian flag on its posters, while 
simultaneously warning that a vote for his rightwing rival could lead toAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> leaving the EU.

While the former leader of the Green party drew his best results in urban 
areas, he managed to increase his share of support in rural parts of the 
country such as Vorarlberg in the westernmost tip of Austria, where he got 
60.4% of the vote.

Even though the centre-right ÖVP had not officially endorsed Van der Bellen, 
he managed to win the support of many of the party’s regional mayors, who in 
Austria are elected via a direct mandate. Compared with May, Van der Bellen 
gained 144,000 net votes from previous non-voters.

Many of those who swung to Van der Bellen were female, a trend some 
commentators put down to an inclusive viral video campaign featuring female 
protagonists such as “Gertrude”, an 89-year-old Holocaust survivor from Vienna. 
Sixty-two percent of Austrian women voted for Van der Bellen, up from 54% in 
May.

According to Reinhard Heinisch, professor of political science at Salzburg 
University, Van der Bellen’s authentic, unconventional appearance played a key 
part in swinging the vote. Heinisch said: “He’s not a career politician and 
didn’t come across as one. He stayed true to his unpolished self. Sunday’s vote 
has shown us that while there is potential for a protest vote, it doesn’t 
always have to go to the far right. There is such a thing as a radical centre.”

Matthias Strolz, leader of Austria’s liberal NEOS party, said: “Brexit was 
definitely a crucial issue for the outcome of the election.” Nigel Farage, the 
former leader of Ukip, told America’s Fox News on Friday that Hofer “will be 
calling for Austria to have a referendum on their membership with the European 
Union”. Strolz said the comments were “a great goal for Van der Bellen”.

“Ten years ago we used to say that the last week of an election doesn’t 
matter, but in the days of social media that is different. I saw how it shook 
people up,” Strolz said.

Italian referendum result is unhelpful for EU, but not a fatal blow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/italian-referendum-result-eu-eurosceptics-far-right-austria-matteo-renzi>
“There’s an encouraging lesson in Sunday’s result: even in a country with a 
history of strongly Eurosceptic attitudes such as Austria, a politician can 
campaign around the idea of a united states of Europe and still win an 
election.”

Christoph Hofinger, co-director of social research company SORA, told Der 
Standard newspaper that Trump’s success in America may have inspired Hofer to 
go for a more aggressive tone in the last round of TV debates. “In a democracy 
where three-quarters of eligible voters actually turn out at the voting booth, 
that is more risky than in the US, where brisk behaviour can mobilise your core 
support,” he said.

Hofer’s party tried to project optimism on Monday, with its leader, 
Heinz-Christian Strache, writing in a Facebook post: “2017 will be the year of 
the Freedom party! Our time will come!”

The FPÖ is currently leading polls for the next parliamentary election, which 
could take place next year if the current coalition government between 
centre-left and centre-right collapses. Given Hofer’s strong showing in the 
presidential election, Austrian media have speculated that the failed 
presidential challenger could replace Strache at the top of the far-right 
party, which governed in a coalition with the conservatives between 2000 and 
2005.

Hofer on Sunday evening denied that he would challenge Strache for the party 
leadership, saying that he was planning to run for the presidency again in 2022.
 