
Paul will be here from 3.50pm with team news. In the meantime, here's an 
excerpt from Jonathan Wilson onGhana's worrying fragility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jan/25/john-mensah-ghana-africa-cup-nations>
.

Midway through the second half of Ghana's 1-0 win over Botswana on Tuesday 
night, Anthony Annan misjudged a long clearance and inadvertently flicked the 
ball beyond the defensive line, giving Jerome Ramathlakwane a couple of yards 
on John Mensah and a run on goal. Powerful and committed, Mensah is a wonderful 
defender – Darren Bent may have taken the plaudits for his goals, but when 
Sunderland dragged themselves out of relegation trouble following their 108-day 
run without a win the season before last, the form of Mensah and the goalkeeper 
Craig Gordon were at least as important – but he can be slow on the turn. 
Struggling to get back to challenge Ramathlakwane, he bundled him over just 
outside the penalty area: a foul and a clear red card.

You can read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jan/25/john-mensah-ghana-africa-cup-nations>
.

Teams:
Unfortunately I still haven't received the Libyan line-up but the Zambian one 
is in and, unsurprisingly, is the same as the one that started their impressive 
victory over shambolic Senegal on the opening day.

Zambia: 16- Kennedy Mweene, 02-Francis Kasonde, 03- Chisamba Lungu, 04- Joseph 
Musonda, 05- Hichani Himoonde,
08 - Isaac Chansa, 11- Christopher Katongo, 13- Stoppila Sunzu, 17 - Rainford 
Kalaba, 19- Nathan Sinkala, 20- Emmanueal Mayuka

3.53pm: Right, finally have the Libyan side, with the big news being that 
defensive linchpin Mohamed El Mughrabi returns after missing his team's dismal 
defeat to Equatorial Guinea on Day 1.

01-Samir Aboud (captain), 02-Rabea Aboubaker, 05-Younes Shibani, 06-Mohamed 
Esnani, 10-Ahmed Osman, 11-Mohamed El Mughrabi, 4-Ali Salama, 16-Abubaker 
Suiueinei, 17-Walid El-Khatroushi, 19-Ahmed Zuway, 23-Jamal Mohamed.

3.58pm: They can get some fairly ferocious storms down by the Equator and 
there has been one today, with the result that the pitch is severely 
waterlogged, there is not a single fan in the stadium and the chances of this 
match going ahead on time are roughly the same as a unicorn riding to the 
rescue. And it's still pelting down. This is all very cricket.

4.07pm: Still no word on when or whether this match will kick off. The rain 
continues to batter the ground and streams are beginning to flow around the 
athletics track and down the tunnel area. The players arrived in the stadium by 
bus, they may have to consider leaving by ark. It is very difficult to see this 
match going ahead and there must now be doubts that the later one between 
Senegal and Equataorial Guinea can be played.

4.12pm: The rain appears to have relented as suddenly as it started. But there 
is still a huge quantity of water on the pitch. Meanwhile, some positivity: "I 
am from Zambia and I love the Zambian National Team, I have supported them all 
my life," announces Dhinaker Dhandi. "I am very thankful and happy that the 
Guardian is covering the ANC with much enthusiasm. You guys are doing a 
fantastic job. Also, did you know that 3 of the starters from the Zambia team 
(Mayuka, Sunzu and Kasonde) played in the 2007 U-20 world cup? Some of the 
other members (Mulenga, etc) are on the subs bench. Looks likeZambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zambia> is finally focusing on grassroots 
football and has a defined strategy in finding and nurturing young players."

4.24pm: No news is good news, right? No, it's just no news. Apparently no 
decisions has yet been taken as to what to do with the Zambia-Libya game.

4.26pm: I can remember watching matches from Argentina '78 when it had pelted 
down and waterlogged the pitch. The solution there was for teams of guys to run 
around with garden rollers squeegy-ing the water off to the sidelines and 
endlines," parps Steve Dahlgreen. "If the match goes on, it'll likely not favor 
the Zambians who will want to keep as high a tempo ground game as they played 
against the tree-like Senegalese." Apparently the Equatoguinean organisers do 
not have any squeegymajigs and are just counting on the sun to clear the water 
up for them. Also, spaking of Argentina playing in near-monsoon conditions, do 
you remember the skill of Diego Maradona on a soaked pitched against uruguay 
during the 1986 World Cup? Would be interesting to see Messi playing in the 
wconditions (and against some of the tacklers) that Maradona used to have to 
contend with.

4.37pm: Right, still no kick-off forecast so we'll take a break and get back 
to you when there is something to report.

4.52pm: So, after some of the most frantic brushing since the last time Robbie 
Savage was told he was about to appear on telly 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/ground-staff-use-brooms-to-try-and-clear-water-at-libya-zambia-not-so-effective/>
, which was far to recently if you ask me, it seems the pitch is almost clear. 
Organisers have set the new kick-off time at 5.15pm, Blighty time.

5.10pm: So the teams come waddling out. There's still a bit of surface water 
on the pitch but nowhere near as much as 45 minutes ago, attesting to the power 
of the sun and the diligence of the brush-wielders. And now we have the jaunty 
new Libyan anthem, with which the players sing along heartily.

5.12pm: The Zambian song is more stately, solemn affair and nowhere near as 
danceable.

1 min: We have kick-off. And we even have some spectators, as hundreds have 
trooped into the stadium since the rain abated. Needless to say, Zambia manager 
Hervé Rénard, the man with the world's largest collection of plain white 
shirts, looks unruffled by all that has proceeded.

2 min: The early signs are that this pitch resembles something that might be 
more readily associated with Arsene Wenger's imaginary state of "farciland". 
The puddles are holding the ball up continually and the players are slipping 
regularly.

4 min: Kalaba, who was excellent in the win over Senegal, curls a freekick in 
from the right. Musonda leaps to meet it but ... heads it clear instead of at 
goal.

GOAL! Zambia 0-1 Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/football/libya> (Osman 5') 
Libya's first goal of the tournament was simply constructed and executed. 
Zambia were prised open with a clever through-ball by El-Khatroushi and Osman 
latched on to it to slot neatly past the out-rushing keeper. On a pitch like 
this pulling off a move like that is no mean feat.

7 min: Zambia couldn't score against Libya in two matches during the 
qualifiers - they need to so do now. Yes, that is a statement of the obvious.

9 min: Libya, it must be said, do have a slight advantage in that the half of 
the pitch that they are defending seems to be more waterlogged than the one 
that they are attacking, making it difficult for Zambia to find any offensive 
fluency.

11 min: A pertinent point from my colleague Penny Woods: "Watching this game 
reminds me of how stupid those Feed the World lyrics are:
'And there wont be snow in africa this christmas time ... where nothing ever 
grows, no rain or rivers flow." Ha! Where's the Nile again? Wigan, is it?

14 min: Freekick to Zambia on half-way is launched into the box. After a bit 
of ricocheting around the area the ball sits up for Kalaba, who lets fly. It's 
deflected into the arms of the keeper.

16 min: It looks like El Khatroushi will have to come off following some 
manner of muscle injury. Whether that is a result of the extra strain caused by 
having to play on such a heavy pitch I can't say. For now he's off the pitch 
receiving treatment so Libya are playing on with ten men.

17 min: Kalaba scoops the ball way over after being presented with an inviting 
opportunity from 18 yards.

Libya change: El Khatroushi can't continue so Albusaifi gets his chance.

20 min:  As the players splish and splosh their way around the pitch, making 
as little fuss about the conditions as possible, Barnaby Pole quips: "This is 
the first decent advert I've seen for holding a World Cup in Qatar."

22 min: El Mugrabi is down with blood pouring from his eye. Can't blame the 
rain for that. He copped a slap in the face from Chansa as the pair challenged 
for the ball. Cue another pause for treatment.

You know the way that when a butterfly flaps its wings in Brazil, it can 
trigger a storm in New York? Yeah, well, when storm breaks out in Equatorial 
Guinea, it can cause technical woe in GU Towers, apparently. Unfortunately, 
therefore, this here MBM is being abandoned. But we'll be back in action for 
Liverpool v Man City later on, hopefully.
 