
Academics <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/academics> are 
now highly mobile. We are internationally-focused. Even if our research is 
highly localised, we are very mindful of the need to foster international 
conversations, networks and partnerships, and publications.

We swap notes about which software allows us to video conference without the 
picture freezing every few minutes, and how to best share files, images and 
co-authoring.

We are very familiar with high-speed trains, long-haul planes and the 
vicissitudes of lost luggage, skipped meals and cancelled flights. In this 
brave new scholarly world, the international academic has a particular position 
and currency.

I am one of those international academics. Mine is not a unique or singular 
story. I moved to the UK from Australia 11 years ago. At the time I didn't 
think too much about it. I was ready for a late-career academic adventure.

I had a partner prepared to move, a grown-up family and two young dogs who 
could be micro-chipped, packed up in vet-approved crates and flown away in 
air-conditioned comfort. A house was easily sold, possessions loaded into a tin 
container and moved from a dry South Australian desert on one side of the world 
to a Midlands drizzle on the other.

Academics have of course always moved around. My own undergraduate experience 
at Adelaide University was greatly enhanced by conversations with lecturers who 
had studied abroad. They brought a cosmopolitan consciousness to our liberal, 
but provincial, university. They were however a tiny minority in an 
overwhelmingly Antipodean institution.

International academics are no longer a tiny minority

These days, the international academic is much easier to find. We are no 
longer a tiny minority. At my current institution, the University of 
Nottingham, close to one in every five academic staff comes from somewhere 
other than the UK. And this is not an uncommon picture around the country.

Achieving this kind of staffing mix isn't accidental. Universities have 
decided that they want to operate in a global market for both students and 
staff . They deliberately place job advertisements in a range of overseas 
locations as well as making them available on the web.

Search committees and personal networks are encouraged to be active in 
spreading the word about vacancies and opportunities. But why, we might ask. 
What does the claim to search for the best in the world actually mean?

We enhance the student experience

We international academics bring a range of interesting benefits to our new 
British institutions.

A culturally and linguistically rich mix of academics enhances the experience 
of students.International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/international> academics 
share the need to make connections between what happens here and what happens 
elsewhere. We incorporate into our teaching our homegrown literatures, 
scholars, histories and ways of life. We provide experiences and narratives 
that might otherwise be harder to access and more remote and abstract.

International academics embody the idea that it's possible to be educated and 
scholarly no matter who you are and where you're from. We represent to 
students, and to the wider public, the international nature of our institutions 
in particular and of a globalised academy more generally. We are the 
quintessential mobile global knowledge workersprofessor Robert Reich 
<http://robertreich.org/> wrote about. We are what we tell our students they 
can be – but only if they work hard!

We international academics bring competitive advantages to our new employers. 
Bids, citations and esteem are now the currency of higher education quality and 
international academics can count and be counted in these areas.

Our previously local knowledge and contacts can be very helpful to our new 
institutions; we may come from countries and/or institutions that are of 
strategic interest.

We can also offer high citations; we bring existing home readers, we write 
with our former colleagues and we add readers in our new country. We may also 
bring esteem to our new institutions because we are invited back home as 
international experts to keynote events and lead prestigious projects.

But all this here-ing and there-ing creates a somewhat ambiguous mandate for 
the international academic. On the one hand, we want to pursue research in our 
new location. The challenge of transferring our interests is one of the things 
that was most attractive about the move in the first place. On the other hand, 
there is also considerable mileage in keeping close contact with our former 
connections, research agendas and policies, events and scholarship in the 
places we have come from.

This kind of double-thinking and double-being is increasingly the lot of the 
international academic. We are neither simply expats nor migrated scholars, but 
must somehow metaphorically be astride two locations and contexts, always a 
little concerned about not falling too far to one side or the other. Some of us 
get tired of this and go home. Some of us stay and get acclimatised.

We relish the ready access to places and practices we previously only knew in 
books. Home and away becomes the only way to be.

Pat Thomson is professor of education at Nottingham University – follow her on 
Twitter@ThomsonPat <https://twitter.com/ThomsonPat>.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
 