
Patrick Wildgust, curator of Shandy Hall

Shandy Hall is a bit like a museum, but charting the house's own history is 
difficult. The architectural scholar Nikolaus Pevsner reckoned it was built in 
the 17th century, but he was wrong, probably because he didn't have access to 
the inside. In fact, the building is a symmetrical, timber-framed hall built 
around 1430. The roof rafters show signs of the fire that would have been in 
the centre of the house, and through a hatch in the kitchen you can see the 
medieval outside wall.

There's more evidence if you look closely. In the old meeting room, there is a 
wall painting of the sacred monogram: the letters IHS, probably meaning "Iesus 
Hominem Salvator" ("Jesus, Saviour of Man"). Another one is of a man with a 
pikestaff and a big plumed hat; probably painted around 1500–1520 and fairly 
certainly not religious.

The writer Laurence Sterne lived here from 1760 to 1768, but by then the 
paintings would have been panelled over and he would have never known of the 
secret story behind his walls. Sterne had already published the first three 
volumes of The Life and Times of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman by the time he was 
appointed as a permanent curate in the building, now a parsonage. "Shandy" is 
an old North Yorkshire dialect word for "crack-brained" or odd, and Sterne's 
friends referred to the house as "Shandy Hall"; the name stuck. The building 
has since featured in a film about Sterne, Michael Winterbottom's A Cock and 
Bull Story, with Stephen Fry playing me.

A 1920s guidebook described Shandy Hall as "sonsy"– a Scottish word meaning 
good-natured, and that's true. The only problem is practically every level is 
an addition to the medieval building: for example Sterne built a powder room, 
overlooked "only by the sun", for a lover who never actually came to live with 
him. So most of the rooms are a bit odd: it has a lot of steps and low 
doorways. Even after six years of living here, I clout myself on one of the 
doorways at least once a month.
 