
Time, it is said, makes strange bedfellows of us all. Maybe so, though not 
half as fast as Twitter does. At the start of this Ashes summer few would have 
guessed that by the fifth TestLily Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lilyallen> would be indulging in chummy 
banter with David Lloyd and Jonathan Agnew. Yet that is what happened. By 
comparison, Monty Panesar's batting heroics at Cardiff appear altogether 
predictable.

In a series that no single player commanded, it was left to mobile phone 
technology to take the games by the throat. Not since Douglas Jardine developed 
bodyline has a new innovation so dominated an England v Australia series.

Jardine, it should be said, was a man who spoke in such clipped phrases it was 
more or less a posh 1930s version of text-speak. (It came minus the emoticons, 
obviously, because even to this day nobody has worked one out that indicates a 
firm and manly handshake.) He lived in a cricketing age when visiting teams 
arrived by ocean liner, newspapers still relied on carrier pigeons for score 
updates and the nearest things to instant messaging was morse code. In those 
days if Lily, Bumble and Aggers had wanted to communicate on matters of 
pressing cricketing importance such as the origin of the term "parky" or the 
width of Andrew Flintoff's thighs, they'd have had to resort to semaphore 
flags. The physical effort alone would surely have deterred them.

Agnew and Lloyd belong to an earlier and slower paced era, one when telex 
tapes still chattered in TV studios and the only person with a mobile phone was 
Dr Who, yet their involvement in ensuring that – no matter what npower think – 
this was TheTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> Ashes is 
not totally surprising. The Sage of Accrington has always been one for new 
techniques, though previously he'd confined himself to encouraging high fives 
and forcing his players to listen to M People.

At Test Match Special, meanwhile, the excellent Agnew has spent his entire 
summer reacting to everything that has been chucked his way with the gun 
dog-like enthusiasm worthy of the late, great Brian Johnson. From Max Boyce, 
via Russell Crowe, to that bloke out of Divine Comedy, Aggers has embraced them 
all. You feel that if several members of a Norse death metal band had turned up 
during the tea interval and set fire to Henry Blofeld he'd have regarded them 
as "absolutely tremendous fun". Little wonder that he has found Twitter such a 
delight.

It is Allen, however, who must take the Inzaman-ul-Haq-sized slice of the 
blame for the situation. It was her passion for Graham Onions that really 
smacked the whole cricket-Twitter thing into the grandstand of public 
consciousness. For most older cricket fans it was a huge shock to discover that 
a hard-living female pop star had a crush on north country pace bowler – a 
clear indication that either cricket has become crazier, or rock music much, 
much tamer. Looking back over previous decades it's hard to imagine anything 
remotely similar happening. Picture Janis Joplin telling the crowd at Woodstock 
about her eagerness to "Get in on with Ken Higgs", or Siouxsie Sioux discussing 
the irresistible allure of Mike Hendrick with Julie Burchill from NME, if you 
can.

It wasn't just Allen and her wish that she was "getting drunk on the crease 
with the boys", however. The Velvet Underground (Nico – "I Fantasise About Not 
Entirely Straight Forward Sexual Hi-Jinx With Lancashire's Peter Lever") once 
sang that, "between thought and expression lies a lifetime". Not any longer. 
Now people can communicate the first idea that pops into their heads with the 
world in less time than it takes Rudi Koetzen to get an lbw decision wrong.

This was splendid news for Phillip Hughes who despite being billed as some 
sort of wild boy from the bush still managed to get a better measure of the IT 
Age than he did the whereabouts of his off stump, broadcasting news that he had 
been dropped from the Test team several hours before his bosses considered it 
wise to do so.

In the end I suppose we should be amazed. Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> after all is a slow moving game. 
There's really no reason why cricketers shouldn't Tweet between deliveries. In 
fact, it's more or less bound to happen at some point. I bet the first time we 
get a referral after mid-off reads the batsman's Tweet "Snicked one to the 
wicky. Luckily Bowden didn't hear it. Phew!" on his Blackberry is less than six 
months away.
 