
Working with Caryl Churchill <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/carylchurchill>
 in the early 1980s catapulted me from unemployment into a whole new world of 
theatre. It marked a big change in my acting life. Before then, all my work had 
been devised.

After a spell as an usherette for the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> at the Old Vic, I had been involved 
in community theatre and theatre in education since the 1970s. With two 
companies, based in Leeds and Coventry, I devised work for children that we put 
on in adventure playgrounds, with playgroups, and at street festivals, and then 
in schools.

Lots of actors long to devise their own work, and I loved it and found it 
satisfying, but eventually I grew frustrated. I wanted to perform words that I 
hadn't made up myself. I loved new writing and I wrote letters to two companies 
I admired: one was the Royal Court, the other was Joint Stock. They carried the 
torch of new writing. To me, they were the shiny places.

I didn't hear back from Joint Stock. The Court invited me down to London and I 
had an interview with Simon Curtis and Antonia Bird. I auditioned using some of 
my own pieces but didn't get the job. However, after I left, Simon Curtis 
recommended me to Caryl Churchill and the director Les Waters; they cast me in 
Fen. It was a Joint Stock production so in a strange muddle I ended up working 
for them after all. I couldn't believe my luck. I'd seen a lot of Joint Stock 
touring shows around the UK and they really inspired me.

We went to workshop the play in the Fens and all stayed in a cottage together. 
We'd meet people out walking during the day and ask them their stories.

It was a great method of working. You'd go out on your own or in pairs and 
stick your head over a fence and just talk to someone. Then, back at the 
cottage, you'd recreate the conversation. Another actor asked the questions 
that you had asked, and you would then reply in character. Sometimes they asked 
things that you hadn't so you would improvise the answers. In the evening we 
read folk tales and ghost stories from the Fens.
 Linda Bassett as Mrs Bryant in Roots at the Donmar Warehouse. Photograph: 
Stephen Cummiskey 
It was an amazing week of headlong work and then Caryl went off and wrote the 
play. A few weeks later we came back and read her play. It was beautiful. I 
played several characters in the production including Shirley, who was a 
countrywoman and a grandmother.

In one scene, the main character comes to talk to her and Shirley is busy 
ironing a shirt, sewing on a button, cooking a meal, washing up and holding a 
baby. It was an extraordinary ballet of work and it took me a while to get my 
head and body around performing it.

I was reminded of Fen when I was at the Donmar last year doing Arnold Wesker's 
Roots, which is also set in Norfolk. That role also required a lot of 
scrubbing, cleaning and cooking. I'm now in rehearsals for Visitors, a new play 
by Barney Norris, and the role is another countrywoman – one who is suffering 
from dementia at the end of a lifetime's hard work.

When Fen opened at the Almeida in London in February 1983, the theatre had 
just reopened but it had no heating and was bitterly cold – as chilly as the 
Fens themselves. We were shivering on stage. One critic said, "Go – but take an 
overcoat." Then we toured the UK and even ended up at the Royal Court but 
before that we took the play to Joe Papp's Public theatre in New York. The Fens 
seem like a foreign country to people from London, let alone New York, but the 
audiences there responded to the rural poetry of it. They felt it in their 
bones.

• Linda Bassett is appearing in Visitors, an Up in Arms 
<http://www.upinarms.org.uk/> production, which tours the UK from 10 February 
to 8 April, including four weeks at the Arcola Theatre, in London.

• More from this series – Tim Pigott-Smith: how Ian McKellen made me raise my 
acting game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/21/monologue-tim-pigott-smith-acting-ian-mckellen>
 