
Terra Australis was first sighted by European ships in the early 17th century, 
settled by England in 1788, and morphed into the self-governing dominion of 
Australia in 1901.

The nation became more independent of Britain after the second world war when, 
together with the US, it blocked invasion from Japan. Yet Australian higher 
education continues to look remarkably like that of the UK.

There is just one difference, but in the long run it will be very important.

In the last generation both the UK and Australia have doubled the proportion 
of the population entering higher education. Both have moved from near free 
tuition to high tuition, funded by loans repaid through taxation on an 
income-contingent basis.

Each treasury worries about the mounting long-term cost of loan non-repayment 
and subsidised interest rates. Australia deregulated student numbers in 2012, 
and in 2015 the UK will follow, offering higher education places to all 
students qualified to enter.

Each country provides a unitary system of universities with a common mission 
in teaching, research and service, competing fiercely for students and research 
support. In each country the combined outcome of historical inequalities and 
market forces is a steep hierarchy of higher education institutions (HEIs), 
informal but real.

The most research-intensive universities are on top (the Russell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/> in the UK, Group of Eight  
<https://go8.edu.au/>in Australia), with successive universities positioned 
below them at decreasing levels of research and prestige.

In both countries further and vocational education sits below the 
universities, underfunded and lacking the prestige of second sectors in 
countries such as Germany. On the margins of higher education both UK and 
Australia subsidise private colleges through student loans, and the number of 
students in for-profit HEIs is growing.

In both UK and Australia higher education has been reshaped by business models 
and a new emphasis on students as customers.

Organisational cultures are like peas in a pod. Both systems run periodic 
research assessment exercises, like modern Domesday books, that have stepped up 
competition and internal mobility. There is also much movement of professors 
and executive leaders between the two countries.

In a world in which cross-border student numbers are growing at twice the rate 
of domestic student populations, both the UK and Australia generate major 
export income as providers of English-language education, charging Asian and 
African students fees well above those paid by local students.

In 2012-13 there were 425,265 foreign students 
<http://www.ukcisa.org.uk/Info-for-universities-colleges--schools/Policy-research--statistics/Research--statistics/International-students-in-UK-HE/>
 (including EU students) in UK higher education and230,923 
<https://aei.gov.au/australiaeducatingglobally/pages/default.aspx> in Australia.

Both are multicultural with a traditional Anglo core, comfortable with foreign 
students but struggling with the politics of migration, creating tension with 
the education export industry. Tensions are greater in the UK, where the UK 
Independence party (Ukip) is riding high, but Australia has its share of 
white-is-right activists and shock-jock radiospruikers 
<http://www.allwords.com/word-spruiker.html>.

The one difference between higher education in the UK and Australia is the 
geopolitics. The UK is at the edge of the EU and deciding whether it is 
European or not. Australia has an indigenous population under-represented in 
higher education.

It is also at the edge of south-east Asia, and figuring out if it is British, 
continental – there are large heritage communities from Italy, Greece, the 
Balkans and Turkey – or Asian. Economically, demographically and culturally, 
the Asian element is growing fast.

More than half of Australia's export trade, led by coal, iron ore, gold and 
education, is withChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, Japan, Korea 
and other dynamic regional economies.

Australia largely avoided the post-2008 recession because of its burgeoning 
trade with China. There has been little increase in unemployment. The largest 
source countries for migrants into Australia were once UK and Ireland. Now they 
are China and India. Malaysia and Indonesia are also important. Many Asian 
migrants start out as international students.

More by luck than design the regional geopolitics are playing in Australia's 
favour. North-east Asia is now the most dynamic region in world higher 
education.

Korea and Taiwan have near universal levels of tertiary participation. China's 
output of scientific papers is expanding by 16.5% a year. North-east Asia now 
spends more on research and development than the US and Canada combined, and 
40% more than the UK/Europe.

When China opened up to the world, Australia developed the relationship early. 
While UK researchers have primarily focused on collaboration with Europe, a 
major source of research funding, Australian universities have been building 
ties in Asia.

Australia has higher rates of research collaboration in China, Taiwan and 
Singapore (though it is weaker in Korea) than the US. Among all the 
English-speaking nations, the UK has the lowest rates of research collaboration 
in dynamic Asia.

Simon Marginson is professor of international higher education at the 
Institute of Education, London, and a professorial associate at the University 
of Melbourne, Australia.

Australian and UK universities mimic each other's strategies when it comes to 
higher education funding and policy. But who's leading the way, and are they 
going in the right direction? We spend two weeks debating, sharing stories and 
opening up the discussion.

Join the Higher Education Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered. <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>
 