
To balance out a so-far-unrelieved diet of literary events, I went this 
morning to listen to psychologist Terri Apter give her Cambridge Series talk 
about sisters, the subject of her latest book. As the owner of a pretty A1 
example of the genus myself, I was interested to hear the academic take on our 
relationship. Apter spoke well on the subject, going into detail about her 
interrogation of the "passionate, complex, endlessly enlightening" bonds of 
sisterhood, and discussed both the ways in which we love, protect and nurture 
our sisters, as well as the equally powerful drive to compete with and/or 
clobber them.

Interesting as this was, none of it felt particularly revelatory: her research 
seemed to describe my own experience fairly accurately, but didn't offer me any 
insights into the underlying psychology that my sister and I hadn't come to on 
our own. What did come as news was that the study of sisters is a recent thing. 
It was not until the late 1970s, said Apter, that psychologists moved en masse 
to include women in their studies at all; almost all psychological research was 
carried out on the (white) male mind. So it was that, in the course of her 
research, she turned to the great works of fiction, which were way ahead of 
science in exploring the sister bond.

She gave several examples: Christina Schwarz's 2000 novel Drowning Ruth, which 
I haven't read but sounds intriguing (please tell me if it's one I ought to 
pick up), Jane Smiley's A Thousand Acres, Alice Walker's The Color Purple, 
Louisa M Alcott's Little Women. According to Apter, Beth the peacemaker's 
refrain of "Birds in their little nests agree" bears no relation to the real 
world whatever – she cited research oneagles 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eagle> which shows that of the two chicks 
normally produced by a mother, the elder will generally terrorise the younger 
until it dies of its wounds or starves to death. However, she was most 
interesting on the subject of Emma, the Jane Austen novel I thought had least 
to do with sisters, but which, she points out, contains the line "How is a 
young woman who is handsome, clever and rich, going to fill her need for a 
sister?" in its opening pages. The book, when you analyse it, is all about 
Emma's search for a sister-figure to replace her real sister and her governess, 
both lost to her through marriage. Harriet appears at first to be an ideal 
sister – meek, compliant – but when she looks about to steal Knightley from 
Emma's affections, the relationship turns sour, and infinitely more 
sibling-like than before.

In modern literature, Maggie O'Farrell is very good on sisters: The Vanishing 
Act of Esme Lennox vividly presents us with a sister relationship strained to 
breaking point. As Isaid earlier this week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2010/may/29/hay-other-peoples-books>
, I'm a huge fan of What Katy Did at School, in which sisters Katy and Clover 
are isolated from the rest of their family and explore their bond with each 
other. Cassandra and Rose in I Capture the Castle are another great pair, but I 
think my favourite literary sisters are probably Celia and Dorothea in 
Middlemarch, who love and support each other unconditionally, despite being 
completely different.

I have to go to another event now, so no time to ponder further, but tell me: 
which are your favourites? I can't wait to get back and find out.
 