
A little-known Egyptian group has claimed responsibility for the killing of a 
senior Egyptian army officer outside his suburban Cairo home.

The claim came in a statement by the Banner of the Revolution on social media 
accounts known to be sympathetic to militant groups. The claim’s authenticity 
could not be immediately verified.

Brig Gen Adel Ragai was the commander of the army 9th armoured division 
headquartered in the sprawling military base of Dahshour, near Cairo. He had 
recently served in the northern part of the Sinai peninsula, where security 
forces have been fighting Islamic militants for years. The unit was also 
responsible for destroyingsmuggling tunnels running between the Sinai and the 
Gaza Strip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/19/palestinians-gaza-city-smuggling-tunnels>
, according to reports.

The statement said Ragai’s driver and security guard were injured in 
Saturday’s attack, which Egyptian media reported was carried out by three 
masked gunmen.

The statement claimed the attack was partly in revenge for the killing earlier 
this month by security forces of Mohammed Kamal, a senior official of the now 
banned Muslim Brotherhood.

The only other attack for which Banner of the Revolution claimed 
responsibility was an August shooting at a checkpoint in Menoufia province, 
north of Cairo, which left two policemen dead and wounded three other policemen 
and two civilians.

Hours after the attack on Ragai, the Egyptian president, Abdel-Fatah al-Sisi, 
conferred with his prime minister, the defence and interior ministers and 
intelligence chief to review the security situation, according to a 
presidential statement. It said Sisi urged authorities to beef up security at 
vital installations, but gave no details.

Before the statement, suspicion fell on the local affiliate of the Islamic 
State group leading the fight against security forces in Sinai, and Hasm, or 
“Decisiveness”, a shadowy group suspected of links to the Muslim Brotherhood. 
Hasm has claimed responsibility in recent weeks for attacks in Cairo, including 
a shooting against the country’s former mufti, or chief Muslim theologian, and 
a car bomb against the chief prosecutor’s deputy. Both escaped unhurt.

The insurgency in Sinai has grown deadlier following the military’s 2013 
ousting of an elected but divisive Islamist president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/03/mohamed-morsi-egypt-second-revolution>
, Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood.

Sisi, himself a career army officer, said in a recent interview that he 
expected the war in Sinai to continue for a long time and that both sides in 
the conflict were getting better at fighting each other.
 