
App: Live Traffic Info

By: Highways Agency

Price: Free

Available on: iOS 3.0 or later

What is it?

Get real-time updates on the traffic situation on England's A roads and 
motorways region by region, with warnings about roadworks and incidents – 
discover that jam on the M25 before you find yourself bumper to bumper and 
unable to plot an alternative course. It's by the people who operate, maintain 
and improve the strategic road network, so it's got to be good, right?

What does it promise?

"This app will home in on your current location to give you the traffic news 
when and where you need it. Plan your journey, arrive safe and less frustrated, 
reduce congestion and lower emissions," it says. It does this with "official 
data collected from thousands of vehicle monitors, CCTV and patrol reports to 
show where the Highways Agency network is flowing well and to keep you 
up-to-date with traffic incidents as they break throughout the day".

Is it easy to use?

Yes and no. It's a piece of cake to operate: open it up, select your region 
and you're presented with a list of incidents/roadworks and a colour code 
saying (I presume, although there's no key) how serious an incident is. When 
you click into each listing you get a more detailed description of what has 
happened, and when normal driving conditions are expected to resume.

However, given that the lists are dominated by road and junction numbers they 
look very data heavy, and scrolling through them to try and locate an incident 
near you is nigh on impossible at any reasonable speed (that is speed as in 
urgency, not mph, because of course – as the app keeps reminding you – you 
shouldn't use the live traffic news device while driving).

Is it fun?

It could be if you manage to spot a traffic black spot before you reach it and 
plot an alternative route; less so if you fire up the app while stuck in 
traffic only for it to confirm that yes, you are in the middle of a three-mile 
tailback. Or worse, if it says traffic conditions are fine, but your static 
vehicle suggests otherwise – this hasn't happened to me (yet), but according to 
the reviews in the app store it's a real possibility.

The traffic radio, which was a particularly useful feature, has also been 
turned off – but the agency is apparently considering proposals to resume this 
service, having advertised the licence earlier in the year.

Is it pretty?

Visually it's a bit uninspiring. The familiar Highways Agency logo with the H 
forming a bridge over the A of a road is present and correct, but the red and 
blue motif just reminds me of theMetro newspaper website 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/home/>. Some of the text – in particular the mobile 
use/driving warning – looks low resolution.

Should you download it?
 Highways Agency QRcode 
With traffic delays apps I work on the principle of more is more. The Highways 
Agency effort is by no means a standalone gem – but it's free. And coupled with 
the free iPhone and Android-compatibleRAC app 
<http://www.rac.co.uk/news-advice/car-knowledge/trafficapp/>, which also covers 
Scotland and Wales, and has a map-based system for highlighting traffic 
problems, you can compare the two sets of information for a cover-all traffic 
safety net.
 