
As the mission continues I am beginning to feel an affinity with Jehovah's 
Witnesses. True, I ask random strangers about local elections, not Jesus, but 
we get the same kind of looks.

The truth is that most people I have spoken to down the campaign trail south 
from John O'Groats don't know there are local elections coming up, or don't 
care.

A new example is woman who works at Left Luggage in Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> train station. "Use your vote to 
improve things?" she asks. "Well, we tried that." When she hears where I'm 
from, she mentions a friend in the Netherlands, Frank, who pays his cleaning 
lady €15 an hour. "That's what, £12? [It's £12.25.] I'm making £6.08 here, how 
can that be?" To be fair, she adds, the minimum wage is set to go up, in 
October, by 11p.

Newcastle feels like so many struggling cities where local authorities feel 
compelled to put up huge billboards trumpeting, in this case, north-east 
England's "pioneering role in electric vehicle development" and 3D printing. 
The city is voting on whether it wants a mayor and local paper the Journal has 
a good background piece. A mayor is a visible figure who can make the case for 
your city, but the referendum feels like blackmail to residents who believe 
there will be sanctions from Westminster if they vote no. This stirs resentment.

The woman selling me the Journal says she is going to vote Labour, by post, in 
the council election. But half a dozen random strangers either won't vote, or 
won't tell me who they'll vote for. Perhaps the apathy itself is the burning – 
or simmering – issue.

What would a Martian think? It sees Egyptians and Syrians dying in their fight 
for a system that people who have it seem to treat with indifference, if not 
contempt. Then I come across a Books for Amnesty secondhand shop, near the 
local Chinatown (featuring among others the Cheeky Duck restaurant). Surely 
Amnesty International will be a hotbed for political engagement? Inside a 
wonderfully kind man says he won't vote. He recently moved houses and forgot to 
register in time.

He once voted for an independent candidate in the local elections, when the 
Labour councillor refused to deal with trouble at an off-licence around the 
corner from his home. At other times his vote went to Labour, "by default 
really".

He says he feels Labour takes the north for granted, while the north has no 
alternative. For a long time his MP was David Miliband, whom he believes simply 
got "parachuted in by the party because we were a safe seat". One wonders how a 
British equivalent of the solidly leftwing German party Die Linke would fare in 
Newcastle.

In an expensive coffee shop a man in his late 20s is reading a book called The 
Ego Tunnel. He has a PhD in philosophy. "In this book I will try to convince 
you that there is no such thing as a self," he reads the opening sentence. "My 
generation awoke politically during the Blair years. Then the Tories came to 
power and really, we don't see much difference. And Labour just sits there 
absorbing political engagement that could be channelled productively. I call 
Labour a sinkhole for political will."

Back at Left Luggage the woman says "everyone's feeling the pinch of the 
cuts". That's on people's minds, not local elections. "I hope to win the 
lottery soon," she chuckles. But what will happen to her friendships when 
suddenly she has millions and her friends don't? "Well, yes, there's that. A 
little would be nice though. I could buy my council house."
 