
After walking for over three hours in the Mozambique heat, Emilia Primeiro 
reached the health centre. She was seven months' pregnant but she needed a 
mosquito net. "It's my first check up," says the 27-year-old. "I heard on the 
radio that because I'm pregnant, I would be given a net. I'm hoping that the 
nurse will give me one. I'm frightened of malaria."

Emilia lives in rural Inhambane province in the south-east of the country and 
20 kilometres from her nearest health centre in Jangamo, but it was worth the 
walk for an insecticide-treated net (ITN) to protect her against mosquitoes. 
Only recently, Emilia's two-year-old son, Filipe, died of malaria. "He had 
fevers and then the next day he got fits. It was too late to carry him here. He 
died at home."

Children under the age of five, pregnant women and people with HIV are the 
most vulnerable to malaria, which is transmitted by female mosquitoes carrying 
one of five species of the plasmodium parasite. In Africa, one in five child 
deaths is caused by malaria and the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates 
that 243 million cases led to 863,000 deaths worldwide in 2008.

The disease is treatable, preventable, and although there is no human vaccine, 
its science is well understood. The weapons to defeat it, including ITNs and 
the more durable Long Lasting Insecticide Nets (LLINs), are all available 
today. Nets have proved to be a simple and effective solution for preventing 
mosquitoes from biting from dusk till dawn.

"When you put the LLINs into villages, every net acts as a mosquito trap," 
says Paul Emerson of the Carter Center, a US-based charity. "If they touch the 
net they are dead. So you can get coverage in a village of only about 70-80 
percent and everybody gets protected from malaria because you shift the age of 
the mosquitoes and you don't get those mosquitoes growing old and becoming 
infectious."

In recent years, the global community has accelerated its fight against 
malaria and millions of free nets have been distributed across Africa by 
international aid agencies working in coordination with national health 
ministries. Nets have been deployed in large-scale programmes or handed to 
pregnant women like Emilia at antenatal clinics. The strategy has been to give 
nets to the most vulnerable to meet the UN's Millennium Development Goal 6 of 
reversing the incidence of malaria by 2015, and the Abuja Declaration – signed 
by 44 African leaders in Nigeria in 2000 – to reduce the burden of malaria by 
the end of 2010.

But nets alone won't cure the sick or eradicate the disease. A three-pronged 
attack with indoor residual spraying (IRS) of buildings to kill mosquitoes, and 
by prescribing artemisinin combination therapy (ACT) is widely accepted as the 
best solution. Governments must act fast – there are growing fears that 
mosquitoes around the Thailand-Cambodia border are building up resistance to 
insecticides.

So far the strategy seems to be working. A WHO assessment of children of all 
ages in four regions of Ethiopia in 2007 revealed a 67% drop in confirmed 
malaria cases, a 54% decline in malaria admissions, and a 55% decrease in 
malaria deaths thanks to this approach. And according to UNICEF, handing out 
nets to each family door to door in Tete Province in Mozambique helped to 
reduce malaria cases and deaths by nearly 70% and 90% respectively in the past 
year.

Statistics, however, may mask fundamental problems in malaria-endemic regions. 
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) 
believes that local volunteers are essential to saving lives. In the district 
of Diébougou in Burkina Faso, the IFRC piloted universal coverage to give nets 
to all 110,000 citizens in 2009. Local volunteers were trained to raise 
awareness, to encourage people to collect the nets, and to show people how to 
hang them up. Advising people house to house about the cause of malaria, where 
to get treatment and how to replace a damaged net helped the most vulnerable 
and the most remote people. The pilot increased net usage rates and 
significantly reduced the incidence of malaria.

Living with his family of 17, Ihiri Justin Sonda received nine nets during the 
campaign for all the sleeping spaces in his home. "Recently, I spent two days 
in the hospital because of malaria," he says. "During my convalescence, our 
seven-month old baby was treated in intensive care, also for malaria. And two 
years ago, we lost a one-month-old baby girl because of malaria so I hope these 
nets will improve health in our family."

Volunteers also help to diagnose the disease which is especially important for 
young children who can die within 24 hours of showing the first symptoms. By 
speaking the language, and knowing the community's customs and habits, locals 
can make a huge contribution, but challenges remain. "Sometimes it is hard to 
convince people who have symptoms of malaria to go to the health centre," says 
volunteer Jefferson Sié Kam. "People have strong habits of using medicinal 
plants and traditional healers and some of them don't believe in modern 
medicine. Fortunately, mosquito nets are widely accepted and people understand 
the importance to sleep under them."

By educating and empowering local people, and by providing the funding and 
support, net distribution programmes are showing positive results. Not only is 
this good for the health of individuals, but it also means people can use their 
energy to work, and their money to buy food and take care of their families 
instead of paying for expensive medicines. People and the economy benefit from 
the fight against malaria, which costs Africa $12 billion annually in losses 
and economic growth according to the Roll Back Malaria Partnership.

When Emilia left the health centre under Mozambique's midday sun with her new 
net, she was happy and optimistic. "The mosquitoes are not going to bother me 
tonight," she says. "And when my baby is born, he or she will sleep with me 
under this net."

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 