
Helen Shaw had a glass of pink champers in one hand, a bottle of New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> beer in the other as she sat 
with her friends in Kiwi House – the official supporters hub-cum-bar in Central 
Saint Martins, by King's Cross in London. Like every single smiling Kiwi 
watching the athletes on the big screen she was celebrating the fact that – for 
the first time pretty much any of them could remember – they found themselves 
above neighbours and rivals Australia in the Olympic medal table. But if this 
was schadenfreude, it was schadenfreude Kiwi style. "We love Australia, we 
definitely want them to do well," insisted Shaw. "But, right now, we are still 
loving kicking their ass."

The Aussies' lacklustre performance, on Sunday afternoon standing at 19th in 
the medal table compared to New Zealand's 12th spot after a disappointing 
showing in the pool, is not going down well with her Aussie friends, added the 
24-year-old magazine publisher, who lives in London. "I'm not surprised really, 
they are so competitive. Friends in Oz are saying that the medal table isn't 
even being shown on television and when a colleague sent a screen grab of it to 
a colleague yesterday … " His response was unprintable.

Official Australian Olympic broadcaster Channel 9 avoided showing New 
Zealand's ascent up the medal table, showing only the nine top countries, 
followed by a gap, followed by Australia. Sydney Morning Herald sports 
journalist Brad Walter thought that was rather unsporting. "Can't believe 
Channel 9 only showed top nine in medal tally plus Australia, then admitted we 
didn't want to be reminded NZ were 10th," he tweeted. "Ch9 should be showing NZ 
gold, not pretending it didn't happen."

The Kiwi attitude is quite different, said Shaw's friend Jessica Middleton, 
24, wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with the colours of the alphabet in Maori. "In 
New Zealand, if you get a medal in anything you will get a parade in your own 
town," she says. "I get sick of these countries who don't appreciate their 
athletes." Right on queue triathlete Andrea Hewitt crossed the line in 6th 
place to huge cheers in Kiwi House. "Aw, that's awesome," said Shaw. "Good on 
her."

Wendy Baker, 51, who normally lives in Leeds but is volunteering in Kiwi House 
during the Games said she wasn't a fan of the rivalry between Australia and New 
Zealand, and didn't get too upset when people mistook her for an Aussie. But 
she could see why they were taking being below their neighbours in the medal 
table rather badly. "In temperament they are a bit more like the Americans, 
while we're a bit more like the British," she said.

Still, the noise in Kiwi House when the Kiwis won gold in the men's single 
sculls, men's pair and men's double sculls in the rowing was anything but 
reserved. "It was incredible in here, totally packed. I don't think I've ever 
been anywhere so noisy in my life."

Proudly wearing his All Blacks rugby shirt, Hanah Huston, 24, is slightly less 
generous to the Australians. "They choked in the pool," he said. Traditionally 
one of the Australian's strongest disciplines, their pool performance has 
confused Aussie patriots. James Magnussen – who had come into the Games as 
world champion – came second to USA's Nathan Adrian in the 100m freestyle on 
Wednesday, and failed to qualify for the final of the 50m freestyle. Earlier in 
the week, the Australian 4x100m freestyle relay team, favourites to win the 
race, didn't get a medal, while Bejing triple gold medalist Stephanie Rice took 
home nothing in the 200m or 400m medley events and wept at the the poolside in 
disappointment. The gold Australia won in the women's 4x100m freestyle, for the 
moment, remains their only one of the Games. "Australia is like our bigger, 
uglier brother so if we beat them it's really good," said Huston. His friend 
Tom Cho, 23, travelling in the UK before heading back to his job in Australia, 
urged caution. "We never expect this, and it's still early days," he said. "We 
have to just enjoy it while we can."

• This article was amended on 5 August 2012 to correct some spelling and 
grammatical errors
 