
The emotions were mixed for Great Britain. There was joy at two silver medals 
on the penultimate day of the Olympic regatta for their 470 dinghy sailors, 
some of the most popular characters in the boat park. But there was a tinge of 
disappointment, too, that GB's title as the pre-eminent Olympic sailing nation 
had gone.

The team had exceeded their medal target but thanks to a hat-trick of golds 
with one more still to play for on Saturday, Australia rather than GB top the 
sailing table.

The joy first. The celebrations from the men's 470 boat summed up their 
characters perfectly. Luke Patience, the bubbly extrovert, somersaulted from 
the dinghy into the sea. "Tom Daley watch out," he said later. Stuart Bithell, 
more lugubrious, went for a conservative jump, explaining that he left the 
flamboyant antics up to his partner.

"This is paradise," Patience said when he was back on shore and dry. "We've 
dreamed about being on the podium for many years. You spend so many years 
thinking of winning. We've achieved so much as youngsters, we've stormed it as 
Olympians."

Making their debuts at the Games, Patience and Bithell have had a brilliant 
regatta, snapping at the heels of the classy Australians, Mathew Belcher and 
Malcolm Page. The British pair went into the final medal race second, needing 
to finish ahead of the Australians and get a boat in between them, a tall order.

They took lessons from a master of match-racing, the four-times gold medallist 
Ben Ainslie. For a while it looked to have worked and the on-camera boat caught 
Patience grinning and laughing. But experience told and after a fascinating 
tactical battle in light wind in front of a packed spectator area, the 
Australians finished second, two places ahead of GB, to secure the gold.

And so went GB's chances of heading the sailing medal table for the fourth 
successive time. If Patience and Bithell had won gold and the 470 women, Hannah 
Mills and Saskia Clark, had done the same immediately afterwards, GB could have 
fought off the big Australian challenge. Of course, that is a lot of ifs and 
buts.

GB finish with five medals. Ainslie won gold while Mills and Clark took silver 
to add to the second places of the windsurfer Nick Dempsey and the Star 
keelboat pair of Iain Percy and Andrew Simpson.

The team manager, Stephen Park, said he was pleased that they had returned 
medals in half of the 10 classes, one more than the target. "It is a good 
effort," he said. "We've exceeded our target of four. Hopefully that will 
secure funding for the four-year cycle, which is important for the Olympic 
programme but also for our junior and youth programmes. We're happy with that."

But he was not ecstatic. "We're conscious the results could have been better. 
We had two gold medal opportunities today. We had a gold medal opportunity in 
the Star. It could easily have been four."

Park said the difference between London 2012 and previous Games was that the 
competition among the top teams was getting tougher. No fewer than 15 nations 
have won medals this time, which will please the InternationalSailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> Federation hugely.

Park accepted that Australian had done a "fantastic" job. They concentrated 
resources on three key boats – the men's 470, the 49er skiff and the Laser 
dinghy. They have won gold in each one.

Competing at home had put additional pressure on the team, he said. There had 
been a "lot of scrutiny and a lot of noise around the team". He also had 
reservations about the Nothe course the medal races take place on. It was sited 
close to the shore to give spectators a good view but that meant the wind there 
was unreliable.

"It's been a great day out for spectators but in my view the course area 
brought too much luck into the results. My personal view is that Olympic gold 
medals should be about who is the most talented and skilful rather than who's 
the luckiest on the day."

Park insisted the future was bright. Some of GB's elder statesmen are unlikely 
to make Rio 2016 though he refused to rule anyone out at this stage. But Park 
said the time would come again for crews such as the 470s. Patience, Bithell 
and Mills will still be in their 20s when 2016 comes around.

Patience and Bithell were also looking forward, first to a drink. Their first 
thought was that a Corona beer might be the thing. Their second was a bottle of 
champagne. The only Scot on the team, Patience was also looking forward to a 
haggis cooked by his mother, Judith.

Then to Rio. Typically, Patience could hardly contain his excitement at the 
prospect of doing it all again and this time winning gold: "I'm sure that we'll 
get a chance one day, and I'm sure we've got the faith and belief that on that 
day we'll be good enough and prepared enough." Bithell told him he sounded like 
William Wallace making a speech. Cue a raised fist from Patience and a hearty 
yell: "Freedom.".Team GB secured a fourth sailing medal when the brilliant 
young sailors Luke Patience and Stuart Bithell won silver in the 470 dingy 
class.

The pair went into the medal race second in the standings but hoping to 
overhaul the much more experienced Australian pair, Mathew Belcher and Malcolm 
Page.

But after a fascinating tactical battle in light wind in front of a packed 
spectator area, the Australians finished second, two places ahead of GB, to 
secure the gold. It was Australia's third gold of the games and means they are 
bound to top the sailing medal table. That is a disappointment for GB, whichwho 
hasve headed it for the last three games.

After the race the Australians and British sailors both leapt into the water 
and celebrated together. Patience, 26, said: "We're happy, happy boys. We're in 
paradise. It's not the gold but there's plenty of time. We're young boys." 
Bithell, 25, said the Australians sailed a "fantastic race". "They held their 
nerve."

Going into the 470 medal race, the Australians needed to finish ahead or a 
single place behind GB to take gold. As so often in such a situation there was 
a tense jockeying for position before the start. The boats got so close that at 
one point they touched.

Patience and Bithell started stronger. They have been relaxed throughout and 
could be seen laughing and joking on the in-boat camera. Going round the first 
mark, GB led with Australia in third.

The Australians gained on the downwind leg and crept into first. In a 
stiffening breeze, Patience and Bithell tried to get close to them and slow 
them down by blocking their wind. Patience has described himself as a terrier 
and it developed into a dogfight between the two. The tussle meant that the 
rest of the fleet caught up.

Still, the Australians rounded the top mark for the last time in first, with 
GB fourth. Desperate to catch up, the British pair wasere adjudged to have 
illegally pumped their sail — by useding their body weight to help power it and 
had to do a penalty turn. The gold was out of reach but silver assured.

Patience, the only Scot in the GB sailing team, and Bithell, who is from 
Rochdale, have had a brilliant regatta, with seven top three finishes in the 
10-race preliminary series.

Both have laughed off the idea that they ought to feel under pressure going 
into their first Olympics and seem destined to be stars of the British sailing 
team for years go to come.

Up next are the British 470 women, Hannah Mills and Saskia Clark. They go into 
their medal race leading the standings on the same number of points as the New 
Zealanders Jo Aleh and Olivia Powrie with a great chance of gold.
 