
Great Britain have one foot in the men's semi-finals after a hugely dramatic 
and at times utterly unlikely 3-3 draw against Australia, which saw the home 
side somehow pull back from 3-0 down against the world's top-ranked team.

For more than half the game the British men were outplayed by a direct and 
hard-running Australian side. Two early goals from Russell Ford and a ferocious 
thwack from the Australia captain, Mark Knowles, shortly after half-time looked 
to have sealed things.

But with just 25 minutes remaining, Jonty Clarke's whipped cross was deflected 
in by the Australia goalkeeper, Nathan Burgers, sending an already noisy and 
partisan crowd at the Riverside Arena close to hysteria. Seven minutes later – 
and with Australia still largely the better side – the volume rose further 
after Barry Middleton lunged to nudge in an angled strike from a penalty corner.

The match could easily have gone Australia's way as a sometimes shaky GB 
defence battled desperately. But with fewer than five of the 70 minutes 
remaining, James Tindall's ferocious sweep from the right struck Burgers's boot 
but carried sufficient force to spin into the goal. To tumultuous booing the 
Australians appealed to the video referee over some mysterious infraction. This 
was rejected and the home crowd's night was complete.

Alastair Wilson, part of hard-pressed British defence, said the support had 
played a significant role in the comeback: "It was amazing. You'd think when we 
went a few goals behind and weren't playing so well they might get a bit 
disheartened, but it was the opposite. At the end of the game I was absolutely 
knackered, but having that many people screaming for you makes you work that 
little bit harder."

It had taken the British some time to adjust to the directness of the 
Australian approach, Wilson added: "Australia put a high press on you, really 
intense. We knew that was coming, it just took a bit of time to get up to 
speed."

Australia remain top of Group A on goal difference from Britain, with both on 
eight points after four of the five games, with Pakistan a point behind. The 
top two from each of the six-nation groups go into the semi-finals.

The last British game, on Tuesday, is against Spain, languishing fourth in the 
group but five in the world rankings. The only way GB could miss the 
semi-finals would be a defeat to Spain coupled with Pakistan beating Australia.

That said, a semi-final would most likely pitch the home team against the 
might of Germany or the Netherlands, leading Group B, who between them have won 
four of the last five Olympic tournaments.

To prosper against either, the British players would need to avoid the sort of 
sluggish start that looked to have sunk them against Australia. The visitors 
almost scored after intercepting GB's first attack, and it took six minutes 
before Ford's cross was inadvertently bundled into the goal by the British 
keeper, James Fair. Just over three minutes later and Ford scored again 
following a direct pass through the apparently dozing British back line.

Wilson said he and his team-mates were not yet thinking about the last four, 
especially given the tough match looming against Spain. But, he said, the 
fightback had raised spirits and expectations: "Three goals down against the 
world's No1 team, to come back to three all is definitely something to be proud 
of. But there's plenty of things to work one – like getting there from minute 
one and not giving them a three-goal start next time."

Wilson said: "We've always come into this tournament with a lot of belief that 
we can compete against all the teams. We've worked so hard and we've been 
training so long, we know our best game can do it. We just need to find that 
best game every time."
 