
It was good getting back to racing again in New Zealand last week following 
the Christmas and New Year break, despite not getting the results we were 
aiming for......

A1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> is undoubtedly a truly global 
series and we're all used to flying long-haul. But the usual 12-14 hours was 
definitely dwarfed by the 38 hour door-to-door epic we endured from London to 
Taupo. It really takes it out of everyone so we try to arrive a few days early 
to acclimatise, but meetings held me back in London so I wasn't able to arrive 
until the last minute. Though at least my luggage made it all the way across 
the world. That wasn't the case for quite a few others whose bags were 
temporarily lost somewhere en-route, so they had to dress themselves in the 
North Island's finest fashions until they were reunited with their belongings. 
Our driver Robbie Kerr was one of the unlucky ones which did cause a slight 
panic until he eventually got his race gear and helmet back just in time to 
sign-on on Thursday, otherwise Great Britain may have been driverless!

Despite the trek, New Zealand, in my opinion, is one of the best venues in the 
A1GP calendar. Not only is it a fantastic and welcoming country to visit, but 
its refreshing to see how enthusiastic the whole country is to see A1GP in 
town. The nation-wide promotion campaign was excellent and a particular 
highlight was the spectacular race between New Zealand's Jonny Reid in "black 
beauty" and an Air New Zealand 747 down the main runway at Auckland Airport a 
few weeks prior to the race. The Kiwi's really buy into the unique concept of 
A1GP, and it's a great example of what we hope to achieve in Great Britain one 
day, where everyone gets behind their national motor-racing team, as they do 
for other national sports.

Taupo is definitely up there when it comes to attractive race settings, with 
nearby Lake Taupo and the mountain back-drop (better known nowadays as "Mount 
Doom" from Lord of the Rings). It has a relaxed holiday resort feel, but 
unfortunately we weren't there on holiday! However it does make a nice change 
staying in small independent hotels rather than the usual urban business chain 
hotels. It's a friendly place to work and makes life easier not having the 
language barrier that we experience at other race venues.

I was kept busy with a fair few radio and newspaper interviews over the race 
weekend, and then unfortunately with the technical issues that arose as the 
weekend progressed. Having been second quickest in Saturday morning practice 
despite Robbie having been out of a car for 3 months, it all started to go 
wrong in qualifying and subsequently in both races. It was USA's turn to target 
the British car, shunting us out of the Sprint race, and then our ongoing 
engine troubles finally caused us to retire early from the Feature race. It's 
always so disappointing to come away with no points, but the team finds it 
particularly frustrating when we've come such a long way for nothing. However 
one thing I can say about the British crew is that we always get our heads down 
and will return to the next race with confidence and ready to fight.

With the next race taking place in Sydney on 3 February, the A1GP circus have 
now spread themselves out across New Zealand and Australia for short breaks 
before meeting up again at Eastern Creek circuit. But for me, there's still 
work to be done though I cannot complain about my make-shift office for the 
week which has views of the Pacific Ocean and it's certainly more inspiring 
than the London office. However I don't think I can run the British team from 
Australia full-time!
 