
Some products do comparatively well in times of recession: alcohol, chocolate, 
cinema tickets, cigarettes. But one surprise bestseller of the economic 
Armageddon is a decades-old science fiction novel about an imaginary economic 
Armageddon - popular now, its fans insist, because the collapse of civilisation 
it describes is on the verge of coming true.

Sales of Ayn Rand's 1957 book Atlas Shrugged - a hymn in praise of radical 
individualism, extreme self-interest and laissez-faire capitalism - are surging 
as the crisis deepens, according to TitleZ, a service that tracks sales trends 
on Amazon.

As of yesterday, the book's 30-day average rank on the website was 110, far 
above its average rank of 542 over the last two years. On 13 January it even 
briefly outperformed Barack Obama's wildly popular work The Audacity of Hope. 
Yesterday it was in 55th place, between The Reader and a book on cultivating 
very small gardens.

Atlas Shrugged tends to inspire either cult-like devotion or sarcastic mockery 
in readers, who are either thrilled or appalled by Rand's vision of a world in 
which the "men of the mind" - inventors, entrepreneurs and industrialists - 
withdraw their labour from a society intent on bleeding them dry with taxes and 
regulations.

Furious at being exploited by the government on behalf of the masses, who are 
described as "parasites" and "moochers", the striking capitalists retreat to a 
camp in the mountains of Colorado, protected by a special holographic shield.

Starved of their genius, society collapses and wars break out until eventually 
bureaucrats are forced to beg the rebels' leader, John Galt, to take over the 
economy.

There is a reason, then, that Amazon categorises the book as fantasy. But Rand 
adherents see looming parallels in today's Washington.

The Obama administration's support for beleaguered homeowners and banks, they 
argue, smacks of tyrannical socialism, forcing the strong and successful to 
prop up the weak, feckless and incompetent. "The current economic strategy is 
right out of Atlas Shrugged," the commentator Stephen Moore wrote recently in 
the Wall Street Journal. "The more incompetent you are in business, the more 
handouts the politicians will bestow on you."

Obama's frequently expressed view that the crisis demands that all Americans 
make sacrifices - and that those earning the most will need to "chip in a 
little more" - would have disgusted Rand, who believed that altruism was evil.

"It only stands to reason that where there's sacrifice, there's someone 
collecting the sacrificial offerings. Where there's service, there is someone 
being served. The man who speaks to you of sacrifice is speaking of slaves and 
masters, and intends to be the master," she wrote.

Some even predict a Rand-style revolution, in which those tired of supporting 
their fellow citizens decide to "go Galt", withdrawing their labour or refusing 
to pay taxes.

In cities around the US, conservative activists have been organising street 
protests known as "tea parties", inspired by the CNBC correspondent Rick 
Santelli, who in a high-profile rant last month called for direct action by 
taxpayers in the manner of the 1773 Boston Tea Party, the anti-British protest 
that helped trigger the American revolution.

Rand, who emigrated from the Soviet Union to the US, considered her 
thousand-plus pages of overwrought prose to be the ultimate statement of her 
philosophy of objectivism, but mainstream philosophers have largely ignored it. 
Noam Chomsky called her "one of the most evil figures of modern intellectual 
history".

The notion of a Rand rebellion has its sympathisers on Capitol Hill, however. 
"People are starting to feel like we're living through the scenario that 
happened in Atlas Shrugged," John Campbell, a Republican congressman who gives 
copies of the book as gifts to his interns, told the Washington Independent.

"The achievers are going on strike. I'm seeing, at a small level, a kind of 
protest from the people who create jobs ... who are pulling back from their 
ambitions because they see how they'll be punished for them."

The book's peak sales days on Amazon seem to correspond to major events in the 
attempted rescue of the economy, including the bailout of Northern Rock, the US 
decision to buy shares in nine major banks, and the passing of Obama's stimulus 
bill. TheAyn Rand <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ayn-rand> Centre for 
Individual Rights claims that US-wide sales almost tripled over the first seven 
weeks of 2009, compared with the same period in 2008.

But sceptics have described the threats of Galt-style tax boycotts as the 
rightwing equivalent of "moving to Canada".

Many liberals claimed they would emigrate northwards if George Bush won the 
2004 election. But when he did, they didn't.
 