
Alistair McAlpine, who has died aged 71, was a man of extraordinary 
individuality: his life was one of a succession of transient passions. At 
various times he was a distinguished political campaigner and adviser, an 
Australian pearl farmer, an English country gentleman, a Venetian romantic, a 
builder, a shopkeeper, a Cork Street antique dealer, a journalist and author 
and, most latterly, an Italian bed and breakfast proprietor in a restored 
Puglian monastery. He was a true eccentric in the finest tradition of the 
maverick.

The great-grandson of "Concrete Bob", the founder of the McAlpine building 
company, was born in the Dorchester hotel, London, where his bottle of milk was 
delivered by room service. He came to public prominence whenMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
 was elected leader of the Conservative party and appointed him as honorary 
treasurer, a post he occupied throughout her leadership from 1975 to 1990. He 
was also deputy chairman of the party from 1979 to 1983. Having raised many 
millions to fight the 1979 and 1983 elections, he was rewarded with a life 
peerage in 1984.

A man of wonderful fun and mischief, he claimed to have helped secure 
Thatcher's continuation as prime minister in 1983 by sending across Smith 
Square from Conservative Central Office and buying all available copies of the 
Labour party manifesto from its headquarters at Transport House. He then 
circulated the document, famously dubbed by the Labour MP Gerald Kaufman "the 
longest suicide note in history", throughout the City and the Conservative 
party's business supporters in an operation so immediately successful that he 
quietly cancelled any further press advertising in the course of the campaign, 
thus saving hugely on the election budget.

He was most recently in the news when he was wrongly identified on Twitter in 
2012 as the Conservative politician from the Thatcher era mentioned anonymously 
on a BBC Newsnight programme as having been involved in allegations of the 
sexual abuse of boys in care homes in Wales in the 1970s and 80s. He was 
profoundly hurt by the suggestion and as a result of legal action was awarded 
apologies and considerable damages in consequence, including£185,000 from the 
BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/nov/15/bbc-lord-mcalpine-compensation-newsnight>
 and £15,000 from both the comedian Alan Davies and Sally Bercow, the wife of 
the House of Commons' Speaker, John Bercow. The money was donated to charity 
but did not assuage the offence caused him by the casual cruelty of the 
internet.

Alistair McAlpine was the third of four children of Edwin McAlpine, who became 
a life peer asLord McAlpine of Moffat 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/sport/spl/aberdeen/head-of-mcalpine-building-firm-dies-1.596049>
 in 1980, and his wife Mollie (Ella Mary Gardner Garnett). He was educated at 
Stowe school, Buckinghamshire, which he left at the age of 16 to begin work as 
a builder. His father had sent him weekly copies of a magazine called The Muck 
Shifter to prepare him for a life in industry and at the age of 21 he became a 
director of the family firm.
 Alistair McAlpine with Margaret Thatcher in 1975. Photograph: PA 
In his autobiography he acknowledged that his life as a child was a luxurious 
one and did not change drastically thereafter. He started working in Australia 
in the 60s, developing in the Broome area on the northern coast ofWestern 
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>, where 
he built a luxury resort at Cable Beach, started a parrot collection, opened a 
zoo, began pearl-farming and collecting art. His collection of modern art and 
sculpture was impressive: he subsequently made a sizeable gift of part of it to 
the Tate Gallery.

It was when he met Thatcher that he found his passion for politics, which 
lasted probably longer than most of his enthusiasms. Though not a conventional 
Conservative, he almost immediately found the fun there was to be had from 
politics. Fuelled by copious quantities of the best champagne, he set about 
helping improve the new party leader's personal reputation with everyone who he 
thought mattered, from the most distinguished dignitaries to even those at the 
rougher end of Fleet Street. He established a political salon in Central 
Office, bought a Georgian town house across the road from the House of Lords 
for entertainment purposes and was the first to host late-night lobster and 
champagne parties in his hotel suite at party conferences to sweeten political 
opinion.

A brilliant and generous host in London, Venice, Perth, Monaco and Puglia, he 
was loyal to those he counted as his friends, irrespective of their status, 
wealth or politics. In particular he remained a devoted friend to Thatcher, 
almost always taking his family to spend Christmases with her or hosting her 
family at his homer. He was outraged by the manner of her fall from power, and 
having become increasingly sceptical about Europe joined the Referendum party, 
formed bySir James Goldsmith 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-sir-james-goldsmith-1251874.html>
, in 1996. The following year Goldsmith died, and McAlpine succeeded him as 
leader. He was critical of all the Tory leaders who followed Thatcher but had 
rejoined the party in recent years.

He survived attacks by the IRA twice. He was in the Grand Hotel, Brighton, on 
the night of its bombing in 1984 and his last guests were still enjoying his 
hospitality when the bomb exploded just before 3am. With his customary panache, 
McAlpine organised for the nearby Marks and Spencer to be opened at first light 
to provide clothes for the shocked hotel guests shivering on the seafront. He 
had a further escape in 1990 when the IRA bombedWest Green House 
<http://westgreenhouse.co.uk/garden/history/>, a 17th-century Hampshire mansion 
owned by the National Trust, where he had lived as a tenant. Knowing that his 
name was on a Republican hit list he had moved his family to Italy shortly 
beforehand.

At West Green, McAlpine restored the gardens as well as the house, and among a 
number of follies included a triumphal arch in honour of Thatcher and a 50ft 
column with an inscription in Latin celebrating the fact that the money he had 
spent on the installation had not instead gone to the Treasury.

Arriving in Venice, he bought a small castello behind the Arsenale, had his 
own motor launch and would meet guests at the airport dressed in a black coat 
and black broad-brimmed hat in the style adopted by an earlier Venetian 
resident, Frederick Rolfe, "Baron Corvo", the author of Hadrian the Seventh.

Among his many books, McAlpine described his life with Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> by reworking 
Machiavelli's The Prince as The Servant (1992) and wrote a successful book of 
memoirs, Once a Jolly Bagman (1997). He also produced several works about 
collecting, and of advice on politics and business. He was an avid collector of 
a truly eclectic variety of things from fine art to snowdrops, police 
truncheons to medieval African beads. He is survived by his third wife, Athena 
(Malpas), along with three daughters: two from his first marriage and one from 
his second.

• Robert Alistair McAlpine, Lord McAlpine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-mcalpine> of West Green, politician, 
businessman and author, born 14 May 1942; died 17 January 2014
 