
Lord McAlpine <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-mcalpine> has settled 
his libel action with Alan Davies over a tweet relating to false child sex 
abuse allegations, with the comedian agreeing to pay £15,000 in damages and 
issuing a warning to users of the social media service.

Last year Davies, a panellist on BBC2's QI, was one of a number of Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> users who speculated that 
McAlpine was the subject of a BBC Newsnight report about a senior Conservative 
from the Thatcher era allegedly involved in child sex abuse.

The 47-year-old tweeted to his then almost 450,000 followers: "Any clues as to 
who the Tory paedophile is?" He subsequently retweeted a response naming 
McAlpine.

Davies, who at the time swiftly tweeted an apology, has agreed to pay McAlpine 
damages and legal costs and apologised through solicitors at the high court on 
Thursday.

"Mr Davies withdraws the allegation he made on Twitter unreservedly, and 
apologises sincerely to Lord McAlpine for the great damage and distress which 
his tweeting caused him," his lawyers said in a statement read out in court.

Davies' lawyers said that he did not intend to retweet the message which named 
McAlpine and that he hoped that the case will make other Twitter users "more 
aware of the potential damaging consequences of tweeting and be more careful 
how they use that platform".

The damages from the settlement, which comes two days after McAlpine settled 
with Sally Bercow over defamatory tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/22/lord-mcalpine-libel-row-sally-bercow>
, will be donated to the Royal Chelsea Hospital.

McAlpine's legal counsel Andrew Reid, of law firm RMPI, said that the 
comedian's "reckless retweet" of a defamatory statement "fanned the work of 
internet trolls".

"This case is a perfect example of the effect of recklessly retweeting a 
defamatory statement," he said. "There still remain people influenced by this 
tweet and all the apologies in the world are not going to put the situation 
back to where it was."

Reid added that McAlpine and his family have been caused "immeasurable 
distress which cannot be rectified".

He added: "The fact of the matter is that Mr Davies has irresponsibly fanned 
the work of the internet trolls who, despite sound bites and promises from the 
government, seem to be able to act with impunity from prosecution."

Davies said later, in a statement issued through his solicitors, Harbottle & 
Lewis: "It is almost a year since I inadvertently tweeted a message which named 
Lord McAlpine. Throughout I've stood by the original public apology I issued in 
November last year making clear the allegations about him were false.

"In an attempt to make amends I also made voluntary donations to the NSPCC 
totalling £13,000.

"I hoped those steps might avoid legal action but in March press reports 
appeared saying I was going to be sued for £200,000.

"I offered to pay £15,000 in damages plus a contribution to costs and agreed 
to make today's statement in court.

"From my own experience, I am able to warn others of the dangers of 
retweeting."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 