
When M&S launched Plan A, its ambitious environmental and ethical programme, 
its success depended on engaging thousands of staff, working in stores, 
warehouses and on the road, far beyond their nine to five working hours.

M&S wants Plan A to make it the world's most sustainable retailer, so every 
aspect of operations is affected, from the amount of energy used in a shop 
window display, to the lives of women harvesting Fairtrade cotton and even what 
happens to unwanted clothes.

The UK's largest clothing retailer embarked on this comprehensive change to 
the sustainability of its business in 2007 and while Plan A works on many 
levels, at its heart is how the 76,000 people working worldwide for the 
business deliver it.

Consequently, M&S is making sure the programme makes a real difference to 
them, both at home and at work.

Such a difference, in fact, that Adam Elman, head of delivery for Plan A and 
sustainable business calls it "the most successful motivational and change 
management programme ever delivered within M&S, enabling people from different 
parts of the business and functions to work together for a common goal."

"We are engaging our people, giving them skills and tools to make a 
difference, integrating Plan A into our processes/systems and challenging our 
teams to think about innovative solutions to the sustainability challenges," he 
says.

Elman says Plan A is regularly quoted by new recruits as a key reason for 
wanting to work for M&S.

180 Plan A targets

Founded in 1884, M&S has stores in 41 countries. Plan A has 180 commitments to 
achieve by 2015 if it is to meet its goal of becoming the world's most 
sustainable major retailer. These cover combating climate change, waste, raw 
materials, ethical trading and healthy living.

In 2010 M&S added 80 new commitments to the original 100.

"We decided to go further because the environmental and social challenges the 
world faces are getting tougher" – Adam Elman, M&S head of Plan A

So far, Plan A has improved stores' energy efficiency by 19% and improved fuel 
efficiency on clothing deliveries by 30%. It has cut the use of food carrier 
bags by 81% and raised recycling levels from 41% to over 90%. Carbon emissions 
are down by 20% per sq ft and M&S has raised levels of sustainable sourced wood 
to 72%, and 62% for its fish.

Such is the importance of Plan A that an element of directors' bonuses is 
based on their achievements and leadership.

It was this link between the sustainability performance of the company and the 
performance of senior managers and pay that particularly appealed to the judges.

They felt that M&S had a solid mix of inspiration, incentives and measurement 
and showed it was embedding sustainability deeply by engaging staff, something 
that is not easily done.

Essentially, M&S is approaching employee engagement by recognising home as 
well as work life and by making Plan A as relevant locally as internationally.

Championing the cause

Every M&S store has a Plan A champion – which adds up to 690 champions within 
the UK who voluntarily take responsibility for enthusing and inspiring 
colleagues to bring down electricity use, cut down on paper and recover more 
waste – important Plan A targets for stores.

Every month, each store is ranked and champions are given this information to 
generate a sense of competition among their colleagues.

M&S also runs team days for champions to share ideas and discuss challenges. 
Significantly, a number of champions have moved into M&S's management 
development programme.

Plan A is embedded in company communication: newsletters, posters, the staff 
magazine, e-mail updates, breakfast debates, team debriefs and an intranet site 
with videos, carbon footprint calculator, a car sharing tool and blog for staff 
to ask questions and share eco hints and tips. A programme of speakers also 
regularly sets sustainability in context.

"A solid mix of inspiration, incentives and measurement" – The Guardian 
judging panel.

Sustainability is also included in staff inductions and technical training, 
and a bespoke website enables staff to view hourly energy use in stores.

To engage staff at home, there are discounts on M&S green services, supplying 
electricity and gas, loft insulation and solar technology as well as discounts 
with other companies for bikes, train and coach fares, and eco holidays. Staff 
have a wellbeing website and every employee is allowed a day's paid leave a 
year to work with a charity, and outstanding work is recognised at the annual 
volunteer awards.

More recently, all employees have been offered a free energy monitor worth £30 
and free loft insulation worth £250.

"This has shifted how employees use and think about energy at home, 
subsequently cutting down their energy bills and carbon emissions," Elman says. 
"We are not aware of any other organisation that has made an investment of this 
magnitude in this way."

A video made for and featuring staff celebrates progress and how to get 
involved. Staff project ideas are encouraged with a £50m innovation fund and to 
date £3.9m has been awarded to 42 projects. Another staff competition generated 
over 7,000 ideas.

Integrating the idea 

"Plan A is not a bolt on to our business delivered by a single department; it 
is owned and embedded right across all areas of our business," Elman says. 
"Last year, we introduced new commitments which aim to ensure sustainability 
principles must be integrated in to day-to-day thinking, such as our goal to 
get 50% of all our products to have a Plan A attribute by 2015.

He adds: "We continue to systematically look at every system/process and 
challenge ourselves to ensure Plan A is integrated, such as introducing 
whole-life-costing for the design of stores so that we can assess the best 
options for reducing environmental impacts across the build and operation."

The top 40 commitments in Plan A are externally audited and assured by Ernst & 
Young every year.

In 2009-10, Plan A had generated £50m additional profit that M&S invested back 
into the business. It has stated publicly that sustainability is critical to 
future business success.

"Our business units have seen the commercial benefits that Plan A can bring 
and want to be part of it; Plan A has become truly embedded in the way we do 
business," says Elman.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 