
Eight police officers and 14 alleged members of an armed group have been 
killed in fighting in a northern Macedonian town, authorities have said, amid 
increased concern about the political stability in the Balkan nation that has a 
history of ethnic hostilities.

Interior ministry spokesman Ivo Kotevski said 37 other police officers were 
wounded in the clashes that started on Saturday. Kotevski told reporters on 
Sunday that the police operation is now over and that “one of the most 
dangerous terrorists groups in the Balkans has been neutralised”.

He said police have found the bodies of 14 individuals believed to be members 
of the armed group. Some of the killed wore uniforms with insignia of the 
disbandedKosovo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kosovo> Liberation Army 
(UCK). No identification documents were found on the deceased.

The UCK, an ethnic Albanian rebel group, fought Serb government forces for 
Kosovo independence in 1998-1999 and international peacekeepers still have a 
presence in Kosovo.

Kotevski named five leaders of the 44-member group – all citizens of Kosovo – 
as founders of paramilitary structures. He said the group enteredMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> at the start of May with an aim 
to launch attacks on state institutions. It was sheltered in Kumanovo’s western 
neighbourhood of Diva Naselba and police found a huge arsenal of weapons at the 
location, he added.

Police have filed terrorism-related charges against more than 30 members of 
the group that have surrendered. Later on Sunday, they are expected to be 
brought before an investigative judge, who will decide on possible detention.

Kotevski was not able to confirm any civilian casualties in the clashes.

The fighting comes as Macedonia is grappling with its deepest political crisis 
since its independence from former Yugoslavia in 1991. The government and the 
opposition have accused each other of planning to destabilise the country to 
take or preserve power, and some analysts fear leaders on both sides are ready 
to provoke ethnic clashes as leverage.

Kumanovo is an ethnically mixed town located about 25 miles north-east of the 
capital Skopje, near the border with Kosovo and Serbia. The region was at the 
centre of hostilities between ethnic Albanian rebels and government forces 
during the ethnic conflict in 2001.

That insurgency, in which about 80 people were killed, ended after six months 
with a western-brokered peace deal that granted more rights to ethnic 
Albanians, who make up about a quarter of the country’s 2 million people.

About two weeks ago, authorities said a group of about 40 people wearing UCK 
uniforms attacked a police watchtower in Gosince on Macedonia’s northern border 
with Kosovo and briefly captured four Macedonian police officers. Authorities 
described that incident as very serious and said Macedonia was the “target of a 
terrorist attack”.

On Sunday, the Macedonian government declared two days of mourning for those 
killed in the clashes, and the president, Gjorge Ivanov, called for a national 
security council meeting. National flags were flying at half-mast and sports 
events and political gatherings have been cancelled.

The EU’s enlargement commissioner, Johannes Hahn, expressed “deep concern” at 
the situation unfolding in the Kumanovo region. “I urge all actors for utmost 
restraint. Any further escalation must be avoided, not the least in the 
interest of the overall stability in the country,” Hahn said in a statement.
 