
A semi-final that featured three shots hitting the woodwork, three red cards, 
a missed penalty, three goals and several on-field punch-ups would normally 
have made all the headlines, but not last Thursday.

All the above happened in the first semi-final of the African Cup of Nations, 
when Senegal surprised Nigeria by winning 2-1 in Bamako's Stade Modibo Keita, 
but the game was utterly overshadowed by events before kick-off a few miles 
across town at the Stade du Mars 26, where Cameroon were preparing to take on 
the host nation, Mali, in the second semi-final.

As Alassane Diao was scuffing the winner seven minutes into extra-time for the 
Lions of Senegal, the Cameroon coach, Winfried Schafer, and his assistant, 
Thomas Nkono, found themselves being arrested by Malian police, ostensibly for 
trying to place a magic charm on the pitch before the game.

For the Confederation of African Football, for whom this tournament is their 
global showpiece, the incident could hardly have been more embarrassing. 
Schafer - banned from the bench today for abusing a match commissioner - 
diplomatically played down the incident, but CAF are desperate to throw off the 
Third World image that they believe was a major factor in the decision not to 
award South Africa the 2006 World Cup.

'We are no more willing to see witch doctors on the pitch than cannibals at 
the concession stands,' a CAF spokesman said. 'Image is everything.' But belief 
in traditional religions still exists, nowhere more so than in Senegal, where 
many attribute the rapid rise of French coach Bruno Metsu's side as much to the 
work of marabouts - the heads of local Islamic brotherhoods who effectively act 
as intermediaries between believers and Allah - as to their coach's tactical 
nous.

Two years ago in the Nations Cup quarter-final in Lagos, Senegal, having taken 
an early lead, looked to be holding on when, 15 minutes from time, a former 
official of the Nigerian FA raced on to the pitch and seized a 'charm' that had 
been lying in the back of the Senegal net. Senegal protested, but to no avail, 
and Nigeria went on to score twice and win. The official was subsequently 
banned, but his action was seen as hugely significant in Nigeria's progress. 
This time around, Senegalese journalists insist they saw a marabout smearing 
goalkeeper Tony Sylva's post with an ointment ahead of the Lions' 1-0 victory 
over Zambia in the group stages. Sylva went 448 minutes without conceding a 
goal.

Freddie Saddam is widely recognised as being South Africa's most loyal fan and 
his trip to Mali was financed by the South African FA. 'I didn't used to think 
anything of muti [fetishism],' he says, 'but now I know it to be true.' He is 
in no doubt that the dearth of goals in Mali - 47 in 30 games before 
yesterday's third-place play-off - is down to the influence of the witch 
doctors. 'It is not normal,' he says. 'If you are a goalkeeper, maybe you put 
an elephant tooth in your boot to make you big and strong. How do you score 
past a man who is like an elephant?'

Elephant teeth are readily available at the fetish market just south of the 
Stade Modibo Keita, a bargain at 2000CFA a pop (£2). A monkey's head costs 
2,500CFA, a cayman's head 7,500 and porcupine quills 5,000 a bundle. Last 
August African Soccer magazine ran a 10-page investigation into witchcraft in 
football, detailing animal sacrifices, self-mutilation, casting of spells, 
lucky charms, odious concoctions and a one-hour delay at an international match 
while teams argued about who would be first to step on to the pitch.

One South African player recalls: 'There was a time when things weren't going 
well for our team [one of the biggest in the country] and a director put us all 
on a bus out into the bush. They cut the top off this big termite mound, dug 
all the earth from inside and poured this muti mixture in. We all had to bathe 
naked in it and walk back to the bus without walking backwards at any time.' 
Results improved. Mamadou, the fetishism store-owner in Bamako, is unsure about 
what each item does, though he insists 'many, many footballers' go to his store.

'I am just the pharmacist, not the doctor,' he says. Adama Dore, though, is an 
expert. He is a magic-man from a village just outside Bamako, who deals with 
30-40 customers a week. His son, Aboubaka, is a promising youth player for 
French side FC Paris - a rise, Dore insists, that has been much aided by his 
magic.

Dore also claims that France's World Cup victory four years ago, far from 
resulting from the defensive pairing of Marcel Desailly and Laurent Blanc, the 
skills of Zinedine Zidane or the pace of Thierry Henry, was largely down to the 
spells of Aguib Sosso, a Malian witch-doctor who died two years ago. Dore and 
Saddam both feel it is unfair that the CAF should have decided to ban the 
muti-men. 'Will they ban Catholic players crossing themselves?' Saddam asks, 
spittle flying from the wide gap between his front teeth. 'Will they shut the 
chapel at Barcelona? If you believe, muti makes you stronger.'

The editor of African Soccer, Emmanuel Maradas, says football only reflects 
the society in which it exists. But it is embarrassing for the image of the 
game in Africa, he believes, that so much time and money is devoted to 
witchcraft.

Whatever they believe in, mental strength is something Senegal have in 
abundance, as they proved in the semi-final when they put behind them the 
first-half dismissal of Birahim Sarr to overcome Nigeria. El-Hadji Diouf, 
twisting, turning and full of tricks, is their undoubted star, but he is aware 
of just how important the team ethic is.

'I know that everyone in Senegal says El-Hadji Diouf is the star of Senegalese 
football, but I don't agree, because the real star is the group and the 
solidarity within the group,' says the Lens striker. That sense of unity, born 
of the fact that nearly the entire squad are based in France, has been 
carefully nurtured by Metsu, whose laissez-faire approach to discipline has had 
its critics, but has, thus far, undeniably worked. His counterpart this 
afternoon could hardly be more different.

Schafer knows he was appointed largely to be as stereotypically German as he 
could be. 'I have never doubted the individual ability of my players, but when 
I took over they lacked self-belief, tactical discipline and organisation,' he 
explained. They have those qualities now. Cameroon in Mali have been dull, 
muscular and brutally efficient. They are yet to concede a goal in the 
tournament, are top-scorers with nine, and appear to be peaking at the right 
time - if a little too reliant on the dead-ball skills and assists of Real 
Madrid's Geremi. Even without the injured Patrick Mboma, the Cup's joint top 
scorer with three goals, they turned in their best performance in the 
competition in the semi-final. Mboma is fit again today.

Should Cameroon repeat their triumph of two years ago they will become the 
first side since Ghana in 1965 to retain the African Nations, a hiatus Schafer 
sees as a challenge rather than a burden. 'Cameroon have never before done well 
as defending champions,' he said. 'They have never done well in a World Cup 
year: this is simply another hurdle to overcome.' Dore, though, is backing 
Senegal. 'I have seen that a West African side will win,' he says.

Schafer overcame the riot police; it remains to be seen whether German 
single-mindedness can overcome Dore's metaphysics.

· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, as sharp or 
as stupid as you like, to the <a 
href="mailto:football.editor@theguardian.com">football.editor@theguardian.com.
 