
The government turned up the pressure on Britain's five largest public 
transport groups today by warning that bus passengers could be getting a bad 
deal from dominant operators.

In an unusual intervention during an ongoing Competition Commission inquiry 
into the industry, transport minister Norman Baker published a report that 
alleges the so-called "big five" – Arriva, FirstGroup, Stagecoach,National 
Express <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalexpressgroup> and 
Go-Ahead Group – operate with much higher profit margins than their smaller 
rivals. "If the bus industry does not agree with what this research suggests, I 
expect they will want to consider what evidence of their own they wish to put 
forward to the ongoing investigation," said Baker.

The report by LEK Consulting was published 24 hours after Stagecoach's chief 
executive, Brian Souter, urged the government not to cut fuel subsidies and 
pensioners' bus passes in the public spending review later this year. Baker 
backed the protection of bus passes, but said the cost of bus travel had 
increased by 24% since the industry was deregulated in 1987. "We have to ask 
ourselves why it is that the cost of bus travel has gone by up so much while 
bus company profitability is extremely healthy," said Baker.

According to LEK, the five main bus operators account for nearly 
three-quarters of the industry's £4bn turnover, with operating margins of 11.2% 
– nearly double those of smaller rivals.

The Confederation of Passenger Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport>, the trade body for bus operators, 
said the report confirmed that the big private operators are "long term players 
in the industry who continue to invest for the long term". Bus operators argue 
that the introduction of greener, more comfortable fleets is impossible without 
the financial heft provided by private companies.The major bus groups also 
argue that their industry-leading margins are a product of management expertise 
rather than market distortion.

The LEK report echoed the findings of an Office of Fair Trading investigation 
this year, which referred bus operators to the Competition Commission after 
concluding that the big five appeared to have carved up some regions, such as 
north Wales, Cornwall and central Scotland, by avoiding competition. However, 
an alternative report, funded by the DfT and published this week by the 
Institute for Transport Studies, found that large groups had lower costs than 
independent operators. According to the major bus companies, this allows them 
to charge lower fares because they pay less for expensive items such as 
vehicles and fuel.
 