
For one weekend this month Bamako lived with the television permanently on. My 
Malian family never left the screen, except when Mother went off to pray. For 
the weekend of January 12 Mother even cut her prayers short. Sometimes her 
prayers last so long we giggle that she must have fallen asleep. I am sure that 
she prays as she sleeps. God is tolerant, her every dream is a prayer for the 
happiness of her children and the increase of her grandchildren. Another girl 
was born recently, called Djita after her granny.

The television party centred on the settee where Papa reminisced with Uncle 
Koulou and Uncle Moussa, their eyes glued to the screen. When the time came to 
eat, Salif Keita was singing. The old men didn't move, washing their hands in a 
bowl and watching the musicians. They waited patiently for food - just so long 
as it arrived in front of the television.

Sali organised her kitchen from an armchair, shouting orders over her shoulder 
to the maids, without bothering to supervise the food preparation. Sali usually 
practises verbal flagellation around the cooking pots, but not today. The maids 
even crept into the house to peel their vegetables within sight of the screen, 
and no one cared that the rice was ready an hour later than usual.

In every house and shop, neighbours and shoppers gathered to watch and chat. 
Flickering black-and-white screens were set up under trees and on the street, 
where clumps of people laughed and sang throughout the day. The weekend had a 
special "24 heures de Bamako" on French-Swiss-Belgian-Quebec channel TV5 - and 
the whole of Mali joined in.

Villages across Mali organised funds to buy new car batteries (well, OK, they 
buy recycled batteries - villagers cannot afford to buy new batteries just to 
run their TV). The village of Diama, deep in the interior delta region of the 
Niger river, even switched on its United Nations-supplied "multi-functional 
generator" in order to provide non-stop electricity for the village television 
set.

People love to see themselves, or people they know, on television. TV5 visited 
cloth dyers and tailors in Bamako, and took us on a tour of the leather and 
jewellery craft market. Interspersed with interviews, we had short films of the 
Niger river djoliba , which means the "the Mother and the lifeblood of the 
land".

TV5 took us as far north as Timbuktu, gateway to the Sahara desert. We 
participated in Dogon burial rituals and Malinke hunting ceremonies, we saw 
dancing and drumming, singing and more dancing. After the music of the 
countryside, TV5 returned us to Bamako where the stars of Malian music were on 
parade.

Mali's top star is Salif Keita, Africa's greatest pop singer. Salif has 
transformed Mandinka praise-singing historical ballads into a world art form. 
In one interview he explained how rap derives from the tradition of Malian 
griots, based on the rhythm rather than the melody.

TV5 gave us the other great Malian musicians. One of my favourites is Toumani 
Diabate, whose cora playing gives me even more pleasure than his English in a 
broad Manchester accent (where he made his first recordings).

Then we heard Keletigui Kouyate on the balafon, the instrument of 
magician-kings that echoes through the battles and legends of Malian history. 
The balafon is a wooden xylophone with calabash sound boxes. Keletigui manages 
to play two at once with a speed that defies the eye, and even the television 
camera.

Mali's finest musician came last. After the divas Ami Koita and Oumou Sangare 
sang, and various griots shrieked their way through a wedding, TV5 took us back 
to Timbuktu, home of Ali Farka Toure. A privilege of my Malian life is loving 
people like Ali Farka, the first African to win a Grammy award for Talking 
Timbuktu, recorded with Ry Cooder.

Ali Farka seems ordinary enough when you meet him. Then he picks up a guitar 
and there is a curious transformation. With his first chord, Ali Farka changes 
physically and spiritually. He becomes a giant, and instinctively we all shrink 
back to give him space. Papa, my Malian father, discovered Ali Farka's musical 
talent as a young man in the 1960s, and gave him his first guitar.

Alongside the musicians and the artisans, we met the footballers. From January 
19 Mali is hosting the African Cup of Nations, the continent's premier football 
competition. New stadiums have been built in Bamako, Segou, Mopti, Sikasso and 
Kayes, and the entire country has received a face-lift. Even private houses are 
looking smarter, as people prepare to offer hospitality diatiguiya to 
supporters from every nation. Nigeria and South Africa are favourites to win, 
with Cameroon (the holders) and Senegal tipped as possible outsiders.

TV5 asked Mali's president, Alpha Oumar Konare, if the Mali Eagles would win. 
Alpha smiled. "The Eagles are improving every day, but I want the best team to 
win."

Mali is already the winner all around. The president will hand over power in 
June 2002 to an elected successor, after completing two five-year terms. Mali 
is still one of Africa's poorest nations, but it is one of the continent's 
happiest democracies. Thanks to the African Cup of Nations, it is also the 
country with the freshest paint.
 