
4.56pm GMT 
 Nigeria's head coach Stephen Keshi and his backroom team celebrate. 
Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
4.54pm GMT 

Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeeeeep! It's all over. Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> have beaten Mali 
4-1 to book their berth in the final, where they will play Ghana or Burkina 
Faso. After a sluggish start this afternoon they were deserved winners, but 
were gifted at least two of their four goals by some staggeringly inept 
defending from their Malian opposition. That's me done for this afternoon - 
thanks for your time and your emails.

4.52pm GMT 

90+3 min: With all Mali's men committed forward, Nigeria break on the 
counter-attack, which Adama Tamboura draws to an abrupt conclusion with a 
marvellous goal-saving tackle. 

4.50pm GMT 

90+1 min: The giant Malian substitute Cheick Diabate rampages down the inside 
left channel before playing the ball between two defenders, teeing up his 
namesake Cheick Diarra in the process. He shoots high and wide.

4.48pm GMT 

90 min: Unwilling to put Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> out of 
their misery, the referee announces that there will be three minutes of injury 
time. To be fair to him, it's the bare minimum - 30 seconds for each 
substitution.

4.47pm GMT 

89 min: Diabate goes close for Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali>
, but no cigar for him.

4.46pm GMT 

86 min: Nigeria striker Emmanuel Emenike goes down clutching his thigh after 
driving a fine effort from distance inches wide of the right upright. He's 
helped from field grimacing with pain and the air of a man who has every right 
to be concerned he might have to sit out the final. That doesn't look great for 
him and Nigeria have nobody to send on his stead, as they've used all three 
substitutes. 

4.43pm GMT 
Colin Udoh (@ColinUdoh) 
Yobo goes to CB, Omeruo shifts to RB. I wouldn't do that. Disrupts defensive 
balance. But hey, I'm not the coach#MLINGA 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23MLINGA>
 <https://twitter.com/ColinUdoh/status/299195721683456000> February 6, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ColinUdoh/status/299195721683456000> 
4.42pm GMT 

83 min: Mali defender Fousseiny Diawarra gets booked for getting a bit too up 
close and personal with Ejike Uzoenyi.

4.41pm GMT 

82 min: Nigeria substitution: Efe Ambrose makes way for Everton legend Joseph 
Yobo, who plays his football for Fenerbahce these days. He's 32 years old, it 
says here.

4.39pm GMT 

81 min: Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! 
Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the 
Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo 
klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! Sound the Yobo klaxon! 
Sound the Yobo klaxon!

4.37pm GMT 

79 min: Nigeria continue to dominate, despite Mali's goal. They've been vastly 
superior this afternoon.
 Mali's goalkeeper Mamadou Samassa. Photograph: Alexander Joe/AFP/Getty Images 
4.34pm GMT 

GOAL! Mali 1-4 Nigeria (Diarra 75) The substitute slots the ball into the 
empty net, getting on the end of a pull-back from the byline after Cheick 
Diabate had shimmied down the inside-right, drawing goalkeeper Enyeama out of 
his goal, before delivering the killer pass. Nigeria's defence was shocking.

4.32pm GMT 

73 min: Nigerian substitution of two minutes ago: Brown Ideye off, Ejike 
Uzoenyi on.

4.31pm GMT 

72 min: Mahamadou Samassa spurns a good opportunity to take the bare look off 
Mali's half of the scoreboard, shooting half-heartedly and tamely at Vincent 
Enyeama from close range when he should really have done better.

4.30pm GMT 

70 min: With 20 minutes to go, Mali 4-0 down and the rain hammering down in 
Durban, you get the feeling that the Eagles would settle for this defeat if the 
referee ended the game now. They've had their wings well and truly clipped by 
their Super Eagle counterparts and will do well not to ship another couple of 
goals before the final whistle.

4.26pm GMT 

66 min: Mali make their final susbtitution and it's an example of Africa Cup 
of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
administration at its best. The fourth official holds up a baord with Seydou 
Keita's number on it, but it's one of the Traores who troops off the field to 
be replaced by Samba Sow, a 23 year old midfielder who plays his club football 
with Lens.

4.24pm GMT 

65 min: Nigeria go on the attack again, with Mali having apparently given up 
the ghost. Another promising sortie into Mali territory comes to an end when 
another Nigerian is flagged for offside.

4.22pm GMT 

63 min: Musa gets the ball in the Mali net, but his effort is ruled out for an 
offside in the build-up. There were a couple of Musa's team-mates in offside 
positions in two phases of play that led to the score and a man could argue all 
afternoon about whether or not they were interfering with play. Luckily for 
you, I am not inclined to do so.

Updated at 4.22pm GMT

4.20pm GMT 
Gary (@garyalsmith) 
I'm told Moses was subbed as a precaution. Nothing really serious, hopefully, 
from a Nigerian POV.
 <https://twitter.com/garyalsmith/status/299189329643851777> February 6, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/garyalsmith/status/299189329643851777> 
4.19pm GMT 

GOAL! Mali 0-4 Nigeria (Musa 59) Mali's back four is caught horribly 
flat-footed as the substitute Ahmed Musa latches on to a defence-splitting 
through ball and neatly slots it between the legs of the onrushing goalkeeper 
Samassa. They'll do well to emulate their 2010 heroics against Angola here.
 And make that 4-0. Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 4.26pm GMT

4.17pm GMT 

58 min: Thanks to Richard Dennis, who has written in to point out that Mali do 
actually have form when it comes to stunning comebacks. In the 2010 Africa Cup 
of Nations, theytrailed Angola 4-0 in Luanda with 16 minutes to go 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/SPORT/football/01/10/africa.nations.angola.mali/index.html>
, but ended up drawing 4-4.

4.14pm GMT 

56 min: Mali substitution: Momo Sissoko makes way for Bordeaux striker Cheick 
Diabate.

4.13pm GMT 

54 min: Mali's Molla Wague rises highest at the far post to attack a cross 
from deep with his head. Wide.

4.12pm GMT 

53 min: Nigeria substitution: Victor Moses, who appears to have bruised his 
foot, goes off. He's replaced by CSKA Moscow winger Ahmed Musa.

4.11pm GMT 

52 min: There's a break in play as Emenike receives treatment on what can best 
be described as an accidental whack in the crown jewels. His eyes will be 
watering for a while, but he'll be alright.

4.09pm GMT 

50 min: Minimum number of goals needed by Mali in the next 39 minutes if they 
are to stay in this tournament: 3. Number of goals scored by Mali in 
four-and-a-half matches in this tournament thus far: 3. Hmmm ... the prognosis 
is not good. 

4.07pm GMT 

48 min: Nigeria striker Emmanuel Emenike is hacked down by Momo Sissoko, who 
is lucky to avoid a booking.

4.06pm GMT 

46 min: Seydou Keita blows a marvellous chance to pull a goal back for Mali, 
getting to a low pull-back from the bye-line and shooting wide of the right 
upright from about 10 yards when it looked easier to score. His grimace of 
disappointment says it all.

4.04pm GMT 

Second half: With heavy rain falling and just 45 minutes to save their bacon, 
Mali get the second half under way. They've made one change: Bordeaux striker 
Cheick Diarra is on for West Ham's Modibo Maiga.

Incidentally, having seen a replay of Nigeria's third goal, I can confirm that 
Emmanuel Emenike's low free-kick took a wicked deflection off Momo Sissoko, 
sending goalkeeper Mamadou Samassa the wrong way. He had no chance.

Updated at 4.04pm GMT

3.57pm GMT 
 Brown Ideye's near post slide for Nigeria's second took a deflection off Mali 
defender Molla Wague. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
3.54pm GMT 
 Nigeria's forward Brown Ideye is congratulated by teammates after scoring 
Nigeria's second goal. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
3.51pm GMT 

Corrections and clarifications department

Bah! Humble apologies, but I've misidentified the scorer of Nigeria's second 
goal. It was actually Brown Ideye who slid in to convert the cross to the near 
post and not Emmanuel Emenike, as I originally stated.

3.49pm GMT 

45+2 min: With the last kick of the first half, Seydou Kewita tries to pull a 
goal back with a free-kick from outside the Nigeria penalty area. The Nigerians 
show their opponents how to defend a free-kick properly and the referee blows 
for the interval. The Nigerians gather for a huddle in the middle of the pitch 
while the Malians troop off to the dressing room looking very fed up indeed.

3.47pm GMT 

45 min: It's difficult not to feel sorry for Mali, but that was kamikaze 
defending. All the players in the defensive wall had to do was stand firm and 
they would have blocked that ball, but several took a leaf out of the Samir 
Nasri Big Book of Defending Free-Kicks On The Edge Of The Penalty Area and cost 
their side a third goal. 

3.45pm GMT 

GOAL! Mali 0-3 Nigeria (Emenike 43) Emmanuel Emenike takes the free-kick, the 
wall breaks and the ball ricochets off one of the scattering defenders and 
loops into the goal past the hopelessly wrongfooted Mamadou Samassa. Mali need 
a miracle now.
 Make that 3-0. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 3.59pm GMT

3.43pm GMT 

42 min: Nigeria win a free-kick in dangerous territory a few yards outside the 
Mali box, a tad to the left of the D, for a Momo Sissoko foul on Victor Moses.

3.42pm GMT 

41 min: Mali are going to need a major reshuffle in tactics and perhaps 
personnel at half-time as they've shown little in the face of Nigerian 
opposition that are threatening to run amok since scoring their second. 

3.41pm GMT 

38 min: Mali's Modibo Maiga picks up the first yellow card of the game for a 
deliberate handball.

Updated at 4.28pm GMT

3.36pm GMT 

32 min: Nigeria laucnh a counter-attack and Ogenyi Onanzi goes close to making 
it 3-0 Nigeria, racing through the centre and trying to chip Mamadou Samassa 
from distance. The Mali goalkeeper is equal to Onanzi's effort and plucks the 
ball from the sky as it threatens to evade his grasp. Onanzi is promptly 
reprimanded by his team-mate Brown Ideye, who was up in support and unmarked on 
the left flank screaming for a pass.

3.34pm GMT 

31 min: Mali's goose isn't completely cooked, but it's sizzling away in the 
oven and will be ready for carving shortly, by the looks of things. For 
neutrals, this match is panning out perfectly - having set out their stall 
defensively, Mali nowhave to go for this. Of course, by doing so, they'll be 
leaving themselves very vulnerable at the back.

3.31pm GMT 

GOAL! Mali 0-2 Nigeria (Ideye 29) Nigeria double their lead, with Victor Moses 
turning provider again. Skinning his man down the right flank again, he drilled 
the ball low and hard towards the near post, where Brown Ideye slid in 
alongside a defender to bundle the ball past Samassa. I think it might have 
taken a deflection on the way in, but it would take a Dubious Goals Committee 
with a heart of stone to chalk that one off Ideye's account.
 Brown Ideye slides in to score. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 3.55pm GMT

3.29pm GMT 

Key event

27 min: Moses, who is having a fine tournament, did brilliantly there. 
Sprinting down the right flank, he turned Mali defender Adama Tamboura 
inside-out before nutmegging him and squaring the ball waist-high to the far 
post. Elderson Echiejile ducked to nod the ball past the helpless Mamadou 
Samassa and into the bottom left-hand corner - it was a fairly straightforward 
finish, but one a left-back could easily have messed up.

3.26pm GMT 

GOAL! Mali 0-1 Nigeria (Echiejile 24) Nigeria's left-back stoops low to head 
home at the far post after getting on the end of a superb cross from the 
irrepressible Victor Moses.
 It's better than the Bale celebration, at least. Photograph: Francisco 
Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 3.40pm GMT

3.24pm GMT 

23 min: Mali are playing much as everyone predicted they would before the 
match, sitting back and letting Nigeria attack them. Mahamadou Samassa is 
looking very isolated on his own up front, but for all that they've created 
several chances and are looking very lively.

3.23pm GMT 

21 min: John Obi Mikel tries a shot from distance that fizzes no more than a 
foot or two wide of the upright. Great effort from the Chelsea midfielder, who 
throws his arms in the air in frustration.

3.22pm GMT 

20 min: For Mali, Mahamadou Samassa (a cousin of goalkeeper Mamadou Samassa) 
picks up the ball on the edge of the final third and tries to go it alone when 
there was an option open to him out on the left wing. He runs down a cul de sac 
manned by three Nigeria defenders and is crowded off the ball.

3.18pm GMT 

17 min: Corner for Nigeria after a Victor Moses effort ricochets wide through 
a thicket of Malian defenders. The ball had broken to him on the edge of the 
Mali penalty area after Mamadou Samassa saved splendidly from a 
close-range Brown Ideye effort from inside right that was heading inside the 
far post. That was a marvellous reflex save - the goalkeeper somehow managing 
to keep out the ball with his outstretched foot. Nothing comes of the corner.

Updated at 3.18pm GMT

3.14pm GMT 

Even the best of us are fallible ...
Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) 
Difficult to be absolutely sure off the TV, But Mali seem to have gone 
4-1-3-1-1, with Sissoko in front of back 4 and Keita off Samassa
 <https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/299172905756020737> February 6, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/299172905756020737> 
3.14pm GMT 

12 min: From about 35 yards out, Momo Sissoko has a popo, but his 
surface-to-air effort was never going to trouble Enyeama in the Nigeria goal. 
Over and out.

3.12pm GMT 

10 min: Mahamane Traore tries a shot from distance and his wild slash takes a 
deflection before going out for a corner. Traore sends another beauty towards 
the near post, where Mali skipper Seydou Keita sends a header flashing across 
the face of goal and wide. Mali are giving Nigeria plenty to think about here.

3.10pm GMT 

9 min: Mahamana Traore sends the ball into the Nigeria penalty area from the 
corner and his delivery is a beauty. Molla Wague gets on the end of it, but 
heads over the bar when he should have done better from 10 yards out. 

Updated at 3.10pm GMT

3.08pm GMT 

8 min: Splendid play from Mali's Adama Tamboura, who skins his man for pace 
down the left wing before crossing the ball into the Nigeria penalty area. 
Godfrey Oboabona heads the ball out for a corner.

3.06pm GMT 

6 min: An injury doubt before this game, Momo Sissoko, formerly of Liverpool, 
gets his first touch on the ball for Mali. He's off to Fiorentina at the end of 
this tournament, on loan from Paris Saint-Germain.

3.05pm GMT 

4 min: Four minutes in and there's been nothing even remotely close to a shot 
on target for either team. They're prodding and probing, trying to get a feel 
for each other and the ball. Fousseiny Diawara concedes the first free-kick of 
the game, the Mali left-back incurring the referee's wrath for a fractionally 
late challenge deep inside his own half. Nothing comes of it.

3.03pm GMT 

2 min: Mali goalkeeper Mamadou Samassa, who is a vision in football hipster 
pink, takes a goal-kick, launching the ball down the field where it's won by 
his team-mate Modibo Maiga, from West Ham.

3.01pm GMT 

1 min: And we're off, with Nigeria getting the ball rolling in what will, 
hopefully, be an entertaining match. Needless to say, Jonathan Wilson is in 
Nelspruit for the other semi-final, where there's far less chance of anyone 
scoring anything so crass as a goal.

3.00pm GMT 

Pre-match niceties

Captains Seydou Keita and Vincent Enyeama meet in the centre-circle for the 
exchange of pennants and the coin-toss, while their respective team-mates 
gather for last-minute pre-match huddles. 
 Nigerian fans get in the mood. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 3.14pm GMT

2.57pm GMT 

Not long now ...

The teams line up in the tunnel, click-clack their way out on to the pitch and 
line up for the national anthems. Nigeria's players wear their customary green 
strip with white trim, while Mali's wear yellow shirts, shorts and socks, with 
red blazes across their shoulders and thin diagonal green and red stripes 
across their chests. There looks to be a decent crowd here in Durban, although 
there are plenty of empty seats too.

2.43pm GMT 

Mali v Nigeria - the line-ups

Mali: 1-Mamadou Samassa; 2-Fousseiny Diawara, 3-Adama Tamboura, 8-Kalilou 
Traore, 13-Molla Wague; 6-Momo Sissoko, 17-Mahamane Traore, 21-Mahamadou 
N'diaye, 12-Seydou Keita; 10-Modibo Maiga, 15-Mahamadou Samassa

Nigeria: 1-Vincent Enyeama; 3-Elderson Echiejile, 22-Kenneth Omeruo, 
14-Godfrey Oboabona, 5-Efe Ambrose; 19-Sunday Mba, 17-Ogenyi Onanzi, 10-John 
Obi Mikel, 11-Victor Moses; 8-Brown Ideye, 9-Emmanuel Emenike

Referee: Backary Papa Gassama (Gambia)

2.41pm GMT 

Pitch and weather watch

This being a semi-final, there's every chance it will be cagier than the 
inmates' quarters in the vivisection unit of a research laboratory, but if the 
match does turn out to be a turkey, it won't be because of a knackered pitch. 
Today's game is being played on the comparatively manicured sward of the Moses 
Mabhida Stadium in Durban, rather than the fungally destroyed, sand-drenched 
pudding bowl of the Mbombela Stadium at Nelspruit, where Ghana take on Burkina 
Faso later.

Weather-wise, it's a fairly hot 25 degrees celsius in Durban this afternoon, 
with cloudy cover, a 13mph wind, 78% humidity and precipitation levels of 20%. 
Sounds fairly sweaty and muggy to me.

Updated at 2.50pm GMT

2.35pm GMT 

Team news

Despite the heroics of Soumalia Diakite in the penalty shoot-out against South 
Africa, Mali's first choice goalkeeper Mamdou Samassa looks likely to return to 
the starting line-up upon his return from suspension, but Mohamed Sissoko and 
Samba Diabate are injury doubts for the West African side.

Nigeria's manager Keshi is in the fortunate position of having a fully fit 
squad and midfielder Fegor Ogude is available after a spell out on the naughty 
step. He could return to a line-up that will almost certainly feature Chelsea 
midfielders John Obi Mikel and Victor Moses.

2.34pm GMT 

Good afternoon everybody ...

Welcome to the Guardian's coverage of this afternoon's first semi-final of the 
African Cup of Nations at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban, writes 
minute-by-minute reporter from Kings Cross bunker.

This afternoon's contest promises to be an intriguing one, pitting the 
sophisticated pass-and-move tiki-taka style of two-time tournament winners 
Nigeria against the more robust, aggressive, bruising tactics of Mali, who are 
attempting to become champions of Africa for the first time. There's also an 
element of needle, what with Nigeria coach Stephen Keshi having been sacked by 
Mali after two years in charge when they exited the ACN at the group stages in 
2010.

After securing their passage to the knockout stages at the expense of 
defending champions Zambia with alate win over Ethiopia in the final group game 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/29/ethiopia-nigeria-africa-cup-nations>
, the Super Eagles of Nigeria blew this tournament wide open with ashock win 
over Ivory Coast on Sunday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/feb/03/nigeria-ivory-coast-africa-cup-nations>
 and are favourites to progress this afternoon at the expense of the plain old 
Eagles of Mali, who made it to the semi-finals courtesy of apenalty shoot-out 
win over hosts South Africa 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/feedarticle/10641442>.

As is customary, football-writing's Jonathan Wilson has been gadding about 
Africa in his sweat-stained safari suit for the duration of the tournament and 
you can read his thoughts on the two semi-finals (Ghana take on Burkina Faso 
later today) inthis typically fine article 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/feb/06/west-african-cup-of-nations>
. And if you're taken by Wilson's wordsmithery, why not go on a virtual 
trolley-dash and buy some or all of his books on upside-down pyramids, 
goalkeepers, men called Old Big 'Ead, the England football team and other 
fascinating topics byclicking on this link 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Jonathan-Wilson/e/B0034PRCUO>.

2.21pm GMT 

Mali coach Patrice Carteron looks ahead to today's game.

Updated at 5.00pm GMT

10.53am GMT 

.

Updated at 5.00pm GMT
 