
Mali are the breaker of hosts' hearts. For the second successive year, they 
reduced a packed stadium to disbelieving silence, coming from behind to beat the
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
hosts on penalties in the quarter-final. On Saturday night in Durban, as in 
Libreville against Gabon, the goalkeeper Soumaila Diakité was the hero. First 
he plunged to his right to beat away Dean Furman's penalty, then he stretched 
even further and lower to deny May Mahlangu. Lehlohonolo Majoro's wild effort, 
driven way wide, sealed the defeat.

So South Africa's dream is over but they at least restored some pride; there 
was some honour in their failure. They go out undefeated and, while their 
opening-day display against Cape Verde was dire, they have the memories of the 
consummate win over Angola and the dramatic late equaliser against Morocco to 
sustain them through World Cup qualifying. And for 26 minutes on Saturday, they 
looked like making the semi-final for the first time since 2000.

Gordon Igesund, the South Africa coach, had warned of the Eagles' height 
advantage and the frisson of anxiety was palpable in the stadium at each set 
play. Yet it was a Mali free-kick that led toSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica> taking a 32nd-minute lead. 
Itumeleng Khune claimed Seydou Keita's delivery acrobatically, sprang up and 
kicked long. Bernard Parker challenged and, although he went down, the ball ran 
on for May Mahlangu, a threat all night in his position behind the lone striker.

He worked an opening for Thuso Phala and although his shot was mis-hit it was 
deflected for Tokelo Rantie to sidefoot home at the back post.

South Africa seemed comfortable at that stage, playing with fluency and 
freedom that made them almost unrecognisable from the side that had scratched 
their way to a goalless draw against Cape Verde in the rain of the opening day. 
But thisMali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali>, inspired by Keita, 
are admirably doughty: raucous atmospheres seem only to stiffen their resolve 
to, in their captains words, bring "priceless hope" to their war-torn nation.

Three years ago they came from 4-0 down with 12 minutes remaining to claim a 
draw in the opening game against Angola in Luanda. A year ago, they came from a 
goal behind in Libreville to eliminate Gabon on penalties. They had offered 
little beyond resistance this time but 13 minutes into the second half a rapid 
break led by Samba Sow culminated in Mamadou Samassa crossing for Keita to head 
past Khune from close range.

Silence fell over the Mabhida Stadium. South Africa's confidence drained. It 
took a fine save from Khune to deny Samassa. South Africa had played with great 
intensity early on; Mali, having sat off and absorbed pressure, looked fresher. 
Parker succumbed to an ankle injury and was replaced by Siphiwe Tshabalala, out 
of sorts in this tournament but still the darling of the crowd, the memory of 
his opening goal at the 2010 World Cup burning strong. The left-back, Tsepo 
Masilela took a blow to the face and ended up playing with a wedge of tissue 
hanging from his nostrils. But for all the endeavour, the game plodded 
inexorably where it had been heading since the equaliser: to penalties and 
Malian triumph.

Earlier, Ghana had secured their place in the semi-final for the fourth 
tournament in a row, riding their luck to beat Cape Verde 2-0. Ghana's 
goalkeeper Fatawu Dauda made a number of fine saves in the second half while 
Cape Verde were furious with the penalty with which the Black Stars took the 
lead, Asamoah Gyan going down following a shoulder barge from Carlitos. Mubarak 
Wakaso smashed the penalty straight down the middle and added his second in 
injury time, breaking through to roll into an empty net after Josimar Vozinha, 
the Cape Verde goalkeeper, had gone up for a corner.

"You have to take your own conclusions on the officiating of the match," said 
the Cape Verde manager, Lúcio Antunes, who will return to his day job as an 
air-traffic controller before leading his country in a World Cup qualifier away 
to Equatorial Guinea. "The result is fair because Ghana have good players. The 
tournament wasn't going to be interesting with Togo versus Cape Verde [in the 
semi-final]."

Cape Verde's 34-year-old captain, Nando Neves, meanwhile, announced his 
retirement from international football after the game.
 