
For Mali, this is becoming a habit: win the first group game narrowly, lose to 
Ghana, do just enough in the third match to get through and set up a 
quarter-final against the hosts. What they did in Libreville a year ago, when
they beat Gabon on penalties <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lgpG3HckdBw>, they 
will have to do again on Saturday as they face a newly enthused South Africa in 
Durban.

That quarter-final – a year ago to the weekend – was characterised by tears. 
Tears from the Gabonese for the shattering of their dream as half the 
government looked on from the stands, and tears from theMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> captain Seydou Keita as he 
described the crisis in his country. Since then, of course, the situation has 
deteriorated, with an attempted coup by the army followed by further incursions 
from Islamist separatists in the north-east and then French intervention. If 
Monday's reports that the historic library in Timbuktu has been burned are 
true, that is a devastating blow against the heart of Malian culture.

Keita has become a great spokesman for his country and the Mali national team 
is fortunate to have such an eloquent speaker as captain. His ghastly 
familiarity with discussing the war in post-match press conferences keeps his 
emotions in check these days, but there is no doubt how deeply affected he is 
by the trouble back home. Nor is there any doubt that the conflict has provided 
les Aigles with additional motivation and a clear sense of their 
responsibilities.

Mali had been quietly impressive in beating Niger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/20/mali-niger-africa-cup-nations> 
in their opening game, the 1-0 scoreline – the winner bundled in eight minutes 
from time after a goalkeeping error – scarcely reflecting their superiority. 
Against Ghana, though, they had lost 1-0 and, while the coach, Patrice 
Carteron, was justified in believing the Ghana goalkeeper Fatawu Dauda should 
have been sent off early, that did not explain his side's flatness.

That left Mali needing a draw against the DR Congo of Claude Le Roy, who had 
made it through the group stage in each of his six previous tournaments. DRC 
had been vibrant but open in drawing 2-2 with Ghana, then scratchy and 
ineffective as Niger picked up their first Cup of Nations point by holding them 
to a 0-0 draw. For about 20 minutes on Monday night, DRC looked like the side 
of the Ghana game.

Lomana LuaLua hit the post after 20 seconds and Yves Diba Ilunga was tripped 
in the box by Momo Sissoko after 35. Dieumerci Mbokani slammed in the penalty 
and DRC held the initiative. But the defensive inadequacies that had been 
exposed by Ghana were evident again. There was no individual to blame for the 
Mali equaliser, rather a general lack of bite that first allowed Modibo Maïga 
to win possession, then permitted the left-back Adama Tamboura to bundle his 
way to the goalline and cross and finally failed to close the forward Mamadou 
Samassa as he knocked the ball in.

DRC rather lost their way after that and the game descended into scrappiness. 
Trésor Mputu, who had started on the bench because of a knee injury, drew an 
excellent low save from the goalkeeper Mamadou Samassa (confusingly, there are 
two Mamadou Samassas in the Mali squad: the goalkeeper, who plays for Guingamp, 
and his older cousin, the forward who plays for Chievo), but Mali always seemed 
to have the edge and hit the post through both Kalilou Traoré and Cheik Diabaté 
in the closing minutes.

Keita confirmed the squad had chosen to accept smaller bonuses for making the 
quarter-finals than had been agreed before the tournament, with the difference 
being diverted to the war effort. "The country is in the process of recapturing 
the north, and people are starting to lift their heads," he said. "This 
qualification will also give a lot of joy to our country. Giving hope to the 
country has been priceless. There is a crisis in Mali and I did my best to give 
hope to those who are suffering. We have made an effort to help, but money 
doesn't matter. You can't imagine what it means to play for Mali at this time. 
I told my government they could reduce our bonuses. My priority is to play for 
my country."

After a fairly low-key start, played out in the usual half-empty stadiums of a 
Cup of Nations, Carteron is relishing a quarter-final against South Africa in a 
packed Moses Mabhida. "The pressure will be on them," said the former 
Sunderland defender. "We will take pleasure in it. The stadium will be full and 
we will enjoy it."

Keita knows that the atmosphere can hardly be more fervent than in Libreville 
last year and he must know too that this South Africa side, impressive as they 
were against Angola, looked shaky when the pressure was on in the opening game 
against Cape Verde and then played with an odd mixture of panic and inspiration 
to steal a draw from a self-destructing Morocco.

"Bafana are a good team," he said. "As the hosts they will have a lot more 
pressure on them, but they will also have the public behind them. That will 
give them ambition and help them to play above themselves. But we're relaxed 
and we don't fear them. We have a good chance of beating Bafana if we play as 
well as we did tonight. It's 50/50."
 