
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
have confirmed they intend to replace Cristiano Ronaldo with Antonio Valencia 
once they have completed the world-record £80m transaction with Real Madrid. 
Ronaldo is expected to fly to Spain to conclude the transfer in the next few 
days but is unhappy about plans for a joint press conference with Kaka because 
he would rather have his own event.

Madrid had been planning to unveil the two figureheads of their new galáctico 
era in one presentation but Kaka is with the Brazil squad in South Africa, 
preparing for their defence of the Confederations Cup, and Ronaldo is reluctant 
to wait until the former Milan player is back because he says he has holiday 
plans. Kaka last night welcomed Ronaldo's transfer: "I rejoice in the signing 
of Cristiano. He is one of the best players in the world and will helpReal 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> fight for every title 
next season."

Ronaldo's agent, Jorge Mendes, will be in Madrid this weekend and is said to 
want guarantees that Ronaldo's salary will be greater than Kaka's so that it 
reflects his standing as the world footballer of the year and, imminently, the 
most expensive player on the planet. Ronaldo then intends to join his family on 
a cruise around the Caribbean before joining Madrid to begin his preparation 
for his first season in La Liga, with the Spaniards scheduled to hold a 
training camp in Co Kildare on 13-22 July. Madrid are trying to arrange a match 
against Shamrock Rovers in which Ronaldo could make his debut on 20 July.

While the logistics are sorted out, United will return to Wigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic> to complete the signing of 
Valencia for a fee in the region of £17m. Valencia, a fast and powerful 
right-winger with 34 caps for Ecuador, will have the formidable task of filling 
the void left by Ronaldo's departure. United have also informed clubs inquiring 
about Nani that he is not for sale.

"They [United] have been in touch with us and we will be starting [formal] 
negotiations very shortly, I would imagine," Dave Whelan, the Wigan chairman, 
said. "United have been in touch with us over Antonio over the last two or 
three months, expressing an interest and putting cash offers on the table. 
Things will develop over the next seven to 14 days." United first contacted 
Wigan once they learned of Real Madrid making an £18m bid for Valencia in 
January. At that stage United, despite their constant denials, were already 
aware of Ronaldo's intentions to follow his "dream" of a move to the Bernabéu.

"It was only a matter of time," Juande Ramos, the Spanish club's manager at 
the time, said this evening. "We already knew that Real Madrid had a 
pre-contract agreement with Cristiano Ronaldo. I don't know exactly when that 
agreement was made, but I do know it was in place."

Valencia, 23, has already shown the Old Trafford crowd a glimpse of his 
talent, producing a man-of-the-match performance when Wigan lost 1–0 at Old 
Trafford in January, but United's initial valuation of the player has fallen 
after he ended the season in disappointing form.

Nonetheless, United confidently expect the deal to go through, though 
Valencia's former club Villarreal are apparently due a sell-on fee of up to 20% 
which may be a complication. A spokesman for the club's owners, the Glazer 
family, reiterated there would be more money for Ferguson to spend on new 
players if necessary. David Gill, United's chief executive, has told colleagues 
the club will not bid for Franck Ribéry at Bayern Munich, but Lyon's Karim 
Benzema is a realistic though potentially expensive target if, as Ferguson 
fears, Carlos Tevez decides not to accept the club's offer of a permanent deal. 
Tevez's two-year loan arrangement at Old Trafford expires on 30 June.

The Glazers' spokesman said: "Only the paranoia of some supporters would lead 
you to believe the owners are not going to continue investing in the team. A 
substantial number of world-class players have been brought to the club in the 
past few years and that will still be the case."

The suggestion of "paranoia" is unlikely to go down well with United 
supporters still digesting the news that Ronaldo's transfer was put in place 
almost a year ago. However, Ronaldo might not be badly missed if a poll on the 
Red Issue website is an accurate gauge of opinion. Of 632 fans who responded, 
321 were "sad" to see him leave while 311 thought "good riddance".
 