
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have 
confirmed Shay Given will miss most of the rest of the season with a shoulder 
injury.

Given, who will be 35 in April, is looking for a summer move after losing his 
first-team place to Joe Hart. Previously there would have been no shortage of 
suitors but the combination of age and a recurrent injury may deter potential 
buyers.

"It is the same injury that he had last year," Roberto Mancini, the City 
manager, said. "He needs an operation and then he will need three months to 
recover. We will probably have to recall David Gonzales from his loan at Leeds. 
We do not have many more options."

Hart is fit for Thursday's home leg of the Europa League tie against Aris 
Thessaloniki <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aristhessaloniki>, 0–0 after 
last week's draw in Greece, with Stuart Taylor as his deputy, but Taylor was 
injured at the same time as Given last season and Mancini cannot afford to take 
risks at this stage of the campaign, with his team involved in three 
competitions.

Mancini is less worried about the goalkeeping situation than his outfield, 
claiming he has only 16 fit players to choose from for the Aris game and can 
select from only three central midfielders. In addition to injuries to Adam 
Johnson andNigel de Jong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/22/shay-given-manchester-city-surgery>
, City have lost Micah Richards to a calf problem and James Milner to a 
hamstring injury. Shaun Wright-Phillips is available having been sidelined with 
a back problem, but for anchoring midfielders Mancini will select two from 
Gareth Barry, Yaya Touré and Patrick Vieira and name the other on the bench.

"We have a big problem, a lot of games and a lot of injuries," the Italian 
said. "It is always going to be difficult when you are playing a match every 
three days. Injuries are a part of the game but at least we have all our 
strikers available. If we can keep it that way for the next three matches, we 
should be able to make progress.

"We will need to pay attention against Aris because 0-0 is not the best result 
away from home, but the pitch will be better and if we play well I'm sure we 
can score goals. We will need to play well, because Aris have shown they can 
get results away from home. They beat Atlético in Madrid."

Mancini admitted he could not be sure how long he would be able to keep hold of
Carlos Tevez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/23/carlos-tevez-roberto-mancini-manchester-city>
, following reports from the captain's agent that the striker may return to 
Corinthians in the next few years.

Tevez's deal with City runs until the summer of 2014 and asked if he felt 
keeping the Argentinian would be a problem, Mancini said: "I don't know this. 
I'm happy for Carlos because he has scored 50 goals for Manchester City and I 
hope he can continue to score. He is important, but in the squad there are more 
than 20 players who are all important

"But in football it is impossible to know what will happen in the future. I 
hope Carlos can continue to play here."

Barry feels it will be a similar game to the first leg, with the Greek team 
playing cautiously and trying to attack on the break. "I imagine they will sit 
pretty deep again and we'll have to try and break them down," the midfielder 
said. "It's good to know qualification is in our own hands. If we win we go 
through but we've just got to be a bit wary of the away goal."

Barry was as amused as everyone else by Touré's statement last week that City 
could be as big as Barcelona one day, but he does not see anything wrong with 
thinking that way. "It was a very confident statement, but Yaya's played for 
both clubs, he should know," Barry said.

His manager was equally upbeat, without committing himself to a timeframe. "We 
can improve this year and then next year," Mancini said. "Of course we are not 
yet like Barça, Milan, Inter and all those teams who have played in the 
Champions League for years. But we can get there, and we can keep improving 
when we do. Why not?"

Manchester City (4-3-3, probable): Hart; Boateng, Kompany, K Touré, Kolarov; 
Wright-Phillips, Y Touré, Barry; Tevez, Dzeko, Silva.
 