
General Manuel Contreras, who headed the feared spy agency that kidnapped, 
tortured and killed thousands during Chile’s military dictatorship, died on 
Friday at a military hospital while serving a combined sentence of more than 
500 years for crimes against humanity. He was 86.

Chilean dictator Pinochet covered up 1986 burning of activists, report shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/31/augusto-pinochet-chile-1986-burning-activists-cover-up>
Contreras had been hospitalised on 26 September 2014 because of kidney 
problems and was later moved to the intensive care unit when his condition 
degenerated.

Soon after his death was confirmed by the government, a crowd of several dozen 
people gathered outside the Santiago hospital waving Chilean flags. They broke 
into shouts of “Murderer!” and toasted with champagne in paper cups to 
celebrate his death.

After the 1973 military coup led by General Augusto Pinochet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet> that ousted the socialist 
government of president Salvador Allende, Contreras formed and commanded the 
Dina spy agency and went on to become the second most powerful and feared 
figure of the regime after Pinochet himself.

Born on 4 May 1929 in Santiago, Contreras was a career military man who also 
helped organise Operation Condor, a co-ordinated effort formed in the mid-1970s 
by South America’s dictatorships to eliminate dissidents who sought refuge in 
neighbouring countries.

Contreras was among Pinochet’s closest confidants early on but the pair 
exchanged accusations in their final years. While Contreras alleged his former 
boss amassed a fortune trafficking drugs to Europe, Pinochet accused the spy 
chief of acting without his consent and committing the era’s worst abuses.

According to an official report 40,018 people were imprisoned, tortured or 
slain during the 1973-90 dictatorship. Chile’s government estimates that of 
those 3,095 were killed, including about 1,200 who were forcibly “disappeared”.

US considered offering asylum to Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/11/augusto-pinochet-asylum-united-states-ronald-reagan>
Contreras supervised the kidnapping of thousands of suspected leftists after 
the coup as Santiago’s national football stadium was transformed into a 
detention centre where hundreds were held and tortured. About 150 bodies, many 
of them weighed down by sections of railroad track, were thrown from 
helicopters into the ocean and lakes, the military has acknowledged.

Most of the disappearances occurred during the dictatorship’s early years when 
Contreras was head of intelligence. His prominence in Pinochet’s government 
waned after the US sought to extradite him for involvement in the 1976 bomb 
assassination in Washington of Orlando Letelier, who had been defence and 
foreign relations minister under Allende.

Chile’s supreme court blocked the extradition but Pinochet removed Contreras 
from his post under US pressure and dismantled and replaced Dina. AfterChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> returned to democracy in 1990 
Contreras was indicted in the Letelier case and eventually served seven years 
for the assassination. He always denied responsibility and blamed the CIA for 
the bombing.

He was also convicted in the 1974 bomb killing of General Carlos Prats, 
Pinochet’s predecessor as army commander, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, but 
hundreds of other cases were still pending against him.

The German cult leader Paul Schaeffer, who operated a secretive compound in 
southern Chile, allegedly collaborated with Contreras by allowing the secret 
police to use the estate known as Colonia Dignidad for detentions and torture. 
Schaeffer was later arrested and convicted in connection with the sexual abuse 
of children at the compound and died at a prison hospital in 2010.

In later years Contreras alleged Pinochet used an army chemical plant to 
produce cocaine that was sold abroad and said drugs and arms trafficking were 
the main source of the $27m the dictator held in secret bank accounts.

Because of his poor health and mild dementia Pinochet avoided trial for 
dictatorship era abuses by being declared unfit. He died in 2006.

There was no escape for Contreras, whom police had to shield from hundreds of 
angry demonstrators in 2004 as he was taken away to serve a 12-year sentence 
for the killing of activist Miguel Angel Sandoval.

From 2005 Contreras served time in a luxury prison for dictatorship-era 
officials convicted of crimes against humanity. The government for years was 
under pressure to shut the prison, which had tennis courts, barbecues and a 
swimming pool for its prisoners.

The prison finally closed under president Sebastian Pinera’s government in 
2013 and Contreras was transferred to a special lockup for human rights 
offenders where he remained until his health worsened and he was taken to the 
military hospital.
 