 The Scottish National party's Margaret Ewing bears a surname that is famous, 
at least in Scottish politics. Her husband, Fergus Ewing, is the MSP for 
Inverness East, and her strident mother-in-law, Winnie Ewing, has been both an 
MEP and MP and is now the MSP for the Highlands and Islands. Margaret Ewing, 
too, has a place in the front rank of the history of her party.
She first entered Westminster at the age of 29 when, as Maggie Bain, she 
became MP for East Dunbartonshire. The MP for Moray (until the 2001 election) 
and now also the seat's MSP, Mrs Ewing remains a parliamentary force to be 
reckoned with, although today her work is done in Edinburgh rather than 
Westminster.

The daughter of a ploughman, she joined the SNP as a 20-year-old at Glasgow 
University where she was training to be a teacher. Nine years later, in October 
1974, she won Dunbartonshire East by just 22 votes - one of 11 SNP MPs elected 
that year, to the terror of the Scottish Labour party.

That victory may have put out of joint the nose of her first husband Donald 
Bain - who failed in his own effort to become an SNP MP - and certainly her 
first marriage became hot news during the 1995 Perth and Kinross byelection, 
when the SNP candidate, Roseanna Cunningham, temporarily stood down because of 
false accusations that she had broken up the Bains' marriage. Mrs Ewing 
responded by saying that "foolish, prurient" stories 18 years after a non-event 
had "no present relevance" and insisted that there was no animosity between her 
and Ms Cunningham; Ms Cunningham subsequently won selection and the May 1995 
byelection.

After losing her Dunbartonshire East seat in 1979 after campaigning on the 
need for an oil revenue fund to save the Scottish economy, she was mentioned as 
a possible contestant for Glasgow Hillhead in 1982 and contested Strathkelvin 
and Bearsden in 1983. But it wasn't until June 1987 that she returned to 
Westminster to represent Moray, her mother-in-law's former seat, beating Alex 
Pollock on a 6% swing from Tories to the SNP.

Although a seasoned and extremely able parliamentarian, Margaret Ewing was 
overshadowed by Alex Salmond's provocative political attacks, which enabled him 
to defeat her in the 1990 contest for the SNP leadership. Normally a deft 
parliamentarian, she burnt her fingers in 1993 when an attempted deal with the 
Conservative Scottish secretary, Ian Lang - which would have given Scotland 
representation on the EU's regional committee in exchange for SNP votes for the 
Maastricht treaty - fell through.

She has excelled as an abnormally active constituency MP for two beautiful 
counties on Scotland's distant north-east coast. Because of their chilly 
climate, she became one of the original crusaders for extra winter heating 
payments and better insulated housing. She has also campaigned for lighter 
taxation for whisky on behalf of the 40 distilleries in her constituency.

She has had lots of friends outside the SNP, not only in the press gallery, 
but among Labour MPs. She is against nuclear weapons and capital punishment, 
and tolerant of homosexuality. But she has to walk softly on abortion because 
of the puritanism of many of her smalltown voters.

Ask Aristotle about Margaret Ewing 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-1637,00.html>
 