
Efforts to repair flagging clothing sales at Marks & Spencer have been dealt 
another blow by the departure of a key womenswear executive.

Gillian Ridley Whittle, development and buying director for womenswear, has 
told M&S she plans to leave to join Australian department store group Target. 
Her exit will heap more pressure on the retailer as investors brace for its 
ninth consecutive quarter of falling general merchandise sales, which span 
clothing and non-food.

Chief executive Marc Bolland is attempting to revive clothing sales with a 
star-studded advertising campaign, which features Dame Helen Mirren and Olympic 
boxerNicola Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicola-adams>.

However, analysts at Deutsche Bank and Credit Suisse recently cut their 
general merchandise forecasts to negative for the three months to the end of 
September. Credit Suisse analysts said while the long-awaited autumn/winter 
ranges show "some signs of improvement", they will not be enough to transform 
underlying sales or margins.

After the chain disappointed with a 1.6% fall in like-for-like general 
merchandise sales in the 13 weeks to the end of June, Deutsche analysts now 
expect a 2% decline during its second quarter, compared with a previous 
forecast for flat sales.

Ridley Whittle's departure follows the exit of Janie Schaffer – dubbed M&S's 
"Knicker Queen" – who was hired to reinvigorate the underwear section but 
walked out after just three months as director of lingerie and beauty.

Ridley Whittle had run lingerie temporarily since Schaffer's exit in April, 
and recently took up a strategic role in womenswear. A source close to the 
company insisted it is business as usual and her exit is not a major blow.

The group's new autumn/winter ranges began arriving in stores from July and 
were formally launched at the start of September.

That coincided with a print, billboard and online campaign featuring a dozen 
"leading ladies" snapped by renowned portrait photographerAnnie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz>, at locations 
including a boat on the River Thames and a country house in Berkshire; the 
women wear dinner dresses, leather jackets, faux furs and stiletto heels from 
the ranges.

According to a YouGov poll, the advertising campaign will not result in a 
deluge of new customers for the retailer. The survey found that the number of 
people who planned to buy M&S clothes had risen slightly from 23% to 24%.

A spokeswoman said: "We wish Gillian all the happiness for her new life in 
Australia."

M&S reports first-half results on 5 November.
 