
Marks & Spencer was among the day's fallers as analysts pointed to the threat 
of growing competition, in particular from mid-market rival John Lewis.

Following plans by the John Lewis-owned Waitrose supermarket to roll out a 
network of smaller shops within the M25, the group also intends to expand its 
department store chain with a new flexible format. In a sell note ING analyst 
John David Roeg said:
 We expect that [the Waitrose] developments will be slightly negative for 
direct competitor Marks & Spencer. The strengthening of the John Lewis brand 
and the wider presence of Waitrose within the M25 could have a more serious 
impact on M&S over the longer term. 
With analysts at Redburn also downgrading M&S, the company's shares closed 5p 
lower at 356.1p.

Still with retailers, Halfords lost 13.5p to 337p after negative notes from 
Peel Hunt and JP Morgan, whileDixons Retail dropped 0.99p to 15.2p as UBS cut 
its recommendation from buy to neutral.Home Retail Group fell 5.7p to 135.3p as 
the same bank reduced its target price from 190p to 140p. But UBS raised its 
target forBurberry, 22p better at £16, from £12.55 to £15.50.

Overall, investors continued to tread warily as Moody's cut its credit rating 
for Greece, while America's attempts to raise its debt ceiling and avoid a 
default continued to flounder amid political disharmony. After falling as low 
as 5892, theFTSE 100 finished 9.76 points lower at 5925.26, avoiding the 
Armageddon some had predicted. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital 
Spreads, said:
 Even though there are concerns about a US default on its debt repayments the 
markets seem convinced that a resolution will be agreed before the August 
deadline. This is the biggest hurdle faced by financial markets at the moment 
and until common ground is found we can expect volatility to remain highs and 
gains to be hard to come by. 
Banks led the way lower on worries about their exposure to European debt if 
Greek defaults despite last week's debt agreement.Barclays dropped 10.65p to 
228.95p,Lloyds Banking Group lost 2.025p to 45.1p and Royal Bank of Scotland 
closed 0.58p lower at 36.28p.

But with gold and silver hitting new highs as investors sought safe havens, 
mining groupFresnillo finished 48p higher at £17.29 and Randgold Resources rose 
30p to £56.25p.

Defensive stocks were also in favour, with GlaxoSmithKline up 22.5p at 
1365.5p, helped by a positive note from Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

BP added 5.05p to 475.4p as it was awarded two deepwater blocks in the 
Caribbean. Meanwhile HSBC analyst Paul Spedding added his voice to those 
calling for a break-up of the oil business. He said:
 We believe that BP has now incurred roughly half of the potential costs 
likely to be associated with the Macondo spill and needs to begin to articulate 
its post-Macondo strategy. We see ConocoPhillips' shrink-to-grow strategy as a 
good example of how shareholder value can be added.

BP should pursue a [similar] strategy by disposing of mature assets (such as 
Alaska) and some of its US deepwater exposure. It should also seek to release 
cash from its investment in TNK-BP Holding. The proceeds should be returned to 
shareholders via a buyback programme. Given the undervalued nature of BP's 
shares, we believe this could add up to 160p of value.

Our target price is 600p, rating overweight, but adoption of such a strategy 
could make our 840p sum of the parts valuation more relevant. 
Elsewhere, Wolseley rose 9p to £19.15 as it sold its Build Center business and 
its Brochette operation in France to Saint-Gobain for £310m. Charlie Campbell 
at Liberum Capital said:
 This is a good price given than businesses were making a combined 1% margin - 
the proceeds are a little lower than I would have expected but profitability of 
businesses is worse; on balance good to get this done. 
Aegis added 3.2p to 160p as bid speculation swirled around the marketing 
group. It is in the process of selling its Synovate market research business, 
which traders believe could leave it vulnerable to a bid. French billionaire 
Vincent Bollore, who owns 26%, could be one buyer, but other bidders are 
believed to be interested. A possible price of around 225p a share was 
mentioned.

Another potential takeover target, technology group Invensys, added 11.3p to 
314p.

As for real bids, Holidaybreak, which specialises in adventure travel and 
school trips through its PGL brand, jumped 15% to 367p after revealing it was 
in takeover talks.

Rivals Tui Travel and Cox & Kings or a private equity group were tipped as 
potential buyers. Analyst Greg Feehely at Altium Securities said any successful 
offer would have to be pitched at 400p a share at least, valuing the business 
at around £280m.

Finally consumer electronics group Armour slumped 40% to 2.375p after it 
reduced its expectations for the full year and agreed a £1.2m loan with Hawk 
Investment Holdings, a vehicle controlled by Armour chairman and entrepreneur 
Bob Morton.
 