
My husband, Mark Jones, who has died aged 67 of cancer, was for 15 years a 
popular head of the BBC’s Sound Archive. He spent four years on the board of the
International Association of Sound and Audiovisual Archives <http:>.

Born in Raglan, in south-east Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, to 
parents who were both schoolteachers, Mark was educated at the Haberdashers’ 
school in Monmouth. Its only lasting gift to him, he claimed, was a lifelong 
love of rugby union. A talented cricketer, he opened the batting for the school 
in 1964, relishing the coaching of the prolific Essex opener Sonny Avery. 
Later, while watching a Test match in Broadcasting House’s reception area, he 
was recruited into the BBC’s illustrious (if somewhat eccentric) cricket team 
the Bushmen. He was an avid member of the MCC.

Mark studied English at Bristol University, winning the Modern and Shakespeare 
prizes in his final year. The disappointment of an uncompleted MPhil at York 
was tempered by later teaching for London University’s extramural department 
and at the City Lit adult education college.

He joined the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in 1972 and found 
his niche in the Sound Archive four years later. The first three years were 
spent in the arcane grading department, which evaluated 25,000 jobs across the 
corporation. The climax of this was spending a week in Lisbon with a news crew, 
observing how editorial decisions were made as the Salazar dictatorship was 
overthrown. All jokes about being paid to watch people work had been heard by 
the time he left.

Mark left the corporation in 1996 and used his vast knowledge and love of 
radio to research and write more than 40 audiobooks. Among other projects, he 
was recruited, withJonathan James-Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/nov/30/radio.obituaries>, the former 
head of radio light entertainment, to prepare the ground for a new BBC digital 
archive channel, now Radio 4 Extra. Their dummy schedules outlined its shape 
and approach.

In 1998 Mark won a gold award from the Spoken Word Publishing Association for 
75 Years of the BBC, a celebration of radio broadcasting. He contributed to the 
BBC History magazine and provided all the recordings for the 
multi-award-winning audio series Eyewitness, a 10-part history of the 20th 
century. At the time of his death, he was half way through a series marking the 
centenary of the first world war.

Mark was a dedicated supporter of York City, one of the more modest football 
league clubs. His wit, sense of mischievous fun and deep humanity will be 
greatly missed.

Mark and I met at the BBC Sound Archive and, having lived together since 1994, 
married in 2013. He is survived by me, his brother, Tim, and two sisters, Wendy 
and Bridgett.
 