
What is the Mary Rose Trust?

The Mary Rose Trust <http://www.maryrose.org/> was formed in 1979, three years 
before the ship was raised to the surface in October 1982, with wonderfully 
concise aims that remain well-focused even now. Not only has the trust raised, 
recorded, conserved and displayed the ship and a large proportion of the 
thousands of artefacts within her, but it has now opened a remarkable museum 
and exhibition. We also have a leading role nationally and internationally in 
maritime archaeology and in conservation of waterlogged material, based on our 
long pedigree and advanced technology.

One particular phrase used to describe the objects sums up our purpose: “all 
for the education and benefit of the nation”, We have added another word: fun. 
People should enjoy it: the visitors, staff and volunteers.

The new museum opened in May 2013 – can you tell me about the journey to 
opening day?

Building a museum in a scheduled ancient monument (the 1802 dry dock) over an 
existing building containing the world’s only 16th century ship – while it was 
being sprayed with chemicals – was never going to be easy, and it wasn’t.

Raising the funds for the daily operational tasks has always been a challenge, 
so setting off to raise £35m was probably the single most difficult wall to 
climb. Raising the profile of the Mary Rose, together with fundraising, 
dominated my life through this period, ably assisted by a tiny staff. The trust 
would be nowhere without the support of theHeritage Lottery Fund 
<http://www.hlf.org.uk/>. Though we failed in our first bid we gained approval 
within the year after sharpening up our designs. Trusts and foundations 
supported us, as did one or two large corporations, and thousands of 
individuals donated generously at differing levels.

Maintaining the environmental conditions for the ship was fraught at times 
during the build. Creating the required conditions within the showcases once we 
had installed them was also demanding. The highest risk factor of the entire 
project was establishing the steady environment (1°C and 4% relative humidity) 
within what we believe is the largest controlled showcase in the world: 35 
metres long and four decks high. Every case in the museum is controlled to this 
precise environment.

Meanwhile, we built up a conservation centre nearby in the dockyard to prepare 
many thousands of artefacts using tanks of polyethylene glycol (PEG) and vacuum 
freeze dryers. Elsewhere, Mary Rose staff were busy designing the exhibition 
mounts and interpretation panels. Using our own team to do the majority of this 
work ensured the maximum safety of the precious and fragile objects, and 
utilised the exceptional in-house skills and knowledge.

The final months of settling in to the new building and preparing to open went 
in a flash. We ran a month of previews by inviting groups in ever-increasing 
numbers and then had a carefully planned public opening day designed to catch 
national and international attention – which it did, reaching nearly 1 billion 
people around the globe.

What was the transition like going from rear admiral in the navy to museum 
chief?

Thirty-six years in the Royal Navy with commands at sea and on shore taught me 
a great deal, but I was still caught unawares in some matters. The first 
challenge was to pay the staff their wages at the end of each month; the trust 
really was that broke. Getting the right IT support was also a struggle. It’s 
amazing what you take for granted until you step into the charity world. 
Because of the lack of financial support, it was difficult to instil optimism 
in the team, who were working so diligently and professionally. There was 
perhaps an air of defeatism around – certainly a lack of belief that we could 
move forward towards the trust’s long-standing wish to build a new museum.

My background as a commanding officer stood me in good stead. I “cleared lower 
deck” on my first day to introduce myself and set out my pitch and ambitions. 
One, I remember, was that they should come to work with a spring in their step. 
There was an audible groan and I realised that I had my work cut out.

One thing I always tried to do when I was a commanding officer was to get 
around to see my people – a term we use in the endearing sense at sea – each 
day to have at least a few words with everyone. For the first few years at the 
trust I did this regardless of the pressures from elsewhere, and we got to 
trust and respect one another. I’m proud that spring did indeed enter their 
step.

Yes, I do consider myself privileged to be their captain, even if I only have 
half a ship!

The conservation and archaeology work of the Mary Rose Trust is 
groundbreaking. What’s been the key to its success?

We are served by extraordinarily dedicated and professional staff, a fair 
number of whom have been here for up to 30 years. Their knowledge, enthusiasm 
and passion for their work is remarkable. The corporate knowledge and integrity 
is outstanding.

It’s not just the staff, but also the 100 volunteers. The museum could not 
function successfully without them. They show the same characteristics as the 
staff, and are especially knowledgeable and engaging.

Perhaps the key is the Mary Rose itself: its stories, artefacts and pivotal 
place in our national maritime history. The new facts that come to light 
monthly are fascinating (“I learn something new every day I’m here” is 
frequently heard). We go out of our way to learn ourselves – all of us – all of 
the time. There is no room for complacency. Then we enjoy passing this new 
knowledge on to others, through our active education and outreach programmes, 
the media and our visitors.

John Lippiett is chief executive of the Mary Rose Trust and Museum 
<http://www.maryrose.org/>

More like this 

• Exeter RAMM’s manager on the museum’s redevelopment  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/mar/25/camilla-hampshire-ramm-museum-exeter>
• Watershed’s Dick Penny on creativity outside the capital  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/feb/18/interview-dick-penny-watershed-bristol>
• The Wellcome Trust’s head of engaging science on funding applications  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/04/engaging-science-wellcome-trust-arts-head>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 