
More than 50,000 free copies of Andrea Levy's novel, Small Island, will be 
distributed today in four British cities in a bid to encourage reading, 
discussion and possibly argument.

The bestseller, which won the Orange prize in 2004, will be made available in 
Bristol, Hull, Glasgow and Liverpool with the help of funds from the Heritage 
Lottery Fund and other sponsors.

The participating cities all have connections with the slave trade. Levy's 
story of migration from Jamaica to a bleak and chilly post-war Britain has been 
chosen to mark the 200th anniversary of the of the slave trade abolition bill.

"The idea is to build a community of readers," said Bea Colley, coordinator of 
Liverpool Reads, one of the groups involved in the project. "You might see 
someone reading the book at a bus stop and say, 'I've read that too' and begin 
a discussion. The book will help bring people together."

In Liverpool, where a slavery museum opens in the autumn, copies can be picked 
up at libraries after presenting a voucher printed in the Liverpool Echo. Extra 
copies, including those in audio and large print formats, are also available to 
borrow. In Bristol, a thousand copies will be distributed to employees at a 
Rolls-Royce factory and the headquarters of Wessex Water.

There will be more formal projects based on Small Island in schools and other 
centres, aided by 80,000 copies of a specially produced readers' guide. "It 
will be discussed in reading groups at the Caribbean Centre, in hospitals and 
at creative writing projects," added Ms Colley. "We want to get out to the city 
the message about people who come to a new country, a message appropriate to 
asylum seekers and others who have come to Liverpool."

Levy is in Liverpool today to discuss and read from her book.

"I am very excited that Small Island is the focus of this ambitious 
mass-reading project," she said. "I feel deeply honoured that it has been 
chosen in the year that commemorates the ending of the slave trade, and that 
the novel, which is set in the 1940s, is being used as the springboard to look 
back to the important issues of slavery and its aftermath.

"It has always been one of the aims of my writing to make the history of 
African-Caribbean people in this country more visible and to show their story 
to be an important part of British history."
 