
Last year more than one fifth of the UK's postgraduate students were enrolled 
on business and administrative courses, making it one of the most popular areas 
of postgraduate study.

The masters of business administration (MBA) offers intensive training in 
managerial and technical skills. Many people see it as a fast track to 
promotion for those whose careers have plateaued.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are offered the chance to grow 
a network of industry contacts through alumni and develop specialisms in areas 
such as global energy or sustainability.

But with some programmes costing as much as £57,500, many will question whether
MBAs <https://www.theguardian.com/education/mbas> are worth the tuition fees.

If you're considering enrolling on an MBA course but aren't sure if it's right 
for you, don't fear. From 1-3pm on Tuesday we'll be joined by representatives 
from business schools across the country. They'll be able to answer your 
questions about finding the perfect course, making an application and securing 
financial support.

To take part in the discussion post your questions in the comments thread now 
or join us between 1-3pm on Tuesday.

The panel


Dasha Amrom graduated with an MBA from Warwick Business School last year. She 
is a founder ofCareer Coaching Ventures <http://www.ukcareercoaching.com/>, a 
career coaching, CV design and sales training consultancy

Steve Cousins is the MBA recruitment and admissions manager at Cass Business 
School

Dr Pamela Yeow is deputy director of the MBA programme at Kent Business School

Karen Barker is career plus manager at Warwick Business School

Dr Brigitte Nicoulaud is director of MBA programmes at Aston Business School, 
Aston University

Mark Stoddard is the accreditation projects manager at the Association of 
MBAs, an international authority on postgraduate business education.

Jamie Rundle is course leader of the part-time MBA course at Sheffield 
Business School

Sarah Fidment is an employer engagement fellow at Sheffield Business School

Anjali Bakhru is director of MBA programmes at Imperial College Business School
 