
Preamble Hello and welcome to live blog coverage of one of the most 
near-sensational events of the sporting-periphery year. Yes, we're coming to 
you live from TalkBalls's studios in the heart of London, where the most 
unavoidable names in sports broadcasting, Andy Gray andRichard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys>, are about to make their 
vaguely awaited debut on their new mid‑morning show Harmless Banter with Keys 
and Gray.

1 min The atmosphere here is definitely a bit excited as we await the arrival 
of the two loudest names in sport. The big question at TalkBalls Towers is: 
will Keys and Gray address directly the furore surrounding their departure from 
Sky Sports and subsequent radio-based bouncing back? Or will they instead just 
not address it at all?

3 min Keys and Gray are in the studio. Repeat: they are in the studio. Gray, 
looking every inch the man he always looks like, is already striding around the 
room in a tight suit gesturing in the style of someone who appears to believe 
he is manipulating a giant swooshing video screen. He's being eased into his 
seat now by members of the TalkBalls production staff. Keys is already in place 
behind the fuzzy microphone looking motivated, prepared, defiant and sad.

5 min It's 10am and we're off. Keys: "Hello and welcome to Harmless Banter on 
the radio with Richard Keys andAndy Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray>. What a show we've got lined 
up. We'll be taking you through all the weekend's action. You can tweet, email 
and text us – no capital letters, no sexual swear words. We've got Warren 
Barton on the phone later. What a show we've got. For you. Lined up for you. 
Andy?"

Gray: "Mmm …"

Keys: "Harmless Banter with Keys and Gray it's 10.02 and only three more hours 
to go. Don't forget: Warren Barton will be on the phone later and if you were 
to ask me if this was much better than being on TV, I would say it definitely 
was. And do you know what else Andy? I'd say it in conjunction with Bumcracks 
Hardware, where for a limited time only gravel is half price and it's two for 
one on fragranced Toilet Duck but you must buy at least six. Six. I can't 
emphasise that enough. We'll be right back with more Harmless Banter after 
these messages."

8 min A blistering start from Keys who looks limber, focused, unshaven and 
somehow irreversibly ruined. Gray yet to make any real contribution and in fact 
appears to be making a small structure from a pile of paperclips on his desk, 
possibly a small horse.

11 min Keys: "And now we're talking tennis. We've got our old friend the 
former British No1 Jeremy Castle on the phone. Jeremy? Let's talk about the 
Wimbledon Open, which will of course be coming live from Flushing Garros in 
Australia in February …"

14 min More deft work there from Keys who seems to be taking to mid-morning 
radio with all the assurance you'd expect of a man who used to do 
lemon-blazered sofa-chat whatnot on that breakfast TV programme with Nick Owen 
in the 80s.

17 min Keys: "… and obviously much better than being on TV, which is finished 
as a medium in my not inconsiderable opinion. So Jeremy: you're at the US 
Masters. You're playing the semi-finals of the four-balls. It's a crucial 
moment in the seventh set. The ball's lobbed high into the air. You're up at 
the net. What do you do next? Would you smash it?"

Castle: "Yes. Yes Richard. I'd smash it."

"Jeremy, thanks. So nothing unusual there, a perfectly normal discussion 
between consenting middle-aged men. Warren Barton still to come. And don't 
forget we'll be having a woman on later and that's not sexism – which I hate – 
it's just a woman. Harmless Banter here on TalkBalls with Keys and Gray, Gray 
and Keys, where you don't just get one presenter, you get two. Do you know what 
else is two for one Andy?"

Gray: "Decking stain at Bumcracks Hardware, your No1 choice for aggregate, 
pebbles, bark chips and an endless choice in outdoor gazebos."

Keys: "We're going to the phones now, where we've got Ron in heavy traffic on 
the Cromwell Road."

Ron: "Hi guys. Loving the show. My point is, I'm just wondering if for a pair 
of high-profile presenters such as yourselves, men who have been present at Sky 
Sports ever since the very beginning of what was initially a high-end start-up, 
a heavily resourced gamble watched by a tiny audience and predicated entirely 
on potential, which then mushroomed year on year to become this grand 
overarching shadow over English football, funnelling ever greater influence 
your way as your own profile grew, as you found yourself addressing players and 
officials as equals, being allowed to pass your opinions as fact and becoming 
intoxicated with a plastic kind of power, if it might have been better in your 
situation to use that lingering influence in a positive way and apologise 
unreservedly for your own actions, to speak out for the kind of people you 
might have belittled or disregarded in the past, to accept you had at that 
stage nothing to lose and were only going to end up on some minor mid-morning 
radio show tarred forever as the most pernicious example of …"

Keys: "Ron I'm afraid we're losing you there. Now, I think we can go to 
Warren Barton. Warren? Warren? … Warren? … Warren?"

[Continues for years without respite]
 