
✒ Look at the Twitter feed (@OC) of Christian O'Connell 
<https://twitter.com/OC>, the much-garlanded Absolute Radio breakfast host, and 
you'll find its backdrop is the poster for his sporadic stand-up "tour", with 
the obligatory quotes from the Observer ("hilarious") and Guardian ("furiously 
funny"). What he may not have reckoned with, though, is that the provenance of 
such praise can now be easily identified, and it only takes a few clicks to 
discover that neither seems to concern his abilities as a comic. Far from 
describing O'Connell at all, indeed, the "hilarious" appears to come from a 
2008 radio review mentioning one of his sidekicks dressing up in drag; while 
the Guardian quote is from sepia-tinted 2005 and evoked his style as a DJ on 
Xfm, when he was younger and hungrier – a touch tragically, though some might 
find it endearing, it's about him almost 10 years ago.

✒ Further examples of "Real W1A" were not hard to find last week, as if 
toilers in New Broadcasting House are using the sitcom as a kind of manual 
rather than a wake-up call. There was thetiming of the news of the axing of 
BBC4's (formerly BBC2's) The Review Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/27/bbc-axes-review-show-tony-hall>, 
just two days after director general Tony Hall summoned the media to rejoice as 
he announced a raft of initiatives amounting to "the biggest arts push for a 
generation". And Monkey hears of an in-house seminar where the World Service 
was being discussed, and "amoebas" – squishy shapes mapping its performance 
according to various criteria – were used in a presentation to demonstrate its 
value. To be fair, though, the insider audience made clear they found the 
amoebas baffling (in W1A such surrealism would have been treated as perfectly 
normal), and suggested they should be renamed butterflies "before it goes 
public".

✒ Outgoing BBC2 controller Janice Hadlow has two doubtless costly one-hour 
documentaries going out this Wednesday and Thursday, in which Ben Macintyre 
adapts his just-published book about Kim Philby. So will she have been thrilled 
to find Radio 4 serialising the same tome every day last week as its Book of 
the Week, given that (a) audience-overlap between Radio 4 and BBC2 is high, and 
(b) anyone who heard the radio version is unlikely to want to have the same 
story recited again with pictures? Probably not, Monkey imagines. But, as she's 
heading for the exit, she might find at least find it amusing that the first 
film immediately precedes W1A, so that one element of the latest splendid 
instance of a real corporation cock-up is neatly followed by Hugh Bonneville's 
Ian Fletcher dealing with made-up ones.✒ Though ITN has been rocked by a series 
of recent departures, its chief executive John Hardie was able to spare time 
from crisis management to spend a night sleeping al fresco near St Pauls 
alongside other supremos in a children's charity event calledCEO Sleepout 
<http://www.demotix.com/news/4317474/ceo-sleepout-st-pauls-london-aid-action-children-charity#media-4317185>
 (if the "before" photos can be trusted, the philanthropic fatcats all 
bizarrely wore suits and ties in their sleeping bags, not nightwear). Before 
this, Hardie appealed to his underlings to contribute by buying raffle tickets 
or taking part in a baking contest, but, sad to relate, the incentive to do so 
– a possible prize of an extra day's holiday ("Bake a cake and win a day off 
work!" urged an internal memo brazenly) – did not go down well with all his 
colleagues. Were staff being "bribed" with company money (ie a day off), the 
more mutinous muttered, to help his personal charity effort? Disgraceful 
cynicism, in Monkey's opinion.

✒ Friday's Daily Mail included a Jan Moir rant and a two-page, 11-picture 
spread devoted to Tony Benn's funeral 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2590858/Cherie-Blair-embraces-former-IRA-commander-Martin-McGuinness-funeral-Tony-Benn.html>
, depicted in the giant headline as a gathering of its hate figures ("Scargill, 
ex-IRA chiefs, BBC luvvies and Cherie Blair"), with photos of others including 
Diane Abbott, George Galloway, Jack Straw and Peter Tatchell. Curiously 
unmentioned was whether Mail editor Paul Dacre nevertheless attended, possibly 
in disguise, out of old-fashioned courtesy as a member of this community of 
friends and colleagues –Benn agreed to the paper lucratively serialising his 
diaries 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-483463/Revealed-Why-Tony-Benn-paid-court-Saddam-eve-Iraq-war.html>
, provoking anger on the left that he had not insisted on a more sympathetic 
outlet.

✒ So farewell, then, Sir Sam Brittan, the 80-year-old economics commentator 
who ended an FT career that began in the 1950s on Friday 
<http://video.ft.com/3399328158001/Samuel-Brittan-on-almost-50-years-at-FT/World>
with a swansong piece that opened with memories of Churchill and Eden's 
premierships. As his retirement was not pre-announced, there was no chance for 
Monkey to check whether the Pink 'Un sage approves of the more poppy 
post-Winehouse direction of his cousin Mark Ronson's career (Brittan is related 
to the tycoon Gerald Ronson, and hence also to the record producer), or whether 
he has ever been a victim of confusion with the movie star of the same name: 
look upSam Brittan <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1909975/> on IMDb, and you find 
a CV including Sweet Seduction, Hungry for Love, Up All Night, Busy Doing 
Nothing, Anything At All and Finding Oblivion.
 