
FREDDIE FOX <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3456865/>



Son of actors Edward Fox and Joanna David. Plays Logan's friend Peter Scabius.

What have we seen you in?

Worried About the Boy [the Boy George biopic on BBC2 last May]. I played 
George's friend Marilyn, a crazy peacock of a man (or woman; no one knew), an 
unutterable bitch a lot of the time but whom everyone was magnetised towards. I 
find it easier to play eccentric characters, but I desperately want to play 
someone more strait-laced and solid.

Tell us about Peter.

He's Logan's old friend from school and Oxford. They're like rutting stags, 
competing to see who will lose his virginity first. Sam West plays Peter later 
on, when he's becoming more of an arsehole, and takes him into a darker place.

What was it like sharing a character with Sam West?

I've watched Sam playing Hamlet and all that, but had the nuts to call him and 
say, "Would you mind talking about this guy we're playing?" We had breakfast 
and found we had the same ideas.

What's your abiding memory of Any Human Heart?

The first scene where you see all the boys together is a bike chase through 
Oxford. It took place on the cobbliest, most knobbly street in the city on 
1920s Dunlop bicycles with tiny tyres. I felt like I had haemorrhoids by the 
end.

What's next?

I'm playing Louis XIV in a 3D version of The Three Musketeers and have just 
finished a series that will come out on BBC2 in the spring called The Shadow 
Line. It's about cops and drug dealers in London, and I play a psychopathic 
assassin.

LYDIA WILSON <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3575723/>



The London-born 26-year-old plays Logan's son's girlfriend, Monday.

Tell us about Monday.

She goes out with Lionel, Logan's son when he comes to New York. She's 16 and 
has run away from home on the West Coast to live in Greenwich Village and jump 
on the beatnik bandwagon. My mum's from Greenwich Village and grew up at the 
same time, so it was a delicious part to research. She told me about living in 
this almost childlike state of bohemianism, walking around the house naked.

What was most challenging about the role?

Getting into the American way of being. We apologise and use words to mask 
ourselves, whereas Americans take the time to think what they think and say 
what they say. That was the hardest thing, making that cultural shift.

What lesson did you take from the novel?

Logan sees a lot of women and breaks hearts, and before doing this I wrote 
that off as a massive sin. Recently I heard someone say, "If you live long 
enough, you play all the parts." And that's what this book seems like to me. 
Logan plays a villain, a hero, a dad, a lover. Seeing it in context, I guess 
I'll be a bit more generous towards the lotharios I meet in the future… maybe.

What do you do when you're not working?

I play in a few bands. I sing and play the oboe. My initiation was a punk-rock 
band and I played in an African funk band. I prefer music to acting; it's less 
embarrassing and you can be yourself.

What's next?

I can see myself doing a synthesis of art and music and acting – it might be 
performance art.

EMERALD FENNELL <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2193504/> 


Born in London, the 23-year-old plays Lottie Edgefield, Logan's first wife.

Tell us about Lottie.

She's spoilt, glamorous and very, very posh – an earl's daughter. Logan is 
dazzled by her whole shtick, but their relationship is a bad idea from the 
get-go. It was fun to do; we scream at each other a lot and it gave us the 
opportunity to run the whole gamut of a relationship in a short time. I like 
flouncing about and pouting and being spoiled, so Lottie suited me to a T.

Where have we seen you before?

As Rachel, one of Howard Marks's girlfriends in Mr Nice. I lounged around in 
60s clothes and smoked a lot. It was my first job and mostly improvised. The 
director gave us fake joints, sat us in a fake dorm, and said: "Away you go."

What 20th-century age would you like to live through?

The roaring 20s, because everyone was so mortal then and really lived. And of 
course, being a girl, I would have loved the clothes.

Which 20th-century figure would you like to meet?

WB Yeats. He was probably a lunatic, with all that automatic writing stuff, 
but I'd like to sit at his feet and listen to him recite. Marilyn Monroe would 
be great too. I could ask her for makeup tips.

What do you do when you're not working?

I'm writing a novel – to keep my mind working and make sure I don't lounge in 
bed eating chocolates until three in the afternoon. My dad [jeweller Theo 
Fennell] is very supportive.

What would you like to do next?

More theatre. Something new and exciting and filthy at the Royal Court, maybe.

CHARITY WAKEFIELD <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1564421/> 


Born in Tunbridge Wells, she plays Land Fothergill, one of Logan's first loves.

What have we seen you in?

I played Marianne Dashwood in the BBC adaptation of Sense and Sensibility. It 
was my first big job and a real challenge. As a person who loves to research 
and get fully immersed in another era, I really enjoy doing period work. I did
Casualty 1907 – another great research project – and Yesterday Was a Weird Day,
 a piece of verbatim theatre about the 7/7 London bombings that we took to the 
Edinburgh festival in August 2005 – a month after the bombings.

Tell us about Land.

She's wants to be a Labour politician, which for a girl in the 1920s is quite 
something. She was unbelievably brilliant to play because she's so erudite and 
witty and dry, and also because she doesn't need Logan as much as he needs her.

What 20th-century age would you like to live through?

The 20s were fun to play, but I'd love to get into the 50s and 60s art scene. 
There's an amazing part of the book when Logan is flitting between Paris and 
New York, owning a gallery and criticising Jackson Pollock as if he were just a 
silly new painter.

What do you do when you're not working?

I've got an allotment in Peckham, which is amazing because it's a tiny piece 
of the countryside surrounded by urban landscape. I love being up there when it 
gets dark and the lights start turning on in all the high rises, and you're 
there digging away.

What would you like to do next?

Play a really dark character. Most of my characters in the past three years 
have been worthy and nice, but not particularly troubled.

HUGH SKINNER <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2369260/> 


Studied drama at Lamda. Plays Lionel, Logan's son by his first wife, Lottie.

What have we seen you in?

I played Felix Clare in the 2008 BBC adaptation of Tess of the D'Urbervilles, 
but so far I've mainly been concentrating on the theatre. I've worked at the 
National Theatre and the Young Vic, and last year I was inThe Great Game at the 
Tricycle. I've just finished a stint in'Tis Pity She's a Whore at the 
Liverpool Everyman.

Tell us about Lionel.

He comes to see his dad in New York in the 60s when Logan is running an art 
gallery. Lionel has started managing a band and brings them to New York to see 
if it works better over there. Lionel has had a very wealthy upbringing, but 
he's the 60s equivalent of a mockney – a rich kid who's gotten in with bands 
and is trying to construct a new image.

What 20th-century age would you like to live through?

The 20s, when the Bright Young Things were around. I'd also like to relive the 
80s. It was a really interesting time, but my memory of it is hazy; I was too 
young to understand what was going on.

Which 20th-century figure would you like to meet?

Andy Warhol, to see what lies behind the facade – if I could get him talk to 
me.

Would you like to live a life like Logan's – interesting, but chaotic?

Definitely. I don't think I'd be happy with a quiet life. In part because, 
being an actor desperate for a job, the idea of anything being quiet is a 
nightmare.

What would you like to do next?

Anything and everything. Some days you want to do some very earnest classical 
work, others you just want to play Frank-N-Furter fromThe Rocky Horror Show.
 