
In 2005, Lydia Cacho was approached by several police officers. They bundled 
her into a van and for the 20 hours it took to drive from Cancun in southern
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, where she lives, north to 
the city of Puebla she was, she says, "tortured". Sexual assault was 
threatened. A gun was pushed into her mouth. A sickening see-saw: "I kept 
thinking one minute I was going to die, then that I would survive."

When they arrived, a female guard told her she would be raped in jail. In 
fact, a network of friends, contacts and activists swung into action and she 
was bailed. Attempts on her life continued, and she has become well known as 
one of Mexico's bravest journalists. A recent estimate put the number killed 
there since 2006 at 67. Amid this, Cacho started work on her next book.

This story tells you several things about Cacho and the world she works in: 
alleged corruption (tapes surfaced that appeared to show her arrest was 
orchestrated by a man she had written about, alleging he had connections to a 
paedophile ring), the vulnerability of Mexico's journalists, and that Cacho is 
not somebody who can be silenced. Her new book, Slavery Inc: the Untold Story 
of International Sex Trafficking, is about to be published in the UK. Although 
she has lived with death threats for years, she took the most recent one four 
weeks ago seriously enough to leave the country.

On 29 July, she received a call on her satellite radio from a man who told her 
she was a "fucking bitch" who had ignored their warnings, concluding: "We are 
going to send you home in pieces." "The way they interfered with my radio, it 
had to be someone who had the power and the means," she says. "Immediately I 
called some security experts, one here in London, and told them. They said to 
get out of the house immediately. I called my lawyers and they said the same 
thing, so I did. I just took my passport and a bag and got out of there."

Is Cacho frightened? If the question is obvious, the answer isn't. She sits 
across the table in an office in central London, utterly composed, an 
occasional flicker of rage behind dark eyes. "I think it's absurd," she says. 
"I'm telling the truth, I'm a good journalist and I have to flee my country." 
Later she says: "I don't scare easily." She has been offered asylum in several 
countries – not just on this occasion, but in the past – but has never wanted 
to take it. "I like my country. [In Mexico] really good journalists are so 
badly needed. It's important. I want to be there to see the change."

Is she prepared for how long she might have to stay away? A deep sigh. "I want 
to go back home, everything is there – my house, my dogs. I'm trying to find 
out who did it and expose them, which is the only thing I can do to save my 
life." She thinks this threat is related to her book, in which she names men 
who she says are involved in sex trafficking in Mexico.

She travels to some of the world's sex tourism centres to piece together her 
story on the thriving global sex trade, much of it told through the testimonies 
of women and children. She met children rescued from sex slavery in Cambodia and
Guatemala <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala>. A North American woman 
who told her how her "employers" – she thought she would be working as a singer 
in a nightclub – confiscated her visa and plane ticket and over several days 
kept her prisoner in a hotel room where she was drugged and raped by dozens of 
men. A woman from Venezuela, who escaped her traffickers in Mexico, was able to 
identify numerous immigration officials either as clients or those who had 
facilitated the passage of girls flown into the country. Dressed as a nun in 
Mexico City – the only safe way, she decided, for a woman to walk its 
mafia-controlled areas – Cacho saw children working as prostitutes in motels.

Finding figures for the number of people trafficked and enslaved is 
notoriously difficult; in 2005, the International Labour Organisation said 2.4 
million at any one time are trafficked into forced labour, with at least 43% of 
these forced to work in the sex industry, but it's a conservative estimate. 
"The point of the book was to understand how the international markets are 
connected," she says. "As a reporter, I was really frustrated, because every 
time I interviewed an expert, everyone kept telling me they're not linked, that 
this isn't an international business. But it is."

She was threatened throughout her research. "In Bangkok, I stayed in very nice 
hotels because it was the way to see the rich European clients who bring girls 
or boys to the hotel. I would be sitting in the bar, and have my camera with 
me, and someone would always come over, a waiter, saying, 'Be careful, don't do 
that, you're a journalist, right?' InCambodia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>, I had to flee a casino and hide 
in my hotel." She tried to barricade herself into her room with furniture. "I 
thought it was clever." She laughs. "And then I thought: 'This is stupid, they 
have guns and I just have a chair against the door.'"

Before she started the investigation, Cacho says she was open to the idea of 
legalising and regulating prostitution, and had listened to many academics and 
feminists who advocated it. "Then the more I travelled, and the more women 
I interviewed, the more worried I got," she says. "I'm absolutely convinced 
that all forms of prostitution are just a way of normalising gender 
discrimination and violence against women, and women are 'trained' to become 
prostitutes because they are objects in a society that wants to have ghettoes 
of women who can be raped."

She adds she doesn't really believe women can "choose" to become a prostitute: 
"In order to make a choice, you really need to have opportunities and options. 
If you don't, you are not really choosing, you are just getting by." She says 
there isn't just the stereotypical idea of children and women who are abducted 
and enslaved (though these do, of course, exist); there are the women who are 
duped and find themselves owing thousands of dollars to the men who control 
them.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, Cacho writes, who 
"have been conditioned to sell their bodies, and believe prostitution is the 
only way for them to make a living". In Cambodia, Cacho met a woman who runs a 
brothel who explained how she "reprograms" girls by "normalising sexual 
exploitation through systematic exposure to pornography. They have to be 
convinced that they were the ones who chose to do this, and they must be 
constantly reminded that their lives are worth nothing."

Even the women she met who were earning thousands of dollars, seemingly free 
to leave when they wanted, didn't convince her that sex work could be a 
rational and free labour choice. "After a while, when you get in depth in an 
interview, they start telling you how miserable they are, how they are 
mistreated by clients, how they hate the smell of them, or the way the clients 
behave. They start giving you little stories that are stories of violence."

She tries to knit together the links that stretch across the world. She met 
the former wife of a drug trafficker who described how young women were first 
exploited as prostitutes, then forced to work in their factories making illegal 
drugs, and how contacts were met in London, and were formed with gangs 
in Mexico and Cuba. Police in different countries have told her how many 
police, politicians and the judiciary are clients of brothels run by organised 
criminals. The tangle she portrays is overwhelming. The sex trade is growing, 
she says, in part "because politicians all over the world are not addressing 
poverty. They are not really improving the lives of women and girls."

One reason for the growth of pornography and prostitution, Cacho believes, is 
that while women's rights are improving in many places, "the culture of 
masculinity has not changed at all". The fact that there are men, she points 
out, from Europe and North America, who "go to Mexico,Venezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela>, Cambodia, Thailand to have sex 
with women there is telling you something". She remembers a young man in Spain 
who explained he used prostitutes because he couldn't be bothered to talk to 
the women he met in his everyday life as equals. What she would love to see, 
she writes, is a "new masculine revolution … a new generation of men, not 
warriors, not armed, not threatening divine punishment, not violent, but men 
who possess a strong sense of progress and justice".

Cacho was born into a large family in Mexico City. Her father was an engineer, 
her French mother a psychologist who was involved in the feminist movement. 
"They way she saw the world was really enlightening for me," she says. "It was 
shocking to live in a house in which equality was really implemented every day 
with my brothers and sisters, and then go out in to a country that didn't 
respect the rights of women."

At 23, she became a reporter, and started writing about violence against 
women. "My editor said, 'This is good, stick to that.' I thought, yes, this is 
what I like doing." In 1999, a man followed her into the bathroom of a bus 
station in Cancun and inflicted a brutal attack, in which she was raped and had 
several bones broken – an attack, she believes, that was "punishment" for her 
work.

And so the threats continued, especially once she started trying to expose a 
paedophile ring in Cancun for her previous book, Demons of Eden (one of the men 
she wrote about, Jean Succar Kuri, was sentenced last year). For a time, she 
travelled in an armoured car and had federal bodyguards; she dispensed with 
them three years ago after her car was sabotaged. "I lost a lot of friends and 
I respected that – they said they didn't want to be seen with me in public. My 
social life changed dramatically. You learn how to walk the street and be 
looking all the time for signs of somebody coming, like a motorcycle."

The psychological toll is alleviated with therapy, yoga, and – until now – 
spending time in her garden with her dogs, "getting in touch with the earth, 
life. I have a sense of humour. A lot of people think I'm weird because I can 
laugh about the worst things that happen – not when they're happening, but 
afterwards. I think that's healthy. You get cynical if you can't laugh."

The risks are real. In April, her friend, the Mexican investigative journalist 
Regina Martinez, was killed.Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya> was also a friend; Cacho 
recalls they met two months before the Russian journalist was murdered in 2006. 
She searches for the words: "Reality. Shock."

The only thing to do is to keep working. (She can't stop – yesterday, she 
says, she was in her hotel room forwarding a Facebook page she believes is used 
by a paedophile ring to Interpol.) As well as her writing, she has founded a 
women's shelter in Cancun; last year, it provided refuge or psychological and 
legal help to 30,000 women fleeing abuse. Cacho never wanted to become the 
story, but the threats on her life also bring a spotlight to her work, and to 
the dangers faced by her colleagues. "I've never wanted a quiet life, otherwise 
I wouldn't be a reporter or an activist," she says.

"Of course, I get fed up with the politics and the corruption, but I never 
question my work. We are journalists because we want to change the world." She 
smiles. "I think my job has made a difference."

Slavery Inc: the Untold Story of International Sex Trafficking by Lydia Cacho 
is published on 6 September by Portobello Books, priced £14.99. Buy it for 
£11.99 atguardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846274213>
 