
Archaeologists working in Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> 
City have uncovered a circular temple built more than 650 years ago to worship 
a god of wind.

 It was excavated at a site discovered two years ago when a mid-20th-century 
supermarket was demolished. The circular platform, about 36ft in diameter and 
4ft tall, now sits in the shadow of a shopping mall under construction.

The site is believed to have been built to worship the god of wind, 
Ehecatl-Quetzalcoatl, and the plans are to preserve it and make it visible to 
the public with a large viewing window.

 What archaeologists initially found below the old supermarket shards of 
pottery and human remains was expected, said Pedro Francisco Sánchez Nava, 
national archaeology coordinator for Mexico’s National Anthropology and History 
Institute.

Liquid mercury found under Mexican pyramid could lead to king's tomb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/liquid-mercury-mexican-pyramid-teotihuacan>
But deeper down they were surprised to find the temple, which offers another 
example of how the Mexica-Tlatelolca people worshipped one of their principal 
deities, Sánchez said. Offerings found included an infant with no signs of 
trauma, bird bones, obsidian, maguey cactus spines and ceramic figurines of 
monkeys and duck bills.

The majority of the temple’s original white stucco remains intact. 
Archaeologist Salvador Guilliem said similar structures, round on three sides 
and with a rectangular platform on the fourth, have been found before, 
including in the same area.


 The temple lies within the perimeter of a large ceremonial site in the 
capital’s Tlatelolco neighborhood, though much of that perimeter is invisible, 
covered by an urban landscape.

Eduardo Matos Moctezuma, researcher emeritus, said modern-day Mexico City 
covers several different pre-Hispanic cities, including Tlatelolco and its 
rival Tenochtitlan.


 Tenochtitlan was a centre of political power while Tlatelolco dedicated 
itself to commerce, with an important market that was noted even by the Spanish 
conquistador Hernán Cortes. Eventually Tenochtitlan took control of Tlatelolco.

When the Spanish and their indigenous allies began conquering Tenochtitlan, 
residents of that city withdrew to Tlatelolco to continue the fight and 
Tlatelolco became the last site of resistance against the Spanish in the area.

The site of the recently uncovered temple is just yards away from where 
Mexican soldiers massacred protesting students in 1968 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/from-the-archive-blog/2015/nov/12/guardian-mexico-tlatelolco-massacre-1968-john-rodda>
.
 