
 I arrive for my interview with Mia Wasikowska 45 minutes early, barrelling 
into the hotel corridor as she leaps gawkily, girlishly through a door. We lock 
eyes, I recognise her, she smiles shyly, as if trying to remember who I am, 
then realises she has no idea. This 21-year-old, the highest-grossing female 
film star of 2010, one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in the 
world, is clearly entirely unused to being recognised. Her expression shifts to 
friendly confusion, and she bounds off through another door.

Even when she's completely silent, stories whisper over Wasikowska's face, 
which explains her latest casting asJane Eyre 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1229822/>, a woman whose inner monologue bubbles 
with wit and defiance. The film opens with Eyre's stricken flight from 
Thornfield Hall, after a betrayal by her great love, Rochester, and the camera 
focuses on Wasikowska's stripped-bare face as she runs across sodden woodland, 
down wet paths, and lies on a rock in the hammering rain. The scene could 
easily veer into parody – the sort of watery, weepy cape-and-bonnet moment 
French and Saunders might once have sent up. But Wasikowska never teeters into 
histrionics, she is always completely believable.

She started reading Charlotte Brontë's novel a couple of years ago, and was so 
enamoured that halfway through she called her agent, asking if any adaptations 
were knocking about. Two months later, she was sent a script. "I was just so 
struck by Jane's sense of self," she says. "She doesn't compromise herself for 
anybody. I have a really supportive family, but she hasn't had anyone cheering 
her on at all." The shoot was exhausting, six days a week in a corset, "quite 
physical a lot of the time, and very emotional, all the time. I don't sleep 
very well in general, but I would be falling asleep any 10 minutes I had. In 
the makeup chair, I'd be," she drops her head back dramatically, "while they 
were trying to fix up my eyebrows."

Wasikowska says she likes to work "inside out", building a character 
psychologically, and that the most important direction she was ever given is 
"the thought really counts". Unlike the majority of actors, her characters live 
palpably behind her eyes. This allowed her to hold her own against the massed 
mushrooms and grinning cats inTim Burton's Alice in Wonderland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/feb/25/alice-in-wonderland-film-review>, 
an eye-popping mess of a film in which her tough, independent Alice was 
nonetheless triumphant. Her co-stars in her other big hit of 2010,The Kids Are 
All Right 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/28/the-kids-are-all-right-review>, 
were also daunting: the fearsomely experienced trio ofJulianne Moore 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/28/julianne-moore-kids-all-right>, 
Annette Bening andMark Ruffalo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/23/mark-ruffalo-kids-are-all-right>. 
But as Joni, the teenage daughter of two lesbian mothers who decides to meet 
her biological father, she was awkward and mesmerising.

Her defining role so far has been as Sophie in the TV series In Treatment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2009/apr/19/us-television-in-treatment>. I 
mention the character, and she almost jumps in her seat: "She's probably my 
favourite, ever." Wasikowska comes from Canberra, Australia, and, at 17, In 
Treatment was the first work she had ever done in the US. It was intense – 
Sophie is a suicidal teenage gymnast, who has been having an inappropriate 
relationship with her coach, and is visiting a therapist played byGabriel Byrne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/apr/26/gabriel-byrne-in-treatment>. Each 
episode was essentially a two-hander, and her performance was remarkably 
subtle. One especially wrenching moment consisted simply of her hugging her 
therapist's wife.

"That was the most incredible initiation ever, I was on such a high the whole 
shoot," says Wasikowska. "I remember each time I got a new script, reading it 
and being like: 'Sophie tried to kill herself in the bathroom! Shit!' I got so 
attached to her, because I was new in the country, I didn't really know anyone, 
and she was like a friend.

"It's really rare as a teenager to be offered a role that actually resembles 
what it's like to be a teenager, because there are so many stereotypes that 
might be attractive to watch, but make you think: whois that? Who has that life 
at 16? I don't know anybody who's like the popular girl in school. The hot 
chick." She wasn't? "Unfortunately not," she laughs. "I was a bit of a loner as 
a teenager. I never went to a single social event, because they terrified me."

Her portrayal of Sophie was partly informed by Wasikowska's own childhood 
experiences as an aspiring ballet dancer. The daughter of artist parents – her 
mother a photographer, her father a photographer and art lecturer – Wasikowska 
always knew she would do something creative, but wasn't quite sure what. The 
household was filled with activity; her mother bringing photography books home, 
her parents discussing their shows or the layout of their work. There were 
regular trips to art galleries, and she came to love the work of photographers 
Lee Friedlander, Roger Ballen, William Eggleston, Mary Ellen Mark, "and a 
thousand others who I'm blanking on". She remembers, as a kid, watching a Czech 
film of Alice in Wonderland, "a stop-motion version byJan Svankmajer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jan_S%CB%87vankmajer>, and being completely 
disturbed and riveted".

Wasikowska's mother Marzena does a lot of portraiture, and some of her 
earliest memories are of having her picture taken, "waking up in the middle of 
the night, because a flash went off. I was like," she mimes shielding her eyes, 
and adopts the low growl of a Muppet, "'Mom, what are you doing!'"

Her mother was born in Poland, and when she landed a commission to work there 
for a year, she took the family with her. Wasikowska was eight, and there are 
pictures of her striding seriously through a grassy field, and looking beadily 
thoughtful in a jacket with a big, shiny hood that resembles a space helmet. 
"Our entire lives have been documented by photography, and I guess that was the 
beginning of acting, in a subtle way, because we never had to perform or smile 
for the camera, we'd just do our thing, and she'd take pictures of us. But 
you're definitely always aware, if you're having your photo taken, and that 
becomes a dynamic and a rhythm between two people."

Wasikowska has her mother's surname, as do her two siblings; older sister 
Jess, younger brother Kai. She says she doesn't know why, but when I ask if her 
mother's a feminist, she replies, "Well, yeah," in a tone that implies, "Well, 
duh". "I would hope everyone would be a feminist," she continues. "Feminism is 
just about equality, really, and there's so much stuff attached to the word, 
when it's actually so simple. I don't know why it's always so bogged down."

Around the time she left Poland Wasikowska began pursuing ballet seriously. 
"It snowballed really quickly, and I got very into it, and I was doing about 35 
hours a week." She loved the way dancing made her feel: "It's such an amazing 
liberation. It's a contradiction, because dancing itself is so liberating, and 
you feel fantastic. It's like a drug. You get really high. But then the 
industry side of it is so rigorous, and quite oppressive, and that started to 
feel," she pauses, "eurgh."

She has said in the past that, when she was dancing, she was probably half her 
current size, "and more unhappy with my body than I am now". She tells me the 
pressure that came with ballet was enormous. "You'd spend 35 hours a week 
staring at yourself in the mirror, and start to really fixate on things that, I 
guess, if you have a proper perspective, are not that big of a deal." Like 
what? "Oh, things you only really see if you're in that world; the curve of 
your ankle, how big your wrist is. Ridiculous things, but when you're a dancer, 
they're serious." A fat wrist could ruin your career? "Yeah! It could."

I ask what she thought of the film Black Swan, with its portrayal of ballet 
dancers as driven, neurotic, anxious. "I thought it was pretty good," she says. 
"You do get very caught up in that world, and there's a lot of negativity. 
Actors get so pampered, and there are a lot of rewards, and dancers work just 
as hard, if not more so, and there's 1% of the amount of help. You work 
yourself to the bone."

In her case, quite literally. At 14, Wasikowska developed a spur – a painful, 
calcified mass on the back of her heel. She had to stop ballet for two weeks, 
and during that time she decided, quite suddenly, never to go back. She had 
been watching a lot of films that intrigued her, includingKieslowski's Three 
Colours trilogy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Three_Colors_Trilogy>, and 
Australian films such as Shine, My Brilliant Career and Picnic at Hanging Rock. 
"Ballet had been so much about achieving physical perfection, and what I liked 
about film was that it was the opposite …" Not exactly, I say, with a laugh. 
Wasikowska must be the only young woman in Hollywood who finds the place 
laidback when it comes to body image. "Well," she says, "it's funny, because I 
feel like the dance world was so hardcore in terms of image and body, and 
physicality, and I know that a lot of people find the film world similar, but 
I've found itso much more chilled out that I'm like 'meh! Whatever! Try 
experiencing prima ballerina land – it's crazy."

Most 14-year-olds would have taken things easy at this point, but Wasikowska 
has an almost unnerving, inexplicable drive. "I was always anxious to do 
something, I always thought – I need to do more," she holds her hands 
dramatically to her face and throat, her pose recalling ageing diva Norma 
Desmond in Sunset Boulevard. "I always felt like it was too late, and I was 
doomed. I think even with acting I thought: I'm far too old." She laughs shyly.

Wasikowska had always hated drama class at school, "because it felt like 
getting up and making a fool of yourself. It was for the loud, outgoing kids, 
and I definitely wasn't socially outgoing. But I don't think acting is really 
about that. I think there's a common misconception that the loud kid in class 
is the actor, and I don't find that necessarily." Where some people take to 
acting to draw attention to themselves, Wasikowska seems much more interested 
in disappearing into a role.

So with no experience whatsoever, she began ringing agents; out of a list of 
12, one finally agreed to take her on. Wasn't she nervous about calling them? 
She cocks her head. "I think I felt less nervous than I would at a school 
dance. It's terrifying, to be at a school dance, or a social, or anything like 
that. But calling an agency, there was a level of comfort, I guess, in dealing 
with adults and pretending to be a professional. I was a different person when 
I was in that element. I wasn't like," she puts on a mock-serious voice, and 
thrusts a forefinger into the air, "'I am now an actor.' I was just going to 
try it for a certain amount of time, and if it didn't work, I really didn't 
want to be a struggling actor, so I wasn't going to pursue it."

She quickly began securing roles in Australian films, and within a few years 
she was working in Los Angeles on In Treatment. Since then, her career has 
built at an incredible rate; last year, she was second only to Leonardo 
DiCaprio on theForbes list of the highest-grossing actors 
<http://www.forbes.com/2010/12/20/highest-grossing-actors-2010-business-entertainment.html>
 in the world ("a fluke!" she says), and she has films coming up with directors 
Gus van Sant and Jim Jarmusch.

One of the aspects of acting she loves most is that she doesn't always feel 
like, "a very articulate person, and with acting you've just got perfect words. 
I mean, not always, because often really good dialogue is about the 
miscommunication between two people. But as an actor you've been given the 
words, and you can immerse yourself in that perfect language and just let it 
wash over you, which is really quite nice."

Yet I suspect, on some level, she'd still rather be an observer, than 
observed. I ask whether losing her anonymity would bother her, and she says: 
"If it was the Twilight level of fame, where you can't go for a walk, that 
would be really difficult … I would not find it comfortable to be followed, or 
to feel like people were always aware of who you are, or had preconceived 
notions about you." In the interests of observation, she has followed her 
mother into photography, with more prodigious success; a photo she took of Jane 
Eyre co-star Jamie Bell, and director Cary Fukunaga, the two suspended quirkily 
in mid-air, was a finalist in a national portrait prize in Australia this year. 
She's only really been taking photographs since her acting career took off, 
training her camera on those pointing back at her. Many of her photos are taken 
on film sets, she says, because: "it equals everything out. It's become my 
shield and my weapon. They're always poking measuring tapes in our faces, and 
cameras, so I just think: I'll do the same back."
 