 As Michael Heseltine fades from political sight the jury is still out on 
whether he was a failed man of destiny or all smoke and mirrors. Certainly his 
walkout from Margaret Thatcher's cabinet during the 1985 Westland crisis was 
the work of a great actor. His most solid achievement may be his publishing 
business, built up from nothing to become one of Britain's largest magazine 
owners. A self-made millionaire, Mr Heseltine has the style to match.
One has always had to distinguish between Mr Heseltine's flashy pretences and 
his constructive reality. He was named defence secretary in 1983 with a brief 
to curb defence expenditure in the wake of the Falklands war, but instead 
concentrated on a propaganda war against the CND, even setting up a separate 
department for the purpose. His theatrical instincts, which led him to 
undertake stunts such as donning a flak jacket for public appearances, 
infuriated the generals and admirals who knew Swansea-born Hezza had shed his 
national service Welsh Guards uniform within nine months for the hopeless seat 
of Gower in 1959.

The strength of his ambition was never in doubt, even if we doubt Sir Julian 
Critchley's story that Mr Heseltine told him while at Pembroke College, Oxford 
in 1952 that he intended to be in the cabinet by the 1990s. In fact he was 
deputy prime minister by 1995, achieving the position by trading the votes of 
his 35 supporters to keep John Major safe from John Redwood's leadership 
challenge. By then, his first severe heart attack in Venice in 1993 had made it 
clear that his poor health disqualified him from the top job.

His political career began to take shape in the mid-1960s - he read the local 
paper every week for a year to swot up on local issues and won the Devon seat 
of Tavistock in 1966. He used his maiden speech to attack Labour's prices and 
incomes bill, which aimed to freeze wages, and also fought Barbara Castle's 
Transport Act.

His first run in with Mrs Thatcher came in 1975 - by which time he had moved 
to become MP for Henley, a seat nearer his London businesses - when he voted 
against her in the second round of the leadership campaign - despite supporting 
her in the first. He won a standing ovation at the party conference for 
denouncing nationalisation and in 1976 he was forced to apologise for waving 
the mace above his head in a moment of madness in the Commons. In 1981, he was 
dubbed 'Mr Merseyside' after he visited the city following the Toxteth riots 
and, although he was sympathetic to the poll tax at the start of its 
legislative process, by the end he was a firm opponent.

In 1985 he resigned from the Cabinet over the government's backing for the 
sale of Westland helicopters to an American firm. Mr Heseltine favoured an 
Italian consortium that could have bailed out the ailing military hardware 
manufacturer and prevented it from turning to Sikorski for help. But there is 
doubt about whether the European consortium ever existed. He could not put 
flesh on it for me then, or in his recent memoirs. I suspect that his goal in 
resigning was to draw attention to Mrs Thatcher's high-handedness and 
anti-Europeanism.

Throughout his career, Mr Heseltine has been the leading Tory advocate of 
government interventionism on the side of entrepreneurs. He wanted to achieve 
this through regional governments - which the Thatcher cabinet rejected - and 
urban development corporations, which it expensively accepted.

Mr Heseltine's big-idea imagination saw the possibility of redeveloping 
rundown east London as a great "east London corridor", with the Millennium Dome 
as its centrepiece. It also led him to advocate the ambitious European project. 
But unhappily for him, however, in the last decade his Europhilia has been 
swamped by the Europhobia of most of his party colleagues, and he has found 
himself increasingly aligned with his Blairite "opponents".

He has had two consolations in these troubles: the success of his Haymarket 
group publishing empire means that he is worth more than £300m and the 
arboretum at his £1m house near Banbury continues to flourish.

Ask Aristotle about Michael Heseltine 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-2386,00.html>
 