
Michael Essien is due back in London by Thursday amid fears that the Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> midfielder has torn the medial 
ligament in his left knee. He will miss at least six weeks if that is 
confirmed, ruling him out of next month's potentially critical derby against 
Arsenal and the first leg of the Champions League tie against Internazionale.

The 27-year-old injured the knee on Sunday in training with the Ghana squad at 
theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> in Angola. A 
preliminary assessment undertaken by the national federation's medical staff 
suggested Essien had partially torn the medial ligament and damaged the 
meniscus in the joint, though Chelsea will conduct their own scans once the 
player reports back to Cobham, most likely on Thursday, with the results due 
the following day.

A despondent Essien is desperate to learn the extent of the damage suffered 
when he slipped while passing to a team-mate in training in Luanda. Chelsea 
have been in regular contact with the Ghanaians, who must win Tuesday's Group B 
game against Burkina Faso to proceed to the knockout phase of the competition, 
but will be hugely concerned at the prospect of being without the dynamic 
midfielder, in particular for the games against Arsenal – who could usurp them 
at the top of the Premier League if they beat Bolton by two goals at home on 
Wednesday – on 7 February and against Internazionale and José Mourinho at San 
Siro on 24 February.

Carlo Ancelotti had been resigned to Essien's absence until the Arsenal game. 
Although Chelsea were publicly comfortable with their midfielder's 
participation in Angola, his involvement still represented something of a 
surprise given that he had not since tearing a hamstring against Apoel Nicosia 
in the Champions League in early December and had resumed full training only on 
6 January.

His rehabilitation work from that injury, and the adverse weather conditions 
in the United Kingdon, had delayed his departure for Angola until last 
Wednesday for what proved to be a farcical week-long stay at the Cup of 
Nations. Essien trained with his international team-mates last Thursday and was 
then pitched straight into competitive action, as a second-half substitute, in 
Friday's 3-1 loss to the Ivory Coast in Cabinda. He departed the turf on a 
stretcher at one point in that 45-minute appearance following a clash with his 
club-mate Didier Drogba, though came through the game unscathed only to suffer 
the fall on Sunday.

"Michael was turning to make a pass when he just went down," said the Ghana 
midfielder Anthony Annan. "There was no contact from any other player, but 
those around him say they heard a click, and then the physios rushed over." 
Essien was taken to hospital in Luanda in an ambulance to be assessed, with his 
fears particularly acute given that he had missed a little over six months of 
last season after rupturing an anterior cruciate ligament playing forGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> in a World Cup qualifier against 
Libya in Tripoli in September 2008. That injury required major surgery.

Chelsea will only determine whether their policy of non-recruitment during 
this transfer window should be modified once they have determined the extent of 
Essien's latest injury.

Juliano Belletti excelled as a makeshift defensive midfielder during 
Saturday's 7-2 victory over Sunderland, though sterner tests than that lie 
ahead.
 