 Tory delegates at the 2000 conference should have been provided with a couch 
for shadow chancellor Michael Portillo's voyage around his psyche. Never has a 
major political figure so lived up to the words, "To thine own self be true".
Mr Portillo's voyage of rediscovery was all the more wondrous since everyone 
was able to witness the shock that pushed him into the political abyss. He lost 
his "super-safe" Tory seat to Stephen Twigg, a gay Blairite stripling. That 
helped Mr Portillo confront his own exotic background on the BBC as the son of 
an exiled Spanish republican intellectual and a Kirkcaldy Liberal Democrat 
teacher.

The resultant catharsis has had political repercussions. Mr Portillo made his 
comeback for affluent Kensington and Chelsea mainly because they saw him as a 
"son of Thatcher". But that is not how he has reinvented himself. In the 
u-turns he has imposed on his leader William Hague as his "loyal" shadow 
chancellor Mr Portillo has emerged as a centre-right inclusivist, in contrast 
to authoritarian-right Ann Widdecombe, his rival for the succession should 
William Hague falter.

To win that battle, Mr Portillo will need all his subtlety. He must not appear 
to be disloyal so as to avoid the Tory "traitor" tag which bedevilled Michael 
Heseltine. He must also help unmask the insanities of rival Miss Widdecombe 
without showing his hand, as happened when the Mail on Sunday found seven 
fellow shadow cabinet members anxious to confess their youthful cannabis 
experiments. Mr Portillo himself did not say whether he had tried cannabis but 
he has admitted to trying homosexuality in his university years.

Mr Portillo's need for subtlety must be frustrating because his party has 
moved into the far-right positions he abandoned after his 1997 election defeat. 
Tory MPs are already three-quarters Eurosceptic rightists.

The one thing Mr Portillo knows intimately is the ethos of allegiance change. 
Born in Bushey in 1953, he was a keen supporter of Harold Wilson while at 
Harrow County grammar school. He was converted to Conservatism at Peterhouse, 
Cambridge University, by the rightwing guru, Maurice Cowling, who also 
recommended him for his job as a researcher at Conservative central office.

His ambition was enormous. In 1983 he contested Perry Barr, Birmingham against 
Jeff Rooker, who increased his majority ninefold. As an adviser, he continued 
to push for the privatisation of British Gas and the deregulation of bus 
transport, serving Cecil Parkinson, the then trade and industry secretary.

His luck was phenomenal, as demonstrated by the IRA Brighton conference bomb. 
Mr Portillo left the Grand Hotel an hour before the bomb exploded and was then 
selected from more than 200 aspirants for the byelection caused by the death of 
Southgate MP, Sir Anthony Berry, who was killed by the bomb.

From his maiden speech, he crusaded against high taxation and for freeing 
nationalised monopolies. He backed bills against abortion and favouring capital 
punishment. A parliamentary private secretary to John Moore and an assistant 
whip by 1986, his 1987 re-election campaign attracted the support of lobbyist 
Ian Greer.

An under secretary for social security from 1987, he withdrew benefit 
entitlement from unemployed school leavers who refused to join youth training 
schemes. He also scrapped the social fund which provided grants and loans to 
the poor and curbed the benefit system and new personal and occupational 
pensions, claiming previous systems had encouraged people to "live off the 
state".

As a reward, he was promoted minister of public transport, offsetting moderate 
transport secretary Paul Channon. Mr Portillo excluded British Rail from his 
effort to build the Channel tunnel with private funds and pushed local 
authorities to dispose of bus enterprises. He urged on Mrs Thatcher the 
privatisation of British Rail and the tube.

By 1990 he was being mentioned by Norman Tebbit as a possible future Tory 
leader and he sought Mrs Thatcher's approval by taking over the poll tax as 
local government minister, telling her, "There is nothing in the whole world I 
would rather do." He despaired when she wanted to step down in 1990, brushing 
aside Mrs Thatcher's permanent private secretary, Sir Peter Morrison, when he 
tried to ban him from dissuading her.

His 1992 appointment to the cabinet as chief secretary to the Treasury was 
taken to mean that prime minister John Major was serious about cutting 
expenditure - Mr Portillo promptly cut funds for inner cities. But he was 
discreet in expressing his Euroscepticism and also voted, in February 1994, 
against reducing to 16 the age of homosexual consent.

His extreme caution was again shown when he refused to challenge John Major 
for leadership of the party in June 1995, even on the joint ticket offered by 
John Redwood, although his ally John Whittingdale set up an office and battery 
of telephones to do so. His reward, promotion to defence secretary, brought out 
his worst expression of super-patriotism, including his chauvinist "Who Dares 
Wins" speech which wowed only the 1995 Tory conference. He enthused the right 
but infuriated gays by refusing to allow them to serve in the forces.

Between his defeat in May 1997 and his re-entry into parliament for Kensington 
and Chelsea in November 1999, he managed to swivel his position from hard-right 
to centre-right. He even managed to confess to his earlier homosexuality, 
although his former lover, Nigel Hart, insisted he had been economical with the 
truth. Mr Hart recalls Mr Portillo saying: "I've just worked out that the first 
time I slept with you was the day after I slept with [my future wife] Carolyn 
for the first time."

Ask Aristotle about Michael Portillo 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4231,00.html>
 