
Michael Johns captured America with a cheeky smile, a voice swimming in soul 
and an Australian accent that made women swoon.


The news of the Perth-born 35-year-old’s bizarre death has shocked the US 
entertainment industry.


Johns, better known in the US than his homeland, made his name in 2008 on 
American Idol <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, on the 
hit US TV singing competition that aired on the Fox network and drew a nightly 
audience topping 30 million.


He went on to write songs for films, documentaries and other artists, 
according to People magazine.

Johns, who went to the US in 1997 on a tennis college scholarship, twisted his 
ankle last week in Los Angeles.


He went to a doctor on Thursday after enduring great pain and watching the 
swelling and bruising rising from his ankle up to his leg, TMZ reported.


He was cleared to go home, but the next afternoon was found in a friend’s 
apartment on a couch unresponsive and when paramedics arrived he was dead.


It is believed he died from a blood clot.


Johns was married to Los Angeles interior designer Stacey Vuduris.


“Our family is devastated by the passing of our beloved Michael, a wonderful 
husband, son, brother, uncle and friend,” the singer’s family said in a 
statement on Saturday.


“We appreciate the outpouring of love and support we have received from all 
corners of the globe.


“Please keep Michael in your thoughts and respect our need to grieve privately 
in this difficult time.”


Johns finished eighth on American Idol in 2008 despite controversy.


It was revealed he had signed with Madonna’s Maverick label in 2002, something 
some believed should rule him out of the show because it was designed to 
unearth unknown talent.


“His acoustic version of the Bee Gees’ To Love Somebody was very special, but 
I will always remember him singing The Beatles’ You Never Give Me Your 
Money/Golden Slumbers,” American Idol executive producer Nigel Lythgoe told USA 
Today.


American Idol judge Simon Cowell, who would destroy young singers with his 
harsh critiques, was full of praise for Johns when he auditioned for the show 
aged 28 – the final year he was eligible.


Cowell tweeted: “I just heard the very sad news that Michael Johns has passed 
away. A truly great guy. Rest in peace Michael”.
 