
There was an amusing photograph in the papers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/oct/31/star-wars-lucasfilm-walt-disney-video>
 last week. It shows all the Disney theme park favourites – the human-sized but 
giant-headed mice, dogs and ducks – dressed up asStar Wars characters. Goofy is 
Darth Vader, Donald Duck is sporting elements of an imperial stormtrooper's 
uniform, Minnie Mouse is wearing a Princess Leia dress and Mickey is in full 
Jedi get-up, light sabre raised, giant immovable mousey grin turned perkily to 
the camera as he prepares to use the force to make Walt proud.

But the most entertaining figure is in the middle – a rotund bespectacled old 
man, also holding a light sabre, dressed scruffily in shirt and jeans but with 
gleaming white trainers, a neat grey beard, and hair as precisely coiffed as a 
Mollie Sugden perm. His facial expression is somewhere between exhaustion, 
sorrow and bafflement, as if some kindly carers have taken him on a day trip of 
which he has little understanding. Of course in reality he fully grasps his 
surroundings, for this is billionaire film-makerGeorge Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> and the photo has been taken on 
the occasion of the sale of his movie empire, Lucasfilm, to Disney.

I don't understand why he agreed to the picture if he wasn't going to enter 
into the spirit of it and make some attempt with his comparatively tiny human 
features to echo the massive Disney grins surrounding him. So maybe this snap 
caught him in a downbeat instant between exaggerated cheesy gurns. Or maybe he 
thought his glum look was more appropriate to the dignity of the great moment, 
like when a statesman signs an important treaty. Maybe he felt Mickey and co 
were lowering the tone with their gaping mouths.

The announcement caused excitement among Star Wars fans, not just because it 
adds another range of funny outfits to the Disney parade wardrobe, but because, 
along with the purchase of Lucasfilm's renowned high-tech production companies, 
the Indiana Jones franchise and the rights to manufacture cuddly mouse-eared 
R2-D2s, this deal allows Disney to make a newStar Wars film. That's something 
which, very recently, seemed unlikely ever to happen again. Lucas told theNew 
York Timesearlier this year that he would never make another: "Why would I make 
any more when everybody yells at you all the time?" I think we can rule out his 
writing a column for theGuardian website any time soon.

The guys at Disney have promised to bring out Star Wars episode seven in 2015 
and to follow that with episodes eight and nine 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/31/star-wars-7-return-jedi-again>. 
Thereafter their plan is to release a new film every two or three years pretty 
much indefinitely. Basically, they wantStar Wars to go Bond.

To Disney's investors, the prospect could hardly look more appetising. The 
latest release from the 50-year-old 007 franchise is being showered with 
critical praise and box-office cash. Having seenSkyfall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/28/skyfall-james-bond-review>, I can't 
say I understand why. I mean, it's fine. It's probably an above-average Bond 
movie but then it benefits from both budgetary and technological possibilities 
that most of its predecessors lacked. It certainly isn't the "best Bond ever" 
as many are claiming. It is very nearly the longest Bond ever, narrowly beaten 
by Daniel Craig's first appearance in the role,Casino Royale. Maybe Craig has 
ambitions to be the longest-serving Bond but wants to get there in the fewest 
possible films.

There's a lot wrong with it. It takes itself far too seriously, the suavity of 
the character is lost; the heartless charmer, the well-dressed psychopath who 
will unhesitatingly deploy violence to get what he wants – but who wants 
nothing more, due to an accident of his nature, than the furtherance of British 
national interests – has been replaced by a gnarled potato-headed bruiser 
haunted by his own past. Batman without the gear. I miss the jammy sod in the 
bow-tie whose toast always lands butter side up. Yet, for all this 
self-importance, the plot is still as daft as in the campest days of Roger 
Moore. I won't spoil the end for you – the writers have already done that – 
except to say: have courage, the film does, eventually, end.

Comparisons with the Bond franchise are bound to make hard-core Star Wars fans 
nervous. Most would balk at an open-ended series of adventures vaguely set in 
theStar Wars universe but with the same variance of style, tone and competence 
that the Bond franchise has displayed. Will they have to endure different 
actors taking on the central characters? They've already seenEwan McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ewanmcgregor> struggle to fill Alec 
Guinness's shoes. But, as the roles of Luke Skywalker, Han Solo and Princess 
Leia are taken forward, the opportunities for other actors to screw them up – 
or rather "put their own stamp on them" – are endless.
 Illustration: David Foldvari 
Will they have to cope with a moody Russell Crowe interpretation of Han in 
middle age, complete with inexplicable and shaky geordie accent? Will Maggie 
Smith turn an aged Queen Leia of the Universe into a wise-cracking old gossip? 
Will Mark Hamill be allowed to reprise the role he created or will he have to 
stand in line to audition with the likes of Bill Nighy, Steve Martin and that 
bloke fromBreaking Bad? Or are Disney's real intentions hiding in plain sight 
in that photo? Are they going to give the galaxy to the Great Mouse?

The prospect of a Disneyfied Star Wars would have appalled me 15 years ago. 
The thought of that corporate giant getting its weird three-fingered hands on 
the beloved space stories of my childhood would have seemed like sacrilege. 
Since then, of course, Jesus has desecrated his own altar and then set up as a 
money-changer in his own temple. And if you think that's a hyperbolic way of 
describing the fact that George Lucas made three disappointing sci-fi films, 
you need to get online more.

As a feckless writer and comedian, I spend a lot of pub time railing against 
all the occasions when creative control is wrested from the people who have the 
ideas by the people who keep the accounts. So I find the story of theStar Wars 
franchise unsettling. Lucas had the successful idea and maintained rigid 
creative control over it, doubtless fending off the advances of avaricious 
predators who wanted to exploit or develop it differently. And yet that idea 
was more comprehensively ruined than if it had been left exposed to the worst 
and most idiotic corporate abuse imaginable.

So what's to fear from Disney? They might make an entertaining film about a 
duck in space. It would be a lot edgier than Jar Jar Binks.

David Mitchell's autobiography, Back Story 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/tvandradio/9780007351725/david-mitchell-back-story>
, is out now.
 