
Letter from America No 2571, May 22 1998 

It's not hard to imagine as the theme of a James Bond movie that a man 
acquires the power to control the internet worldwide. He could, before long, 
control the world's economies, knowledge, food, transport, all the services 
that more and more will be done over the internet.

Well, such a monster is inconceivable in life, but the United States 
government is acting as if the lives of nations, as well as you and me, would 
be disturbingly affected if one man controlled everybody's access to the 
internet.

This week the government - the cavalry division, namely the department of 
justice - came down like a wolf on the fold of one famous young man way off 
there in Seattle, on the Pacific coast, in the far west. The name of the case 
on the docket is USA v Microsoft Corp. Riding alongside were the supporting 
troops of 20 states, each bringing its own charge, against Mr Bill Gates's 
corporation, of monopoly.

Mr Gates is 42 years old, has a baby face and large wire-framed glasses (don't 
let them fool you), and, it is generally admitted, is a genius of an innovator 
with computers to whom millions owe their livelihood. He is the king of 
software manufacturers; some say the dictator. One of his struggling 
competitors said he is "the most dangerous and powerful industrialist of our 
age".

At Mr Gates's Senate hearing, there were several heads of rival computer 
companies present, very angry men I can tell you. When Mr Gates was disputing 
the use of the word "monopoly", one of them swivelled round and put a question 
to the astonished audience at the hearing, "How many people own personal 
computers?" About three-quarters of those present. "How many have a computer 
that's not fitted with Microsoft's Explorer?" Not a hand raised. "That," 
shouted the rival, "is a monopoly."

... The last big business monopoly case that the government brought spent 17 
years in the courts before an outside settlement was reached. So, don't expect 
this mighty case to be done with tomorrow, next week, or even perhaps by 2100. 
If you're around then, please tell me the result in an email, sent to Cooke. 
Dot com. Valhalla.
 