
On the sixth floor of DKV insurance in Barcelona, I watch Carlos Martínez 
shuffle through his schedule. An appointment is hard to get with the Director 
of the Department of General Services at one of the largest and most profitable 
health insurance companies in Europe.

Approximately 6,000 miles away in Quito, Vinicio Villalba, Director of the 
Intermón Oxfam mission in Ecuador is no easier to pin down for an interview. 
Working in the non-profit sector of one of the poorest countries in South 
America, his hands are full.

So what links these two very different figures and their seemingly unrelated 
roles and sectors? Well, an interesting project that illustrates how and why 
multinational private enterprises can and should deploy their expertise and 
knowledge in the world of development.

The story starts with an Italian priest and activist based in South Quito 
named Padre José Carollo. His dream of giving universal medical care to a 
community with scarce economic resources was realised in the form of Un Canto 
de Vida, a Hospital constructed two years after his death in 2007. Through 
Carollo's Funcadión Tierra Nueva (FTN), the hospital was able to offer health 
care services for the local community with the help of microinsurance.

Like the under-fire microcredit industry, microinsurance aims to offer a 
financial product - taken for granted in the developed world - to the poor of 
underdeveloped countries. In the case of FTN, members are covered by a medical 
insurance policy linked with the hospital protecting them for $2 a month. It is 
all made possible as the foundation acts as a non-profit cooperative which 
pools members' payments, ensuring there is enough to cover the predicted costs.

The only thing missing is the technical expertise to ensure fully 
comprehensive and legal insurance coverage. This is where the corporate social 
responsibility arm of DKV insurance in Spain was called upon by a Spanish 
collaborator at FTN. Carlos Martínez from DKV explains, "Our role was to design 
a health insurance product [for the FTN cooperative] attentive to all the needs 
of this population." In the case of FTN and the hospital it was, "A product 
specifically adapted to the most frequent illnesses and diseases in the area."

The project was a success and thanks to a team of three insurance experts sent 
regularly from Spain to Quito, a suitable model was developed and monitored 
voluntarily by DKV to, according to Martinez, "periodically ensure, its 
economic sufficiency and guarantee its sustainability."

Those covered by the scheme now receive medical attention for anything from 
vaccinations to childbirth, both of which require special attention in a 
country which suffers from some alarming health statistics. WHO publications 
show the level of maternal mortality at more than double the regional average 
while the prevalence of Tuberculosis, for example, is almost triple that of 
neighbouring countries.

The microinsurance scheme successfully offered protection from these ills to 
around 3,000 members, alerting the attention of Vinicio Villalba of Intermón 
Oxfam, the Spanish speaking arm of Oxfam International.

Villalba and Oxfam had been engaged in various projects in the region of 
Tungurahua, also in poverty stricken South Quito, with another local healthcare 
foundation, Fundacion Alli Causai (FAC); Kichwa for "good life." Focused on 
rural health issues in one of the poorest regions in Ecuador, they planned to 
construct a hospital in the year 2000. The project was never completed due to 
spiraling costs which were exacerbated by 94% inflation during the worst 
economic crisis in the history of Ecuador.

"This is how the necessity to seek alternative financial resources to complete 
the hospital was born," explains Villalba. He adds that the state's failure 
during this period "marked the start of the relationship between Intermón Oxfam 
and DKV," the latter of which were already engaged in the country.

Villalba called upon Martínez and DKV and funds were soon provided to aid the 
completion of the hospital. Later, after the working relationship had been 
established, came "the idea of putting DKV's expertise in health insurance at 
the disposal of FAC in order to design a system of microinsurance for 
indigenous families and rural communities in the province of Tungurahua."

A similar system as before was replicated and by 2009 previously vulnerable 
people were being protected through the affordable, community-based, non-profit 
microinsurance scheme that FAC offered. Oxfam, DKV and FAC managed to fill a 
vacuum left by the broken public institutions of a struggling state. Where 
public institutions had failed to offer sufficient protection in a developing 
country, private but cooperative enterprise succeeded.

Since then Ecuador has recovered somewhat from its crisis and has maintained a 
level of stability in recent years. Improved institutions have returned and 
found a strong legacy left behind by the community hospital and its 
microinsurance access scheme.

The project, which Villalba admits would not have been possible without the 
help of DKV, has not just protected members of the scheme but has altered the 
perceptions about health entirely. "It has succeeded in changing practices of 
hygiene among children, families, schools and other public sectors which has 
been a fundamental element in the prevention of diseases." Furthermore, 
"Emphasis has not just been on the prevention of diseases and illnesses but 
also on innovating the methods and quality of curing as much in primary health 
as in secondary health care in the hospital, providing a quality service at 
accessible prices."

It seems that DKV's corporate social responsibility program has made real and 
lasting change in South Quito. It has successfully transferred existing 
knowledge and expertise, encouraging the development of healthcare where it is 
needed most.

However, Villalba thanks the company's attitude more than their "know how". 
"DKV has understood the focus on rights that Intermón Oxfam works with. It has 
demonstrated commitment to a 'Southern' country, helping poor people fight for 
their rights and achieve a quality of life and level of dignity that 
strengthens their roles as citizens."

On a final return to DKV I wonder if I can detect a sense of duty being 
fulfilled. "It's not a duty, but an opportunity," their expert in corporate 
social responsibility, Daniela Toro, tells me. "Health is our business but it 
is also where we can make a difference." She draws on DKV's "competence, 
expertise and knowledge," in its field, highlighting that these put them in 
good stead to contribute through "social investment". She adds that when a 
company chooses to take advantage of its position in this way, "participation 
in a joint enterprise can be magnificent."

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 