
After a stellar school career, and with an offer to study law at the London 
School of Economics, Chrisann Jarrett was confident of her future. Educated in 
England for 10 years, having arrived in the UK from Jamaica when she was eight, 
and head girl of her school in Hackney, London, she expected to be treated no 
differently from her classmates when it came to paying for her higher education.

Only as she was filling in her student finance form did she realise that 
because her immigration status had still not been settled she would have to pay 
fees of nearly £16,000 and would have no access to loans, which made taking up 
the place impossible.

“I saw my whole world crumbling around me,” she says. “I watched as all my 
friends were having an exciting week as freshers. I was looking at the internet 
for scholarships, and there were none. It was crushing.”

Tough government immigration policies have come under fire from universities 
concerned about losing lucrative international students. But these policies 
have also affected a group of students much closer to home.

Changes to immigration rules, introduced in 2012, mean that young people who 
have discretionary leave to remain in this country but are waiting to be 
granted indefinite leave are no longer treated as home students with access to 
loans and are forced to pay higher international fees. Unlike Chrisann, many of 
these are asylum seekers or children of asylum seekers.

A further change, brought in earlier this year, means they have to wait at 
least 10 years before applying for the more settled status that would give them 
access to lower fees. And, since last year’s cuts to legal aid, no help is 
available for this.

Now, other students and universities are stepping in to offer support to these 
students.

After deferring for a year, and with help from the charity Just for Kids Law 
<http://www.justforkidslaw.org/>, which offers advocacy and support for young 
people in difficulty, Jarrett eventually secured financial help from the LSE, 
and started her course this term.

And she has now launched a campaign to help others in her position. Called Let 
Us Learn, it aims to raise awareness in schools so pupils from similar 
backgrounds to her own, who want to go on to higher education, realise that it 
could be an issue for them.

Many of the children affected have been living in the UK for most of their 
lives and have thought little about their immigration status, says Fiona 
Bawdon, a development manager at Just for Kids Law. “Often these are kids who 
have come from difficult situations but have managed to get the grades to go to 
university and discover at the last moment that they cannot go because they 
won’t get a loan. It’s really devastating.”

She says the next stage of the Let Us Learn campaign will be to persuade 
universities to establish a specific fund to support these students. An 
increasing number already do. From next year the LSE will offer two awards 
worth up to £20,000 per year for asylum seekers and those granted limited leave 
as a result of an asylum application.

Sue Plater, financial support manager at the LSE, says: “Potentially, there 
are going to be more asylum seekers on the move so we thought we would 
establish these awards and see what happens.” She says it is also a way to 
demonstrate the LSE’s commitment to supporting students who perform well enough 
to get a place there, whatever their immigration status.

Queen Mary University of London is also offering a fee waiver for two students 
in this category, plus a grant of nearly £10,000. And 17 universities have 
joined the Article 26 campaign, which aims to remove barriers to higher 
education for students from an asylum-seeking backgrounds. Sixteen students 
supported by this programme have now graduated and 56 more are at university.

Melissa Page, HE guidance officer at De Montfort University, which is offering 
four places with fee waivers this year under the Article 26 scheme, and 
maintenance scholarships for two of these, says the university decided to join 
after realising that many students in this category were no longer applying.

Emma Williams, director of Student Action for Refugees, a network of student 
groups, says increasing numbers of universities have agreed to class these 
students as home students. But, she adds, this is easier for better-off 
universities with lower numbers of potential applicants from this group. She 
suggests that some universities are wary about appearing to encourage students 
from asylum-seeker backgrounds in the current political climate.

The National Union of Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students>
 wants to go further. It has made the issue a key part of its pre-general 
election campaign, galvanising support from student unions to lobby for a 
change in the law.

Shreya Paudel, NUS international students officer, says Scotland has already 
implemented a scheme whereby if a student is an asylum seeker or a child of an 
asylum seeker and meets certain residence conditions, they are eligible for a 
student loan for tuition fees. “We know it can be done,” he says

In the past year, two students have challenged rules regarding access to loans 
for students with discretionary leave to remain.

One was Beaurish Tigere, a Zambian national and high-achieving pupil, who came 
to the UK when she was six. The case was overturned at the court of appeal in 
August and is now headed for the supreme court. Making his judgment, the lead 
judge said: “Anyone acquainted with the facts of the case would wish to pay 
tribute to the claimant’s single-minded ambition to gather the benefits of 
higher education.”

It is a sentiment Jarrett echoes. She says her experience and her work setting 
up the Let Us Learn campaign has not diverted her from her studies. “I have 
always wanted to do law,” she says. “It has just added to what I want to 
achieve.”
 