 Al-Muhajiroun 
 Leader: Self-styled Sheikh Omar Bakri Mohammed 
Membership: Refused to reveal numbers 

One of the largest Islamist parties in Britain. The organisation is banned 
from campuses of many British universities which it uses as a fertile 
recruiting ground.

Formed after a breakaway from Hizb ut-Tahrir, Al-Muhajiroun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> ("The Emigrants") has one 
purpose, establishing the Islamic state. Its members are regularly seen with 
loudhailers exhorting mainstream Muslims and non-believers to embrace their 
particular brand of fundamentalism, which calls for those practising 
homosexuality, adultery, fornication and bestiality to be stoned to death.

It now denies that it recruits for jihad but it boasted of this before 
September 11. Bakri Mohammed said of the al-Qaida attacks on the US embassies 
in Dar-as-Salaam and Nairobi: "We would not carry out terrorist activity 
ourselves, but we endorse the use of violence. Bin Laden is a hero to all 
Muslims." He adds: "I want Britain to become an Islamic state. I want to see 
the flag ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> raised in 10 Downing 
Street."



 Hizbut-Tahrir
 Leader: Jalal Uddin Patel, little known 
Membership: Refused to reveal numbers 


Another hardline organisation, though with worldwide tentacles, this group is 
opposed to cooperation with any existing governments. Like other hardline 
groups, its main purpose is to re-establish the Caliphate, the period of 
unification following the death of Mohammed in 632. Most radical Islamist 
movements believe that this was the one true Muslim society. The organisation 
which once said "the only place to meet Jews is on the battlefield" recently 
issued a statement saying it is far less militant than it once was: "We wish to 
point out once again that Hizb ut-Tahrir has no relationship whatsoever with 
any violent, terrorist or sectarian organisation and nor does the party engage 
in violent or sectarian actions."



Supporters of Sharia
Leader: Self-styled Sheikh Abu Hamza
Membership: Thought to be 200 at most 


 Associated closely with Finsbury Park mosque in north London, the Supporters 
of Sharia also wish to re-establish the Caliphate. Abu Hamza was named in a 
Yemeni court as the man who sent eight Britons there to carry out terrorist 
bombings on western targets. Egyptian-born Hamza lost both hands and an eye 
fighting in Afghanistan.

The SOS website says that "Muslims and non-Muslims are being oppressed 
throughout the world. SOS is one of the organisations struggling to remove this 
oppression created by man-made laws."

Abu Hamza and two other men were arrested in March 1999, held under the 
Prevention of Terrorism Act, but released without charge. Last October he was 
forced to relinquish control of the Finsbury Park mosque after a legal fight 
and recently he was banned by the charities commission from speaking at the 
mosque.



 Other key figures: 


· Abu Qatada 

Abu Qatada, a Muslim cleric, was sentenced to death in absentia in Jordan and 
is accused by the US, Spain, France and Algeria of being a key influence in the 
September 11 attacks. Videos of his speeches were found in the Hamburg flat of 
Mohamed Atta, the hijackers' ringleader. He is now in hiding following the 
introduction of the government's anti-terrorism laws.



· Abdullah al-Faisal 

Awaiting trial after allegations that he urged followers to kill Jews and 
non-believers. A preacher at two north-west London mosques, if convicted he 
faces a sentence of up to life imprisonment.

· Abu Doha 

An Algerian described by intelligence sources as Osama bin Laden's main man in 
Britain, he is fighting extradition to the US to face charges that he plotted 
to bomb Los Angeles airport. A judge said Doha, who has lived in London since 
1999, had been at the al-Qaida training camp in Afghanistan and was trained in 
the use of explosives and assassination. He is also linked to bomb plots in 
Strasbourg and Paris.
 