
Miners were among the main casualties on a day when leading shares on both 
sides of the Atlantic fell back on renewed concerns that talk of an economic 
recovery could be premature.

A series of disappointing US figures did much of the damage, with more than 
half a million private sector jobs lost in May, a fall in mortgage applications 
last week and a sharper than expected contraction in the US service sector. All 
eyes will now be on the key US non-farm payroll figures due on Friday. Rob 
Carnell at ING Bank said:

"The [service sector] index for May might be giving some of the first clues 
that the V-shaped recovery hypothesis is flawed. Expectations for a rise in the 
index to 45.0 were optimistic, and the survey registered a mere 0.3 point 
increase to 44.0. This is still consistent with economic stagnation."

A better than expected UK service sector survey had little chance of 
withstanding this wave of negative news from across the Atlantic, while fairly 
positive comments from Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke at a budget 
committee hearing also failed to make much of an impact. So with Wall Street 
nearly 80 points lower by the time London closed, theFTSE 100 finished down 
93.60 points at 4383.42, not helped by the growing political crisis engulfing 
the Labour government.

Among the miners, Vedanta Resources lost 137p to £15.82, Xstrata fell 50p to 
728p andAnglo American fell 113p to £17.85. The sector had already been weak 
ahead of the US data following downbeat comments from China about the pace of 
recovery in the country.

Rio Tinto lost 141p to £29.12 as rights issue rumours resurfaced. Merrill 
Lynch, in a positve note on the miner, said:

"We see the potential for material changes to the proposed Chinalco deal 
and/or a small rights issue as an alternative, both of which we believe would 
be received positively by the market."

Bank shares were under pressure on concerns that UK institutions might need to 
follow their US counterparts and raise yet more funds, and on fears of further 
stake sales.HSBC fell 5.5p to 529.5p despite the troubled Saudi group Saad 
seemingly denying earlier speculation it was selling its near 3% stake.Barclays 
dropped 13.75p to 259.75p on talk that Singapore's Temasek had followed the Abu 
Dhabi example and disposed of its shareholding - with a loss of £800m. But 
another Barclays' investor, Qatar Holding, said it remained a supportive 
shareholder in the bank.

The leading index was also weakened by a number of major companies going 
ex-dividend. These includedVodafone, which fell 5.8p to 113p and alone 
accounted for 12 points of the FTSE's fall. Others where the shares lost the 
right to a payout includedInternational Power, 18.75p lower at 255.5p, and 
National Grid, off 39p to 561p.

But elsewhere in the power sector Drax added 5.25p to 485.25p as Morgan 
Stanley upgraded the coal fired power station owner from underweight to 
equal-weight and raised its price target from 475p to 545p. The bank said:

"The risk-reward profile for the stock has improved, in our view, but is not 
yet compelling in a sector context –our preferred name for a play on UK power is
International Power <https://www.theguardian.com/business/internationalpower>. 
Biomass investment could be a positive, but it is too early to be sure. In our 
bull case (805p) three dedicated biomass plants could be worth up to 100p of 
value. However, the valuation spread is wide, and uncertainties remain. S&P 
recently downgraded Drax's corporate credit rating to BBB- and has the rating 
on negative outlook. But given our earnings forecast increases, we see risk to 
a further downgrade as low."

Several other businesses benefited from positive analyst coverage. Medical 
devices groupSmith and Nephew rose 9.75p to 475p as Goldman Sachs issued a buy 
note and raised its target price from 590p to 610p.

A positive note on the food retail sector from Cazenove lifted Morrisons 3.5p 
to 247.5p ahead of a trading update tomorrow, whileTesco added 0.9p to 353.3p 
andJ Sainsbury 2.25p to 316.5p. Tobacco companies benefited from Citigroup 
comments on the sector, withBritish American Tobacco up 1p to £16.87 and 
Imperial Tobacco 15p better at £16.

BAE Systems climbed 5.5p to 338p after Cazenove repeated its outperform rating 
on the company. The broker said it was surprised BAE had missed out on the 
recent market rally, and believed the shares were materially undervalued.

Housebuilder Taylor Wimpey was boosted by 2.25p to 36p after Collins Stewart 
upgraded from hold to buy, but the same broker advised taking profits inTullow 
Oil, down 31.5p to 990.5p.

Tullow's partner in Uganda, Heritage Oil, was suspended at 585p, up 55p, after 
it revealed it was in talks about a possible merger, which would effectively be 
a reverse takeover of the business. Traders have previously pointed to the 
Chinese state oil companies as possible bidders.

Meanwhile Lloyds of London insurer Amlin added 2.5p to 341.5p as it placed 
23.5m shares at 325p each to help fund the £300m purchase of Fortis Corporate 
Insurance from the Dutch government. In a hold note analyst Tom Dorner at Oriel 
Securities commented:

"The acquisition is expected to be earnings and return on equity enhancing in 
2009. FCI was loss making in 2008 so a key question will be whetherAmlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amlin> are able to turn around FCI's 
operations."

But JP Morgan was less positive, saying the deal looked expensive and adding:

"Amlin say that sharing Amlin's underwriting skills and risk management will 
improve FCI's ability, however this could also prove to be a management 
distraction and could reduce the quality of existing business which attracts a 
premium rating to the sector."

Holiday group Thomas Cook reversed earlier gains to close 4.25p lower at 
225.75p on continuing concerns about the financial state of its 52% shareholder 
Arcandor, which is seeking state aid to keep it going. The European Commission 
seemed to pour cold water on this idea by saying Arcandor would be unlikely to 
qualify. At the same time refinancing talks among Arcandor's banks were said to 
have stalled after disagreements over extending a credit line due to run out in 
a matter of days. Investors are concerned about the fate of Arcandor's stake in 
Thomas Cook, which overshadowed positive notes from Panmure Gordon and Credit 
Suisse following a meeting with theThomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> management last night.

Finally Debenhams dipped 1.25p to 92.25p on talk of an imminent cash call to 
raise perhaps £300m.
 