
A review commissioned by the government from its health advisers has concluded 
that ministers should introduce minimum unit pricing of alcohol to tackle the 
grim medical, economic and social toll of drink-related harm.

The in-depth study 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/574055/alcohol_public_health_burden_evidence_review.pdf>
(pdf) has found that drink is now the biggest killer of people aged between 15 
and 49 in England. It accounts for 167,000 years of lost productivity each year 
and is a factor in more than 200 different illnesses.

Alcohol-related cancer to kill 135,000 in England by 2035 – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/135000-will-die-from-alcohol-related-cancer-next-20-years-says-study>
It leads to such huge harm that the lost economic activity it produces, 
through early death and disability among workers, is more than that for the 10 
most common cancers combined, the review found.

The study’s publication by Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England (PHE) is an embarrassment 
for ministers because it says they should embrace a policy that they have 
rejected due to an alleged lack of evidence.

The report says: “Policies that reduce the affordability of alcohol are the 
most effective, and cost-effective, approaches to prevention and health 
improvement … Implementing an MUP [minimum unit price] is a highly targeted 
measure which ensures any resulting price increases are passed on to the 
consumer, improving the health of the heaviest drinkers who experience the 
greatest amount of harm. MUP would have a negligible impact on moderate 
drinkers and the price of alcohol sold in pubs, bars and restaurants.”

The coalition government pledged in March 2012 to bring in the policy, but it 
made aU-turn in July 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/17/minimum-unit-price-alcohol-shelved>
, earning condemnation from medical organisations and arousing strong 
suspicions that it had caved in to intense lobbying by the alcohol industry.


PHE, the government’s advisory agency on public health issues including 
obesity and smoking, published its “comprehensive review of the evidence on 
alcohol harm and its impact in England” in the Lancet medical journal on Friday.

 Sources say senior PHE officials feel its remit prevents it from explicitly 
backing minimum pricing, though ministerial opposition may also be a factor. 
Nevertheless, the report leaves little doubt regarding its support for the 
policy, observing that “the financial burden which alcohol-related harm places 
on society is not reflected in its market price, with taxpayers picking up a 
larger amount of the overall cost compared to the individual drinkers”.

It says pricing policies should be updated in line with changes in income and 
inflation, “in order to retain their relative affordability and therefore be 
able to impact upon alcohol-related harm”.

The new analysis has examined all the available evidence globally on alcohol 
harm and the steps effective in reducing it.

PHE makes clear that the pricing of drink and the way it is marketed – issues 
of concern to medical groups – need to be urgently re-examined. It says 
policies can “address market failures by protecting people from the harm caused 
by other people’s drinking, deterring children from drinking, and improving 
consumer awareness of the risks of alcohol consumption.”

The review, undertaken by PHE and researchers from Sheffield University, found 
that the economic burden of health, social and economic alcohol-related harm 
was substantial, with estimates placing the annual cost at between 1.3% and 
2.7% of annual GDP.

“In 2015 there were an estimated 167,000 working years lost due to alcohol, 
16% of all working years lost in England,” it says. “More working years are 
lost to alcohol than the 10 most frequent cancer types combined.”

The authors’ conclusions will pose difficulties for the Department of Health, 
which asked PHE to undertake the assessment of the latest research. It will now 
face questions about why the government is not pushing ahead with introducing 
the policy, given that the evidence suggests it would be effective.

In 2013 the government justified abandoning its plans by saying public 
consultation had “not provided evidence that conclusively demonstrates that 
minimum unit pricing will actually do what it is meant to: reduce problem 
drinking without penalising all those who drink responsibly.”

It is unclear how Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, will respond to the 
results of a review that his own department asked PHE to instigate.

Medical groups want ministers to take tougher action on alcohol. Although 
total alcohol consumption has fallen since 2008, that has not been accompanied 
by a drop in alcohol-related harm.

Scotch whisky body accused of arrogance over minimum pricing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/scotch-whisky-body-accused-of-arrogance-over-minimum-alcohol-pricing>
 Nicola Sturgeon’s Scottish National party government in Edinburgh plans to 
introduce minimum unit pricing in Scotland if it successfully sees off alegal 
challenge against the policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/scotch-whisky-body-accused-of-arrogance-over-minimum-alcohol-pricing>
 brought by the Scotch Whisky Association (SWA).

The Holyrood administration won the last round of the battle in the courts in 
Edinburgh in October, but the SWA is appealing against that decision at the UK 
supreme court in London. The Scottish government hopes to set a minimum price 
of 50p a unit, the level backed by many doctors. The scrapped Westminster plan 
was to have set the level at 45p a unit.

Medical and public health groups are likely to welcome the new findings but 
alcohol firms are expected to dismiss them. Manufacturers often argue that a 
minimum unit price would penalise responsible drinkers who stick to the amounts 
of alcohol recommended by the chief medical officers of the four home nations. 
That guidance was revised in January to set a weekly consumption limit of 14 
units for men as well as women, down from the 21 units previously advised for 
males.

However, previous evidence has concluded that the move would save thousands of 
lives because the heaviest drinkers are most likely to consume less as a result 
of the hike in price.

• This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to add a mention of the Scotch 
Whisky Association’s legal challenge to plans for minimum unit pricing of 
alcohol in Scotland. An earlier version said the SNP government was “pressing 
ahead” with the introduction of the policy.
 