
Look at all that is good about Zambian football and you will see the hand of 
Kalusha Bwalya. He scored a hat-trick when Zambia beat Italy at the 1988 
Olympics. After the air-crash of 1993 had wiped out almost the entire team, he 
was the rallying point the new side was built around. And, asZambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zambia> look to reach their first Cup of 
Nations final since that remarkable renaissance side of 1994 in Wednesday's 
semi-final against Ghana, it is Kalusha, now president of the football 
federation, who drew the blueprint.

This Zambia has been almost six years in the planning, resulting from the 
failure to qualify for the 2006 World Cup, when they finished behind Togo and 
Senegal. "The long plan began with the president Kalusha Bwalya when he was 
vice-president," the captain Christopher Katongo explained. "He made a plan for 
four years. He kept the players we had to keep 70-80% of the players to see 
what we could do.

"That began in 2006 and this is payback. In 2006 when he was the coach, we 
were eliminated in the first round. In 2008, the same thing, but he was the 
president and he insisted that we keep this team. Then in 2010, you saw what we 
did: we went to the next round and we lost to Nigeria."

The group was primarily drawn from the Under-23 and Under-20 sides, and what's 
telling about Zambia's success is how few of them have gone on to great things 
individually. Only the centre-forward Emmanuel Mayuka plays for a top-flight 
European club, and then only for the Swiss side Young Boys. This is absolutely 
not a golden generation, but rather a squad drawn predominantly from Africa: 
five of the squad are based at home in Zambia, eight in South Africa and five 
with the DR Congo giants TP Mazembe while the midfielder Jonas Sakuwaha is with 
Al-Merreikh in Sudan. Katomgo and James Chamanga play in China and the young 
midfielder Chisamba Lungu is in the Russian second flight with Ural Sverdlovsk.

This Zambia are a notably tight-knit squad who clearly enjoy each other's 
company, which is what made it such a shock when the midfield Clifford Mulenga 
was sent home last week after refusing to apologise for breaking a curfew with 
two other players (who did apologise and were thus spared). Hervé Renard is 
clearly popular with his players, but he is a father-figure who is not afraid 
to impose discipline — a point he emphasised at a press conference on Tuesday, 
when he reacted to the chaos that marked the end of the English section and the 
beginning of the French by beating his hand on the table and hissing 
"DI-SCI-PLINE" while gesturing in mock despair at the scrum by the door.

In that regard, although after his first two years in the job he had a year 
away with Angola before returning to replace Ivano Bonetti after the qualifiers 
for this tournament, Renard is reminiscent of Oscar Washington Tabárez who, as 
Uruguay coach, also forged a squad in 2006, taking them to success at last 
year's Copa América. For the Uruguayans, team spirit mean not merely that the 
players liked each other, but that they respected their coach enough 
immediately to subjugate themselves to his tactical demands. Renard has had a 
similar impact.

"[The togetherness] helps from a tactical point of view," Katongo said. "For 
instance with [the rapid left-sided forward Rainford] Kalaba, I know where he's 
going to run. I know his weaknesses; he knows my weaknesses. I know his strong 
points. I think it's a good thing that we know each other. We've stayed 
together for four or five years.

"We have a team unit. We may not have big names but we have a team unit. You 
just have to look at the way the Senegalese play. Nigeria is not here – why? 
Cameroon is not here – why? The teamwork is the important thing. You can have 
200 million professional players at Chelsea, Barcelona, Inter … but if they 
can't play together as a team, they can't do anything, they can't win anything. 
And this is our key point: if we can just play as a team thenGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> are beatable."

It was Senegal, much fancied with their mass of attacking strength, who first 
discovered just how dangerous Zambia's teamwork can be.

Sitting back and picking Senegal off on the break, Zambia were 2-0 up within 
25 minutes of that first game and went on to win comfortably, silencing 
pre-tournament criticism. "We'd been working on how we would play tactically 
against Senegal," Katongo explained. "We tried to do this against Namibia, but 
we drew, and people were saying: 'Oh, you can't score ...' but we were trying 
tactically how we were going to approach these games. We played against South 
Africa and drew 1-1, and they said: 'Oh, it's not working,' and stuff like 
that. But we were planning, we were in a process. And then D-Day came, and we 
did."

Ghana, meanwhile, have a number of injury concerns. Asamoah Gyan admits he is 
still "not tip-top", having come into the tournament with a calf problem. 
Although he maintains he is improving, he needed a break in training to have 
his ankle strapped. The midfielder Emmanuel Agyemang-Badu did not train at all 
having suffered a knock against Tunisia in the quarter-final and makes way for 
Derek Boateng. Also absent is the left-back Al-Hassane who is replaced by Lee 
Addy, and Jordan Ayew comes in for Sulley Muntari.

The Black Stars themselves are the result of consistency of approach, the 
coach Goran Stefanovic continuing the approach implemented by his fellow 
Serbian Milovan Rajevac with almost the same personnel. Long-term planning is 
hardly a revolutionary concept, but it is rare enough in African football that 
those who try it, can enjoy great rewards.
 