
Peter Graves, best known for his role in the 60s TV spy drama Mission: 
Impossible as well as theAirplane! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane> 
films, has died.

Graves passed away on Sunday, just a few days before his 84th birthday, 
outside his home in Los Angeles, his publicist, Sandy Brokaw, said. Graves was 
returning from brunch with his wife of nearly 60 years and his family when he 
had what Graves's doctor believed was a heart attack, Brokaw said.

Graves first gained attention with the 1950s TV series Fury, but remained best 
known for the role of Jim Phelps, leader of a gang of special agents who 
battled evil conspirators in TV's Mission: Impossible.

Graves appeared in dozens of films and a handful of television shows in a 
career of nearly 60 years. Normally cast as a hero, he turned in an 
unforgettable performance early in his career as the treacherous Nazi spy in 
Billy Wilder's 1953 prisoner-of-war drama Stalag 17.

He also masterfully lampooned his straight-arrow image when he portrayed 
bumbling airline pilot Clarence Oveur in the 1980 disaster movie spoof 
Airplane! The authority and trust he projected made him a favourite for adverts 
late in his life, and he was often encouraged to go into politics.

"He had this statesmanlike quality," Brokaw said. "People were always 
encouraging him to run for office."

Graves was preceded in stardom by his older brother James Arness, who played 
Marshal Matt Dillon on TV's Gunsmoke.

Born Peter Aurness, Graves adopted his grandfather's last name to avoid 
confusion with his older brother, who had dropped the "u" from the family name.

Graves's career began with cheaply made exploitation films such as It 
Conquered the World, in which he battled a carrot-shaped monster from Venus, 
and Beginning of the World, in which he fought a giant grasshopper.

He later took on equally formidable human villains each week on Mission: 
Impossible, which began in 1966.

Every show began with Graves, as agent Phelps, listening to a tape of 
instructions outlining his team's latest mission and explaining that if he or 
any of his agents were killed or captured "the secretary will disavow any 
knowledge of your actions".

The tape always self-destructed within five seconds of being played.

The show – which also starred Martin Landau, Greg Morris, Barbara Bain, Lesley 
Ann Warren and Leonard Nimoy – ran on CBS from 1967 to 1973 and was revived on 
ABC from 1988 to 1990 with Graves back as the only original cast member. The 
new series was filmed in Australia.

As well as its stirring theme music, Mission: Impossible was also renowned for 
its complex, twisting plots.

Graves credited clever writing for the show's success. "It made you think a 
little bit and kept you on the edge of your seat because you never knew what 
was going to happen next," he once said.

He also played roles in films such as John Ford's The Long Gray Line and 
Charles Laughton's The Night of the Hunter, as well as The Court-Martial of 
Billy Mitchell, Texas Across the River and The Ballad of Josie.

Graves's first television series was the children's Saturday morning show, 
Fury, about an orphan and his untamed black stallion. Also filmed in Australia, 
it lasted six years on NBC.

In his later years, Graves brought his white-haired eminence to public 
television as host of Discover: The World of Science and A&E's Biography series.

He noted during an interview in 2000 that he made his foray into comedy 
somewhat reluctantly.

The film-makers Jim Abrahams and David and Jerry Zucker had written a satire 
on the airplane-in-trouble movies, and they wanted Graves and fellow actors 
Lloyd Bridges,Leslie Nielsen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leslie-nielsen> 
and Robert Stack to spoof their serious images.

All agreed, but Graves admitted to nervousness. On the one hand, he said, he 
considered the role a challenge, "but it also scared me".

"I thought I could lose a whole long acting career," he recalled.

Airplane! became a box-office smash, and Graves returned for Airplane II: The 
Sequel.

Graves had been a champion hurdler in high school in Minnesota, as well as a 
clarinet player in dance bands and a radio announcer.

After two years in the air force, he enrolled at the University of Minnesota 
as a drama major and worked in summer stock before following his brother west 
to Hollywood.

He found enough success there to send for his college sweetheart, Joan 
Endress. They were married in 1950 and had three daughters – Kelly Jean, 
Claudia King and Amanda Lee – and six grandchildren.
 