
The swirling rumours were finally quashed: British theatre-maker Jonathan 
Church has been announced as the incoming artistic director of SydneyTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company (STC), to take over from 
Andrew Upton in 2016.

Reaction to the news was quick and mixed. While some were thrilled by what the 
current artistic director of Chichester festival theatre could bring to the 
Australian arts community, others questioned the import of a Brit at a time 
when many arts organisations are increasingly led by homegrown talent.

We asked some of the arts community for their thoughts on the appointment. 
Tell us yours in the comments below.

Robyn Nevin, actor and former STC artistic director

I feel very positive about the news of Jonathan Church’s appointment; it’s 
both exciting and sound. He has deep theatre experience, he is obviously a real 
theatre creature, and that’s where his great love lies. His experience is also 
interesting because it combines artistic direction with management of the 
Chichester festival theatre. That’s a very good combination for the artistic 
director, because the STC has many venues and needs to find funding and 
sponsors.

It will be interesting to see how he adjusts to the way things are done in 
Australia, it’s not quite as hierarchical here as it is in Britain. Funding 
will be the biggest challenge, and his particular challenge will be to get to 
know the local community: the actors, the directors and the designers. He will 
be excited to do that. There will be so much of interest to him and he has 
visited and seen a lot of work done here. I have great confidence that he’ll 
overcome both challenges.

Jonathan Church appointed Sydney Theatre Company's artistic director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/jonathan-church-appointed-sydney-theatre-companys-artistic-director>
Brett Sheehy, artistic director, Melbourne Theatre Company

I was very happy to hear of the appointment of Jonathan Church to lead Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Theatre Company into the 
next phase of its life. While not a household name here, Jonathan is an eminent 
figure in theatre internationally and he will make a terrific contribution to 
the theatre landscape in Australia. As recently as 18 months ago, I was in 
discussions to try to bring his wonderful production of ARTURO UI to Melbourne. 
While that didn’t happen, I’m delighted that Jonathan is making the move to 
Australia.

Kate Cherry, artistic director, Black Swan State Theatre company, Perth

Coming from three generations of Australian theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australian-theatre> artisans and directors 
myself, I am intrigued to read of Jonathan Church’s background. I look forward 
to hearing what Church’s plans for STC will be, and how STC plans to 
collaborate with other Australian companies. The international possibilities 
sound very exciting. However, the Australian cultural sector is at a critical 
juncture. We need strong leaders who are committed to Australian artists. I am 
heartened to read Church is committed to engaging with Australian artists, and 
I wish him well in his new role.

Eamon Flack, incoming artistic director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/14/eamon-flack-named-belvoir-artistic-director-from-2016>
, Belvoir, Sydney

Jonathan has a great track record and there’s a wonderful element of surprise 
about his appointment. I’m quite delighted by it.

Ralph Myers: let's keep the dreamers in charge of the arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/01/ralph-myers-lets-keep-the-dreamers-in-charge-of-the-arts>
Jane Howard, arts writer

The most interesting thing about Jonathan Church being imported from Britain 
is how much it feels that is going against the tide of the arts in Australia 
right now. I feel we’re in a time of really valuing and amplifying Australian 
voices on stage, and bringing in an outsider feels odd. You only need to look 
at recent festival appointments to see the shift: in 2014, Melbourne was our 
only major international arts festival with an Australian artistic director; by 
2017 they will all be headed by Australians, except for Melbourne.

Church will be supported in the position by a knowledgable and rigorous team 
who will be able to introduce him to Australian performance, and he will 
undoubtedly lean on the rich ecosystem of artists STC works with. What could be 
lost in the transition, though, is how long it takes him to identify the 
artists who are most exciting who don’t exist in STC’s sphere, and who could 
most use a company like STC for the next steps in their career.

Lieven Bertels, outgoing artistic directory, Sydney festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/02/wesley-enoch-e-sydney-festivals-new-artistic-director>

This is a wonderful appointment. I admire Jonathan’s work both on and off 
stage, and had the great pleasure of seeing the Macbeth he produced for 
Chichester [festival theatre] when it came to BAM [Brooklyn Academy of Music] 
in New York. We share the view that you can take your audiences on a journey 
from the known to the unknown. And he is another performing arts person with a 
practical, production-savvy brain – he started as a backstage tech and stage 
electrician, so he understands theatres inside and out. It’s a pity I won’t get 
to work with him, but I’m confident Wesley Enoch and Jonathan will get on well, 
and who knows, coproduce a major new work together? That would be exciting!

Lee Lewis, artistic director, Griffin Theatre Company, Sydney 

The news is very exciting for Sydney, and I hope he will take us on an 
adventure. It’s been really interesting to contemplate what having a completely 
new voice in the city will do. He has an enormous amount of experience taking 
works from production through to the West End. That’s obviously one thing that 
has been very important to STC over the past few years – and how do you do that 
without Cate [Blanchett]? So it bodes well for STC being an international 
company. I really hope I can make a show at Griffin [Theatre Company] that he 
picks up at STC and we can take to the West End. And the balance of trade will 
be absolutely restored when I take over the National Theatre.

I’m glad that it’s someone with real experience with running a theatre company 
of scale and that they’ve have gone with an artistic director who also makes 
theatre. His biggest challenge will be moving countries. It takes a long time 
to get to know a place, and when you make theatre, you make it for a very 
specific audience. As an artistic director, I spend a lot of time thinking 
about the people in Sydney and what they need and want. But he’s got a well 
established team at STC who have been leading that company really well. The 
best thing we can do is all invite him out to dinner to welcome him. He can sit 
in my backyard, we’ll get seafood and have a BBQ.
 