
A strong performance by A1 Team GBR driver Robbie Kerr saw the team net a 
superb second place in today's Sprint Race followed by frustration in the 
Feature Race when another potential podium was ended by a puncture which led to 
an unscheduled pit stop.

Today's results put A1 Team GBR third in the A1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> World Cup of Motorsport as the teams 
head for round three in Malaysia.

Having qualified third for both races, Kerr's day started well with a strong 
drive in the Sprint Race, fending off a challenge from A1 Team Ireland at the 
opening corner to hold a solid second place to the flag. At the start of the 
Feature Race he held onto third place behind Netherlands and South Africa with 
a fast-starting China behind in fourth.

While the Dutch car moved ahead of the field, A1 Team GBR were trapped behind 
South Africa and became involved in an intense battle after the first round of 
official pit stops on lap nine.

 On lap 11 the A1 Team GBR and South African cars made contact, dropping 
behind France as a result, but six laps later Robbie was forced to make a 
second, unscheduled stop, as a result of a right rear puncture caused by the 
incident.

This dropped Kerr down to 20th position and although he fought to recover he 
had to settle for 17th.

 "The Sprint Race was a fantastic first race back in the car," said Kerr. "It 
was a shame we couldn't make it one place higher but the car wasn't quite under 
us to challenge New Zealand and we had a lot of over-steer.

"It was a great battle during the first lap of the Sprint between us, New 
Zealand, Ireland and South Africa - we all went for it but respected each other 
and tried to make it as clean as possible. Unfortunately Ireland and GBR did 
touch but there was no blame and it was great racing and a good result."

"In the Feature we got a great start battling for the lead going into the 
first corner. Jeroen (A1 Team Netherlands) did exactly as I would and saw us on 
the outside and ran me out which was fair but it allowed Adrian (A1 Team RSA) 
to get back past going into turn two which was disappointing as I knew I was 
much quicker.

"From that point on he held me up. We had a slower first pit stop than normal 
and South Africa came out ahead, but I battled hard and immediately got up 
behind him. We had a good battle but when I eventually overtook him down the 
straight, giving him plenty of room, he unfortunately got it wrong on the 
inside and drove into the back of my car knocking off the valve cap, therefore 
puncturing my tyre with his front wing. We couldn't wait until the next pit 
stop window to change the tyres so had to come in for another stop. It's 
disappointing as we were heading for a possible podium and could have left Brno 
as Championship leaders."
 