
The number of two-year-olds getting the MMR jab, the triple measles, mumps and 
rubella vaccination <http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/mmr/pages/introduction.aspx>, 
is at its highest level since 1998, after years of worrying measles and mumps 
outbreaks among teenagers and young adults.

More than nine in 10 infants under 24 months across the UK have had their 
first jab against the highly infectious viral diseases for the first time since 
the now discredited doctorAndrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/andrew-wakefield-struck-off-gmc>
 suggested a link between the jab and autism.

The controversy so undermined public confidence that vaccination rates fell to 
dangerously low levels – with then prime minister Tony Blair being quizzed 
repeatedly in 2001 as to whether his son Leo had had the jab. TheMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> has never been compulsory in the UK, 
unlike the US where children have to have the jab before they go to school.

Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and six English regions (north-east, 
north-west, Yorkshire and the Humber, east Midlands, West Midlands and south 
central) achieved at least 90% coverage among under-twos between January and 
March this year, according to a report by Justin McCracken, chief executive of 
the government'sHealth Protection Agency (HPA) <http:/www.hpa.org.uk/> that 
will be presented to the board on Wednesday.

Experts recommend the first inoculation when a child is around 13 months old. 
Uptake of the second booster jab between the ages of just under three and five, 
now stands at 85.1%.

Mary Ramsay, head of the agency's immunisation department, told the Guardian a 
mixture of changing attitudes in parents and greater focus by health 
professionals on chasing up those who had not been inoculated had helped 
improve take-up.

"The aim now is getting it as high as possible and keeping it as high as 
possible. If we can get coverage up at two and five years we still need to keep 
up with (unvaccinated) people before they leave school. Once they leave school 
they are quite difficult to get hold of."

There were 654 cases of measles confirmed in England and Wales in the first 
six months of 2011, more than the 374 for the whole of 2010, and coinciding 
with Europe-wide outbreaks which saw 21,000 cases reported in the first six 
months of the year, with France badly hit.

London and southern England, where MMR uptake is lowest, accounted for just 
under two-thirds of cases. There were probably more than reported since about 
80 likely cases among unvaccinated children at unnamed schools in the 
south-east were not tested because of objections from parents.

Most new reported cases were among under 19s, the vast majority unvaccinated.

The MMR was introduced in the UK in 1988 and by 1996 once-feared diseases it 
inoculates against seemed in long-term decline. That year there were 112 
confirmed measles cases in England and Wales, plus 94 of mumps and 3,922 of 
rubella.

Figures have fluctuated since then, although mumps and measles cases are still 
far more numerous than 15 years ago. The worst recent year for measles was 2008 
when there were 1,370 cases, while there was a massive surge in mumps to 43,378 
in 2005.

This led to campaigns by health specialists to get previously unvaccinated 
teenagers inoculated. There have been fewer than 100 rubella cases each year 
for a decade however. The vaccine component against this disease affords most 
protection of the three.

MMR inoculation rates have risen since they reached a low point of around 80% 
of two-year-olds having had the jab in England during 2003-4, when the figure 
for London dipped to just seven in 10. London, where the population is far more 
mobile than most parts of the country, still lags with just 83.3% of 
two-year-olds having had the jab according to figures for the first three 
months of this year.

Wakefield first suggested the MMR and autism link in 1998 but it was about 
three years before his theory received widespread media coverage.

Gradually health departments and public health specialists have managed to 
persuade most parents they should take the MMR and not leave their children 
unvaccinated or rely on single vaccines obtainable only through private clinics.

When Wakefield, who had spent most of his working time in the US, was banned 
by theGeneral Medical Council <http://www.gmc-uk.org/> from practising in the 
UK last year – for offences related to dishonesty and not acting in the best 
interests of children – he portrayed himself as a victim of the medical 
establishment.
 