
Mo Farah has ended weeks of speculation and uncertainty by announcing he will 
stand byAlberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>, 
the American coach who helped turn him into a double Olympic and three-times 
world champion.

Salazar has been dogged by allegations that he violated a series of 
anti-doping rules and is also under investigation by the United States 
Anti-Doping Agency. But Farah said he felt he had “to believe” in his coach’s 
impassioned12,000-word response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/24/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
 to allegations made by the BBC and the US news website ProPublica earlier this 
month and would continue to work with him.

Galen Rupp and Alberto Salazar emerge to applause and scepticism in Eugene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/26/galen-rupp-alberto-salazar-eugene>
In a statement Farah said: “Following all the speculation I want to make it 
clear where I stand. Although it’s been a difficult time, I asked Alberto to 
respond to the allegations made against him and he has now done so in full.

“As someone I’ve worked with for many years, I feel I have to believe in 
Alberto and the evidence he has provided. Based on that evidence, I will 
continue to work with him and hope now that I can focus on what I do best – 
training hard to win medals for my country.”

Salazar, meanwhile, has been in Eugene in Oregon where he watched Farah’s 
training partner Galen Rupp – who the BBC has accused of taking testosterone 
when he was a 16-year-old – win the 10,000m at the US trials for the seventh 
consecutive year.

Speaking in public for the first time since the Panorama documentary, Salazar 
said he was “feeling good” despite the allegations swimming around him and 
confirmed that Barry Fudge, the head of endurance for BritishAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics>, was carrying out his 
instructions while Farah trains in Font–Romeu in France. “I speak to Barry 
every day,” Salazar added.

However he ruled out legal action against the BBC and ProPublica, adding: “I’m 
not a vindictive person.” Instead he insisted he wanted to return his focus to 
his athletes. “It’s good to get back to racing,” he added. “The last couple of 
months have been tough. When you’re accused of horrible stuff, and you know 
you’re innocent, that’s a lot of stress. After getting my statement out, I feel 
much better.”

There is no suggestion that Farah has done anything wrong since joining up 
with Salazar in 2011. But he has inevitably been drawn into the whirlpool of 
allegations surrounding his coach and training partner Rupp.

Last week Farah insisted he had never taken performance-enhancing drugs and 
said his two missed tests before London 2012 were the only ones of his career. 
It is understood by the Guardian that Farah told anti-doping chiefs he was 
asleep when he failed to hear the doorbell during his second missed test in 
2011.

In a careful worded statement, UK Athletics said it “noted and respected” 
Farah’s decision. UK Athletics’ CEO Niels de Vos added: “As is normal at this 
time of the year, Mo is currently training at altitude under the guidance of 
British Athletics as he prepares for the August defence of his world titles in 
Beijing.

“ As has always been the case, we will continue to take responsibility for all 
nutritional, medical and sport science elements of Mo Farah’s training regime.”

Farah will return to the track for the first time since the allegations were 
made when he races over 5,000m in the Diamond League meeting in Lausanne on 9 
July. He will then run the 1500m in Monaco on 17 July as he builds up to 
August’s world championships in Beijing.
 