
UK Athletics has found no evidence of wrongdoing by Mo Farah in the initial 
findings of its investigation into allegations of doping against his coach,
Alberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>.

The governing body also said its investigation had not given it “any reason to 
question the appropriateness of the input” given by the Nike Oregon Project to 
the double Olympic champion’s training regime.

UKA launched a review following allegations in a BBC Panorama programme shown 
in June that Salazar, the head coach at the Nike Oregon Project in Portland, 
where Farah trains, had violated several anti-doping rules. Salazar, who is an 
“unpaid consultant” for UKA, has strenuously denied all the accusations against 
him. Farah, who was not accused of any wrongdoing in the BBC documentary, has 
vowed to stick by his coach unless any allegations are proven.

UKA launched a review into the American’s relationship with the governing body 
and Farah, which was undertaken by its three-person Performance Oversight Group 
(POG) comprising the former athletes Jason Gardener, Dr Sarah Rowell and Anne 
Wafula-Strike.

A statement from UKA said: “With reference to the first and most vital 
objective of the review, the board can confirm that none of the extensive 
information supplied to the POG contained any evidence of impropriety on the 
part of Mo Farah, nor gave UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> any reason to question the 
appropriateness of the input given by the Oregon Project to Mo Farah’s training 
regime.”

Farah was questioned by the United States Anti-Doping Agency in a routine 
meeting at a central London hotel on Saturday, a day after he received a warm 
reception on a winning return to the Olympic Stadium for the Anniversary Games.

UKA said the formal investigations by Usada and UK Anti-Doping into the 
allegations against Salazar meant the findings from its own review “will now 
need to be shared with UKAD, at their request, prior to any wider circulation”.

It said that its board therefore does not expect to make a public announcement 
on its full findings until after the world championships in Beijing, which 
finish on 30 August.

UKA added it “continues to take the issue of doping violations in sport 
extremely seriously and will assist UKAD and other relevant authorities in 
their important work whenever required”.

Farah is currently training at his base in Font Romeu in the Pyrenees as he 
gears up for the defence of the 5,000m and 10,000m titles in Beijing. The 
initial findings will come as a welcome boost for the 32-year-old, whose 
performances on the track, amid a tumultuous summer off it, have been 
impressive.

In Beijing he will be aiming to become the first man to complete the 
long-distance double at two world championships. “I have never taken 
performance-enhancing drugs in my life and I never will,” stated Farah earlier 
this month. “Over the course of my career I have taken hundreds of drugs tests 
and every single one has been negative.

Usada grills Mo Farah on Alberto Salazar with British Athletics next
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/usada-mo-farah-alberto-salazar-british-athletics-black-fudge> 