
Jim White Let’s get some things absolutely clear from the start. Have you ever 
knowingly taken or been recommended to take the banned substance testosterone?

Mo Farah “No.”

JW Have you ever used or been recommended to use EPO or human-growth hormone?

MF “No. Never.”

Mo Farah insists he will split from Alberto Salazar if doping claims proved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/30/mo-farah-alberto-salazar-doping> 
JW Have you ever used or been recommended to take drugs to treat a thyroid 
problem?

MF “No. And I have never been taking anything like that.”

JW Have you ever knowingly taken or been recommended to take any 
performance-enhancing drugs?

MF “No. Never.”

JW It’s been reported that as many as 19 former athletes and former staff of 
the Nike Oregon Project have given evidence of alleged wrongdoing against your 
coachAlberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>. 
Accusations of testosterone use, misuse of thyroid treatments and asthma 
treatments. When you watched those accusations being made, how do you feel?

MF “Yeah. I was shocked. I couldn’t believe what I saw. And for me, when I saw 
it afterwards, I wanted some answers. I spoke to Alberto and he gave me some 
answers.

“You know, I was one of the first people to say, ‘look, what is going on?’

“It was just before Birmingham. I wanted to get the race out of the way. But 
the night before the race, I remember thinking … the people need to know this … 
I remember being on the phone to Alberto: ‘What’s going on?’

“He goes to me: ‘Mo. These are just allegations. I can prove this to you. 
These are just allegations.’

“I was like: ‘OK.’ I tried to race. My head wasn’t there. There was just so 
much. I changed my flight. I went home.

“I went and saw him, to confront him, to say: ‘What is going on Alberto? Look, 
you need to assure me.’

“He said: ‘Mo, I’m working on this, I will come out and prove that these are 
just allegations.’

“I was like: ‘OK.’ That is why it has taken me so long to [respond]. I wanted 
him to come out. These are allegations about him. Not about me. About him. I 
wanted him to come out and prove to this, to come out publicly, tell the 
people.”

Alberto Salazar inquiry: Mo Farah set to be questioned by Usada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/27/alberto-salazar-inquiry-mo-farah-usada>
JW Let’s just stick with this for a moment then. You flew to Oregon. When you 
confronted him how would you have described the mood of that meeting?

MF “It wasn’t good, obviously, the meet. But, at the same time, I wanted 
answers as an athlete. I work so hard for what I do. To achieve what I have has 
taken me half of my life to be able to achieve what I have achieved. And for 
people to think I have taken a short cut, it’s not right and it’s not fair.

“This picture has been painted of me. It’s not right. I am 100% clean. I love 
what I do. I want to continue winning medals. But I want people to know that I 
am 100%, I am not on any drugs, I am not on thyroids, I am not on any other 
medication. The only medication that I am on, I am on asthma and I have had 
that since I was a child. That’s just a normal use. I am on TUE [therapeutic 
use exemption] where you have … it’s just the normal stuff. And that’s it.”

JW I want to get more of this meeting. You withdrew from the Diamond League in 
Birmingham and you flew straight to Oregon. So you are in front of Alberto 
Salazar and he spoke to you. Did he allay your fears there and then?

MF “Yeah. He said to me: ‘Mo, I can assure you this, trust me. These are just 
allegations. I can prove all this. Wait until it comes out. And it will come 
out.”

“I was like: ‘Are you sure?’

“He said: ‘Yes.’ That is when I just left it.

“For me, I wanted to just continue running. I couldn’t be there because, you 
know, I wanted at the time to relax with my family, to enjoy time. But it was 
difficult. Certain newspapers would come to my house, park outside the house, 
bother me with the kids. It was just too much.”

JW Did you believe what he told you that day?

MF “Yes. I believed in him. But, at the same time, there’s no point in me just 
believing in him. He needs to prove it to the public and the people. For all 
the people to come out … I want those people to go to the right authority. Not 
just to the media and everyone else and [their] words get twisted. They need to 
go to the right people. I am glad now that UK Anti-Doping and Usad [the US 
Anti-Doping Agency] are going into these allegations.”

Alberto Salazar denies allegations: ‘I will never permit doping’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
JW How would you describe your relationship with him following this meeting?

MF “Yeah, it was good. Obviously, you know, I wanted to be sure. At the same 
time separate myself. I came out here to France, to get on with training, to do 
what I do. At the same time, it’s like with all this going on … look I don’t 
want to be there. I really don’t want to be there. I want him to answer the 
questions, to answer everything and then later on, ‘OK, let’s sort it out’.”

JW More and more people are alleging that Alberto Salazar has manipulated the 
system. As more and more alleged this, might you consider, the longer than this 
goes on, distancing yourself from him or moving on from altogether?

MF “Yeah, for sure. If more people come out, and it’s proven that he has 
crossed the line, yeah I’m the first person out. I’m out. Trust me on this, 
Jim. Because I work every day hard, I put my body through hell. Let me just 
tell you. Every year, seven months of the year, I’m away from my family. 
Year-in, year-out. I don’t see my family. I miss my kids. I miss my kids’ 
birthdays, our anniversary. Those are times I can never go back and share with 
my kids. And that really kills me. To be labelled something you are not, to 
have people label me as a cheat, it’s not fair and it’s not right. If I am a 
cheat, prove that I am cheat. Or just leave me alone. Let me do what I do best. 
And that’s to run, to represent my country and make my country be proud. At 
least the people and the public … 75,000 people were there in London, cheering 
for me, shouting out my name. I will never let them people down. If people say 
I am a cheat, I am crossing the line, then prove I’m crossing the line.”

JW People allege, though, that he has crossed the line. So, again, I put it to 
you, if not now, you are saying some time maybe in the near future, you would 
distance yourself from Salazar altogether?

MF “For sure, 100%. If he has crossed the line and it is proven he has crossed 
the line, and the more people come, and more people go to the right 
authorities, instead of going to the newspapers, we can deal with this, then 
yes, I’m out. Why would I be there?”

JW How does Salazar’s method provide you with more energy during a race? How 
did he get you quicker?

MF “For me, I have always had the talent. As a youngster, I had the talent. I 
started off when I was young, representing my country and winning medals. I 
never learned to win big races. I was there, thereabouts. In 2007 in the world 
championships I was number six. Then again in 2009 I was number seven. So, I 
was just there or thereabouts. It always came down to the last lap. Now I have 
learned to use more speed. Obviously, I have more speed at the end of races. I 
am more stronger. I have probably taken advantage of the facilities and been a 
lot more stronger as an athlete and used my head.”

JW So he has undoubtedly helped you become the athlete that you are today?

MF “100%. Alberto has coached me and helped me. I have trained with the rest 
of the team. It has helped me. There is no question of a doubt, I have won 
medals by being coached by Alberto.”

JW But, if you had to progress in your career without him, you could?

MF “Well, I have to do it. If these things are [true] and Alberto is proven 
that he’s doing something wrong and it’s not right, and he has crossed the 
line, then, of course, I have to do it.”

JW But look at where we are today. As you said, US Anti-Doping agency, now UK 
Anti-Doping, are investigating this man Salazar. The renowned British athlete 
Jo Pavey has said she would, quote, ‘run a mile if her coach was accused of the 
things that Salazar has been accused of’. The UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> boss Ed Warner, you know him, 
said: ‘Your best friends should be telling you to suspend links with Salazar 
and wait for investigations to conclude.’ And, yet, as you speak to me you are 
still with him?

MF “These things are just allegations, Jim. Let’s put it right. If these 
things are proven and it has worked out, UK Anti-Doping and Usada go into it, 
and there is some wrongdoing, he has crossed the line, yes I’m the first person 
to run. But you have to give people a chance in life. That’s fair. Someone has 
helped in your career, done so much for you, you have to give them the benefit 
of a doubt. These are just allegations and someone has said, she said this, he 
said this; it’s no good to anybody. It’s no good to me. It’s no good to the 
sport. So, there’s no point them falling out, saying this, that or the other.

“They need to go to the right people and the right investigations. UK 
Anti-Doping need to keep on top of this. Usada need to get on top of this. It 
needs to be dealt [with] properly. Because it’s overshadowing athletics. It’s 
not good for athletics. I think the people and the public need to know this. 
There’s no point us talking about it. They need to go to the right people.And I 
encourage anyone, Kara [Goucher] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/28/mo-farah-warned-team-mate-alberto-salazar-revelations>
, the rest of the guys, to go to the right people and let’s get to the bottom 
of this! It’s killing me, it’s killing my family! There are people there who 
are the painting the picture of me: ‘Oh, Mo Farah, he’s on this.’ I am not 
anything. Trust me.”

Mo Farah warned by former team-mate more Alberto Salazar revelations to come
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/28/mo-farah-warned-team-mate-alberto-salazar-revelations>
JW But if those two agencies do prove that he manipulated the system …

MF “Boom! I’m out. Trust me.”

JW How did you feel when you heard the audio of a speech made by Salazar when 
he said – and I quote – ‘I believe it’s currently difficult to be among the top 
five in the world, in any of the distance events, without using EPO’?

MF [pause] “That’s the first time I am hearing this. How is that possible? Are 
you saying that I am on EPO? I’m one of the top athletes in the world. And I 
put my body through hell, week-in, week-out, 120 miles week-in, week-out. I 
have achieved double Olympic champion, double world champion. So what does that 
say? Am I a cheat?”

On Farah’s second missed drug test, White asked “how on earth did he not hear 
the doorbell ring?”

MF “I was in Teddington. I was staying in one of the Kenyan’s house in 
Teddington. I was just racing. I was staying on the top floor. And I didn’t 
hear the buzzer. I was sleeping in my tent. I didn’t hear it. That was the 
genuine thing. I am not going to lie about it. I know I shouldn’t have done it 
[missed test]. But that was it. There is no point people saying: ‘He missed a 
test.’ There are a lot of athletes who have missed tests and they never seem to 
come public. So why me? Let me tell you this: I have taken 148 tests since 
2007, I have taken 103 tests since 2012 Olympics. And every single one of them 
has been negative. So I can’t win. If I had taken that test they say something. 
If I miss a test, they say something. You can’t win.”

JW But you were one strike away from missing your Olympic dream. Another 
missed test and you were out of there.

MF “But I didn’t miss it, Jim. Let’s put it … it’s not like I did it 
deliberately. Things happen, you have to put your hand up. But I have taken all 
those tests, too.”

JW So with regards to two missed tests: you feel you have been made to feel 
something of a scapegoat?

MF “It’s true. The last one I missed was 18 months before the Olympics. So, 
it’s not like I just missed it just before the Olympics. It’s 18 months before. 
And the one other was in February 2010.”

JW So, it’s something you have to live with?

MF “It’s something I have to live with. As an athlete, you have to take 
responsibility. I am training week-in, week-out, every day, doing other stuff, 
and obviously something like that shouldn’t happen, but it does happen. You 
have to put your hands up. There’s no point lying about it. Tell the truth. I 
have come out, told the truth, but why have other athletes’ [missed tests] not 
been made public? Why aren’t they made public? Why are other athletes’ [missed 
tests] not made public? It’s not fair that people have: ‘Mo …’ and: ‘Oh, Mo 
missed this’ – what about the other athletes?”

Mo Farah faces testing period that could snuff out golden glow of 2012
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/mo-farah-testing-period-ricky-simms-alberto-salazar>
JW You are here with me now, what are we, 2,000 metres above sea level, in the 
mountains of France? A million miles, it seems, from you loved ones, your 
daughters, your wife. Do you sometimes question, especially in the light of 
recent events and reporting, is this sacrifice worth it?

MF “Sometimes you have to ask yourself, yeah obviously. I work so hard at 
everything I do. I am away from my family. Seven months of the year. I am away. 
Year-in, year-out. I miss my kids’ birthday, I miss our anniversary. I can 
never go back to those times, to go back to the kids and play with them. Yet 
this picture of me seems to be like: ‘Mo Farah. Cheat. He has missed tests.’ 
It’s not right, it’s not fair. Why me?”
 