
It is nearly a fortnight since Mo Farah smiled nervously into dozens of camera 
lenses and admitted the backdraft from the allegations against his coach,
Alberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>, was 
scalding his good name: “My reputation is getting ruined,” he said, every word 
pained and passionate. “There are questions that need answering … The public 
deserve to know what is going on and I need to know what is going on.”

A few hours later he slipped away from the Crown Plaza hotel in Birmingham to 
catch a 6am flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/12/mo-farah-apologises-withdrawing-birmingham-diamond-league>
 to his home in Portland. Some said he was chasing answers. Others that he was 
running away. Twelve days on we are still no nearer to knowing the truth.

Mo Farah enlists PR experts to tackle missed drug tests controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-fresh-questions-missed-drug-tests>
We can say this, totally and unequivocally: Farah is losing the public 
relations battle. Day after day he is suffering the athletics equivalent of 
being lapped. From the outside it looks like a 101 course in how not to handle 
crisis management. No wonder he is now getting discreet advice from the PR 
agency Freud’s, which calls itself “the world’s leading communications 
consultancy”. It already faces an uphill struggle.

Farah’s problems started shortly after midnight on 6 May, when he and his 
agent, Ricky Simms, received an email from the BBC explaining they were working 
on a 60-minute documentary about drugs in athletics. Two things were 
immediately apparent. First, serious allegations were being made against 
Salazar and Farah’s training partner, Galen Rupp, about “a number of breaches 
of World Anti-Doping Agency rules, including the use of prohibited drugs”. 
Second, the documentary did not intend to make any allegations that Farah had 
violated anti-doping rules.

Yet somehow the line between those two statements has become blurred. There 
was always going to be a seismic jolt of interest in Farah when the Panorama 
programme was broadcast. It is naive to think otherwise. Especially when 
Salazar, one of the world’s leading coaches, was accused of giving Rupp the 
banned steroid testosterone as a 16-year-old and bending or breaking other 
doping rules. Farah, the double Olympic and triple world champion, was his star 
athlete.

There would have been no shame, or disloyalty, for Farah to have announced 
immediately he was putting distance between himself and Salazar while the 
allegations were investigated. That was mistake No1.

A second error came in what was an otherwise polished performance in front of 
the world’s media before the Birmingham Grand Prix. Farah said he found out 
about the BBC’s claims “three or four days” before the programme was broadcast. 
It quickly became apparent he had receivedthe first email four weeks before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/10/mo-farah-alberto-salazar-panorama-bbc>
 the programme aired on 3 June.

A basic rule of journalism is this: if reporters think someone is being 
evasive they will keep digging. Farah had given them fresh ground to get their 
spades into. A few hours later there was another negative story to write. What 
should have been a triumphant victory in the 1500m in Birmingham became a story 
about Farah pulling out of the race because of emotional and physical strain.

The decision not to race upset some who had paid £50 for a grandstand seat but 
there was sympathy too. The smart public relations move would have been to 
stay: to sign every autograph and smile for every selfie. UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> spent hours trying to persuade 
Farah to hang around but no amount of pleading or cajoling could get him to 
change his mind.

A few days later Farah issued an apology for withdrawing from Birmingham on 
Facebook but since then there has been silence. And silence is never a smart 
move when a story is rumbling away because journalists will keep hammering away 
to fill the void.

Which brings us on to the revelations that Farah missed two tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-reportedly-missed-drugs-tests-2012-olympics>
, in 2010 and 2011, and that on the second occasion he didn’t hear the doorbell 
being rung over the course of an hour despite being inside his house. These are 
serious charges, which deserves a full and frank response, yet we are yet to 
hear one.

What would be the smart PR riposte be? Well, if those missed tests were an 
exception – and we have no way of knowing – Farah could have made a virtue of 
that. There is a vast gulf in perception between two missed tests in a year and 
two in an entire career. Better still, he should have admitted his idiocy and 
then pleaded for clemency. It is not as if he is alone in erring. Two British 
800m runners, Lynsey Sharp and Michael Rimmer, pointed out on Thursday that 
they had accidentally missed tests as well.

So what has gone wrong? Some believe Simms, who also represents Rupp, should 
have been a more visible and vocal presence. But his speciality is looking 
after his athletes’ interests, not crisis management. And it is whispered that 
Farah’s wife Tania plays a increasingly dominant role in guiding her husband’s 
career too.

Missed drug tests happen but three strikes and out feels about right | Owen 
Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/18/missed-drug-tests-mo-farah-wada>
Those more sympathetic to Farah say he finds himself in an impossible 
scenario. There are no accusations against him of any wrong-doing, yet he 
remains in limbo while Salazar prepares and tinkers with his long-awaited 
rebuttal. It is two weeks since Farah spoke to him on the phone and he was 
told: “Mo, I can prove to you, these are just allegations and I can show you 
some evidence.” Yet Salazar continues to wait and wait.

It is said Salazar is preparing sworn-statements and eyewitness testimony to 
counter the claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/15/oregon-project-athletes-mo-farah-alberto-salazar>
 made against him by Panorama and the American news website ProPublica. 
Perhaps, because he is in the US where the story has barely made a ripple, he 
does not quite appreciate that with every day’s delay he inadvertently hurts 
Farah.

At least Farah has now put some distance in their relationship by moving to 
Font Romeu, his traditional summer camp in the south of France. The Guardian 
understands that he is unlikely to return to Portland for at least two months. 
Instead he will stay in France until early August and then go to the UK 
Athletics holding camp in Japan in preparation for the world athletics 
championships in Beijing.

It is understood that Farah feels under immense pressure because of the 
intense media scrutiny. That is understandable. Usually he only has to focus on 
three things – training, family, and winning – the latter of which has become a 
habit ever since moving to Portland in early 2011. But, as recent weeks have 
shown, staying ahead in the PR battle requires a vastly different skill set.
 