
Mo Farah has been warned by a tearful former team-mate that more revelations 
aboutAlberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar> are in 
the pipeline and he risks tarnishing his reputation if he stays with the coach. 
On a day when Farah pledged to speak under oath to the United States 
Anti-Doping Agency, Kara Goucher – who trained alongside Farah in 2011 and 2012 
– refused to criticise him directly but urged anyone thinking of training with 
Salazar to “think long and hard because you’re going to be labelled something 
for the rest of your life”.

Goucher, one of the whistleblowers in the BBC Panorama programme, also said 
she was confident Usada would find enough evidence for “the truth to come out” 
but admitted it would probably not happen overnight.

“I know that these things take time,” she added. “I saw Lance Armstrong on 
Oprah, and afterwards [the Usada CEO] Travis Tygart was on. I told my husband 
Adam: ‘You get me that guy and I’ll talk to him.’ Seven days later I was in his 
office. I believe that Usada is doing everything in its power. Think of how 
long it took for Lance. I believe the truth will come out. When? I don’t know.”

Goucher’s claims came a day after it was revealed Usada’s team of detectives, 
who brought down Armstrong in 2012, has put its investigations into Salazar and 
Farah’s training partner Galen Rupp on a more formal footing by interviewing 
the Oregon Project athlete Treniere Moser. On Sunday night Salazar promised to 
co-operate with Usada if it decides to question him, saying: “Absolutely, I’ve 
got nothing to hide.” However, when asked whether he would do so under oath, he 
said: “I don’t understand exactly what that means. I’d need to speak to my 
lawyer.” When told it would mean if he lied then he would be in trouble, 
Salazar repeated: “I would have to speak to my lawyer about that.”

Usada is also expected to speak to other members of the Oregon Project and its 
investigation may even involve senior figures at UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics>, which employs Salazar as a 
consultant. There is no suggestion Farah has committed any wrongdoing and he 
has made it clear to friends he would be happy to speak to any relevant 
authority, at any time, in any circumstances.

Goucher, the 2007 world 10,000m bronze medallist from the US, said “multiple 
sources” had come forward since the Panorama documentary aired at the start of 
June. In the programme Goucher alleged Salazar had coached Rupp to try to get a 
Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) for an intravenous drip before the 2011 world 
championships and had offered her a thyroid drug to get her to lose weight. In 
his 11,750-word response to the BBC’s claims last week Salazar called both 
claims false and published detailed email documentation that appeared to show 
he was happy with Goucher’s weight.

Yet Goucher stands by her story and says there is more to come. “I have, 
constantly, all day long, people passing me information, wanting me to bring it 
forward,” she said.

“I really want to encourage all the people who have reached out to me to reach 
out to Usada. I pass everything along that you give me but the case is much 
stronger if it comes from you.

“I will most definitely give all my evidence in the coming days. They took my 
quotes out of context and when you put partial emails or emails from a 
10-email-long chain and just put one in, you don’t get both sides. I understand 
that, if you read it through, it looks like I’m a liar. I don’t like being 
labelled a liar, just like anybody else.”

Goucher insisted she would continue to fight for a clean sport despite 
Salazar’s ferocious counterattack on her character. “I’m being dragged through 
the mud and it will probably continue but I’m still here, I’m going to keep 
racing and I stand by my statements and I always will. I want my son to be able 
to believe in the sport and the system.” Goucher, who first spoke to Usada in 
February 2013, also confirmed that she would be happy to go under oath. “I 
would welcome that opportunity for myself, for every former Oregon Project 
member, for every doctor that’s been involved,” she said.

Rupp, who finished third in the final of the 5,000m on Sunday, said he had 
sent Usada “tons of documents and had nothing to hide”. He added: “Usada knows 
everything. I’ll do everything I need to do to co-operate with them.”

Rupp’s team-mate Matthew Centrowitz, who won the 1500m at the US trials on 
Saturday, insisted he had never seen any evidence of wrongdoing at the Nike 
Oregon Project. ‚ÄúIf I ever saw one thing that I felt was wrong or whatever I 
would be the first to leave,‚Äù he added.

The most impressive time of the final day of the trials came from the 
controversial sprinter Justin Gatlin, who became the fifth fastest man in 
history over 200m when he ran 19.57sec.

The most impressive performance, however, came from Alysia Montaño, who won 
the 800m only 10 months after giving birth to a daughter. Montaño ran in last 
year’s championships when she was pregnant.
 