
Mo Farah took a hiding from the media over the past week, especially when it 
was revealed that he hadmissed two drugs tests before London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-reportedly-missed-drugs-tests-2012-olympics>
. But the release on Friday of acarefully calibrated statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/mo-farah-statement-denies-taking-performance-enhancing-drugs>
, drafted by his recently appointed crisis-management PR team Freud’s, has 
eased the pressure – for now. After another week of revelations and rumours, it 
is time to take stock of the key players in this saga:

Mo Farah

Crucially, Farah has now addressed the main issues head on, explaining that he 
had not missed any other tests in his career and had never taken 
performance-enhancing drugs. He also offered a glimpse of his human side, 
insisting: “The last two weeks have been the toughest of my life – with rumours 
and speculation about me that are completely false – and the impact this has 
had on my family and friends has left me angry, frustrated and upset.”

It is understood by the Observer that Farah, who has never been accused of 
taking a banned substance, intends to stay out of the public eye until he races 
in Monaco on 17 July, although he will release a statement after his coach,
Alberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>, has 
responded to the doping allegations made byPanorama.

Mo Farah looks like the victim of a witch-hunt, says Steve Cram
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/mo-farah-witch-hunt-steve-cram> 
Alberto Salazar

Despite rumours that Farah was in the process of separating from the coach who 
turned him into the best 5,000m and 10,000m runner in the world, Salazar 
remains very much in charge. For while Farah is now training at altitude in 
Font Romeu in France, the American coach is still setting his daily programme 
and calling the shots. “Mo is on a different training cycle, as he always is at 
this time of year,” Salazar told theOregonian newspaper. “So I send him to 
Europe to get accustomed to the time zone. This is how we’ve always done it.”

On Friday Farah revealed that Salazar has also “reassured me that the claims 
[against him] are false and that he will soon be providing evidence to make 
that clear”. But it is nearly two weeks since Salazar asked for a “short time” 
to deliver his riposte to the allegations made byPanorama and the ProPublica 
website and we are still waiting. The rumours are he will do it before the US 
trials which start on Thursday.

UK Athletics

UK Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> believes that 
missed doping tests are a matter for the UK Anti-Doping Agency and so remained 
silent over Farah’s two missed drugs tests. Indeed, there has been little 
publicly from the governing body since Ed Warner, chair of UKA, appeared on 
Radio 5 Live’sSportsweek last Sunday to talk about the independent review it 
has set up to investigate its relationship with Salazar. Privately, however, it 
is understood some in the organisation are happy that Farah is now training in 
Font Romeu under the guidance of UK Athletics’ head of endurance, Barry Fudge, 
rather than in Portland, where he was being chased by paparazzi when he tried 
to train.

Publicly they remain firmly behind Salazar, who serves as an unpaid 
consultant, with Warner urging people to “wait for a few weeks to see all the 
facts and see how things settle, and that is what we are doing”, adding: 
“Alberto is innocent until proven guilty. The right thing is to be swift but 
not hasty.”

UK Anti-Doping Agency

Usually when Ukad speaks to the media it is dry and procedural. But that was 
not the case in the wake of the revelations about Farah’s missed tests in 
midweek, with the chief executive, Nicole Sapstead, admitting it was “not 
common for athletes to have two missed tests” and the director of legal, Graham 
Arthur, explaining: “We have got a pretty detailed protocol for doping control 
officers to follow when they conduct an in-hours test – and they include 
ringing the doorbell every 10-15 minutes or so, knocking and staying there for 
the full hour.”

Mo Farah faces testing period that could snuff out golden glow of 2012
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/mo-farah-testing-period-ricky-simms-alberto-salazar>
It has been suggested that Ukad should be more open about how often it tests 
athletes – the US Anti-Doping Agency has a searchable database of athletes 
which shows their tests each quarter – but Ukad says this would be difficult to 
achieve in the UK because of data privacy issues and it “would add 
significantly to our workload”.

Galen Rupp

Mo Farah’s training partner has not spoken publicly about the allegations 
against him, including that he took testosterone from the age of 16, since 
emailing a short comment on the morning after the Panorama programme to a 
handful of journalists – including theObserver. In it he claimed: “I expressly 
told these reporters that these allegations were not true and their sources 
admit they have no evidence, yet they print ‘suspicions’ attacking me and 
sullying my reputation. That is inexcusable, irresponsible journalism.”

Since then Rupp has stayed out of the limelight but in the past week confirmed 
he would be running the 5,000m and 10,000m at the US world championships 
trials, which start on Thursday. Inevitably there will be a huge amount of 
focus on him – and pressure, too. Rupp is likely to speak to the media but how 
will he cope with the most pointed questions?
 