
Mo Farah’s coach, Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>, has told the Guardian he 
is increasingly confident the United States Anti-Doping Agency’s investigation 
into him will find no evidence of any wrongdoing and insisted the two-time 
Olympic champion would be staying with his Nike Oregon Project training group 
despite recent rumours to the contrary.

Salazar has bitten his tongue since Usada began interviewing his athletes, 
including Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/27/alberto-salazar-inquiry-mo-farah-usada>
, in June. Instead he preferred to focus on getting his stable of Olympic and 
world medallists – who include Farah, Galen Rupp, Matthew Centrowitz and 
Shannon Rowbury – battle-ready for this week’s world championships.

Andy Vernon reignites feud after Mo Farah’s 10,000m triumph in Beijing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/andy-vernon-mo-farah> 
Speaking in Beijing, Salazar said: “You should put your money on me being 
cleared – it’s a winning bet. Everything I wrote in my statement back in June 
will be shown to be correct.”

In that 11,750-word statement Salazar rejected all allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
 by the BBC and the US news website ProPublica that he violated a series of 
anti-doping rules, which included claims that he gave Rupp testosterone when he 
was 16, and said the accusations had left “innocent athletes’ careers tarnished 
with nothing but innuendo, hearsay and rumour”. Rupp has insisted he is 
“dedicated to clean sport” and said the “allegations were not true”.

Neither the BBC nor ProPublica made any allegations against Farah and there is 
no suggestion of any wrongdoing on his part but Britain’s most successful 
athlete ever has beencaught in the crossfire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/mo-farah-pr-team-eases-pressure-alberto-salazar-galen-rupp>
. It meant that in the two months before the world championships Farah trained 
in Font Romeu, in the French Pyreenes, under the supervision of the British 
head of endurance, Barry Fudge, rather than Salazar’s watchful eye.

According to Salazar, though, things will return to normal when Farah returns 
to Oregon to begin winter training in October. “Nothing has changed with Mo, 
and nothing will,” he said. “Mo will be back with us.”

Justin Gatlin vows to boycott BBC and UK media over ‘biased’ 100m reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/justin-gatlin-boycott-bbc-uk-media-biased-reports>
Salazar also said that he had been the mastermind behind Farah’s sensational 
gold-medal winning 10,000m display 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/22/mo-farah-10000m-gold-world-championships-beijing>
 in Beijing on Saturday, writing him workouts in the run-up to the 
championships that were administered by Fudge. “Mo’s last major session 
involved running a mile at altitude in 3min 55sec, and then running intervals 
of 1,200m, 1,000m, 800m, 600m and 400m, a workout I devised for him and emailed 
to British Athletics,” he said. “His final 400m was run in 51 seconds.”

So good was Farah’s performance in the 10,000m final, when he ran away from 
two worthy Kenyans on the home straight, that it only confirmed Salazar’s 
impression that the Briton deserves to be ranked at least as highly as such 
distance legends as Haile Gebrselassie and Kenenisa Bekele. “Mo was exceptional 
and with those six Olympic and world medals I really think he has a case to be 
the best middle-distance runner of all time now,” said Salazar.

Perhaps the lack of an outdoor world record counts against Farah in the 
all-time rankings but his medal haul seems certain to rise again when he races 
in the 5,000m final on Friday. He has also shown his huge versatility this 
season, running the 1500m in 3min 28.49sec – the fourth fastest time in the 
world this year – and a half marathon in 59min 32sec – the third fastest in the 
world.

Farah, meanwhile, admitted that he had sympathy for Salazar, saying it had 
been “hard” for his coach. Farah also revealed he had kept his own focus during 
a turbulent period of his life by concentrating on training. “There are certain 
things in life that you don’t control,” he said. “But I am in control of my 
training and my running. So, as long as I am enjoying it and doing the right 
thing, that’s all that matters.”

Farah believes Salazar’s latest batch of workouts have made him better than 
ever and he sounded an ominous warning to his 5,000m rivals. “Training has been 
going really well and I am in the best shape I have been for the whole of my 
career,” he said. The bookies have him at short odds on to double up again.

But, for all Farah’s staggering unbeaten streak at major championships, which 
stretches back to the 5,000m in Daegu in 2011, he says he has lost none of his 
thirst for gold medals – or his love for the simple act of putting one foot 
ahead of another. “That’s what drives me,” he said. “I enjoy running, I enjoy 
what I do and, when you enjoy something so much, and it’s just like a hobby, 
you just want to continue that and keep going.”

Farah is now 32 and knows he cannot go on for ever but he denied that he was 
being driven by a fear of his career coming to an abrupt end. “Not at all,” he 
said. “Everything comes to an end, everything that goes up must come back down. 
It’s reality. At some time in my career, when I get older, I won’t be able to 
do what I am doing. So I’m going to continue looking after my body and ticking 
every box.”

Farah also joked that he had heard his Kenyan rivals talking about him after 
he had left them in his wake during the 10,000m final. “One of them said, ‘You 
tried to kill him’ but the other said, ‘Ah, no, we can’t kill this guy’.”

That anecdote brought a smile but, when Farah was also asked whether he 
thought the public took him for granted, he became serious. “I don’t know,” he 
said. “It’s not easy. I don’t blame people. They don’t see what it takes. I 
wish sometimes people were there to see you at training, when you are on the 
floor when you have done back-to-back runs or at high altitude.”
 