


1. De La Warr Pavilion, Bexhill-on-Sea <http://www.dlwp.com>

The nautical theme has been reduced to a corny joke in British seaside 
architecture, but there's a dignified restraint to it here. The modernist tides 
of 1930s Europe washed this elegant culture palace up on our shores thanks to 
an enlightened patron (Earl De La Warr, mayor of Bexhill) and twoémigré 
architects (German Eric Mendelsohn and Chechen Serge Chermayeff). The strong 
horizontal lines of this 1935 building are reinforced by cantilevered balconies 
and minimal detailing, and the visual lightness is enabled by a then-radical 
prefabricated steel-frame and concrete structure.

01424 229111



2. Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral, Liverpool 
<http://www.liverpoolmetrocathedral.org.uk>

A majestic crown of thorns or a leaky concrete wigwam, depending on whom you 
ask, Frederick Gibberd's bold design (completed 1967) successfully translated 
Christian architectural language into a modern idiom. The trusses of the 
circular structure evoke gothic flying buttresses, while the circular nave 
radiates congregational intimacy. Internal highlights include the lantern, with 
stained glass by John Piper and Patrick Reyntiens, and the cavernous crypt of 
Edwardian architect Sir Edwin Lutyens' previous, unfinished cathedral design – 
a taste of what might have been.

0151-709 9222



3. Engineering building, Leicester University <http://www.le.ac.uk>

A fine illustration of form following function designed and built between 1959 
and 1963. You can almost read the separate components from the outside, 
particularly the jutting lecture halls. But rather than slavishly following 
modernist tenets, with this building James Stirling and James Gowan led the 
movement away from its purist roots, into something more eclectic and mindful 
of the past. The crystalline roofscape of the laboratory block, for example, 
evokes the warehouses of industrial Britain, while the articulated structure 
draws on the gothic as much as Le Corbusier.

0116-252 2522



4. Barbican centre, London <http://www.barbican.org.uk>

The Barbican's soaring, sprawling scale speaks of irrepressible utopian 
ambition. Its designers were young architects Chamberlin, Powell and Bon, who 
won the competition in 1955 to redevelop a badly bombed area of London – 
although they would be old or even dead by the time it was finished in 1982. 
The brutalist treatment has been much maligned, but the concrete is actually of 
exceptional quality, and the apartments are designed to 140 different floor 
plans. And despite the maze-like complexity, the scheme was ahead of its time 
in the creation of a safe, quiet, car-free, pedestrian-friendly mini-town; an 
urban fortress enclosing oases of culture and calm.



5. Alton West estate, Roehampton, Surrey

This estate reflects the layout of Le Corbusier's (unbuilt) Ville Radieuse 
(Radiant City), with its rational layout of giant apartment blocks in wide-open 
parkland completed in 1959. The ocean liner-like, 11-storey, concrete slab 
blocks, raised on their slender piloti, were directly inspired by Le 
Corbusier's Unité d'Habitation in Marseilles, which the London county council 
architects had recently visited. But there is a mix of housing options here, 
from 12-storey towers down to single-storey retirement dwellings. Alton East, 
modelled on Scandinavian public housing, highlights the ideological split in 
Britain's postwar housing design.

Not open to the public



6. Penguin Pool, London Zoo <http://www.zsl.org>

Berthold Lubetkin said he designed London Zoo's most famous structure as a 
stage set, albeit one better for showing off the properties of concrete than 
the natural behaviour of penguins (they were moved to a different enclosure in 
2003). It's perhaps better viewed as an abstract sculpture. Its dazzling white 
curves, long openings and slender piloti distil the Corbusian zeitgeist into a 
delightful folly, and the intertwining spiral catwalks are a brilliant 
structural conceit – an aviation-inspired double swoop that soars in ways 
a penguin cannot.

020-7722 3333



7. Trellick Tower, west London

It was once derided as a Ballardian symbol of all that was wrong with 
modernism, and its architect even gave his name to a Bond villain, but it later 
turned out all that Erno Goldfinger's 1968 west London high-rise needed was a 
concierge in reception to iron out its problems. Like its younger east London 
cousin, the Balfron Tower, the Trellick's detached service tower gives it an 
unmistakable silhouette. And there's a logic and efficiency to the design: 
gallery levels with stair access to apartments above and below mean the lift 
only needs to stop every three floors, hence the spaced-out bridges over to the 
main block. The exteriors are carefully composed, too (note the line 
of maisonettes two-thirds of the way up). Britain didn't quite embrace 
high-rise living as Goldfinger wished, but to those enjoying the view from up 
there today, the rest of us missed out.

Not open to the public



8. Royal Festival Hall, London <http://www.bit.ly/fQpTjg>

The only survivor of the 1951 Festival of Britain introduced a forward-looking 
Scandinavian-style coolness to London's bustling riverside, and to Britain as a 
whole – a clean, simple form and a clean break with the past. Designed by 
a team of London county council architects under Leslie Martin and Peter Moro, 
the building's concept was also simple: an egg in a box. The egg being the 
auditorium, acoustically isolated from the surrounding public and support 
areas. As it turned out, the acoustics were one of the building's great 
failures (until a 2007 revamp). However, the open, flowing spaces of the 
single-level foyer and terraces are a model of democratic space.

020-7960 4200



9. Arnos Grove underground station, north London <http://www.tfl.gov.uk>

This 1932 building is proof that modern architecture could achieve a civic 
presence even within the historic patchwork of a city like London, though sadly 
the neighbourhood built around it never matched the station's clarity of form 
and intent. Architect Charles Holden drew on the more classically inclined 
examples of European modernism, particularly Gunnar Asplund's Stockholm City 
Library. The contents of the station (and several others like it) were all of a 
piece with the design, from the benches to the enduring typeface of the signage.



10. Boots factory, Beeston

With a bluntness that betrays his roots in engineering rather than 
architecture, Owen Williams laid out Boots' 1932 Nottingham manufacturing 
complex to a functionalist design. Block D10 is the highlight: a vast but 
light-footed "wet" factory for preparing pharmaceuticals. It is concrete and 
glass and little else. The massive, mushroom-headed columns enabled large, 
practical spans and gave the building a dynamic, sculptural quality, while 
natural light was brought in through the all-glass elevations and light wells.

Not open to the public
 