
When the Tbilisi-born architect Berthold Lubetkin arrived in London via Paris 
in 1931, he searched in vain for modernist buildings. Continental Europe 
sparkled with white concrete and flat roofs created by architects for whom form 
followed function and the house was, asLe Corbusier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lecorbusier> put it, "a machine for 
living". But in Britain, classicism prevailed, interrupted by the odd flourish 
of art deco. British architects did use steel and concrete in their buildings, 
but covered them over with Portland stone.

Britain, Lubetkin lamented, was "about 50 years behind, as though locked in a 
deep provincial sleep". This was especially disappointing as  he had been 
influenced by British aesthetics and, like other modernist architects, he 
admired the early 20th-century English house. The honesty of expression in the 
British Arts and Crafts movement had been a catalyst for European modernism. 
French and German architects extrapolated the British emphasis on expressing 
the nature of materials into a movement with overarching ambitions. In Germany, 
Peter Behrens and his students Walter Gropius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe saw 
buildings as, in Mies's words, "the spirit of the epoch translated into form". 
In France, Le Corbusier controversially insisted that humans needed space, 
light and order as much as they needed bread or a place to sleep. For Le 
Corbusier, the choice was between "architecture or revolution".

But in Britain, the more radical aims of the Arts and Crafts movement were 
forgotten after the first world war. Art deco cinemas sprung up across the 
country in the 1920s, but these frivolous pleasure palaces used the modern as 
a decorative style rather than a template for a new society.

There was the occasional genuine modernist building. In 1925 Peter Behrens had 
designed Britain's first white concrete box, New Ways in Northampton. But it 
was a one-off, dismissed by the Architectural Review as a mere "exercise in 
modernity".

It took the arrival of Lubetkin and other émigrés to wrench Britain into the 
future. Lubetkin provided England with several modernist masterpieces: two 
sleek, white, concrete apartment blocks, Highpoint Iand II, in London's 
Highgate, the sculpturally sublime Penguin Pool in Regent's Park, and the 
entirely modernist Black Country zoo. Meanwhile Erich Mendelsohn joined Serge 
Chermayeff in creating the De La Warr Pavilion at Bexhill in 1934. The white 
curves appealed in an age of sun worship; the seaside was ready for an 
architecture of space and light. For George Bernard Shaw, the Pavilion 
signified that Bexhill had at last "emerged from barbarism".

Mass-produced steel and concrete were quick to construct and economically 
attractive and some British architects went further than their European 
counterparts, obsessive in their attempts to pour entire buildings from a 
single mould. Maxwell Fry saw reinforced concrete as "the revolutionary 
material par excellence" and put it to use in a 1937 Ladbroke Grove housing 
scheme, Kensal House, intended to be "no ordinary block of flats but a 
community in action".

These buildings were not without their critics. Evelyn Waugh complained about 
the appearance of "villas like sewage farms, mansions like half-submerged 
Channel steamers, offices like vast beehives".

But the British like being cosy, which was hard in open-plan buildings with 
stark white fronts. As the 1930s progressed, all the arts retrenched from the 
cold abstraction of high modernism to something more accessible and familiar. 
The white concrete boxes morphed into a more British version of modernism, clad 
in brick and timber.

By 1940 JM Richards, editor of the Architectural Review, had concluded that 
"Englishness" was "not incompatible with modern architecture". Homegrown 
modernism was exemplified by Charles Holden, who designed a series of curved 
brick tube stations including Arnos Grove, South Wimbledon and East Finchley.

After the second world war, this compassionate (or apologetic) modernism 
emerged as the prevailing aesthetic in the burgeoning welfare state. Just as 
important in an age of bomb-damaged austerity was the speedy construction of 
new homes.

Of course, there was a backlash amid this new consensus. The angry young 
husband-and-wife partnership of Alison and Peter Smithson banished cosiness in 
a style known as brutalism.Architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> had become 
uncomfortable again, this time in the service of the community. Brutalism 
created Le Corbusier-inspired "streets in the sky", intended to mirror the 
roads in the slums they replaced, later epitomised by Erno Goldfinger's 1968 
Trellick tower in North Kensington.

But the vertiginous streets did not foster a neighbourly environment. They 
became easy pickings for muggers and quickly fell into disrepair. It is hard to 
feel house-proud of a machine. Ironically, it was suburbia that flourished. In 
the 1950s, many people abandoned inner-city flats for suburban houses, lured by 
the prospect of a front door opening on to an actual street. Even the Smithsons 
didn't give up their Victorian house. For all the lofty dreams of two 
generations of utopian architects and planners, much of Britain remained 
ensconced in earth-bound homes, gratefully burrowed in "provincial sleep".

• Dr Lara Feigel is lecturer in English at King's College London. She is the 
author of Literature, Cinema Politics 1939-45: Reading Between the Frames
 