
App: Moneysupermarket.com Car Insurance 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/moneysupermarket.com-car-insurance/id472968042?mt=8>

By: Created by Mobile Interactive Group for Moneysupermarket.com

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch, (Android tbc)

What is it?

An app to compare quotes and purchase car insurance.

What does it promise?

"Compare accurate quotes from a huge range of car insurance providers and then 
purchase straight from your phone – all in a matter of minutes. You can switch 
your insurance in just 3 taps."

How does it work?

When you first use the app you need to make more than three taps as you need 
to register your personal details. Then, unless you're accessing a previous 
search, you need to fill in all the usual (often boring) details: make and age 
of car, usage, personal details, additional drivers etc. Once you've done this, 
the app provides you with a list of quotes which you can go on to purchase by 
ringing through to the insurer or connecting to its website.

Is it easy to use?

Yes. It might take a while to set up your initial details but after that it's 
a breeze. The app allows you to flip quickly between monthly and annual 
premiums, which is a really useful way of seeing the savings you can make by 
paying upfront. You can also easily tweak the type and level of cover you need 
(eg change any voluntary excess).

When I searched for insurance on my car, I obtained quotes ranging from around 
£300 (Sheila's Wheels, since you ask) to £1,900 (from a firm called 
HY-performance, which has little chance of attracting my custom based on that 
quote). You can add searches as well as store and tweak previous ones.

Is it fun?

I'm not sure "fun" is the word to describe obtaining on-the-go insurance 
quotes, but it's certainly handy.

Is it pretty?

It's functional rather than beautiful, but consistent colour-coding and good 
definition of clickable buttons helps users navigate effectively.

Should you download it?
 Moneysupermarket car insurance QR code 
A slight quibble is that the app displays a lot of information about policies, 
but not the actual policy details or terms and conditions; and some consumers 
may wish to obtain quotes from insurers not on the Moneysupermarket.com 
platform (it claims to compare prices from more than 100 insurers). The app may 
also benefit from putting some of the useful guides that appear on the website, 
on the app.

But minor drawbacks aside, this is an undeniably useful app. If you are 
car-hunting and see a car in a garage forecourt or for sale privately, you can 
quickly see if the insurance would make it prohibitively expensive to own.

It works well – when I clicked through to the Sheila's Wheels website to 
purchase the policy at the price the app had displayed, I half expected the 
original quote to disappear and be replaced by one 20% more expensive. But the 
original quote was there and I would have been able to purchase it instantly at 
that price (I didn't because I already have insurance).

As you'd expect from a digital business, an email was waiting for me with all 
my quotes displayed for reference, displaying nice integration between mobile 
and desktop. Even better, because the app did not demand I fill-in my phone 
number at the registration stage, I've received no irritating follow-up calls 
from the company about my need for car insurance.
 