
Switching public spending from "grey" projects such as roads and airports, to 
"green" schemes such as parks, tree planting and allotments, would not just 
save the government billions of pounds, improve health, and cut climate 
emissions, but it would create jobs and make British cities more attractive.

The analysis comes from two groups of government advisers, Natural England and 
the Commission for Architecture and the BuiltEnvironment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/environment-careers>, and is supported by 
evidence from other countries. It shows that where cuts are made in those areas 
that add to pollution, waste and ill health, and money is invested instead in 
projects that save energy, improve health and reduce waste, the benefits are 
seen quickly.

For instance, the £10.2bn budgeted by central government for road building in 
Britain this year will increase traffic and emissions and leave the public 
purse to clean up the pollution and waste. Just half of that money would pay 
for a new park in every local authority. Equally, the £1.28bn set aside for 
widening the M25 by a single lane would benefit drivers by perhaps 
a few seconds a journey, but it would buy and maintain more than 3m new street 
trees.

Councils have bid more than £4bn this year for local road schemes, most of 
which will have marginal social benefits. That money could be invested in 
commuity gardens and urban farming, which have been shown to improve health and 
encourage exercise.

There is now a proven relationship between green space, health and economic 
development. Yet local authorities spend less than £20 a year per person on 
trees, parks, gardens, allotments, woodlands, rivers and waterways, which 
together provide clean air and water and enrich their citizens' quality of life.

The NHS is responsible for more than 18m tonnes of CO2 a year. If it invests 
in energy saving, it will not just save itself great sums in future as costs 
inevitably rise, it will help to avoid a catastrophe as diseases spread further 
and droughts, floods and heatwaves increase. Every year that addressing climate 
change is delayed, the public costs rise.

Government figures show that road traffic has increased 25% in the past 15 
years, at the same time as obesity and public health costs have soared. 
Research also shows that where people have direct contact with the environment 
via animals, plants or landscapes, they more likely to be mentally and 
physically healthy. Hospital patients with views of trees rather than of brick 
walls stay in hospitals for far less time.

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 