
Morocco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco> stayed cool and calm on 
a hot night in Tunisia to crush Mali - and their hopes of an appearance in the 
final - with a 4-0 win in Sousse.

Youssef Mokhtari scored twice as Morocco carved their through the Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> defence, with late efforts from 
Youssef Hadji and Nabil Baha propelling them easily into their first final 
since 1976 - the last time they won the tournament.

"We were well-disciplined against a talented Mali team," said Morocco coach 
Badou Zaki. "But they came up against a very strong Morocco team which managed 
to dictate the play and deserved to win."

Morocco dominated from the outset and it was less than 15 minutes before 
Mokhtari curled in a superb free kick from the edge of the area.

"After the first goal went in we never recovered," said Mali coach Henri 
Stambouli. "Then it became a nightmare, as we kept getting caught on the break."

Mokhtari added a second shortly after the interval, a stinging low shot with 
his left. And Hadji scored Morocco's third goal with 10 minutes left. Baha 
added the fourth in injury time.

Coach Badou Ezaki praised Morocco's discipline following a display which left 
Mali players in tears.

"Mali have excellent individuals and can cause problems for any team but I 
think Morocco were well disciplined and well in control of the match," he said. 
"We created chances, scored four times and could even have had more."

Looking ahead to Saturday, he said: "It's an all-Arab final and I hope Morocco 
and Tunisia put on a good show, with fair play."

That's something Stambouli can still only dream about after the west African 
side's fourth appearance at the finals ended in desperate fashion.

"Everybody is ready, everybody is strong before a semi-final," Stambouli said. 
"But when you concede a goal from a free kick after 15 minutes and have to try 
and get back into the game against a team who pack the midfield, it obviously 
makes everything more difficult.

"It's a very heavy scoreline tonight," he said. "It's hard to take and it 
really hurts... in the dressing room, they're crying. They're extremely 
disappointed.

"These are difficult moments. But they are also the moments that you judge a 
man by."

Looking ahead to Friday's playoff against Nigeria, he said: "It's going to be 
hard to rouse them for the match for third place."

Morocco will face Tunisia in the final after the hosts dispatched the fancied 
Nigeria 5-3 on penalties.

A tense match had finished 1-1 after extra time thanks to two penalties, the 
first converted by Jay-Jay Okocha for Nigeria and the second by Khaled Badra 
eight minutes from time.

Tunisia came through the tie after the heroics of 37-year-old keeper Ali 
Bounnijel in a shootout which saw him stop Peter Odemwingie's kick before Karim 
Hagui scored the deciding kick.

"I was really concentrating and he hit it well but it feels fantastic to have 
made the save.

"We worked on penalties before the game but it was a collective effort. The 
preparation was really supportive and we have had a real intensity to our 
game," Boumnijel said.

After the match, Tunisian coach Roger Lemerre paid testament to his players' 
hard work in the finals.

"It was a very difficult encounter but now we all wish to become the 
champions. We want to feel like we are in paradise. "The players have 
understood that the hard work they put in is responsible for the victory," he 
said. "They have also learnt that a lot of goals are scored in the last minutes 
of the match and that is why we did not give up. We are very happy."
 