
Morocco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco>, whose chances of 
winning the African Nations Cup are rated as minimal by their own coach, beat 
much-fancied Nigeria 1-0 today with a superbly-taken winner from substitute 
Youssef Hadji.

France-based Hadji received a long pass by Abdelkrim Kaissi with his back to 
goal, turned and fired the ball past Vincent Enyeama in the 77th minute to stun 
a listless opposition.

Nigeria, with a vastly more experienced team including several players based 
in the Premiership, barely mustered a chance in their spluttering debut to the 
competition. Star player Jay-Jay Okocha was furious "I think we didn't show 
enough character, we didn't show that we wanted to dominate the game," he said. 
"We let them in the game and we gave them so much room to do whatever they 
wanted to do."

The Moroccans, who fell at the first hurdle in the last two Nations Cup 
finals, are rebuilding their team almost from scratch under former goalkeeper 
Bedou Ezaki. He said had yesterday that his countrymen were dreaming if they 
thought their team had a serious chance of winning the title.

But they dominated the first half, winning almost every 50-50 ball, forcing 
nearly a dozen corners and creating all the best chances. At the other end, 
their defence, marshalled by Noureddine Naybet in his 98th international, kept 
the Nigerian attack under wraps.

Nigeria's big-name players were strangely subdued.Okocha produced a few clever 
flicks but his long balls forward never found the target, Nwankwo Kanu barely 
touched the ball and was substituted after 72 minutes, while at the back Isaac 
Okoronkwo kept getting himself into a tangle.

Morocco should have gone ahead in the 19th minute when Jawad Zairi, their most 
dangerous player, dispossessed Isaac Okoronkwo on the right and produced a 
perfectly flighted cross into the path of Marouane Chammakh at the far post, 
but he headed woefully over.

Zairi was replaced by Hadji in the 59th minute and he constantly tormented the 
Nigerian defence until he was rewarded with the winner. Chammakh came 
agonisingly close to a second when his shot hit the inside of the post two 
minutes from time.

Nigeria's defeat came after a troubled build-up highlighted by the late 
appearances of Okocha and Kanu to the training camp."We all knew before the 
game how important it was for us. But unfortunately we've made qualifying very 
difficult," Okocha said afterwards."Clearly, we're very, very 
disappointed...but we've got two matches left and we're just going to have win 
them."

 Nigeria, champions in 1980 and 1994, need to get their campaign back on 
course against South Africa on Saturday and Benin next week. Morocco are now in 
a prime position to progress to the next stage.
 