
App: Mortgage Assistant

By: London & Country <http://www.lcplc.co.uk/>

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>

What is it?

An app to look up the latest best-buy products, mortgage calculators, 
affordability checks and property articles.

Who is it by?

London & Country, a leading independent mortgage broker. It offers free 
advice, will search the mortgage market for homebuyers and also offers its own 
exclusive mortgage deals. It has won a fistful of awards – it's been named 
Mortgage Adviser of the Year by trade publicationMoney Marketing 
<http://www.moneymarketing.co.uk/> five times.

What does it promise?

"Keep on top of your mortgage and the latest mortgage deals on the market with 
our iPhone app. Our mortgage assistant also gives you access to our most 
popular calculators and can tell you instantly if we can save you money on your 
mortgage." The app falls short of offering first-time buyers free cash to use 
as a deposit, but you can't have everything.

How does it work?

There's a touch of the hard sell about the app, as most sections of it seem to 
exist solely to advertise the fact that L&C can find you a cheaper mortgage. 
But, sales tactics aside, users can click on best buys to look at current 
market-leading mortgage rates; use calculators to find out how much they can 
afford to borrow, how much a mortgage will cost, and what will happen if 
interest rates change; and can read the L&C blog containing mortgage-related 
chatter and news.

However, results are displayed in such a way, with essential mortgage details 
omitted, as to encourage you to contact L&C, meaning the experience can be 
lacking and many will be frustrated they cannot immediately find a suitable 
mortgage for their needs via the app.

Is it easy to use?

Even mortgage novices and the financially illiterate should be able to work it 
out. The navigation is occasionally counter-intuitive, with buttons to proceed 
not appearing where you would expect, but this is not distracting enough for 
you to give the app a swerve. The ability to store your own mortgage 
information means you can access the app at any time to check if there are 
better (or any) products out there for your specific needs.

Is it fun?

The inclusion of the broker's blog and best-buys helps elevate this above 
bog-standard mortgage calculator apps, but looking at mortgage rates will 
either excite or depress you depending on your circumstances.

Is it pretty?

If only the developers had the courage to make more of the graphic that 
appears on most pages. Looking as though it has edged in from a completely 
different, more beautiful app, the graphic features a community of houses atop 
rolling green hills, with beautiful trees dotted across the landscape – the 
kind of place we would all love to live. The problem is that while the graphic 
is lovely, it is also tiny – vying for attention by poking up from the bottom 
of the screen like a small schoolchild straining an arm to answer a question in 
class. Elsewhere, it's a fairly underwhelming mix of ocean blues and sea greens.

Should you download it?

It packs a lot more functionality than other mortgage calculator apps and, 
while there is a commercial edge to it, at least L&C is independent (ie not a 
bank pushing its own horribly expensive mortgages). It features real-time data, 
with best-buys automatically updated, meaning you can check whether things are 
moving in your favour.

One major problem, particularly for first-time buyers, is that the app doesn't 
tell you what loan-to-values apply on the best-buy products. So while you can 
use the app to easily find the cheapest fixed or variable rates, without 
knowing what size deposit you require they are of little value for many 
prospective homebuyers. This is no doubt because L&C wants you to contact it 
for further details rather than go direct to a lender, but it makes the app far 
less attractive.

For first-time buyers struggling to buy a home the app would also benefit 
greatly from links to real sources of help and information for those in 
difficult circumstances – indeed, the app itself makes no mention of the 
vagaries of the housing market apart from the odd acknowledgement in the blog.

For those ready to buy a home it should prove to be a useful mobile mortgage 
checker which, when coupled withRightmove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/oct/18/rightmove-app-of-the-week> or 
Zoopla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/jan/17/zoopla-consumer-app-of-week>, 
puts a large part of the homebuying process in your pocket.
 