
· Andrey Kurkov <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrey-kurkov>, best known 
in this country for his novel Death and the Penguin, is a Russian-born 
Ukrainian who, during the recent contested elections, made his feelings very 
clear, not least in the Guardian: he is for the revolution, and against Putin's 
meddlings.

This has not gone down well in Russia. Every year the Paris Book Fair asks a 
different country - or, more specifically, the writers of the country - to be 
guests of honour; in March it's Russia's turn. Kurkov goes every year because 
he often has a book to promote - this time it's The President's Last Love, in 
which Putin, coincidentally, is a character. But not long ago he received a 
phone call from a person close to the Russian delegation, warning him not to 
say anything critical about Putin.

Pressure has also been applied to the organisers of the fair to disinvite him; 
it has been ignored. Kurkov says he has never been reviewed in Russia, even 
though he writes in Russian, but that for a while he sold well on the internet, 
classified as a cult author. No longer - he hasn't sold there for nearly three 
years. And a publishing house in St Petersburg that expressed interest in 
taking him up has fallen silent. So is he intimidated? Will he comment on the 
political situation, if the question arises? "Of course I will," he says. "I 
always do."

· The shortlist for the 2005 Arthur C Clarke Award for Science Fiction has 
just been announced - along with a dire prediction that it may be the last. 
Organisers are struggling to fund it, and have failed to find a sponsor. "It 
would be an incredible shame for it to fall through now," says China Miéville - 
and that's not just because he's won it once, and is shortlisted again this 
year. "British SF is world-beating at the moment. And, importantly, it's an 
award people who don't read SF have heard of. It's always had a very 
open-minded approach to the genre" - Amitav Ghosh has won it, David Mitchell's 
Cloud Atlas is shortlisted this year - "so it does a good job of attracting 
readers who don't necessarily read SF".

· Books as movies, part II. To the Charlotte Street Hotel, for a preview 
screening of Kinsey, Bill Condon's biopic, introduced by Jonathan 
Gathorne-Hardy, on whose biography much of the film is based. Gathorne-Hardy 
had little good to say about his rival in Kinsey biographical endeavour, James 
H Jones, who he feels accuses the scientist of being a voyeur, an 
exhibitionist, fraudulent (perhaps, he even hinted darkly, it had to do with 
Jones's three Rockefeller grants - the Rockefeller foundation, in moral 
outrage, pulled the plug on Kinsey's researches). But "at least he didn't 
attack him as a paedophile", as the American right appears to be doing at the 
moment: "the only good Jones has done Kinsey recently is to defend him from 
that". And he ruminated on turning biographies into movies: though Kinsey 
compresses several characters into one, and teases more out of the love stories 
than the evidence strictly suggests, Gathorne-Hardy is so pleased with it he's 
already seen it three times.
 