
HER STORY Alexandra Burke, 26, singer

Mum raised us in Islington, north London, with my grandfather and aunt, as my 
dad was in and out of our lives. I remember watching her perform onTop of the 
Popswith Soul II Soul and thinking: “This is what I need to do with my life.” 
She didn’t force me into it, but when she knew I wanted to sing, she wouldn’t 
let me muck about or sleep over at friends’ houses because she knew what it 
takes to get to the top. I didn’t rebel as I enjoyed doing it and got an 
audience out of it.

In 2008, when I was on The X Factor, my mum found out she had kidney failure. 
It was difficult at first, but now it feels normal to check on her every day. I 
would love to help her and she says I can donate a kidney after I have kids, 
but not before.

Mum’s illness means that I don’t take a day for granted. My job makes it 
difficult for me to meet men and I ask her for advice about boyfriends. She’ll 
meet them and go: “That’s not going to last.” Unfortunately she’s always bloody 
right.

I drag Mum out with me whenever I can. She doesn’t drink, but we drink for her 
and she will still stay out with us until four in the morning. The last time we 
sang together was when I was performing on New Year’s Eve at G-A-Y and we did 
“I Wanna Dance with Somebody”. We also sometimes record each other’s backing 
vocals – Mum’s should be on my third album.

My feistiness, a lot of my confidence, my desire to never give up and my faith 
all come from her. She does worry more than me, though, especially about her 
children. When she’s panicking , I’m, like, “Woman – chill.” The way we talk 
and make jokes is the same – a lot of her is embedded in me.

HER STORY Melissa Bell, 51, singer

Alexandra was very prim and proper as a little girl. She was the sensible one 
out of four siblings and always made sure the others did their chores.

My career as a singer has given her the ambition to do better than I did and 
if she has a child I’m pretty sure it will go even further. She’s learning to 
curb how much she tours as well as late nights and smoky atmospheres, but I’ll 
go out with her sometimes and hold the handbags. We support each other – she’ll 
make me see the bigger picture when I’m too occupied by one part of a 
situation. Relationships aren’t easy at the best of times, but one day she’ll 
find the right person – and his brother for me!

Alex buys me lovely gifts, but I don’t accept wads of cash from her – in West 
Indian culture that’s an absolute no-no. Saying that, if she wants to take me 
to the Dorchester, I’ll get there before her.

I’m often at home dialysing and I feel awful sometimes. I can’t go anywhere 
and just stay in my nightie. Alex will check that I’ve eaten and order me a 
takeaway. Last week I had some problems and spent two days in hospital. She 
came to visit me there in her lunch break and the whole place was starstruck. 
I’ve refused a kidney from Alex and her sister as it may hamper their chances 
of having children, but all being well, I’ll get one from my son.

When Alex was younger, she was adamant that she owned Alexandra Palace, the 
big concert venue near our home. We used to go up there on nice days to look at 
London. I let her believe it and said that if she thinks big, she’ll get big – 
and she did.

Renegade by Alexandra Burke <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke>
 is out on 25 March

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 