
Two down for Tottenham this week and, while the big one down the road is all 
that really matters, Mauricio Pochettino will certainly be a happy man going 
into the north London derby this weekend. His side had been second best for 
much of this game but Mousa Dembélé’s fine late strike puts their European 
campaign firmly back on track, sending them top of Group J and leaving them 
well-placed to advance.

Anderlecht had come from behind against Spurs already this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/tottenham-anderlecht-europa-league-match-report>
 and, when Imoh Ezekiel equalised deep into the second half for the Belgians, a 
repeat scenario appeared possible, even likely. However, Dembélé’s sweet finish 
from 20 yards secured victory, his strike arcing into the top corner from an 
unlikely position to earn Tottenham three points following Harry Kane’s earlier 
effort.

Having beaten Aston Villa on Monday and with Kane in the midst of a scoring 
run, Tottenham will be full of confidence going to Arsenal, even if this 
display was far from perfect.

Kane’s goal was out of the blue and Anderlecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> deserved at least a point, 
but Pochettino praised his team’s resolve after the equaliser.

“It was difficult for us to create chances, they play deep and in front, they 
have very fast players and it was difficult but we showed character,” said the 
Spurs manager. “It is difficult to play how we play in every game, always 
trying to build from the back, but today I congratulate the players because we 
showed character and we competed.

“When you can’t play well it is important to show character and compete, and 
suffer. Today we learned a lot. Now we are in a good position at the top and 
need to be focused only on Sunday.”

When Kane’s opening goal arrived it came from nothing. Tottenham had been on 
the back foot during the opening stages, with Anderlecht’s pace and the 
physical presence of Stefano Okaka up front a threat.

Indeed, Spurs – who only made three changes from the win over Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/02/tottenham-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
 with the full-backs Danny Rose and Kyle Walker not in the squad – were caught 
dozing in the first few minutes, when a ricochet from a challenge in midfield 
broke to the onrushing Okaka who was thwarted by a well-timed tackle from Jan 
Vertonghen.

Steven Defour showed glimpses of his quality from midfield, forcing a fine 
save from Hugo Lloris with a swerving drive in the eighth minute which the 
goalkeeper tipped over, before Youri Tielemans pulled an effort narrowly wide 
from the edge of the area following good work from Okaka once more.

Okaka was momentarily forced off, holding his face after a tussle with Lamela 
and, whether his injury was genuine or not, during his short absence on the 
sidelines Spurs capitalised. Ryan Mason was alert shortly after the referee’s 
whistle to slide a ball into a pocket of space for Christian Eriksen, whose 
deft touch through to Kane resulted in the striker firing into the bottom 
corner past Silvio Proto.

It was a fine finish but Anderlecht began the second-half appearing confident 
of another comeback win. The centre-half Olivier Deschacht curled a left-footed 
shot two feet over the bar from the edge of the area as Lloris’ goal started to 
face a period of sustained pressure.

However, soon after Ben Davies hit the crossbar with a swerving strike from 
the outside of his boot, it was the Anderlecht fans who were doing the singing.

The substitute Ezekiel had only been on the pitch a matter of minutes but his 
well-timed run reached Defour’s drifted cross from the left, the forward 
finishing off the post first-time with Tottenham’s defenders statuesque.

However, Dembélé had the final say. Davies advanced down the left and his 
cross was laid off well to midfielder by Son Heung-min, and the Belgian broke 
the resolve of his compatriots with a wonderful strike into the top corner.

The Anderlecht manager, Besnik Hasi, said: “I’m very disappointed with the 
result, but the effort of the team was really good and we at least deserved a 
draw. Everything remains possible in this group and we’ll look to the future. 
Dembélé could have been covered a bit more but maybe that had something to do 
with tiredness.”

Tottenham Hotspur v Anderlecht: Europa League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/nov/05/tottenham-hotspur-anderlecht-europa-league-live> 