
In the early 80s, we would actually have had to go up to a ticket booth and 
say, out loud, "One for Yazoo, please". Now that Yazoo are reforming to present 
their first gigs for 25 years, we couldn't be happier that we can buy our 
tickets online. The internet's done us many favours, but few are as grand as 
sparing us the pain of uttering the word "Yazoo" in public.

Yazoo, who were confusingly known as Yaz in the US, were one of the great 
early synth-pop bands, a duo that was able to take Kraftwerk's zing and make it 
a little less intimidating. When they split in 1983 it was ostensibly because
Alison Moyet <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alison-moyet> was pursuing her 
solo career - but we've always suspected it was because she was embarrassed to 
keep saying the Y-word.

Moyet of course went on to great, wispy-voxed things. And Vince Clarke became 
very busy with a group called Erasure. But they've always ruminated on those 
Yazoo-tinged days, Moyet says. She always wanted the chance to return to hits 
like Don't Go and Only You. "I wanted to do it, and never stopped wanting to do 
it," she told Billboard this week. "If it had been one gig, it would have been 
good. I just wanted to do it."

But whereas circa 1990, Moyet couldn't fit in a single gig, now she and Clarke 
have found room for 24. In an ever-expanding tour, Yazoo will visit Europe, 
America, Ireland and the UK - including two dates at London's Hammersmith 
Apollo in June.

"I don't know how long [the] window's going to stay open for," Moyet admitted, 
but for the moment they're entirely gung-ho. A four-disc collection of 
remasters, remixes, B-sides and the like - including a DVD - is to be released 
in May. And Moyet admitted there's even the faint chance of a new album. "I 
hate the idea of just making a record because we can," she said. "It would have 
to be if when we were together and sparking creatively. There's absolutely no 
set-in-stone plan. But if we wrote a brilliant song while we were half-pissed 
after a gig, then that'd be fantastic. But if we don't, then fuck it."

Note that she avoided saying the word "Yazoo".
 