
In many ways, says the writer G Willow Wilson, Marvel's new comic-book 
character is a typical teenager, dealing with the angst of high school, before 
discovering superhero powers. So far, so Peter Parker. Except 16-year-old 
Kamala Khan is female, and a Muslim: unusual enough in the world of comics to 
have caused quite a ripple when it was announced in November.

"She's a child of Pakistani immigrants," says Wilson from her home in Seattle, 
where she is already working on the third issue; the series will start in 
February. "On the one hand, she grew up in an American city as a fairly typical 
middle-class American kid, but she's also got the tradition and history of her 
parents. She faces a lot of the same dilemmas many second-generation kids do."

To begin with, the story establishes Kamala's family and high-school life. 
"And then quite unexpectedly – I won't quite reveal how – she finds herself 
with these extraordinary powers that allow her to grow and shrink her entire 
body, or specific limbs. Eventually she will be able to take on the appearance 
of other people and things, and so she really has to decide, 'Why do I have 
these powers, and what am I meant to use them for? How does this change who I 
am?'" She takes on the name MsMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>, previously used by superhero 
Carol Danvers (now known as Captain Marvel). "It's very much a classic 
superhero origin story but with this added tension of her growing into herself 
as a second-generation American Muslim."

Kamala isn't the first Muslim comic-book character, nor even Marvel's first 
Muslim woman, but she is their first to lead her own series. The idea came from 
two Marvel editors: Sana Amanat, who had been telling her colleague, Steve 
Wacker, tales of growing up in a Muslim family. (The idea predates the recent 
rise to prominence of the similarly named, similarly brave teenage girl, 
education activist Malala Yousafzai.) Amanat and Wacker approached Wilson – who 
converted toIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> in college, and 
whose work includes the comic Cairo and novel Alif the Unseen – to be the 
writer (with artwork by Adrian Alphona). "My immediate thought was, 'What are 
we going to get ourselves into?'" she says.

It wasn't that she worried Marvel's readership would balk at a Muslim teenage 
girl: "The comic-reading demographic is certainly changing and diversifying." 
But, she says, "whenever you have a character representing any kind of 
minority, including women, who are underrepresented, there is extra scrutiny 
because there are no other examples. Everyone wants to see their own personal 
opinions in that character. So I knew we had to have a very deft touch."

Amanat told the New York Times that Kamala's brother is very conservative, her 
mother worries "she's going to touch a boy and get pregnant" and her father 
wants her to become a doctor. This led some to suggest the series reinforced 
the stereotype of a Muslim family, although the general response was positive. 
"I understand why people are apprehensive because any time you hear about a 
Muslim character in pop culture, you're immediately bracing for all of that 
negativity," says Wilson. "But Sana and I have tried to stay very true to our 
own experiences in the community. I come from a fairly conservative Muslim 
community in Seattle, and I know the positive side of those communities and 
nuances that are maybe not picked up in the media."

Kamala's faith, she says, "is part of her personal journey, but she is in no 
way a poster child for religion. She's very much at the phase of deciding who 
she is, which many teenagers go through regardless of their background. I don't 
think any of us were out to make some political point, just to reflect the 
reality and give voice to the young women who are at this very interesting 
point in history and trying to navigate two worlds." Or three – if you're a 
teenage superhero and about to enter the Marvel universe.
 