
Magners League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnersleague> newcomers 
Aironi proved feisty opponents for Munster before some forward grunt propelled 
the Irish province to a bonus-point win at Musgrave Park.

The visitors, one of two new Italian teams in the Magners League, delighted 
their small pocket of fans by drawing level at 11-11 before half-time, with 
French full-back Julien Laharrague charging through for a 31st-minute try.

A strong start to the second half saw Munster assume greater control of 
proceedings. The sin-binning of Aironi prop Salvatore Perugini was quickly 
followed by tries from man-of-the-match Niall Ronan and Tony Buckley. 
Experienced fly-half Ludovic Mercier sandwiched a Paul Warwick drop-goal with 
two penalties, butMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> bagged 
the bonus through Ronan's second try on 62 minutes.

Aironi took their time to settle and two early penalty strikes from Warwick, 
the first from distance, gave Munster a deserved lead. Ronan gave away a 
penalty at the breakdown, which former France international Mercier miscued 
from the right. ButAironi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aironi> soon 
showed what they can do with ball in hand as Italy scrum-half Tito Tebaldi 
ignited a great passage for his side. He scampered away from two midfield 
tackles and Gareth Krause and Giulio Toniolatti added further purpose to the 
move, forcing Munster back towards their try-line. The pressure yielded two 
penalties in the space of three minutes, both of which Mercier converted. The 
visitors were visibly growing in confidence, with their grizzled forwards 
increasing their influence.

Munster were sluggish in attack, save for a lovely spell of continuity that 
set up full-back Felix Jones's first league try. From a ruck in the 22, Aironi 
were caught out when scrum-half Peter Stringer put Jones over to the right of 
the posts. Warwick's conversion attempt was off target.

But Aironi's infectious endeavour got them back level. They scored a terrific 
try, breaking forward off a scrum on their 10-metre line. Mercier chipped over 
the top for centres Dylan des Fountain and Roberto Quartaroli to link, before 
the latter sent Laharrague darting in at the right corner. Mercier missed the 
conversion, leaving the sides tied at the break.

Munster came out with more purpose in the second half and went for the jugular 
after Perugini was yellow-carded for tackling a player without the ball. The 
men in red shunned a penalty and following a series of pick and drives, a 
bloodied Ronan muscled his way over under the posts. Warwick converted, and a 
clever counter from Jones set Munster on the move again, with prop Buckley 
pouncing to score from a close-range ruck.

Mercier's brace of penalties briefly kept Aironi in touch at 26-17. Doug 
Howlett, who was hungry for work all night, blasted his way through midfield – 
with the help of fellow All Black Sam Tuitupou – and although Johne Murphy was 
held up short, Ronan squeezed over from the ensuing ruck. Warwick converted and 
struck the post from a long-range penalty.

Although the game was now beyond them, Aironi kept pressing and the 
replacement scrum-half Michael Wilson was inches away from registering a late 
try that their efforts would have merited.
 