
Last autumn, the National Maritime Museum Cornwall <http://www.nmmc.co.uk/> 
hit the road with a living history programme that explored Cornwall's 
relationship with the sea. Called Cornish Voices, this actor-led outreach 
programme was designed especially for schools and delivered in partnership with 
local museums, which made each performance relevant to the history and heritage 
of its local community.

Running outreach work in any area is a time consuming and complex operation. 
Add to that Cornwall's geographic spread, super-narrow country lanes, some tiny 
schools, a handful of cars causing gridlock and questionable road signs and you 
get the picture.

So why not ask the schools to come to the museum? The issues with this are 
twofold: geography and transport. Cornwall is a long, thin county, which makes 
travel times quite long, and the rural public transport system can be expensive 
and tedious. These are real barriers to children accessing educational and 
cultural experiences beyond the school grounds, so much so that in some remote 
villages you're looking at one bus in the morning and one back sometime in the 
afternoon.

Hiring a coach is an option but it all adds to the cost, plus Cornwall is 
unusual in that a high percentage of schools are very small (60 children in the 
whole school) meaning to make a coach cost-effective you'd need to bring the 
whole school on a visit, which has the added complication of making the visit 
meet the diverse educational needs of children from four to 11-years-old.

So taking the museum's programme out is an attractive offer, but only if the 
schools can make the numbers add up. Teachers really want something they can't 
deliver themselves, like real artefacts, real paintings or live drama with 
professional actors. However, deep down, they are judging value for money 
against basic benchmarks, such as the cost of a supply teacher for the day. 
This places a subtle set of limits on what can be charged, and the resources 
that can be committed.

"The beauty of our model is that we can do a performance up to three times for 
each school and are very flexible depending on what the school wants, for 
example two performances and an assembly, or all-day drama, or sharing the cost 
with a neighbour school," says Stuart Slade, education manager at the Maritime 
Museum. "All this makes it much more attractive to schools."

Working with very old and small schools, sometimes in halls or classrooms, 
brings interesting challenges for the museums and actors. Slade lists a few: 
"Cooking smells coming through making the children hungry; classroom 
changeovers meaning lots of children coming and going over the performance 
space, and so you have to find actors who will to be comfortable to take 
whatever the day will throw at them and be okay with a pretty random set of 
bookings over the course of the tour."

Sessions also took place in some of Cornwall's small, often volunteer-run 
museums, where space can be an issue; the buildings can be packed with 
artefacts, so bringing a school group in is challenging, let alone a 
performance.

"Cornwall's network of museums are an amazing cultural asset, often run on a 
shoestring. We've faced a lot of challenges creating this living history 
programme – financial, time, expertise," says Slade. "Arts Council England 
investment has meant we can work with the small museums and help them to 
develop their own programme and build relationships with their local schools by 
linking the stories to their artefacts they became the evidence of the story."

The team behind the programme started by looking at how each museum could add 
to the core performance, linking the general themes to key local stories, 
artefacts and traditions. Some of the museum staff and volunteers were nervous 
about bringing new activity and groups of children into their spaces, but "a 
common desire to do something good for the children broke down the barriers 
very quickly," says Slade.

"If everyone genuinely wanted to do their best for the children then egos, 
reputations and politics all become secondary and you end up with something 
pretty inspirational and unique."

Sarah Ferrie is a freelance consultant in arts, culture and tourism – follow 
her on Twitter@sarahlferrie <https://twitter.com/sarahlferrie>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 