
Chart battles such as Alexandra Burke v Robbie Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams> have helped 2009 to become 
the biggest year ever for UK singles sales, industry experts said yesterday.

Recorded music body the BPI hailed the "astonishing" transformation of the 
market, as it was revealed that 117m singles have already been sold this year.

The Official Charts Company data showed sales have surpassed the previous 
record of 115.1m, set in 2008. The total has been reached with 10 weeks of 
trading, including the vital Christmas period, still to run this year, which 
also marks the 60th anniversary of the single.

Martin Talbot, managing director of the Official Charts Company, said: "The 
explosion in the singles market has been nothing short of astonishing this 
year, driven by big-sellers from Lady Gaga, La Roux, Dizzee Rascal, Lily Allen 
and the Black Eyed Peas."

He added: "What is so encouraging about this growth is that it looks likely to 
continue right through to the end of the year – in the past 10 days alone, we 
have seenAlexandra Burke <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke>, 
Robbie Williams and Cheryl Cole releasing three more singles which are already 
rivalling the biggest sales totals of this year."

Lady Gaga has the top two best-selling singles of the year so far – Poker Face 
is in first place and Just Dance is second. The Black Eyed Peas are third with 
I Gotta Feeling and fifth with Boom Boom Pow, while La Roux's In for the Kill 
is fourth.

Geoff Taylor, BPI chief executive, said: "We've witnessed an astonishing 
transformation of the UK singles market during the last six years, with digital 
downloads rapidly overtaking sales of CD singles and cassettes to dominate the 
scene. That singles have hit these heights while there are still more than a 
billion illegal downloads every year in the UK is testimony to the vibrancy of 
the download market. Consumers are responding to the value and innovation 
offered by the legal services and these new figures show how the market could 
explode if the government acts to tackle illegal peer-to-peer filesharing."

Last month, the business secretary, Lord Mandelson, said persistent illegal 
filesharers could have their internet connections cut off for short periods 
after a series of written warnings. However, culture secretary Ben Bradshaw 
told MPs this week that innocent people would not be cut off "willy-nilly" as 
the government cracks down on piracy.

Unlike the albums market, which is dominated by CD sales, the UK top 40 is now 
almost entirely comprised of digital singles. During this year, 98.6% of all 
singles were sold in digital formats. More than 389.2m single-track downloads 
have been sold in the UK since the launch of the first mainstream online stores 
in 2004.

Kim Bayley, of the Entertainment Retailers Association said: "In the physical 
world of CDs, the UK has long been the world leader in music consumption."
 