
What’s the best way to learn music? For many, progression is best measured by 
the formal exam journey – from the treasured early prize of grade 1 through to 
the proficiency and skill of a grade 8. It’s a time-honoured route: easy to 
understand and evaluate, and effective, but it only tells a small part of the 
story.


The established music education sector remains fixated on formal learning (an 
area that draws an alarmingly narrow demographic) and in doing so fails to 
reflect the diversity of young people, the ways in which they engage with music 
and the achievements of those who learn away from the exam system.

In recent years, much has been done to encourage early engagement in music. 
Group instrumental lessons for young children are now a regular feature in 
schools, withMusic Hubs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/music-in-schools-what-hubs-must-do> 
(introduced under the National Plan for Music Education), often in partnership 
with other music providers, working with around 80% of primary school children.

But the progression from that point becomes fragmented – a bit like a first 
date without a follow-up – and there’s a whiff of snobbery towards those who 
provide routes to musical progression that aren’t measured by a pass, merit or 
distinction. Those who wish to follow the formal exam route should be 
encouraged and welcomed, but so too should the child who wants to play in a 
band, sing in a choir or learn an instrument just for the hell of it. 
Progression – that is, getting as good as you can – is an important part of all 
routes.

It may come as a surprise that almost half 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/images/uploads/MUSICAL_ROUTES_report_-_Sarah_Derbyshire,_Royal_Philharmonic_Society.pdf>
 the children who currently play an instrument presently don’t have lessons and 
almost a fifth of them never have done. That’s a large slice of our musical 
youth who are choosing non-formal routes, for example through the participatory 
work of our professional ensembles, or by providers trying to meet the need of 
their local communities.

Musical Routes 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/index.php/rps_today/news/musical_routes_a_new_landscape_for_music_education>
, a report into musical learning for children and young people in England that 
I produced in partnership with theRoyal Philharmonic Society 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/>, identifies significant inequities of 
opportunity that are preventing many children from reaching their full musical 
potential.

The fault lies not so much with the range of provision on offer – our report 
celebrates excellent practice from a deeply committed profession – but in the 
way that it’s articulated. Away from the school setting, many eager young 
musicians simply don’t know about the varied opportunities to participate and 
learn. Economic and social barriers to learning, and a postcode lottery 
exacerbate the problem.

While the National Plan for Music Education has laid the ground plan for 
collaboration, it has not yet succeeded in providing an infrastructure that 
knits together the many and various strands for delivery. Many musicians, 
teachers, practitioners and organisations recognise that inequalities of 
opportunity exist and are devising ways to fill the gaps, but the current 
structure for music education is widely acknowledged as complex.

Music education and professional music organisations don’t coordinate 
effectively, making it difficult for children and their families to navigate 
the musical landscape. At a local level, individual organisations often work in 
isolation, and examples of good practice that could be replicated in other 
areas of the country, especially those with a traditional lack of musical 
provision, remain firmly rooted to the spot.

Music Hubs (previously local authority music services) have long provided a 
traditional framework, including instrumental tuition and ensembles, through 
which the keen child musician can progress. They provide a crucial bridge 
between schools and music professionals. The learning and participation 
programmes of professional ensembles are also the backbone for the research and 
development work that will grow the musicians, listeners and audiences of the 
future. But in some quarters, there’s still a sense that broader musical 
learning is a side issue. Like confetti, you can sprinkle music across the 
community, so long as it’s brushed away before the “real” concert begins.

The most successful and enlightened ensembles and organisations – and there 
are many world leaders in the field in the UK – recognise that the driving 
force for creativity, understanding and engagement is learning and 
participation. It’s central to their artistic output. The transformative effect 
of these learning experiences, whether intimate or dazzlingly ambitious, 
individual or communal, is recognised and championed by many musicians (though 
sadly, rarely reported). Professional musicians performing and working in a 
school setting offer an important catalyst; the more that children experience 
the world of music close-up, and musicians understand the educational 
environment, the better.

The key to lifelong engagement in music is enjoyment, whether young music 
enthusiasts ultimately become professional musicians, amateur music-makers or 
keen listeners. The challenge is to ensure that every child has the chance to 
realise their potential.

 Conductor Marin Alsop put it nicely in her Last Night of the Proms speech, 
describing the children of Baltimore Orchestra’sOrchKids 
<http://www.bsomusic.org/education-community/young-musicians/orchkids.aspx> 
programme: “listening to each other, responding to each other, making beautiful 
music together, they’re proud of themselves, they’re proud of their community, 
when I see them it gives me great hope for the future.”

We need to focus less on the “best” way to learn and more on the fundamentals 
of engaging children and young people in excellent music of all kinds – in all 
settings. The starting point is to define clearly the building blocks of 
musical learning, which are, to my mind: singing; reading music; access to 
instrumental tuition (both formal and informal); digital technology; attending 
live performance; creative involvement in composition; improvisation and 
performance of their own work.


The music profession needs to work harder to articulate clearly what musical 
progression and success looks like in terms that are relevant and applicable 
across different genres and traditions. It needs to better value all areas of 
provision and signpost more clearly to children and their families the 
diversity of musical routes open to them.

It’s our responsibility to articulate the impact that music can have on a 
child’s learning and wellbeing to education leaders, teachers and parents – and 
to build diversity in music, so that children see people enjoying and 
participating who reflect their communities and the world around them.

Quite simply, we need to get much better at telling people about opportunities 
for musical learning – and where to find them. Why not have a national online 
music education map and resource centre to improve communication? How about a 
network of national musical mentors and champions from all ages and backgrounds 
to widen diversity in music? Funding is tight, but there are opportunities to 
realign available resources to encourage a more inclusive approach.


If we don’t close the fault line between formal and informal approaches to 
learning, then the inequities will prevail and we will fail many young people 
with musical talent.


Sarah Derbyshire is author of Musical Routes: A Landscape for Music Education, 
which you can downloadhere 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/index.php/rps_today/news/musical_routes_a_new_landscape_for_music_education>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 