
This week, the storied record label executive Clive Davis published his 
autobiography, The Soundtrack of My Life 
<http://www.amazon.com/Soundtrack-My-Life-Clive-Davis/dp/1476714789/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1361553514&sr=1-1&keywords=clive+davis>
 – an account of five decades in the music business and his central role in the 
careers of Whitney Houston, Alicia Keys, Barry Manilow and more. Attention, 
however, has focused less on the music and more on Davis's bisexuality, a 
revelation that the 80-year-old made calmly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/feb/20/record-mogul-clive-davis-bisexual>.

"There will come a time," he writes, "when very few will care about other 
people's sexual preference – or preferences." There are, indeed, far more 
interesting things in the book than this and the "she-said he-said" Kelly 
Clarkson imbroglio. ("She cried", he said; "He was a bully", she said – and so 
on). Here's what we learned:

Janis Joplin wanted to "ball him" (and he turned her down)

When an endearingly square Davis first sees Janis Joplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/janis-joplin> perform, it's at the 
flower-strewn, marijuana-soaked Monterey Pop Festival and he's wearing "a V 
neck tennis sweater in the traditional white, maroon and black, over white 
pants." He's blown away by the "not conventionally beautiful" Janis and signs 
her as soon as he can. But she also seems to terrify him. Herewith, the most 
cringingly indelible line of the book: "In the afternoon sun, she radiated a 
desperate sexual heat." So "desperate" that after signing her and the band, 
their manager tells him: "She thinks it only fitting and proper that she ball 
you to cement the deal." Davis declined the offer "as politely as I could."

He assented to be dressed by Miles Davis

If a legendary jazz trumpeter wants to style his record label boss, who is 
Davis to say no? Miles sends him "a pair of black-and-gray flared trousers, a 
black-and-gray striped vest, and a long sleeved black shirt", accompanied by a 
note asking him to wear this outfit to the opening night of his shows with the 
Grateful Dead at the Fillmore West because, as he puts it, "I want you to look 
special." And he certainly did.

He missed out on owning a Warhol and he hasn't got over it

When Andy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> made an 
album-cover portrait of Aretha Franklin, Davis was tempted to buy it but 
thought the asking price, $25,000, a little steep. "I was recently in a 
first-class restaurant at Park Avenue and Fifty-third Street called Casa 
Lever," he writes. "On the wall was the Warhol portrait of Aretha." On learning 
from the manager that it's worth $3.7m, he writes, "I lost my appetite and, 
good and hospitable as the restaurant is, I have difficulty going back there."

He has watched Austin Powers and would like you to know that he has a sense of 
humour

In his chapter on the Milli Vanilli scandal, Davis claims he had no idea that 
the duo did not, in fact, sing on their own recordings. "Over the years I've 
tried to comprehend how that might have played out, how the discussions with 
the producer might have gone: 'Look, we all know these aren't the singers on 
the tracks but let's pretend we don't know, and pull of this musical fraud' – 
at which point I might have stroked a cat in my lap like Dr Evil."

He told what Whitney what to do

Davis begins this section of the book by saying that it is "without question" 
the most difficult chapter for him to write and his grief followingthe singer's 
death last February is palpable 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/feb/12/whitney-houston-dies-aged-48>. It 
is extraordinary, though, to read of just how peremptory he was in the early 
stages of her stardom. Davis reproduces a lengthy, paternalistic letter to a 
young Whitney in which he enumerates several "constructive suggestions". "It's 
certainly OK to improvise at the end of the song and to extend it and give it a 
soulful feeling but it can't go on and on just aimlessly," he chides. "[...] it 
looks like you don't know how to end the song."

He and Michael Jackson used to sing to each other down the phone

Would that we had tapes of this! Davis reveals that during a conversation with 
MJ about his annual pre-Grammys party, "We would take turns singing songs 
together on the phone as we talked about the various artists who would be 
performing and his favourite hits of theirs."

Clive and rappers have a lot in common (he believes)

Nowhere does this self-described good, Jewish, Brooklyn boy seem more clueless 
than in his chapters on Bad Boy, the imprint of Arista Records run by Sean 
Combs – or Puffy, as Davis still calls him. When Davis is called on to speak 
about Combs to "a large hall filled with all the power players, both artists 
and executives, in the hip-hop community" he is "concerned that I might not fit 
in or that I would be perceived as not fitting in". But don't worry y'all, he's 
got this. This, the middle-aged white record executive proudly recalls, was his 
opening sally: "Let me just get one issue out of the way right here and now: 
Tonight you motherfuckers are gonna get the real Clive Davis!" But here's Clive 
keeping it real, with his explanation of what he and the world of hip-hop have 
in common: "I am passionate about music and my work to the bottom of my very 
soul, but I also very much enjoy good clothes and some of the finer things in 
life. Rappers do too, and perhaps it's one of the reasons I've been welcomed so 
warmly into their world."

The Davis clan play their own version of American Idol

Towards the end of the book you can practically feel Davis leaning back in his 
armchair, soaked in paterfamilias satisfaction. "So it's been a wonderfully 
full life," he writes. But, he writes, if his account of the record business 
"leaves you, the reader, with the impression that I had little or no life 
outside of work, let me correct that notion right now." There follows a 
bewildering insight into Davis family life when he reveals that they play a 
version ofAmerican Idol <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>
, the megalithic TV show on which he was a guest judge. "The competition is 
really serious in the warmest of atmospheres", and it takes place in his home's 
"wonderful theater which comfortably seats about forty people". In case you 
were wondering.

He is very, very proud of his parties

Oh did he mention his pre-Grammys party? Yes. Yes, I think he did. The book 
begins and ends and is regularly punctuated with much chest-puffed musing on 
this annual event, "a music business institution to which invitations are 
highly coveted". The hardest part, he brags, "is saying no, even to people I 
socialize with regularly." Never mind Whitney's seven consecutive No1s, forget 
being inducted into the Hall of Fame or his five Grammy Awards – the real 
reason he's going to die happy is this: "It is one of my proudest achievements 
that it continues to this day... the party is still going strong – more 
exclusive, more unique, and more festive than ever."
 