
App: My Council Services UK <http://www.mycouncilservices.com>

By: iTouch Vision <http://www.itouchvision.com/> and, in the UK, Abavus 
<http://www.abavus.co.uk/>

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone, iPod Touch, iPad (BlackBerry and Android versions are in 
development)

What is it?


Report problems in your local area to the council direct from your phone.

Who is it by?


iTouch Vision specialises in developing government IT solutions for the 
iPhone, Android and the internet. Abavus is an established service provider to 
the UK public sector.

What does it promise?


"Submit reports for the following issues: graffiti, litter, fly-tipping, 
potholes, street lights, abandoned vehicles, pest problems, refuse problems, 
missed bin collections, dog fouling, dead animals and many more."

Is it easy to use?


The set-up is a little arduous. You have to fill in your country, region and 
council, along with your personal details – including your mobile phone number. 
To be fair, this enables you to upload details of a problem to your particular 
council so it's worthwhile taking the time.

Once that's all done, you can access your council's contact details easily 
enough and reporting an "incident" is simple, if a little drawn-out. You 
describe the location and nature of the incident, categorise it, take a photo 
or video of the incident and then submit it. Your history of reported problems 
appears on the home page.

A quick apology to Brighton & Hove council – I reported a phantom faulty 
street light in the testing of the app, though without a location or any 
further details.

Is it fun?


Let's be honest here – reporting dog poo on the pavement, dead seagulls on 
your lawn or a Banksy wannabe's latest work of art scrawled across the side of 
your garage is not the sexiest way to spend your time. But itis useful.

Is it pretty?


It's a shame the creativity behind the icon that appears on your phone – two 
stick men jumping for joy underneath the union flag, clearly delighted to be in 
direct contact with their local council – is not replicated elsewhere across 
the app. Instead, it's a uniformly dull blue and white palette with the odd 
integrated Google map to brighten things up.

Should you download it?

 My-Council-Services-code 
There are minor irritations. The entire news section reloads each time you 
click on it, rather than leaving the already downloaded links and reloading 
only the latest updates. Another minor quibble is that the event and info 
section wouldn't load on my set-up, due to an RSS feed problem.

But if you even occasionally find yourself outraged by fly-tipping, dangerous 
potholes or foxes slaughtering your chickens this will be worth downloading. 
Input the details, take a quick picture and, hey presto, you've informed your 
local council of the problem. It sure beats trying to speak to a real person in 
the notoriously labyrinthine communications departments of local councils.

The £1m question is, of course, how can you be sure the council is receiving 
your communique and, crucially, will act on it? The creators of the app say: 
"By default all councils will receive the report by email. Once a council has 
signed up to the premium services they will be able to receive reports by their 
preferred method." This means the council will receive your messages, but if it 
wants to manage them in a sensible fashion, it will have to pay Abavus a fee to 
download its software. Timeframes for responses will depend on individual 
councils.
 