
Sat in front of the gas fire one Sunday afternoon during my neverending 
adolescence, I didn't pay much attention to theblack and white film starting on 
BBC2 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FsB6-5KymIw>. As its lace-trimmed credits 
rolled I knew exactly what was coming: a comfortably dull period drama. A 
couple of hours later, as its neat ending was undercut by a final, fiendishly 
clever twist, my 14-year-old funk of know-it-all boredom had been blown away. 
How exhilarating to see a bunch of well-dressed, well-spoken grown-ups behaving 
despicably – and getting away with it. For a cosy Ealing comedy it was 
incredibly black. Unlikely as it seemed, apparently there were adults – even as 
far back as 1949 – who understood that most people were disgusting and the 
world sucked.

Set in 1900, Kind Hearts and Coronets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36180/kind-hearts-and-coronets> tells the 
story of Louis Mazzini (Dennis Price), a Clapham draper's assistant and distant 
heir to the D'Ascoyne dukedom who decides to murder everyone standing between 
him and the family title in revenge for their cruel treatment of his mother. 
From the opening scenes, in which a hangman frets about the "proper" execution 
of his titled victim ("the last execution of a duke was very badly bungled. 
That was in the days of the axe of course"), Robert Hamer and John Dighton's 
whip-smart screenplay and economical direction sweep you up and speed you along.

We catch our first glimpse of the debonair Mazzini from behind – lustrous 
curls gleaming above the padded satin collar of his smoking jacket as he pens 
his memoirs in his well-appointed cell. We then follow him in flashback as he 
drinks port in country vicarages, punts along the Thames and takes tea on sunny 
home-county lawns, all the while killing off his relatives one by one.

Busy as he is "pruning" his family tree, Louis still finds time to conduct an 
adulterous affair with his equally worldly childhood sweetheart Sibella. (How 
fantastic, I thought, that she was allowed to be just as nasty as he was.) 
"Louis, I think I've married the most boring man in London," she purrs about 
his better-off rival, Lionel. "In England," he replies. "In Europe," she sighs.

If Price's beautifully modulated voiceover creates much of the film's spell, 
then Joan Greenwood's fruity delivery is also funny and seductive. Always 
pouting from beneath some complicated hat, Sibella is poison in petticoats. 
Louis describes her as: "Vain, selfish, cruel, deceitful. Adorable."

The film is best known now as an early showcase for Alec Guinness, and his 
cameos aseight variously jolly, arrogant, mean and stupid D'Ascoynes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DAA41TwZz1w> are acting genius – I especially 
like the vim with which the suffragette Lady Agatha punches in shop windows 
with her brolly. In the famous funeral scene where we see the remaining 
D'Ascoynes together, Guinness inhabits each of his Edwardian establishment 
gargoyles completely –general, admiral, banker 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fq7DeZRL7U> – before the camera finally comes 
to rest on the clergyman leading the funeral service (Guinness again) and 
Mazzini rounds off his inventory: "And in the pulpit, talking interminable 
nonsense, the Reverend Lord Henry D'Ascoyne."

Kind Hearts and Coronets is a brilliantly sustained attack on what Hamer 
called "established, although not practiced, moral convention". Silkily 
subversive, his amusing comedy of "20th-century homicide" not only makes you 
root for a serial killer but delight in the ingenuity with which he dispatches 
his victims. Its witty script can still feel disarmingly dark today. "I was 
sorry about the girl," Louis muses coolly, after sending playboy Ascoyne 
D'Ascoyne and his mistress to their death over a weir, "but found some relief 
in the reflection that she had presumably, during the weekend, already 
undergone a fate worse than death." In another he erases infant twins from the 
D'Ascoyne family tree – explaining that "fortunately, an epidemic of diphtheria 
had restored the status quo".

From a fairly privileged background himself, Hamer won a scholarship to 
Cambridge before being sent down for a homosexual affair and going into films. 
This was his first as director, and his most perfect. (In different ways, drink 
does for two of the D'Ascoynes and it did for the alcoholic Hamer too, aged 
just 52.)

Knowing that backstory, his disgust at the callousness and hypocrisy of 
Britain's class system seems more pronounced. Take the scene where the Duke 
finds a poacher caught in one of his mantraps and sends in his gamekeeper – to 
collect the bird; or the assassination of the general at his club with a 
booby-trapped tin of caviar: "If there's one thing the Ruskies do well … " the 
pompous old bore tells his dining companion before being obliterated by 
Mazzini's homemade bomb. (The others, of course, being molotov cocktails and 
the communist overthrow of a feudal system.)

Kind Hearts and Coronets may not be the most cinematic film – there are others 
more spectacular, more thrilling, more moving, more romantic, – but watching it 
was such a delicious surprise to my 14-year-old self. Like hearing an elderly 
relative swear, its sophisticated cynicism shocked me awake.
 