
There's a touching scene near the end of Alien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> vs Predator when an eight-foot, 
fang-faced predator, using the acidic blood from the severed finger of an alien 
face-hugger, tenderly scorches a mark of courage and respect onto the cheek of 
the last human survivor. She grimaces as her skin burns, and then their eyes 
meet across the great expanse of space and time that separates both cultures, 
and then they kiss … or they would have if the queen alien hadn't eviscerated 
the woman's new friend with the pointy end of her tail. And there ends the 
almost-birth of a new movie genre, the inter-species romcom.

Alien vs Predator was directed by Paul WS Anderson, whose other movies include 
the flawed but decentEvent Horizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/69256/event-horizon-review>, one of his 
few non-video game tie-ins – which despite a strong cast, including a slimline 
Laurence Fishburne, was a critical and financial failure. (This due largely to 
the fact that someone apparently replaced the original ending with "Hellraiser 
in space" and didn't tell any of the cast except Sam Neill. Which would explain 
why Neill appears to be channelling Clive Barker's Pinhead in the final 
scenes.) Even less well known, despite starring the incomparable Kurt Russell, 
was Soldier. Again it was a commercial and critical flop, perhaps because of 
the fact that it co-starred Jason Scott Lee, previously Mowgli in the 
live-action version ofThe Jungle Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/05/jungle-book-west-yorkshire-review>
, as a psychotic, genetically modified super-soldier.

But I'm sure that Anderson doesn't care about such minor setbacks, as he can 
always churn out yet another in the mindless, money-raking Resident Evil 
franchise. There he can hone his minimalist approach to plotting, scripting and 
characterisation, while keeping the money in the family by casting his wife, 
Milla Jovovich, in the lead role for all 300 planned movies.

In fairness to Anderson, he does two things well: action sequences and turning 
video game franchises into profitable movies. If he achieves nothing else in 
his career, then at least he will have done society a favour by encouraging his 
spotty-faced target demographic, pale and blinking, out of their bedrooms and 
into the light, even if only for the time that it takes them to get from house 
to cinema.
 Heavy weaponry … the casting of Lance Henriksen lends some gravitas and 
legitimacy to AvP. Photograph: Jorgen Vollmer/AP 
So, to the plot of AvP, for what it's worth. A dying businessman, Charles 
Bishop Weyland (Lance Henriksen), and a "crack" team of experts are 
investigating the source of an unidentifiable signal emanating from beneath the 
Antarctic ice sheet, which also happens to be the site of an old whaling 
station, mysteriously abandoned exactly 100 years before. Spooky. When Weyland 
and his team arrive, ready to start digging into the ice, they find that a 
perfectly round tunnel has already been cut using technology not of this world. 
A bit like Crossrail then.

At this point, and for the 100th time in 10 minutes, they ignore the advice of 
the expedition guide (a game Sanaa Latham), and Weyland leads his team down 
into the unknown. At the bottom of the tunnel they discover a 1,000-year-old 
pyramid that has clearly been built by a race of space-travelling warriors, the 
predators. And it soon becomes obvious that the humans have been lured there to 
act as host bodies to baby aliens that, once fully grown into the now familiar 
HR Giger-inspired killing machines, will be hunted by the predators as part of 
a rite-of-passage.

Needless to say it all goes horribly wrong, proving that no matter how 
technologically advanced you are, anything that involves Tory-inspired 
transport initiatives will end in disaster. Before you can say "sacrificial 
chamber", baby aliens are sprouting through ribcages like blood-splattered 
daffodils during a particularly fecund spring. Soon everyone is running and 
screaming through a maze of randomly shifting tunnels, and dying in a variety 
of painful and ingenious ways. And along the way we discover that one of my 
long-held beliefs is in fact true: that this is how the great indigenous 
civilisations of the Americas perished.

AvP owes its genesis more to the video games than to the movies that preceded 
them, but this actually weighs in its favour in that it is not tied down by the 
conventions of the originals. (Although, that didn't stop the wonderfully loopy 
Jean-Pierre Juenet from making the spectacularly bonkers Alien Resurrection, a 
movie that, having Winona Ryder as a vengeful synthetic lifeform, is 
responsible for one of the most ill-judged casting decisions of all time.) And 
so, while I am still plagued by the question of how the aliens, without so much 
as gulping down a bottle of powdered milk, go from eight inches long to seven 
feet tall in the space of five minutes, in this context I no longer need to 
care.

As with all of Anderson's films, AvP looks good and moves fast, and once the 
action gets going there is no letting up. For me, though, the cast is the best 
thing about it. In what a cynic might view as a cynical marketing move, the 
casting of Henriksen is inspired, as both he and the character he plays are a 
physical link to the Alien franchise proper, lending the movie a specious 
legitimacy. He is also a decent performer who has been in mostly terrible 
films, but whose gravelly voice and dried-shammy features always lend much 
needed gravitas to the nonsense around him.

But it's Spud from Trainspotting (aka Ewen Bremner) who takes the plaudits, 
and to me he is generally the highlight of whatever tosh he's in. It's not that 
he's a great screen presence or any more gifted than the rest of the cast, it's 
just that we must applaud any fictional unemployed drug addict from an 
Edinburgh council estate who has achieved so much in one lifetime, even when 
it's only giving birth to baby aliens as opposed to seeing them crawl across 
the ceiling. It's fitting too that Spud should spend his final moments with his 
fellow countryman Tommy Flanagan, the Scottish bloke with the scarred face from 
Braveheart and Gladiator. Spud is perfect for this film, even if he's only here 
as an alien birth mother, because he does a great line in bug-eyed terror. And 
when his new mate is dragged off, screaming "freedom!" at the top of his lungs 
while on his way to a non-consensual coupling with an alien face-hugger, Spud's 
eyes say more than a thousand words ever could, they scream; where's that radge 
bampot Begbie when you need him?

Meanwhile, back in reality, the predators have turned up late and are none too 
happy with the humans messing with their Crossrail project. It's not only that 
some of the sacrificial humans are still alive, it's that they've also 
inadvertently stolen the predators' laser-guided weapons, thus making the 
outcome of the hunt a little less certain.

And here we come to an unpalatable truth that I have long tried to ignore: the 
Predators' sense of martial superiority stems primarily from their hunting 
weaker and less technologically advanced prey using advanced weaponry and 
cloaking technology. This seems a bit one-sided, and doesn't seem like a 
healthy societal dynamic to me. I'm proven correct when the aliens stop killing 
or impregnating solid British character actors and start picking on some beings 
their own size.

So there's little sympathy when the predators' invisibility cloaking fails and 
their over-reliance on technology leads to a green-bloodied end. But before 
they fall we witness the scene I had always dreamed of: a predator spinning an 
alien by the tail like an Olympic hammer thrower, before launching it across 
the screen.

And then there are two: one woman, one predator, and they do what they have to 
do. She proves her mettle doing what heavily armed eight-foot invisible 
predators clearly can't. She kicks alien arse, destroys the queen's eggs, and 
then they both race hand-in-claw into the night toward the almost-romantic 
denouement. Then, with her beau-that-will-never-be gone, it's down to the 
feisty Ripley-replacement to take out the alien queen and source some 
anti-scarring cream for her permanently disfigured face. He should have just 
given her a ring.
 