
Joe: 
My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece is a brilliant book which shows dilemmas 
and differences that people have. It shows you should never judge people on 
their appearance, or in this case religion. The author has shown the strong 
relationships between brothers and sisters and shows weaknesses with other 
members of the family.Annabel Pitcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annabel-pitcher> has made Jamie sound like 
he is very confused and containing his emotions. He doesn't remember his 
sister, he only has memories of others, like his other sister Jasmine, and his 
mum and his dad. It is a very sad story but has a happy ending. It is a 
brilliant book and I would recommend it to anyone!

Peace_love_books: 
This book oversteps the boundaries of "really good" and crosses into the 
section marked "favourites". Written in the point of view of 10-year-old Jamie, 
the language is easy enough to understand, but the subtext and subject of the 
book is quite adult.

The book starts with Jamie talking about his dead sister, killed by a 
terrorist attack, and how his family view her – as still living. When his mum 
walks out on him, his dad and remaining sister, his dad turns to alcohol, and 
they move to the Lake District for a new start. But the only person at school 
who doesn't bully him is Sunya, and she's Muslim. Jamie has been brought up 
with the belief that Muslims are bad, and he never argued – after all, some of 
them killed his sister – but Sunya is different; they can be superheroes 
together.

Annabel Pitcher cleverly balances the underlying themes of bullying, racism, 
depression, and alcoholism with the excitement of forbidden friendship, hope, 
and ultimately the strength to move on. The result is an amazing book; one you 
won't be able to put down because you wish so much that Jamie will be okay.

Larainlima: 
This book was about a boy called Jamie who had twin older sisters. When he was 
five his family had a picnic and one of his older sisters, Rose, was blown up 
by a terrorist bomb. Jamie hasn't cried in the five years his sister has been 
dead. On his sister's birthday his mum walks out on them.

Jamie and his sister auditioned for Britain's Biggest Talent Show because the 
advert said that the audition would change your life. He invites his mum and 
dad to the talent show and in his mind they would get back together but mum 
doesn't say anything.

My favourite part of the book was when dad gave Jamie the second hug he could 
remember and a cup of hot chocolate. Jamie loved the hot chocolate, even though 
there were lumps in it due to the powder not being stirred in properly, because 
his dad had made it.

I recommend this book to people who like a sad story but that has some funny 
parts. If you like Jacqueline Wilson's Diamond Girls where the mum just lies in 
bed the whole time and doesn't take care of her four girls, you'll love this.

SophieDophie: 
My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece is about a boy called Jamie. He has ginger 
hair and a wonderful cat called Roger. When Jamie was just five years old, his 
older sister, Rose, was killed by a bomb which exploded in London. Although 
everyone in the family tries to live with what's happened, it's impossible. 
Jamie's dad starts to drink too much, Rose's twin sister, Jas, dyes her hair 
pink and then Jamie's mum decides to move out and live with another man called 
Nigel.

Just before Jamie's 10th birthday, Jamie, Jas, their dad and Roger move to the 
Lake District and this is where the story starts. Jamie has to cope with 
starting at a new school and making new friends as best as he can without the 
help of either of his parents. His dad's too sad and his mum's not there. 
Throughout the book, all he wants is to have a happy family again.

Why I love this book

I love this book because it tackles so many interesting subjects in a 
realistic, honest way. At school, Jamie has to worry about friendships and 
bullying. At home, he has to worry about death, divorce and change. The issues 
of racism, religious differences and injustice also feature in the story.

Also, the book tackles the idea that even when dreams come true, there's 
always a risk that you'll end up feeling terribly disappointed.

The way the book is written, Jamie seems like a real person. I think this is 
because the author explains the many controversial subjects through the eyes of 
a 10-year-old boy who obviously doesn't think about them in the same way as an 
adult would.

Who will enjoy reading this book?

I'm 12 years old and I think it's just perfect for people of my age and older. 
In fact, both my parents want to read it and I think they'll really enjoy it! 
(For the moment I think my younger sister's a little bit too young to really 
enjoy it, especially the ending.)

I also think it would make a great film or television series, but only for 
older children. If it was for younger children, many of the serious bits would 
have to be taken out of the story.

If you don't live in the UK (I live in France), I think it's a brilliant book 
for finding out what it's like to go to school in the UK. It's also really 
interesting to see how English children speak to each other - and to adults!

Final thoughts

At the end of the book, I felt really moved because no matter how many bad 
things were happening to Jamie and no matter how sad he was feeling, he still 
had to get up in the morning and go to school.

So even though his sister had been killed, his parents were getting divorced 
and he was feeling terribly sad and lonely, he still had to carry on and try to 
stay positive, no matter what. It's a great reminder that we often don't always 
know what's happening in our friends' lives and sometimes they might be feeling 
sad at school because of what's going on at home.

My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece is one of the best books I've ever read and 
I really, really hope it is translated into French so that all my French 
friends can read it, as well!

Penguin:
My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece is a very good story about the effects of 
an act of terrorism on a family. A lot of sad things happen, but there are good 
things too.

In this book I like how Annabel Pitcher writes through the eyes of a 
ten-year-old boy. Jamie is a normal boy whose family is traumatised. The author 
has done an exceptional job of displaying the emotions of the characters, it is 
this and Jamie's hopeful outlook that make the book flow brilliantly and make 
you want to read every last word.

I hope Annabel Pitcher is going to write another book, and if she does she 
will be a very successful author. If I were to rate this book I would give it 
10 out of 10.

Wookie: 
My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece by Annabel Pitcher is the best book I have 
ever read! This heart-wrenching book is one of a kind and not to be missed. The 
narrator, Jamie, a young boy, has a truly unique personality which comes across 
clearly in his portrayal of the events. This book tackles many 
awkward/sensitive concepts such as young love, racism, divorce and death and 
how they can divide a family. It covers all emotions, as I read my mood changed 
from crying with laughter to crying full of sorrow at the heartbreaking. I 
would recommend this book to all above-12s as it is written from a naïve point 
of view and in my view GENIUS!
 