
Nathan Lyon spun a patched-up Australian side closer to a 3-0 Test series 
sweep over Pakistan on day three of the SCG clash. The tourists were 271-8 at 
stumps on Thursday, still trailing Australia by 267 runs despite a gallant 
century from Younus Khan.

Chris Gayle marks 'Don't Blush Baby' anniversary with lewd video post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/chris-gayle-dont-blush-baby-anniversary-lewd-video-post>
Younus is 136 not out, having frustrated Steve Smith’s side with the help of 
rain that washed out one and a half sessions in the morning. Lyon grabbed three 
wickets on day three, including the key scalp of skipper Misbah-ul-Haq. Fellow 
tweaker Steve O’Keefe also helped Australia turn the screws, removing Asad 
Shafiq for four with the help of a remarkable slips catch from Smith.

Smith has been criticised by Shane Warne for much of the summer regarding his 
treatment of Lyon. The legendary leg-spinner had no complaints on Thursday when 
Lyon was called into the attack with the second new ball just five overs old. 
He delivered the wicket of Mohammad Amir that over.

Lyon was then given an odd one-over break but returned to bamboozle Wahab Riaz 
with a well-flighted delivery that spun sharply between bat and pad. Mitchell 
Starc conjured the first of six wickets to fall on the rain-shortened day, with 
his run-out snapping a 146-run partnership between Azhar Ali and Younus.

Smith was forced to reshuffle his plans late in Thursday’s final session 
because of the absence of Matthew Wade and Matt Renshaw. Wade took the field at 
2.35pm when play finally started but left shortly after and spent most of the 
day at the team hotel, laid low by a stomach bug.

Australia v Pakistan: third Test, day three – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/05/australia-v-pakistan-third-test-day-three-live>
Peter Handscomb, who has served as keeper for Victoria and Big Bash League 
side Melbourne Stars, took the gloves in the absence of Wade. It meant 
Handscomb, who claimed a couple of impressive catches at short leg during the 
Boxing Day Test, wasn’t available to field under the lid. Renshaw was given 
that job and delivered a reminder of why it is so unpopular, copping a nasty 
blow to the top of his helmet during the final session.

The 20-year-old, who was also hit on the grille during his maiden Test ton on 
day one, initially remained on the field but came off soon after with a 
headache. Renshaw was assessed for concussion and never returned to the fray. 
That setback meant David Warner was shifted to first slip when Australia took 
the second new ball.
 