
National Youth Week could be abolished with the federal government refusing to 
guarantee funding beyond 2017 in a move youth advocates say will alienate young 
people.

In savings worth about $3m to the budget’s bottom line, the May budget cut 
funding for the National Youth awards, the Australian Clearinghouse for Youth 
Studies (Acys), and has not funded National Youth Week beyond 2017.

Acys provides information and research on youth and issues affecting youth as 
a free service to government, youth peaks, the youth sector and broader 
community organisations.

The national director of the Australian Youth Affairs Coalition, Leo 
Fieldgrass, said the cuts had been “buried” in the Department of Education and 
Training budget statements instead of being included in the main budget papers.

The entire youth engagement line which funded the youth awards and National 
Youth Week was cut by 80% in the 2015-16 financial year and by 100% after June 
2017.

Forget about intergenerational theft, this is intergenerational bullying | 
Evan Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/10/forget-about-intergenerational-theft-this-is-intergenerational-bullying>
“We’re incredibly disappointed. Sadly, this is the latest in a series of cuts 
by the Abbott government to youth engagement and the youth sector,” Fieldgrass 
told Guardian Australia.

“These cuts show loud and clear that the government has no interest in hearing 
and working with young people and those supporting them, or recognising and 
celebrating young Australians’ achievements and contributions.

“At a time of record youth unemployment, and concerns about youth people 
disengaging from their communities, these are short-sighted, counterproductive 
measures that will further alienate young people from the policy makers 
supposed to be acting in their interests.”

Fieldgrass said the government had stopped funding for federal related 
activities for National Youth Week such as the the national organising 
committee, central website and eNewsletter. The government had already 
committed money to the states and territories for local events until 2017 
before the budget and it shows no money beyond then.

Fieldgrass said the cuts to the youth sector began straight after the 2013 
election when the government did not retain a minister for youth or a dedicated 
youth portfolio. The Australian Youth Affairs Coalition was defunded in last 
year’s budget and the Australian Youth Forum has also had its funding abolished.

Billed as a national celebration of youth, National Youth Week was conceived 
in 2000 and runs exhibitions, shows, competitions and events. In his press 
release launching this year’s National Youth Week, the parliamentary secretary 
to the minister for education and training, Scott Ryan, said it was about 
providing opportunities for all young people to voice concerns or issues 
relevant to them.

“There are many young people out in local communities doing good things, and 
this is one event that aims to celebrate that,” he said.

The state and territory peak youth organisations wrote to the education 
minister, Christopher Pyne, two weeks ago asking for the cut in funding to 
youth engagement to be reconsidered.

The letter focused on the “devastating” impact the closure of Clearinghouse in 
particular would have.

“The youth sector has relied on this information to inform our work, promote 
best practice within the youth sector and stay up to date with current events 
and practice across the youth sector in Australia and internationally,” the 
letter says.

“The decision to cut funding for Acys will have a devastating impact on 
outcomes for young people, and ultimately the Australian community, who will 
bear the burden of ill informed responses to key issues affecting their 
families, and the ability of young Australians to achieve economic and social 
participation.”

Pyne has yet to respond but Ryan said the budget had focused on new 
initiatives to provide opportunities for young Australians to participate in 
education and employment. He cited the $330m for the youth employment strategy, 
which includes paying 6,000 young jobseekers to do work experience for up to 
four weeks while still receiving income support.

“The Australian government will continue to fund state and territory 
governments for National Youth Week for the next two years, while it is also 
important to note that the National Youth awards have only occurred since 2013 
and are not a longstanding activity,” he said.


Ryan said the Acys research would still be widely available.

Griffin Blizzard, 21, the Tasmanian representative for this year’s National 
Youth Week said a key loss would be the shutdown of social media pages which 
had built up communities of young people from all over the country. The pages 
are due to be shut down at the end of this month.

“Being involved in youth week has allowed me to voice my opinions and the 
issues of my peers, especially in rural and remote areas to the national 
scale,” he said. “It’s an amazing opportunity to bring forward the issues that 
none of the other states or territories face.

“That’s been one of the most important and beneficial things for me, to be 
able to put those ideas and issues forward.”


Blizzard said he was surprised such a well known and recognised event was “not 
seen as important” in the national government’s eyes.
 