
It has taken Natural England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/natural-england>, the government's 
adviser on the environment, just three years to meet a radical carbon-cutting 
goal to halve emissions from its business travel and estate.

The carbon reduction programme began in 2007 and reached its goal in the early 
days of 2011 – proving major cuts could be made by changing behaviour and 
finding more sustainable ways of working.

The office estate's carbon footprint was cut by 60% and travel footprint by 
40%. Together they have contributed £2m in savings, plus increased productivity 
and a better work-life balance for staff.

Three factors were critical to this success.

Firstly, a travel carbon footprinting tool – based on expenses claims, credit 
card bills and other records – was used to work out carbon emissions for each 
mode of travel along with a monthly report.

Secondly, energy efficiency in offices was improved by moving to more 
sustainable locations, encouraging homeworking and the use of touchdown 
centres, running an energy saving campaign in offices and giving home workers a 
home electricity meter.

And finally, staff were consulted on a green travel policy in which they 
agreed to cut carbon by reducing business journeys. This was helped, in part, 
by fitting rail ticket machines in offices.

Natural England has taken some innovative steps to help staff make a 
contribution to cutting carbon. Alongside the carbon footprinting tool, it has 
also introduced a meeting planning tool and a carbon calculator, which it is 
now sharing and may market commercially.

The use of folding bikes, office ticket machines and tele-video conferencing 
has saved significant amounts of money while monthly reports have generated a 
collective sense of ownership – staff can see what contribution they have made 
in meeting targets, Natural England says.

Estate and travel carbon were Natural England's priority because they had the 
biggest environmental impact. The organisation is also working to cut water 
consumption; minimise, recycle and reuse waste in offices; source sustainable 
timber and buy local food and drink for events and catering.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 