
Barclays is on track or ahead of schedule on all six elements of its 
turnaround plan, said its chief executive,Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, on Wednesday. Since this 
plan is only two months old, and in any case represents plan B, this is not 
quite the triumph it might sound.

The same applies to the 4% jump in the share price. The rise merely returned 
the shares to where they were a month ago before Eric Schneiderman, New York's 
attorney general, alleged fraud and deceit within Barclays' "dark" trading 
pool, charges the bank denies. In terms of book value,Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> remains one of the most lowly 
rated major banks.

But, yes, a little credit is due. There is a sense that New Barclays is 
finally taking shape. The retail bank, the corporate bank and Barclaycard all 
recorded stronger profits in first half of this year. The bits of Barclays 
investors tend to like are performing better.

The big mystery, and the main reason for the shares' lowly rating, is the 
investment bank. Profits there plunged by 46% in the six months, contributing 
to an overall fall of 7% in group profits to £3.35bn.

That outcome in investment banking was better than many had feared given the 
whirl of internal restructuring and weak trading volumes in many corners of the 
market. But whether a healthy investment banking core will emerge in, say, a 
year's time once the cost-cutting and retreats from capital-intensive areas 
have been completed, remains an open question. The division's return on equity 
was just 5.7% in the first half – miles away from earning the right to exist, 
even in a slimmed-down form.

We have yet to see whether Jenkins can stick to his promise to tie bonuses to 
performance. Last year he capitulated to avoid the risk of what he called a 
"death spiral" of defections. On Wednesday Barclays refused for the first time 
to give a ratio for investment bankers' compensation on the grounds that the 
number would be misleading at the half-year because bonuses are determined at 
year-end.

Technically speaking, the plea is semi-understandable: the new system of 
deferring bonuses complicates the arithmetic. But silence offers shareholders 
no clues on whether Jenkins has discovered his backbone on bonuses. If he has 
not, improvements elsewhere will count for little.

In the meantime, one other figure leaped from the results statement – the 
fresh provision of £900m for payment protection insurance, taking Barclays' 
tally to almost £4.8bn. It was accompanied by the startling revelation that 44% 
of claims came from people who never had a PPI policy with Barclays in the 
first place. The banks are reaping what they sowed, so sympathy is limited. But 
the claims-management firms which orchestrate bogus claims have become a bunch 
of chancers. They deserve a hard regulatory slap.
 