
Although Disraeli, Darwin, Lewis Carroll, Giuseppe Garibaldi and the Queen of 
Hawaii have been unable to accept the invitation to Lord Alfred Tennyson's 
birthday party today, his library on the Isle of Wight will again be full of 
distinguished guests talking of literature, science and art.

A private passion for Victorian art has given rise to a new museum at 
Farringford House, Tennyson's home of 40 years, opening today to mark the 
bicentenary of the birth of a giant of the Victorian literary scene. Furniture 
including his writing desk and chair, and portraits – by his friend GF Watts – 
of the poet, his wife and their sons, have come back to the house for the first 
time in over a century.

The poet laureate was an A-list celebrity of his day, hounded by fans. His 
works, including The Charge of the Light Brigade, Maud, In Memoriam and his 
Arthurian cycle, Idylls of the King, were read by millions, recited, painted, 
sung and dramatised. He moved to Isle of Wight in 1853 when he was so stalked 
that he could no longer work in London. But, everyone who was anyone followed 
him there – many as house guests – including politicians, painters, authors, 
scientists and royalty.

The house became a hotel in the early 20th century, owned at different times 
by both Thomas Cook of the travel firm, and Sir Fred Pontin of holiday camp 
fame. Older islanders, including the craftsman who restored pieces for the 
exhibition, remember bonfires in the grounds of surviving Victorian furniture, 
many commissioned by the Tennysons from trees on the estate.

The hotel was bought three years ago "on a whim, not a very well-thought-out 
business plan", by Martin Beisly, senior expert on Victorian painting at 
Christie's auction house, and his friend Rebecca Fitzgerald. Beisly was brought 
up on the Isle of Wight, but didn't start out particularly interested in 
poetry, never mind Tennyson or crumbling Victorian architecture. "I really came 
to Tennyson through painting. Wherever I looked at the painters I loved – 
Millais, Holman Hunt, Watts – I realised they were completely in awe of 
Tennyson. The house struck me as like a work of art, too, a painting in urgent 
need of sensitive restoration."

Beisly and Fitzgerald spent the winter making the building watertight, before 
restoring the extension the Tennysons had added to make a party room and a 
library – with a staircase concealed in the corner so he could flee visitors. 
The extension was designed by another Tennyson worshipper, the architect of the 
Natural History Museum in London, Alfred Waterhouse.

The library has been restored to museum display standards, and will house 
regular exhibitions. With curator Veronica Franklin Gould, an expert on the 
period, they have secured major loans from national collections, including the 
Watts Gallery in Compton and the Tennyson study centre in Lincoln, which holds 
the family archives. The paintings, letters and photographs by his next-door 
neighbour, the pioneering photographerJulia Margaret Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/feb/07/art.artsfeatures2> – who 
kidnapped his most distinguished guests – give a vivid impression of the life 
of the house.

Visitors were sometimes overawed: in 1865 Anny Thackeray, daughter of the 
novelist, herself renowned as an eccentric, wrote: "Everybody is either a 
genius or a poet or a painter or peculiar in some way." The islanders were 
highly entertained by the procession of notables, including Prince Albert 
leaving with a bunch of primroses from the garden; or Garibaldi, campaigner for 
Italian unification, in embroidered shirt and scarlet-lined white poncho. They 
queued to wave to the American poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, author of 
Hiawatha (Tennyson also brought him to the village stores to buy tobacco and 
clay pipes), but clearly every day was as good as a cabaret: Thackeray recorded 
locals coming to their doors to stare as Tennyson, the painter GF Watts, and 
Henry Thoby Prinsep, brother-in-law of Cameron, walked past in sweeping cloaks 
and giant hats.

The exhibition includes the throne Tennyson had made, of timber from the 
garden, for the widowed Queen Emma of Hawaii when she came to stay for four 
days in 1865. Photographs include Cameron's portrait of Longfellow. When he 
escorted the poet to her door, Tennyson warned: "You will have to do whatever 
she tells you. I'll come back soon and see what is left of you."
 