
In 2014, director Molly Mathieson created Addicts’ Symphony, 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/addicts-symphony> a one-off Channel 4 
documentary in which 10 recovering addicts put on a musical performance with 
the London Symphony Orchestra. The programme focused on musician James 
McConnel, a recovering alcoholic, who lost his 18-year-old son to a heroin 
overdose, and Mathieson saw how playing helped him through the healing process.

This led her to found New Note Orchestra <http://www.newnote.co.uk/>, a 
Brighton-based group for people recovering from alcohol and substance misuse 
that has met weekly since last October. They spend 10-12 weeks composing a 
piece of music together that is then performed in front of an audience. The 
genre, Mathieson says, is difficult to categorise: “We’ve got a really eclectic 
mix of instruments, so it’s somewhere between experimental classical music and 
rock.”

There are also plans for a guitar group and a percussion group

The orchestra, the first of its kind in the world, is deliberately inclusive: 
anyone, from beginners to professional musicians, is welcome and rehearsals 
don’t require players to be able to read music. On the website, you can buy an 
instrument or sponsor a concert or a participant.

Although music’s therapeutic’s benefits are widely recognised, there isn’t a 
great deal of research specifically on music and recovery from addiction. 
“There’s no doubt in my mind that it works – I see it on the ground, but I 
struggled to find any proper research around it,” says Mathieson. She is now in 
talks with Brighton University about a collaborative project measuring its 
effectiveness. There are also plans for a guitar group and a percussion group, 
as well as playing in places with hard-to-reach audiences, such as prisons.

“It does really work,” says Mathieson. “I was surprised at how successful it’s 
been so quickly. There have been small relapses, but of all the musicians we’ve 
got, every single one has maintained their recovery, and they say the orchestra 
is a vital part of that.”
 