
The referee is biased, the pitch is tilted against us and we’ve given up 
trying to predict our results. But, don’t worry, dear shareholders, we’re 
taking decisive action: we’re cutting your dividend by 54%. Please don’t 
grumble because it’s for your own good. Your patience will be rewarded – one of 
these years.

Yes, it’s new-look Barclays, under the dynamic new leadership of chairman John 
McFarlane and chief executive Jes Staley – “like me, a banking veteran,” says 
McFarlane, as if that were reassuring. It was certainlya veteran whinge that 
accompanied Barclays’ 8% fall in pre-tax profits to £2.1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/barclays-cuts-dividend-as-profits-fall-8-percent>
.

“Outsized” fines and penalties for past misconduct “are not proportionate to 
our smaller size”, grumbled McFarlane, a plea of poverty that jars with the 
fact that Barclays still managed to dig deep and pay 323 employees more than 
£1m last year. Meanwhile, the 62% stake inBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> Africa, previously advertised as 
a growth business for decades to come, will be sold down (at the bottom of the 
market, probably) because today’s regulators are strict about how they 
calculate liabilities.

Barclays chairman complains about 'disproportionate' fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/barclays-cuts-dividend-as-profits-fall-8-percent>
At least Staley has jettisoned predecessor Antony Jenkins’ vacuous description 
of Barclays as the “go-to” bank. In its latest incarnation, Barclays wants to 
be a “transatlantic” bank, which is easier to understand. There will be a UK 
bit – which will sit within the new regulatory ringfence – and a corporate and 
international division, also housed in the UK.

Fine, but the new structure doesn’t answer the perennial question of whether 
Barclays can make consistent and stable returns in investment banking. Even 
after Jenkins’ tactical retreats from capital-heavy activities, Barclays isn’t 
remotely close to financial respectability. The 2015 return on tangible equity 
in investment banking was a miserable 6%. As ever, investors must give thanks 
for Barclaycard, which breezes along at 22%.

Staley is the latest chief executive to believe the investment bank requires 
just one last heave. Maybe he will confound the doubters eventually, but you 
can’t blame shareholders for feeling that the timing of Barclays’ promised 
revival has been massively delayed since the chief executive’s arrival in 
Canary Wharf.

As recently as last October, McFarlane mused that “a high and progressive 
dividend will in future need to make up a significant portion of our annual 
total shareholder return”. Now Staley has cut the dividend in half to give 
“unfettered ability to accelerate the wind-down of non-core assets”.

No wonder the share price is winding down too: it’s now halved since the point 
at which McFarlane reckoned it could be doubled within three years. And no 
wonder the chairman would rather talk about beastly regulators and governments.
 