
When the philosopher AC Grayling announced his plans for the New College of 
the Humanities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jun/05/new-college-dawkins-grayling-ferguson?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 in 2011, he argued that, mainly because of government funding cuts, the 
liberal arts were under threat. Many academics agreed. But Grayling's project, 
later realised with the opening of a college in Bloomsbury, central London, had 
a catch: annual fees of £18,000, twice what conventional universities usually 
charge and with no access to upfront government loans. The result is that, 
though a third of Grayling's students get some financial support, the majority 
don't. Far from rescuing the humanities, critics say, Grayling is reinforcing 
the view, created by government policy (which insists arts courses must be 
self-funding from student fees), that studying the humanities has become a 
luxury for the public school-educated children of the rich.

So what about a university for the humanities that is completely free? Not a 
MOOC (massive online open course), which leaves students to learn at home 
alone, but a university that, though it would have an online element, would 
also have, at its core, first-hand contact with academics and other thinkers, 
and one that would also offer the stimulation of mixing with other students. 
The idea sounds impossible butBarbara Gunnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/barbaragunnell>, formerly a senior 
journalist at the Independent on Sunday, Observer and New Statesman, andJonny 
Mundey <http://www.rsablogs.org.uk/tag/humanities/>, a musician and fellow of 
the Royal Society of Arts, decided that it wasn't.

London, they point out, is awash not only with free culture in the form of 
free museums, art galleries and concerts but also with free lectures from 
experts on every imaginable subject. This week alone, you can hear lectures on 
maths from the author Simon Singh at Conway Hall and on the legitimacy of 
foreign military interventions from the academic and former politician Michael 
Ignatieff at King's College. You can also hear about macroeconomics at theLondon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> School of Economics, the second world 
war at Gresham College, the feminist Simone de Beauvoir at the British Academy, 
Machiavelli at Queen Mary University, and the sculptures of the Parthenon at 
the British Museum.

St Martin-in-the-Fields in Trafalgar Square and St James's Church in 
Piccadilly put on free lunchtime concerts on most days of the week, and the 
Royal Festival Hall at the Southbank arts centre every Friday and Sunday. Free 
music is also available, less frequently, at numerous other London churches and 
the Royal Opera House. Many other talks and events can be accessed for entry 
fees of just a few pounds.

Gunnell and Mundey argue that the capital can serve as a giant lecture hall. 
They decided that, if they could collate the free resources, broker access to 
paid-for events, and add the best online lectures from internationally 
acclaimed academics, they would have a syllabus. If they could also rent 
premises for a central London hub, persuade organisations to donate rooms for 
weekly seminars and workshops, and enlist academics, postgraduates and others 
to contribute "shards" of their time to lecturing, tutoring or mentoring, they 
would have something that looked very like a university. But, in the words of 
their initial working title, now shortened to IF, this university is free.

They envisage an initial offering of a one-year humanities foundation course, 
similar to that offered in many American universities. Drawn up with advice 
from established academics, it will offer modules in 10 subjects, including 
history, music, literature, classics, philosophy and the history of science, 
giving students, according to the course outline, "a survey of some of the most 
inspiring and incisive intellectual disciplines humans have created, and the 
tools to think critically, clearly, ethically and creatively". The target 
audience would be non-graduates aged from 18 to 30. They would be assessed 
partly on online exercises and offline workshops and partly on two long essays, 
possibly leading toMozilla Open Badges <http://badges.openbadges.org/badges>, a 
new open-source form of accreditation used to certify what US colleges call 
"non-credit" learning, which doesn't lead to a conventional qualification. Such 
badges are issued by, for example, Michigan State University and some of the 
Smithsonian museums in Washington.

Gunnell and Mundey recently launched an appeal for funds and have about £7,000 
pledged from 92 backers. If they reach their initial target of £10,000, they 
will hold a four-week summer school in May as a pilot. It will take in history 
lectures at Gresham College, visual arts experiences via the Victoria and 
Albert Museum collections, and discussions around the Festival Hall concerts. 
They hope the university can begin teaching next January. If successful, it 
could be replicated in other large cities.

Where will the students come from? "There's a perception among young people 
from less affluent backgrounds," says Gunnell, "that they're being priced out 
of mainstream universities. I think many would like to pursue careers in 
creative areas but believe they lack the cultural background and don't have 
the contacts."

She and Mundey see access to higher education in the humanities as a human 
right. "Society benefits from well-educated, argumentative citizens," Gunnell 
says. "We have principles of justice and tolerance. We can't just hand them 
down as diktats: we need to understand their basis. The humanities enrich 
people's lives. They make you think about the big issues and start to suggest 
answers. It's because of their education that top politicians are so utterly 
confident about everything."

More information at ifproject.co.uk <http://www.ifproject.co.uk/>. To donate, 
go tokickstarter.com/projects/1271205777/if-this-university-is-free?ref=328b4z 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1271205777/if-this-university-is-free?ref=328b4z>
 