
One conspiracy theorist – an Australian – reckoned the loss of the Ashes was a 
cunning marketing ploy. Now there will be a bonanza in 2010-11 as hordes of 
Poms descend Down Under to see whether those Ashes can be retained. After all, 
that is what happened in the aftermath of the 2005 series in England.

The thousands who spent their savings to witness England's attempts to retain 
the Ashes on the 2006‑07 tour were short-changed. The series was hopelessly 
one-sided: Australia, with their wounded stars, were ruthless, England were 
abysmal and, by the time the bandwagon had reached Melbourne, the contest had 
all the attraction of a floodlit Pro40 match in which the floodlights cannot be 
erected because of the wind (as in Thursday's farcical meeting between Kent and 
Surrey at Canterbury).

It should be more fun in 2010-11. Neither side is good enough to win 5-0. It 
will be a tight contest and Australia have more problems to solve than England, 
not just as a consequence of their loss of the Ashes. In their number they have 
four men older than England's most senior citizen, Paul Collingwood.

Out of Ricky Ponting, Mike Hussey, Simon Katich (all 34) and Stuart Clark 
(33), I would expect to see only Ponting when England arrive in Brisbane in 
November 2010. You have to be a truly great cricketer to play at Test level 
aged 36 and of the crinkly quartet only Ponting is a great player, despite 
Hussey's impressive overall statistics.

Moreover, Ponting seems to retain the hunger. Despite the results, he gave the 
impression this summer that he was still enjoying the game and the challenge of 
leading a team of mortals rather than superstars. He lost with impressive 
dignity and it feels as if all the messages of support from within his team are 
genuine, rather than being the banalities of potential successors shuffling for 
position.

By the time England pitch up in 2010, Australia have to sort out whether 
Phillip Hughes can function as a Test opener when targeted with bouncers at the 
body. Their selectors were very quick to come to the conclusion that he was not 
capable of doing that in 2009. Is Shane Watson really an opening batsman? I 
doubt it but he may well be good enough to occupy a slot in the top six. And 
who replaces Hussey? Callum Ferguson, the 24-year-old from South Australia, 
currently here with the one-day squad, is a possibility.

Australia will find some fresh batsmen. That is the easy part. The reason they 
were so beatable this summer was that they had an ordinary bowling attack. No 
doubt the nucleus of pacemen will be the same in 2010 – minus the creaking 
Clark. Let us also mention Josh Hazlewood in search of a "you read it first 
here" moment. He is 18 years old and 6ft 5in tall, and they speak well of him 
in New South Wales, for whom he has played one game.

Quality spin remains their problem as they seek to balance the attack. There 
is one specialist spinner, Nathan Hauritz, among the 25 players with a central 
contract. He performed better than expected during the Ashes tour, but still 
Australia were not prepared to select him for the Oval Test. That is no 
endorsement.

England also have some significant decisions to make. Forget the 2010-11 tour 
for a moment. Arguably, a trickier undertaking is this winter's tour to South 
Africa, who are now ranked as the No1 side in the world. Win there and the 
retention of the Ashes might be a breeze.

England's middle-order was flimsy all summer. So now we expect two of the 
slots to be taken up by the products of South Africa: Kevin Pietersen and 
Jonathan Trott. No doubt they will be frequently reminded of their origins 
throughout the series. That leaves one place to be fought over by Collingwood, 
Ian Bell and Ravi Bopara.

It may be time to say "thank you and farewell" to Collingwood at Test level. 
Some figures: Collingwood's Test average, 42, is the same as Graham Gooch's and 
is superior to those of a host of English players – Mike Gatting, Allan Lamb, 
Mike Atherton, Alec Stewart, Michael Vaughan – all of whom had more natural 
ability. That has been Collingwood's triumph. But since that match-saving 
innings in Cardiff there has been nothing.

He is 33, the age when the reflexes can start to dull, which is all the more 
relevant if he does not have a sound technique to fall back upon – and he does 
not.

Monty Panesar could well be replaced by Adil Rashid in the Test squad for 
South Africa, where touring sides rarely carry more than two spinners. Rashid 
has found form for Yorkshire at just the right time. Panesar may resurface in 
Bangladesh.

Then there is the perennial question of what to do with Steve Harmison, who 
has already acknowledged that another Ashes series is a long shot for him. I 
would take him to South Africa but be pleasantly surprised – and a little 
nervous – if he propelled the first ball at Brisbane in November 2010.
 