
Nicky Bentley, who has died aged 48 of breast cancer, was a much-loved dance 
teacher and choreographer for more than 25 years. Her name became synonymous 
with the Pineapple studios in Covent Garden, London, and she was a familiar 
face at Frank's cafe on Neal Street, where she would have a pre-class bacon 
sandwich, or Maxwell's restaurant nearby, where she would go for a post-class 
cigarette and burger – in that order.

She was positive, energetic and had a passion for teaching, and for sharing 
dance. Nicky attracted a wide variety of students, and because of this her 
classes were always full. She became famous for her Christmas classes – she 
would insist that everyone come in fancy dress, and then head off afterwards to 
Cosmos restaurant, where it was not unusual for one of her routines to be 
danced during the meal.

More recently she had developed an influential style of street jazz, which she 
taught under the name of Nicky B and which was highly regarded by her peers as 
well as students. She gained a reputation for training and choreographing 
artists and groups includingCliff Richard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cliff-richard>, S Club 7, Dannii Minogue, 
Lulu, the Sugababes, Status Quo and Hayley Westenra, as well as choreographing 
Raymond Gubbay's spectaculars at the Royal Albert Hall.

Born in Bristol, Nicky moved to London in the 1980s. I met her while she was 
taking Arlene Phillips's dance classes at Pineapple. She introduced us to many 
things – newly fashionable legwarmers and plastic dance pants worn on top of 
statutory lycra, ensuring that her students sweated as much as possible. She 
may have been small, but it did not stop her powerful voice from belting out 
instructions. Her ability to laugh and work her students hard were attributes 
everyone adored. She was as caring out of class as she was in the studio.

Nicky's illness did not at first prevent her from working. In fact, she did 
everything she could to keep going, despite the discomfort.

Her love of her family was as strong as her love of dance. Nicky married the 
composer Mark Sayer-Wade, and they had four children, Tobias, Joshua, Storm and 
Fabian. They survive her, along with her father, John, and her sisters, Sharon 
and Sue.
 