 In an era when ex-Tory millionaires are welcomed into the Labour fold, it 
seems strange that a highly skilled, widely respected Labour minister should 
hide his origins in the squirearchy by calling himself 'Nick'. The name of the 
minister for housing and planning is actually Wyvill Richard Nicolls Raynsford. 
The Raynsfords of Milton Malsor Manor, near Northampton, can trace their 
ancestry back to 15th century squires.
This does not stop him from being one of the government's most skilled 
technical experts. While minister for London he carried through the 413-clause 
Greater London Authority Act, the longest piece of legislation since the 
Government of India Act 1948. Since he knew so much about this 
Livingstone-curbing act, Tony Blair at first thought Mr Raynsford should 
contest for the mayoralty. But this uncharismatic, balding technocrat was 
thought no match for the 'Great Entertainer' and Frank Dobson was thrown in 
instead.

Nick Raynsford has kept smiling, most recently launching his major reform of 
property conveyancing: making selling a house almost as easy as selling a car. 
When MPs from impoverished northern slums complained that the £300 cost was too 
much for houses selling for £4,000, he agreed to consider special dispensation.

Mr Raynsford is a housing specialist with finely honed political skills. After 
Repton and Sydney Sussex, Cambridge, he did a diploma in art and design at the 
Chelsea School of Art. A social housing enthusiast, he worked for the Society 
for Cooperative Dwellings, then for SHAC (London's sheltered housing aid 
centre), and then for Raynsford Morris, a housing consultancy in which he was a 
partner and director.

He joined the Labour party after campaigning against evictions and a motorway 
though Fulham. Elected and re-elected to Hammersmith and Fulham council, he was 
selected to contest the 1986 byelection caused by the death of its popular 
sitting Tory MP, Martin Stevens, and won the seat, beating in the process Roger 
Liddle, then standing for the SDP and now back in the Labour fold as No 10's 
policy adviser on Europe. Despite becoming an active and constructive soft-left 
MP, he lost his seat a year later after the local Labour council increased 
rates by 50%.

Remaining in the public eye, Mr Raynsford failed to be selected for safe 
Vauxhall or Rotherham, but was chosen for marginal Greenwich, then held by 
SDP's Rosie Barnes. He ousted her in 1992.

Although normally genial and anxious to please, he warned the John Smith 
leadership against sleepwalking into oblivion by "simply relying on the 
incompetence and failure of the Tories to deliver us a victory." Tony Blair 
named him a housing spokesman under Frank Dobson. In 1997 he became under 
secretary for environment and transport with responsibility for London. His 
promotion to minister of state two years later showed the PM's appreciation for 
his high level of unflappable competence.

Ask Aristotle about Nick Raynsford 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4344,00.html>
 