
Senior officials from Nigeria and Indonesia will join Andrew Mitchell, the UK 
international development secretary, ona panel on development effectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jun/29/andrew-mitchell-busan-aid-panel>
 bringing together traditional aid donors, developing countries and emerging 
economies.

Armida Alisjahbana, Indonesia's planning minister, and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, 
Nigeria's finance minister, complete the panel lineup, which is a direct 
outcome of thefourth high-level forum on aid effectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
 in Busan, South Korea, last December.

Busan sought to bring in key aid players from the global south – Brazil, India 
and China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership>
 – and set out a common framework on aid effectiveness, particularly in 
relation to governance and transparency. The new panel is the linchpin of the 
new global partnership on development co-operation, moving away from the model 
dominated by the group of industrialised countries that comprise the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) development 
assistance committee.

A political body, the global partnership's role is to maintain the momentum 
for more effective development co-operation and ensure accountability for 
implementing the commitments agreed at Busan. The important caveat at Busan was 
that the participation of emerging economies should be on a voluntary basis.

The partnership, which is expected to work with the UN Development 
Co-operation Forum and the G20 group of industrialised countries, is to hold 
ministerial-level meetings every 18 to 24 months. The panel will be backed up 
by a steering committee of 18 members that will act as the "glue" between the 
global partnership and the networks of aid recipients.

As expected, Brazil, India and China – the big three emerging economies – are 
keeping their distance from the global partnership. There will be no one from 
the trio on the steering committee. OECD officials say the three want to stay 
on the sidelines for the time being to see how the global partnership develops. 
Some African countries, including Rwanda, have criticised the likes of China 
for taking an arm's-length approach.

While Rwanda is in favour of south-south co-operation, it also thinks the new 
donors should be subjected to the same principles of transparency and untied 
aid as traditional donors.

The global partnership will involve a greater role for the UN Development 
Programme, which will combine its wide reach and on-the-ground knowledge with 
the OECD's strength on data and analysis.
 