
Jay-Jay Okocha was presented with a special award for scoring the 1,000th goal 
of the African Nations Cup, as Nigeria overcame their off-the-pitch problems 
with an easy 4-0 victory in front of a sell-out crowd.

It was nothing spectacular from the Bolton Wanderers midfielder - a 
63rd-minute penalty after Kanu had forced Aaron Mokoena into handling the ball 
- but it was fitting that the honour should go to one of the African game's 
great players. The showpiece goals more suited to Okocha's extravagant style of 
play duly arrived in the last 10 minutes, but from an unlikely source.

Second-half substitute Osaze Odemwingie, who has a Nigerian father, a Russian 
mother, and who plays in Belgium, scored with a spectacular left-foot shot from 
Okocha's pass then followed up with a right-footer after a run by John Utaka. 
The first goal, which settled Nigeria's nerves, followed the game's first 
corner in the fourth minute. Okocha took it, and Everton's Joseph Yobo scored 
before returning to the other end to keep out South Africa in a commanding 
defensive display.

The Super Eagles' first game had ended in defeat by Morocco, and their chances 
of progressing worsened when three players - Celestine Babayaro of Chelsea, 
Yakubu Aiyegbeni of Portsmouth, and Schalke 04's Victor Agali - were thrown out 
of the squad for staying out late at a nightclub. They will be thrown back in 
again after Wednesday's game against Benin, according to the Nigerian sports 
minister last night. The team should win that comfortably and take their place 
in the last eight.

For the fifth time in a week there was a sell-out crowd, and four of those 
matches, two in Monastir and two in Sousse, have not featured the host nation. 
This is almost unheard of at the Nations Cup and is indicative of the drawing 
power of the Super Eagles here, and of the number of Algeria fans in Sousse, 
where an estimated 10,000 were locked out of Thursday's victory over Egypt.

Morocco took advantage of a comedy of errors by the Benin defence to win 4-0 
and maintain their perfect record in Group D. Striker Marouane Chammakh was 
gifted the opener in the 17th minute after Benin goalkeeper Rachid Chitou 
completely missed a cross. Benin fell apart late in the game, allowing 
substitute Youssef Mokhtari and defenders Abdeslam Ouaddou and Talal El 
Karkouri to score in a seven-minute spell.

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 