
The Super Eagles beat yellow-clad Benin 2-1, hopping over a potential banana 
skin thanks to goals from Garba Lawal and John Utaka and ensuring passage to 
the quarter-finals. There Nigeria will meet their perennial rivals Cameroon in 
what should be the game of the tournament so far.

Moussa Latoundji's goal for Benin as time ran out was mere consolation - the 
Squirrels' first and only as their first Nations Cup participation came to an 
end.

"Today the game was very tricky and we didn't want to underestimate Benin," 
said Nigeria's coach Christian Chukwu after his team finished second in the 
group to Morocco, who drew 1-1 with South Africa thanks to a goal from 
Coventry's Youssef Safri.

Nigeria were scarcely better than average but they may have some 
reinforcements for the Cameroon match; Chukwu said that the suspensions imposed 
on Yakubu Aiyegbeni (Portsmouth), Celestine Babayaro (Chelsea) and Victor Agali 
(Schalke) for breaking curfew had been rescinded.

"The three players have shown remorse and apologised so we must forgive them. 
Will they come back? I don't know. If they don't, we will carry on without 
them."

Nigeria could certainly have done with Aiyegbeni and Agali up front. Nwankwo 
Kanu played from start to finish but made little mark. The captain Jay Jay 
Okocha was more impressive and his whipped corner led to the opening goal. 
Maxime Agueh's punch was weak and in the ensuing scramble Lawal poked home.

Benin's play was pleasing and Oumar Tchomogo waged a compelling battle with 
the superb Joseph Yobo. But when Damien Chrysostome tried to dribble out of 
defence, Utaka stole the ball and took the game beyond Benin's reach.

 Nigeria (4-4-2): Enyeama; Abbey, Yobo, Okoronkwo, Udeze; Utaka (Ikedia, 84), 
Okocha, Olofinjana (Ekong, 88), Lawal; Aghahowa (Odemwingie, 66), Kanu.

 Benin (5-4-1): Agueh; Emmanuil, Konabe (Sylvain, 71), Toclomiti, Chrysostome, 
Adjamossi; Oladikpikpo (Agnide, 75), Ahoueya, Oketola, Latoundji; Tchomogo.

 Referee:  A Fatah Essam (Egypt).
 