
Nigeria's campaign got off to the worst possible start with a troubling Group 
D defeat toMorocco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco>. Youssef 
Hadji's late goal means they are already up against the count in a group also 
featuring South Africa. Yet for the Super Eagles the manner of their defeat 
must have been almost as worrying.

Incoherently organised, slipshod at the back and unable to bring their 
individual talents into play, Nigeria thoroughly deserved to lose. "We didn't 
show enough character," the captain Jay Jay Okocha admitted. "We didn't show we 
wanted to dominate the game. We will do our best but the future may be very 
bad." If they fail to win against South Africa on Saturday, that prognosis 
could be considered optimism personified.

If Nigeria are to improve, their formation may have to change. Nwankwo Kanu 
was pushed back into a midfield of strikers, with John Utaka and Yakubu 
Ayegbeni on the flanks and Okocha further back in a holding role. Attacking 
intentions were flagged then, but with no one to win the ball the team 
struggled.

Morocco should have taken the lead when Jaouad Zairi fired in a great cross 
after 20 minutes; his co-striker Marouane Chamakh's header was of much lower 
quality. For Nigeria, Ayegbeni was creating intermittent danger and twice in 
the early minutes of the second period he broke clear. First Talal El Karkouri 
denied him, then he fired wide.

Morocco's goal was more memorable. Chamakh had gone close minutes earlier with 
a smart turn and swift shot, but Nigeria's defence failed to heed the warning. 
Hadji repeated the trick and found the corner of the net. The missed header 
from three yards by Nigeria's substitute Victor Agali seemed a fitting 
conclusion.

 Morocco (3-5-2): Fouhami; Ouaddou, Naybet, El Karkouri; Regragui, Kissi, 
Safri, Mokhtari (El Yaagoubi, 72), Kharja; Chamakh, Zairi (Hadji, 59).

 Nigeria (4-2-3-1): Enyeama; Abbey, Yobo, Okoronkwo, Babayaro; Olofinjana, 
Okocha; Utaka, Kanu (Ikedia, 73), Ayegbeni (Agali, 79); Aghahowa.

 Referee : Falla Ndoye (Senegal).
 