
Teams

Nigeria: Ike Shoronmu; Celestine Babayaro, Furo Iyenemi, Taribo West, Godwin 
Okpara, Finidi George, Sunday Oliseh, Mutiu Adepoju, Tijani Babangida, Nwankwo 
Kanu, Raphael Chukwu.

South Africa: Andre Arendse; Lucas Radebe, Mark Fish, Pierre Issa, Dumisa 
Ngobe, Thabo Mngomeni, John Moshoeu, Quinton Fortune, Helman Mkhalele, Shaun 
Bartlett, Siyabonga Nomvete.

Referee: Gamal el Ghandour (Egypt)

1 GOAL Nigeria 1 - 0 South Africa A sensational start as Tijani Babangida 
scores after just 40 seconds for the favourites Nigeria, whose rugby-style 
huddle seems to have psyched the players up considerably as they kick off. The 
ball is worked forward to Babangida lurking on the left flank, and he cuts 
inside, accelerates unexpectedly and unleashes a low right-foot shot from the 
edge of the area which zips into the bottom right-hand corner of Andre 
Arendse's goal.

9 South Africa hit back and Quinton Fortune's free-kick from the right is 
headed out by Nigeria's towering defenders.

12 The game begins to settle into a pattern as South Africa sit deep before 
launching their fleet-footed midfield at a rigid Nigerian back four which 
nevertheless holds firm.

16 Finidi George concedes a free-kick on the left, taken by Manchester 
United's Quinton Fortune, but the Nigerian goalkeeper Ike Shorunmu saves easily.

20 Babangida suddenly finds himself through on goal as the South African 
defence loses concentration but Arendse is alert to the situation and the 
Oxford United goalkeeper plunges bravely at his feet to save. The danger is not 
yet over as the ball breaks to Raphael Chukwu but when a cool head is needed he 
blasts the ball over the bar.

27 Finidi works a short corner on the right, Furo Iyenemi gets his head to the 
ball first but it goes wide.

29 As Nigeria attack again Finidi's shot from a central position flies past 
the post. South Africa fight back and create their best chance so far, but 
Siyabonga Nomvete's shot from the left of the area hits the side netting.

35 GOAL Nigeria 2 - 0 South Africa Babangida scores again. In a typically 
direct Nigerian attack down the right, the ball is swiftly worked across the 
edge of the area to Babangida who is unmarked on the left. A quick look up, a 
stroke of the right foot and the ball is curling around Arendse and into the 
far top corner of the net.

45 Half-time and although South Africa have striven manfully, Nigeria have 
rarely been threatened. The onus is clearly now on the Bafana Bafana to attack, 
with Nigeria sitting comfortably around the halfway line and looking to close 
the game down.

45 South Africa restart and Alex Bapela wastes no time in dealing with the 
threat of Babangida, chopping the Ajax striker down in full flight to earn the 
Mamelodi Sundown forward the first booking of the match.

47 Nwankwo Kanu creates space on the right, Chukwu breaks free and as the 
goalkeeper advances he once more fails to keep a clear head, shooting hurriedly 
the wrong side of the post.

51 South Africa are looking more positive now and Bapela pops up in front of 
goal only to have his fierce shot well saved by Shorunmu.

53 Some Manchester United-Arsenal rivalry surfaces as Fortune is warned by the 
Egyptian referee Gamal Ghandous for a nasty foul on the Gunner Kanu.

57 Babangida is taken out again, this time by Mark Fish of Bolton Wanderers 
right on the edge of the area. Fish is booked, but after much consultation the 
Nigerians mess up the free-kick.

60 South Africa miss two golden opportunities, Fish's run and pull-back from 
the right touchline setting up Nomvete who mis-hits the ball in front of goal. 
It spins across to the unmarked Shaun Barlett but the FC Zurich striker blasts 
hopelessly wide.

64 South Africa are pushing forward desperately and Nomvete sees another good 
chance go to waste, his shot being hit straight at the goalkeeper. The striker 
then just fails to connect with a right-wing cross but it seems the game is 
drifting away from South Africa as the missed chances mount.

69 Nigeria substitution The star of the African Nations Cup so far, Julius 
Aghahowa, replaces Chukwu to rapturous applause. His first act is to set up 
Finidi for a shot which goes just over the bar.

74 A searing run by Babangida leaves Aghahowa with only the goalkeeper to beat 
but his shot is too low and Arendse beats it out with his knees. Nigeria are 
back in the ascendancy.

77 South Africa substitution Steve Lekoelea replaces the disappointing Fortune.

79 Nigeria's Godwin Okpara is booked for time wasting.

80 South Africa substitution Pollen Ndlanya replaces the misfiring Nomvete. 

85 Babangida is named man of the match, unsurprisingly, as the heart begins to 
go out of South Africa and the trumpets of the celebrating Nigerians on the 
terraces grow ever louder.

89 Victor Ikpeba, who expected not to play after a row with the coach Jo 
Bonfrere, underlines Nigeria's superiority with a rasping shot which skims off 
the top of the crossbar.

96 Full time: Nigeria 2 - 0 South Africa. An unfeasible amount of injury-time 
but an emphatic performance by Nigeria. Can anyone stop them now?
 