
The end came for George Weah yesterday in front of a crowd of 7,000 in Mopti, 
a dusty town east of Bamako. The 35-year-old former world player of the year 
probably bowed out of international football with Liberia's first and only 
defeat at these African Nations Cup finals, 1-0 to Nigeria.

Nigeria go through to the quarter-finals as the winners of group A. Mali 
qualified as runners-up with a 2-0 win over Algeria yesterday in front of a 
sell-out home crowd of 60,000 in Bamako. Liberia finished in third place with 
two points from draws with Mali and Algeria.

The Lone Stars' lone star could hardly complain yesterday. Nigeria took 
control from the start and would have won by more had Ipswich's Finidi George 
not had a weakly taken penalty saved by Louis Crayton in Liberia's goal.

But Crayton was let down by his defence just past the hour, when Julius 
Aghahowa was left unmarked to head in a George corner at the far post. It was 
the 19-year-old Shaktar Donetsk striker's second winning goal in three games 
here.

Mali are ranked No108 in the world, the lowest-rated team in the finals, but 
they belied their position with a confident display against the Desert Warriors.

It was all the more confident for a strong start. Mamadou Bagayoko scored a 
wonderful opening goal after only 18 minutes and set up another for Bassala 
Touré six minutes later.

The striker had not previously scored in the tournament, but yesterday he soon 
proved he was worth his place. After controlling an awkward ball on his chest, 
he eluded two defenders before spinning on to a shot that he whipped into the 
far corner of the net.

The crowd had not entirely settled before Mali scored again. Bagayoko put 
Touré through alone on Lounes Gaouaoui and the striker slipped the ball home 
for a 2-0 lead.

Gaouaoui was soon exposed again. Soumaila Coulibaly and Seydou Keita narrowly 
missed adding more goals and the goalkeeper had to be alert to save a powerful 
attempt from Bagayoko.

It soon got worse for Algeria. An ambulance was called on to the field just 
before halftime after the captain Abdelhafid Tasfaout collided with a Malian 
player, lost consciousness and swallowed his tongue.

In the second half, the Monaco midfielder Djibril Sidibe just missed extending 
Mali's lead with a shot that scraped the Algerian crossbar.

Mali will play the winners of group B, which will be decided today. The 
leaders Morocco will play South Africa, who have figured in two goalless draws, 
in Segou. Burkina Faso and Ghana, each of whom can still qualify for the 
quarter-finals, square up in Mopti.
 