
Issam Jemâa scored a 90th-minute winner to put Tunisia on the verge of 
qualifying for theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> quarter-finals with a 
2-1 victory over Niger.

The substitute stepped inside two defenders and hammered a left-footed shot 
into the net to shake off Niger's challenge in the Group C game at Stade de 
l'Amitié in Libreville, Gabon.

Youssef Msakni's second goal in two games had put Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tunisia> ahead in the fourth minute and 
seemingly on course for a straightforward victory but Ngounou Tonji equalised 
five minutes later.

Niger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/niger> had the Tunisians rattled 
for the rest of the first half, hitting the post and missing a string of 
chances through the centre-forward Moussa Maazou before a shaky Tunisia found 
their composure in the second half.

Gabon's later 3-2 victory over Morocco sent both Tunisia and Gabon through to 
the last eight, with the Moroccans the latest high-profile team to leave the 
tournament early.

Msakni put the Tunisians in front with a weaving run and finish reminiscent of 
his goal in their opening win over Morocco, skipping away from defenders and 
slipping his shot neatly past Kassaly Daouda.

The lead lasted five minutes, however, before Niger scored their first ever 
goal at a major tournament, with Tonji's header greeted with joy on the bench 
and by the coach, Harouna Doula.

Maazou challenged the Tunisia goalkeeper Aymen Mathlouthi in the air with the 
striker flapping at the ball with his hand but there seemed to be no contact 
and Tonji followed up to head into an empty net. The goal stood, despite strong 
protests from the Tunisians.

Maazou, who was embroiled in a physical battle with the Tunisia captain, Karim 
Haggui, throughout the first half, had a great chance to complete a shock 
turnaround in the 18th minute but shot wide after shrugging off a challenge 
from Haggui.

Maazou again powered away from Haggui on the half-hour before pushing a 
right-footed shot past the far post.

The Niger winger Issoufou Boubacar's shot three minutes later struck the same 
post after a touch from Mathlouthi, with Tunisia completely rattled and hanging 
on against the unfancied Niger.

The Tunisia manager, Sami Trabelsi, looked on with arms crossed and his team 
would have been relieved to reach half-time without further damage against the 
suddenly rampant tournament debutants.

Niger's players, as has become their tradition at the tournament, knelt in a 
huddle to pray at the end of the first half and before kick-off in the second.

Jemâa was brought on at the break and the experienced forward appeared to 
settle Tunisia. Daouda was off his line quickly in the 57th minute to scramble 
a through- ball away with Jemâa closing in, and Msakni curled a shot just wide 
soon after.

In the 64th minute the defender Aymen Abdennour, who had taken over the 
marking duties of the troublesome Maazou, surged forward and sent a low shot 
from distance bobbling past Daouda and off the post.

Almost immediately Niger cleared upfield to Maazou, who forced his way past 
the last defender but could not beat Mathlouthi.

Tunisia's Ammar Jemal headed over with Daouda out of position and the goal 
gaping in the 89th minute and sank to his knees and screamed at himself in 
frustration with the North Africans appearing to have slipped up.

But Jemâa latched on to a pass on the right of the penalty area in the dying 
moments, coolly cut inside the scrambling Niger defenders and finished 
convincingly.
 