
Nigeria, England's opponents in the World Cup, were held 0-0 by their African 
Nations Cup hosts Mali, who kept alive their own hopes of qualifying for the 
quarter-finals in front of a capacity 50,000 crowd in the capital Bamako last 
night.

 But the goal drought at this competition continued, South Africa's earlier 
game against Ghana having also ended scoreless.

In 10 matches there have been six goalless draws and only five goals, a far 
cry from the 1998 tournament in Burkina Faso when 93 goals were scored in 32 
games.

 Mali started the stronger, urged on by most of the crowd in the new March 26 
stadium. Lorient's Seydou Keita caused Chelsea's left-back Celestine Babayaro 
problems, while Toure Bassala, who plays for Greek side Athinaikos, hurried 
Nigeria's midfield into making mistakes. But the early Mali pressure produced 
few clear chances.

Keita, who scored Mali's equaliser against Liberia in the opening game, fired 
a long-range left-foot shot over the bar after 12 minutes and Strasbourg's 
Mamadou Bagayoko, with his back to goal, chipped the ball over Isaac Okoronkwo 
and raced clear into the box but the defender recovered to make a perfectly 
timed tackle. In the second half Arsenal's Kanu linked well with Aghahowa and 
Vitesse Arnhem's Tijani Babangida injected some pace into Nigeria's attack when 
he came off the bench.

 Nigeria had claims for a penalty in the 75th minute when Aghahowa, played 
through again by Kanu, appeared to be tripped.

 In South Africa's stalemate in Segou they were frustrated by a disallowed 
goal and a missed penalty. The defender Aaron Mokoena put the ball in the back 
of Ghana's net after just 45 seconds but the effort was disallowed for pushing 
and Quinton Fortune's spot-kick was turned around the post by Ghana's 
goalkeeper Sammy Adjei.

Manchester United's Fortune, booked less than a minute later, went off after 
an hour following a listless performance and the midfielder has still not 
scored in 36 internationals.
 