
8.25pm GMT 

That's it from me. Thanks for your company today - and for all your emails. 
Well played Nigeria, hard luckBurkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>. See you all next time.

Let's leave the last word to Henry Efe Diemesor in Lagos: "Lagos is 
ecstatic!!! Fire works, trumpets, it's a carnival. Seems the football drought 
is over."

Updated at 8.28pm GMT

8.25pm GMT 

But Nigeria are dancing a jig of joy. They're deserved winners tonight! 
Neither team was at their best butNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> were certainly the 
stronger. And in Sunday Mba's winner, they certainly had a strike that deserved 
to settle the tournament.

8.23pm GMT 

Paul Put looks tearful, Koffi is staring at the sky, then collapses on his 
knees on the turf. Burkina Faso are heartbroken, shellshocked. There's no 
romance here tonight.

8.22pm GMT 

PEEP PEEP: NIGERIA WIN THE AFRICA CUP OF NATIONS!

That's it - the referee blows his whistle and Nigeria win the tournament for 
the third time!

Updated at 8.22pm GMT

8.21pm GMT 

90 min + 4: The Nigeria subs are bouncing on the spot, nerves coursing through 
them. Burkina Faso launch another last ball long towards the goal but Enyeama 
claims.

8.21pm GMT 

90 min + 3: Ideye handballs in the centre of the pitch, halfway into the 
Nigeria half. He's given a harsh yellow too. Rather than chip the ball into the 
box, Dagano thrashes a wild shot at goal from distance. He finds the stands.

8.19pm GMT 

90 min + 1: Nigeria can feel this now ... the drums in the stadium are 
pounding harder and harder.

8.18pm GMT 

90 min: The other Traore comes on for Kone - Abdou Razack - with four minutes 
of injury time to play.

8.16pm GMT 

89 min: Nakoulma is flagged offside (but wasn't) but crosses nonetheless. The 
Nigeria clearance is nervy - but unnecessary because of the offside flag. It 
does suggest they're a little worried in the last minutes of this game. Stephen 
Keshi brings off Mba and replaces him with Yobo, looking to see the game out.

8.15pm GMT 

87 min: Those were Nigeria's two best chances of the match - one of them 
really should have scored. But Ideye's had an off night tonight and Moses has 
been oddly reluctant to shoot.

8.14pm GMT 

86 min: Musa flies up the left wing and his cross into the box causes havoc. 
Burkina Faso flail around, trying to clear the ball, and Moses is just unable 
to get a shot in. A minute later, Musa fliles up the same wing and crosses to 
Ideye who fails to flick the ball at goal too. That would have killed this off 
... is there still time for Burkina Faso?

8.12pm GMT 

84 min: I think it's fair to say that there has never really been much heat in 
this final. Burkina Faso, for all the romance of their being here, haven't 
really tested Nigeria much. It means Nigeria have played within themselves too. 
Paul Put attempts to shake things up - he takes off the centre back Koulibaly 
and replaces him with the striker Dagano.

8.10pm GMT 

82 min: Nigeria flick and trick their way up the right wing but Ideye goes 
down under the challenge of Koulibaly, more or less buying the free-kick. It's 
just outside the area to the right of the goal. Ideye stands over the ball, 
lines up a shot, and plants the ball perfectly into the lap of that chap in row 
K.

8.07pm GMT 

79 min: Sunday Mba has a wild shot from distance, slightly taking the sheen 
off his brilliant goal.

8.07pm GMT 

78 min: Nakoulma is offside, hoping for an early ball on the edge of the 
penalty area. Alain Traore, the key Burkina Faso who is injured and sat on the 
bench, has a pained look on his face - one that suggests he would love to have 
been on the end of just such a ball.

8.05pm GMT 

77 min: That really was a great save - missed by the ref who gave a goal kick. 
But it came at the end of a period of Burkina Faso dominance. They are just 
beginning to wake up now.

"The Burkina Faso team have that God-given spirit of togetherness and 
indomitability ... seeing them coming back, pushing Eagles to the limit that 
shows the team pedigree have possesses," howls Wandile Mtana.

Updated at 8.05pm GMT

8.02pm GMT 

74 min: Fantastic save from Enyeama! Nakoulma played in Sanou, who thwacked a 
fantastic shot at the far post. A finger-tip save from the Nigeria keeper stops 
him from equalising.

8.01pm GMT 

72 min: Burkina Faso are getting on top for a spell here. They have a corner, 
from which Kabore thumps the ball into a Nigeria hand in the area - it was ball 
to hand rather than a penalty - and Nigeria scramble the ball away for another 
corner. Finally Ambrose gets a good header on it to clear. Nigeria counter at 
speed and Moses finds Musa in the box ... who falls over on the turf with the 
goal at his mercy.

7.59pm GMT 

71 min: Oshaniwa is carded for clattering Kabore to the floor. He concedes a 
free kick on the right wing, which is flashed into the box. Mikel easily thumps 
it away though.

7.58pm GMT 

70 min: Corner to Burkina Faso, but it's hit too deep and Nigeria can clear.

"To be fair to the Chili Peppers – which admittedly is something that 
shouldn't usually be done – the pitch was mostly protected by a thick rubber 
covering for the duration of their show last week," emails Nick Mulgew in Cape 
Town. "So it comes down to both the groundskeepers – the pitches this year have 
been atrocious across the board – and the stadium management: even with 
precautions being taken, who in their right mind would allow a massive concert 
to take place at a stadium being used for the continent's biggest sporting 
tournament? Fifa were anal about events (and even rugby matches) taking place 
at venues a full month before the 2010 World Cup here; why doesn't CAF at least 
try get close to those standards?"

7.57pm GMT 

69 min: Nigeria aren't exactly gunning for a second goal here, instead they're 
playing with a certain amount of caution. They're helped by the fact Burkina 
Faso aren't throwing much at them at the moment. Pitroipa needs to inject the 
spark in the Burkinabe midfield.

7.54pm GMT 

66 min: Lovely run from Moses, a twisting wiggle up the right. He hit the 
cross high and over the Nigerian forward Ideye though, rather than along the 
ground. Pitroipa seems to have moved to a central position for Burkina Faso.

Updated at 8.37pm GMT

7.52pm GMT 

65 min: Looks like Oshaniwa is coming on for Nigeria as Echiejile is lying 
flat on his back, pole-axed on the pitch. Not sure what happened there. For 
Burkina Faso, Sanou is coming on Rouamba.

Updated at 7.52pm GMT

7.51pm GMT 

63 min: Kone flashes a long-range shot from a good distance out. The ball 
skims off the surface and wide of the left hand post.

"Moses is bossing the game England's loss is Nigeria's gain, for me he is the 
player of the tournament," reckons Chidi in Israel. He's looked good tonight, 
certainly.

7.49pm GMT 

62 min: Pitroipa is everywhere at the moment, tricking his way around the 
pitch. This time, he's sqiurming around up the left flank. His heel is clipped 
by Ambrose and he goes down for a free kick on the left flank. A strong 
defensive header gets the ball clear.

7.48pm GMT 

60 min: Pitroipa whizzes up the left wing, papa's brand new bag under his arm, 
and pings the ball into the box. But Burkina Faso still can't get a shot at 
goal.

7.46pm GMT 

58 min: Kabore delivers the free-kick into the box and Bance gets up to head 
the ball. He finds only Enyeama's arms though. James Brown has strutted back 
onto the pitch, incidentally, lining up a little bit of Sex Machine no doubt.

Updated at 8.36pm GMT

7.45pm GMT 

57 min: Oop, here comes trouble. Pitroipa goes down under a challenge from 
Omeruo. The contact is pretty accidental, without any malice. But Omeruo gets a 
yellow, as does Mikel for arguing with the referee. Nigeria have the hot, hot 
heat on here - and rightly so, Pitroipa is doing the full James Brown here, 
hobbling from the pitch but just lacking the blanket over the shoulders for the 
full tribute act.

"Hi Tom, My girlfriend's dad is working out in Burkina at the moment, so we're 
all behind them," emails GIles Page. "In regards to the Chilis, I worked as a 
medic at the Leeds festival when they headlined a couple of years ago, they 
were the worst live band I have ever seen! So it's no surprise the pitch is 
bobbly, presumably the crowd got bored and started chucking lumps of turf them 
or each other!"

7.43pm GMT 

55 min: Nakoulma crosses from the left wing and the ball deflects behind off 
Victor Moses. Kabore delivers but Nigeria clear. They counter at pace and Moses 
finds himself clear in the box. Rather than slap the ball home though, he looks 
for a pass and Burkina Faso can get the ball back out. Odd from Moses, he 
should have taken a shot.

7.41pm GMT 

53 min: Moses wins a corner, battling with Koffi up the Nigerian left wing. 
Koffi's not happy about it but he'll have to suck it up, frankly. Burkina Faso 
clear the ball, after a fashion, and rattle their way forward. Nakoulma is 
unlucky to concede a free-kick for handball as he charges forward though, the 
ball pinging off his hand without him knowing much about it. Uche gets hoicked 
and Musa replaces him for Nigeria.

7.39pm GMT 

51 min: Burkina Faso are triyng to find Bance with long balls up the middle. 
The big striker has been fairly isolated today but he's a powerful presence up 
there alone.

7.38pm GMT 

50 min: Onazi hits a long ball to Uche on the left wing. It skids off the 
surface and into touch though, with the Nigeria forward free in space. Unlucky.

"As Nigerian I want to express my pessimism until I see 3 goals from our 
team," emails Henry Efe Diemesor.

7.36pm GMT 

48 min: Moses finds Ideye in the box. He turns and fires a shot across the 
face of goal from, virtually, the byline. It fizzes past the posts. Good 
effort, though perhaps pulling the ball back was the right option there.

7.34pm GMT 

46 min: It's a scrappy start to the second half, the ball bouncing about all 
over the place. Finally Nigeria slow things down for a beat but Onazi then 
flashes a pass centrally up the pitch and to nodody.

7.32pm GMT 

Peep, peep

45 min:  The second half is underway. Burkina Faso get us going.

"Rich Smith may be right about the first touches,but he'll admit the goal was 
beautiful," writes Nicholas Ayanleke in Lagos. "African players are mostly 
technically accomplished, its tactical awareness that escapes them."

7.31pm GMT 

Here's tactics guru Michael Cox on the game.
Michael Cox (@Zonal_Marking) 
Burkina Faso haven't turned up so far. But they've been strong in the second 
half throughout the tournament
 <https://twitter.com/Zonal_Marking/status/300688083219795968> February 10, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/Zonal_Marking/status/300688083219795968> 
7.25pm GMT 

Some more half-time thoughts. Sunday Mba must be tempting a lot of scouting 
departments at the moment. That goal was sensational - fantastic technique. 
He's still based in Nigeria, though not for much longer you suspect.

7.19pm GMT 

Half-time thoughts: "Very poor first touches," emails Rich Smith. "More 
fumbles than a teenagers' disco." More fun though, if we're honest.

7.18pm GMT 

Peep, peep

That's half-time. Nigeria deservedly lead but Burkina Faso are by no means out 
of this.

7.17pm GMT 

45 min +1: Mba pounces on a poor pass out of the defence from Burkina Faso. In 
space, he lines up a shot from 40-odd yards. It goes high over the bar though.

"re. the Chili Pepper," emails Ryan Dunne. "As a band they're obviously no U2, 
but come on - the junkie/mustache one was great in Point Break!" The bass 
player once threw a bottle at my head. I've always held that against them.

Updated at 7.18pm GMT

7.15pm GMT 

44 min: Pitroipa latches onto a raking, crossfield ball but his touch lets him 
down. He passed directly to Koffi rather than cross.

"I find it a little disconcerting that the Burkino Faso team are managed by a 
man called Paul Put," emails Justin Kavanagh. "Brian Clough may have approved 
of the dictatorial approach to football management, but that is just too close 
for comfort."

7.14pm GMT 

 43 min: Burkina Faso nearly get a chance to equalise immediately but Nakoulma 
was offside after Bance's knock down. A moment later Pitroipa went down in the 
box (a little too easily for some people's liking) under rthe attentions of 
Omeruo. No penalty - and rightly so. Taking that setback well, Bance decides to 
leather another long range blast from distance. Over. As usual.

7.12pm GMT 

40 min: That was fantastic stuff from Mba. Moses had finally taken a shot but 
it bounced back off a Burkina Faso back. Looping out to Mba, rushing in from 
midfield, he managed to dink it up and into the box with one foot, then 
clobbered it into the net. Great strike.

7.10pm GMT 

GOAL! Nigeria 1-0 Burkina Faso (Mba, 39 min)

Moses and Uche were diddling around with the ball in the box, but it broke to 
Mba and he lashed it into the bottom right corner having flicked the ball up 
off one foot and hitting it with the other.

7.08pm GMT 

38 min: Kabore clips the ball forwards, Omeruo heads the ball back. That's the 
extent of the action in the last few minutes. But wait, what's this? It's Onazi 
standing on a Burkinabe foot. He gets a yellow and Burkina Faso get the chance 
to launch the ball into the box. Bakary Kone gets onto it but heads down, out 
and behind the goal. SHould have headed that back across.

"An analogy based on MBMers having or being able to imagine having a wife?! 
Come on Tom!" howls Ryan Dunne.

7.05pm GMT 

35 min: "The pitch surface is World Class the players are adjusting with the 
ball very well...both teams will not have excuse for not winning the AFCON," 
hollers Wandile Mtana from Uitenhage, South Africa patriotically. "The Burkina 
Faso team have an edge because their backline have conceded only two goals, 
prior." Well, I'm only watching on telly so of course haven't strolled on the 
surface myself. But it looks a bit bobbly. Meanwhile, any excuse to have a dig 
at the Chili Peppers, who played here last week, is one I'm going to take.

7.03pm GMT 

32 min: Burkina Faso are getting some joy down their left wing here, hoping to 
make use of the space Nigeria are leaving there. Meanwhile, Rouamba gets a 
yellow for a robust challenge in midfield.

7.02pm GMT 

31 min: Omeruo passes the ball directly into touch. His partner at centre back 
gives him the sort of look you might give a man who you'd just caught in bed 
with your wife. If looks could kill, Omeruo would be stone, cold dead.

7.01pm GMT 

30 min: Mba finds Uche on the edge of the area. He turns sharply and wriggles 
a ball through the Burkina Faso lines. There's just too much on it though, his 
touch too heavy and Ideye isn't quick enough to latch onto it and shoot.

6.59pm GMT 

28 min: Nice play from Kabore to dink the ball over the top and into the 
Nigeria penalty area. Enyeama comes out to claim but it's a sign Burkina Faso 
are settling.

6.58pm GMT 

28 min: Rather than blast a screamer, he sends a skimmer across the deck. 
Think he slightly miskicked it and the ball hammers into the hoardings.

6.57pm GMT 

27 min: Nakoulma is fouled in the centre of the pitch, clipped about 45 yards 
out. There's no doubt in Bance's mind. He's lining up the shot.

Updated at 6.58pm GMT

6.56pm GMT 

25 min: An excellent ball out of the defence pings the length of the pitch and 
into the corner flag. The typist's friend Panandetiguiri sprints down the line 
to get onto it. His control lets him down at the last though and he concedes a 
goal kick.

Updated at 8.32pm GMT

6.54pm GMT 

24 min: Bance controls a long ball on his chest, turns then pulls the trigger. 
He thumps the thing into next week, several miles over the bar.

6.52pm GMT 

22 min: A period of loose passing from both sides. First Kone gives the ball 
away for no good reason, then Onazi passes to nobody from the Nigerian 
midfield. Nigeria have been the brighter so far, Burkina Faso looking nervy.

6.50pm GMT 

19 min: Koulibaly attempts a back heel while under pressure and defending just 
outside the Burkina Faso box. It's exactly the sort of the thing that makes 
watching African football so entertaining - mindless showboating for no good 
reason. It nearly allows Ideye in. A moment later Moses thumps another good 
cross into the area from the left wing. He's looked lively so far.

6.48pm GMT 

18 min: Mikel fires a pass at Ideye, lurking on the edge of the box. He can't 
control the pass though, which was excellent from the Chelsea man. The ball 
bobbled a little on the sandy surface here. I blame the Chili Peppers. Their 
funk rock nonsense the week earlier can hardly have been the ideal preparation 
for this pitch.

6.47pm GMT 

16 min: Pitroipa flashes a lovely ball into the box with Bance onside and 
ready to run onto it. The ball clips off a Nigeria defender's foot and behind 
for a corner though. Nothing comes from the set-piece.

"Well, perhaps tell us about the hairstyles, then - its all very well if 
you've a telly to watch. You Guardian commentator types are just rubbing it in, 
aren't you?" huffs Andrew in China, were TVs are banned. Well, Bance has a crop 
of peroxide blonde mop on his head. There are some good dreadlocks piled up 
high elsewhere with Koulibaly, but largely most of the players are opting for 
the traditional short, back and sides. McCourt gets very carried away about 
these things.

Updated at 6.48pm GMT

6.44pm GMT 

13 min: Onazi and Nakoulma clash in the centre of the pitch with the Nigeria 
man coming off worse. He's on the floor clutching his head. But not for long - 
this is theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> final! He's not going 
to spend long rolling about on the pitch, soaking up the spilled beer of the 
Red Hot Chili Peppers crowd. No sir!

Updated at 8.31pm GMT

6.42pm GMT 

12 min: Ambrose flicks the ball through the Burkina Faso back line but Uche 
had mistimed his run - he was a yard or two offside but completely in the 
clear. Nearly a good chance there.

6.41pm GMT 

10 min: Panandetiguiri, whose name I'm not going to enjoy typing tonight, 
switches off. He thought the ball had gone into touch but instead Moses nipped 
round behind him and crossed. Corner. Next, there's a massive let off for 
Burkina Faso. Diakite came out to claim but failed to get onto the ball and 
Brown Ideye should really have scored.

Updated at 6.41pm GMT

6.39pm GMT 

8 min: Nakoulma clips Omeruo's heels as he attempts to get onto a long ball 
into the box. It's a shame he does as he would have been in otherwise.

My colleague Ian McCourt, sat three feet away, has nonetheless emailed me., 
"What has most impressed me about this final so far is the impressive array of 
hairstyles on show. Regards, Ian," he says.

6.37pm GMT 

7 min: Ideye takes an outrageous dive in the middle of the pitch, claiming 
Rouamba flattened him. He didn't, the referee bought that hook, line and sinker 
though. From the free-kick, Ambrose is in acres in the penalty area but heads 
over the bar. Should have done better.

Updated at 8.31pm GMT

6.36pm GMT 

6 min: Echiejile looks for Uche in the middle of the box. Burkina Faso clear 
for a corner. Diakite comes out and punches well to clear. Apparently popular 
beat combo the Red Hot Chili Peppers played a show here last week so the pitch 
isn't all that tip top.

6.34pm GMT 

4 min: A long ball from Burkina Faso leads to a slight chance. Kabore finds 
himself with the ball in the middle, a fair way out. He shoots but blazes over.

6.33pm GMT 

3 min: Kone attempts to skip through the Nigeria midfield. He doesn't get far 
and so Onazi smacks it out wide for Echiejile to run onto on the left wing. The 
ball goes into touch.

6.31pm GMT 

1 min: Ambrose flashes a shot at goal from the right wing, an insouciant flick 
from distance just for the hell of it. Might have been better crossing there.

6.30pm GMT 

WE'RE AWAY!

Peep, peep: It's 22 degrees, it's live and it's the African Cup of Nations 
final! Nigeria kick off: Goliath v David, top dog v underdog.

6.26pm GMT 

Here come the anthems. Nigeria's is big, bold and serious. Plenty of big horn 
action, drummers giving it some roll while they're at it. Not particularly 
African though. The Burkinabe anthem is a slower, more ponderous affair. It's 
not afraid to give it some to the colonial masters though and nor should it! 
Take that "petty local servants".

6.22pm GMT 

The teams are out on the pitch and the vuvuzelas are in full bumble. Good old 
Sepp Blatter is also out on the pitch though he doesn't appear to be wearing 
the extendable shoes and big red nose that are the official garments of his 
office.

Updated at 6.22pm GMT

6.20pm GMT 

Just spotted than Alain Traore has been named on the bench for Burkina Faso. 
He was supposed to have been injured and definitely out of this game. Wonder if 
he's recovered, or whether this is a sympathy selection.

6.17pm GMT 

Just one of the fans today. Timmy Mallet has been looking for those glasses 
for a number of years now.
 Supporters cheer ahead of the kick off of the 2013 African Cup of Nations 
final football match between Burkina Faso and Nigeria. Photograph: FRANCISCO 
LEONG/AFP/Getty Images 
6.11pm GMT 

Both teams are out on the pitch warming up. The surface looks a good deal 
better than the Nelspruit pitch, which looked a bit like parks pitch baked hard 
in the sun.

Updated at 8.29pm GMT

5.38pm GMT 

The latest from our man in South Africa.
Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) 
Just seen a Nigeria fan wearing a loaf on his head, bearing the message "Eat 
them like bread."
 <https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/300638127045881859> February 10, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/300638127045881859> 
5.36pm GMT 

Nigeria's Emmanuel Emenike has been ruled out with a hamstring injury and is 
replaced by Ike Uche. There's no place for captain Joseph Yobo again after he 
was dropped following the first game of the tournament. As expected Burkina 
Faso have selected Jonathan Pitroipa after his red card reprieve.

Updated at 5.36pm GMT

5.32pm GMT 

Team news

Nigeria: 1-Vincent Enyeama; 3-Elderson Echiejile, 22-Kenneth Omeruo, 
14-Godfrey Oboabona, 5-Efe Ambrose; 17-Ogenyi Onazi, 10-John Obi Mikel, 
19-Sunday Mba, 11-Victor Moses; 8-Brown Ideye, 15-Ikechukwu Uche

Burkina Faso: 1-Daouda Diakite; 5-Mohamed Koffi, 4-Bakary Kone, 8-Paul 
Koulibaly, 12-Mady Panandetiguiri; 6-Djakaridja Kone, 18-Charles Kabore, 
7-Florent Rouamba, 22-Prejuce Nakoulma, 11-Jonathan Pitroipa; 15-Aristide Bance

Referee: Djamel Haimoudi

The kick-off has been delayed until 6.30pm GMT.

Updated at 5.58pm GMT

5.00pm GMT 

Preamble

The Bridesmaid's Lover is a tale of romance set in Johannesburg. Zandi Zungu, 
an economist by day and mother by night, has had her heart broken by Jeffrey. 
But, with her best friend's wedding approaching, she needs a date – and so buys 
a suit for her non-existent partner on the off-chance that she'll meet him 
before the big day. Enter Rhulani Mhinga, a tall dark stranger who, according 
to the publisher's blurb, “sends her heart beating to a multitude of drums”.

If this is the sort guff that passes as romance in Johannesburg, then their 
heartstrings could be in for some punishment tonight if Burkina Faso win 
tonight. The Stallions left Ouagadougou with one mission before this 
tournament: to won just one game. They've not managed it since making the 
semi-finals on home turf in 1998. That year, they also lost out in the third 
place play-off after conceding three times in the last four minutes and losing 
on penalties. Like unlucky-in-love Zandi Zungu, they are due some romance 
tonight.

They are boosted tonight by the fact their winger Jonathan Pitroipa has been 
cleared to play after being mistakenly sent off in the semi-final against 
Ghana. The referee, Slim Jdidi, showed him a second yellow for simulation but 
then later apologised. Pitropia has been forgiven and is available today, Jdidi 
has been suspended for a shambolic performance.

Burkina Faso are also without their key striker Alain Traore, scorer of three 
goals in the group stages, but injured against Zambia before the knockout 
stages. They have never beaten Nigeria, but managed a last-gasp equaliser 
against them in the group-stages in Nelspruit.

Nigeria, despite a creditable policy of ignoring star names and plumping for 
in-form home-based players, find themselves the pantomime villains tonight. 
They're aiming for a third victory in the tournament, and have made it to the 
final without established players like Peter Odemwingie – though rumours he has 
turned up in the Soccer City car-park are unconfirmed – and players like 
Obafemi Martins. Instead, unheralded players like Sunday Mba and Godfrey 
Oboabona have been their stars.

They had injury worries before the match in Victor Moses and Emmanuel Emenike, 
though the Chelsea forward has made the starting lineup while the Spartak 
Moscow man appears not to have done.

Updated at 5.28pm GMT
 