Thrill rating 5/10 
Danger rating 1/10

Fitness rating 4/10

In a nutshell...

If you've ever wanted to watch badgers frolic or bats bomb around undisturbed 
by the usual human distractions, take a night hike into some of the darker 
corners of Britain. What's more, the lack of light pollution in these 
delightful spots make them perfect for a bit of stargazing, too - always 
assuming it's not pouring with rain, of course.

While most people are tucked up in bed, you can join an organised night hike 
for a comfortable (and very informative) two-to-three hour trek - commonly 
through woodland where the nature spotting possibilities are most varied. The 
Charterhouse Centre in Somerset's Mendip Hills, for example, has 85 acres of 
land ready to be explored - including astronomy night hikes with portable 
telescopes for stargazing.

What's the buzz?

For city slickers used to high levels of light pollution, the sheer darkness 
of these countryside haunts is dramatic in itself - and a wonderful opportunity 
to scare yourself and friends with talk of mysterious dark shapes. Revel in the 
chance to walk under the moonlight, with glowworms lighting your path ahead and 
owls hooting all around you.

Enjoy brief encounters with everything from horseshoe bats (so called because 
of their horseshoe-shaped nose) to startled rabbits. Most officially organised 
night hikes will bring along bat detectors so that you can pick up their 
ultrasound echo.

Thrill a minute?

More a case of "there could be a thrill at any minute" - nature, of course, 
has its own timetable so patience (not to mention silence) is a virtue. But 
walking through unfamiliar woodland, not always sticking to the major paths and 
having earth, twigs and goodness knows what else under foot tends to keep the 
adrenaline pumping and stave off tiredness.

The Bristol-based naturalist and broadcaster Chris Sperring runs night "owl 
prowls" (during which he helps the group identify different varieties from 
their wonderfully varied calls) and all-night wildlife safaris. These, of 
course, introduce you to another night-time natural marvel, the dawn chorus.

Adrenaline peak

In the middle of the woods, in the middle of the night, in the middle of 
nowhere, it's time to have a "torches off" moment. This is not simply to scare 
the living daylights out of you (though of course that's a possibility), it 
will also focus your other senses to listen and smell out all the animal and 
bird activity around you. What's that rustling in the undergrowth? As your eyes 
adjust to the darkness, you'll also gain a full appreciation of the tapestry of 
stars above you.

Where to do it

The greenspace ranger for Perth and Kinross Countryside, Fergus Cook, is 
planning a night hike up to Kinnoull Hill - famed for its birch and oak 
woodland, red squirrel and deer. At the top of the hill is the Kinnoull Tower, 
built in the 18th century and guaranteed to offer some ghostly sightings - 
although Fergus says the view down to the town below, laid out in twinkling 
lights, is another highlight.

Who can do it

Children will surely be captivated by the prospect of staying up so late - 
although do also factor in their unique ability to get tired and emotional 
without even a moment's notice.

What to take

Wear "silent", rustle-free clothing (you don't want to disturb the squirrels) 
and appropriate footwear for treading through undergrowth, heather and badger 
poo.

Typical prices 

The Charterhouse Centre's night hikes cost £120 per group, whereas the Perth 
night hike is absolutely free (but booking is essential).

Impress your pals 

British badgers are, apparently, the envy of their brothers and sisters 
throughout Europe and Asia. Despite this one species living in so many 
different habitats of the world, only in Britain do they live in big groups 
("clans"). Why? Well, clearly they're as scared of all those funny shapes in 
the night as we are.

YouTube searchwords 'badger watch essex'

Good links

charterhousecentre.org.uk <http://www.charterhousecentre.org.uk>

chrissperring.com <http://www.chrissperring.com>

perthshirebigtreecountry.co.uk <http://www.perthshirebigtreecountry.co.uk>


Don't miss this star-studded event ...

Fancy seeing the Milky Way piercing through the clouds like an ethereal ribbon 
of light? Or how about spying Andromeda, a spiral galaxy 2.5 million light 
years away yet plainly visible through your binoculars? If this sounds like 
your idea of a wild night out, then join fellow stargazers at a special event 
held in Kielder Forest in Northumberland next month.

Why Kielder? "It has 250 square miles of forestry, millions of trees and not a 
street light in sight," explains the event organiser Richard Darn. Astronomy 
lovers will descend upon England's largest forest from October 10-14, to enjoy 
a star-studded (but celebrity-free) powwow under the night sky. There will even 
be a whole day's worth of events at Kielder Castle on October 13, with 
equipment stalls and expert talks on the latest astrological developments - 
plus, later on, a chance to take part in "group binocular observing".

"Binoculars are great because they offer a wider field of view compared to a 
telescope," Darn explains. "Especially when looking at the Andromeda galaxy. 
Using a telescope is like looking through a microscope, whereas binoculars 
enable you to see the whole expanse of the galaxy, which is a real pleasure."

The Kielder Forest Star Camp is now a popular annual event (this will be its 
fifth time of happening). One of the most spectacular (and still fondly 
remembered) sights came in 2005, when the Milky Way shone through a cloud like 
a ghostly phenomenon.

· For more details and to book, visit richarddarn.demon.co.uk/starcamp/ 
<http://www.richarddarn.demon.co.uk/starcamp/> or call its organiser, Richard 
Darn, on 01226 246351. It is open to all ages, especially the free (daytime) 
event on Saturday October 13.
 