Thrill rating 7/10 
Danger rating 7/10

Fitness rating 7/10

In a nutshell ...

Harness your Jedi bike skills - don't think, just feel - as you blast along a 
narrow tunnel of light. Your mission is to react fast enough to unexpected 
turns and obstacles to keep the bike the right way up and on the trail. Just 
because summer is over, there's no excuse to stop riding when the sun goes 
down. Night riding is massively popular in the UK. At first the sensation is 
weird to the point of terrifying, but you quickly learn to focus on what you 
can see rather than what you can't, and this can bring a new dimension to your 
riding by improving your feel for the varied terrain.

What's the buzz?

There are plenty of companies that do organised night rides, and plenty of 
bike centres around the UK that can provide the hills. But the beauty of this 
is that actually all you need is some darkness, a trail and a decent set of 
lights (plus a modicum of common sense), most of which are readily available 
anywhere in Britain.

Thrill a minute?

That depends on how much you want to challenge yourself. There is a lot of fun 
to be had barrelling along wide forest roads in the dark, and for beginners 
that's the place to start. But for the truly committed, the real thrill is 
launching into your favourite tight, overgrown, steep, exposed single-track and 
hoping you can hold it together. A split second's loss of concentration could 
equal disaster.

Adrenaline peak

Hit a trail that you know well from the daytime, and you will find every bump 
and bend utterly different - usually much bigger - from what you remember. As 
you quickly get used to the small depth of field and relax into the riding, 
gradually push it harder until you are approaching the same sort of speeds you 
would hit if the sun was shining overhead. But for the ultimate adrenaline 
rush, try riding routes you've never tackled with the benefit of 20/20 vision.

Where to do it

Anywhere there's a hill and a path. But to get started it's a good idea to go 
on an organised ride. At the Glentress bike centre near Peebles in the Scottish 
borders, for instance, the Hub runs night riding on Wednesdays for part of the 
year, offering dinner in the cafe, hire of top-notch lights, and a shuttle ride 
to the top of the trail. If you fancy a bit more of a challenge, try the Maxx 
Exposure event run by Trail Break - a 75-mile enduro night ride from Beachy 
Head across the South Downs Way to the Queen Elizabeth Country Park in 
Hampshire.

Who can do it

Depending on the terrain, anyone with a bike and a reasonable standard of 
riding should find night riding instantly addictive. But only the truly 
irresponsible would think about going out on a night ride alone. Don't.

What to take

It's not rocket science - the most important bit of kit is a good lighting 
set-up. For some hardcore riders that means spending in excess of £600 on 
dazzlingly high-powered HID units, but £50-£100 will get you lights that do the 
job, if not quite so spectacularly. You'll also need one attached to your 
helmet to throw light along your line of vision.

Impress your pals

Suggest you all sign up for the very relaxed official night-biking tour of 
Paris, starting from in front of the Eiffel Tower.

YouTube searchwords 'night time mountain biking'

Good links

thehubintheforest.co.uk <http://www.thehubintheforest.co.uk>

trailbreak.co.uk/maxx_exp/ <http://www.trailbreak.co.uk/maxx_exp/>

snowbikers.com/mtb_training_courses.html 
<http://www.snowbikers.com/mtb_training_courses.html>


Freeriding: pedal to test your mettle

Not so long ago, there were just two breeds of mountain bikers: lycra-clad, 
weight-obsessed cross-country riders and full-face helmeted, body-armoured 
downhill racers. Then freeriding was born. At its most basic, it means riding 
big descents littered with obstacles - man-made or natural - that require you 
to drop off, jump or ride along them.

In the UK, the freeride scene is growing fast. At Forestry Commission centres 
such as Glentress in the Scottish borders, or Cwmcarn near Newport, there are 
new, purpose-built freeride trails with jumps and drops.

Plenty of privately run spots are popping up, too. Among the best is the UK 
Bike Park in Dorset - run by volunteers - which boasts four full downhill runs 
and a series of tight, twisty offshoots, all sprinkled with stunts. If you want 
to learn how to get your bike airborne, this is the perfect place.

Or there is the Esher Shore park in Surrey. This is the spot for mastering 
"North Shore riding" - so called because it was invented in the rainforest 
north of Vancouver where riders had to build elevated timber bridges to carry 
themselves over the dense undergrowth. It has now become a discipline in 
itself, and Esher Shore is the UK's finest facility, with nearly two miles of 
timber obstacles.

No special equipment is required for freeriding, just a bike with front 
suspension at least, a helmet and good elbow and knee pads. And remember rule 
number one - always wear baggy shorts. Lycra has no place in freeride.

For more details check out:

eshershore.com <http://www.eshershore.com>

forestry.gov.uk <http://www.forestry.gov.uk>

mountain-bike-scotland.com <http://www.mountain-bike-scotland.com>

mtb-wales.com <http://www.mtb-wales.com>
 