
Letter No 1331, August 16 1974

The writers of the Constitution devised, to their satisfaction, a recipe for 
removing a president. And, after 187 years of all sorts of presidents and every 
sort of turmoil, including a civil war, the provision was used. It took two 
years from a short report in the papers about some comic burglary in Washington 
to the blinding headlines: "Nixon Resigns". Two years for the vast and alarming 
literature of Watergate to reach a single recording of a few quick telephone 
conversations between President Nixon and his closest adviser, HR Haldeman, in 
which he expressed his alarm that the FBI was already on to the burglary [at 
the Democratic national committee's offices in the Watergate building in 
Washington] and might trace it to the White House ... The charge of dynamite in 
this conversation was the simple fact that it took place on June 23 1972, only 
six days after the burglary had taken place.

Why did Nixon release this tape? Because he had to. Because he had kept it 
from his lawyer. And when the supreme court ordered the president to give it 
up, the lawyer heard it, was stunned, and threatened to resign. If he had done 
that, and was called later either in the impeachment proceedings or in the 
Watergate cover-up trial, he would have had to say what he knew or run the risk 
himself of a criminal charge. So the president had to release the tape, along 
with a pathetic hope that the House and the Senate would see it, as he put it, 
"in perspective". They were able to do that, as all of us were, right away. 
Because suddenly the only perspective that mattered was the perspective of the 
two years between June of 1972 and August of 1974, during which, it was now as 
plain as a red rag to a bull, the president had lied in every public statement 
about Watergate, every press conference, every speech. The conservative 
Republicans in the Senate, who had manned the last barricade on Nixon's side, 
who had doggedly insisted they wanted positive "direct" evidence that the 
president knew about Watergate before March 1973 - well, now they had it, and 
knew it. And the Republican leader in the House said, "from now on, it's all 
downhill." The Republican leader in the Senate said the president was through. 
And the word was taken to this cornered man.

Hype

Letter No 1816, December 2 1983 

"Hype" you may have heard is an abbreviation of "hyperbole," or conscious 
exaggeration. Not so! That's what the linguistic scholars used to call an ID 
(an intellectual derivation) and now call "folk etymology". Hype was put into 
print over 30 years ago by a Broadway songwriter, saying a particular movie had 
"no hyped-up glamour". He picked it up from drug users, whose aim was to be 
"hyped up". It was shortened to hype. So, think. Next time you fall for a 
bestseller, or a pretty face, or an ugly doll, it's not your judgment that's at 
work. The publishers, the movie company, the manufacturer - or more likely 
their advertising agency - have given you the needle.

New Anxieties 

Letter No 2000, June 19 1987

I have to mention what many of you may already know, that this is the 2,000th 
edition of a series of talks that were meant, when they started in the spring 
of 1946, to go on for 13 weeks, 26 weeks at the most. Since President Truman's 
abrupt suspension of Lend-Lease aid in the wake of the Japanese surrender 
plunged Britons into a harder year than any they'd endured during the war, 
there was trouble converting sterling into dollars. But somehow, the Treasury 
heroically squeezed out my modest fee. And here I am. I was urged to deliver 
some missionary message. But missions are for bishops. I am a reporter. And I 
can't say where America is going. I am a hopeless prophet. One book I will 
never write is: Whither America? As it is, the most memorable line, or bit of 
philosophy, from an American this week came from a 99-year-old man in Gilroy, 
California. He and his wife of 78 years were congratulated by the governor. The 
man was asked his recipe for a happy marriage. He said: "Frequent separations, 
and a growing loss of hearing."

The OJ case: preliminaries

Letter No 2368, July 1 1994 

I'd better say that OJ Simpson is probably the most famous, the most handsome, 
certainly the most greatly gifted of modern American athletes in my time, your 
time, or the time of anyone interested in American football who is now alive 
and sentient. Just as once Americans, and not only Americans, automatically 
referred to Bobby Jones as the greatest golfer who had ever lived, so Americans 
repeat, as in a catechism, the answer to the question: who is the greatest 
running back in the history of American football? OJ Simpson.

But the moment OJ was charged [with the murder of his former wife and her 
friend], the television networks and the independent city stations and, of 
course, the tabloids went ape with impatience to know the worst, or to assume 
it. In no time, even the most serious American papers and the television were 
printing as news, rumours and rumoured leaks.

The defence requested and got a preliminary hearing before a judge, at which 
the prosecution was to lay out its positive case, on the understanding that the 
defence lawyers would be allowed to see, and independently test, every bit of 
evidence brought in to support the charge of a double murder.

The press and other media are, of course, within their most respectable rights 
in reporting that hearing. So, the networks were prepared to lose millions of 
dollars to sponsors by stopping the soap operas, even going to the extreme of 
abandoning coverage of the World Cup and sacred Wimbledon.

Why, why so impatient, little man? Because everyone wants to know the verdict 
now, before we've heard the facts, the case charged, the case defended, before 
in fact, the trial, which is the point at which we, the media, should decently 
come in.
 