
The statement, “the government doesn’t comment on security and intelligence 
questions” contains an important and basically incontestable kernel of truth.

There are good reasons for some security and intelligence matters to remain 
out of the public domain. They might be of public interest, but the “public 
interest” is served by them remaining secret, at least for a while. For 
example, nobody sensible thinks that the Australian Federal Police should be 
required to reveal details of ongoing investigations, or surveillance, or plans 
for arrests, or that the precise location of naval assets should be posted 
online. Revealing certain secret information is a criminal offence, and so it 
should be.

But that’s not the same as saying that any question about the conduct of 
officials, or about tactics, or about concluded operations, are legitimately 
caught by the same exclusion.

Tony Abbott accuses media of 'promoting discord' with Indonesia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/16/tony-abbott-accuses-media-of-promoting-discord-with-indonesia>
The recent allegations that Australian officials may have paid people 
smugglers to return to Indonesia demonstrates that an ever greater area of 
political real estate is being quarantined from effective scrutiny. There is 
too much opportunity – and too much political advantage to be had – by 
ministers and bureaucrats being able to use the rhetorical fire-blanket 
“security and intelligence” as a non-answer.

The opportunity arises because “we don’t comment on security and intelligence 
matters” effectively shuts down sensible discussion. Sure, the story runs on, 
but with nothing of substance revealed, it’s all pretty much just white noise. 
The irresistible political advantage is that it allows the government to avoid 
legitimate scrutiny and prevent exposure of a blunder – or worse.

This is why the catch-all convenience of the security and intelligence 
exclusion is often merely obfuscation.

For one, governments routinely comment on security and intelligence matters, 
as any number of press conferences in front of flags and frigates or Dorothy 
Dixers in the parliament clearly demonstrate.

Second, not all security and intelligence matters involve questions of 
reasonable national secrecy, particularly after the fact. There is an enormous 
volume of material in the public domain about these matters. The problem is 
that the boundaries of the exclusion seem always to shift just enough to suit 
the political needs of the government of the day – Labor or Liberal.

Why, for example, are we allowed to know extensive details of the rules of 
engagement for ADF personnel employed in a hot warzone, but not about basic 
details about border protection tactics?

Given it is not uncommon for security agencies to slip the leash of 
ministerial direction and parliamentary oversight, and run programs or employ 
tactics that are beyond democratic control, we should be concerned about this.

Illegal or not, these sort of tactics need proper democratic scrutiny.

Following these latest pay-off allegations, Labor has also relied on the 
security and intelligence exclusion to avoid answering questions about whether 
cash was paid, for information or otherwise, on its watch.

Paying for information, while a good distance from paying boats to turn 
around, raises its own issues. Stool pigeons are prone to saying what handlers 
want to hear in order to get the next envelope, and the use of paid informants 
domestically has been linked to multiple instances of police corruption and 
miscarriages of justice.

It is not difficult to imagine how things might have evolved from intelligence 
gathering to paying for information to straight pay-offs. Once the clever 
lawyer in the strategy meeting has pointed out that Asis agents enjoy a general 
– and understandable – immunity from prosecution in respect of overseas 
operations, a world of additional “options” present themselves to agencies and 
ministers.

It would be illegal, says the legal consensus since the story broke, for a 
Navy or border protection officer to pay a sling to a people smuggler. But add 
an Asis agent to the mix as bag-man and what would otherwise be a serious 
criminal offence becomes a mere tactic.

But just because you can do something doesn’t make it a good idea. Illegal or 
not, these sort of tactics need proper democratic scrutiny. And the security 
and intelligence trope operates to prevent it.

A serious, properly functioning democracy must have a way to debate these 
issues properly, with the facts on the table.

It has always struck me as strange that something as important as national 
security can be quarantined from debate or scrutiny or that it should be “above 
politics”. I say this not as some tragic bleeding heart, but as someone with a 
mainstream Labor-right view of most of these issues.

Jakarta warns Australia over people smuggling 'bribery' claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/15/jakarta-demands-bishop-retract-claim-indonesia-failing-to-secure-its-border>
Leave aside for a moment that on questions of boats and terrorism the 
government appears intent on escalation until even Labor people considerably 
more conservative than me on these questions blow a gasket. Despite this game 
of chicken, there is a broad consensus about a large chunk of security issues. 
But that mustn’t be the end of it.

Inherent in an issue being complex, difficult and important is the 
inevitability of different views, and the possibility of different, competing 
solutions. Questions associated with national security are one example. The 
position of Indigenous Australians is another.

Strange then, that it’s sometimes on these sorts of questions, where a contest 
would not just be healthy but is necessary for democratic health and good 
decision making, that we mostly get dull bipartisanship. Meanwhile we have 
insanely vicious “contests” over nonsense issues like bias on the ABC.

The attorney general’s website warns of how bribery is “a threat to democracy 
and the rule of law [and] corrosive of good governance.” Dead right. But so is 
excessive secrecy and misuse of “security and intelligence” to avoid proper 
scrutiny.

And so, I might add, is losing your moral compass entirely. 
 