
The Catholic condemnation of abortion and the death penalty is well known and 
understood. But Catholic doctrine also condemns unfettered capitalism. We offer 
here a list of principles of Catholic social doctrine – not to argue their 
priority over others – but because we judge these to be the most in danger of 
being ignored or distorted in contemporary public debate.

The Catholic view of the human person is social not individual. Congressman 
Paul Ryan <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/paul-ryan> has stated that he 
learned from Ayn Rand to view all policy questions as a "fight of individualism 
versus collectivism". The Catholic church does not espouse "individualism" but 
rather sees it as an error as destructive as collectivism. Blessed John Paul II 
described "individualism" as a dimension of the "culture of death" arising from 
an "eclipse of the sense of God". The human person is "by its innermost nature, 
a social being". We are radically dependent upon and responsible for one 
another. Again, in the words of John Paul II: "We are all really responsible 
for all." This truth of the human person is tied to the central doctrines of 
the church. It reflects the very "intimate life of God, one God in three 
persons".

Government has an essential role to play in protecting and promoting the 
common good. The error of individualism leads to a mistaken understanding of 
the role of government. For too long politicians have echoed Ronald Reagan's 
misleading mantra "government is the problem". The Catholic church, on the 
contrary, because of its social understanding of the human person, considers 
government to be as "necessary" for human nature as the family. The state 
exists to "defend and promote the common good of civil society, its citizens, 
and intermediate bodies". Thus, while the church does not offer a specific 
blueprint for policy, it does view our government's action on behalf of the 
common good a positive good in itself.

Catholic apologists for small government repeatedly invoke a single paragraph 
from John Paul II'sCentesimus Annus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centesimus_Annus> which cautions against the 
excesses of a "social assistance state" ignoring the decades-long papal 
consensus supporting social insurance and welfare systems. In the same 
document, John Paul described the "intervention of governmental authority" on 
behalf of the defenceless as "an elementary principle of sound political 
organisation" taught by the church for a century. John Paul later stated "one 
can only rejoice" that "states set up social welfare systems to assist families 
… and pension funds for retirees". These express a sense of national 
"responsibility" and "solidarity".

The doctrine of subsidiarity both limits government and demands that it act 
when local communities cannot solve problems on their own. Subsidiarity has 
both negative and positive dimensions. Negatively, it limits overreach by 
government (as well as other large organisations, including corporations). 
Positively, the concept (which means "help" or "assistance") requires that 
government act when problems cannot be solved on the local level.

Ryan has invoked subsidiarity to justify devolving management of Medicaid to 
states thereby ending centralisation "in the hands of federal bureaucrats". At 
the same time, his budget cuts Medicaid by $750bn over 10 years, a policy that 
willcut healthcare for an estimated 14 to 27 million Medicaid recipients 
<http://www.kff.org/medicaid/upload/8185.pdf>.

The broader outlines of the budget plan will radically reduce the size of 
government and consequently cut funding for private and religious safety net 
providers such as Catholic charities who depend upon federal grants and 
contracts for much of their funding. This fails the positive obligation under 
subsidiarity to render needed assistance.

The "preferential option for the poor" demands both individual and collective 
action, including the acts of the state. In the words of John Paul II, the 
preferential option for the poor affects "our daily life as well as our 
decisions in the political and economic fields"; placing demands upon 
individuals as well as "leaders of nations".

The portrayal of the Last Judgment in the Gospel of Matthew is a judgment of 
the nations based on how they treat the "least of these". This was the "central 
moral measure" applied by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishopsin 
its evaluation of the Ryan budget <http://www.usccb.org/news/2012/12-063.cfm>. 
"The needs of those who are hungry and homeless, without work or in poverty 
should come first."

Ryan, like Rand, sees "dependency" as our most serious problem. Thus, he 
describes his understanding of preferential option as 
<http://blogs.cbn.com/thebrodyfile/archive/2012/04/10/only-on-brody-file-paul-ryan-says-his-catholic-faith.aspx>
 "don't keep people poor, don't make people dependent on government so that 
they stay stuck at their station in life".

It should go without saying that poverty is not caused primarily by a too 
generous government safety net that becomes, in Ryan's words, "a hammock that 
lulls able-bodied citizens into lives of complacency and dependency". It is 
much easier to cut government programmes than to help people out of long-term 
poverty as thevery mixed results of the 1996 Welfare Reform Act 
<http://www.npc.umich.edu/publications/policy_briefs/brief28/policybrief28.pdf> 
prove. Ryan's 2012 budget achieves 62% of its designated savings from cuts to 
programmes for low-income families and individualswhile cutting the top 
marginal tax rate and the corporate tax rate 
<http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=3723>. It is impossible to 
justify this as a serious exercise of the preferential option for the poor.

Economic forces must be reckoned among any serious account of the threats to 
society and human dignity. Ryan's budget resolutions speak mainly of 
overbearing government and free individuals acting in a private sector whose 
justice is never questioned. It is hard to reconcile this vision with the 
history of the past 40 years, in which globalisation has deindustrialised 
America and deregulation has increased the power of private corporations. At 
the same time, unions, which official Catholic teaching has long recognised as 
indispensible to the rights of workers and the common good, have been severely 
weakened. Whatever the threat of government power, any adequate response to our 
challenges must address the facts of economic power as well. Modern papal 
social doctrine has addressed both threats since its inception.

In Caritas in Veritate, Pope Benedict XVI has offered an analysis more probing 
than that offered by either political party. Benedict speaks of the loss of 
state power in the face of globalisation and calls for the development of new 
forms of government engagement:

"In our own day, the state finds itself having to address the limitations to 
its sovereignty imposed by the new context of international trade and finance, 
which … has altered the political power of states… [T]heir powers … need to be 
prudently reviewed and remodelled so as to enable them, perhaps through new 
forms of engagement, to address the challenges of today's world.

Benedict continues the century-long papal teaching that the market alone 
cannot address the needs of the common good:

"Economic activity cannot solve all social problems through the simple 
application of commercial logic. This needs to be directed towards the pursuit 
of the common good, for which the political community in particular must also 
take responsibility. Therefore, it must be borne in mind that grave imbalances 
are produced when economic action, conceived merely as an engine for wealth 
creation, is detached from political action, conceived as a means for pursuing 
justice through redistribution."

Benedict offers a description of the temptation to reduce the social safety 
net that reads like an analysis of the Ryan budget:

"From the social point of view, systems of protection and welfare … are 
finding it hard and could find it even harder in the future to pursue their 
goals of true social justice in today's profoundly changed environment … [T]he 
market has prompted new forms of competition between states as they seek to 
attract foreign businesses… These processes have led to a downsizing of social 
security systems as the price to be paid for seeking greater competitive 
advantage in the global market, with consequent grave danger for the rights of 
workers, for fundamental human rights and for the solidarity associated with 
the traditional forms of the social state. Systems of social security can lose 
the capacity to carry out their task, both in emerging countries and in those 
that were among the earliest to develop, as well as in poor countries. Here 
budgetary policies, with cuts in social spending often made under pressure from 
international financial institutions, can leave citizens powerless in the face 
of old and new risks."

The momentous challenges facing our nation cry out for the full wisdom of the 
church's social doctrine. We live at time when the social indifference of 
libertarian thought is achieving broad cultural legitimacy and political power. 
This vision of the human person and society are fundamentally at odds with the 
Gospel and the principles of Catholic social doctrine. Legitimate disagreements 
with the Obama administration must not lead the church to edit the fullness of 
its teachings for political expediency. Our political obligations as Catholics 
go beyond choosing a candidate for which to vote. To be truly prophetic, the 
church – bishops, clergy and lay faithful – must proclaim the fullness of its 
message to all parties, movements, and powers.

• This is an edited version of a document signed by 157 American Catholic 
intellectuals. The full document and a complete list of signatories can be 
found atwww.onourshoulders.org/ <http://www.onourshoulders.org/>
 