
Sukumuland in Tanzania is a traditional and conservative area where reliance 
on spiritual belief is ingrained into the fabric of daily life. Belief in 
witchcraft and faith in the rhetoric of traditional healers are manifested in 
the persecution of older women for events without rational explanation - 
HIV/Aids deaths, infertility, drought and crop failure. The standing of older 
people in the community, largely based on age and wisdom, is being eroded as 
urbanisation and migration have led to the abuse and neglect of older people by 
their relatives. An increase in violent attacks has left others fearful that 
they will be next and asking: "Why should I be violated at this age by a child 
that I made grow?"

Villages along the shores of Lake Victoria have encountered escalating numbers 
of murders: mostly older women, who have been accused of witchcraft. The only 
global network striving for the rights of disadvantaged old people, HelpAge 
International estimates that as many as 1,000 witchcraft-related killings occur 
in Tanzania annually. Complaints of abuse in both Tanzania and Mozambique are 
confirmed by the UN Committee on the Convention on the Elimination of the 
Discrimination Against Women (Cedaw).

The reasons for these killings are complex. Tanzania and Mozambique remain two 
of the poorest countries in the world with over 50% of the population living 
below the locally defined poverty line.

A belief in witchcraft and the use of traditional healers to vocalise 
suspicions and vendettas seeps through the lifeblood of East Africa. There is 
nothing wrong with belief in spirits and a connection to the land; it is no 
different from other organised worship. The harm is in utilising a respected 
and ancient belief system to justify irreligious violence and brutality for 
settling jealousies and fear of the unknown. Witchcraft is a vague and loose 
term, defying exact definition. All too often an accusation of witchcraft 
prevents the participants from confronting the true nature of the social 
problems that face them.

The idea that a "witch" may be in their community comes out of a culture that 
regards traditional healers as infallible. Searching for herbs in the scrubland 
rather than making expensive and exhausting journeys to clinics is seen as a 
telltale sign of witchcraft, as are red eyes: in reality often the result of 
old women spending a lifetime stirring maize porridge over smoky fires.

And women have often led particularly difficult lives. Despite having lived 
through civil war, famine, national independence and the communications 
revolution, few older women ever went to school.

Witchcraft allegations can be a tool to keep women in fear of men: if her 
husband is not at home, a woman is not permitted to give out information. This 
leaves widows particularly voiceless. According to Cedaw, discriminatory 
inheritance laws and customary practices against women in both Tanzania and 
Mozambique are also to blame. Widows have a low status in society, little 
knowledge of their rights and cannot inherit property.

Leonard Ndamguba from HelpAge International's Mwanza office explained that 
unlike other crimes, violence against older women is not just tolerated but 
accepted. The perpetrator of an attack is always known and feud is personal. 
Many older women are vulnerable targets with which to attribute blame for 
unforeseen problems. Older women are also regarded with suspicion for having 
outlived many of their own children - the so-called ghost generation of 
HIV/Aids. Unicef estimates that 14% of all children in Tanzania are orphans, of 
whom 64% are cared for by grandparents.

But attitudes to the recording and reporting of elder abuse by local and 
national authorities are changing. This is partly due to efforts to implement 
change in the perceptions of older women through awareness-raising, practical 
interventions such as the construction of secure housing and fuel-efficient 
stoves, and role play where abuse and its aftermath are dramatised.

If long-term change is to be possible, older people must become the agents of 
change themselves; feeling able to voice their own stories and having a forum 
in which to do so. Changing attitudes will take time. One woman I spoke to 
remarked in a considered way, "If only we had sniffer dogs and binoculars, we 
could identify the real witches in the village rather than making false 
accusations."

The training of community-based paralegals in inheritance and land law by 
HelpAge International in both Tanzania and Mozambique is a step towards 
achieving change for villagers. Disputing parties are encouraged to consult 
paralegals rather than traditional healers. However, counsellors receive only 
minimal expenses and cannot provide answers to the endemic problems of poverty 
and neglect that lie behind the violence. The killing of an old woman had taken 
place the night before we arrived to meet Bugandando villagers. Leonard 
Ndamguba was sure it had been a deliberate act of intimidation intended to 
crush the momentum of activists like him.

In N'gwaswengele, near to the Williamson diamond mine in Tanzania, the village 
council assured me that community justice prevails in witchcraft disputes. If 
an old woman accused of being a witch denies the allegation, she can appear 
before the council to "demonstrate" her innocence. As an alternative to 
isolation or dispossession of land, a woman can compensate for her witchcraft 
by paying 12 cows. The problem is that no woman has ever been known to own more 
than 10 cows.

The number of killings has reduced in areas where work is being done to 
prevent them but reporting allegations of witchcraft remains highly 
controversial and often dangerous. A journalist who did not want to be named 
told me: "We avoid these stories because they are just too difficult to 
investigate properly."
 