
After last week’s Test match in which the Wallabies attempted to break down 
England’s 15-man wall of hard-bodied humanity with the cunning tactic of 
running at it head first, Michael Cheika’s men brought variety to Saturday 
night’s party. There was greater creativity, guile and endeavour. They were 
competitive, occasionally dominant at scrum, lineout and breakdown. And they 
threw it around and ran it about and scored some rather fine tries. And still 
they lost to England, again.

 Haven’t they been good, England? Hard and focused and physical. They’ve 
played the rugby they’ve had to. They’ve won different Tests different ways. 
They’ve been belligerent, unbowed and un-bullied. And they’ve scrapped like 
convicts in a prison riot. England, we have learned across three Test matches 
of hard-boned jolting footy action, are really quite good at rugby.

Wallabies coach Michael Cheika prepared for criticism after England's clean 
sweep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/wallabies-coach-michael-cheika-prepared-for-criticism-after-englands-clean-sweep>
 The Wallabies haven’t been completely awful, and weren’t completely awful in 
Sydney on Saturday night. And yet whatever they threw at England - and it was 
plenty – they couldn’t land the killer blow. England attacked and defended with 
alacrity, and were the better, more clinical team. The Wallabies scored more 
tries, but really, so what?

 Pre-match pundits were talking up England’s potential for lolly legs at the 
end of a long playing season. But if anything they grew stronger. Eddie Jones 
and his fitness man John Pryor – apparently something of a mad zealot even by 
the kooky standards of the health and fitness industry – has England ripped and 
fit. And Jones emptied his bench judiciously. And they continued to hit and be 
hit.

 Five-eighth Bernard Foley was pretty good for Australia, running the show and 
keeping England’s rushing defence guessing with some tidy kicks short and high. 
Unlike the first two Tests, the Wallabies didn’t “run everything” as Eddie 
Jones had correctly assumed and advised his men thus.

 But England’s kicking was supreme. Deep, for the corners, often out. Forwards 
jog forward with more alacrity. One of these long-range touch-finders begat a 
lineout that the Wallabies botched which begat a scrum which begat a try to No8 
Billy Vunipola, a rolling boulder of a man.

 From there it was all England. They won Stephen Moore’s next line out, won a 
penalty from the resulting breakdown and watched Owen Farrell – whose 
interesting sway-backed run-up mannerism halfway will be copied like Jonny 
Wilkinson’s praying hands – land his yet another laser beam goal.

 Again, the Wallabies weren’t disgraced. Michael Hooper was his usual 
Energiser Bunny morphed with rum-soaked Ram Man self. Dane Haylett-Petty was 
impressive on the wing. Matt Toomua seems a lock at No12 if for no other reason 
than he seems the most effective method to put the ball in Israel Folau’s hands 
on the run. Cheika could think about putting Haylett-Petty in his preferred 
role of fullback and put Folau in the No13 where his mandate could be:run, 
Israel, run. Tevita Kuridrani? He couldn’t break free this series, a credit 
again to England’s meaty wall.

 The Wallabies played a lot smarter than the previous week. Instead of trying 
to break through the wall with a succession of battering rams, there were 
angles to their running lines and guile to their attack. Chip kicks and 
grubbers, these things serve to put doubt in a defender’s mind. And the 
Wallabies did enough to beat most teams.

Folau in the 57th minute probably should have iced it. Previous England teams 
might’ve thought, well, we’ve done well to get this close, good for us. But 
this England keeps coming. And they believe.

 The Wallabies did plenty right but gave away penalties. Cheika called it 
“inaccuracy” at the breakdown. But it’s really just dumb rugby. Test match 
rugby, you take the points, you kick long, you chase and tackle like fiends. 
And you work the referee to your advantage. You almost have to earn the right 
to run the ball. And the Wallabies, without David Pocock, Matt Giteau, Adam 
Ashley-Cooper, Will Genia and James Horwill, didn’t play smart.

Australia captain Stephen Moore says England deserved series whitewash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-captain-stephen-moore-england-deserved-whitewash>
 Nick Phipps, for one, can be a headless chook. He’s super-fit, but always 
playing full-on can make a man tend to the erratic. And when Phipps’ blood is 
up, dumb things happen. Sean McMahon’s an openside flyer who can play No8 but 
it doesn’t mean he should. Scott Fardy’s work-rate is never in question but 
he’s been relatively anonymous this series apart from giving away penalties, 
usually to the delight of England’s annoyer-in-chief, Maro Itoje.

 But the 21-year-old’s lack of respect – and fear– is indicative of what Eddie 
Jones has brought out in his squad. He’s tapped into something in each player. 
There’s a cussed, ornery quality to England. They seem to revel in being 
disliked and you can guarantee Jones would’ve been telling his players how much 
Aussies disdain Poms. It doesn’t matter if it’s nine parts bunkum; Jones has 
been in their ear.

 Look at fullback Mike Brown after he scored his cracking 30th minute try – 
his celebration was part exultation, part raised middle finger to the home 
crowd. Dan Cole looks like a bouncer who revels in back-alley dirty work. Dylan 
Hartley, Chris Robshaw, the chunky tackle machine James Haskell, hard cases 
all. And they roughed up Australia from kick-off in Brisbane to denouement in 
Sydney.

This “Bodyline” tour – a brilliant bit of branding by a mind games master– has 
been a spirited three weeks of top Test rugby. And away England fly to fill the 
Cook Cup with Boddington’s Bitter and knight Sir Eddie, as Wallabies fans dimly 
realise what a sporting life might be like as a middling rugby nation with more 
chance of winning next year’s Superbowl than the Bledisloe Cup.

Could three-nil against England now be the new normal? Australian rugby, with 
its dearth of depth and some of its best players injured or in France, might 
now be better off setting lower expectations for itself, so in the event of 
more of these kind of results, there is less surprise – and less pain to cope 
with.
 