
In the rural village of Catavicollo in Western Bolivia, 13-year-old Nancy Nina 
Parina frowns when she remembers what life was like without a toilet. "We used 
to go up into the hills behind the school," she says. "We girls had to go 
further up to make sure the boys couldn't see us and laugh at us."

Catavicollo, high up in the Bolivian Altiplano, is nearly 4000 metres above 
sea level. Located in west-central South America and bordered by Chile, 
Argentina and Peru, the Altiplano is the most extensive area of high, flat land 
on earth. The relentlessly cold weather in a landscape dominated by volcanoes 
and the Atacama Desert to the south is unforgiving for Nancy and her small 
community.

Nancy's situation is a familiar one. In many of the world's poorest developing 
countries, more than half of primary schools have inadequate toilet facilities 
and children are often unable to wash their hands with soap and water.

According to a report published by the United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF), over 90 school children share a single toilet in countries such as 
Nepal and Bangladesh. More than half of the toilets are broken or too dirty to 
use.

Children all over the world have a universal right to a clean and safe school 
environment yet this lack of basic sanitation means that each year, children in 
the developing world lose 272 million school days due to diarrhoea and an 
estimated 400 million are infested by worms.

Diseases such as these lead to poor health, malnutrition, the blood disorder 
anaemia which causes profound tiredness, and even death. Worm infections in 
particular affect a child's ability to absorb the vitamins and minerals that 
they need from their food. The severe anaemia caused by low levels of iron 
limits a child's physical growth and diminishes their ability to learn and pay 
attention in class. Children with impaired cognitive skills are less likely to 
enrol, attend and fulfil their potential at school.

Dr. Maria Neira, Director of Public Health and Environment at the World Health 
Organization (WHO), says: "Unsafe water, inadequate sanitation and the lack of 
hygiene claim the lives of an estimated 2.2 million children under the age of 
five every year. Of these deaths, 1.5 million are due to diarrhoea."

"The impact of diarrhoeal disease in children under 15 is greater than the 
combined impact of HIV and AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis," she adds.

A school health and nutrition program – FRESH - was launched ten years ago by 
leading organisations UNICEF, WHO, and the World Bank. It recognised that the 
Millennium Development Goal of universal primary school education for every 
child on earth by the year 2015 could not be achieved while the health needs of 
school children remained unmet.

The FRESH framework suggests that to improve child health and prevent the 
spread of disease, short term school-based health and nutrition services such 
as deworming and nutrient supplements have to go hand in hand with improvements 
in water, sanitation facilities and hygiene education. This school-led 
education helps whole communities to understand the importance of hygienic 
behaviour such as hand washing with soap and water. These behavioural changes 
are fundamental if lasting improvements in the health, attendance and 
educational achievement of primary school children are going to be achieved.

The risk of disease is not the only problem caused by poor sanitation. Girls 
are particularly vulnerable to dropping out of school if safe, clean and 
private toilet facilities are not provided. For teenage girls in particular, 
secure facilities help them to feel safer from the risk of rape and to prevent 
them from staying away during menstruation. An average of four days missed 
every four weeks may result in a girl missing up to 20% of her school days. 
This would make it very difficult to keep up in class and increase the 
likelihood of dropping out altogether.

An additional burden is that girls are often forced to miss classes to carry 
out household and school chores such as fetching water over long distances and 
cleaning the toilets.

A study undertaken by the Government of Bangladesh revealed that better toilet 
facilities increased girls' enrolment in school by 11%. A 15% increase in 
girls' attendance was also found when supplies of safe water were available 
within a 15 minute walk compared to one of an hour or more.

Sigrid Kaag, UNICEF Regional Director for the Middle East and North Africa, 
says: "Millions of children in the developing world go to schools which have no 
drinking water or clean latrines – basic things that many of us take for 
granted."

"Every child has the right to be in a school that offers safe water, healthy 
sanitation and hygiene education."

In Catavicollo, Nancy and her friends are lucky. Thanks to a UNICEF sanitation 
programme, their school now has two separate toilets – one for boys and another 
for girls – and the community has 12 public taps which save the women and girls 
hours of heavy work fetching water.

In April, a global partnership - Sanitation and Water for All - was launched 
to coordinate efforts globally to achieve universal and sustainable access to 
sanitation and drinking water. This framework for action reinforces the need to 
target aid in schools like Nancy's to provide child-friendly water, sanitation 
and hygiene education (WASH). WASH in and through schools is one of the best 
ways to improve the health and hygiene behaviours of entire communities.

"Our teacher told us that we have to use the toilets and about how important 
it is for us to wash our hands afterwards," Nancy explains. "We now know that 
using toilets keeps us healthy and keeps our community clean."

With the support of their teachers, children like Nancy can become role models 
within their families to promote the importance of hand washing and 
cleanliness. This behaviour, alongside continued improvements in sanitation 
facilities in schools and homes, gives children in the developing world the 
best chance of survival and success throughout their school years.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 