
The scale of Theresa May’s task in forging a form of Brexit that does not 
damage Northern Ireland’s unique economy was underlined when the province’s two 
senior elected leaders set out their negotiating demands, including retention 
of a porous border with Ireland and some form of free movement of labour with 
the rest of the EU.


May has already visited Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-hard-border-fears-northern-ireland-visit-brexit>
 to discuss the consequences of leaving the EU, and in a joint letter Northern 
Ireland’s first minister, Arlene Foster, and deputy first minister, Martin 
McGuinness, set out a series of demands that the prime minister will struggle 
to meet. Northern Ireland voted strongly to remain in the EU, as did Scotland, 
putting pressure on May not to negotiate a Brexit that simply suits English 
interests.

The two leaders, from either side of the sectarian divide, write: “It is 
critical to our economy that our business, both indigenous and foreign direct 
investment companies, retain their competitiveness and do not incur additional 
costs.

“We need therefore to retain as far as possible the ease with which we 
currently trade with EU member states and also more importantly retain access 
to labour.

“Policies need to be sufficiently flexible to allow access to highly skilled 
labour and unskilled. This applies not only to businesses and the private 
sector, but also to the public sector employers, which are highly dependent on 
EU and other migrant labour.”

They also point out that since 1994 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has benefited from €13bn 
(£11bn) of EU funding and is hoping to draw on a further €3bn by 2020.

The two leaders write: “The current uncertainty about the ability to draw down 
on these funds and the absence of EU programmes in the future is a matter of 
real concern to a range of sectors.”

We need to retain as far as possible the ease with which we currently trade 
with EU member states
Arlene Foster and Martin McGuinness 
They also point out that Northern Ireland’s agricultural sector, with its 
dependence on common agricultural funds, is “uniquely vulnerable both to the 
loss of EU funding and to potential tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade”.

Referring to the border with Ireland, they say the region is unique because it 
is the only part of the UK with a land border shared with an EU member state.


The border, they argue, must not become “an impediment to the movement of 
people, goods and services”. At the same time it must not become a catalyst for 
illegal activity, or compromise in any way the arrangements relating to 
criminal justice. The Stormont ministers said they want to play their part in 
any engagement between the British and Irish governments in relation to the 
border.

They said they were reassured that the prime minister has given a commitment 
that Northern Ireland would be fully involved and represented in negotiations.

However, they said they recognised “the possibility that it cannot be 
guaranteed that outcomes that suit our common interests are ultimately 
deliverable”.
 