
The story of a teenage girl, known only as K, explains all anybody needs to 
know about abortion law inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

K was living in a care home when she became pregnant at the age of 13. She was 
desperate for an abortion: cutting her wrists with broken glass, apparently 
starving herself, punching her stomach to force a miscarriage and threatening 
to kill herself.

This Belfast ruling means women will still be going to Britain for abortions | 
Goretti Horgan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/belfast-ruling-women-britain-abortions>
A high court judge ruled that K should be allowed a medical abortion, which is 
granted to very few women and girls in only the most extreme circumstances 
where their life or health is in grave danger.

But no doctor in the province would carry out the abortion: so confused and 
uncertain was the law that they were afraid of being prosecuted. The sentence 
for carrying out an illegal termination is life in prison.

In these circumstances, the official abortion rate in England and Wales is a 
little more than 16 terminations for every 1,000 women. The rate for women in 
Northern Ireland is less than three. With many women travelling to private 
clinics, the abortion rate in Northern Ireland will be considerably less than 
half that for the rest of the UK.

The almost total ban on abortion in Northern Ireland is founded on the 1861 
Offences Against the Person Act, which made it a criminal offence to have or 
perform a termination anywhere in the UK.

That prohibition began to be whittled away in the last century, notably by the 
Bourne Judgment in 1938. An English doctor, Alex Bourne, performed an abortion 
on a 14-year-old girl who had been raped. Bourne persuaded a judge that the 
girl would have been severely mentally and physically damaged if the pregnancy 
continued – thus extending the law to allow an abortion to protect the physical 
and mental wellbeing of the mother.

The 1967 Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act legalised 
the practice altogether. Except in Northern Ireland.

Since K’s case in 1993, there has been some clarification of the conditions 
under which an abortion is legal in Northern Ireland, but it is still not clear.


In 2001 the Family Planning Association prosecuted the Northern Ireland 
government for not publishing clear guidelines.

The judgment in 2003 recommended this happen, and provided more detail. The 
threat to a mother’s health must be “real and serious” and “permanent and long 
term”, said Mr Justice Brian Kerr. The risk to life could be “possible”, but a 
danger to health must be “probable”, he added. The following year the court of 
appeal demanded guidelines be produced.

And still they have not been agreed. The timetable of consultations, votes, 
legal challenges and delays for more than a decade is dizzying.


In the latest development, in November a high court judge ruled that under 
human rights law women and girls who are victims of rape or incest, or who have 
fatal foetal abnormalities, should be allowed abortions.

The Northern Ireland health minister, Simon Hamilton, published yet another 
set of guidelines for consultation, but these too could be superseded if the 
attorney general appeals.

Meanwhile, since 2000 the Northern Ireland police have investigated 28 cases 
of people suspected of procuring an abortion, since 2006 ten men and one woman 
have been investigated for the offence, one of those men being convicted in 
2010.


The Guardian view on abortion in Northern Ireland: the wrongs of missing 
rights | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/the-guardian-view-on-abortion-in-northern-ireland-the-wrongs-of-missing-rights>
Reliable figures for abortions by the health service in Northern Ireland date 
back to 2006-07, when there were 57 terminations. In 2013-14 there were 23. The
Marie Stopes centre in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/24/we-christened-your-dead-baby-belfast-clinics-anti-abortion-marie-stopes>
 also privately carries out legal abortions, but does not publish figures.


NHS records show women from Northern Ireland travelling to England and Wales 
for an abortion (which they must pay for) peaked at more than 1,500 in 2001, 
and has fallen steadily to 837 last year. Officials believe the real number is 
likely to be 2,000, as many women give false addresses in England.


Yet more travel to private clinics on the UK mainland. Marie Stopes in England 
treats about 500 women a year from Northern Ireland.


For those who can’t afford the travel and private costs (usually £600-£2,000), 
abortion pills can be ordered online. Charities that supply these services are 
reluctant to divulge their numbers, however.


The final option is to keep the baby. Nobody counts those women or children.
 