
Medical staff in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> are operating in a “climate of 
fear”, worried about the threat of imprisonment if they offer advice to women 
seeking an abortion, healthcare leaders have said.

Illegal pills and trauma: how Northern Ireland's abortion ban affects women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/05/abortion-in-northern-ireland-women-share-their-experiences>
The number of legal abortions being carried out in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has halved in the past two 
years because doctors and midwives have been so alarmed by punitive draft 
guidelines, which state that healthcare workers risk life imprisonment for 
performing an unlawful abortion.

“There is a real sense of fear, and concern that one of us could end up in 
prison,” said Carolyn Bailie of the Northern Ireland committee of the Royal 
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.

Doctors feel scared to provide information about clinics in England where 
women could seek an abortion because they are unsure whether giving even this 
very limited advice is illegal.


“It is difficult for us to advise our patients – if you offer them advice on 
who to contact, are you breaking the law? We don’t know. We are walking a legal 
tightrope,” said John O’Kelly, chair of the Royal College of GPs in Northern 
Ireland.

Northern Ireland's abortion laws: share your experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/25/northern-irelands-abortion-laws-share-your-experiences>
The UK’s Abortion Act 1967 was never extended to Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-abortion-laws-human-rights>
. Abortion is available if “there is a risk of a real and serious adverse 
effect on a woman’s long-term physical or mental health”, but there is little 
clarity about what circumstances this clause embraces.

Because the law is so unclear, midwives say they are worried they may be 
committing a crime if they agree to help with an abortion. Some fear they could 
still be prosecuted for procedures they have assisted with in the past because 
of this legal uncertainty.


Consultant obstetricians and gynaecologists say they feel unable to provide 
women with adequate care, given the absence of official guidance on how to 
interpret the law. Alarmed by recent discussion of punitive guidelines, most 
are now erring on the side of caution, forcing more women to travel across the 
Irish Sea for a termination, even in cases where an abortion might legally be 
permissible in Northern Ireland.

“Women in Northern Ireland are not getting the care that they really need 
because of the fear and confusion on the part of the healthcare team looking 
after them,” said Breedagh Hughes, director for Northern Ireland at the Royal 
College of Midwives.

The situation has become more confusing for healthcare staff in the past two 
years after the publication of draft guidelines by Northern Ireland’s health 
minister,Edwin Poots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/11/northern-ireland-edwin-poots-creationist-anti-gay>
, in early 2013. “It is important for practitioners to appreciate that anyone 
who unlawfully performs a termination of pregnancy is liable to criminal 
prosecution with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment,” the document states.

Although these guidelines were subsequently withdrawn, doctors say they had a 
“chilling effect”, making staff very reluctant to provide abortions that might 
previously have been viewed as standard. New guidance has yet to be published.

In 2012-13, 51 clinical abortions were carried out legally in Northern 
Ireland, but by 2013-14 (the latest year for which figures are available) the 
number had more than more than halved to 23. By contrast, more than 800 women 
travelled to England in 2014 for an abortion.
Abortions in Northern Ireland 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/abortions_nireland/giv-27167Kv3ghOuWeWAi/>
Doctors who had previously felt able to provide abortions to women who were 
carrying foetuses with fatal abnormalities in Northern Ireland say they no 
longer feel able to help those women; instead they advise them to travel to 
England for a termination.

“The law is very unclear, and it depends on the interpretation of the law,” 
said Bailie. “Rather than being managed locally with staff who have got to know 
them and can support them, with family close by, women are having to go to 
England and have the procedure there and then travel back.”

The discussion of the punitive guidance has frightened medical staff at all 
levels, said Hughes. “Before there was a spotlight being shone on it, the 
medics may have said: ‘I think this is probably lawful, a woman is in distress, 
we are going to offer her the option.’ There is no question of that happening 
now.”

Hospital doctors, midwives and GPs all said they found it particularly 
difficult when women who were having a miscarriage after taking abortion pills 
bought online came to seek their advice, because of pressure to report anyone 
who has illegally procured an abortion.

One doctor (who asked not to be named because of the uncertain legal 
situation) recounted the unease he felt when a woman told him she had taken 
these pills. “It put me in an illegal position because, in the letter of the 
law, I should report. Obviously, I’m not going to do that, but this is the sort 
of problem you get,” he said.

Two drugs, Mifepristone and Misoprostol can be taken in combination to trigger 
a miscarriage, up to the ninth week of pregnancy. These are widely available 
from online pharmacists, but they are expensive, and it is hard to be certain 
whether the online provider is genuine.

Nurses have also spoken of their anxiety about helping women at A&E 
departments who are panicking after taking abortion pills bought online. Hughes 
said: “That’s not a good situation to be managing. The midwives are thinking: 
‘Oh dear God, do I have to report this woman to the police because she is in 
the middle of a criminal act here?’” Midwives were encouraged not to ask too 
many questions.

Hughes was also concerned at the rising number of women taking tablets bought 
over the internet without medical help. “As knitting needles and coat hangers 
became obsolete and passe, in the last couple of years, abortion pills have 
become available on the internet,” she said. “We are very concerned that women 
are taking pills bought on the internet and taking them without any medical 
supervision.”

She said she was worried that women might misinterpret dosage instructions. 
“If you are eight weeks pregnant and you buy the pills online, it says take two 
twice a day. That’s fine. If you are 16 weeks pregnant and you work on the 
assumption that if you take two at eight weeks, you could take four at 16 
weeks, that would do the job. That’s disastrous. That is our worry.”

Hughes understands how potent the sense of fear of prosecution is among 
medical staff. In 2008 she was interviewed at a police station after telling a 
newspaper that over the course of her career she had been present at 
terminations and was not always sure whether the procedures were lawful or not. 
“Four hours of questioning was not pleasant,” she said.

She was asked by police to supply names both of the patients and of staff she 
had worked with but refused to comply. The investigation was dropped owing to 
insufficient evidence.

Hughes said it was hard for midwives to judge when a procedure was legal. 
“Unless the doctor makes a written declaration to say that in my opinion this 
procedure meets the requirements of the law in Northern Ireland, midwives 
[can]live with the fear that something that has happened in the past may come 
back and haunt them.”

But the situation is confusing for doctors, too, Hughes added. “Are they meant 
to sit with the law books in the wee small hours of the night and read the 
legislation and try to interpret it for themselves? What happens is they become 
fearful and they err on the side of caution? Those who have money travel to 
England and have an abortion and those who don’t have money stay in Northern 
Ireland and have babies.”

Bailie said there was optimism that constructive ongoing talks with the health 
minister would lead to greater clarity.

A spokesperson for the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> in Northern Ireland said new 
guidance was under consideration but in the meantime, healthcare trusts should 
“ensure that any health professional has access to legal advice where it is 
considered to be needed in connection with a termination of pregnancy”.

 