
Conner Adams was hanging out at a friend’s house on a recent Sunday when a man 
and a woman she didn’t know burst in the door and headed straight to the 
bathroom.

Minutes later, Adams heard screams and crying. The man came into the living 
room and hastily explained that his girlfriend had a condom inside her body 
stuffed with about $1,300 worth of heroin – and it wasn’t tied. She had tried 
to remove as much as possible in the shower, but a large amount of heroin was 
entering her body, and she was entering a massive overdose.

A deadly crisis: mapping the spread of America's drug overdose epidemic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
Adams ran to the bathroom, crouched next to the girl and stuck a needle in her 
right bicep, shooting naloxone into her veins – a drug that can snatch a person 
from death as they overdose on opioids such as heroin or prescription 
painkillers.

The girl kept murmuring, “I’m gonna die. I can’t breathe.” Adams injected her 
with repeated doses over several hours. She kept telling her, “You’re 
breathing.”

The girl survived.

Adams, who used heroin and crack as a teenager, saved the girl’s life as part 
of aNorth Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina> 
initiative that has halted, or reversed, more than 3,000 overdoses across the 
state in the last two years. This figure doesn’t include those overdoses 
stopped by first responders.

The program, the North Carolina Harm Reduction Coalition (NCHRC), 
<http://www.nchrc.org/> is focused on getting overdose drugs into the hands of 
current users and their peers. The coalition’s success is receiving national 
attention from peers and experts in overdose prevention, as opioid deaths have
skyrocketed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
 across the country in what many are calling an epidemic.

By way of comparison, New York State has reversed about 3,500 overdoses since 
2006, according to William Matthews, who works with that state’s overdose 
prevention programs. And a Chicago-based program covering the state of Illinois 
has reached 7,388 people with naloxone – in the last two decades, according to 
Dan Bigg, director of theChicago Recovery Alliance 
<http://www.anypositivechange.org/menu.html>.

Eliza Wheeler, who collaborated with several other researchers on the most 
recent peer-reviewed survey 
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6423a2.htm> of naloxone 
distribution programs in the US, said “no other state” in the country is doing 
the same kind of work as the North Carolina coalition.

The girl kept murmuring, 'I’m gonna die. I can’t breathe' ... She kept telling 
her, 'You’re breathing'

Adams, who oversees the coalition’s work in western North Carolina, said it’s 
important to have people who have used opioids working at preventing overdoses, 
because it’s easier to gain trust and reach current users, who often feel 
hopeless and marginalized.

“What we’re trying to do is create connections and make change,” said Adams, 
now 27. “We’re accessing a group that is so isolated.”

The scenario Adams faced recently at her friend’s house was her first time 
administering naloxone herself, after 18 months of volunteering and then 
working for the coalition. Until that moment, she had helped thousands of 
naloxone kits get into the hands of users and their peers.

That means the 500 reversals in her area have overwhelmingly been achieved by 
other addicts. “Drug users are … the heroes in this situation,” Adams says. 
“They’re stepping up and saving each other.”

Wheeler, who also directs a coalition focused on overdose prevention in San 
Francisco, said research has shown that “peers distributing to other drug users 
… is what works” to prevent deaths from opioid overdoses.

“I don’t know of any other state that’s doing widespread peer distribution 
networks like North Carolina,” she added.

Robert Childs, executive director of NCHRC, says his staff of five currently 
works with 185 volunteers across the state, most of whom are former or current 
users.

The organization has also helped put in place what experts say is another key 
to North Carolina’s life-saving success: laws that make it easier for regular 
people to get naloxone.

North Carolina passed its first law in early 2013, legalizing “standing 
orders” which allow doctors to authorize an entity such as the coalition to 
possess and distribute naloxone freely to persons at risk of overdose. Dozens 
of states have followed in the last two years, as the opioid epidemic has 
claimed increasing numbers of lives. Thirteen states still lack provisions 
legalizing standing orders, a fact Corey Davis finds “mind-boggling.” Davis, 
senior attorney with the National Health Law Program, has created adatabase 
<https://www.networkforphl.org/_asset/qz5pvn/naloxone-_FINAL.pdf> of laws on 
naloxone access.

'It's beyond pain': how Mormons are left vulnerable in Utah's opiate crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/utah-mormons-prescription-painkiller-addiction>
The importance of standing orders, Davis says, is that they “make naloxone 
available to people where they already are” – instead of limiting the drug’s 
availability to pharmacies, or clinics, or in ambulances or police cars.

Childs’ organization also works with all of the above, and has trained more 
than 100 police departments to use naloxone. Police in North Carolina have 
reversed more than 80 overdoses since January 2015, according to NCHRC.

Despite its success saving lives, the coalition faces an increasing obstacle: 
the cost of naloxone, and of staff needed to run a growing program. Kits can 
cost between $35 and $85 each, Wheeler says. Childs says the coalition’s 
budget, a mix of private and public funds, has grown from $30,000 a year to 
$600,000 in less than seven years. But this year alone, the coalition has 
passed out nearly 7,000 kits.

Reporting overdoses is also easier in North Carolina: the coalition collects 
the data in-person, online, by email, cellphone call or text. No personal 
information is kept. Many states use forms that can only be filled out at 
certain locations, Childs says. Making data collection simpler creates added 
public health value: on one occasion, 12 overdose reversals were reported in 
one location during a 24-hour period. A swift investigation revealed that a 
dangerous batch was on the streets; the coalition deployed volunteers to pass 
the word to users.

Peter Davidson, a professor at the UC San Diego School of Medicine who has 
studied opioid deaths said it’s “frustrating” to see that other states haven’t 
yet adopted North Carolina’s methods, which he believes should be a national 
model.

“We have a really good … public health response that works, and seeing it not 
being done more comprehensively is infuriating,” he said. “You’re watching the 
death reports come in, and you know they don’t need to be that high.”
 