
Norway has learned nothing from the terrible events of 22 July 2011, when 
Anders Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> 
killed 77 young people on the island of Utøya, according to Norwegian author 
and journalist Åsne Seierstad.

“We are hiding it under the carpet and I don’t think we have learned anything 
from it,” the writer told theEdinburgh international book festival 
<https://www.edbookfest.co.uk/>.


“To some extent it wants to forget about it,” she said of Norway’s reaction to 
the horror. “It doesn’t want to deal with what happened.”


Seierstad, a foreign correspondent in Russia, China, Kosovo and Afghanistan 
before she turned her attention to the shattering events in Oslo and on Utøya, 
painstakingly researched Breivik’s life and the events leading up to the 
massacre for her bookOne of Us: the Story of Anders Breivik and the Massacre in 
Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/26/one-of-us-the-story-of-anders-breivik-massacre-norway-asne-seierstad-review>
.

She also researched the lives of those who had been murdered, talking at 
length to the families of the dead, keen to represent them as “not just victims 
being hunted”. Though the events she was describing were “as terrible as it 
gets”, it had been rewarding, she said, to meet the parents and learn about the 
lives of the young people who had been attending the Labour party’s summer 
youth camp. The family members were given the right of veto over Seierstad’s 
manuscript; none of them exerted it and royalties from the book are to be 
donated to charities of the families’ choosing.


The inadequate and slow police response to reports of the killings had been 
particularly notable, she said: “It wasn’t just one person who didn’t do his 
job but 35 or 40,” she said. There had been what she called a “wait-and-see 
attitude” – but for every minute wasted, another life had been lost.


Security measures had not been much altered in Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> as a response to the tragedy, she 
said – politicians deciding that to increase security for obvious targets of 
terrorism would increase the risk for softer targets such as schools and 
kindergartens.


Seierstad, whose previous book was the bestselling The Bookseller of Kabul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/13/bookseller-of-kabul-author-cleared>
, also said that Breivik had much in common with Islamic State. “He was 
building a new state in his head,” she said. His fantasy Europe was white and 
Christian, in which apostates would be killed, or in certain cases forced to 
pay special taxes: a kind of reverse image of Isis’s vision.


And yet the violent anti-Islamic rhetoric that he espoused was not the most 
important motivation for the killings, she had concluded.


After examining Breivik’s life in detail – including speaking to his mother 
days before she died from cancer – she found “a childhood that a child 
shouldn’t have”. Breivik was the son of a dysfunctional marriage that, when it 
ended, left him alone with his troubled mother, who had probably been the 
victim of childhood abuse.


At the age of four, the child had already been monitored by social services, 
and his inability to smile, play or connect with other people noted. His mother 
ricocheted between signs of hatred for her son – telling him she wished he had 
never been born – and displays of affection. “Love hate, love hate: the worst 
thing you can do to a child,” said Seierstad.


Having been denied the opportunity to form relationships with his parents, he 
then struggled to relate to other children. A pattern was formed in which 
Breivik attempted to befriend, or failing that, impress, peers: first 
schoolmates, then contacts made online through games such as World of Warcraft; 
and later those he met on the web via rightwing and anti-Islamic groups. “If 
you are not loved you want to be admired; if you are not admired you want to be 
feared, in the end,” said Seierstad.


Having failed to connect with the people around him, he also failed to connect 
with wider society: “His hatred for society, for social democracy and Norway 
came so much earlier than his anti-Muslim and anti-immigration ideas,” she 
said, although these thoughts had formed the basis of a series of texts, 
distributed electronically on the day of the massacre, setting forth his views.


Seierstad said that she had believed Breivik to be gay for some time, but at 
length rejected the idea. “He was not afraid of women – just afraid. He was 
afraid of getting close to people and being unmasked,” she said.


His attempts to show off to those he encountered and attempted to befriend 
were rebuffed.


Even when he forayed to “the darker sides of the internet” – sites where 
conspiracy theories and fantasies about Muslims taking Europe were shared– he 
was rejected. “Not because he was so weird, but because he was so boring,” said 
Seierstad. She said that she believed that Breivik was not in fact truly 
committed to the anti-Islamic rhetoric he espoused. “He was never racist”, she 
said, but it was among the far right that “he met his crew of hatred”.
 