
Norway has dismissed complaints by the mass murderer Anders Behring Breivik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> that his conditions 
in prison – where he is serving 21 years for killing 77 people in 2011 – 
violate his human rights.

Breivik, who is being held apart from other inmates at a high-security 
facility, is suing the Norwegian state, accusing it of “inhumane” and 
“degrading” treatment in violation of the European convention on human rights.

Ahead of the hearing on 15 to 18 March, however, the office of the attorney 
general defended Breivik’s conditions in jail.

“The measures which have been applied to the plaintiff … are well within the 
limits of what is permitted” under the convention, it said in a document 
submitted to the Oslo district court and published on Wednesday.

The document said Breivik had access to three cells – one for living, one for 
studying, and a third for physical exercise – as well as a television, a 
computer without internet access and a games console, and that he was able to 
prepare his own food and do his own laundry.

The Norwegian prison where inmates are treated like people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/25/norwegian-prison-inmates-treated-like-people>
While he is allowed no contact with other inmates, also for security reasons, 
he interacts with guards and professional staff, the attorney general’s office 
said.

“There are limits to his contacts with the outside world which are of course 
strict – it pretty much has to be that way – but he is not totally excluded 
from all contact with other people,” said Marius Emberland, the lawyer who will 
defend the state at trial.

Breivik’s lawyer, Øystein Storrvik, argued meanwhile that his client has been 
subjected to “a longstanding isolation for almost five years” and he is 
suffering “clear isolation damage”.

In the first two years of his sentence, “the only visit from a 
non-professional was that of the plaintiff’s mother” just before she died of 
cancer, Storrvik said in another document submitted to the court.

“They had around five minutes together during which they hugged.” 

Breivik also accuses the state of violating another aspect of the convention, 
regarding the “right to respect for his private and family life … and his 
correspondence”.

Authorities have said those restrictions are necessary to prevent him from 
building up an “extremist network”.

On 22 July 2011, Breivik killed eight people in a bomb attack outside a 
government building in Oslo and later murdered another 69 people, most of them 
teenagers, when he opened fire at a Labour Youth camp on the island of Utøya.

He was given a 21-year prison sentence in August 2012, which can be extended 
if he is still considered a danger to society.

The hearing later this month will for security reasons be held in the 
gymnasium of the Skien prison, about 62 miles (100km) south-west of Oslo where 
the 37-year-old killer is incarcerated.
 