
Mass murderer Anders Behring Breivik has accused the Norwegian state of trying 
to kill him by keeping him in isolation, which he described as “torture”.

The rightwing extremist, who killed 77 people in a bombing and gun massacre in 
2011, also vowed to fight “to the death” for Nazism as he took the stand in his 
lawsuit against the state, confirming fears he would use the platform to 
grandstand his extremist views.

“I have fought for national socialism for 25 years, and I will fight for it to 
the death,” he said of the Nazi party’s political doctrine.

Breivik made a Nazi salute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/anders-behring-breivik-norway-court-inhuman-treatment-utoya>
 on the first day of proceedings on Tuesday but obeyed a judge’s orders not to 
do so on Wednesday.

Norwegian authorities have refused to televise his testimony to prevent him 
sending coded messages to supporters and out of respect for survivors and 
victims’ families.

Describing himself as a model prisoner, the 37-year-old claimed the state “has 
been trying to kill me for five years” by keeping him in isolation.

Breivik spent much of his testimony elaborating his extremist ideology, but he 
also complained of drinking cold coffee and eating frozen meals heated in a 
microwave – a fate “worse than waterboarding” – and said he was suffering from 
headaches, apathy and insomnia.

His lawyer has previously argued that isolation has caused Breivik clear 
damage, citing memory loss and an inability to focus on his political science 
studies.

Three hours were set aside for the court to hear Norway’s most infamous 
prisoner outline his jail conditions.

Breivik is serving a maximum 21-year sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/24/anders-behring-breivik-verdict-norway-utoya>
 – which can be extended if he is still considered dangerous – for killing 
eight people in a bombing outside a government building in Oslo and then 
murdering another 69, most of them teenagers, in a rampage at a Labour youth 
camp.

Utøya, the island paradise turned into hell by Anders Behring Breivik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/23/utoya-mass-murder-anders-behring-breivik>
The massacre on the island of Utøya lasted more than an hour, as he 
methodically stalked and killed attendees of the camp.

He has accused the state of breaching two clauses of the European convention 
on human rights prohibiting “inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” and 
guaranteeing respect for “private and family life” and “correspondence”.

The state’s lawyers have argued that Breivik’s conditions fall “well within 
the limits of what is permitted” under the convention.

In his first public statement since his sentencing in 2012, Breivik told the 
court he now adhered to a “non-violent” version of national socialism, a 
statement bound to provoke many in a country occupied by the Nazis during the 
second world war.


For security reasons, the case is being heard in the gymnasium of the Skien 
prison in southernNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>, where he 
is serving his sentence.

Breivik made a series of demands, indicating he wanted his letters to be 
uncensored, see other prisoners and receive visits from at least five friends 
and supporters. He also wants the right to publish books.

He says he has been subjected to 885 strip searches since his arrest, which he 
called humiliating and senseless.

“It’s understandable when it’s justified, for example when it involves people 
who have a violent past or something like that, but I have been conducting 
myself in exemplary fashion for five years,” Breivik said.

He has access to three cells – for sleeping, studying and physical exercise – 
as well as a television, a computer without internet access, a games console, 
books and newspapers and puzzles.

Breivik is also able to prepare his own food and do his own laundry, according 
to state representatives.
 