
An 85-year-old international jewellery thief was back behind bars on Tuesday, 
charged with stealing a pair of $690 earrings from an upmarket department store 
inAtlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta>, in the latest caper of 
her decades-long career as a jet-setting burglar with sparkling taste.

Doris Payne was caught pocketing a pair of Christian Dior earrings from a Saks 
Fifth Avenue store inAtlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> on 
Friday, according to a police report.
 Doris Payne, 85, an internationally known jewel thief, was arrested for 
stealing $690 earrings from an upmarket department store in Atlanta. 
Photograph: AP 
The subject of a 2013 documentary, “The Life and Crimes of Doris Payne,” she 
was charged with shoplifting and remained in the Fulton County jail on Tuesday.

Ten years ago she swore she was done with a lifetime of pilfering jewels 
across two continents. Several arrests later, in 2013, she said again that she 
was leaving that life behind.

Payne is said to have committed countless thefts over six decades in the US 
and Europe and has discussed her exploits in media interviews over the years.

A store security guard watching surveillance video saw Payne enter a Christian 
Dior boutique inside the department store and take the earrings from a standing 
shelf before quickly leaving, the police report says. She was arrested in the 
mall, and the earrings were found in her pocket, the report says.

She is also wanted on a warrant for a similar offence by the sheriff’s office 
in North Carolina, and will face extradition, police said.

Shawn McCullers, a lawyer for Payne, said his client has health concerns that 
need to be taken care of, but he did not elaborate.

“We would look forward to obtaining her release and having her medical needs 
addressed as soon as possible,” he wrote in an email Tuesday. “When that has 
occurred we can make a determination on how to proceed.”

The daughter of an illiterate coal miner, Payne was born in Slab Fork, West 
Virginia. When she was 23, she walked out of a Pittsburgh jewellery store with 
a diamond valued at $22,000, kicking off a criminal career that would land her 
behind bars multiple times, including a nearly five-year prison stint in 
Colorado, she told The Associated Press in 2005.

She developed a winning strategy — dressing nicely, carrying a designer 
handbag and arming herself with a detailed story — that she used to charm 
jewelry store employees.

Faced with a well-to-do woman with money to spend, store employees would relax 
their rules and bring out multiple high-value pieces at once, and Payne would 
quickly slip the expensive baubles on and off until the employee lost track and 
she could easily leave with one in hand.

Through the years, authorities have said she has used at least 22 aliases and 
probably got away with her crimes more often than she got caught. The Jewelers’ 
Security Alliance, an industry trade group, sent out bulletins as early as the 
1970s warning about her.

Payne is truly in a league of her own in the pantheon of jewel thieves, 
Jewelers’ Security Alliance president John J Kennedy said: “It’s 
extraordinarily rare for a criminal to have that lengthy of a career.”

“Usually they either stop because they have enough money and they don’t want 
the risk anymore, or they’re dead.”

In a 2005 jailhouse interview with The Associated Press in Las Vegas, Payne 
remembered her exploits with amusement, throwing back her head and laughing. 
She stole diamonds because they were easiest, she said, and she was in it for 
the game, not the money.

“I’ve had regrets, and I’ve had a good time,” she told the AP. 

She also said in that interview that she was done stealing — at age 75, it was 
time to stop. Multiple arrests later, in the summer of 2013, she told Matthew 
Pond, a documentary filmmaker who had chronicled her life,that she wouldn’t 
steal again, according to a report in the Los Angeles Times two years ago.

Kennedy, for one, wasn’t surprised to hear about her latest arrest.

“I have long said that she is a career criminal, and I doubt if she has any 
interest whatsoever in stopping,” he said. “When you’re that age and you’re 
still doing it, you’re not about to stop.”
 