
Rumours that the Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> manager Alex McLeish 
has resigned over a lack of transfer window activity have been scotched by the 
club.

Forest said McLeish is still in charge, despite speculation about his 
departure and it is understood he took training as normal on Friday morning.

The speculation arose on Thursday when Forest's transfer window move for 
Peterborough's George Boyd fell through at 9pm, ostensibly over an eye problem 
detected in a medical. McLeish was understood to have wanted to go ahead with 
the deal regardless but was over-ridden by the club's owner and chairman, Fawaz 
Al-Hasawi.

However, in a statement posted on Forest's website, McLeish said: "Fawaz is a 
strong individual, he is the owner and isn't a successful businessman for no 
reason. Sometimes he will say no to my requests and suggestions and sometimes I 
will say no to his because I am a strong manager. If that's the level of the 
alleged 'bust-up', then I guess we'll be reading about more managers having 
them with their owners this week."

Al Hasawi later said the pair's relationship was as good as ever, saying: 
"Alex and I talk every day, at least twice a day. We have a very good working 
relationship and it troubles me greatly that people think otherwise.

"I have been involved in football for 15 years and have never interfered when 
it comes to the players a manager wants to sign. I didn't do that in Kuwait and 
I haven't done it since we purchased Nottingham Forest last summer.

"Yes, I have recommended players to managers but the final decision rests with 
them, not me. We have signed 18 players for Forest this season and all of them 
were either chosen byAlex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> or Sean O'Driscoll.

"All I want to see is Nottingham Forest back in the Premier League and, if 
that means I have to sign another 18 players that Alex wants, then I will do 
it."

After missing out on new additions yesterday, McLeish and Al Hasawi met at the 
club's training ground today to discuss possible targets in the emergency loan 
window, which reopens next week.

"Alex and I have spoken at length today and he has already outlined to me the 
kind of players he would like to bring in on emergency loan," he added. 
"Whatever players he asks for I will try my hardest to bring to Nottingham 
Forest.

"I've heard it suggested that my family don't have the money to fund what we 
are trying to achieve at Forest or that we don't have any idea what we are 
doing.

"That upsets me because all I want is to make this great club successful. But 
the last word on transfers will always be with the manager."
 