
It was perhaps unfortunate that Alex McLeish should have twice used the phrase 
"If it ain't broke, don't fix it" on the occasion of his first press conference 
as manager ofNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest>.

That, of course, is exactly what many Forest supporters feel the club has done 
in sacking Sean O'Driscoll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/26/nottingham-forest-sean-odriscoll-sack>
 a matter of hours after the 4-2 Boxing Day win over Leeds United that left the 
team in eighth place in the Championship, just one point off the play-off 
positions. They feel this all the more because they believe McLeish, who 
acquired a reputation for what might be described as an over-cautious approach 
during his spells as manager at Birmingham City and Aston Villa, to be a less 
than inspirational replacement.

"I think they may be confusing 'negative' with 'organised', and I'm not making 
any apologies for that," was the 53-year-old Scot's dry response.

"When we go back to my time at Rangers [2001-06] we were one of the best 
footballing teams to have played at Ibrox in a long time. I inherited some good 
players like Ronald De Boer and Claudio Caniggia and we got these guys to 
express themselves at high tempo. We ended up winning seven trophies and played 
some tremendous football."

Not that Forest's owners, Fawaz al-Hasawi and Abdulaziz al-Hasawi – both of 
whom are currently in Kuwait – have told him they wanted him to get the Reds 
playing like Barcelona, he said.

"Equally they have not said: 'Don't play a long ball game.' There is more than 
one way to win football matches and long balls can be effective as well. We'll 
only ask the players to play the way they see the game. Guys like [Forest 
midfielder] Andy Reid, I can't tell him to ping the ball. There's never one 
team I've asked not to pass the ball. And I'm not saying there weren't any good 
passers at Villa."

Having described his time in charge at Villa, when he oversaw nine wins in 42 
league games, as "a catalogue of horrors", McLeish suggested the Premier League 
club's continued struggles this season may serve to put his time in charge into 
context.

"I think it should allow people to understand it's not easy to turn it around 
overnight with a few changes. There were too many draws, 17 I think in the 
league, and but for that we'd have been much further up the table. But in 
saying that the glove just didn't fit."

He admitted he had felt physically drained by the time he was sacked by Villa 
last May, after the club finished 16th in the Premier League, two points clear 
of relegation.

"I felt that over the course of the Villa job I had to use every bit of 
experience I had and in the end we got the boys over the line. We blooded a lot 
of youngsters, maybe ahead of their time, and as you can see, it's up and down 
a wee bit just now for Paul Lambert. It is not an overnight job at Villa, it 
was and is a work in progress."

Hence, he said, his deciding to turn down an indirect approach by Forest last 
summer. "I was sounded out by an agent and I said no, I was going to take a 
break. And I seriously had to do that. Though maybe there were five or six 
people that agent phoned."

That he should be offered the position again six months later with Forest in a 
position of relative strength was an opportunity he could not turn down, 
McLeish acknowledged. It was not one, his words suggested, that he did not 
deserve.

"I suppose you could have nine positives on your CV and one negative, and 
people would point out the negative. If we can get to the Premier League with 
Forest it will be another big achievement in a career that I've had full of 
trophies and medals as a player, and some trophies at a managerial level as 
well. I have to make the most of it."
 