
Rare recordings of some of the last century's greatest writers are to be 
released for the first time - fromF Scott Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fscottfitzgerald> reciting Othello to 
Tennessee Williams lambasting critics and Raymond Chandler drunkenly slurring 
his way through an interview with Ian Fleming.

The British Library CDs are a literary goldmine, with recordings of 30 British 
writers and 27 from the US, most of whom are being heard for the first time 
since they were in front of the microphone. They include the only surviving 
recording of Virginia Woolf, the sole recording ofArthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle>, battily explaining the 
importance of spiritualism and the existence of telepathy, and Gertrude Stein 
incomprehensibly explaining how she writes.

"We have opened up a real treasure trove," said Richard Fairman, of the 
library's sound archive. "The reason people love hearing the CDs is because we 
read these authors and we feel we know them through reading their work. But 
when we hear them speak it's like meeting them in person. It's not quite as 
good as having them walk up to you, but it's not bad."

If you were to meet Vladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov>, it would be an alarming 
experience, on the basis of his broadcast. The author of Lolita answers 
questions in the style of a ham actor reciting poetry. He is asked if writing 
is a pleasure or drudgery: "Pleasure and agony while composing the book in my 
mind. Harrowing irritation when strolling with my tools and viscera, the pencil 
that needs resharpening, the bladder that has to be drained, the word that I 
always mis-spell and always have to look up."

Tennessee Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tennesseewilliams>, on 
the other hand, sounds as you might expect, with a wonderful, warm southern 
drawl. In the 1959 edition of the BBC's Frankly Speaking he says people have 
taken advantage of him. "I'm an extremely malleable person. Almost anybody can 
twist me round their finger. And I've been twisted around so many fingers that 
I feel like a multiple pretzel."

He concedes critics can kill a play. "It's a very humiliating experience and 
an unfair one because, if a play on which you've worked say two years or three 
years or even, in the case of Orpheus Descending, 17 years off and on, its fate 
can be decided in a couple of hours of reflection."

One of the most poignant recordings is Joe Orton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/orton>, a week before he was murdered by his 
lover Kenneth Halliwell. He explains he has done well out of Loot but wants to 
save his money "because I shan't always be young and I don't want to do 
anything grand with it, because there's nothing I particularly want to do, but 
I would like to sort of put it away so that when I'm not writing any more ... I 
shall be able to go away and do something else."

He adds: "I only have so much inspiration. I think any playwright does. It's 
like a boxer, a really good playwright's career is quite short. A boxer's 
career is usually 10 years and then they start to get punchy, which I think 
playwrights do as well. Shakespeare's career was pretty short ... probably 15 
years. And he wrote some pretty rum plays at the beginning of his life. I hope 
I've never written anything as bad as the early Shakespeares."

One of the jolliest interviewees is PG Wodehouse, in conversation with 
Alistair Cooke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alistaircooke> in 1963. They 
talk jocularly about a new theory that automation is going to throw so many 
people out of work that by the year 2000 every middle-class family will need 
four servants to keep people employed.

The drunkest interviewee is Raymond Chandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymondchandler>, who had been at the whisky 
before his 1958 interview with his friend Ian Fleming.

The British Library CDs are the latest in its series of historic recordings. 
Fairman said there were still gaps in the sound archive, and if anybody had 
recordings of DH Lawrence, John Galsworthy and George Orwell they should get in 
touch.

• The Spoken Word: British Writers and American Writers is released tomorrow 
by the British Library, price £19.95 each

In their own words

"Perhaps then one reason why we have no great poet, novelist or critic writing 
today is that we refuse to allow words their liberty. We pin them down to one 
meaning, their useful meaning. A meaning which makes us catch the train, the 
meaning which makes us pass the examination."
Virginia Woolf, 1937

"I've had a very disappointing life, I feel, but still it's been well 
worthwhile ... I think life's really, and has been probably through history, 
quite horrible, but it's great fun somehow."
Rebecca West, 1958

"Obscenity is something that I abhor. I don't think there's anybody more 
squeamish than I am about what is obscene. I cannot stand anything 
scatalogical, anything physically disgusting ... my plays are extremely moral 
in my opinion. I'm almost an old puritan."
Tennessee Williams, 1959
 