
Tell actor Aidan Gillen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen> 
that you think that he is on the cusp of being big, really big, and he recoils 
as if you've bitten him. "No I'm not that kind of person. I'll only fuck it up. 
I'm not good enough," he protests. But whether he likes it or not, Gillen is 
staring major success in the face. Already well-known for his role as the 
arrogant, good-time Stuart in Queer as Folk - the drama that brought gay life 
and love to mainstream TV - Gillen's Shakespearean debut as Ariel in Jonathan 
Kent's production of The Tempest at the Almeida later this week will bring two 
years of non-stop work to a climax.

Over Christmas he will be seen as Carver Doone in the BBC's production of 
Lorna Doone; and in January there will almost certainly be more attention with 
the release of Jamie Thraves's original and smart debut feature film The Low 
Down, in which Gillen stars as Frank, a confused man about to hit 30, who can't 
make up his mind whether to go for the mortgage and commitment or to stay a 
waster. This performance won Gillen the best newcomer award at this year's 
Edinburgh film festival.

In the circumstances it's no surprise that 32-year-old Gillen ("I look younger 
and feel older - much older") is looking weary. The arrival of his second child 
six weeks ago, combined with rehearsals for The Tempest, are also taking their 
toll. "Every couple of years - no, that's every couple of weeks - I think I'm 
going to give up acting. I heat myself up over the fact that I am never going 
to be as good as I want to be. I hate it when people tell you you're good when 
you know that you're not."

Gillen has been acting since his early teens, when he joined his local Dublin 
youth theatre as a way to meet girls and get invited to parties. "To start, I 
wasn't really interested in acting at all and I didn't make much impact. The 
first play I was in was on for five nights and I didn't show up for two of them 
and nobody noticed. But I stayed because that's where my friends were, and 
after a while I found myself wanting to inhabit other people's worlds and 
lives. I discovered that I enjoyed acting - although you can't deny that it's 
also about showing off and wanting people's approval."

At 18 he auditioned for a role in Billy Roche's A Handful of Stars at the 
Bush, got it, came to London, felt lonely and has barely been out of work 
since, although he had a bare patch just before Queer as Folk. He still claims 
that his career feels like an accident - but his CV reeks of quality, with 
stints in Mojo at the Royal Court, the Playboy of the Western World at the 
Almeida and Juno and the Paycock at the National.

While he clearly gets offered good stuff, he is canny enough to skim off the 
real cream. He spotted the quality of Russell T Davies's scripts for Queer as 
Folk as soon as he saw them and was keen to play Stuart, not least because the 
self-confident gay man who was always the centre of attention was a million 
miles away from his own persona.

"I felt I needed to confound people's perceptions of what they thought I was," 
says Gillen. He points out that the series has done his career nothing but 
good, though he was unprepared for the amount of attention - not all of it 
welcome - it brought him. He groans when I tell him that I've taken a tour of 
sites on the internet on which female and male admirers drool over him.

One of the pleasures of Gillen's performance in The Low Down is the way in 
which he suggests that there is part of the hapless, personable, slightly comic 
Frank that is hidden, wild and totally unknowable. It is what gives the film 
its emotional ballast.

Jonathan Kent, who is directing Gillen in The Tempest, recognises that quality 
in him too, describing it as "a hinterland...There is a darkness in him that is 
fascinating," says Kent. He originally hadn't thought of casting Gillen, who 
had no Shakespearean experience and no drama-school training. He just happened 
to be having a drink with Gillen one day when the rightness of the casting hit 
him. "I was sitting staring at him and I suddenly thought, 'I've been mad not 
to think of him. He is Ariel. Ariel is so elusive and so is Aidan.' "

"Jonathan had to talk me into it. I was a bit worried because I've been used 
to doing a lot of muttering and mumbling as an actor," says Gillen. "But I've 
discovered that once you know what you're talking about and you believe in it, 
the Shakespearean language comes naturally.

"What I've really found interesting is the antagonistic relationship between 
Prospero and Ariel, and the way they are tied together, like body and soul. It 
is as if Ariel represents the dying of Prospero's imagination."

Gillen starts laughing at himself. He is a little over-analytical - a 
natural-born worrier. "The reason I get in a tortured state about acting is 
because sometimes I don't think I feel enough anguish about it," he says. "I 
want to care. I don't want to be apathetic. I want to move people. I'm not good 
at smiling. I'm not saying that I'm not interested in being famous but I'm more 
interested in being good, and I never feel that I am good enough."

He gets up to leave and smiles. "On the cusp, you say? The cusp. Yes, I'd say 
being on the cusp is a quite interesting place to be."
 