
O2 UK wants to be recognised as a leader in sustainability by the end of 2011 
and has partnered with sustainability experts, Forum for the Future, to assess 
its progress independently.

The company also launched think big, a new sustainability programme, in 2010. 
While the strategy involves a wide range of stakeholders, from customers and 
suppliers to social action groups and communities, the company believes that to 
achieve sustainability leadership status, it needs to hand ownership of the 
programme to its 12,000 employees.

Championed by the chief executive, Ronan Dunne, who personally leads O2's 
sustainability taskforce every six weeks, the think big programme aims to 
include everyone at O2 in what the company's calls it's big sixtargets.

The rationale is that by "starting small", everyone can become motivated to 
have bigger ideas about people and the planet.

Think big aims to create greener products and services, to make buildings more 
sustainable, lower the company's environmental impact and help build the 
confidence of a million young people through a £5m social action programme 
investing in youth projects.

All employees are encouraged to make pledges to get involved, supported by a 
strong internal campaign (online, in stores, offices and call centres) and a 
dedicated website.

From suggesting business and energy saving ideas to volunteering or reducing 
their travel impact, employees are encouraged to join a community of 
sustainable thinkers and the company says it tries to offer something for 
everyone, whatever their role.

Think big values are also built into personal development reviews and O2 
rewards involvement through an award-winning peer-voted recognition scheme, 
known as Fanclub.

People can get involved in activities such as one-to-one mentoring of young 
people, fronted by the National Youth Agency and other partners.

They can join the company's own network, described as teams of activists, who 
are able to dedicate paid-time to exploring social enterprise ideas within and 
outside the business.

Or staff can make a difference in their everyday work by, for example, finding 
ways to work together more efficiently, reducing travel and energy use or 
recycling.

Business initiatives are flowing from the campaign, the company says, together 
with sustainability-related investment, sales and revenue.

One example is the eco-rating system for handsets that launched in 2010, and 
the first grading system to look at the life-cycle of mobile phones and enable 
customers to choose products based on their sustainability credentials.

All profits from O2 Recycle, a consumer pay-back scheme also goes toward 
helping young people.

At a grassroots level, the small business development team has promoted 
products from a youth social enterprise – mobile accessories made from recycled 
fire hose – within O2 stores.

A year into the programme and O2 says it has seen a "palpable change" in 
business culture.

In the company's 2010 employee survey, 83% of staff said they were strongly 
aware of the company's sustainability aims and the think big programme has 
achieved the highest increase in environmental awareness yet recorded.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 