
Communicating good practice in an effective way is especially vital for any 
telecoms company with an ambitious sustainability agenda.

Take O2 in the UK, for example. The mobile operator aims to be recognised as a 
leader in sustainability by 2012 and is collaborating widely to reach this goal.

Consumer research has helped the company establish what matters most to 
customers. As a result, its strategy includes greener products and services, as 
well as some far-reaching social and environmental projects.

But in terms of mobile phones, the message has been clear. The majority of 
customers are concerned about the impact of the products they buy: 44% say 
sustainable performance influences their purchases and 11.5% say it has a 
strong influence.

Among the initiatives under O2's "think big" vision, the company sought a 
sustainability rating system for the phones it sells.

Working closely for 14 months with the supply chain and the independent 
sustainability experts, Forum for the Future, it introduced an eco-rating in 
August 2010.

Eco-rating helps customers to see the overall sustainability performance of 
mobile handsets, not just their environmental credentials.

Measured against the entire sustainability spectrum, the rating considers 
supply chain ethics, packaging, chemical substances, recyclable content, energy 
performance and functionality, for example.

It also considers how phones can help people lead more sustainable lifestyles, 
for example by reducing their travel or being able to connect to health and 
education services.

An important part of the project was the confidential discussions Forum for 
the Future held with major manufacturers – such as HTC, LG, Nokia, Palm, RIM, 
Samsung and Sony Ericsson – to develop the eco-rating methodology.

With this new tool, O2 believes it has a comprehensive system based on 
life-cycle thinking, sound science and manufacturers' own supply chain research 
to reveal what it calls "a single source of truth".

As well as the traditional specifications of battery life, web-access and 
connectivity, consumers can now take a view about a handset's sustainability at 
the point of purchase, with labels displayed right next to the price.

To communicate the initiative O2 wanted a visually-striking yet simple 
labelling system. It came up with a rainbow-style image, which complements the 
think big branding.

The grading system measures each device's sustainability performance from 0.0 
to 5.0: the bigger the rainbow, the better the handset.

O2 says it has had worldwide enquiries from within and outside the industry on 
how the tool might be used in future and what other uses it might be put to.

Currently being assessed for international markets by Spanish parent company 
Telefónica, its eco-rating for mobile phones is thought to be a world first. 
While some competitors have introduced carbon or environmental labels, none has 
attempted to grade sustainability in a wider sense.

The company is now working with manufacturers to help them improve their 
future ratings. This open and collaborative approach could well translate into 
a shared system for the whole industry in future, O2 says.

Co-operation with stakeholders and Forum for the Future will be crucial. The 
forum will monitor the tool's evolution – working with handset makers, 
consumers, NGOs and action groups, network operators and others.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 