
Police and black Americans: a relationship worse than in the 90s | Al Sharpton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/10/police-black-american-relationship-reform-justice-al-sharpton>
A long and deep legacy of white supremacy has always arrested the development 
of US democracy. We either hit it head on, or it comes back to haunt us. That’s 
why a few of us have pressed the president for seven years not to ignore issues 
of poverty, police abuse and mass unemployment. Barack Obamasaid 
<http://time.com/4397600/obama-alton-sterling-philando-castile-speech-transcript/>
 it very well, following the shootings of Philando Castile and Alton Sterling, 
that some communities “have been forgotten by all of us”.

And now – in Dallas, Baton Rouge, Falcon Heights and beyond – this legacy has 
comes back to haunt the whole country.

Obama and his cheerleaders should take responsibility for being so reluctant 
to engage with these issues. It’s not a question of interest group or 
constituencies. Unfortunately for so much of the Obama administration its been 
a question of “I’m not the president of black people, I’m the president of 
everyone.” But this is a question of justice. It’s about being concerned about 
racism and police brutality.

I have deep empathy for brothers and sisters who are shot in the police force. 
I also have profound empathy for people of color who are shot by the police. I 
have always believed deliberate killing to be a crime against humanity.

Yet, Obama didn’t go to Baton Rouge. He didn’t go to Minneapolis. He flew over 
their heads to go to Dallas. You can’t do that. His fundamental concern was to 
speak to the police, that was his priority. When he references theBlack Lives 
Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>, it’s to 
speak to the police. But the people who are struggling have a different 
perspective.


The Counted: people killed by police in the United States – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
The very notion that Dallas is the paragon of policing is something that needs 
to be interrogated. The Dallas mayor said we have done nothing wrong, but look 
at your history. Ask people in southern Dallas about the police. Ask Clinton 
Allen 
<http://www.dallasnews.com/news/metro/20131014-dallas-police-officer-not-indicted-in-fatal-shooting.ece>
, an unarmed black man fatally shot by the Dallas police in 2013. I was with 
his mother, Collette Flanagan, the founder of Mothers Against Police Brutality, 
last year. Countless people came up and told us about all the struggles black 
communities are having with the Dallas police.

Unfortunately, Obama thrives on being in the middle. He has no backbone to 
fight for justice. He likes to be above the fray. But for those us us who arein 
the fray, there is a different sensibility. You have to choose which side 
you’re on, and he doesn’t want to do that. Fundamentally, he’s not a love 
warrior. He’s a polished professional. Martin Luther King Jr, Adam Clayton 
Powell Jr and Ella Baker – they were warriors.


Obama’s attitude is that of a neo-liberal, and they rarely have solidarity 
with poor and working people. Whatever solidarity he does offer is just 
lip-service to suffering but he never makes it a priority to end that suffering.


Obama has power right now to enact the recommendations made after Ferguson. 
Better training, independent civilian oversight boards, body cameras. But he 
has not used executive orders to push any of these changes through.

This November, we need change. Yet we are tied in a choice between Trump, who 
would be a neo-fascist catastrophe, and Clinton, a neo-liberal disaster. That’s 
why I am supporting Jill Stein. I am with her – the only progressive woman in 
the race – because we’ve got to get beyond this lock-jaw situation. I have a 
deep love for my brother Bernie Sanders, but I disagree with him on Hillary 
Clinton. I don’t think she would be an “outstanding president”. Her militarism 
makes the world a less safe place.

Clinton policies of the 1990s generated inequality, mass incarceration, 
privatization of schools and Wall Street domination. There is also a sense that 
the Clinton policies helped produce the right-wing populism that we’re seeing 
now in the country. And we think she’s going to come to the rescue? That’s not 
going to happen.

The American empire is in deep spiritual decline and cultural decay. The 
levels of wealth inequality and environmental degradation is grotesque. The 
correct response to this is: tell the truth about what is going on. Bear 
witness. Be willing to go to jail to fight for justice if need be.


When the system is declining, it can bring despair. That’s why Black Lives 
Matter – and all other young people of all colors who are mobilizing – is a 
beautiful thing. We are having a moral and spiritual awakening. It gives us 
democratic hope. Its not about having hope butbeing hope. It’s time to move 
from being spectators, to being actors.
 