
It has been a relatively quiet time for pan European mergers and acquisitions 
over the past few years, what with the financial crisis and all.

But there have been signs in recent times that companies are more willing to 
spend their cash piles, and analysts at Exane BNP Paribas believe more deals 
could be on the way. Analysts David Finch and Ian Richards said:
 For the past three years the market has been calling for a revival in M&A in 
Europe. Assets were historically cheap and bargain financing available for 
solvent acquirers. But the boom has stubbornly refused to take off. The missing 
ingredient has been the confidence required to take a step into the dark and 
this lack of animal spirits in the boardroom was of course exacerbated last 
year by the spectre of a eurozone collapse. With Europe's existential crisis on 
the backburner (at least in terms of sentiment) we see some room now for 
European M&A to catch up with the more dynamic M&A trends that have been 
developing across the Atlantic. 
They have updated their merger list, and have added a couple of new UK names, 
includingOcado, up 1.3p at 104.3p. Ocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> has often been tipped as a 
potential target, and many analysts are dismissive of the idea and believe it 
is struggling to achieve profitability. But Exane believes there is potential 
for an offer:
 In a recent report we highlighted the shift to online distribution and the 
challenges this represents for the traditional big box retailers. Given that 
on-line shopping tends to appeal to wealthier time-poor customers with a 
preference for premium priced goods it is increasingly difficult for food 
retailers to take a relaxed attitude to developing a competitive offer. In this 
context Ocado represents a turn-key solution for the laggards in on-line 
retailing. Ocado has invested in developing an efficient distribution network 
and a highly effective IT platform. Even at a significant premium to today's 
enterprise value of £750m Ocado would represent an affordable shortcut for 
either a domestic (Morrison or Marks and Spencer) or an international operator 
(Amazon…). 
Other names on its list of possible targets include Micro Focus International, 
steady at 622.5p, andOphir Energy, down 0.5p at 500p.

On the other hand it has removed a number of companies which it feels are no 
longer in the takeover frame, includingInforma, down 4.3p at 479.1p, and Smith 
and Nephew, 14.5p lower at 707p. Aegis, unchanged at 235p, has been taken out 
because it has actually received a bid, from Japan's Dentsu.
 