
Wong Kar-Wai's Ashes of Time Redux continues the vogue for director's cuts. 
When did it start?

Malcolm Smith, Cromer

The first film-makers had sufficient control over their work to release their 
preferred versions. But the formalisation of the business in the mid-1910s gave 
production companies, distributors and exhibitors a say in the content and 
length of release prints. DW Griffith, for example, produced an eight-hour 
rough cut of Intolerance (1916) and considered issuing it in two parts. Yet, 
even though he was persuaded to cut the picture to around 200 minutes, it was 
deemed overlong and its box-office failure prompted Griffith to hack into the 
negative and release The Mother and the Law and The Fall of Babylon as separate 
items to recoup his losses. Unfortunately, when he later attempted to 
reconstruct the original, 2,000 feet had been permanently lost.

Erich von Stroheim's Greed (1924) suffered an even worse fate. The rough cut 
ran for 45 or 42 reels, depending on which source you believe. However, Samuel 
Goldwyn rejected this nine-hour version and insisted Von Stroheim further 
reduce his 22-reel revision. Even the 18-reel, two-part compromise prepared 
with fellow director Rex Ingram failed to please and MGM wunderkind Irving G 
Thalberg sanctioned a 10-reel hatchet job by title writer Joseph Farnham and 
the destruction of the excised footage.

The first director's cuts of the sound era emerged in the early 1930s, when 
Griffith added sound effects to his contentious 1915 masterpiece The Birth of a 
Nation and Abel Gance transformed Napoleon (1927) into Napoleon Bonaparte 
(1934) with some sound effects, dubbed dialogue and several new scenes. But 
many years were to pass before a director again had such autonomy over his 
work. Perhaps surprisingly, the modern trend for director's cuts begins with 
John Cassavetes. In 1959, he salvaged scenes from a discarded 1957 version of 
his directorial debut, Shadows, while in 1978, he cut 26 minutes from the 
134-minute 1976 print of The Killing of a Chinese Bookie. But rather than 
simply removing or truncating footage, Cassavetes reshaped the material and 
added new scenes to alter both the film's thematic and stylistic emphasis.

Last week you said The Rice-Irwin Kiss contained the first female close-up. I 
always thought it came in Grandma's Reading Glass.

Mitch O'Neal, Connah's Quay

Probably starring Eva Bayley and Tom Green, George Albert Smith's Grandma's 
Reading Glass (1900) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a_89uZv5_pQ> contains what 
is presumed to be the earliest example of a female close-up in a projected 
film, and even then we only see the right eye of the old woman being 
scrutinised by a young boy with a magnifying glass. One of the first to attempt 
point-of-view shots, this short film has been the subject of much debate, with 
some historians claiming it as the work of Arthur Melbourne-Cooper.
 Million dollar legs ... Betty Grable. Photo: Kobal 
I heard that Cyd Charisse's legs were insured for $1m and something similar 
about Elizabeth Taylor's eyes. Are these urban myths?

Monica Islam, Oxford

 The Guinness Book of Records confirms that Cyd Charisse's pins were insured 
for $5m in 1952. But Elizabeth Taylor's violet eyes never seem to have made the 
million-dollar club, although a policy for that amount was taken out in case 
the plastic surgery makeup she wore in Ash Wednesday (1973) permanently damaged 
her face.

The vogue for movie star insurance began in the silent era when Douglas 
Fairbanks bought a "scar policy" with Fireman's Fund and Lloyd's of London 
promised to pay strabismic clown Ben Turpin $25,000 if his eyes uncrossed. 
During Hollywood's golden age, Fred Astaire, Sonja Henie, Lana Turner and Ann 
Miller all had their legs insured for sizeable sums, but none could match the 
$1.25m policy that 20th Century-Fox took out on Betty Grable, who was 
subsequently billed as "The Girl with the Million Dollar Legs".

In ensuing decades, Marlene Dietrich had her voice insured for $1m, but Jimmy 
Durante's schnozzle nose was only valued at $50,000, while Bette Davis had to 
settle for a $28,000 payout against excessive weight gain. But not all stunt 
policies were accepted, with Lloyd's refusing Disney's bid to insure the life 
of Mickey Mouse for $1m in October 1935 on the grounds that he was "immortal".

Got a question for Parky? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 