
If you landed in Britain today for the first time, you could be forgiven for 
thinking that there was a civil war between generations in this strange country.

That's what the media and many policymakers would like us to believe as they 
pit young people against older people. Pick up a newspaper, go online or read 
the latest thinktank pamphlet, and you will see countless myths and stereotypes 
about older and young people never having had it so good (or bad).

The reality is rather different. Older people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> are concerned about what is 
happening to their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren and their 
future. Young people are concerned about how their grandparents will fare in 
old age.

We should not be stoking up enmity between generations. We should be focusing 
instead on the distribution of income, wealth and opportunities, and how we 
create a society where people of all ages prosper. Attacks on older and young 
people are a diversion from the real problems Britain faces.

Rather than dividing age groups, politicians should be seeking to develop a 
progressive contract that unites all ages. Action by and for people of every 
age can be the basis for a national prevention strategy from cradle to grave. 
From active ageing to tackling obesity and giving children a good start in 
life, we must help people to help themselves. Bringing older and young people 
together has multiple benefits – from reducing loneliness and sharing skills to 
tackling the care crisis.

As United for All Ages' new report 
<http://www.unitedforallages.com/drupal/sites/all/sites/default/files/files/A%20Britain%20for%20All%20Ages%20July%202014%20pdf.pdf>
 argues, it's time to build a Britain for all ages with a contract between the 
generations.

There are already lots of opportunities to make it happen in communities 
across the country. Opening up local facilities such as children's centres, 
schools, older people's housing schemes and care homes to people of every age 
makes social and economic sense.

There are a growing number of multigenerational households, with members of 
three or more generations living under the same roof. And schemes such as 
Homeshare and Shared Lives enable adults of different ages to share a home with 
mutual benefits. But much more could be done to tackle the housing shortage – 
such as by encouraging and supporting older people to downsize and free up 
family-sized homes.

Ending the ageism that underpins much of social and family policy would be a 
good place to start. It would encourage policymakers and practitioners to think 
differently about the way we deliver services and how we could make better use 
of all our resources. Change requires vision and leadership at all levels. It 
doesn't always need extra resources, and many of our proposals are about saving 
resources by preventing problems and doing things differently.

Where new resources are required, we propose action on taxation. Britain is 
still one of the richest countries in the world and fairer and more effective 
taxation could generate resources for all ages. We need to focus taxation on 
wealth and assets as much as income. In particular, wealthier older people 
should contribute more.

We need to engage people in raising awareness and coming up with solutions. 
This is not just a challenge for older people but for us all. We must enable 
people to help themselves across the life course – by planning ahead and 
remaining fit, healthy and involved with friends and family. And we need to be 
smarter about how we spend public resources: out of expensive hospital and 
residential care and into the community, homes and prevention.

Promoting intergenerational conflict is not the answer to tackling the 
profound problems and inequalities in Britain today. We are much stronger as a 
society if we are united, not divided, across generations.

Stephen Burke is director of United for All Ages 
<http://www.unitedforallages.com> and Good Care Guide.
 