
When Paul Nixon first held ambitions of keeping wicket for England the 
presence of Alec Stewart tormented him that his hopes would never be realised. 
Stewart was England's champion all-rounder, not only a wicketkeeper but a 
top-order batsman and briefly a captain. Throughout the 90s there was no job 
that he would not do.

But whereas once Stewart blocked Nixon's ambitions, his career now brings only 
encouragement. There has been much scoffing at the thought that Nixon is about 
to begin an England career at 36 - even if there is no shortage of support for 
his claim that he is "the fittest 36-year-old in the game" - but the lesson 
provided by Stewart is that nothing is impossible.

"Alec Stewart played until he was 40 and I would like to think that, fitness 
wise, I am up there with him. I've just turned 36, I'm as fit as anyone in the 
game and I still love it. I'd be a liar if I didn't say that the World Cup was 
at the back of my mind. You never think your England chance has gone because 
all you ever work for is the chance to represent your country. I am passionate 
about the game and about doing well and winning. Duncan Fletcher aims high and 
hopefully I can keep learning. Realistically, being behind Stewart at his peak, 
I knew I was never going to play. It's different this time around. Hopefully a 
calm head and experience will help."

Life was so simple in the 90s. Stewart kept wicket, except when the calls for 
a specialist became so loud that Jack Russell got a game instead. Nixon got on 
with life as a county professional with Leicestershire and later Kent. Then 
Leicestershire tried to sign a Kent reserve keeper, freshly qualified for 
England, name of Geraint Jones. Kent chose to keep Jones and offloaded Nixon 
instead. Jones soon attracted England's attention. Nixon seemed destined for a 
few more years' service at Leicestershire and a deserved retirement, but 
refused to abandon hope.

Now he is in Sydney: straightforward, combative, a senior professional who 
understands his limitations. "I certainly know now that I am far more right for 
the role as an England wicketkeeper-batsman in one-day cricket than I was six 
years ago. I am certainly a stronger person. I certainly know my game a lot 
more. It's important to be relaxed about your game and not tighten up. I just 
want to go out there and make match-winning contributions. One-day cricket is 
about strong characters. In business, in sport and in life, strong characters 
get to the top.

"I don't feel that I'm treading on toes, absolutely not. When you train as 
hard as I've trained for the last 20 years, and I've had four winters playing 
in Perth and worked hard, I am testimony to the fact that if you keep doing the 
right things eventually it comes."

Consider his rivals for the World Cup and the list runs to almost half the 
county keepers. We are no longer in the simple world of Stewart v Russell. But, 
for the moment, it is Nixon in possession. As he awaited the likelihood of an 
England debut in today's Twenty20 international at the SCG, he even had a rare 
psychological advantage over Australia. He and Leicestershire have been 
involved in the last four Twenty20 finals days, winning the competition twice, 
whereas Australia insist that the 20-overs game is a lottery, even though a 
Twenty20 World Cup is on the way and their own 20-overs state game is thriving. 
However justified their suspicions might be, their resistance is futile.

The contenders

1 Paul Nixon Leicestershire The latest man in possession.

2 Chris Read Nottinghamshire Showed slick glovework but flimsy batting in the 
Ashes series. Still does not seem entirely integrated.

3 James Foster Essex This week's highest mover. As a youngster he was a 
favourite of Duncan Fletcher, but his batting has not really kicked on.

4 Geraint Jones Kent Fletcher has yet to abandon hope of a revival, even if 
others have.

5 Jonathan Batty Surrey Big run-scorer for Surrey, but ignored because he is 
an opener and England want a middle-order manipulator.

6 Matt Prior Sussex Pugnacious hitter. Recently tried as a top-order batsman, 
but discarded.

7 Steven Davies Worcestershire Trendy kid on the block. Talented, 
inconsistent, not ready.

8 Nic Pothas Hampshire Now England-qualified, advocated by Shane Warne.
 