
Australia is set to improve its position on the summer Olympics medals table 
next year in Rio for the first time since the triumphant 2000 Sydney Games. In 
releasing its annual Sports Tally report, Australian Institute of Sport 
director Matt Favier said Australia was much better placed now across a range 
of sports than at the same stage before the London Games, when it slumped to 
10th on the overall table with just seven golds among 35 medals.

“We believe we can and will improve on London,” Favier told AAP. “The margins 
are ever so small between our aspiration of fifth and certainly no lower than 
ninth. We believe we have everything in place to finish well within the top 10. 
But it is difficult to predict and the margins are small when it comes down to 
gold medals and silver medals as a likely differentiator.”

The targets are very similar to those last week from Australian Olympic 
Committee secretary general Fiona de Jong, who flagged a stretch target of 
fifth and a benchmark result of seventh on the overall medals table in Rio. 
Australia finished fourth overall at the 2000 and 2004 Games and sixth at 
Beijing in 2008.

The AIS will make more detailed medal projections early in 2016 following a 
year which includes world championships in swimming and athletics. Swimming has 
traditionally been Australia’s best source of Olympic medals and its progress 
was graded as “on track” by the AIS following a successful Commonwealth 
campaign last year in Glasgow which netted 52 podium finishes. But three other 
high-profile Olympic programs – athletics, rowing and basketball – had their 
ranking dropped to “progressing”.

The AIS repeated its criticism of the shambolic campaign by athletics at the 
Glasgow Commonwealth Games, where head coach Eric Hollingsworth was sent home 
in disgrace for publicly criticising Sally Pearson.

“[It] was poorly timed and unhelpful for the sport’s image,” the AIS said in 
the Sports Tally report. “Despite this distraction, there were solid 
performances from a number of athletes including Sally Pearson, Kimberley 
Mickle, Alana Boyd, Michael Shelley and Dani Samuels.”

The Boomers failed to meet the target of a top-eight finish at last year’s 
World Cup in Turkey.

The non-Olympic sport of surfing received the highest possible rating of 
“excelling” by the AIS while judo was given the lowest mark.
 