
As we head into the final day of racing for the rowers at Eton Dorney it has 
arguably been the most exciting Olympic Regatta ever. The headlines may very 
well read "British Empire has been rebuilt" when the final race concludes on 
Saturday afternoon.Team GB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> have 
managed the incredible feat of placing every one of their 13 crews into the 
medal finals. With three more finals on Saturday the team had already recorded 
two golds, one silver and three bronzes with three excellent medal chances 
remaining. It is one of these chances that interests me slightly more than 
others though.

Eight years ago I lined up with Canada on the start line in Athens to contest 
the men's four final against the soon to be knighted Matt Pinsent and his 
team-mates. We had avoided each other throughout the qualification rounds and 
were co-favourites for gold. I remember thinking that there was no way we would 
lose but also knowing that this was the same mindset that the British crew 
would be entering the race with.

As we crossed through each 250 mark separated by less than half a second my 
belief was becoming more and more concrete.

No matter how many times I watch the race the result does not change but 
neither does the feeling that we would win for every stroke of that race. As I 
look at how the "Battle of the Ashes on the Water" has unfolded to date I am 
convinced that all eight members of the Australian and Great Britain crews must 
share the mindset that I had in Athens. With each chapter of this dramatic 
rivalry there has been evidence for each crew to draw on to reinforce their 
confidence. In Lucerne the British rowed through the Australians in the last 
500 and in Munich the Australians held on in the last 500.

The athletes and coaches will attribute these outcomes to differences in 
preparation and tactics and therefore focus only on the positives.

Fast-forward to the past week and much of the same. Dominant performances by 
both crews in the heats resulted in the unlikely situation where the crews were 
placed in the same semi-final.

Having not faced this scenario in Athens my mind went to think of how the 
crews would approach this race. Within the first 500m it was obvious that both 
crews had decided to gear down and feel each other out. Despite lower stroke 
rates than their opposition both crews pulled away from the field and once 
again it was a two-horse race. But with qualification places assured both crews 
appeared to be content to cruise through the middle 1000m. As they entered the 
final 500m there was a strange energy within the venue as it appeared the 
crowds were more engaged than the crews.

I was calling the race for Canadian television and struggled to sell the sense 
of urgency as I looked at the faces of the athletes. A conservative sprint 
brought Britain through with 250m to go and this was met with nearly no 
response from Australia. As both crews crossed the line there was a feeling 
that this was merely a dress rehearsal. I looked for some sense of 
accomplishment from the British crew but was confronted with the facial 
expressions I would expect after a hard training run. This is a great reminder 
that for the favourites, semi-finals are the worst part of the regatta. The 
only reward in what you were expected to achieve is a place in the final and it 
physically still hurts a lot.

So the stage is set for another epic contest in this 20-year rivalry. 
Australia won the men's four in 1992 and 1996 with the Oarsome Foursome while 
Britain won in 2000 with Sir Steven Redgrave's four, in 2004 with Pinsent's 
four and in 2008 with Hodgy [Andrew Triggs Hodge] and the boys. On Saturday 
afternoon the score will either be levelled or Britain and Jürgen Gröbler will 
have added another gold medal to what is being described as the most dominant 
performance by a rowing nation since the Berlin Wall came down. For me it will 
be a thrill to watch knowing that all eight athletes truly believe they will 
win this until the final stroke.
 