
Choreographer Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips> is best known for 
judging BBC1'sStrictly Come Dancing, but found fame with 1970s dance troupe Hot 
Gossip and has worked on numerous films and stage shows, including recent 
productions ofSaturday Night Fever and The Wizard of Oz. While growing up in 
Manchester she studied ballet, but when she moved to London she fell in love 
with modern American jazz dance and began teaching at Pineapple Dance Studios. 
After departingStrictly in 2008 Phillips judged So You Think You Can Dance? and 
created a series of children's books. She has also producedMidnight Tango, a 
dance show starringStrictly Come Dancing professional dancers, which is at the 
Phoenix theatre, London.

Exhibition

Ice Age Art, British Museum until 26 May
 Female figure sculpted from steatite. Photograph: RMN/Jean-Gilles Berizzi 
When people realise how old the pieces on display are, their minds will be 
blown. It looks like it will be the most extraordinary exhibition. Among the 
artworks there is a figure carved from soapstone that is 20,000 years old and 
yet is obviously a model for the large, incumbent, shapely women created by 
Rubens and Henry Moore.

Film

Hyde Park on Hudson
 Bill Murray in Hyde Park on Hudson. Photograph: Snap Stills/Rex Features 
I saw this beautiful film in a very small private cinema in Toronto. Set in 
1939 when King George VI visited the US for the first time and was invited to 
Franklin D Roosevelt's house in upstate New York, it shows the remarkable way 
in which these two men became close friends. There is a touching moment when 
King George is made to eat a hotdog and he is told in no uncertain terms that 
it would be beneath him, but he does, and from that moment he is welcomed into 
American society.

Music


Your Song by Elton John
 Elton John performs live in 1973. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
I am about to go into a workshop for a possible musical about the disco era, 
so at the moment I am listening to and reading the lyrics from masses of 1970s 
pop music. Bizarrely, Elton John is what sticks in my mind most. I've realised 
how theatrical his music is, but also how intriguing the lyrics are. Your Song 
is a great example: "If I were a sculptor, but then again no… " The song 
invites you to imagine, to feel something.

Dance


Kooza <http://www.cirquedusoleil.com/en/shows/kooza/tickets/london.aspx>, 
Cirque du Soleil, Royal Albert Hall, London until 14 February
 Kooza, performed by Cirque du Soileil. Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex Features 
Supposedly they've gone back to the origins of clowning, but for me it was far 
too lengthy. However, there was a circus act that I have never ever seen 
anything like before. It was pure art. Called the wheel of death, it involved 
two boys skipping on top of a pair of wheels as they rotated, somersaulting and 
jumping with no harnesses or safety nets. The speed that the wheels turned at 
was incredible – the boys looked like little hamsters going round and round. I 
was hoarse from screaming with delight. It was worth sitting through all the 
clowning for that moment.

Books

An English Affair by Richard Davenport-Hines 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007435845>
 Christine Keeler and Mandy Rice Davies. Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch 
Collection/CORB 
In the 1960s everybody knew about Christine Keeler and Mandy Rice-Davies. No 
matter what class people belonged to, they were talking about these two young 
girls who had become mixed up in the Profumo affair. Extraordinary times. 
Davenport-Hines's book makes a fascinating read because it explores who did 
what to whom, describing the roles played by characters from all sections of 
society, including the physiotherapist Stephen Ward, who introduced the home 
affairs minister John Profumo to Keeler, and Peter Rachman, a notorious 
landlord, in these scandalous events .

Theatre


A Clockwork Orange, Soho Theatre
 A Clockwork Orange. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Directed by Alexandra Spencer-Jones, this was an all-male production with a 
mix of actors and dancers – many of whom doubled up roles – staged in a black 
box with few props and simple costumes. It told Anthony Burgess's violent story 
using movement, drama and a combination of classical and contemporary music 
(the Beethoven was there of course) to make the brutality appear beautiful. The 
fights were done through dance and therefore the horror was transformed into 
something you could watch without being disgusted. It felt like a nightmare 
passing through your mind.
 