
I follow what I have learned from the bible," Dr Addo, director of the Raphael 
clinic in Ghana explains. "In the Bible it says, 'Thou shalt not kill.' Because 
of this I have banned any doctor from performing abortion services in my 
hospital."

In 1985, Ghana liberalised its abortion law, significantly widening access to 
legal abortion for women across the country. Although still technically illegal 
in Ghana, the new law stipulates three exceptions where abortion is legal. 
These exceptions are sufficiently broad and flexible to mean that in practice 
any woman can demand a legal abortion.

But 23 years on, because of a lack of knowledge on the law and because of the 
actions of those who could implement it, safe abortion services are still not 
widely provided. As a result, thousands of women illegally undergo abortions 
every year in Ghana using unsafe methods. Desperate women seek help from 
unskilled local "quacks" or try to solve the problem themselves using methods 
such as inserting Guinness mixed with sugar, twigs dipped in acid, or broken 
glass.

When Rebecca became pregnant this year, aged 14, her mother thought abortion 
was illegal. However, fearing a scandal within the community she took Rebecca 
to a herbalist who inserted a tablet to induce an abortion. After 20 minutes 
Rebecca was in great pain and began bleeding. Fearing she might die, her mother 
sought the help of the local pharmacist who referred her to Marie Stopes 
International (MSI).

Rebecca is now undergoing post-abortion care at the MSI Kokomlemle Clinic in 
Accra. The tablet contained acid and had burned the surrounding skin, causing 
an incomplete abortion. Rebecca was badly traumatised and is now undergoing 
counselling with MSI. "Sadly we still see lots of cases of women who come to us 
with severe complications after having an unsafe abortion," Faustina Fynn Nyame 
from MSI in Ghana tells me. "Many of these women will suffer life-long 
debilitating conditions as a result."

Religious sway

Ghana is a very religious country and abortion is frowned upon by Church and 
tribal leaders alike. "Religious leaders have a great deal of influence here 
and so ourselves and other advocates of abortion rights have had to tread very 
carefully so as not to stir up a backlash," Koma Jehu Appiah from Ipas Ghana, 
an international health NGO explains. Ghana's president, John Kufuor, is 
Catholic and has never spoken publicly about this politically sensitive issue. 
With the lack of political will, abortion remains largely unregulated in Ghana 
and there has never been a public awareness campaign to combat ignorance of the 
law. As well as working with the Ghana Health Service (GHS) to provide training 
and equipment for comprehensive abortion care, Ipas Ghana is also working with 
other NGOs to raise awareness about unsafe abortion.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimates that 5m unsafe abortions are 
performed annually in Africa, resulting in the deaths of an estimated 34,000 
women. In the majority of African countries abortion is illegal or severely 
restricted. Ethiopia, like Ghana, is an exception. Following a decade of 
advocacy by international and local NGOs, Ethiopia's abortion law was 
liberalised in 2005, dramatically increasing women's access to safe abortions. 
As in Ghana, although abortion remains technically illegal, the revised law 
permits abortion for an expanded range of circumstances including when the 
pregnancy results from rape or incest and when the health or life of the woman 
is in danger. No evidence is required other than the woman's word making this 
one of the most liberal abortion laws in the whole of Africa.

Three years after the law change, access to safe abortion services is still a 
major challenge in Ethiopia. Unlike in Ghana, this is not for lack of political 
will. The president of Ethiopia himself supports safe abortion.

But Ethiopia is one of the poorest countries in the world and access to any 
health service is very limited. Around 30% of the population of 80 million are 
without access to any type of modern health facility. Furthermore, many 
Ethiopians are nomadic pastoralists who are widely dispersed over this large 
country.

Health Unlimited, a British NGO, has been working with nomadic pastoralists in 
the South Omo region since 2005. They recently conducted a survey in South Omo 
and found that forced unsafe abortion was the most harmful traditional practice 
in the region. Over 10% of single women aged 15-25 had experienced forced 
abortion performed by a traditional healer massaging the abdomen. "The fatality 
from forced abortion in the regions where we work is extremely high," Tadesse 
Kassaye from Health Unlimited Ethiopia tells me. "In some focus group 
discussions women have told us that three out of 10 women die from having this 
kind of forced abortion."

Even in the capital, Addis Adaba, access remains a problem. Many health 
services still do not provide safe abortion services and vested interests 
create another barrier. A group of young men congregate at the top of the road 
leading down to the MSI Arada clinic in Addis Adaba. They stop women on their 
way to the clinic telling them that it has closed or moved premises. If 
believed, these brokers would take them to an unlicensed and unskilled doctor 
to perform the abortion, for a price. Prior to the liberalisation of abortion 
laws in 2005, doctors were illegally performing abortions, charging a month's 
wages or more, and it remains a lucrative business.

Like most young women in Ethiopia, Adowa, 19, had little knowledge of 
contraceptive methods before she came to the Arada clinic for an abortion. 
According to UNFPA, just 8% of the population use any form of contraception in 
Ethiopia. But nearly all of the women who have an abortion at MSI will leave 
with some form of family planning method. I met up with a relieved-looking 
Adowa after her procedure and she told me that she had just been fitted with 
the coil, "so that I will never be in this situation again".

As the cases of Ethiopia and Ghana show, legalisation on its own does not 
decrease the numbers of unsafe abortions but it is the first step towards 
reducing abortion-related deaths. The challenges for these countries are great. 
Getachew Bekele, of MSI Ethiopia, tells me, "We have won the battle of 
reforming the law, but we have not yet won the war."

"When I was 19 years old I got pregnant. I was not married yet and was so 
scared of my parents finding out, for they would be sure to chuck me out of the 
house", Thelma explains. Like many girls in her situation she turned to her 
peers. She was recommended a local man who was rumoured to 'help' girls in this 
situation. "I would call him a self styled doctor, the room did not look like a 
surgery, there were no nurses, no proper equipment".

After charging an average of a month's wages he performed the termination. "He 
told me to lie on a rusty table which he had covered in a cloth, and which 
still had patches of blood from his last patient. He gave me no painkillers and 
it was the most painful thing I have ever experienced".

Three weeks after the 'procedure', Thelma was still bed-bound and bleeding and 
was admitted to hospital. The doctor told her that she had had an incomplete 
abortion and Thelma knows she is very fortunate to be alive. "There are many 
doctors out there still taking advantage of young girls. They are able to 
charge what ever they like because these girls are desperate. I would have paid 
everything I had or done anything for him to help me and he knew it."
 