
At some point in the future, a number of MBA graduates from Manchester 
Business School will come across a field of crops protected by biosensors 
instead of chemicals and know they had a hand in it.

They provided ideas for taking to market the innovative biosensor technology 
for early detection of crop disease and pests. Employed by Syngenta, the 
world-leading agri-business, the team of business school students, led by a 
senior tutor, undertook the consultancy project as part of their studies. It 
cost Syngenta just £1,000 for 800 hours of work from the team of five.

Manchester is one of many business schools providing a consultancy service. 
The school offers 200 hours of students' time to work on not-for-profit 
projects run by small community groups, or to larger companies looking at 
sustainability or social responsibility issues.

A recently formed agency, MBA & Company, also provides MBA students and 
graduates with access to paid consultancy work for companies all over the world.

Adam Riccoboni, one of the two entrepreneurs who founded the company, says 
they rank consultants according to their qualifications and experience plus 
feedback from clients.

Global recruitment

"Our consultants come from the 50 most highly ranked business schools in the 
world and, broadly speaking, the school they attended does have an influence. 
London Business School graduates are very good technically but they are also 
good on the soft skills; clients find them nice to deal with. Some schools 
produce students who are very confident but who can appear arrogant."

The best consultants are not always from the most highly ranked schools, 
however, adds Riccoboni: "Generally someone will pay more for a student from 
Harvard than Edinburgh, but the EdinburghMBAs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mbas> we have used have been very 
impressive."

Fireman Dan Blazing a trail to the top

If you want to get to the top of the Fire and Rescue Service then get an MBA. 
That was the advice given to senior firefighter Dan Tasker who makes no secret 
of his ambition to join the elite group of chief fire officers.

Since joining the service at the age of 18, he has attended more than 4,000 
calls across Hampshire, including aircraft crashes, train derailments and major 
fires in tower blocks.

But despite his broad experience in the field, Tasker the group manager in 
charge of fire stations in Eastleigh and the Test Valley felt he didn't have 
the qualifications necessary for promotion.

Now, at the age of 37, he has graduated with an MBA from Portsmouth Business 
School, a qualification recognised by the Chief Fire Officers Association.

"The service is under pressure to deliver more for less and the entire 
operating model has become greatly attuned to commerce. Our senior managers 
must demonstrate the ability to perform like a chief executive," he says.

Married with two young children, he studied part-time so he could continue in 
full-time employment. "The MBA has without question developed my academic and 
personal skills to such a level that I now feel ready to take the step into 
senior management."

"As I developed within Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service it was sometimes 
inferred that my management style was lacking in 'softer skills'," he says 
frankly. "Truth be told, I always struggled to grasp the necessity of such a 
skill-set. I now have a new found respect for its importance in leading any 
organisation."
 