
The varnish is peeling now, and the manufacturer's lettering scarcely legible, 
but what really stops you dead as you walk round the National Museum in Antigua 
is a cricket bat. Well, it's not any old bat: it's the one Viv Richards wielded 
to score the fastest century in Test history, off 56 balls, and even now, 15 
years later, you can imagine the shock of being an English bowler that day, 
huffing and puffing to the wicket only to hear the whipcrack of another brutal 
boundary.

The bat and the ball to which it did so much damage have now been encased in a 
glass cabinet - a potent symbol of island pride. The bat is probably assured 
its dusty corner for several years to come because such is the parlous state of 
West Indian cricket at the moment it is hard to see another Antiguan even 
scoring another century for West Indies, let alone doing it quickly. These days 
the boys on the beach seem to favour football, dreaming of becoming the next 
Dwight Yorke of Tobago (although, thankfully, no one has heard of Jordan yet).

Richards still dominates this island, a testament to more prolific times. The 
tumbledown street where he was born in the island's capital, St Johns, has been 
re-named in his honour, and hoteliers chatter excitedly about how the island's 
goodwill ambassador sometimes honours them with his presence for a drink by the 
poolside. There is even talk that he might finally turn to politics and if 
there was an election tomorrow he would probably sweep to power with the kind 
of majority that would make even Tony Blair blush.

All that's in the future. For now Richards sits in his mansion, secure in his 
status as official national hero, the living embodiment of all that was once 
cool about Antigua. There are those in the tourist board who won't thank me for 
saying this, but you can probably extend the analogy of Antigua's cricketing 
eclipse to cover tourism.

In a non-sporting sense, the problems started in 1995 when Hurricane Luis 
ripped through the island, upturning houses and scaring off the holidaymakers 
upon whom the economy has become completely dependent. Then cheaper, more 
exotic destinations with just as much sunshine started to wake up to their own 
potential and, for the first time, Antigua experienced the chill winds of 
competition. Operational problems with airlines further dented its reputation, 
prompting a rethink about what the island had to offer anyone who wanted more 
than to watch England play cricket every four years.

While it would be wrong to say that the island has been rebranded, there has 
certainly been a concentration on the quality end of the market. Other 
destinations, such as St Lucia and the Dominican Republic, now do the cheap and 
cheerful stuff better, while Antigua has made huge efforts to up the standard 
of its service.

If any of the locals were in any doubt, posters declaring that "Tourism is 
everybody's business" remind them just how vital the industry is, while hotels 
take the message into local primary schools with evangelical zeal. There are 
even plans to open a finishing school for anyone employed in the industry. 
"Have a nice day now, you hear," (and they actually seem to mean it).

The results are already being felt, and the signs are that the island is 
bouncing back quicker than its cricket team. A string of top-quality hotels, 
each with the obligatory beach, offer the right mix of diversity and an array 
of water sports.

For the more leisurely inclined, Antigua remains a place where there is no 
pressure on anyone to do anything more strenuous than count the sandpipers 
scampering along your balcony or feel the palm trees filter the heat of an 
early-evening breeze. In fact, the whole island seems to take it personally if 
total flop-out is not achieved at least by day three. And the best thing is 
that the beaches are only eight hours away from Britain because, unlike some 
other Caribbean destinations, flights are direct.

By night, the best action takes place at Shirley Heights, a former British 
look-out station that sits 1,200ft above the swirling waters of English Harbour 
and has been transformed into an impromptu open-air nightclub. As the sun slips 
down, a steel band strikes up all those old Bob Marley songs which still get 
people going in these parts. Okay it's all a bit touristy, but I didn't see too 
many people with their feet still.

 Strain your eyes into the distance and you can just make-out the shape of 
poor, tragic Montserrat, which used to vie with Antigua as a holiday 
destination until a volcano blew it apart in 1997. These days, it still 
smoulders, occasionally glowing red around its crater, to provide a sad 
reminder of how exposed the islands remain to natural disaster. Inevitably it 
has now been turned into a tourist attraction and helicopters regularly fly 
from Antigua to zip round the island. This trip does not come cheap, and the 
mountain is sometimes lost in cloud and ash, but the inquisitive are guaranteed 
an eerie snapshot of what used to be Montserrat's capital, Plymouth, before it 
was buried up to its rooftops.

You can also take a ride round Antigua to check out the much-trumpeted claim 
to 365 beaches - "one for every day of the year" - although who needs that many 
when a couple of quiet ones will do. I can't vouch for peak season but when I 
travelled there was plenty of scope for seclusion with acres of empty white 
sand and uncluttered seas which feel like a bath tub even at three in the 
morning.

It is no surprise that Antigua has become established as an increasingly 
popular wedding destination with most hotels offering knock-down rates and 
purpose-built gazebos for the ceremony. They arrange everything down to the 
free bouquets and button-holes - and a champagne breakfast on a private balcony 
the morning after. Be warned, though: other guests are quite likely to 
gatecrash the nuptials.

We spent a surreal afternoon watching an overweight ship salesman from Miami 
Beach get hitched to a Barbie doll half his age. You sensed she wasn't sure 
about his credentials because the pina coladas flushed up her cheeks like 
beacons at sunset and her mother had to prop her up all the way to the groom. 
To no one's great surprise, the newlyweds duly fell out at the reception which 
only goes to show that even paradise can't guarantee you happiness.

There weren't too may other scowling faces to be seen in the hotel we stayed 
at, with most guests happy with their lot and unperturbed by the fact that 
their all-inclusive holiday meant they did not get the chance to sample other 
cuisines away from the hotel. The subject is a pretty hot potato in the 
Caribbean with opinion split as to whether tour operators will offer more 
variety in the future.

One sensible development likely to happen is that guests will soon be offered 
the chance to eat out at other hotels on certain nights, although most people 
seem to budget for a few meals out at local restaurants. There is a good 
selection in St Johns, a neat little town with brightly painted shop fronts and 
a sensible criss-cross road system that allows the casual tourist to wander 
around without getting lost. Apart from one quaintly Carribean cathedral, 
there's not much to see and still less to buy but plenty of atmosphere to soak 
up.

And atmosphere is really what Antigua is all about. This isn't a place to go 
rushing around (there's probably a law against it), but somewhere to relax in 
first-class surroundings. If you really insist on being energetic you can take 
what is optimistically called a safari round the island. In reality, it's a 
Jeep trip past a few pineapple plantations with a stop-off at what was once the 
island's biggest sugar mill. Antigua used to boast 174 of them, and for 200 
years sugar remained the dominant industry. Now, they don't even bother to grow 
the cane, which somehow seems rather sad.

Tourism is what makes the island tick these days, although thankfully it is of 
the understated variety. And when you get home it will be a while before you 
forget the casual whoop of the tree frogs at nightfall or the magnificent 
flamboyant trees with their thick, confident branches and shocking red-feather 
tops. So what if there's not much to do. There's no better place not to do it.

Way to go

Kuoni (01306 747000, kuoni.co.uk <http://www.kuoni.co.uk>) offers seven 
nights' all-inclusive at Galley Bay from £1,206pp between now and November, 
based on two sharing a Gauguin cottage and including flights and transfers. 
Seven nights' all-inclusive at Blue Waters costs from £1,216pp (two sharing a 
superior room) between now and November, inc flights and transfers. Seven 
nights' room-only at the Hawksbill Beach (two sharing a standard room) start 
from £567pp, including flights and transfers. BWIA West Indies Airways 
(020-8577 1100) flies daily from London Heathrow to the Caribbean, including 
two non-stop flights a week to Antigua. Fares start from £399, plus tax.

 Further information:  Antigua and Barbuda Tourist Office: 020-7486 7073, 
antigua-barbuda.com <http://www.antigua-barbuda.com>. CaribbeanTourism 
Organisation: 020-7222 4335, doitcaribbean.com Flight time: 8 hours 30 mins. 
Time difference: - 4 hours. Country code: + 1 809. £1 = EC$3.92
 