
I recently shopped in my local Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>
 store, arriving in the early evening when the car park was half empty. I 
didn’t see the signs, which were not illuminated, specifying a maximum stay of 
one and a half hours.

I had a lot of shopping to do – with several questions about pricing – and 
finally spent £115. There was no indication from the staff as to the danger of 
overstaying one’s welcome in a car park that was now empty.

Imagine the shock when I received a demand for £70 from ParkingEye, apparently 
because I had overstayed by 15 minutes. The language and tenor of the letter 
were strong, promising to pursue me for payment.

I will not pay this outrageous charge, but can you imagine the distress such 
behaviour produces in pensioners, like myself, and others? Aldi should be 
boycotted until it sees some sense.WH, Surbiton, Surrey 

In our view it doesn’t seem unreasonable for major supermarkets and retailers 
to provide their customers (who are going to spend money with them) with 
unlimited free parking, but of course there’s money to be made from this. 
Aldi’s car parks throughout the UK are managed by ParkingEye, and although Aldi 
has told us before that it does not receive any revenue from parking notices, 
that does not stop us from receiving a regular flurry of complaints.

In your case you admitted to overstaying by 15 minutes, but you also wrote to 
Aldi with a copy of your receipt. Happily for you, Aldi has cancelled the 
charge. It said: “WH first contacted us on 28 September, and [the issue] took a 
little longer than it would usually do to resolve because he didn’t provide an 
email address, so the appeal system had to be taken forward via letters.

“A letter was sent on 11 October to let him know that his charge has been 
cancelled, so he should receive it soon, if he hasn’t already.”

So no need to boycott Aldi just yet!

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 