
One in five Australians have rated a Trump presidency as the biggest threat to 
international peace and stability in a new opinion poll.


The new Essential poll published on Tuesday 
<http://www.essentialvision.com.au/category/essentialreport> found 42% of 
Australians surveyed nominated Daesh and Islamic radicalisation as the number 
one threat to international peace and stability when presented with a list of 
seven options.

Second behind the terror threat was a Trump presidency, which was nominated by 
21% of the survey as the biggest current security threat.

Eleven percent of the sample nominated a growing level of inequality, and only 
6% nominated global warming.


The survey suggests Australians remain worried about acts of terror carried 
out on Australian soil. Around three quarters of respondents, 72%, said they 
were concerned about an attack in Australia, and 24% of that group are very 
concerned.

The same percentage believes the threat of terrorism happening in Australia 
has increased over the last few years.

Essential says that level of concern is consistent with results from March 
2015, October 2015 and November 2016, but is substantially higher than the 
survey from September 2014, just prior to the Lindt Café siege.

A large percentage of survey respondents, 81%, said they supported measures 
preventing dual nationals who are suspected of fighting in Syria from returning 
to Australia.

But there was also strong community support (79% of the survey) for 
de-radicalisation programs.

While security fears and the spectre of a Trump presidency is evidently high 
on the minds of Australian voters – people appear largely unmoved by the issue 
which nominally triggered this year’s federal election, reconstituting the 
Australian Building and Construction Commission.

Support for reviving the ABCC in the latest poll stood at 36%, and opposition 
at 16%. The remaining 48% of the sample ‘neither support or oppose’ (24%) or 
‘don’t know’ (24%).

The survey was divided over whether the issue should be a priority, with 39% 
rating it important compared to the other issues the government needs to 
address and 38% suggesting it wasn’t important.
 