
Almost no one buys a full tank of gas here. They can't afford to. Yet the road 
out of Malawi's commercial capital, Blantyre towards the hills and valleys of 
Mwanza is long. There are few places to fill a thirsty four wheel drive. Beyond 
a blazing field being burned for crops is a small collection of mud huts and 
vegetable gardens. "What looked completely out place though was a massive grey 
building set back from the village", says Lee McDaid who works with vulnerable 
young people. "It looked like a badly built school gym from the 1970s".

An old man in a loose fitting uniform is asleep in a chair by the entrance. 
Lee is told that the three-roomed monstrosity was built by a foreign aid donor 
two years ago. But it was yet to get electricity and a water supply. "I 
couldn't figure out what it was there for in the first place, let along why 
someone would want to break in. It was completely out of place and useless. 
What kind of a gift was that?"

There is no shortage of help available for Africa. Over the last half century 
the continent has received around US$1 trillion in aid, creating a "development 
industry" that dwarfs many of its national economies. Yet as a new millennium 
dawned, impatience with Africa was growing. The continent was failing; in many 
places it was even going backwards. Poor economies across Asia had boomed in 
previous decades, but where was Africa? In 1960 South Korea was as poor as 
Ghana. Now it has its own African aid programmes. Something is clearly wrong. 
Aid should have worked by now.

The West certainly has a heart for Africa's poor. But does it have a mind for 
them? More specifically, is it possible to ask if aid is working or not, 
without the emotion? In her recent book Dead Aid, Zambian economist Dambisa 
Moyo says that such a conversation is long overdue. "Real development", she 
argues, "cannot be shoe-horned in from outside. It needs to grow organically". 
Aid is a risky business. Reliance on it can distort government priorities, 
discourage innovation and creativity and create a relationship of dependency.

Robert Calderisi, the former World Bank spokesman in Africa writing of his 
time at the Bank, says "in areas meant to tackle poverty directly – clinics, 
schools, literacy programmes, clean water supply and sanitation – the foreign 
aid record in Africa has been deeply disappointing. Successes have been small, 
or too expensive to reproduce on a larger scale."

An empty and useless building in a Malawian field is testament to how badly 
coordinated aid often is. Giles Bolton is the former representative of the UK's 
Department for International Development (DfID) in Rwanda. Speaking to 
development professionals he points out that "good donors don't grow, bad 
donors don't go bust and there are no mergers or acquisitions". It's an 
inefficient and uncoordinated industry. The Luyia in Kenya say, "only build a 
bridge where there is a river". Bolton says that only an industry so bad at 
coordination should also need to add, "and a road".

Many Africans are not only angry at the failure of aid programmes to deliver. 
They are also frustrated with their own governments. For Moyo there is a 
democratic deficit, "if Americans or Europeans can vote for governments based 
on their delivery of public goods, why can't Africans do the same? Or should 
they simply vote for aid organisations?"

Whether it is palatable or not, aid and development are two different things. 
Short term support or humanitarian aid will deliver those small, local 
successes that can bring real benefits to people. But the long term development 
of economies, markets and governments is a different matter. It must be owned, 
lead and delivered locally by Africans. The role of outsiders is minimal at 
best.

Standing in front of an empty building, Lee explains how she felt like a 
fraud. "I think my concern for Africa was confused". She was visiting Malawi to 
set up a mentoring project for young people, linking them with elders in the 
nearby town. "My perceptions of it were romantic and I was naïve to think that 
I could change it where so many others were failing. I suddenly felt like we 
were all there for the wrong reasons". Africa is not new to Lee, nor is the 
power of it to deeply move. "But this time my tears were private", she 
explains, "I couldn't even speak".

Back in London Lee was so frustrated that she decided to get the building 
working herself. All that was needed was £2000 to complete a job that should 
have been done by the donor. Her children's school PTA and Scout Group raised 
the money within a year. "It felt wrong though. I didn't want to see it done 
this way" she explains, "not only had aid let an African community down, even 
more aid was needed to fix a problem they hadn't even created. To raise the 
money in Surrey I had to portray my friends as victims. More images of crying 
Africa. It made me angry. I wanted us to meet as equals".

The filling stations on the main road in Blantyre may only be doing a modest 
trade in petrol. But there is no shortage of customers topping up cell phone 
cards. A young man lugs a car battery. For a tiny fee he will charge your phone 
for you. Along the main road, women come to the car window to sell mobile 
minutes. Behind them on bright billboards, or painted on the sides of the 
trucks that thunder by are the slogans of a new Africa that is talking; "Let Us 
Connect You", "Join Our World".

No one foresaw the impact that the mobile phone would have on connecting 
Africa. Neither were they prepared for the internet or an ambitious China. 
Across the continent development is happening, but unpredictable ways. In most 
cases it is in spite of aid, not because of it. Help Africa along one may. But 
its course will be its own. This is a continent of contradictions.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 