
We've been talking a lot about hospitality recently. It's one of those words 
that, in contemporary usage, seems to have lost all its depth. "Hospitality" 
nowadays means merely what hotels do: making sure that rich people can enjoy 
lounging around. Or else it's synonymous with entertainment, with having chums 
around for dinner. Or it's used to describe how corporate freeloaders get to 
watch live sport.

Whereas hospitality has always been a sacred act, a cultural obligation 
through which people inadvertently glimpse the holy. In India they use the 
phrase from the Taittiriya Upanishad, "Atithi Devo Bhavah", meaning "The guest 
is God" (now the slogan of the Indian tourist board). In Hebrew scriptures, 
Abraham and Sarah received guests who turned out to be angels. For ancient 
Greeks, hospitality was a way of honouring the gods, which was why Zeus, the 
big cheese himself, was the "god of guests". In the New Testament, Jesus makes 
it clear that what you do to a stranger you do to him. In Italy they say, "The 
guest is sacred" (although they also say that a guest is like a fish – they 
begin to smell after three days).

All of which suggests that the act of hospitality is somehow hallowed; that 
rather than being something frivolous – a way to shower around the glitter of 
consumerism – hospitality is actually sacramental. And perhaps it's only true, 
or mystical, hospitality when the person being welcomed isn't an old friend but 
actually a stranger or even an enemy (both "guest" and "hostile" have the same 
etymological root).

The theory, of course, is easy, but the practise can be very tough. In fact, 
in most languages the words for "host" and "guest" are the same and are somehow 
interchangeable. It suggests a bond of equal reciprocity between the two and 
perhaps implies that the roles of welcomer and stranger can be reversed.

Certainly one of the happiest consequences I notice of radical hospitality is 
that the so-called guest imperceptibly becomes a host. Someone who was new here 
last week is now showing someone else around, offering them a cuppa and showing 
them where the pillows are kept. The guest has become the host and, often, the 
host becomes the guest, sitting at table while someone else ladles out his or 
her soup. That blurring of the host/guest divide is a mark of true hospitality. 
Nobody's a charity case, nobody's a do-gooder: we're all just getting by 
together as best we can.

For all the hard work involved, it's incredibly enriching. The sheer diversity 
of the people who roll up here is wonderful. And every time a stranger arrives 
there's excitement and surprise. We're always learning things from them, or 
about them, or about ourselves. The children, particularly, are fascinated by 
the array of people sitting around the dining table. There are, certainly, 
risks involved, but that's why hospitality has always been seen, in every 
culture, as sacred: in order to honour the stranger, you have to put at risk 
what's most precious, your home and your family.

I suspect our understanding of hospitality in contemporary Britain is so 
superficial because we're acutely paranoid about those risks. It's possibly the 
fault of, ahem, the media, but for many people, strangers are likely to be 
axe-wielding murderers, ranting terrorists, filthy foreigners. Most of us would 
rather be ghettoised and gated than risk having any dealings with the unknown. 
One of the most emancipating aspects of radical hospitality is facing that fear 
head on and realising that, actually, strangers tend to be magnificent 
messengers, bringing you news you didn't expect.

That said, I know that the word host is linked to the word sacrifice 
("hostia"). And that, I guess, is why the Host is a formal term for the 
consecrated bread of the communion. Being a guest or a host involves 
sacrifices, but that's precisely why it's sacred: it's a an act of worship 
or, if you prefer, of offering.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 