
At the Open Government Partnership summit 2013 we spoke to Sir Nigel Shadbolt, 
chairman and founder of the Open Data Institute and professor at the University 
of Southampton, about the open data movement and its benefits to both the 
public and the private sector.
 Sir Nigel Shadbolt Photograph: Rex Features 
Tell us about the Open Data Institute and the work you do?
The Open Data Institute <http://theodi.org/> is just a year old and we're 
not-for-profit and independent of government. Our key proposition is to try to 
develop the demand side for open data. It's one thing simply to publish data – 
which is a great start – but the best guarantee to keep on supplying data to a 
high level is businesses and organisations that depend on that data. We're also 
about trying to get better practice in publishing data – we're about training; 
we're about standards.

Which innovative uses of open data really stand out to you?
The release of data can change the prospects for people's quality of life – 
their length of life. In the UK, we released our data on survival rates for 
cardiac surgery, and when people saw that some hospitals, some surgeons were 
doing much better than others, they asked questions about how could those who 
were not doing so well do better. Over the last few years our performance and 
survival rates in these kind of areas have improved hugely in the UK.

If you look farther afield, there is a great example of an initiative which is 
all aboutmodelling deforestation in real time 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/newsevents/news/newsrecords/2012/06June/Deforestation-tracker-Rio20-launch.aspx>
. Rather than getting reports every two or three days, this is taking very high 
resolution data and producing real-time business intelligence for the planet, 
fundamentally based on open data.

What would you say are the biggest challenges to the open data movement today?
We have to communicate much more widely to groups about what the opportunities 
are and why it's an important idea. If you look at various league tables and 
the way countries are going you might imagine the job's done, but it's far from 
done.

Having a good set of scores on a certain set of measures does not mean 
necessarily that governments have built publish-by-default into the process. It 
does not mean that all the challenges around key data sets being released 
openly rather than being charged for have been solved. It doesn't mean the 
quality of the data itself has necessarily been improved. As David Cameron, the 
prime minister, was saying, open data is one of the transformational agents in 
the 21st century.

How can we encourage the private sector to get on board to the open data 
movement too?
Many in the private sector think that giving information away or the open data 
movement is somehow asset stripping the value of the data they hold. But what 
we see in many cases is that this can add value to the business itself – value 
based on trust. If a business loses the trust of its consumers, clients and 
investors, that's a big deal. Open data around who owns a company, the 
beneficial ownership relationships between a company and its subsidiaries – 
when this is published, it increases trust.

The private sector working with the public sector can release all kinds of 
business models. Organisations which give their information away or provide 
their services pro bono can actually generate innovation that may end up being 
of value to the company itself.

What would you say to people who think the open data movement is elitist 
because the connectivity needed to engage in an open space is lacking in so 
many parts of the world?
Open data is just one part of what I call the power of open – open licences so 
you can use material unrestrictedly, open standards so you don't have to get 
locked into some supplier's particular formats, specifications and constraints. 
Or the open participation you get from more people being able to use the data. 
Open source – software that is more easily available – all this leads to open 
innovation, that's the prize. So when people say it's elitist, I think the real 
message is open data – open partnerships of this sort – are all about extending 
participation. Of course there is still a huge amount to do – a third of the 
planet has no access to the internet.

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

To get our articles on policy and leadership direct to your inbox, sign up to 
the Guardian Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders/> now. 

Looking for your next role? See our Guardian jobs site 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/> for senior executive jobs in government and 
politics 
<http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>. 

• For the latest on public services leadership, follow us: @Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 