
Maya Daruwala, director of the commonwealth human rights initiative based in 
New Dehli with small offices in Ghana and London

What does open government mean to you?

It means open data and transparency of a high quality, and the possibility of 
citizens participating much more in the decisions that their government makes 
between elections.

What benefits might police forces get from being more transparent?

All policing really needs to be intelligence-led now. It cannot be the 
old-style policing which subjugates people, and without trust you are not going 
to get the kind of policing you want. We have seen that, in extreme 
circumstances of terrorism, it is intelligence provided by the public and trust 
in the police which has prevented some of the most dastardly attacks from 
taking place.

How far has transparency moved forward globally in policing?

It depends on the police force – you cannot generalise. A police force in a 
dictatorship will be less transparent but the global trend is that the police 
should be more transparent.

What do you think are the barriers to greater transparency in policing and 
public safety?

Changing a whole lot of embedded practice and mutual distrust. It is like a 
big ship that has been going along in one direction and all of a sudden it 
needs to turn around. It is going to take a long time; that is really what it 
is.

Tatyana Tolsteneva is development manager of the freedom of information 
foundation in Russia

What is the state of transparency in policing and public safety in Russia?

Unfortunately Russia is not the best example of transparency in the world, and 
we recognise this fact. We have modern and contemporary freedom of information 
legislation and for us this is a great opportunity to push government to 
implement this legislation and become more open.

What do you think needs to change in Russia?

Our main idea is that transparency has great benefits everywhere, and when 
officials are transparent we can understand what is going on. We are trying to 
promote the recognition of this idea in Russia.

What is the main focus of your work in Russia?

Our main idea is working with freedom of information because in Russia no one 
knows about it, and we are trying to push the government to publish more and to 
be more open. We are working on both the supply and the demand side of openness.

Has there been increased interest in Russia in the freedom of information?

Yes because the act came into force in 2010 and began to be implemented then. 
We have seen this practice become stronger since then. A couple of years ago 
our claims against officials were rejected in court, but now they are much more 
effective and more information is becoming open.

What do you think is the correct balance between the need for privacy and the 
need for openness?

The balance between openness and privacy is the most controversial point 
nowadays, and no one knows the right answer. In Russia this is not our problem 
right now because we still have problems with freedom of information, and 
protecting privacy is maybe not so topical for us. But we think that first it 
is necessary that people should recognise that the problem exists.

Maja Daruwala and Tatyana Tolsteneva were speakers on the policing and public 
safety 
<http://www.opengovpartnership.org/get-involved/london-summit-2013/agenda/session/policing-and-public-safety>
 panel at the Open Government Partnership summit 2013

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

To get our articles on policy and leadership direct to your inbox, sign up to 
the Guardian Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> now. 

Looking for your next role? See our Guardian jobs site 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/> for senior executive jobs in government and 
politics 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>. 

• For the latest on public services leadership, follow us: @Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 