
The Open Government Partnership summit has concluded with the launch of a 
competition to see which country best engages with its citizens.

The two-day meeting in London of the 61 countries in the accountability and 
transparency organisation ended with UK cabinet office minister Francis Maude 
reiterating his refrain that "transparency is an idea whose time has come" and
handing over the lead co-chair of OGP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2013/oct/30/indonesia-chair-open-government>
 to Kuntoro Mangkusubroto, head of the president's delivery unit in Indonesia.

Mangkusubroto will be joined by undersecretary Julián Alfonso Olivas Ugalde of 
Mexico, and Rakesh Rajani, head of Tanzanian civil society body Twaweza, who 
will act as the civil society partner for OGP. "This is a formidable team and 
we look forward to the OGP going from strength to strength," said Maude.

Mangkusubroto announced the OGP competition for 2014, the theme of which will 
be citizen engagement. Rajani said the most important step OGP needed to take 
was ensuring the quality of engagement. "Most people don't really care about 
open government for its own sake," he said, adding that heads of governments 
needed to get better at articulating transparency in real terms that affect 
every citizen.

Mangkusubroto said he was proud that OGP now represented 61 countries and a 
third of the world's population, but the organisation now needed to develop the 
mechanisms to share experiences and best practice between countries.

Ugalde said the organisation should focus on helping countries improve their 
open government. "We are not going to denounce anybody for failing," he said. 
"We are a community of countries all committed to open information."

The OGP was launched in 2011 with eight founding countries, to provide an 
international platform for reformers committed to making their governments more 
open, transparent and accountable. There are now 61 partner states, most of 
which came to the summit with pledges for improved transparency.

Facilitating the closing plenary of the OGP summit, held in London on 31 
October and 1 November, Professor Ngaire Woods, of the Blavatnik School of 
Government, said governments need high quality feedback in order to improve. 
"That's what this partnership is about: sharing good ideas, holding countries 
to account … and ensuring that citizens have information and space to keep 
giving feedback to governments even when that's uncomfortable," she said.

Sir Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the internet, introducing the closing plenary 
at the summit, said the next challenge for the delegates from all over the 
world was to go back and persuade the people at home.

Berners-Lee said open government is not about blame or even transparency – the 
important thing is to concentrate on its economic benefits. Publishing datasets 
can benefit people you don't even know, he said. "Twenty-five years ago it was 
hard for people to see the value of putting a web page up. But they got it."

He also said he hopes future debates about open data would focus on 
corporations as well as on governments, as some multinational corporations have 
more power than states.

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

To get our articles on policy and leadership direct to your inbox, sign up to 
the Guardian Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> now. 

Looking for your next role? See our Guardian jobs site 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/> for senior executive jobs in government and 
politics 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>. 

• For the latest on public services leadership, follow us: @Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 