
It's been six weeks since the last A1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> race and we've all been itching to get 
back to the action again, so the start of the Asian leg in Malaysia last 
weekend was extremely welcome. I headed out early to the island of Borneo. The 
main purpose was to visit and adopt Opok the orangutan on behalf of the British 
team as part of A1GP's environmental campaign, though I was quietly hoping to 
fit in a few days of relaxation on the beach too - unfortunately the four-day 
monsoonal storms put a stop to that.

There are usually a few evening functions leading up to race weekends that 
drivers and team principals are expected to attend, and Malaysia was no 
exception with a double-booking on the Thursday. Robbie Kerr and I represented 
the Brits at a business reception hosted by the Irish ambassador, before 
heading to "Ignition," an event for VIP guests and media held at all race 
venues to launch the weekend. Like Ignition, many of the best restaurants and 
bars in Kuala Lumpur seem to be located at the top of skyscrapers. As I suffer 
from vertigo, I wasn't sure I'd cope with this, but luckily the Malaysian team 
and their sponsors put on some fantastic entertainment which kept my mind off 
the venue.

Despite the continuous tropical rain earlier in the week in Borneo, it didn't 
rain once while we were in Sepang this year, but instead we had to cope with 
extremely humid and hot conditions, both on and off the track. This affected 
everyone in different ways: from Olly Jarvis trying to keep hydrated while 
exerting himself on-track despite having a broken water bottle; via Robbie 
positioning himself at the end of the pit-lane in the blistering heat for 70 
minutes so he could radio the team when Olly was coming into the pit-lane as 
our team radio didn't work (I'm really proud and thankful to him for this as it 
shows great team work); to fainting grid girls.

The humidity as well as Tilke's impressive track-design make Sepang a 
physically tough circuit, but it never fails to deliver action-packed racing. 
But after we had topped the practice time sheets on Friday and qualified well 
on Saturday, Sunday's race action didn't go our way. As if a drive-through 
penalty, a sticking wheel nut during the second pit-stop, and Neel Jani having 
the Midas touch weren't bad enough, we were also hit by Germany which cost us 
valuable positions - though I don't think they were being indiscriminate since 
the Germans also hit three other teams. Then to top it off, just when the team 
were getting over the shock of putting in all that hard work for a single point 
in the feature race, we were given a two-second penalty for a pit-lane 
infringement and lost the point.

It was disappointing since we've come to expect nothing less than a podium 
place now. But the British squad are a hard-working and committed team with two 
great drivers, so hopefully everything will go our way in Zhuhai, China, in 
three weeks' time.

Katie Clements is the Team Principal of the A1 Team GBR
 