
Talk about irony. Within minutes of being upset by Brazil's Alan Oliveira in 
the final of the men's T44 200m,Oscar Pistorius claimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/03/paralympics-oscar-pistorius-angry-loss>
 that he was "not running a fair race". The crux of his argument, which he also 
stated before even losing the final, is that his rivals were artificially 
extending the length of their legs: "it's very clear that the guys have got 
very long strides".

To add to that case, he was quoted after the final as saying: "I can't compete 
with Alan's stride length."

Now, let me start by saying there is a lot more to running than stride length. 
If all it took was big strides, then the running world would be dominated by 
the tallest men, and shorter runners like Tyson Gay would stand no chance.

What matters is not just stride length, or height, but rather the length of 
the leg relative to height, and the ground contact length, which is a function 
of the leg length (partly). Plus there is force applied to the ground, leg 
turnover rates and all those things, but let's take one component at a time 
here.

A cursory look at the strides

So, since Oscar Pistorius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> 
has made a point to emphasise how long his rivals' strides are I rewatched the 
race and did the obvious thing: I counted the strides.

It turns out that Pistorius took 92 steps during the race (2.2m per stride), 
and Oliveira took 98 steps to win gold (2m per stride). To break it down 
further: in the first 100m, Pistorius took 49 steps (2.0m per stride), with 43 
steps in the straight (2.3m per stride).

Oliveira, on the other hand, took shorter strides: 52 in the first 100m (1.92m 
each) and 46 in the second 100m (2.2m each).

So, a simple count shows that Pistorius has longer strides than Alan, and they 
are consistently longer – on the bend, and in the straight, for those who are 
wondering. It's Oliveira who "can't compete with Oscar's stride length". His 
faster speed, then, is the result of faster leg movement, because speed, as you 
will appreciate, is the result of stride length and stride rate.

And here again, let me repeat, there is much more to the debate than simply 
the stride length, as I'll get to shortly. But the point here is that once 
again, you have this misinformation from Pistorius, and the media are too lazy 
to interrogate it further, they just report and allow the uninformed debate to 
go on. Already on Twitter I have got numerous responses saying "Look how long 
Oliveira's stride is"! But it's not – it's shorter than Pistorius', by some 
margin.

It's not (just) about the stride length. And welcome to the slippery slope

Right, so having dealt with that oversimplification, let's talk briefly about 
the issue here. Is it possible that the Brazilian has increased his stride 
length as a result of increasing the length of his blades? Of course it is. 
This is part of the problem with the prosthetic limbs, and there's no way to 
know this unless you go back to the IPC World Championships in 2011 and measure 
the height of the athlete and compare it to today.

You could count Oliveira's strides and find that his stride length has 
increased, but now you have another problem – you can't confidently attribute 
any increase to the leg length. It may be that he is stronger, and is covering 
more ground per stride as a result. If that were true, then his stride length 
relative to his height would be much greater, with no explanation other than 
many hours of good training (this is how Pistorius explained his own 
performance improvements, incidentally).

So, for Oliveira, his improved performance may be due to the blade length, it 
may be due to his technical skill, it may be due to his improved strength, it 
may be due to some weight loss. You see the slippery slope here? Only if his 
height was measured and is continuously measured can one know with certainty 
this answer.

But even then, an athlete may discover they are a few inches shorter than the 
upper limit imposed by some rule based on ratios, and they can, quite legally, 
add to their blades. What is wrong with that? I'd say nothing — they are simply 
correcting and then optimising what nature did not provide, aren't they? Their 
mistake was making their prosthetics too short the first time, and they should 
be allowed to add height within reason. Again, welcome to the slippery slope of 
technology in sport.

So then your response may be to say "Surely there is an ideal leg length for 
someone's height?" The answer is that thereis a range, but in elite athletes, 
the limits have to be wide because ranges that you'd find in the normal 
population don't apply.

There is substantial evidence, for example, to show that elite runners (Kenyan 
and West African runners in particular) have disproportionately long legs 
relative to height, and so this may be a factor that predicts running success. 
I'd bet that if you look at the likes of Usain Bolt, Kirani James and Asbel 
Kiprop, you'll find that they have longer legs than normal for their height.

The double problem for a double amputee is that you don't have a height: 
without prosthetic limbs, there's no reference point against which to "anchor" 
leg length. So then, you can start using arm length and say that the "normal" 
leg length is a certain factor of the arm length. But again, that doesn't work 
because the ranges are large enough that you can "artificially" get longer legs 
without violating the upper limit of what is found normally.

Again, I'd be willing to bet that in the elite athletic population, you'll 
find many of the best runners are guys with disproportionately long legs 
relative to arms. It's worth checking all the athletes, of course, but the end 
result of this is that the kind of accusation Pistorius is making is pretty 
baseless. Not to mention the timing, which is another matter.

As for the fast finish, I'd love to see the splits from the race, measured 
accurately. Doing it off the TV set is weak, and it gives splits of 11.1s and 
10.4s for Pistorius, and 11.5s and 10.0s for Oliveira. That's fairly 
meaningless because you'll see many 200m races with a 0.6s swing. It's unusual, 
certainly, for a leader to be reeled in that strongly, but it's the kind of 
finish that has carried Pistorius to a few gold medals in his time. I remember 
a Commonwealth 100m race where he gave up about 5m (0.5s at that speed) in a 
100m race and still won. Today was no different, so the claim that you can't 
win from behind is equally misguided.

The bottom line is that whatever the rules of prosthetic limbs, if Oliveira is 
within them (and we have good reason to think that he is, given his compliance 
with the IPC and even Pistorius' accusation is not that he is cheating, but 
that the rules are wrong), it just re-introduces the same debate. How do we 
know, with 100% certainty, that we are not seeing the result of some 
technological battle?

The answer is that we can't. The leg length issue is an 'advantage' that 
Pistorius has always had, and we've been watching him compete for years not 
knowing if he's done the exact same thing as he is now accusing Oliveira of. 
Remember, the leg:arm ratio is a flawed way to establish these boundaries for 
elite athletes.

And it does beg a question: why doesn't Pistorius just push his length up to 
the limit if the rules allow it? If Pistorius is below whatever limit exists 
for leg length, then he should just increase his length and run a 44s 400m in 
2013. Or, if Pistorius is already there (which I strongly suspect, given the 
R&D backing he has), then all we've seen tonight is that Oliveira has corrected 
his length and managed to create an equal race with Pistorius.

The bigger issue is that of technology. The advantage for Oliveira tonight was 
not his stride length, despite Pistorius' claims. The advantage was stride rate.

And remember, this is the factor that Peter Weyand concluded gave Oscar 
Pistorius an enormous advantage over able-bodied runners who simply cannot move 
their limbs at the same rate, because Pistorius was able to achieve leg 
repositioning times that no able-bodied runner ever could. That advantage is 
still in play, except now we have another runner who is benefitting from it, 
and possibly exploiting it even better than Pistorius.

Pistorius doesn't enjoy that company. I look forward to the emergence of even 
more of these runners, and perhaps one day, sooner rather than later, we'll be 
seeing the first even sub-21s 200m time by a double amputee, and then it's 
matter of time before we see a sub-45s 400m time, and so on.

Are we just seeing the emergence of the next generation of athlete, equally 
capable of using the technology, but with greater athletic potential than 
Pistorius? Have the floodgates opened? I'd be willing to say that there is 
already an athlete who has begun training who will beat both Oliveira and 
Pistorius by some margin and force these same questions, all over again.

If you're wondering whether Pistorius has a valid argument, then welcome to 
the slippery slope that is the introduction of technology with no clear answers 
to the sport. We've been here for eight years.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>. To find out 
more about it,click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/nov/09/welcome-guardian-sports-network>
.

• This blog first appeared on the Science of Sport 
<http://www.sportsscientists.com/>.
 