
Yes I admit it. I shed a few tears after the 100m final on Sunday. I only ever 
want to do the best I can. I felt really good during the heats. But my start 
was poor. And over the first 5 metres I just wasn't powerful enough to work my 
way back into the race. I can suggest all sorts of reasons why I finished 
sixth. But they're all excuses. I didn't do it when it mattered. And that's the 
truth of it.

But we have a rule. We're allowed to dwell on disappointment for an hour and 
then move on. So I've done that and now I'm concentrating on the 200m, which is 
scheduled for Thursday.

One of the effects of being at the Games is that you learn so much about 
yourself. We all come out different people from how we came in. It's hard as an 
athlete to say your event doesn't have a consequence. But as my coach told me: 
the world didn't end after my race. The trains didn't stop. We like to think we 
make a difference – particularly in theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>. But it's up to the crowd and 
those watching and listening at home to give the Games their real significance.

My focus now is to nail the start of the 200m and get a good transition round 
the bend. That's where the 200 is won and lost. There are no heats for the '2' 
and so start lanes will be selected at random. I prefer an outside lane because 
of my stride length, so we'll just have to wait and see.

The whole point of the Paralympics is to have races that are fair. That's why 
the classification system is in place. Truth is, though, only the doctors and 
physios who establish the rules fully understand the structure. It's certainly 
not clear to outsiders and it does cause confusion.

In my category – cerebral palsy – it's all about brain damage. So our 
situation rarely changes. Others with progressive illnesses are also checked 
regularly and they can go from one category to another.

In the Oscar Pistorius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> 
controversy, I thought his race was quite fair. He and Alan Oliveira crossed 
the line pretty much together. It simply shows Alan was the better runner on 
the day. In the wider context my view is that blades do give you an advantage 
over able-bodied athletes. For example, the blade runners don't have feet so 
they don't suffer tendonitis or stress fractures. It also means they can train 
longer and harder than their counterparts.

Coaches also say the blades delay body fatigue, which is what 400m running, 
for instance, is all about. For these reasons it was wrong in my opinion that 
Oscar was allowed to take part in the Olympics. You look at the advantages and 
disadvantages and it's the courts that decide it all in the end and I don't 
believe that's right either.

Oscar has put Paralympics on the map, no question about that. And this may not 
be PC, but whether he likes it or not perhaps he should just acknowledge that 
he's disabled.

We're fortunate in the Paralympic programme that our image hasn't been 
affected by drug scandals. But when we see exceptional performances we do start 
to question things. We're randomly tested through the year. I've had three so 
far in 2012. There's a knock on your door at eight in the morning and you have 
to give a urine sample. The pressure to pee on demand is tough, I can tell you. 
But when I look around the athletes' village here, hand on heart, I can 
honestly say there are no suspicious characters.

Whatever happens next, I'll never forget the sensation I felt when the crowd 
started cheering before my 100m. It really was amazing. If I could I'd bottle 
it and give it to everyone. What a difference that would make. The support is 
phenomenal and even if I go home with nothing but that acknowledgment from the 
crowd for all the hard work and effort that we put in will have made it all 
worthwhile.

Ben Rushgrove is a sprinter who has cerebral palsy and competes in T36 
classification disability events. He is competing in the 100m and 200m in London
 