
South African officials have registered a formal complaint with the 
International Paralympic Committee, reigniting the row over whether rivals to
Oscar Pistorius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> are 
breaking the rules by swapping their prosthetic blades mid-competition.

Although Pistorius attempted to quell the row by apologising for the timing of 
his outburst after being beaten in the 200m for the first time in nine years by 
the BrazilianAlan Oliveira <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alan-oliveira>, 
the South African Parlaympic Committee has raised the issue again.

In a letter to the IPC delivered on Tuesday, it asked the world governing body 
to investigate whether Pistorius's rivals had changed the height of their 
blades between the heats and the finals, which is against the rules.

The IPC said it had investigated the claims by immediately asking coaches in 
the athletes' village whether their athletes had switched their blades.

"They asked the IPC to urgently investigate allegations that a number of T43 
athletes were running on different-sized prosthesis for semi-finals and finals 
and different events," said the IPC director of communications, Craig Spence.

"When we put the allegation to the coaches about different-sized running 
blades, there was a look of shock because it's difficult to do. There is no 
evidence they were competing on different-sized running blades."

He admitted the IPC did not record the height of the competing athletes before 
each race. It simply measures whether they are beneath the maximum height 
permitted under the formula it uses to calculate the allowable length of 
prosthetic blades.

But he said unless the South Africans came forward with new evidence, the 
matter was closed.

Oliveira switched to his new blades, 4cm higher than his old pair, three weeks 
before theParalympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>, and said 
he was disappointed with Pistorius for raising the issue after the 200m T43/44 
final.

Pistorius races at a height of 184cm because he continues to use blades that 
are sanctioned for non-disabled competition, despite the fact that he could 
wear prosthetics that extended his height to 193cm under the IPC rules.

Oliveira raced in the 200m at a height of 181cm, 3.5cm below his maximum 
allowable height under the rules.

The IPC said it wrote to all participating countries and athletes in April to 
ask if they had any concerns regarding wheelchairs or prosthesis but had 
received no response.

But the South African Paralympic Committee said in its letter that Pistorius 
had raised the issue several times informally with the IPC since the world 
championships in New Zealand last year.
 