
It was one thing everyone seemed to agree on: this year's Oscar lineup was the 
strongest for years. A Vanity Fair article in October set the tone by asking: 
is 2013 the greatest year for movies since the Gone with the Wind era?

Others including the Hollywood Reporter have stoked the fire, suggesting that 
this year's offerings – from meaty social-conscience dramas such as 12 Years a 
Slave through oddball indie flicks (Her, Nebraska) to blockbuster laden with 
special effects in the shape of Gravity – are on a par with Hollywood's best 
ever. But as Oscar night nears, the mood appears to have subtly altered. Will 
the results night suggest that Hollywood's best and most artistically 
significant film-makers are unable to cut it commercially?

This, in truth, is one of Hollywood's oldest dilemmas, perhaps emphasised most 
dramatically at the 2010Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, when 
The Hurt Locker, which had grossed only $14m (£10m) at the US box office at 
that point, defeated the most successful film of all time, Avatar, for the best 
picture award. The 2014 vintage is perhaps less starkly differentiated, but 
raises a similar question.

Of the nine best picture nominees, only four can be counted as bona fide 
domestic hits, having surpassed $100m at the US box office: Gravity ($270m),
American Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle> ($145m), The 
Wolf of Wall Street ($113m) and Captain Phillips ($107m). Of the remaining 
five, 12 Years a Slave ($49m) and Philomena ($33m) can be viewed as respectable 
performances, while the remaining three have struggled to find a significant 
audience – Dallas Buyers Club ($25m), Her ($24m) and Nebraska ($17m).

If, as is widely believed, 12 Years a Slave beats Gravity and Hustle to the 
top award, it will represent another small crisis for those who want Hollywood 
to be capable of being popular and artistically successful at the same time.

Of course, as Variety magazine's executive editor, Steven Gaydos, puts it: 
"Anyone who thinks that commercial success is a barometer of Oscar achievement 
is after the wrong rabbit." The awards season, he says is, refreshing precisely 
because for a few weeks Hollywood stops thinking about the bottom line and 
starts thinking about what are actually the best films.

But the age-old dance between these two concerns is important, if only 
because, Gaydos says, "whatever else, the Academy has a need for a bunch of 
films that people have seen to get ratings for telecast of the show".

"It's almost as if the Academy is divided against itself," he adds. "On the 
one hand, there's a desire that the awards are a pure, sanctified process, all 
about artistic grace. But if they took all the campaigning and showbiz out of 
it, the telecast would be dead in two years."

One of the clearest signs of the Oscars' desire to change was the expansion of 
the best picture nominee list in 2009, from a maximum of five to a maximum of 
10. The widening of the net, it was reasoned, would lead to more populist films 
being included, and this has largely been borne out. Ratings have recovered 
since the low of 32 million viewers in 2008, when No Country for Old Men won, 
reaching 40 million last year.

Although he doesn't see the 2014 Oscar circus as a disaster in waiting, Gaydos 
does suggest any diminishment of Hollywood confidence can also be explained by 
the increasing speed and pressure of what he calls the "hype cycle". Fuelled by 
the explosion of social media, a film's reputation can be established and then 
reassessed at lightning speed as scores of self-appointed pundits weigh in. 
What might have taken months, or years, in old-media days, now can develop in a 
matter of weeks, or even days.

Even without commercial considerations, the shine has been taken off what just 
months ago was considered the best field of Oscar contenders for decades. 
"There are a lot of unseasoned voices out there trying to assert themselves 
alongside the experienced commentators. There's a new fraternity of awards 
season bloggers who are the ones who, by constant buzz, actually create the 
field that the Oscar voters pick."

This year has certainly seen some radical shifts in status, most obviously 
that of American Hustle. The 1970s-set crime comedy won many of the early 
critics awards in December and January, as well as the Golden Globe (best 
musical or comedy) but is now considered an outside bet for best picture behind 
Gravity and 12 Years a Slave.

Some things, however, won't change. Gaydos says: "The masterpiece consensus 
may happen real fast, but time, as ever, is a disinfectant. Great movies stand 
the test the time, over-hyped movies fade in the harsh light of day."

Top grossers

Gravity $270m American Hustle $145m

The Wolf of Wall Street (below) $113m

Captain Phillips $107m

12 Years a Slave $49m

Philomena $33m

Dallas Buyers Club $25m

Her $24m

Nebraska $17m
 