
Alan Greenspan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> has seen 
more than a few dicey days on global markets in his time. So it was telling 
when the 90-year-old former chairman of the US Federal Reserve described the 
market chaos sparked by Britain’s leave vote as “the worst period I recall”.

“There’s nothing like it, including the crisis – remember 19 October 1987, 
when the Dow went down by a record amount of 23%? That I thought was the bottom 
of all potential problems. This has a corrosive effect that will not go away,” 
Greenspan told the broadcaster CNBC.

He is right. Brexit is about so much more than financial market turmoil. As 
Greenspan, who presided over the Federal Reserve for almost two decades, 
warned: “This is just the tip of the iceberg.”

A referendum many thought should never have been called in the first place has 
seen a narrow majority decide that the country should break away from the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> at a time of great 
economic and political uncertainty.

The worry for other EU leaders is that Britain’s Leave vote will spark a 
domino effect throughout the rest of the continent, where forces of economic 
nationalism and anti-immigration politicians have already been gaining ground. 
For the eurozone’s fragile economic recovery, this new phase of uncertainty 
could dash consumer spending, derail business deals and probably force the 
European Central Bank into yet more unconventional measures to get cash into 
the economy and shore up confidence.

In Italy, alarm bells are already ringing that the economic consequences of 
Brexit could bring some of the country’s vulnerable banks even closer to the 
brink of collapse. Milan’s stock index suffered its biggest one-day drop in 
history after the UK result was announced.

The shock waves could spread further still, says international thinktank the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Its secretary-general, 
Angel Gurría, warned of “major consequences for the UK itself, the EU and the 
international community”.

In a febrile world, policymakers could be forgiven for not knowing which fire 
they will be putting out next.

In China, relied on in recent times as the main engine of global growth, the 
pace of expansion has slowed and the economy is still struggling to rebalance. 
With or without Brexit, China’s difficult transition was always seen as a 
global risk. Now the fear is that Britain’s departure from the EU will 
intensify problems for the world’s second-biggest economy, which has invested 
heavily in the UK in recent years.

In Brazil, not so long ago seen as another potential draw for international 
investors, a credit crunch and the worst recession for eight decades has 
sparked a wave of bankruptcies. While trade links with the UK are small, the 
South American country’s currency and stock market were under pressure on 
Friday on fears that Brexit could knock confidence in emerging economies – 
especially those like Brazil with hefty current account deficits.

The world’s biggest economy, the US, is not immune from any of this either. 
Markets are already jittery in advance of November’s presidential election, 
which could potentially result in a change for America so momentous it would 
rival Brexit for headlines and global soul-searching. Indeed, the parallels 
were not lost on presidential candidate Donald Trump, who described the UK’s 
referendum result as a “great” development.

The risk that Brexit will worsen the global economic slowdown and cause an 
extended period of volatility on global markets adds a new uncertainty to the 
US outlook. With the horizon so clouded, markets have shifted to reflect 
radically reduced chances of the Federal Reserve raising interest rates again 
this year.

As Greenspan says, the global economy is in “real serious trouble”. In such a 
world, Brexit brings additional challenges.

The UK’s historic decision to split from the European Union risks stoking 
those global fires and, just as importantly, risks exhausting the energies and 
capacities of policymakers at a time when they can least afford it.

We hoped energy giants would be reformed. How naive we were

Not just a good day but a brilliant day to bury bad news. The Competition and 
Markets Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission> 
(CMA) has spent the past two years studying the much-criticised energy markets 
and chose to publish its “do-nothing” findings on Friday.

It was a deeply suspect decision to pick the same date as the result of the 
UK’s most serious constitutional question for 40 years, but then the move was 
fitting in many respects.

The “big six” suppliers have always believed the competition authorities had 
been dragged into a cynical exercise geared to take the political crisis of 
rising consumer bills off the government’s hands and carry it safely into the 
long grass of regulation.

Equally, consumer groups always feared the CMA was unlikely to crack down on 
profiteering by the big six, which can mobilise armies of advisers to run rings 
around regulators such as Ofgem and now the CMA, which has little understanding 
of the sector.

So early expectations 24 months ago that excessive profits would be halted, 
vertical integration of wholesale and retail interests dismantled, and all 
domestic energy bills capped have been dashed. In their place the CMA has come 
up with 30 recommendations, none of which amount to more than tinkering around 
the edges: temporary price caps for those on prepayment meters and a database 
to make it easier for rival suppliers to approach existing customers, for 
example.

Even one of its own senior panel members, Martin Cave, found the CMA’s 
inaction unforgivable and insisted on having his objections noted.

He wanted a price cap across the whole sector, given that his colleagues have 
admitted it is the 70% of loyal, often long-term, customers on standard 
variable tariffs that are overpaying most.

Many of the new breed of independent suppliers expressed their horror at the 
missed opportunity to properly reform the market but the scale of the CMA’s 
inaction has been partly obscured by falling commodity prices.

Lower bills currently mean consumers are less affected by fuel poverty issues: 
but just wait till wholesale power costs rise and retail bills go with them. 
Then public anger will reappear and the CMA’s failure will be laid bare.

Tesco has made some good calls, but must play less golf

Giraffe restaurants, Harris + Hoole coffee shops and Dobbies garden centres. 
These were the brands that formerTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> boss Philip Clarke believed could 
attract shoppers back into the company’s supermarkets. They didn’t, and now 
Clarke’s replacement Dave Lewis has sold them off.

With hindsight, messing around with coffee shops and restaurants showed how 
far off the mark Tesco was with customers under Clarke, who left in 2014. 
Tesco’s real problem was that its products were too expensive and not of 
sufficient quality.

The growth in Tesco’s sales in the last two quarters shows that it is fixing 
this, but there is still a lot of work to do for Britain’s biggest retailer.

For example, the revelations that the boss of Tesco Bank spent more than 
£18,000 on taxis in just eight months, and that Tesco had a £10,000-a-year 
membership at Wentworth golf club in Surrey, show that the company still needs 
to make more cutbacks.
 