 Take an oversized skateboard, replace the wheels with chunky pneumatic tyres, 
lash your feet to the deck and point it down the steepest hill you can find. 
For a sport so redolent of jaded Californian thrill-seekers with too much time 
(and skin) on their hands, it's a surprise to discover that mountain boarding 
is a largely British invention. We can, apparently, thank native would-be 
snowboarders, who eventually tired of standing atop our nation's many green 
eminences, waiting for them to turn white.
After long weeks of rain, it's hard to imagine the Surrey slopes of the XPB 
Ride the Hill centre ever looking more verdant. The wet hillside is dotted with 
traffic cones, galvanised facsimiles of street furniture and plywood walls of 
death, and topped with a mighty Victorian gothic manor house - something to 
look up at when I'm sprawled on my back. And sprawl I surely will, as becomes 
plain when a groggy youngster is led into the reception hut as my 13-year-old 
son Kristjan and I are signing our indemnity forms. "You'll be fine, mate," 
breezes the accompanying instructor, patting a pale cheek. "Just a bit shaken 
up, right?"

Mountainboarding is a young man's game. Of the fellow students donning helmets 
and kneepads, I'm the only one not counting the days until term starts, in 
rather a high voice. The gung-ho instructors sport Celtic tattoos and a lot of 
face metal, and answer to names like Godders and Stretch, or in the case of our 
irrepressibly upbeat tutor, Sloggs. As we trudge up the nursery slope, Sloggs 
tells me that, having just turned 30, he's now obliged to compete on the 
mountainboarding seniors tour.

As with any sport defined by gravity and ratcheting momentum, the first lesson 
covers how to stop. Sloggs demonstrates the "power slide": he squats down and 
leans back until his combat shorts are brushing the grass, then grabs the edge 
of the board with both hands, steering himself perpendicular to the slope and a 
prompt, slithering halt. My power slide is more of a leisure arc, but it does 
the job.

"Done any board sports before?" asks Sloggs, giving me a double thumbs-up. A 
little skateboarding in my youth, I reply, in a drawl that disguises the 
precise accuracy of this statement. All I really know is that leaning back 
makes you go left, and leaning forward makes you go right. And that if you lean 
too far, it's better to kiss bedrizzled Surrey grass than be-urined South Bank 
concrete.

As a board-sport novice, Kristjan is at a competitive disadvantage, and his 
are the muddier jeans at the end of an hour focused on basics: flexing your 
knees, keeping your weight on your back foot and calling everybody "mate". We 
move up the hill for a primer on "making turns at speed". I turn back at the 
end of my first exhilarating slalom through the cones to see Kristjan tumble 
into a cataclysmic wipe-out. "It's OK," he calls out, emerging from the 
trackside tussocks. "I landed straight on my head."

But drawing upon a genetically mysterious wellspring of fearless 
determination, my son swiftly makes up the ground. "This is a bit easier than 
it looks," says Sloggs, leading us towards the low, 10-foot metal rail that is 
our introduction to mountain-boarding's stunt-centred freestyle discipline. 
Only a bit? The trick is to focus on the end of the rail, not the beginning - 
but it's a trick that takes me several mouthfuls of hill to master. When at 
last I do, my board and I clickety-clack blandly off the end. By this time, 
Kristjan is swishing down the rail at speed, getting serious air on his exit 
and landing on all four wheels; once he even crouches down and touches the 
board at the apex of his leap, like those urban maestros in the old BBC1 ident.

It's much the same when we pitch ourselves at the plywood quarter pipe and a 
series of ramp jumps, though by cleverly exploiting my superior weight I 
salvage some pride in a mud-splattered downhill race. "That's pretty amazing 
for someone on their first day," coos Sloggs, but he isn't looking at me. I 
turn to watch as Kristjan masters the lofty double parabola known as the dragon 
rail. He sweeps to an impressive halt before us and asks if we can come back 
tomorrow.

Berm isn't a word I've heard much since the first Gulf war, but the low 
earthworks that litter the XPB hillside are known thus. I get to know one of 
them very well when attempting to save face by rounding our day off with a 
power slide worthy of the name. "You'll be fine, mate," says Sloggs as I creak 
myself upright, clutching a shoulder. I'm sure he's right. But for the time 
being, here I am with my right arm in a pashmina sling, typing with one hand ...

· Spanish Steps, by Tim Moore, is published by Vintage at £6.99. For more 
mountainboarding details visitRidethehill.com <http://www.Ridethehill.com>, 
tel: 0845-0944360.

Mountainboarding in a nutshell ...

Thrill rating 7/10

Danger rating 5/10

Fitness rating 5/10

It's snowboarding without the snow. It's extreme skateboarding without the 
graffiti. It's fast, fun and - most importantly for a country where the snow 
isn't great, the waves are temperamental and there's rarely much sun - it can 
be carried out on any terrain, although grass is a good option if you plan on 
doing lots of falling over.

The not-entirely-sensible aim is to perch yourself on an oversized skateboard 
with oversized, off-road wheels (and foot straps), then hurtle downhill, 
slaloming around cones, jumping over ramps and generally feeling like a bit of 
a nutter at speeds of up to 30mph. But don't do it by yourself - courses like 
those offered by the Ride the Hill board school start by teaching how the board 
works and how to stop. Then you can progress to jumps - the special foam pit at 
the South West Mountain Board Centre (SWMBC) enables you to practise big-air 
jumps and back-flips without (much) risk of injury.

What's the buzz?

According to Sam Gleeson, the managing director of SWMBC, "Unlike surfing, 
where you spend most of the introductory lesson paddling, mountainboarding is 
really easy to pick up. By the end of our hour-long lesson, people are boarding 
down the hill, can stop, break and turn on their board."

Thrill a minute?

Pretty much, as there's such a huge choice of thrills. SWMBC boasts some of 
the biggest jumps in Britain, and hosts the world freestyle championships, no 
less - but it also has learner slopes and mini-ramps too. Once you build up 
your skills, try tricks like "the rodeo" (a back flip with 180-degree twist) or 
the "misty flip" (a front flip with a 180-degree rotation). Ride the Hill 
offers everything up to advanced courses with rails and pipes (and an 
all-important drag lift to haul you back to the top) - on weekends only outside 
school holidays.

Adrenaline peak

The double back-flip is the ultimate trick - only a handful of 
mountainboarders can do it. The aim is to do two full rotations in the air 
while travelling at 30mph. It's tough and there have been injuries along the 
way, so best to practise in a foam pit to limit the damage. Scratch that - best 
not to practise this trick at all.

Where to do it

Surfin' Dirt in County Down scores with its location in the Mourne mountains; 
admire peaks including Slieve Donard (Northern Ireland's highest) on the rare 
occasions you have your eyes open. Ride the Hill boasts two centres: SuperBole 
in Chester ("it's bowl central!") and the XBP Centre in Redhill, Surrey. SWMBC 
("the south-west's premier mountainboard centre") is near Bideford in north 
Devon.

Who can do it

You need to be reasonably fit but once you've learned the basics, you can take 
it at your own pace. Kids as young as eight can take part.

What to take

A sturdy pair of trainers/boots and clothes you don't mind getting dirty. 
Gloves help to protect your hands against grazes. You can rent safety gear 
(helmets, kneepads, elbow pads) from most centres.

Typical prices

Hour-long group tuition sessions start at around £6 for under-16s, £7 for 
adults. Private tuition can cost upwards of £20 per hour.

Impress your pals

Mountainboarding's 15 minutes of fame came when brothers Dave and Pete Tatham, 
the British champions no less, were felt up by Jonathan Ross (and somehow 
identified) during the blindfold round of They Think It's All Over.

YouTube searchwords 'mountainboarding, ride the hill'

Good links

mbseurope.com <http://www.mbseurope.com> (for all the gear plus centres across 
Europe)

ridethehill.com <http://www.ridethehill.com>

surfindirt.co.uk <http://www.surfindirt.co.uk>

swmbc.co.uk <http://www.swmbc.co.uk>
 