
Preamble Hello. As someone who has a recurring dream about being in a town 
centre with odd trainers on (conclusion one: I am light years ahead when it 
comes to chav fashion; conclusion one: I am a complete loser), I am used to the 
sensation of sporting inappropriate attire. Yet even I feel a little unusual 
today: I began the long trek to GU Towers yesterday afternoon wearing a Trail 
Duster, a Texas Fast Draw and a Western Cattleman Stetson, expecting upon 
arrival to nurse jugs of paint-stripper with Paul Nixon. Instead, all I needed 
to wear was my boy-next-door outfit and an insincere smile because, instead of 
drinking in the last-chance saloon against Australia today, England will be 
having a gentle tea party (which may, admittedly, spill over into a fight at 
some stage when Paul Nixon steals the last Custard Cream and tellsAndrew Symonds
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> where he can shove it).

Bangladesh's stunning and frankly hilarious victory over South Africa 
yesterday means that, at the risk of sounding so very English,we can bloody 
well afford to lose this. Humans, as Mike Brearley point out, will delay the 
moment of performance as long as possible - why do you think that, at 31, I 
still haven't spoken to a real female? - and given that qualification for the 
semi-finals will almost certainly necessitate beating South Africa whether 
England win or lose today, they could argue, as before their game with 
Australia in the last World Cup, that victory could ultimately have the same 
value as defeat. They might even lose and take psychological points, if the 
victory margin is in two figures.

This leads to scrambled thoughts, as it did in that match at Port Elizabeth in 
2003, when England allowed themselves to be Bevaned from a position of 
seemingly certain victory. Australia have no such problems. In their mind is 
one solitary thought: never give a sucker an even break (even if someone has 
wrongly written the 'S' as an 'F' and added the word 'Pommie' before it): they 
want to continue their run of 17 World Cup runs in a row, whether it means 
putting England out or not. They are an extraordinary team, full of champions, 
and we must enjoy every last chunter, WAAAAAAAH, cross-batted clump over 
long-on and misread Chinamen while we can.

Oh, and happy Ea- nah, I can't lie to you.

While you wait Why not read The Spin <http://sport.theguardian.com/thespin>, 
Lawrence Booth's peerless weekly cricket email?

Strauss is back for Joyce A superior, experienced batsman replacing an 
inferior, callow one: these selectors really are getting the hang of their 
craft now. England will hope he has as much pent-up stuff in the bank as Big 
Suze's boyfriend Stu, the hunk of monk, at the start of Season 3. Australia 
make one change, too: Brad Hodge for Shane Watson. Brad for Shane. I ask you.

Audio link for today's game This 
<http://mfile.akamai.com/21317/live/reflector:34764.asx?bkup=21549> is all you 
need, apart from a doctor to tell you that you have piles and then, just as the 
full horror flashes before your eyes, confirm that it was actually a joke.

England win the toss and bat first Ponting says he would have batted ... good 
pitch ... long batting line-up ... hot bath probably the preferred method these 
days ...

1st over: England 2-0 (Bell 2, Vaughan 0) Blimey, it is Bell to open. That's a 
stinking decision, which puts the 'por' in 'torpor'. Saying which, Bell shows 
good intent by walking down and across the wicket to ping the first ball of the 
innings from Bracken through the covers for two. HE'S GOT A BLOODY STRIKE-RATE 
OF 200 TAKE THAT YOU AUSSIE $*"!$£wr$%er$awe.Amend: He had a strike-rate of 
200, which must comes as something of a surprise to those among the Australian 
population who questioned his ability to score in a house of moral disrepute. 
By the end of the over Bell is back down to business in every sense: a 
strike-rate of 33 after five dot balls.

2nd over: England 4-0 (Bell 3, Vaughan 1) Tait greets Vaughan with a cracking 
delivery that rose from nowhere, like Hulk Hogan from the canvas, shaking his 
head as if to say "you're in real trouble now, boy" in any of his entirely 
unfixed wrestling matches in the 1980s. That kicked really nastily and almost 
hit Vaughan in the armpit. It's a lively but ultimately quiet over, otherwise - 
two lengths, as ever with Tait - and England settle for two singles and four 
healthy armpits.

3rd over: England 9-0 (Bell 4, Vaughan 5) Bell is on the walk to Bracken 
again, but it's a slightly odd gesture because no big shots ever result: like 
wearing a really eyecatching suit/dress/scented string vest to a nightclub and 
then rebuffing all attempts to talk to and/or pull you. After he gets a single, 
Vaughan edges - possibly deliberately, the face was a little open - low for the 
first boundary of the innings. "Rob - you're surely joking about Geraint Jones 
being our best batsman-keeper, aren't you?" says Gary Naylor, failing to see 
the sickeningly serious and morose gesture on my face. "Foster too. Nixon is a 
classic case of a very specific type of player - limited in skill (though not 
as limited as he would like us to think); respecter of nothing and nobody; and 
(this is the clincher) a man whom you are pleased is on your side more often 
than not. Like Lee Carsley or Robbie Savage in football, he's below the very 
best, but an important member of the Team. Nixon has 16 first-class centuries 
at 33, so he is no mug (Geraint has 4 at 30, Foster 8 at 34 and Matt Prior 14 
at 39). Ravi and Nixon have what it takes - let's see them in Test cricket 
too." I like the cut of Bopara's wotsit, so he becomes the next cab on the Test 
rank. But Nixon? Please. He will be 38 in 2009.

WICKET! Vaughan b Tait 5 (England 10-1) You don't need Mark Ronson to tell you 
that Michael Vaughan has failed again. It was a really indeterminate shot: Tait 
rammed in a short one just outside off stump and Vaughan, going back to no 
particular purpose, just chopped it onto the stumps with a crooked bat. "The 
short ball ends Vaughan's caree- sorry, innings," says Damien Fleming, but he 
might not have been a million miles from the truth, in one-day terms at least.

4th over: England 14-1 (Bell 4, Strauss 3) I had a feeling they might put 
Pietersen at No3 but, no, it's Strauss. And the right decision too I reckon 
because if Tait ran through Pietersen here, as could easily happen, England 
would be up a recognisable creek sans paddle. Strauss is greeted with a bouncer 
that is wided on height. Tait consoles himself with a seven-letter barrage to 
Strauss, at least one of which was printable in a family newspaper. Strauss 
gags him temporarily with a really classy push through the covers for three to 
get off the mark. Tait then goes up for LBW when Bell plays around a fizzing, 
full delivery, but it was going miles down leg. Looks a good pitch, this. "I 
think Kieron Richardson is a fine player; hopefully, he will have a place in 
the XI on Tuesday replacing the suspended 'Scholesy'," says Lou Roper, cackling 
maniacally and idly caressing his original vinyl copy of 'The Anfield Rap'.

5th over: England 18-1 (Bell 4, Strauss 7) It's reasonable to assume that 
Strauss's only problem in Australia - apart from Rudi Koertzen (who is at 
Bracken's end today; you just know it's going to happen don't you) - was mental 
fatigue, and he does look perky and busy so far. Saying which, he was a bit 
lucky to edge Bracken low and wide of second slip for two in an over that 
yields four. England are under a bit of pressure already.

WICKET! Strauss b Tait 7 (England 24-2) Bell begins Tait's third over with a 
creamy push-drive through mid-off for his first boundary but then Strauss goes 
as Vaughan did before, trying to force off the back foot but going at it with a 
crooked bat and dragging the ball back onto the stumps. Bug. Ger.

6th over: England 24-2 (Bell 9, Pietersen 0) Watching Tait is a bit like 
watching Cristiano Ronaldo three years ago: you think that, with all these raw 
materials, if he nails the fundamentals he'll befrighteningly good. And hated 
by gazillions of one-eyed Englishmen.

7th over: England 24-2 (Bell 9, Pietersen 0) Bell really has perfected the 
on-the-walk dot ball: there are two more in that over from Bracken, which with 
the aid of an excellent piece of fielding from Hayden is a maiden. I only 
mentioned the fielder so I could jot up a rhyme in my World Cup Rhyme-Off with 
Tom Lutz. England are being muzzled and, really, you can only admire a great 
team at work.

8th over: England 29-2 (Bell 9, Pietersen 4) Tait v Pietersen, a live game 
within a dying game, and Pietersen adjusts his body to drive an attempted 
yorker thrillingly down the ground for four. He's the Mark Ronson of cricket, 
forever finding new and imaginative takes on old favourites: probably every 
other batsman in the world would have hit that ball through mid-on.

How do you like dem apples department According to my friends at C***info 
(i.e. blame them if it's wrong, not me), Trescothick has smeared 256 in a 
pre-season 30-over game today, including 25 fours and 18 sixes. In the context 
of Bell's Gavaskarian vigil, it's like seeing the poster for Match Point before 
walking solemnly into a Kings Cross £10 All You Can Eat Hosebag House.

9th over: England 31-2 (Bell 10, Pietersen 4) The thing about Ian Bell is a) 
he is bloody talented; b) he has a comprehensive range of shots; c) he is the 
ICC's Emerging Player of the Year and, most importantly, d) he has been tipped 
to make 8000 Test runs by Booth and Smyth. SO WHY WON'T HE BLOODY HIT THE 
BALL?! In that Bracken over he settles for a gentle wave past point for a 
single. A wide makes it two from the over; Bell has 10 from 29 balls. "When are 
England going to start by picking the best 11 players and then selecting a 
captain?" says Mike Cowie. "Picking Vaughan, time after time, is like saying - 
we think we can beat Australia with 10 men! Thanks for the memories, Michael, 
but close the door on your way out." Nononono. One-day cricket, sure - although 
I've no idea who'd replace him - but not in the Test side, where his captaincy 
is good enough to justify his place so long as he can average 30-35 and play 
one psychologically vital innings per series. Like he did between 2003 and 
2005, then.

10th over: England 39-2 (Bell 18, Pietersen 4) Target: McGrath. Good stuff 
from Bell, who charges the old fella's first ball and dumps it disdainfully 
over midwicket. It only went for two because he didn't time it, but as an 
agenda-setter it will be worth more. Unless he gets out trying it again, 
obviously, in which case I'll doubtless berate him for his poor shot selection. 
Gilchrist responds by coming up to the stumps, so Bell stays in his crease and 
drives the slower one sumptuously over mid-off for four. Two more timed behind 
point make it a good first over: eight from it.

11th over: England 43-2 (Bell 19, Pietersen 7) A fascinating psychological 
move from Ricky Ponting: Michael Clarke is coming on. Against Pietersen. In a 
Powerplay. With Scented Leather Chaps on. I think they fancy Clarke against 
Pietersen - Warne said before one of the Ashes Tests, I forget which, that 
Clarke would get Pietersen out in the match - but I can only think that it is 
ego-related. Does he stick or biff? Pietersen is respectful for now, driving a 
single from the third ball and flapping two from the sixth. "If lack of runs is 
no bar to ODI captaincy," says Sunil X, "why not resurrect Mike Brearley?" And 
if lack of wit or originality is no bar to a gag, why don't I just print all 
these emails?

12th over: England 48-2 (Bell 20, Pietersen 11) A single to third man from 
Bell sounds the, erm, bell for the much-hyped McGrath v Pietersen contest. Only 
two balls in that over: Pietersen takes round one by walking down the track to 
his first and flipping what was consequently a full-toss through midwicket for 
four. A simply imperious shot. Ponting and Pietersen are having a pretty heated 
discussion as to whether they should have commissioned a fourth season of Peep 
Show. I can't lipread, but I think Pietersen is saying that he's of the opinion 
that the denouement to season three was a natural end point, and that he hopes 
they don't tarnish what would have been a hugely strong legacy by stretching 
the show beyond its natural life. "It could have been worse," says Rachel 
Clifton, gently padding her only remaining toe. "I could have started ranting 
about Read's treatment again. And criticism from YOU, Smyth, about my social 
life - harsh ..."

13th over: England 49-2 (Bell 21, Pietersen 11) Gilchrist is saying the word 
'Powerplay' more often than Jose Mourinho says 'I' and Ali G says 'Aiiiiiiii', 
trying to goad Pietersen to take risks while the field is up. He doesn't in 
that over, but a slightly absent-minded defensive thrust prompts a huge shout 
for leg-before. He wasthis far outside the line. Good stuff from Clarke: he 
hustled through his second over for just a single run.

14th over: England 61-2 (Bell 33, Pietersen 11) Exquisite stuff from Bell, who 
takes three boundaries from McGrath's second over. First he drives up and over 
extra cover for four to bring up the fifty, and then he sends the next ball 
skimming square of the wicket to similar effect. Then, two balls later, he 
eases one beautifully through the covers. Twelve from the over and suddenly 
England are in good order.

15th over: England 74-2 (Bell 34, Pietersen 23) Pietersen is looking restless 
against Clarke but, for now, contents himself with a swept single. The logic, 
presumably, is that there's almost no need to go after him with McGrath going 
round the park. But 10 an over at both ends is better than 10 an over at one, 
and you heard that here first. Scratch all that: there goes Pietersen, stomping 
almost malevolently down the track to crunch Clarke through mid-on for four 
before advancing again to lift him a long way in the air, like a father playing 
with his newborn, and over long-on for six. So they get 13 from the over, which 
makes it 25 from the last two.

16th over: England 77-2 (Bell 35, Pietersen 25) Ponting engages plan B: Brad 
Hogg, and no third Powerplay. Big spell, this, because Hogg has consistently 
given England a problem in the middle overs of one-day innings. And yet he 
always looks sohittable. Not in that over - England settle for two 
range-finding singles. "According to TMS, Brad Hodge is known as the 
Roadrunner," says John Starbuck. "Any idea why? And which other cartoon 
characters are playing today?"

17th over: England 86-2 (Bell 36, Pietersen 33) Clarke continues, but with 
added protection now that the Powerplay has been postponed. Not that Hussey on 
the leg-side fence can stop Pietersen getting four for one of those 
devastatingly powerful, flat sweeps of his. Eight from the over and, whisper it 
(actually you can shout it all you like because there's no effer reading this 
apart from you and me, kid; they've all gone to the pub), but England are going 
nicely.

18th over: England 91-2 (Bell 37, Pietersen 37) Low-risk accumulation in that 
George Hogg over - five from it - so attention turns to what would be a good 
score on this pitch. When you factor in the strength of Australia's batting 
(Hodge at No7), I'd say about 4000. But the experts seem to think 300ish is 
par, 280 minimum.

19th over: England 99-2 (Bell 38, Pietersen 44) Symonds for Clarke, and 
Pietersen plays a premeditated lap for two before backing away to smear the 
last ball of the over through the covers for four. He is playing majestically, 
and he is approaching fifty: in this tournament, that has been something of a 
double-edged sword. "Symonds as Sideshow Bob's a bit obvious, innit?" says 
Andrew Thomas, before doing himself a serious injury after realizing that Ricky 
Ponting looks AHAHAHAHAHA a bit OOOHSTOPITMATRON like 
MESIDESHAVEONLYGONEANSPLIT George Bush!!!

20th over: England 101-2 (Bell 39, Pietersen 45) A Bell single brings up the 
hundred - first fifty from 81 balls, second from 35 - but it's an otherwise 
quiet over from Hogg: two from it. "Ricky Ponting does share a passing 
resemblance with Elmer Fudd," says Glenn Miller. "And Monty's batting could 
lead to him being singled out as 'that wascally wabbit'." Who the fudd is Elmer 
Fudd? Sorry, this all means nothing to me because I stopped watching cartoons 
when I got into serious political drama and mildly erotic drama around the age 
of four months. So who would be Martin McCague?

21st over: England 107-2 (Bell 44, Pietersen 46) Standard middle-over fare - a 
nudge here, a nurdle there, a sharp blast of self-loathing nipped in the bud 
there - but six runs make it a decent one for England. They now have an almost 
perfect platform, which will make the all the more exasperating when their 
knees go weak and they collapse in a pitiful heap.

22nd over: England 115-2 (Bell 49, Pietersen 49) After four singles from the 
first balls of the over, Ponting brings in his mid-on, so Bell instead 
late-cuts for three. Eight from an over of effortless milking.

23rd over: England 120-2 (Bell 51, Pietersen 52) Ponting drops Pietersen! It 
was an outrageously difficult chance, as Pietersen smeared a slower full-toss 
from Symonds to the right of mid-on, and Ponting could only palm it down at the 
full extent of a wonderfully athletic, Superman dive. Earlier in the over both 
Pietersen (from 49 balls) and Bell (from 69) had reached their half-centuries.

24th over: England 126-2 (Bell 52, Pietersen 57) Four from Hogg's over, which 
brings up the century partnership. Thus far it has been outstanding, but - 
always the but with the guys - they simply have to go and make centuries on 
what is a belter of a wicket. This partnership is like talking to a pretty girl 
in a pub: it's lovely and all but a) there's still time for you to Horlicks it 
up and b) there's an even greater chance that someone bigger and better than 
you will come along and outdo your patter with contemptuous ease. "According to 
my research Martin McCague is "Foghorn Leghorn 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foghorn_Leghorn> and appears in no mildly erotic 
dramas," says Anthony Griffiths.

25th over: England 138-2 (Bell 62, Pietersen 59) If you own a Talking Boony, 
it's time to give it the finger, because England are all over Australia at the 
moment. Bell takes boundaries from the first two balls of Symonds, one with a 
cherry-pie-fine whip to leg and the next, erm, somewhere - I was too busy 
high-fiving the toilet cleaner. Four more singles make it a cracking over for 
England; 12 from it.

26th over: England 146-2 (Bell 64, Pietersen 61) This is where the Aussies 
really miss Brett Lee. He would come back, he would grind his teeth till it 
really hurts, and he would take someone's off stump for a walk. Instead they 
are warming up Lee-lite, Shaun Tait, because they desperately need a wicket. In 
the meantime Pietersen almost gives it away against Hogg, missing a sweep at a 
full-toss that then turned just past off stump and went through Gilchrist for 
four byes. It might have been a stumping chance as well.

27th over: England 154-2 (Bell 71, Pietersen 62) Tait is back, and with him 
comes the final Powerplay. Immediately there's some reverse swing and he almost 
strikes third ball, when Bell inside-edges a drive to fine leg for a single. 
Then Bell plays a remarkable stroke for four. He was completely fooled by a 
surprise bouncer but, just as it was about to do some damage, he adjusted his 
hands wonderfully to deflect it to third man for four. Great stuff, prompting a 
little, cheeky smile from Bell, like a man who is desperately trying to 
maintain a veneer of modesty but just can't do it anymore.

28th over: England 161-2 (Bell 77, Pietersen 63) Now then: it's McGrath for 
Hogg at the other end for the rest of this final Powerplay, and you certainly 
wouldn't put it past the old man to sucker Pietersen out. Pietersen hustles an 
incredibly sharp single to mid-off - he is such a good judge of the stolen run 
- and then Bell times two to third man before driving McGrath off the back 
foot, elbow thrillingly kite-high, over extra cover for four.

29th over: England 163-2 (Bell 77, Pietersen 63) Hayden has dropped a dolly! 
It was Pietersen as well! He tried to smear Tait into a nearby nightclub but 
got under it and Hayden, running back from mid-off, made a laughable hash of 
it. It was a strange, almost apologetic, reach out in front of him, and while 
he might have been put off by the nearby Brad Hodge it was still a woeful miss 
for a fielder of his class. Just two wides from a really fiery, sinew-straining 
over.

WICKET! Bell c Hussey b McGrath 77 (England 164-3) After the square-leg 
umpire, that clown Koertzen, turns four into one with a needless intervention 
(he opened his legs to try and let the ball through but instead stopped it), 
Bell, who shouldn't even have been on strike, falls to the next ball: it was a 
tame dismissal, just opening up and driving straight to Hussey in the covers. 
The maiden hundred continues to elude him, but it's hard to be too critical 
after a really excellent innings.

30th over: England 166-3 (Pietersen 64, Collingwood 2) Collingwood will take 
time to play himself in here, so Australia have got away with this final 
Powerplay.

WICKET! Collingwood c Gilchrist b Tait 2 (England 167-4) Tait was simply too 
hot for Collingwood to handle. Having fallen over while digging out a snarling 
reverse-swinging yorker, Collingwood felt tentatively at the next, good-length 
ball, his mind on the reverse, and snicked it through to Gilchrist. It was not 
so far removed for his many dismissals to Stuart Clark during the Ashes. 
Australia, as they so often do, have gone bang bang, and now England may have 
to kiss kiss goodbye to their hopes of a challenging total (300 is looking like 
an absolutely minimum rather than par).

31st over: England 168-4 (Pietersen 65, Flintoff 1) It's marvellous bowling 
from Tait really, yet another example of the importance of actually trying to 
take wickets, rather than waiting for unforced errors, during the middle overs. 
His figures are 7-0-29-3.

32nd over: England 169-4 (Pietersen 65, Flintoff 2) Ponting, conscious that 
Flintoff is a nervous starter against spin, brings Hogg back. England have a 
problem here because Pietersen, as so often around 50 and 60, is as becalmed as 
he'll ever be (it's like he gets bored; he went to 50 from 49 balls and now has 
65 from 77, while Flintoff has possession of that 20-ball pass to play himself 
in without worrying about the scoring rate. So there's only one from the over.

33rd over: England 171-4 (Pietersen 65, Flintoff 3) Top stuff from Tait to 
Flintoff; just a wide and a single from the over, as Flintoff is content to 
block and get his eye in. I think he might need to revise this approach in the 
medium-term; in the Twenty20 match you get your eye in through singles, not dot 
balls. If Flintoff is consistently paying out at the end, it's fine for him to 
promise with a slow start. But when he isn't, it's a dubious tactic: innings of 
3 from 17 balls are about as useful as a talking nipple.

34th over: England 175-4 (Pietersen 66, Flintoff 4) Some big nerd really 
should do some serious statistical research on the value of taking wickets in 
the middle overs in one-day cricket. It has changed this game completely: in 
the last five overs England have scored just 12 runs, and the pressure is 
starting to tell. Pietersen misses an awkward sweep at a delivery from Hogg 
that would just have shaved off stump. Billy Bowden says not out, but it was 
devilishly close.

35th over: England 178-4 (Pietersen 69, Flintoff 4) Bracken returns to bowl 
his cutters, prompting Smyth to wrestle with some half-arsed Echo & The 
Bunnymen riff that bites the big one soon after he realises Shaun Tait isn't 
actually the killing moon, and England continue to feel the squeeze. With 
Gilchrist up to the stumps and Bracken in complete control of line and length 
there is very little room for manoeuvre, and they take just three from the 
over. Flintoff has four from 17 balls now.

WICKET! Flintoff st Gilchrist b Hogg 4 (England 179-5) Wonderful work from 
Brad Hogg, who has just daubed 'CHUMP' on Andrew Flintoff's forehead. He 
dragged him down with a flighted wrong'un, Flintoff missed with a resigned 
defensive push that got nowhere near the ball, and Gilchrist did the rest 
before 'WAAAAAAAH'ing as if told he would never 'WAAAAAH' again. It really was 
high-class stuff from the ever dangerous Hogg, but Flintoff has done what we 
feared he would do: 4 from 19 balls. He'd missed the previous ball, a flatter 
wrong'un, and he was just completely clueless, like a jock stumbling 
accidentally into a debating society and being asked to take the stage. It's 
sad to say him so emasculated and, for now, he should really be batting below 
the man who has just replaced him, Ravi Bopara.

36th over: England 181-5 (Pietersen 71, Bopara 1) Pietersen's innings is in 
its slightly tedious middle act after that explosive beginning. I hope to 
goodness that the final twist is worth sitting through this for because if not 
England are in huge trouble. No emails forages. Except this one: "What if the 
talking nipple is more eloquent than you?" says Paul McMillan, marvelling at 
the possibilities.

37th over: England 188-5 (Pietersen 73, Bopara 6) This innings could be very 
instructive in terms of Bopara's Test prospects. He gets England's first 
boundary for nine overs off Bracken there, although he didn't know too much 
about a low edge to third man. In the last ten overs England have made 34 for 
three, news so dispiriting that it almost justifies shooting the messenger.

38th over: England 190-5 (Pietersen 73, Bopara 6) Bopara looks a bit lost 
against Hogg and, like Flintoff, is beaten by successive wrong'uns. Thankfully 
he didn't go charging at the second one so is still at the crease, but it's 
another outstanding over for Australia and Hogg finishes with splendid figures 
of 10-0-36-1. The Curse of the Ostensibly Modest Spinner in the Middle Overs 
has hit England again. "Would Flintoff's nipple be saying 'hit a ball you 
tit'?" asks Paul Jackson. "Just an idea."

39th over: England 192-5 (Pietersen 74, Bopara 7) Just two from Bracken's 
over. Pietersen hasn't played a big shot for as long as I can remember, 
although it's hard to blame him because he knows that, due to the incompetence 
of his team-mates, he has to be the team's pinch-hitter (the only time he 
hasn't been in at diddly-for-two in this tournament was against Canada), anchor
and death-hitter. What an extraordinary burden, even for one with such a big 
talent and a big ego. The time is coming when, as with Mike Atherton but in a 
different way, playing for England will start to damage Pietersen's career. 
"What if you could sell the talking nipple to channel Five to become a new TV 
gameshow host?" says Peter Sale, failing to realise that I really don't need 
any further encouragement to go all Walter Mitty on the OBO's collective ass.

41st over: England 199-5 (Pietersen 78, Bopara 10) I've accidentally deleted 
the 40th over, which is a sickener. In the 41st, the returning McGrath keeps 
England to just three runs. It's been an amazing turnaround since Bell and 
Pietersen were making hay in the sunshine, and you have to say it all started 
with Bell's tame dismissal. Basically Pietersen is being starved of the strike, 
which has prompted the same inertia he showed when batting with the tail during 
the Ashes. He has to go big soon, though.

42nd over: England 204-5 (Pietersen 82, Bopara 11) Pietersen drives a Symonds 
full-toss inside-out for two to bring up the 200, but Bopara is struggling to 
get it away - 11 from 24 balls - and the expected late flurry of boundaries 
seems not so much in the post and lost in the mail by an incompetent postman. 
Pietersen continues to deal in ones and twos. It's strange; his batting is 
almost solemn.

43rd over: England 207-5 (Pietersen 84, Bopara 11) The excellent Tait is back, 
with a remit to reverse, and he has a huge shout for LBW against Bopara turned 
down third ball. I suspect it reversed too much, and replays, Mike Atherton, 
Rudi Koertzen and The Man all agree. There's another huge shout next ball but 
Koertzen is, again, having none of it. I'm not sure what saved him on that one. 
Koertzen's incompetence, in fact, because it was hitting leg. Cracking over 
from Tait who, like Glenn McGrath 12 years ago, may be turning from boy to man, 
and promising to irreplaceable, during a tour of the Caribbean.

44th over: England 215-5 (Pietersen 90, Bopara 13) When will Pietersen 'go'? 
So far he has just 29% of his runs in boundaries, and it had been 61 deliveries 
since his last boundary when he rocked back to slap a lolloping half-tracker 
behind point for four. A flurry of singles make it England's best over for a 
long while: eight from it.

45th over: England 223-5 (Pietersen 92, Bopara 19) Bopara begins Tait's final 
over with a splendid off-driven boundary. Still, however, Pietersen is in 
nurdler mode, riding the bounce to work a single to fine leg and then risking 
another off the final ball. Eight from the over is a reasonable effort, but 
with Pietersen in you'd expect a whole lot more. Tait finishes with 10-0-41-3, 
outstanding figures on a really good batting track.

46th over: England 229-5 (Pietersen 95, Bopara 21) And still we wait. 
Pietersen just isn't playing big shots - three singles from the three balls he 
faced in that over - and just six in total. He may simply be absolutely 
shattered; he may simply be playing for his hundred. The fifty partnership is 
up from 62 balls. "I can only wonder what kind of aspersions you would be 
casting if Kallis had played the same innings as Pietersen is playing today," 
hmphs Paul Ilechko.

WICKET! Bopara c Hussey b Bracken 21 (England 230-6) Being born with rubber 
wrists isn't always a good thing: Bopara, reaching for one from Bracken, got 
hold of that so well that it reached Hussey on the leg-side boundary. It was a 
so-so innings - 21 from 36 balls - and now we have Paul Nixon.

47th over: England 233-6 (Pietersen 99, Nixon 0) Kallis gets just three from 
the last four balls of Bracken's over. "Let's see how the Aussies play Colly 
and Monty in the middle overs on this," says Gary Naylor, with a straight face.

48th over: England 236-6 (Pietersen 101, Nixon 1) That's Pietersen's century, 
from 117 balls, a pretty forgettable affair by his standards. It's his fourth 
in ODIs, his first for two years, and he is punching the air with delight. It 
is telling, however, that his second fifty came from 68 balls and contained (I 
think) just one four. There will, inevitably, be accusations of selfishness: 
the world's top batsman is No1 every sense. Just three from McGrath's over - a 
good effort from him, but pretty shoddy from England, who have cocked this up 
completely.

WICKET! Pietersen c Clarke b Bracken 104 (England 240-7) Pietersen backs away 
and humps a full delivery from Bracken straight to Clarke at long-off. He's 
raising his bat to all and sundry but, given that England were 163 for 2 after 
29 overs, he has nothing to celebrate.

WICKET! Mahmood c Hodge b Bracken 0 (England 240-8) Pietersen didn't bother to 
cross when the ball was in the air, so Mahmood is exposed and slashes his 
second ball, a full-toss, to the diving Hodge at backward point. Very smart 
catch; unfathomably brainless cricket from England.

49th over: England 240-8 (Nixon 2, Panesar 0) That was the last ball of a 
soul-crushing over.

WICKET! Nixon c Hodge b McGrath 8 (England 246-9) Nixon jabs the first ball of 
McGrath's final over thrillingly over wide long-on for six but then, with blood 
rushing to that shrunken head of his, clunks the next ball, a full-toss, 
straight up in the air.

WICKET! Anderson LBW b McGrath 0 (England 247) Anderson is yorked 
comprehensively by McGrath. Well, what a sick little twist that was. England, 
163 for 2 and flying after 29 overs, bottled it completely and will do 
extremely well to defend a palpably under-par total. Only Bell (77), Pietersen 
(104) and Bopara (21) reached double-figures. I'll be back in 30 minutes.
 