
Oxbridge is struggling to overcome stereotypes of elitism and private school 
dominance even after a decade of well-funded outreach to state schools, 
according to a survey of schoolteachers.

Oxford offers highest number of places to state pupils for 40 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/02/oxford-university-places-state-school-pupils>
The Sutton Trust found that more than 40% of state secondary school teachers 
rarely or never advised their brightest pupils to apply to either the 
University of Oxford or theUniversity of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/cambridgeuniversity> – in some cases 
because they thought their students would be unhappy there – a proportion that 
has not changed substantially since the trust asked the same question nine 
years ago.

The survey also revealed stubborn misconceptions held by teachers about the 
background of those pupils who did gain entry to Oxbridge, with the majority of 
those who responded underestimating the success rate of state school 
applicants, many by a wide margin.

“We know how important teachers are in shaping young people’s aspirations 
which is why we run teacher summer schools at Oxford and Cambridge,” said Sir 
Peter Lampl, the Sutton Trust’s founder and chairman.

“Today’s polling tells us that many state school teachers don’t see Oxbridge 
as a realistic goal for their brightest pupils. The reasons are they don’t 
think they will get in and if they get in they don’t think they will fit in. It 
is vital that the universities step up their outreach activities to address 
teachers’ and students’ misconceptions.”

The research has been published as the deadline for next year’s Oxbridge 
applications looms on 15 October.

The poll of 1,600 primary and secondary school teachers found that little more 
than a fifth said they always advised their brightest students to apply to 
Oxbridge, while 28% said that they usually advised them to.

Of those teachers who didn’t encourage their pupils to apply to Oxbridge, in a 
majority of cases it was because they didn’t advise students on their 
university choices. Of the remainder, nearly a fifth said it was because they 
didn’t think their students would be successful in gaining admission.

But at least one in 20 of the teachers said they wouldn’t advise bright pupils 
to apply because they “didn’t think they would be happy there,” according to 
the survey.

Those with the greatest potential may not be those who have already attained 
the most. We need to seek them out
Louise Richardson, vice chancellor of Oxford University 
Both Oxford and Cambridge have spent heavily in outreach activities in recent 
years, with Oxford spending more on widening access schemes and similar events 
than any other UK university, according to figures from the Office for Fair 
Access.

Dr Samina Khan, Oxford’s director of undergraduate admissions, said tackling 
perceptions about Oxford was a central part of the university’s work with 
teachers. “We are increasingly reaching out to teachers of younger pupils to 
help them understand how best to support talented students from early on. At 
the moment we work with about 2,750 state schools every year to address 
misconceptions about Oxford,” Khan said.

In Oxford’s case the effort has had success: last month it announced that its 
undergraduate intake was made up of nearly 60% of former state school pupils, 
the highest level for decades and an increase on the nearly 56% it admitted in 
2015.

But Louise Richardson, Oxford’s new vice chancellor, has said that the 
university needs to do more in attracting the best and brightest. “In an 
increasingly complex world the best may not be those who look and sound like 
ourselves. They may not be those who naturally think of coming to Oxford. Those 
with the greatest potential may not be those who have already attained the 
most. We need to seek them out,”Richardson said 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2016-01-12-new-oxford-vice-chancellor-calls-agile-university-forefront-global-change>
 after she took up her post earlier this year.

A spokesman for Cambridge said the poll showed the extent of the challenge it 
faced in encouraging more state school students to apply. “Teachers are key 
partners in our work to widen participation. We spend £4.5m a year on access 
measures leading to 190,000 interactions with school learners and teachers,” 
the spokesman said.

Oxford and Cambridge condemned over failure to improve state school access
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/12/oxford-cambridge-state-school-admissions-failure>
Cambridge noted that it runs teacher residential courses alongside summer 
schools with the Sutton Trust, a programme of conferences, college visits and 
departmental events “to advise, support and inspire teachers”, as well as 
liaison officers providing points of contact for teachers in every part of the 
UK.

But a fifth of teachers surveyed thought fewer than 20% of students at Oxford 
and Cambridge were from the state schools, compared with the actual figure of 
around 60%. Only 1% of teachers overestimated the proportion of state school 
students at the two universities, while just one in 20 knew the right 
proportion.

The Sutton Trust – which campaigns on widening access to education – said the 
remaining “significant access gap” between state and privately educated 
students may be down to support and advice offered at schools.

Pupils “from more advantaged educational backgrounds are more likely to 
receive higher quality support and to be able to draw on more relevant forms of 
social and cultural capital”.

A spokesperson for the Department for Education said: “There should be no 
barrier to any child’s ambitions and we are already seeing record numbers of 
young people going to university.

“We know the importance of good careers education and guidance in helping 
young people, whatever their background, make informed choices – whether that 
is going on to the next stage of education, training or work.”
 