
Fifteen years ago, Gordon Brown turned a pupil at a comprehensive school in 
the north-east into a national cause célèbre in a fierce attack on selection 
procedures at Oxford University. Laura Spence, the then chancellor pointed out, 
had the “best A-level qualifications you can have” but had been turned down by 
Magdalen College, Oxford. Her rejection came at the hands of “an interview 
system more reminiscent of an old-boy network than genuine justice for society”.

Spence, who went on to earn five A grade A-Levels, subsequently accepted a 
£35,750 scholarship from Harvard to study biochemistry and graduated from the 
Ivy League university in 2004.

She didn’t look back. Oxford and Cambridge, however, were thrown into 
disarray. The past decade and a half has seen those universities launch a 
ferocious public relations exercise to rescue their reputations. Oxford’s vice 
chancellor, Professor Andrew Hamilton, spoke a few years ago of his institution 
being “passionately committed to attracting talented students whatever their 
circumstances”. He said: “By offering the most generous financial support in 
the country, we have made it more likely that those from under-represented 
socio-economic backgrounds will choose Oxford.”

Oxford and Cambridge condemned over failure to improve state school access
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/12/oxford-cambridge-state-school-admissions-failure>
Cambridge, while resisting the idea of lower admissions criteria for poorer 
pupils, trumpets its £4m a year spending on “outreach” work to identify 
talented pupils from deprived backgrounds.

But now all that talk is put into stark perspective. In its annual report this 
week, the government’s Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission will pick a 
major fight with Oxbridge all over again. And they expect it to make waves.

The commission’s report – likely to be the last under the current “social 
mobility tsar” Alan Milburn – will reveal that, despite an increase of 6% in 
the proportion of state-educated pupils between 2003-04 and 2013-14, 
independently schooled pupils still make up around two-fifths of the intake at 
both Oxford and Cambridge.

It will conclude that to meet their benchmarks for disadvantaged pupils Oxford 
will need to increase the percentage of state school pupils by a quarter (24%) 
and Cambridge by a fifth (18%). And it will, in an unprecedented and 
provocative move, name and shame the worst Oxford and Cambridge colleges 
(Oxbridge colleges have control over admissions of undergraduates).

Some of those colleges, it will say, make less than half of their offers to 
state-educated pupils. Even the best performers in this regard still give a 
quarter or more of their places to the privately educated.

The move has delighted Damien Shannon, who sued St Hugh’s College 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jan/19/oxford-university-st-hughs-sued-student-fees>
, Oxford, in 2013 when, despite winning a postgraduate place on academic merit, 
he was told that without £12,900 to fund living costs he was not welcome. The 
son of a single mother from a council estate in Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, 
Shannon had only applied after a chance meeting with a professor who said he 
was “quite bright and should have a go”. Shannon decided to represent himself 
in a legal action against the college’s extremely expensive and hostile 
barristers on the grounds that it was discriminating against poor pupils.

Despite initially appearing to take a hard line, the college put up the white 
flag and settled out of court. It gave him his place and it reviewed and 
reformed its policies. Shannon is now a high-flying civil servant.

But what a battle. And he recognises just how otherworldly an Oxbridge 
education must seem to many young men and women from disadvantaged backgrounds. 
His first degree was done partly at Salford University, and then the Open 
University. “I loved my time at St Hugh’s and I go back all the time now,” he 
said. “But studying there as an undergraduate would not have occurred to me in 
a million years, no more than living in Buckingham Palace.”

Looking down the list of the worst-performing Oxbridge colleges, Shannon can 
also see a trend. “The decision on admissions is made by the colleges and not 
the faculty for undergraduates,” he said. “I have always thought that was a 
mistake. I don’t know how a college can divorce an academic decision from the 
knowledge that a candidate who comes with resources may be more useful for the 
college in the future.

“I do not think it is any coincidence that the richest colleges are the ones 
who seem minded to accept the richest applicants.”

On Thursday, on publication of its report, the commission will demand more 
action from Oxbridge and, in particular, the greater use of contextual data – 
information on the background of pupils that can be used to judge the merits of 
an applicants’ grades and their predicted A-level grades – to increase the 
quota of pupils from state schools.

The true picture about poorer children accessing Oxbridge is likely to be 
worse than the bald statistics show, however. State schools include grammar 
schools, and those in wealthy catchment areas.

Back in 2012 the business, innovation and skills select committee sought to 
block the appointment of Professor Les Ebdon, vice chancellor of the University 
of Bedfordshire, as director for the Office for Fair Access, which monitors and 
regulates admissions to universities because of his championing of such 
information. The then education secretary, Michael Gove,lobbied privately to 
reject Ebdon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/feb/13/cameron-defeat-university-access-tsar>
, saying he was an advocate of social engineering rather than excellence in 
universities. That is old and unwelcome thinking, the commission will now say.

Shannon, 29, who now gives talks to pupils at Paddington Academy in London on 
attaining a place at Oxbridge, agrees. “Contextual data is not a new idea it 
has just gone out of vogue,” he said. “A man called David Miliband, who went on 
to be foreign secretary, received a place at Oxford University on the basis of 
contextual data. If it was a good idea 30 years ago, it is a good idea today. 
If it was right for David Miliband, then I don’t see why it wouldn’t be right 
for the children from poorer backgrounds today.”

THE WORST OFFENDERS

Colleges with the lowest proportion of acceptances from the state sector 

Christ Church (Oxford) 42.2%

Trinity (Oxford) 44.3%

St Peter’s (Oxford) 47.1%

Robinson (Cambridge) 47.4%

University College (Oxford) 48.3%
 