
Every year, around this time, the admissions process at the elite universities 
of Oxford and Cambridge gets underway. Every year, concerns are raised about 
access for students from “non-traditional backgrounds” (only in Oxbridge could 
being a member of an ethnic minority, being from a working-class background or 
having attended a state school be described as “non-traditional” – as if this 
were something quirky, deviant and modern). Hands are wrung and bucks are 
passed. Every year, dedicated teams of students and staff make valiant attempts 
to “bust stereotypes”.

But in this case, the stereotypes are (still) not so far from the truth. The 
awkward fact is that the proportion of students from state school backgrounds 
at Oxbridge is still nowhere near in line with the proportions in the general 
population. In May, the Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/27/oxbridge-state-school-numbers-falling>
 that although only 7% of British children attend fee-paying schools, students 
from private schools make up 39% of Cambridge undergraduates (at Oxford, the 
figure is 43.2%). And state school admissions to Cambridge dropped by nearly 
two percentage points this year.

Most academics recognise that this is a bad thing, but see little that they 
can do about it. They are operating within a system that increasingly 
constrains their possibilities. Private school students obtain higher grades, 
on average, than those in the state sector (it would be pretty embarrassing for 
them if they didn’t, given their greater resources and smaller average class 
sizes). Combined with ever-stricter centralised admissions criteria – at 
Cambridge, for example, the offer made to almost all candidates is now A*AA – 
this can make it difficult to admit representative numbers of state school 
students. Many of those state students who do achieve top grades do not apply 
to places like Oxford or Cambridge – perfectly understandably, given the 
toff-heavy demographics of those universities and the huge burden of debt that 
studying at any UK university now entails.

When systems constrain us, we need to change those systems. But that does not 
mean that there is no action that can be taken from within them, action which 
might serve both to shake oppressive structures and to ameliorate their worst 
effects. This is something that feminists have long understood. In 1694, the
English philosopher Mary Astell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Astell> 
published A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, for the Advancement of Their True 
and Greatest Interest, in which she argued for equal educational opportunities 
for women, and presented a plan for an all-female college where women could 
pursue a life of the mind. Today, three of Cambridge’s 29 colleges are reserved 
for women.

Well, here is another serious proposal: what about a college that only admits 
state school pupils?

Cue gasps, nervous laughter and murmurs of “discrimination” (believe me, I 
have tried this idea out at various high table dinners; it can be a useful way 
to put an end to the faux-agonised discussions that are customary around this 
time of year).

Many of those who would reject the idea of a state school only college as 
“discriminatory” recognise the case for women-only colleges. They recognise 
that women have suffered and continue to suffer important disadvantages 
relative to men, within education as in other fields: women are the victims of 
exclusion and deprivation and domination, constrained by imposed expectations, 
judged as less intelligent and less deserving, and afflicted by manufactured 
deficits of confidence.

The disadvantage suffered by state school students is also real. It is the 
disparity between the situations and experiences of state school pupils and 
those of their independent school counterparts that produces the situation in 
which the numbers studying at elite universities are so radically out of kilter 
with the numbers attending the respective types of school. So what’s the 
difference? The usual objections I’ve encountered fail to supply one: 
“Admissions should be purely on academic merit.” Well, being a woman is not an 
academic merit.

“Some private school students are brilliant, not just privileged.” So are some 
men.

“It’s not their fault if they’re from wealthy backgrounds.” It’s not men’s 
fault that they’re men.

“But some private school students are on full scholarships, while many state 
school students are from very privileged backgrounds.” True – and some men are 
poor and oppressed, whereas some women are rich, privileged and powerful.

If state school kids weren’t in general more disadvantaged than private school 
kids, we wouldn’t have a situation in which the country is run by a cabal of 
Old Etonians (who have typically passed through the finishing schools of 
Oxbridge on their way to the cabinet). It may well be that a state school-only 
college would be over-populated by the products of grammar schools and students 
with educated upper-middle-class parents (at present, colleges are already 
populated by a contingent of such students plus the private school cohort). But 
then, women-only colleges are over-populated by white women from wealthy 
backgrounds. This is a problem all right, but it’s an argument for further 
work, not for the abolition of women’s colleges.

Getting more state school students into Oxbridge is not the answer to economic 
inequality and class privilege, any more than (eventually) getting women into 
those universities was the answer to sexism and the oppression of women. But 
state school-only colleges could be a significant step and statement: a step in 
the direction of more open, more representative institutions; a statement about 
and against the enduring significance of the state/private distinction and the 
pervasively unequal, wasteful, segregated and humanly impoverished form of 
society to which it belongs.
 