
More state school pupils have been offered places at Oxford University than at 
any time in the past 40 years, after it responded toaccusations of social 
exclusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/12/oxbridge-colleges-shamed-disadvantaged-students>
 by investing heavily in outreach projects.

Nearly six in 10 places have been offered to pupils from state schools, up 
from 55.6% of places taken last year. That still leaves about four in 10 places 
for the estimated 7% of British schoolchildren who are educated privately.

Oxford’s head of undergraduate admissions, Dr Samina Khan, said the university 
took diversity “incredibly seriously”.

Although university officials do not yet know how many state school pupils 
will take up places, they expect the final rate to be the highest intake from 
the state sector for decades.

Prof Les Ebdon, director of fair access to higher education, said the figures 
were “good news”. It was, he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, “a result of 
the long-term, sustained outreach work that [Oxford] have been doing to attract 
more applications from disadvantaged students”. However, he added that there 
was still more work to do.

Part of the problem, Ebdon said, was that society was less socially mobile 
than it was 40 years ago. “One of the puzzles is how can we restore the 
mobility, and there are theories about that,” he said.

But he said it was “giving the message out that Oxford is a university which 
is open to a wide diversity of people, by getting out there, for example, with 
their summer school programme”.


Oxford says its total spend on outreach across the university and colleges is 
more than £6m a year, and that it spends a further £10m a year on financial 
support for students.

Members of the collegiate university last year took part in more than 3,000 
outreach activities across the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/20/oxford-college-lady-margaret-hall-scheme-recruit-disadvantaged-students>
 – a near 40% increase on the number that took place in 2011-12 – reaching more 
than 3,400 schools, its spokesperson added.

Commenting on the figures, Khan said: ‘We take our commitment to diversifying 
Oxford incredibly seriously – our work in recent years especially through 
initiatives like ourUNIQ summer school <https://www.uniq.ox.ac.uk/> for state 
school students has been about targeting the students and schools that are most 
underrepresented at Oxford.

“These figures, along with our continuing progress towards our access 
agreement targets for disadvantaged groups of students, are a positive 
indication that all our work is bearing fruit. That we are seeing progress 
during a time of potentially destabilising changes to university fees, school 
curriculum and qualifications is all the more encouraging.”

 