Thrill rating 6/10 
Danger rating 6/10 

Fitness rating 6/10

In a nutshell ...

Surfing the traditional Hawaiian way - none of that strenuous mucking about 
using your arms to paddle for the surf; you work up a rate of knots with a 
lightweight paddle (like a single-blade canoe paddle but with a longer handle) 
and cruise into the waves with ease, as did Hawaiian surfers in days of yore. 
Actually it's a lot harder than it sounds and, as with regular surfing, you'll 
spend far more time falling off at first - but once you have it wired, you'll 
look remarkably cool and elegant as you stand on your 4-metre board and stroke 
out through the shorebreak. It's a great sport for British waters as, with a 
stand-up paddle board, you can have fun in the tiniest of waves.

What's the buzz?

"It's a great option for flat or small days, and when you get it wired you can 
have a lot of fun in bigger surf too," says Martin Connolly, head honcho at 
Discovery Surf School in south Devon and an experienced paddler in the UK and 
Hawaii. "I also use it for keeping in shape and even to explore the local 
coastline and the estuary."

Thrill a minute?

Your first session will last a couple of hours and will be as exhausting as it 
is thrilling. You'll pick up the basics of standing on a stationary board and 
getting it moving with your paddle. With any luck, by the second session you'll 
be paddling into your first tiddly waves and, small as they may be, there's a 
real buzz to gliding smoothly down the face of them thanks to your skilled 
(ahem) paddling.

Adrenaline peak

The thrill factor comes all at once as you feel your paddle strokes being 
matched by the speed of the swell, then find yourself being caressed into the 
smooth, inviting face of a wave. Succeed in pulling off a turn to ride along 
the wave face and the sense of excitement and achievement is complete - but 
that's easier said than done. You'll need a rock-solid stance on the board and 
a deft lean of the upper body into the turn -if you're really cool, let your 
paddle blade scythe into the wave face to make your turn look even more stylish.

Where to do it

The best-established UK paddle surfing school is the Discovery Surf School at 
Bigbury. The variety of wave conditions there gives everyone from total novices 
to experienced surfers looking for a new wave-riding challenge the chance to 
try out the sport.

Who can do it?

So far, most of Discovery's clients have been experienced surfers, but that's 
not to say that non-surfers shouldn't give it a go. "Coming to the sport 
without any preconceptions can be an advantage," says Connolly. "Anyone who is 
fit and a good swimmer, kids especially, should be able to pick it up."

 What to take

All surf schools will provide you with a board and paddle. If you have your 
own wetsuit that's great, if not, surf schools will provide one.

Typical prices

Lessons with Discovery cost £35 an hour, all equipment included. For £20, 
experienced surfers can hire a board and paddle for two hours.

Impress your pals

While top surfers such as Hawaii's Laird Hamilton take on 12-metre waves on 
their stand-up paddle boards, it's not solely a macho thing - Sheryl Crow, 
Darryl Hannah and now Jennifer Aniston have all apparently got the stand-up bug.

· Alf Alderson is author of the award-winning Surfing - a Beginner's Manual 
(John Wiley, £12.95)

YouTube searchwords 'SUP technique'

Good links

discoverysurf.com <http://www.discoverysurf.com>

supsurfmag.com <http://www.supsurfmag.com>

standuppaddlesurf.co.uk <http://www.standuppaddlesurf.co.uk>


Board meeting: your other surfing options

Stand-up paddle boards are just the latest resurgence on the ever- growing 
surf scene. Here are a few more wave-riding options ...

Shortboard
 The standard board for high-performance surfing, varying in length from 
around 5ft 6in to 6ft 3in (surfboards almost always come in imperial units). 
The most common designs will have a pointed nose and three fins, with varying 
tail shapes and bottom designs.

Mini-mal
 Longer, more rounded boards of around 7ft 6in which are good for learning on. 
Mini-mals are also often used by experienced older surfers, since they pick up 
waves more easily and are easier to ride in smaller surf, making them good for 
UK conditions.

Longboard
 As the name suggests, a board over 9ft long which allows for a more classic, 
smooth and flowing style of surfing, as well as moves such as "walking the 
board" and the famous "hang five" and "hang 10" (five and 10 toes respectively 
over the nose of the board while riding a wave - the latter is a very skilled 
and difficult move). Longboarding has undergone a huge worldwide resurgence in 
recent years.

Boogie boarding
 Designed for riding on your belly, boogie boards allow experienced riders to 
perform amazing moves in the most challenging waves since you don't have to 
stand up and balance. If you haven't got the time or skill for real surfing, 
boogie boarding is the obvious option - but be ready for endless looks of 
disdain (and worse) from "real" surfers.
 