
Monty Panesar has survived unscathed his tour of hell. Remember that one? It 
was a tour when he was bracing himself for perpetual abuse from Australian 
crowds, an underlying - occasionally quite blatant - racism, a febrile refusal 
to accept that Panesar was potentially England's most exciting spin bowler for 
a generation.

There were many shrewd judges - South Africa's captain Graeme Smith among them 
- who suspected that Panesar was in for a rissoling - an Australian term, not 
particularly pleasant. Eccentric left-arm spinners were dead meat in Australia. 
History told us so. Just remember Phil Tufnell: "Tufnell: we're building an 
idiot, lend us your brain?" Add soulful eyes, an unshaven beard and an 
unworldly aura and a rubbishing was assumed to be inevitable.

So what happened? In the words of the contender for the most boring newspaper 
headline of all time: "Small earthquake in Chile - not many dead." As Panesar 
struggled, not for the first time, to control Australia's batsmen (well, let's 
be honest, it was the lower middle-order) on the third day of the final Test, 
the taunting once again failed to materialise.

Admittedly, the presence of thousands of England supporters helped. At the end 
of the overs in which Panesar dismissed Andrew Symonds and Shane Warne he 
bounded towards the boundary with rare energy to be treated to a display of 
adulation that would not have embarrassed Freddie Flintoff had Flintoff 
followed a run-a-ball hundred with the first nine wickets. That sort of 
response has communicated an affection that the Australian public has 
recognised - it has stated: "We love this guy, we think he is something 
special, barrack him as much as you want but do not demean him. He is off 
limits. He is one of ours. He cares." And Australia, by and large, has nodded 
in appreciation.

The left-arm spinner Australia has roundly abused in recent years has been 
Ashley Giles, because he refused to adopt the classical style, turning the ball 
past the outside edge from around the wicket. Yesterday Panesar bowled Andrew 
Symonds, drawing him into a lumbering drive, and eventually had Warne stumped 
for 71 - long after he should have had him caught at the wicket, had Aleem Dar 
been on his mettle. "Did you touch it?" Warne was asked afterwards? "I might 
have, I might not have," grinned the Great Man.

Panesar's figures since his call-up for the third Test are nothing special - 
10 wickets at 38. But that did not prevent Philip Dye writing in the Sydney 
Morning Herald: "It's the passion we love and Panesar is showing a passion and 
unbridled joy in the game we haven't seen for a long time." Panesar, supposedly 
the ingenue who Australia would cruelly expose, has earned his right to fight 
another day.
 