
Shane Warne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, who has made no 
secret of his desire to move into coaching eventually, yesterday admitted that 
he gave an impromptu bowling clinic to Monty Panesar at the end of last week's 
fifth Test.

The 24-year-old finger-spinner took a relatively acceptable 10 wickets in his 
three Tests but still had the presence of mind to seek the retiring 
leg-spinner's advice after the 10-wicket defeat in Sydney which completed the 
5-0 whitewash. "He approached me while I was chatting to Freddie Flintoff, 
saying he wanted to ask a few questions about spin bowling," Warne said.

"We spoke for 30 minutes or so and he went away with a few new ideas. I talked 
about having a plan, attitudes towards bowling to different players, field 
placings and bowling from different areas in the crease. A ball can land in the 
same place, but you can get variety by delivering it from a slightly altered 
angle or trajectory. I hope Monty can take something from it."

England's coach Duncan Fletcher has already indicated that he would not rule 
out involving Warne in his set-up, an idea that the Hampshire captain, who 
still has a two-year playing contract at the Rose Bowl, may yet be receptive to.

"There is a big difference between an informal chat, where you wouldn't dream 
of asking for a cent, and being employed," Warne added. "I am not sure what 
Duncan has in mind, whether it is for me to go around the counties or for 
bowlers to come to see me at Hampshire. I want to make sure that cricket stays 
healthy so I would not have any problem with helping in England, New Zealand, 
South Africa or anywhere else. I've helped out England bowlers in the past. I 
am a big believer in players learning from each other, but Australian cricket 
is my priority."

England subsequently denied that Warne has been approached. "We have a 
coaching structure that we are more than happy with," a spokesman added. "But 
clearly he has a wealth of experience and could be a valuable addition to any 
team."
 