
There is a scene in the comedy film The Other Guys where Will Ferrell and Mark 
Wahlberg's characters have an extended argument about who would win a fight 
between a lion and a tuna. "You find yourself in the ocean," Ferrell warns, "a 
20ft wave, I'm assuming it's off the coast of South Africa, coming up against a 
full-grown, 800lb tuna with his 20 or 30 friends. You lose that battle. You 
lose that battle nine times out of 10." You get the gist.

That was me at the start of the 2012 Paralympics, on which I would be 
reporting. I sat in the gorgeous Aquatic Centre and watched the athletes file 
out one by one to their stations: the guy with one leg, another with no arms 
(key, in my experience, for swimming backstroke), someone else rolling on in a 
wheelchair and taking his place alongside a competitor with no immediately 
obvious impairment. So I scanned the line and made a mental wager over who 
would prevail. Invariably I'd have lost my stake.

Everything changed when Ellie Simmonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eleanor-simmonds> raced America's Victoria 
Arlen in the S6 400m freestyle on the first Saturday evening. There's a special 
feeling when you are watching great sport: it convulses through your body in 
unpredictable, sometimes disturbing ways. You make noises that you didn't 
realise you had inside you. Immediately afterwards, I wrote that their 
encounter reminded me of defining clashes between Ali and Frazier, Borg and 
McEnroe. I woke up the next morning and wondered if I might have been carried 
away, but the fog has cleared and I stand by it.

Until this point, I hadn't got Simmonds. She had a couple of gold medals, but 
there were British Paralympians who had won 16 and we didn't care about them. 
There were plenty of our athletes who had a more captivating "story" than she 
had. She was a lovely, modest, warm person, but again that did not make her 
unique in these Games. What I had not appreciated was that she had that 
instinctive flair for drama that all great sportspeople possess. In person she 
is completely irresistible. She could be an overwhelming favourite to win a 
race and it would still be a shock when she came first. As Graham Gooch 
famously said to Ian Botham on one of his comebacks: "Who writes your scripts?"

Oscar Pistorius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> has that 
rare charisma too, but this was not an entirely auspicious Games for South 
Africa's Blade Runner. He won medals, broke world records, but crucially he 
"damaged the brand", in the words of Alastair Campbell. Simmonds represents 
what we expect from Paralympians: wholesome, gracious, pleased-to-get-bronze on 
the rare occasions that she doesn't spank her rivals. When Pistorius huffed, 
sniped and flounced after being overhauled by Brazil's Alan Oliveira in the T44 
200m, he burst a bubble and gave a glimpse of the future: maybe these athletes 
were just as vain and petulant as other sports stars?

While few were prepared to defend Pistorius, his outburst was actually a 
welcome sign of the Paralympics growing up. There was an edge to these Games 
that we have never seen before and that perfectly dovetails with the message 
that we should concentrate on the ability, not the disability, of the 
competitors. They don't expect or want any allowances. Pistorius was judged 
exactly the same way as, say, Wayne Rooney would have been for making a similar 
outburst. This represents epic and unexpected progress.

There is an unseemly side to this maturity, too: many of us were introduced to 
"boosting" at this Paralympics, where competitors with spinal injuries might 
strangle their testicles or sit on a drawing pin to raise their blood pressure 
and improve performances. Two Russian powerlifters were suspended for taking 
human growth hormone and a Georgian tested positive for steroids. More 
scandals, technological bitching and classification irregularities will surely 
follow as the prizes and recognition become bigger.

We can certainly no longer talk patronisingly about Paralympic athletes who 
are just happy to be taking part. British cyclistJody Cundy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jody-cundy>, the world record-holder and 
unbeaten in six years, expressed this emotion with particular eloquence when he 
was disqualified from the C4/5 1km time trial. "I've wasted four fucking years 
of my fucking life," he squealed, hobbling around on his prosthetic racing leg. 
"Do you know what it's like to dedicate four years of your life? I can't even 
express it. There aren't the fucking words." Try telling Cundy, who was born 
with a deformed foot that was amputated when he was three, that it was 
a success just to reach the start line and let us know how many f-bombs you get.

Simmonds and Pistorius were pretty much household names going into the event; 
they will now be joined by Jonnie Peacock,Sarah Storey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sarah-storey>, Hannah Cockcroft and David 
Weir, all of whom made an indelible mark on the national psyche. But it would 
be myopic just to focus on British success, and crowds at the Olympic Park 
showed no inclination to do so. On the night when Mickey Bushell powered to 
gold in the T53 100m, I thought I would never hear a louder cheer. Then 80,000 
people turned as one to a small corner of the infield where the F42 high jump 
was taking place for single-leg amputees. Competitors would reach their mark, 
drop their crutches, bounce a couple of times on their standing leg and then 
hurl themselves over a bar roughly the height of your garden hedge. After an 
almighty ding-dong, with personal bests obliterated, the Fijian beat the Indian 
and the crowd feted the competitors like they were the Beatles at Shea Stadium.

Sometimes it felt like the spectators would get behind anyone. Then George 
Osborne took the stage to make a medal presentation in the Olympic Stadium. 
That dark underbelly again. Now, here's the thing: every second you were at the 
Paralympics you felt like you were ensconced in a parallel Britain that was 
more tolerant, accepting, joyous, even free of litter. That is what made the 
booing of Osborne so powerful. He couldn't dismiss it as a wild-eyed fringe or 
a coordinated assault (the reaction was spontaneous, the moment his doughy face 
appeared on the big screen). It must almost have felt like his conscience 
talking to him.

Will the Paralympics have an effect on the policies of the Coalition? Don't 
bet on it. But for the millions of people who have marvelled at some aspect of 
the Games, it will have exploded and refashioned their view of disability. Now 
that's a legacy.
 