
Alan Oliveira speaks candidly when asked about Oscar Pistorius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius>, the man who described the 
Brazilian's victory over 200m at the London Paralympics as "unfair" and 
"ridiculous". "He tried to take all the shine off my gold medal, but it didn't 
work," says Oliveira. "After the semi-final, when I arrived in the Olympic 
village, everyone was coming up to me and saying: 'You know that Oscar is 
complaining about your blades?' I didn't know that but we knew the regulations 
so we weren't worried, he could complain but we were right. I think he was 
playing mind games to make me nervous or lose my focus, but it didn't work."

Pistorius's comments had the reverse effect: Oliveira was trailing round the 
bend in the T43/44 final by some distance but following a remarkable burst of 
pace he edged past his South African rival on the line to secure a surprise 
win. The eight months that have passed read like a bad movie script that has 
yet to reach a denouement. Instead of debating the legal length of athletes' 
prosthetic legs, Pistorius will soon find himself on trial for the murder of 
his former girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp.

"I was sleeping when I heard about it," says Oliveira. "My coach called me and 
he told me the story, I felt sad, shocked and I couldn't believe it. Now we 
just have to wait, it's not a sporting issue, it's a police issue."

Life after London has been somewhat different for Oliveira. The 21-year-old, 
who had both legs amputated below the knee soon after birth, is now a household 
name in his homeland and has quickly had to adapt to life as a poster boy. He 
will race at the Great City Games in Manchester on Saturday, as will a number 
of high-profile Paralympians including Britain's Jonnie Peacock, but any plans 
to make the transition into able-bodied racing, like Pistorius, have been put 
on hold until after Rio 2016.

"For now I want to focus on the Paralympics, to race in the 200m and the 100m, 
that's the reason I train every day. The Paralympics have so many good 
athletes, look at Jonnie Peacock for example, he is such a great athlete and a 
great person," Oliveira says. "Sometimes I wonder if I could be a national 
qualifier for the Olympics but maybe I could try after Rio. It's just an idea, 
let's see, after Rio we could think about that."

Pistorius's frustration after defeat in the 200m last September was the 
reaction of a man unaccustomed to losing. He apologised for the timing of his 
criticism, which came instantly on the side of the track at the Olympic 
Stadium, but maintains that Oliveira's longer blades increased his stride 
lengths and gave him an unfair advantage, although the Brazilian actually took 
six more steps than Pistorius during the race.

Oliveira, though, is not dwelling on the row. Indeed, when he recalls that 
night last summer, his memories are not shrouded in bitterness, but instead he 
remembers a seminal moment in his career that came four years after first 
running with metal legs.

"When I watch a video of it I still can't describe how it happened," Oliveira 
says. "That night was for me, that was my day and every time I watch it is such 
a rush. I was just relaxed, I was more nervous in Beijing [2008] but at London 
I was well prepared, I wasn't worried about who I was racing against, just 
ready to do my best and that's what I did.

"I can't explain – when I crossed the line and saw that I was in first I just 
had to control myself and not go crazy. London was an unforgettable moment for 
me and for the whole Paralympic movement with everything it represented in the 
world of sport.

"I have to thank God that I don't have legs, otherwise I would be on a farm in 
the countryside, working in the north of Brazil just like another guy. Now I am 
an athlete who gets to travel the world and competes with the best because I 
don't have legs. I have had to work to be the person that I am.

"I am always looking on the bright side. I always think I can inspire young 
people, able-bodied and disabled, and I'm so glad that I can compete in the 
best competitions. I have the right structure in place and my family supports 
me."

He continues: "Paralympic sport has changed a lot here in Brazil. People got 
to know it during London 2012 and I'm recognised more on the streets now. It's 
a lot different for me since London.

"I'm looking forward to Rio and after everything in London I hope it is the 
same here for me – the crowd supporting their home athletes. I'm really looking 
forward to racing in my home country and seeing people cheering for me. It's 
normal that when you win a gold medal that people expect you to win again and I 
will have to be prepared for that."

Oliveira does not believe that Pistorius's murder charge has damaged the image 
of Paralympic sport. However, with the South African having dominated the Games 
both in a sporting and commercial capacity for so many years, the future of the 
Paralympics must undoubtedly undergo a significant period of adjustment.

Pistorius won six gold medals and earned the right to compete at the Olympics 
before Steenkamp's shooting in Pretoria in February. Now, the Paralympic 
movement needs a new figurehead, but Oliveira wants to shape his own path 
rather than follow in the footsteps of an adversary.

"I'm writing my own story – I'm Alan, he's Oscar. It's my history. I still 
have a lot of work to do but if it happens it will be natural. You can't just 
replace someone, it must come with my performance," says Oliveira. "The 
Paralympic movement will go on without Oscar. It was sad and everybody feels 
shocked. But it's not going to stop the Paralympics."
 