
Thrill rating 9/10

Danger rating 9/10

Fitness rating 8/10

In a nutshell ...

Hang out in a glider that looks like a parachute. If you live anywhere near a 
steep escarpment, you'll have seen these brightly coloured fellows soaring and 
swooping (they're not to be confused with the traditional fixed-wing 
hang-gliders). Pilots launch by running down said steep hills, then cruise 
around in the air "looking" for invisible thermal updrafts that allow them to 
gain height. They steer the canopy much like a skydiver steers their parachute.

What's the buzz?

Unlike with gliding, the pilot is totally exposed to the elements. You have a 
great view, and there's always a certain amount of faith involved in launching 
yourself off the precipice. As Pete Bernon, an instructor at Purple Haze 
Paragliding in West Sussex, says, "It's like being Peter Pan. You can't help 
but think happy thoughts as you soar over the countryside, mountains or 
seaside." Experienced paragliders can cover large distances, too - people often 
paraglide from Brighton to Margate in Kent, about 80 miles away.

Thrill a minute? 

"It's the feeling of getting airborne, that moment of weightlessness - there's 
nothing else like it really," Bernon adds. Beginners' lessons at Purple Haze 
usually last all day, with learners progressing through a series of exercises 
that start at the bottom of the hill and work up.

First, flyers learn to inflate the canopy by walking it along the ground and 
steering left and right. The next step is "short hop" flights just above the 
ground while (fingers crossed) maintaining directional control. The lessons 
then move up the hill in stages, with the short hops becoming low-level 
flights, straight at first then with some turns. And after all that, like a 
timid young swan ready to leave the nest, you'll be ready for higher flights 
with controlled takeoffs, turns and spot landings.

Adrenaline peak

Experienced paragliders might like to check out "extreme Alpine speed 
paragliding", a combination of skiing and paragliding that's really beyond 
description - other than to say, search "extreme alpine speed paragliding" on 
YouTube to see a crazy example, subtitled "downhill nutters on paragliders".

Where to do it

Any number of places, provided you can find that all-important hill (plus 
expert guidance if you are anything less than expert yourself). The best spots, 
such as ridges and bluffs, have a constant uplifting wind - although even where 
there aren't any hills from which to get airborne, paragliders can be launched 
from winches on the ground. Paragliders are, of course, very portable, weighing 
10-15kg with the harness, so expert flyers can travel to remote spots to gain a 
stunning bird's-eye view.

Purple Haze doesn't offer one-day introduction courses, believing it safer and 
more effective to run a course over a few days. There are, though, numerous 
other companies that do host one-day tasters, allowing you to learn solo 
flights over short distances.

Who can do it

You must be over 14 to fly (under-18s need permission from parents). There are 
no upper limits on age, but you should be fit, active and have good 
coordination. "It's not a sport you need a lot of stamina for," says Bernon. 
"You really just use your fingertips for the controls."

The sport has changed radically since he started in 1988. "The performance of 
the canopy has improved dramatically - they are all certified now, and if 
anything goes wrong, the canopy will sort itself out and just glide down. When 
people start, we tell them that, literally, a sack of potatoes would fly a 
paraglider. If you put it in a harness and launch it, it will float to the 
bottom of the hill."

The British Paragliding Association's "Flyability" programme helps people with 
disabilities get involved, too.

What to take

Because of the wind-chill factor, flying can get very cold. Layers of clothes, 
loose-fitting trousers, a windproof jacket or a ski suit are a good idea; 
gloves are a must. The BHPA recommends hiking shoes (without lacing hooks) or 
sneakers with ankle supports. As lessons often occur in open fields, take food 
and a vacuum flask of tea, too. Most importantly, says Paul, don't forget your 
sense of humour.

Typical prices

A one-day introduction costs £150. From there, an Elementary Pilot's licence 
is around £500 - plus you'll need equipment that costs £1,000 second-hand or 
£2,400 new. The second stage is a Club Pilot's licence, costing a further £500.

Impress your pals

Polish paragliding champion Ewa Wisnierska got caught in a tornado-like storm 
in Australia this year, and was dragged up to an altitude of 10,000 metres in a 
matter of minutes. She lost conciousness and was encased in ice, yet, 
incredibly, she woke up still airborne an hour later and landed 40 miles away!

YouTube searchwords 'paragliding, preston'

Good links

bhpa.co.uk <http://www.bhpa.co.uk>

paraglidingforum.com <http://www.paraglidingforum.com>

purplehaze.mistral.co.uk <http://www.purplehaze.mistral.co.uk>

paraglide.co.uk <http://www.paraglide.co.uk>

flybubble.co.uk <http://www.flybubble.co.uk>

fly-paragliders.co.uk <http://www.fly-paragliders.co.uk>

Hang-gliding: don't let Del Boy put you off ...

Hang-gliding is the oldest brother of all air sports and one of the bravest, 
with pilots flying at faster speeds than paragliders do. The sport has its 
origins in German pioneer Otto Lilienthal, who developed the first successful 
glider (although just how successful it was is arguable - Otto died after 
falling 17 metres from his glider in 1896).

Thankfully, modern hang-gliders are rather safer - although this is still seen 
as one of the most risky extreme sports to undertake (not helped by the classic 
episode of Only Fools and Horses in which Del has a go, not wanting to appear 
scared, and then flies out of control for more than 12 hours).

The flexible wing design was developed by a Nasa researcher in the 1960s, and 
has been honed over the decades (the wing's shape changes according to the 
pilot's weight shifts, thus controlling the glider's flight). Hang-gliders are 
now made of aluminium or carbon fibre frames, with fabric or plastic coverings 
and improved handling and stability.

Hang-glider pilots launch on foot, running down the face of a hill or off the 
end of a cliff into the wind. The pilot then settles into a harness that looks 
something like a sleeping bag (it gets quite cold up there) and controls the 
glider by shifting his/her weight around. A hang-glider is more difficult to 
control than a paraglider, but does have a much better "glide ratio", so 
there's more time to figure out where you're going to land.

Learning requires around 10 days of lessons with a qualified instructor and, 
depending on the school, can cost a whopping £900 - plus equipment (harness, 
helmet and flying suit).

bhpa.co.uk/hangglide/index.php <http://www.bhpa.co.uk/hangglide/index.php>
 