
The International Paralympic Committee maintained on Sunday night that the 
shock new T43/44 Paralympic 200m champion, Alan Oliveira, who beat the poster 
boyOscar Pistorius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius>, had 
broken no rules.

After Oliveira stunned Pistorius in the final 30 metres of a race the South 
African had never lost at a major championships, Pistorius accused the 
Brazilian of running on blades that were too long and made the race unfair. 
"Not taking away from Alan's performance, he's a great athlete, but these guys 
are a lot taller and you can't compete [with the] stride length. You saw how 
far he came back. We aren't racing a fair race. I gave it my best."

Pistorius said he had been raising the issue with the IPC for "several weeks" 
and also named Blake Leeper, who took bronze, as another rival whose blades 
were too long. He said that their blades elevated their knees to four inches 
above their natural height and lengthened their stride patterns. Pistorius 
claimed their times were "ridiculous", despite the fact that the world record 
he set on Saturday night was 0.15 seconds faster than Oliveira's winning time 
of 21.45sec.

The IPC said Oliveira's blades and those of the American Leeper were well 
within the legal length.

A spokesman for the IPC said: "There is a rule in place regarding the length 
of the blades which is determined by a formula based on the height and dynamics 
of the athlete. All athletes were measured today prior to competition by a 
classifier and all were approved for competition."

Later the IPC said it would convene a meeting between Pistorius's camp and its 
chief medical officer, Peter van de Vliet, to discuss the South African's 
concerns "without the emotion of tonight's race".

A calmer Pistorius added: "I'd just like to congratulate Alan. I shook his 
hand outside on the track. He did a great performance tonight and I wish him 
the best and my focus is going to be on my upcoming races. I wasn't able to 
defend my title in the 200m but hopefully I'll be able to do so on the 400m and 
maybe, with a bit of luck, the 100m."

Oliveira, who lost his legs at the age of two months, shocked a capacity crowd 
when he stormed past Pistorius with 30m to go and won in 21.45sec. He said he 
was "disappointed" with the claims from Pistorius. Using tactics usually 
employed to devastating effect by the South African, Oliveira had tracked 
Pistorius round the bend and ran him down on the straight to win by 
seven-hundredths of a second amid gasps from the crowd.

Pistorius had previously praised the fact that Paralympic fields are getting 
stronger but he was undone by one of the young guns who are now looking to 
shoot him down. The South African, who is the first double amputee to compete 
on the track at both the Olympics andParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>, had appeared to be in the form 
of his life during a heat on Saturday night in which he broke a world record he 
had set in 2007. The "Blade Runner" waved to the crowd as he came out to a huge 
roar and a blaze of flashes but looked nervous before the start.

There was none of Usain Bolt's braggadocio or horseplay. Afterwards he 
appeared disbelieving. "I think Alan's a great athlete but … I run just over 10 
metres per second, I don't know how you can come back, watching the replay, 
from eight metres behind on the 100 to win. It's absolutely ridiculous."

At the start the athletes were forced to wait in the call room for an extra 
half an hour as the schedule overran amid endless medal ceremonies.

Before the race Pistorius said it was "great to have rivals in the sport 
evolving". But his comments after being beaten did not appear to match his 
pre-race sentiments, as he urged the IPC to look into the issue. Just as it was 
the depth of talent in the 100m and 200m Olympic fields that made those races 
iconic, and not simply Bolt's performances in winning them, so the same is true 
for Pistorius's emerging rivals in the Paralympic sprints.

But instead of recognising that fact, Pistorius went on the offensive. 
Oliveira said he believed it was a deliberate tactic to unsettle him before the 
race.

"Pistorius is a great athlete. The interview when he said my blades were too 
big, he was bothered by the time I had in the semi-finals and wanted to get to 
me with this polemic. But it did not work. I don't know with whom he's picking 
a fight, it's not with me," he said.

"For me he is a really great idol. And to hear that coming from a really great 
idol is difficult."

Oliveira – who said he was inspired by his family, his girlfriend and "the 
whole Brazilian people" – put his victory down to training and hard work. 
Pistorius has long said he views the Olympic and Paralympic Games as equals. 
But it is the size and fervour of the crowds in London's Olympic Stadium that 
is proving his point. When he broke the world record in the heats on Saturday 
night, he brought the house down. The cheers from the Olympic Stadium mingled 
with those of the Aquatics Centre, where Ellie Simmonds was writing her own 
chapter in the history of this remarkable summer.

On Sunday, in front of another capacity crowd of 80,000 fanatical spectators, 
the cheers for Pistorius were – if anything – even louder. Oliveira remarked 
afterwards on the contrast between the huge cheers at the start for Pistorius, 
who has done so much already to break down the barriers between disabled and 
non-disabled sport, and the silence when his name was announced. It was a 
different story at the finish.

The night brought to mind some of the biggest evenings in the stadium during 
the Olympics, where anticipation of hoped-for homegrown success from David Weir 
mingled with the excitement of seeing a genuine global star. What they got was 
the biggest shock of either Games to date.

The pair will renew their rivalry in the T43/44 400m and the 100m, where they 
will also face the British world record holder Jonnie Peacock.
 