
Carlton has hired the most powerful public relations firm in the City in an 
emergency attempt to save Michael Green's job as chairman of the merged ITV.

Alan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> and his PR agency 
Brunswick were called in by Carlton's board at the weekend to help the TV 
company spin its way out of the shareholder revolt that is threatening to stop 
Mr Green becoming the ITV chairman.

Eight shareholders, led by Fidelity's "quiet assassin" Anthony Bolton, have 
demanded Mr Green goes by noon tomorrow but the Carlton chairman is defiantly 
refusing to go and believes he can cut a deal to save his position in the short 
term at least.

Mr Parker, the 46-year-old multimillionaire son of former British Rail 
chairman Sir Peter Parker, has gained near-legendary status in the City in the 
17 years since he founded Brunswick, which he majority owns.

He has built up a formidable network of contacts across the nation's biggest 
blue-chip companies and banks and maintains hawk-like interest in the running 
of his clients' accounts.

When fighting to retain the British Airways account last year, Mr Parker is 
believed to have called the airline's chiefs on a daily basis.

Despite long-term speculation that he wants to sell up - with Chime chairman 
Lord Tim Bell touted as a buyer - Mr Parker has regularly denied Brunswick is 
on the market.

Carlton has brought Mr Parker on board in addition to its usual City PR firm, 
Finsbury, and will be battling to make sure Mr Green's reputation - battered by 
the ferocity of the shareholder revolt - emerges intact.

Andrew Garfield, the former financial editor of the Independent, is leading 
the Brunswick team and Mr Parker is thought to have advised Mr Green personally 
over the weekend.

Mr Parker's agency advises about a quarter of the FTSE's top 100 firms and is 
regularly hired to deal with corporate image crises or "brand recovery" as it 
is known in the trade.

Brunswick advised communications group Marconi, which was annihilated by the 
economic downturn, but then lost the account. Abbey National and Cable & 
Wireless also walked.

However, the PR firm retained the prestigious British Airways business after 
the airline's business suffered in the wake of September 11.

Marks & Spencer - which has turned around its ailing business and modernised 
its image - BT and the Bank of Scotland have also appeared on Brunswick's 
client list.

Last month Brunswick was cleared of leaking market-sensitive information that 
forced House of Fraser group to reveal its interim figures almost a week early

Helping Mr Green cling on to his £730,000-a-year job will undoubtedly be one 
of the toughest tasks the agency has taken on.

Mr Green's position looks shakier by the hour as it emerges more shareholders 
are backing the rogue eight who demanded he step down on Friday.

They represent 36% of the stock in the company but Standard Life - one of the 
eight - today claimed it had support from shareholders representing as much as 
50%.

All eyes are now on Granada, which is holding a board meeting tonight. If it 
comes out in support of the shareholders' revolt, Mr Green has no chance of 
survival.

If it equivocates in its statement, Mr Green may have some time to cut a more 
acceptable deal and Mr Parker's task will become a face-saving exercise.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857
 