
Federal parliament will begin on a sombre note on Monday as MPs and senators 
pause to remember the late prime ministerMalcolm Fraser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-fraser>.


Parliamentarians are returning to Canberra for the final week of sittings 
before the government delivers its second budget in May, but normal business 
will be suspended on Monday after both houses consider condolence motions.

The mark of respect for Australia’s 22nd prime minister means the government’s 
push for the Senate to pass its mandatory data retention laws will be delayed 
until at least Tuesday.

The House of Representatives will meet at 10am on Monday, when about four 
speeches are expected from each side of politics in honour of Fraser,who died 
on Friday at the age of 84 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/20/malcolm-fraser-dies-aged-84>
 after a brief illness.

Fraser entered the prime ministership in highly controversial circumstances in 
1975 when the then governor general John Kerr dismissed Gough Whitlam’s Labor 
government, but won three elections before his defeat to the ALP’s Bob Hawke in 
1983.

Fraser remained in the public spotlight as an outspoken advocate for human 
rights and, in recent times, a critic of the direction of the Liberal party he 
once led, particularly over its refugee policies.

The Senate will also consider a condolence motion before adjourning to 
Tuesday, when data retention is likely to be back on the agenda. It is one of 
the main pieces of legislation the government wants to pass before parliament 
rises for a long recess.

The House of Representatives last week voted in favour of the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/19/malcolm-turnbull-says-access-to-journalists-metatdata-a-special-case>
 forcing telcos and internet service providers to store customers’ call logs, 
email recipients and other metadata for two years.

It followed a deal between the Coalition and Labor to amend the law to require 
police and government agencies toseek a warrant to access journalists’ metadata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/19/australias-new-improved-data-retention-laws-how-will-they-work>
, clearing one of the hurdles to bipartisan support.

The fact that agencies will continue to be able to obtain other citizens’ 
metadata without a warrant will be raised by Greens senators and the Liberal 
Democratic crossbencher David Leyonhjelm during the Senate debate.

Labor will face the awkward situation of having to vote on a series of 
amendments moved by the Senate crossbench designed to enshrine greater 
safeguards.

The opposition is expected to hold firm on the deal it did with the prime 
minister,Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, 
although some senators could choose to use their speeches to raise general 
concerns and call for greater oversight of security agencies.

Parliament is due to rise on Thursday and not return until the treasurer, Joe 
Hockey, hands down his second budget on 12 May.

The Senate has blocked or held up significant policy decisions that were part 
of the poorly received 2014 budget, including university fee deregulation and 
pension changes, while the government has dropped contentious elements such as 
the proposed Medicare co-payment.

Abbott is likely to face further scrutiny in parliament this week about the 
budget strategy, after he suggested last week that the measures would be 
“almost dull compared to last year” and would include tax cuts for small 
business and a families package.

On Sunday the assistant treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, rejected assertions that 
the prime minister had gone soft on budget repair.

In an interview with Ten’s Bolt Report, Frydenberg said the government had to 
cut spending growth, but $30bn of savings were “stuck in the Senate including 
around $5bn worth of savings that Labor took to the last election”.

He defended planned spending on childcare reform as being “important in terms 
of female workforce participation”.

Labor’s finance spokesman, Tony Burke, said Australia did not have “an 
immediate budget emergency” but was dealing with “a situation where the full 
trajectory, particularly over the 10-year period, is something that needs to be 
addressed”.

“There’s no point doing some massive, immediate fiscal consolidation that just 
hurts consumer confidence and has an ongoing impact on unemployment, which was 
what the government tried to do in the last budget,” Burke told the ABC’s 
Insiders program.

“We need to accurately identify the problem that we have, which is a 10-year 
genuine problem, to make sure that we do turn that around.”

The former Liberal prime minister John Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard> said governments 
should never rest on their laurels on economic reform and he believed Abbott 
could stage a political recovery.

“I don’t doubt for a moment his political recovery skills and I don’t doubt 
for a moment his overall political skills,” he told the ABC.

Howard, who served as prime minister from 1996 to 2007 and was previously 
treasurer in the Fraser government, emphasised the importance of “policy 
consistency” and the need to “isolate your opponent’s weaknesses”.

He suggested the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, was like former Labor leader 
Kim Beazley because people thought he was a “terrific bloke” who did not stand 
for anything.
 