
In 1988, the shock defeat of General Augusto Pinochet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/11/chile.pinochet4> in a referendum 
on his rule of Chile opened the way to elections the following year. Patricio 
Aylwin, who has died aged 97, was thus inaugurated in 1990 as the country’s 
first civilian president since the overthrow and death ofSalvador Allende 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Salvador-Allende> in 1973.

It was Aylwin who led the transition of Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> back to full democratic rule during 
his four years in power, although many on the left criticised him for his 
cautious approach, and for allowing Pinochet and the armed forces to continue 
to exercise considerable influence.

A founding member of the Chilean Christian Democratic party in 1957, Aylwin 
had been opposed to the government of the socialist Allende in the early 1970s. 
In the weeks before the coup by Pinochet and the armed forces in September 
1973, he declared that: “Faced with the choice between a Marxist dictatorship 
and a dictatorship of our armed forces, I would choose the latter.”

However, during his time as president, he set up the national commission for 
truth and reconciliation headed by the juristRaúl Rettig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/may/05/guardianobituaries.chile> to 
investigate the human rights abuses committed during the years of dictatorship. 
He formally apologised on behalf of the Chilean state to the relatives of all 
those who had been tortured and killed in what Aylwin called the “greatest 
tragedy” in the history of Chile.

Aylwin was born in the coastal resort of Viña del Mar, the son of Miguel 
Aylwin Gajardo, a prominent lawyer of mixed Basque and Irish origin, and his 
wife Laura Azócar Alvarez. He followed his father into the legal profession, 
graduating from the University of Chile in the capital, Santiago, in 1943 and 
becoming a professor of law there in 1946.

At the end of that decade he made his first foray into politics, as a member 
of the Falange Nacional, a rightwing grouping. Then in 1957 he helped found the 
Chilean Christian Democratic party, on the lines of the Italian party of that 
name, and soon became its president.

By 1971 he was the leader of the senate, and in this capacity frequently 
opposed the efforts of Allende’s government, elected the previous year, to 
bring about radical change in Chile.

Immediately after the coup of 1973, Aylwin declared that Allende’s government 
had been on the point of “installing a communist dictatorship by force”, and 
that what was needed was a short takeover of power by the Chilean military, 
followed by the installation of a centrist government.

However, Pinochet had other ideas, and when it became obvious he had no 
intention of relinquishing power, Aylwin, who never went into exile, became a 
leading member of those seeking a constitutional exit to rule by the armed 
forces. He was instrumental in the creation of the Group of 24 that brought 
together politicians of different persuasions, and eventually led to the 
Concertacíon de Partidos por la Democracia coalition that was to hold power 
from 1990 onwards.

In 1988 Aylwin was active in the campaign for the “no” vote in the plebiscite 
on the continuation of Pinochet in power, and when that campaign was 
successful, he became the Concertacíon’s candidate for the presidency. In the 
1989 election he won more than 55% of the vote, and was inaugurated in March 
1990.

His period in office saw Chile return to stability both economically and 
politically. But Pinochet remained head of the armed forces, and President 
Aylwin never felt in a strong enough position either to remove him or to change 
the constitution brought in under the general’s rule, or to end the amnesty 
that had been declared for members of the armed forces accused of human rights 
abuses. As a consequence, unlike in neighbouring Argentina, there were no 
trials of high-ranking members of the dictatorship.

Aylwin defended his attitude towards Pinochet, arguing that: “It was better 
for him to continue as commander-in-chief because this obliged him to stay 
within the constitutional framework he himself had created and so reduced the 
risk of any threat of a coup.”

After the end of his term as president in 1994, Aylwin was active in regional 
organisations such as the economic commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean, but no longer played a prominent role in domestic politics. 
Announcing a state funeral for Aylwin, the current president, Michelle 
Bachelet, praised him as someone “who always put unity above differences, and 
enabled Chile to reconstruct a democratic country”.

A devout Catholic, in 1948 Aylwin married Leonor Oyarzún Ivanovic. She 
survives him, along with their three sons and two daughters.

• Patricio Aylwin Azócar, lawyer and politician, born 26 November 1918; died 
19 April 2016
 