
Before the Activate Singapore Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore> on 16-17 
January, Paul Dempsey, president global markets,BBC Worldwide 
<http://www.bbcworldwide.com/>, spoke to us about about what the open internet 
and growth in mobile computing mean for the future of media companies.

Can you tell us a bit about BBC Worldwide Global Markets, and your role within 
the corporation?
Global Markets is the term we use to describe the non-English speaking 
territories of the world. Essentially, it is the whole world less the UK, North 
America and ANZ. Our main business activities are: international distribution 
of finished TV programmes; the sale of TV formats; our network of 34 owned and 
operated BBC branded TV channels; consumer products; and brand licensing. We 
also have a production presence in France, Germany and India making localised 
versions of some of the best known BBC formats.

My job, as president, is to lead all of our business activities in each of 
these 200-plus markets and to find and grow audiences for BBC content. We do 
this through our network of 16 international offices. I also have overall 
responsibility for major sales events such asBBC Worldwide Showcase 
<http://www.bbcworldwideshowcase.com/>, MIPCOM <http://www.mipcom.com/> and 
MIPTV <http://www.miptv.com/>.

How does BBC Worldwide differ from its parent company, the BBC?
BBC Worldwide is the commercial arm of the BBC. We exist to support the BBC 
public service mission and to maximise profits on its behalf. We do this by 
commercialising and showcasing content from the BBC around the world. We are 
the biggest distributor of completed shows outside the US players. We also 
build the reach and reputation of the BBC brand overseas and champion British 
creativity. By maximising the value of BBC intellectual property, we provide 
investment for great new BBC programmes and help keep the licence fee as low as 
possible.

Profit for the year 2012/2013 rose 1% to 156m. How do intend to keep profits 
rising, while still keeping the integrity of the BBC brand?
We are very happy with our track record of delivering growth in profits 
year-on-year. Our strategy for growth is to invest even more into premium TV 
content, build brands in the genres where we enjoy a world class reputation and 
to invest in bbc.com as our primary direct-to-consumer digital service. And 
further investment in content means more and better content for our third party 
partners as well – a virtuous circle.

We see the global markets as a rich source of future growth for us. We know 
audiences all over the world enjoy our shows and with the new focus we are 
putting on these territories, I expect the share of business that we generate 
in the non-English speaking world to increase significantly. The restructuring 
of BBC Worldwide away from separate global operating divisions to geographical 
lines of management will also help to deliver growth. Bringing together our 
sales, channels and digital businesses into integrated regional teams puts 
decision-making closer to our customers and allows us to respond more quickly 
to changing dynamics in different markets – and the markets really are 
different. The restructure also allows us to put more focus on fast-emerging 
markets in the world – particularly Latin America and Asia.

Global Markets takes the format of a television programme, such as The Great 
British Bake Off, and helps produce localised versions. How do you ensure the 
format stays the same?
BBC Worldwide has international format producers who work very closely with 
local broadcasters to develop shows while maintaining the core format points 
and creative vision. This doesn't always mean sticking rigidly to the format. 
Often, we will work with local producers to localise shows in specific 
territories. The ability to have some flexibility to reflect regional mores is 
important in creating successful shows.

On the 23-26 February, BBC Global Markets is hosting the BBC Worldwide 
Showcase in Liverpool. How do you expect such events to be reflected in the 
sales and profits of 2014?
Our Showcase event is a major moment in our annual calendar. Run in the UK 
each year for each of the last 37 years, it is the largest individual TV 
distributor sales market of its kind in the world. We attracted – a record – 
700 of our global TV sales customers to Showcase 2013 and this year we are 
predicting that Showcase will be even bigger and better than ever and are 
anticipating another record attendance.

We generate more than £300m a year in sales of our programmes to third-party 
broadcaster and digital entertainment services. The showcase is fundamental to 
this success.

A focus of the Singapore Activate event is the role of the open internet in 
transforming how companies do business. How can you utilise this change to 
increase profits for BBC Worldwide?
The open internet and growth in mobile computing is the driving force behind 
commercial and cultural change around the world. Media companies willing to 
embrace and lead these changes will be the global brands of the future. The BBC 
has long known this and has led the way in taking its services digital – we 
were first with News Online, first with Radio Online and we led the way with 
digital video on iPlayer in the UK. Our innovation in these areas has led to 
real gain in reach both internationally and domestically.

As content costs continue to increase and content becomes harder and harder to 
miss, media companies must embrace the open internet to survive. Over IP, the 
BBC can be a truly global brand giving audiences direct access to content we 
know they will like.

The internet presents very exciting opportunities for BBC Worldwide in mature 
markets like the UK, North America and Australia; it also allows us to leapfrog 
the traditional linear TV world in other markets, particularly in Africa and 
the Middle East. There are many more mobile phones in Africa than there are TV 
sets, for example. Now that's exciting. The internet challenges us to behave 
more like a startup to find audiences in new ways. To succeed, we have got to 
be more consumer-focused … our consumers are becoming more demanding of what, 
when and how they consume content and we have got to listen to them in every 
market we operate in. It is this last point that I will be addressing at the 
Guardian Activate Summit.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 