
Obama called him simply "this tall guy behind me" today but the 
2.01-metre-tall (6ft 7in) Paul Volcker – after whom the president's new rule to 
curb Wall Street will be named – has an illustrious history at the heart of 
American economic policy-making.

Born in New Jersey in 1927, and educated at Princeton, Harvard and the LSE, he 
served as under-secretary of the Treasury for five years under President Nixon 
at a critical time when the Bretton Woods system of fixed global exchange rates 
was being dismantled – an experience that made him sceptical about the benefits 
of floating currencies.

But it was as the Federal Reserve chairman – the job he was given in 1979 by 
President Carter – that his reputation was sealed. With theUS economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> in crisis, he had the 
unenviable task of squeezing the inflation unleashed by the 1970s oil crises 
out of the economy. He pushed interest rates up to an eye-watering 20% by 1981. 
The policy provoked much protest but was eventually perceived as successful, 
and Ronald Reagan reappointed Volcker.

President Reagan replaced Volcker with Alan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> – who Wall Street dubbed 
"the maestro" – in 1987, because, despite the success of his monetary policies, 
he was sceptical about Reagan's plans to unfetter the financial sector from 
regulation, a cause Greenspan enthusiastically embraced.

Since being ejected from the Fed, Volcker has often been drafted in as a 
steady hand by governments or firms facing a tricky situation. He wrote a 
report on irregularities in the UN's Iraq oil-for-food programme and when the 
disgraced accountancy firm Arthur Andersen was near to collapse after theEnron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/enron> scandal, they hired him as an 
adviser in a failed bid to salvage their reputation.

Obama made him head of his Economic Recovery Advisory Board but Washington 
insiders say he has been largely sidelined ever since, with the president 
listening more to treasury secretary Tim Geithner, and Larry Summers, a veteran 
of the Clinton administration that in effect repealed the Glass-Steagall Act, 
which prevented deposit-taking commercial banks from embarking on risky trading 
activities.

Volcker, however, argued strongly for the reinstatement of the separation 
between commercial and retail banking, telling the New York Times last year: "I 
am not pounding the desk all the time but I am making my point." Yesterday, it 
appeared he had finally won the argument in the White House.

A recent book by a US journalist, Charles Morris, paid tribute to Volcker's 
wisdom by bracketing him together with the famous investors Warren Buffett and 
George Soros as "The Sages". If Obama can get his proposals through Congress, 
the affable economist will have a lasting memorial in the Volcker Rule.
 