
A consortium bid for Severn Trent may have failed recently, but that might not 
be the end of takeover attempts in the sector.

That is the view of analysts at JP Morgan, who said:
 The UK water companies face an uncertain 16 months until the regulator's 
final determinations are published in December 2014. We expect allowed returns 
to fall by 90 basis points in the next review period from 5.1% to 4.2%. 
However, despite the likely reduction in returns, we would not rule out M&A in 
the sector with debt costs low and no immediate risk of the regulator moving to 
a company specific cost of capital.

Leaving any takeover speculation aside, JP Morgan is particularly keen on 
Pennon, up 12.5p at 693.5p, mainly due to its non-water business:
 We upgrade Pennon to overweight from neutral as its waste business offers 
both structural growth and the potential for cyclical upside. Pennon has 
underperformed Severn Trent and United Utilities by 7% and 6% respectively over 
the last year and with signs of improvement in the waste market and greater 
visibility around its energy from waste build programme, we believe it is well 
placed to reverse that underperformance in the second half. 
Overall, markets continued to come under pressure again on fears of an 
imminent attack on Syria, although the concerns eased somewhat as the day 
progressed and discussions were set to begin at the United Nations. A key 
speech from recently installed Bank of England governor Mark Carney seemed to 
leave investors as uncertain as ever despite his attempts to clarify interest 
rate policy. Kathleen Brooks at Forex.com said:
 Carney is trying to tick every box, and the market is questioning whether he 
can deliver everything at the same time. The rise in yields during his speech, 
although moderate, suggest the market does not believe rates will remain low 
until 2016, at least not while the Fed is poised to take its first step on the 
road to normalising monetary policy by potentially tapering next month. 
Carney's problem going forward may be credibility.

Elsewhere, market fears about the Syrian crisis faded slightly and the dollar 
is broadly higher today. US stocks have managed to claw back some gains after 
sharp losses on Tuesday. There is a growing perception that potential Syrian 
risks could be limited. If there is an air attack (and at this stage it is 
still an if), and it is short-term and does not involve ground troops then the 
markets may be soothed. Hence, in the absence of other news it looks like oil 
and gold may have made a temporary top, stocks could be due a mini-recovery and 
the dollar may see an extended period of strength.

So the FTSE 100 finished down 10.91 points at 6430.06, but well off the day's 
low of 6393. With the recent strength in crude - Brent added another 1.4% to 
nearly $116 a barrel - energy companies bucked the downward trend.

Royal Dutch Shell B shares climbed 44p to £22.21, BP was 5.55p better at 
452.65p, BG added 57.5p to 1267.5p, while Tullow Oil rose 8p to £10.26. Petrofac
 edged up 2p to £13.75, a day after the oil services group issued an upbeat 
trading outlook.

But the prospect of higher jet fuel prices continued to hit British Airways 
ownerInternational Airlines Group, down 13.5p at 287p and the biggest faller in 
the FTSE 100 for the second day in a row. Low cost rivaleasyJet fell 22p to 
£12.12.

Legal and General ended 6.7p lower at 187.4p as its shares went ex-dividend.

Miners came under pressure again amid the uncertainty, with Randgold Resources 
off 140p at £51.95 andGlencore Xstrata down 2.85p at 311.35p.

Irish-based Kenmare Resources slumped nearly 0% to 27p after first half 
profits tumbled 85%.

The fall to $6.9m was blamed by the ilmenite and zircon specialist on higher 
operating costs, lower mineral prices and subdued demand. It has completed 
plans to increase production by 50%, and managing director Michael Carvill said:
 With increasing production and the completion of the major investment phase, 
management's focus is now on controlling operating costs, conserving cash and 
de-risking the business. 
But African Barrick Gold added 9.6p to 179.9p after a positive note from 
Nomura, which raised its target price from 155p to 250p.

Finally Oxford BioMedical climbed 23% to 1.74p as the pharmaceutical group 
announced a $1m milestone payment from Pfizer had been triggered, following the 
entry of an antibody therapy into clinical trials.
 