
Harold Wilson blamed the gnomes of Zurich, a disparaging term for Swiss 
bankers, when his economic policies went awry, while John Major pointed the 
finger at currency speculatorGeorge Soros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/george-soros> for wrecking his 
government's finances.

Last week Alan Greenspan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> 
joined the blame game and outed the Germans as responsible for much of the US 
sub-prime crisis and the resulting financial meltdown. Admittedly, the former 
Federal Reserve chairman never actually mentioned the German nation as chief 
culprit. He told the opening day of a US inquiry into the crisis it was big bad 
Europe that played a significant role when it recklessly bought dodgy US 
mortgages without checking to see if the promise of a risk free 10% return was 
too good to be true.

He meant the Germans because 15 years of export success has left them with 
huge unspent savings and a thirst for owning foreign property, even when it was 
packaged as a financial derivative and called a mortgage-backed security. They 
couldn't get enough and are still counting the cost (just ask the four 
pensioners convicted last month of kidnapping their financial adviser after he 
lost them thousands of euros investing in Florida property).

Greenspan's inquisitors dismissed his suggestion that investors, European or 
otherwise, were to blame. Several of the panel, made up of business people and 
representatives of Congress, blamed the 85 year old directly for failing to 
supervise lenders and the many fraudulent brokers who sold billions of dollars 
of home loans. They attacked him, despite his sleight frame and sometimes 
stumbling delivery, for his lax regulation of investment banks and their high 
octane trading. They asked how he came to ignore warnings about the ravenous 
bonus culture on Wall Street and extracted another admission from him that he 
was wrong to believe in the self correcting nature of global capitalism that, 
in his terms, almost made the regulation of global money flows irrelevant.

Yet while all these points are valid, Greenspan was adamant the underlying 
cause of the meltdown lay elsewhere. Not so much the German investor, or even 
the European, but the unstoppable force that is the investor community as a 
whole, much of it participating through what we usually think of as wholly 
benign institutions such as pension funds.

Greenspan was saying that crux of the issue was and is the demand for assets. 
In a telling submission to the committee he said his ability to influence asset 
prices, and in particular the US housing market through short term interest 
rates had largely evaporated by the early part of the decade. Mortgage rates 
were determined by long term interest rates and they were influenced by other 
factors, including the readiness of investors to lend their funds to US banks 
through the purchase of mortgage-backed securities.

But for the time being the securitised market in property has disappeared. So 
the question is where next for investors?

Ask a pension fund, a US college endowment fund or a sovereign wealth fund and 
you are likely to get a similar answer and that is bonds, private equity and 
hedge funds.

A recent report on hedge funds said they were on their way back to 
accumulating $2tr (£1.3tr) in investments by the end of the year and would soon 
regain the $2.7tr they amassed just before the crash.

Private equity <https://www.theguardian.com/business/privateequity>, which was 
equally badly hit by a flight of investors into cash in 2008, is enjoying an 
influx of funds. Bond funds have also swelled. Not as a safe haven, as in the 
past, but for many a route to riches.

Combined, these funds act like a shoal of tuna, roaming the seas in search of 
a ready meal. When they spot easy pickings in the shape of an even larger shoal 
of sardines, they encircle their prey and swoop.

Bill Gross, the smiling Pimco bond fund manager, is the poster boy for today's 
investor.

Gross has gained notoriety for steering his $158bn fund clear of government 
debt issued by the UK, US, Greece and most other European nations. He favours 
Asian markets where there are plenty of young people willing to work for low 
wages and growth is more assured.

In his March newsletter 
<http://www.pimco.com/LeftNav/Featured+Market+Commentary/IO/2010/Investment+Outlook+March+2010+Bill+Gross+Dont+Care.htm>
 he urged investors to reject promises from Bank of England governor Mervyn 
King that the UK economy will make it to the promised land. "Show investors the 
money, not vice-versa. An investor's motto should be, "Don't trust any 
government and verify before you invest," he said.

No doubt Gross will be held up as the root of all evil, much as bankers are 
now, when the next crash comes, but throwing insults at bond fund managers will 
be as fruitless and misplaced as Vince Cable's display of anger at bankers as 
pinstriped Scargills.

The real villains of the piece are the California teacher, the BT engineer and 
the German car worker. They have promised themselves an affluent retirement. 
Even lower paid workers in final salary schemes want a retirement income they 
can only afford if they bet on every rising asset, wherever it appears in the 
world.

These investors, along with the massive oil-rich sovereign wealth funds (think 
of the $330bn Norwegian pension fund and United Arab Emirates $750bn fund), are 
seeking the best returns they can and will stop at almost nothing to win big.

A look at the UK stock market tells us that it is now a meeting place for 
international companies and international investors who through their 
investments speculate as much on commodity prices through UK and Russian mining 
firms as they do on the prospects of bog standard retailers, insurers and 
defence contractors.

Investors are creating asset bubbles as they move around the globe. Earlier 
this year there were worries about a commodities bubble. Now a bubble in bonds 
is ready to burst. Property is also on the way back.

In the early 1990s it took property prices six years to begin growing again 
after the recession and 10 years to recover their losses. This time they 
declined for 18 months at most and in London are racing back to bubble-like 
levels, despite this recession being the worst for 60 years.

Why is the California teacher at fault? Because they have an asset – a promise 
to pay a fixed and generous retirement package – and instructed fund managers 
to seek the best returns possible to meet a deficit in the pension scheme. 
Whether they understand the implications or not, they have effectively agreed 
to fund managers like Gross shunning their own government's debt in favour of 
richer pickings elsewhere. They agree to fund managers telling employers to 
freeze pay and cut pension contributions to younger workers. They pay lip 
service to corporate governance while they demand extra dividends and asset 
price growth so they can cash-out before retirement.

These savers have racked up trillions of dollars over the last 30 years and 
own much of the wealth created during that period. Their power is vast. They 
own the homes, the stock markets and they lent their cash to the banks, 
governments and companies and as we know to our cost, there were plenty of them.

Now that such savers have lost money in the crash, they are desperate to 
regain their winnings.

Politicians picture savers as if they are down trodden LS Lowry matchstick 
people filing into the local post office to deposit a few coppers. They believe 
them to be a force for good.

But when you ask why Greece is going bankrupt, ask yourself who gives Gross 
his money. Why does he have the power? It is only because greedy western 
investors have told their fund managers to rape and pillage on their behalf to 
fund an otherwise unaffordable retirement.

phillip.inman@theguardian.com

theguardian.com/business/economics 
 