
THE BAD PLACE THAT IT HURTS TO THINK ABOUT

Peering through the cobwebbed peephole in the floor of its King's Cross 
crawlspace, squinting down into the brightly-lit spaces below where the 
Guardian's ace platoons of eminent soya-latte-quaffing, retro-trainer-swanking, 
quill-flourishing proper journalists compose their daily 5,000 words on fancy 
handbag-blah or five great new knit your own yoghurt patterns or anything 
involving the words iPad, Twitter and Jeremy Clarkson repeated incessantly, the 
Fiver has over the years picked up a few tips.

Mainly that it is important to take an overview and to see the bigger picture, 
particularly when that bigger picture can be illustrated with a large 
photograph of a handbag, or Jeremy Clarkson. It is an approach the Fiver found 
itself adopting only today while trying to digest the shock news that cheerful, 
microphone-warbling Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina has not-quite-announced 
that he might be willing to go and play for Manchester United due to a recent 
lack of what it is now fashionable to refer to as "prizes".

"I think it's hard for me to come back to Spain to play. I think my place is 
in England – and right now that is with Liverpool," Reina said today on Spanish 
radio station Onda Cero, bringing you goalkeeper wiffle seven days a week that 
was the travel, this is REO Speedwagon.

"Edwin van der Sar is hanging up his gloves and people say that Arsenal are 
looking. I can't do or say anything; I renewed my contract with Liverpool last 
year. But what a player wants, logically, is to challenge for titles."

This is shocking news indeed for the north-west's most renascent 
still-secretly-big super-giant. To lose one high-class first choice Spaniard 
might simply be unfortunate. To lose two looks like carelessness, particularly 
when one of them wants to go to The Bad Place That It Hurts To Think About up 
the road. "We used to fight to be among the top teams and to be in [Big Cup]," 
cheerful Pepe added, taking out an aloe vera-infused super-soft scented man 
fluid tissue. "But sadly in the last two years that has not been the case."

All of which does seem like another brewing mini-crisis for Liverpool's latest 
bigger-picture new era under King "Kenny" Dalglish. And this is a club that 
seems to trade in new eras more than most. The Fiver recalls all too clearly 
the furious bit-part cast-of-thousands era of Gerard Houllier, the 
Hispanic-rage era of Rafa Benitez and, more recently, the less successful 
heavily-tattooed-bald-men era of nice Roy Hodgson.

As a high-class and also strikingly bald Spaniard, Reina was perhaps the one 
man who might have provided a natural bridge with the new era of giddy, 
leaping, Sammy-Lee-air-punching hope under Dalglish. Or, of course, on the 
other hand he could simply flounce off to Old Trafford.

It's not much of a silver lining but the Fiver suspects the fine foam padding 
in the elbows of the standard replica goalkeeper shirt does probably make it 
slightly more flammable.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

"Francis [Jeffers] is an excellent player and someone we think will score 
goals in the Scottish Premier League" — Motherwell manager Stuart McCall hails 
a man who has scored 34 league goals in 190 matches ... and delivers a damning 
indictment of the SPL in the process.

DOUBLE YOUR MONEY WITH BLUE SQUARE!

Open an account with online bookies Blue Square, placing a bet of at least £5 
and they'll give you a free £10 bet, win or lose! (Terms Apply) Register now. 
<http://bit.ly/elKwyX>

TALKSPORT WANTS ME BABY!

As the Fiver understands it from his recent waaahfest on TalkSport, Richard 
Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> is something of a 
Human League figure for broadcasters, and Gabby Logan, Kelly Cates, Alan 
Hansen, Alan Shearer, Terry Wogan and both of the Lumiere Borthers were all 
working as waitresses in a cocktail bar when he met them, picked them out, 
shook them up, turned them around and turned them into something new.

So we should not be surprised that this most seminal of anchors has wangled a 
new job for himself just two weeks after resigning from Sky. "TalkSport ... 
TalkSport wants me ... TALKSPORT WANTS ME BABY!" he may well be crooning at 
this very moment, possibly as a droolingAndy Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> attempts to persuade a new 
female colleague to tuck in his mic so he can sing along.

Actually, tucking in mics is not Gray's bag any more: now he's all about 
turfing out Mikes. For Keys and Gray are to become the new hosts of Talksport 
mid-morning rantathon, which has hitherto involved Mike Parry and Mike Graham 
fulminating against everything from political correctness gone mad to political 
correctness gone mad.

"I can't tell you how excited I am about joining the tAlkSpOrT team," 
blathered Gray. "This is the start of something new and exciting for Andy and 
myself," covered Keys two weeks after apologising to Sian Massey on behalf of 
his mucky mucker, who wasn't man enough to do it himself.

"This continues our commitment to investing in top talent," boomed Talksport 
wonk Moz Dee before returning to the subject of Keys and Gray: "The events of 
the last couple of weeks have been a lesson and have changed them," claimed 
Dee, who has cannily scheduled the debut show for the smashing pair on St 
Valentine's Day.

FIVER LETTERS 

"May I be the 1,057th pedant to respond to Matty Weir's comment in yesterday's 
Fiver ('70s ad producers were happy to derive cheap humour from stereotyping 
Mexicans long before Richard Hammond was even a twinkle in his parents' eyes') 
by pointing out that Hammond was born in 1969. Presuming of course a Mexican 
Terminator didn't go back before Hammond was born in an effort to find his Mum 
To-Keel-Her (To Kill Her/Tequila)" — Rob Jacks.

"I can't believe so much media attention is being paid to Fernando Torres and 
his loss of form, when the answer is staring us all in the face. It's his hair. 
His moping and ineffectual performances began just in time for the World Cup, 
which took place just after he substituted his dodgy blonde locks for a more 
serious brunette do" — Daniel Kennedy.

"If the Fiver wants to feel less irritated by the phrase 'pass and move' 
(yesterday's Fiver) it should let go of the fistful of complacently chuntering 
pundit collar and take a trip to the odd League One or Two ground where they 
will see that the alternative is actually the mis-place pass and don't move 
philosophy. And it happens quite a lot" — Andy Birbeck.

Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com <>. And if you've nothing better 
to do you can alsotweet the Fiver <http://twitter.com/TheFiver>.

BITS AND BOBS 

Only two months after his failed attempt to scale the Eastlands walls to find 
a club that plays football where the sun shines and people dance the rhumba, 
Carlos Tevez is in love with Manchester City again. "I don't think there is 
anyone who loves the shirt more than me. I show that in every game I play," 
cheered Tevez.

Ledley King has undergone groin-gah surgery in Germany after concerns that he 
may lose his title of most-knacked Spurs defender to Jonathan Woodgate. "Our 
club captain will fly back home later today and is expected to return to 
training in two weeks," droned an optimistic club suit.

And the Queen's Celtic's captain, Scott Brown, a grown man of 25 years, has 
described the yellow card he received for taunting Pope's O'Rangers El Hadji 
Diouf as the "best booking I've had in my life".

STILL WANT MORE?

Unlike Cast and Oasis, playing three-at-the-back may be better now than it was 
in the 90s, writes Jonathan Wilson in this week's tactical lesson inThe Question
 <http://bit.ly/fljwr5>.

Charlie Adam stars as a Holloway prison inmate and the kind of dodgy-looking 
bloke you definitely don't want to stare at when waiting for a bus to Liverpool
in this week's Gallery. <http://bit.ly/hy8tjL>

Being sent to watch Championship football to find English talent was probably 
not what Fabio Capello expected <http://bit.ly/hS0ako> when he took the England 
job, chuckles Kevin McCarra.

SIGN UP TO THE FIVER 

Want your very own copy of our free tea-timely(ish) email sent direct to your 
inbox? Has your regular copy stopped arriving?Click here to sign up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/signup/2010/mar/30/1?CMP=twt_gu>.

WE LIVED THROUGH THATCHER. WHY WOULD WE WANT TO SEE A FILM STARRING MERYL 
STREEP AS HER?
 