
Corey Perry scored two goals and Jonas Hiller made 30 saves as the Anaheim 
Ducks beat Bobby Ryan and the Ottawa Senators 4-1 Sunday for their fourth 
straight victory.

Captain Ryan Getzlaf and Nick Bonino also scored for the Ducks, who were 
Mighty again on a throwback night celebrating the 20th anniversary of the 
franchise's 1993 debut. The Ducks wore their original eggplant-and-teal jerseys 
while racking up a franchise-record 56 shots against the Senators, who lost 
their fourth straight.

Ryan scored his 150th career goal amid boos from the sellout crowd in his 
first game back in Anaheim since the Ducks traded the high-scoring forward last 
summer. Anaheim surpassed its previous club record of 54 shots, set in March 
2009 against Edmonton. Ottawa also set a franchise record for shots allowed, 
surpassing the 51 shots yielded twice before.

The Los Angeles Kings goalie Ben Scrivens made 20 saves for his third career 
shutout, leading LA past theFlorida Panthers 3-0 for their third consecutive 
win. Jordan Nolan had a goal and an assist. Justin Williams and Daniel Carcillo 
also scored for the Kings. Jacob Markstrom had 26 saves for Florida, which has 
lost four of its past five games.

In Manitoba, Al Montoya made 24 saves for his fourth NHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> shutout and Evander Kane scored twice 
as theWinnipeg Jets ended a three-game losing streak with a 3-0 win over the 
New Jersey Devils. Kane opened the scoring early in the second period, carrying 
the puck the length of the ice and banking it off Devils defenseman Andy 
Greene's leg and past goalie Cory Schneider. The goal came after New Jersey 
failed to score on a two-man advantage.

Rob Klinkhammer scored his second goal of the game 22 seconds into the third 
period to help thePhoenix Coyotes down the Carolina Hurricanes 5-3. Shane Doan, 
Mikkel Boedker and Lauri Korpikoski had Phoenix's other goals. Mike Smith made 
31 saves for the Coyotes, who closed a five-game road trip by winning the final 
three. Eric Staal, Riley Nash and Jeff Skinner scored for the Hurricanes.
 