
US drugsmaker Pfizer has raised the stakes in its much-contested quest to buy 
British rivalAstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> by 
lodging a fresh £69bn takeover approach.

The new proposal of £55 a share piles pressure on AstraZeneca's board to enter 
negotiations to create the world's largest pharmaceutical company in the face 
of considerable opposition from politicians and Britain's scientific community.

In a bid to force AstraZeneca to accept what would be the biggest foreign 
takeover of a British company,Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> said the improved offer is "final 
and cannot be increased". It added that it will not make a hostile offer 
directly to AstraZeneca shareholders and will only proceed with an offer with 
the recommendation of the AstraZeneca board.

Pfizer boss Ian Read, who addressed political concerns over the mooted 
takeover in two parliamentary appearances last week, said: "We believe our 
proposal is compelling for AstraZeneca's shareholders and that a 
Pfizer-AstraZeneca combination is in the best interests of all stakeholders. We 
are excited at the opportunity to create a scientific powerhouse, delivering 
great benefits to patients and science in the UK and across the globe. We stand 
by our unprecedented commitments to the UK government."

In an attempt to persuade AstraZeneca investors to force the board to 
negotiate, he flagged the company's apparently implacable opposition to a deal. 
He said he did not believe the "AstraZeneca board is currently prepared to 
recommend a deal at a reasonable price. We remain ready to engage in a 
meaningful dialogue but time for constructive engagement is running out."

The New York-based Viagra maker raised its cash and shares proposal by 15% to 
£55 a share, from £50 a share at the beginning of the month. It raised the cash 
element of the approach – viewed as a significant factor in whether the deal 
will go through – to 45% from 33%, with the rest payable in Pfizer shares. 
AstraZeneca's shares ended last week trading at £48.23.

Pfizer has until 5pm 26 May to lodge a formal offer and meet a "put up or shut 
up" deadline imposed by the Takeover Panel, or walk away for six months.

AstraZeneca chief executive Pascal Soriot told the Guardian last week that 
AstraZeneca's reputation could be damaged by Pfizer's tax avoidance plans, 
which will see Pfizer base the company in the UK in order to keep its cash pile 
from the US taxman. He also raised concerns about the proposed break-up of the 
business, which would see AstraZeneca's assets split between three new Pfizer 
divisions.

In an emotional appeal at parliamentary hearings last week, Soriot said a deal 
could endanger lives by interrupting work on new cancer drugs. "What will we 
tell the person whose father died from lung cancer because one of our medicines 
was delayed – and essentially was delayed because in the meantime our two 
companies were involved in saving tax and saving costs?" But he also 
acknowledged his duty to shareholders, saying the board would have to consider 
a credible bid.

Pfizer wants to move its tax domicile to Britain to cut its tax bill, which 
has sparked controversy in Britain and among US lawmakers. The company has also 
worried British politicians and trade unions with the admission that it would 
cut global research and development spending and jobs.

AstraZeneca has spent the last two weeks talking up its drug pipeline, in 
particular a new generation of cancer treatments that target the body's immune 
system.

A tour of AstraZeneca shareholders by the Pfizer chief executive last week 
left the impression among City institutions that the US group is strongly 
committed to securing a takeover, a view confirmed by the renewed approach on 
Sunday night.

Two of AstraZeneca's top ten shareholders, Sweden's Investor AB with a 4.1% 
stake and Aberdeen Asset Management with a 2.4% holding, had publicly backed 
the board's rejection of Pfizer's advances.

The influential fund manager Neil Woodford, who controls a £350m stake in 
AstraZeneca on behalf of investment firm St James's Place, has also backed the 
firm's fight for independence, prior to the sweetened offer. But other big 
investors want it to start negotiations. Pfizer's Read is thought to have met a 
dozen institutional shareholders in AstraZeneca last week, including two hedge 
funds.

Pfizer is under pressure from the UK government to extend from five years to 
10 years its commitment to keep 20% of the combined research and development 
workforce in Britain.

Meanwhile, British civil servants have begun exploratory talks with the EU 
over amending the terms of the public interest test to include continued 
investment in research and design as grounds on which the government could 
threaten to block the takeover.

Vince Cable's business department is also interested in using the test to 
obtain stronger commitments from Pfizer on jobs and R&D. TheLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party has also said it would 
subject any deal to an amended public interest test if it won the general 
election. Any takeover would be vetted on competition grounds by the European 
commission and regulatory authorities in the US and China, which competition 
lawyers say could take more than a year.

AstraZeneca's chairman, Leif Johansson, has pointed to regulatory 
uncertainties, particularly in China. "We identified a big execution risk," he 
told the Sunday Times. "It could be over a year or more before the transaction 
happens."

Sir Tom McKillop, who ran AstraZeneca from 1999 until 2006 and is a former 
president of the Science Council, became the latest senior industry figure to 
voice serious concerns about the takeover. Writing in the Sunday Times, he 
urged the firm's directors and shareholders to "protect the 'soul' of this 
great business". McKillop oversaw the 1999 merger between Sweden's Astra and 
Britain's Zeneca, which he described as a "genuine merger of equals" that 
"allowed increased investment in R&D, not the reduction that Pfizer proposes".

McKillop said Pfizer and AstraZeneca, by contrast, have "different visions and 
conflicting cultures; it is unlikely that they will make a good fit together". 
He concluded by telling AstraZeneca's directors that they must remember that 
their fiduciary duties extend not just to shareholders, but to the wider 
society – "including the millions of patients hoping for new treatments that 
can only come from a commitment to research."

The Swedish trade unions Unionen, Akademikerföreningen and IF Metall, 
representing workers at AstraZenca's sites in Sweden, echoed concerns voiced by 
British unions Unite and GMB. They said: "Pfizer's historical track record on 
mergers and acquisitions is quite scary.

Takeover after takeover has been followed by redundancies and closures all 
over the world."

It was also reported this weekend that the US drugstore chain Walgreens is 
reportedly preparing to take full control of Britain's biggest chemist,Alliance 
Boots <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>, in a £10.5bn deal. 
It is the latest attempt by a US company to redomicile to Britain to save 
billions in tax. Walgreens already owns 45% of Boots and has an option to buy 
the remaining 55% from next February with a six-month window.
 