
It was hot, the tension was merciless, his team-mate's integrity was being 
questioned - no, none of them is really a valid excuse forpushing over a medic 
and getting sent off <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_00zChO1AZM>, as Andre 
Bikey did last night in the dying minutes of Cameroon's victory over Ghana. It 
was a real pity because Bikey, like his defensive partner Rigobert Song, had 
been superb. His dismissal may not have been as dumb as the senseless handball 
that deprived Claudio Cannigia of a place in the 1990 World Cup final, but, as 
he was escorted from the pitch under a hail of bottles, you can be sure he 
regretted his momentary lapse of reason.

Bikey was conspicuous by his absence from the swimming pool around the 
Cameroonian team hotel this morning, where the players basked in the sun and 
their glorious victory over Ghana - all against a backdrop of a giant board 
displaying the fixtutres and results from the African Cup of Nations; Egypt's 
exhilarating victory over Ivory Coast was noted, but apparently the hotel 
owners hadn't yet been able to bring themselves to fill in the result from the 
semi-final that went before that. Cameroon's sluggishness in the tournament so 
far meant few saw their victory coming, though Geremi chortled to your GU hack: 
"It just goes to show you should never underestimate the spirit of Cameroon - 
that's the thing about indomitable lions: even when they seem to be sleeping, 
they're dangerous."

Cameroon's spirit was indeed immense 
<http://football.theguardian.com/breakingnews/feedstory/0,,-7291043,00.html>, 
but it would be wrong to attribute their win to that alone. In truth, they 
simply played better than the disappointing Ghanaians. Michael Essien performed 
well in the Black Stars' defence but Claude Le Roy's decision to deploy him 
there in the absence of the suspended John Mensah handed the initiative to 
Cameroon, even though the manager strung five across the middle, effectively 
trying to use two men to replace Essien in the centre. But Sulley Muntari had a 
poor game, and Andre Ayew and Quincy Owusu-Abeyie were almost invisible.

Sensing Ghana's uneasiness, Cameroon went for the jugular, frequently pushing 
Achille Emana and Mohamadou Idrissou up alongside Samuel Eto'o and Joseph 
Desiré Job to form a four-man attack. But in a scrappy first half in which only 
Alexandre Song kept enough composure to pick out astute passes, the best 
chances came either from mistakes - Essien's mishit allowing Emana to go close 
with a shot from 20 yards - or set-pieces, Geremi's magnificent 35-yard 
free-kick crashing against the bar.

Junior Agogo was too isolated up front and, besides, does not have a good 
enough touch to hold the ball up and bring others into play with regularity. 
Nevertheless, his work rate and physicality are beyond reproach and as Ghana 
began to gain the ascendancy in the second period he looked menacing. Ish.

Eto'o may not have the boxer's build of Agogo, but he is, obviously, a far 
more effective front pivot. Unable to wriggle free of Essien, he took to 
receiving the ball in deep positions and slipping it through to his fellow 
striker or overlapping midfielders. That's precisely what he did in the 71st 
minute whenteeing up Alain Nkong <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=51PsaVlFJ3M>, 
who though making only his second appearance for his country, finished with 
Eto'o-like finesse.

Ghana battled for an equaliser, Le Roy eventually switching to 4-4-2 and 
restoring Essien to midfield, but Cameroon defended heroically - even Thimothée 
Atouba, whose hesitancy was something Ghana had attempted to exploit at the 
start.

"When you're young you work hard at school so that you can get a good job to 
look after yourself and your family," said Geremi this morning. "You play 
football and dream of making a good living out of it but you know it might 
never happen. But we, who've been lucky enough to make it, know that we now 
have the chance to look after not just ourselves and our families, but to bring 
some joy to our whole country. That's why this final on Sunday is so special 
and why we're so determined to succeed."

Egypt, going for a record sixth title, are determined too, of course. 
"Everyone keeps talking about Ivory Coast and how strong and focused they are, 
but they don't understand how determined we are," Pharoahs striker Amr Zaky 
told me before scoring two goals in last night's semi-final. "The average age 
of our squad is 24 and we're all friends as well as team-mates. Our unity is 
very powerful."

That unity was reflected last night 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xBkP-7XEyFk> in outstanding last-ditch 
defending (particularly from Wael Goma and Hosny Abd Rabou) and, as ever, a 
wonderfully fluid playing style. While the Ivorians relied on explosiveness and 
instinctive brilliance, which they have in abundance, Egypt are more 
methodical. And clinical.

Ivory Coast may have boasted, on paper, the best ever squad assembled by an 
African nation, better even than the Cameroon and Nigeria sides of the 90s. But 
they are not a better team. Their cohesion wasn't helped, of course, by the 
loss of manager Uli Stieleke just before the tournament but it's also true that 
they were let down by some of their most experienced players. Didier Drogba 
brooded rather than battled and, to boot, missed two excellent chances. And 
Kolo Touré's role in Egypt's third goal was comical - with Zaky closing in on 
the box, he charged off in the other direction as if he'd just spotted someone 
trying to steal his car.
 