
The list of leading figures in our national game who believe they were hacked 
by News Corp's News International is growing by the week. It's a deep irony 
that the company which seeks to buy the television platform that broadcasts
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> football 
stands accused by some of the most famous people in football of the most 
egregious unlawful invasions of their privacy.

Phone-hacking cases started with football. Gordon Taylor, the Professional 
Football Association's boss, his former deputy, Mick McGuire, as well as the 
PFA's former in-house lawyer, Joanne Armstrong, were targets. If a player had a 
problem, theNews of the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>
 would be snooping, using the private investigator Glenn Mulcaire – himself an 
ex-footballer.

The football world should speak out against the News Corp bid for BSkyB. The 
build-em-up, knock-em-down relationship between the tabloids and sports stars 
is not inevitable, harmless or fair. BSkyB turns young athletes into stars. In 
turn, those stars help BSkyB sell lucrative satellite packages to fans. And at 
the same time, BSkyB's sister agency, the NoW, tramples over the private lives 
of the players, destroying reputations in order to sell newspapers.

Just look at the story of Paul Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-gascoigne>. The court papers in his 
case claim that the invasion of his privacy was so great it's affected all 
aspects of his health. He is a vulnerable man whose weakness has been exploited.

The former FA boss David Davies was not only of interest to Mulcaire, who was 
jailed in 2007, but also to another detective used by the tabloids, Steve 
Whittamore – convicted in 2005 for breaches of the Data Protection Act.

The former England footballer Sol Campbell was named in the court case 
involving the interior designer Kelly Hoppen. The football promoter Sky Andrew, 
who represents many high-profile players, heard in court allegations that 
Mulcaire passed on personal information to many in the newsroom at the News of 
the World. And the former Sky Sports presenterAndy Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> is up against the News Corp 
machine again, in the case he is bringing with the actor Steve Coogan.

It has been reported that the former England manager Sven-Göran Eriksson is 
considering his options.Footballers were top of the league for the News 
International hackers. If I were David Beckham, Gary Lineker or one of the 
other top football names, I would contact the Metropolitan police to check the 
evidence. They owe it to the next generation of footballers to make sure the 
cycle of abuse is ended, not just toned down for a few months until the 
spotlight moves on.

Big name football players not only make the back and front pages of newspapers 
– they make the business pages and the Sunday supplements. Now that we are 
beginning to understand the full extent of the phone-hacking scandal, how many 
of those stories were obtained through illegal means?

Players' representatives should be speaking out, particularly the PFA. But 
there is a problem. Gordon Taylor is compromised. Taylor settled his own 
phone-hacking case for an alleged £700,000 but it came at a price – a gagging 
clause that forbids him from speaking out. At the time when he should have been 
leading a charge against his members' abusers, Taylor was allowing his silence 
to be bought. The PFA should appoint an independent official to deal with the 
phone-hacking allegations of its members, or it should change its chief 
executive. It should be giving clear advice – in conjunction with the clubs – 
to its members. And it should be working with fans groups to speak out against 
the BSkyB bid.

How can Rupert Murdoch's company be trusted when his staff hacked players' 
phones unlawfully; his son,James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch>, paid the PFA's boss for his 
silence; and those police officers who weren't also being paid by News 
International were too scared to investigate?
 