
General Augusto Pinochet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet> directly 
ordered the 1976 assassination of a Chilean diplomat who was killed in a car 
bomb in Washington DC, according top secret US intelligence documents 
declassified by the Obama administration.

The documents, which were handed to the Chilean president, Michelle Bachelet, 
on Tuesday in Santiago by the US secretary of state, John Kerry, also show that 
the former dictator was so concerned with covering up his role in the murder 
that he planned to assassinate his own head of intelligence, General Manuel 
Contreras.

Manuel Contreras, head of Chile's spy agency under Pinochet, dies aged 86
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/manuel-contreras-head-of-chiles-spy-agency-under-pinochet-dies-aged-86>
Orlando Letelier, a former defence and foreign minister under President 
Salvador Allende, was tortured and incarcerated after Pinochet’s 1973 coup. He 
later fled to the US and worked at the Institute of Policy Studies in 
Washington DC.

Letelier, who had once been Chile’s ambassador to the US, was murdered on 21 
September 1976 by a car bomb planted under the driver’s seat of his vehicle 
just a mile from the White House.

Ronni Moffitt, an American colleague, was also killed in the blast. Her 
husband Michael survived but was badly wounded.

Letelier’s son, Senator Juan Pablo Letelier, confirmed to the Guardian that he 
had received copies of the newly released documents, which are understood to 
include papers from the CIA.


Letelier described reading the declassified documents and discovering a memo 
from George Shultz, who served as secretary of state in the 1980s, to President 
Ronald Reagan.

“[Shultz] informs [the president] that there is a conclusive document from the 
CIA that shows Pinochet ordered the murder of my father. This is concrete 
information about how Pinochet covered up his responsibility,” he said.

According to Letelier, who is among the first to have read the newly released 
documents, they also included evidence that the dictator intended to have his 
own spy chief murdered to cover up his role in the assassination.

 “In his [Pinochet’s] predisposition to defend his position he planned to 
eliminate Manuel Contreras to keep him from talking,” said Senator Letelier in 
an interview with the Mesa Central programme on Tele13 Radio. Asked to clarify, 
Letelier said “physically eliminate”.

Peter Kornbluh, author of The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier of 
Atrocity and Accountability, said the documents “help provide historical 
accountability in the killing of these two wonderful people” and called them 
“the missing documents” in the ongoing efforts to unravel one of the most 
notorious acts of international terrorism in the US capital.


Kornbluh, a senior analyst at the National Security Archives, called for the 
full release of all the intelligence documents on Pinochet’s role in the 
Letelier-Moffitt bombing.


Investigators in the US and Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> 
are poring through the records searching for evidence that CIA officials had 
forewarning but did not stop the assassination plan.

Speculation that the CIA was aware of the plot to kill Letelier is based on 
previously declassified records showing that Manuel Contreras was paid by the 
CIA before the bombing and was in regular contact with top officials at the spy 
agency.


The US eventually sought to extradite Contreras of the murder, but Chile’s 
supreme court blocked the extradition.

Pinochet removed Contreras from his post under US pressure and dismantled and 
replaced the Dina spy agency he had once run. AfterChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> returned to democracy in 1990 
Contreras was indicted in the Letelier case and eventually served seven years 
for the assassination.

Contreras, who died in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/manuel-contreras-head-of-chiles-spy-agency-under-pinochet-dies-aged-86>
, always denied responsibility and blamed the CIA for the bombing

“It is very important that these documents have been declassified,” said the 
Chilean foreign minister, Heraldo Muñoz. “It helps us to clarify a painful 
historical moment for our country.”

 