
Gerrit Cole gave up two hits in six dominant innings and had an RBI in his 
playoff debut as thePittsburgh Pirates beat the St Louis Cardinals 7-1 Friday 
to even their National League division series at a game apiece.

The Atlanta Braves also evened their NL division series at a game apiece after 
beating theLos Angeles Dodgers at home 4-3.

In the American League, the Boston Red Sox took advantage of poor Tampa Bay 
Rays defense in a five-run fourth to beat the Rays 12-2 in Game 1 of their 
division series and theDetroit Tigers held on to beat the Oakland Athletics 3-2 
in their series-opening game.

The Pirates showed poise in their first playoff win since 1992 and St Louis 
looking tentative in the field a role reversal from the Cardinals' 9-1 win in 
the opener against Pittsburgh. Cardinals starter Lance Lynn, who hasn't lasted 
long enough to qualify for the victory in any of his three career playoff 
starts, yielded five runs and seven hits in 4 1-3 innings.

Cole, meanwhile, struck out five batters and walked one. After allowing Carlos 
Beltran's double with one out in the first, he retired 11 straight before 
Yadier Molina led off the fifth with his third career postseason homer.

"I just trusted myself and tried to keep it as simple as I could," he said. 
"You just try and clear you mind after every pitch and just look forward."

Pedro Alvarez homered for the second straight game for the Pirates, who host 
Game three on Sunday.

In Atlanta, Mike Minor pitched six strong innings, Jason Heyward had a two-run 
single and the Braves pulled off some nifty plays in the field to hold off the 
Dodgers. In a postseason already marked by numerous defensive miscues, 
including some shaky plays by the Braves in Game one, Atlanta's defense came 
through by turning three double plays none more crucial than the one Luis 
Avilan started in the seventh to escape the inning with a 2-1 lead intact.

Hanley Ramirez drove in all three runs for the Dodgers, including a two-run 
homer in the eighth. Not taking any chances, the Braves went to closer Craig 
Kimbrel for a rare four-out save. He ended the eighth by retiring Juan Uribe on 
a groundout, then pitched around two walks in the ninth. The best-of-five 
series shifts to Los Angeles on Sunday.

Jon Lester gave up a pair of solo homers to Tampa Bay, but Boston got the lead 
back when the Rays fell apart in the fourth. One ball fell between two 
outfielders, one batter reached safely on a dropped third strike and another 
reached when pitcher Matt Moore was slow to cover first.

By the time it was over, the Red Sox were ahead 5-2 and on their way to the 
early lead in their AL division series. The Red Sox added three more runs to 
chase Moore in the fifth inning, when they sent nine batters to the plate the 
first time in franchise history they have batted around in consecutive innings 
in a postseason game.

In all, Moore was charged with eight runs seven earned on eight hits, two 
walks a hit batter and a wild pitch, striking out four in four 1-3 innings. 
Every Boston starter got a hit and scored a run, the first time a team had done 
that in the Major LeagueBaseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> 
postseason since Lou Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio and the Yankees in the 1936 World 
Series.

In Oakland, California, Max Scherzer struck out 11 over seven dominant innings 
to help give Detroit a 1-0 lead in their AL division series rematch. Scherzer 
retired 16 of his first 18 batters and was nearly untouchable before Yoenis 
Cespedes hit a two-run drive in the seventh for his first career playoff home 
run. The strikeouts were his most in seven postseason starts.

Major League Baseball's lone 20-game winner, Scherzer (21-3) allowed three 
hits and walked two. Miguel Cabrera and Alex Avila each hit first-inning RBI 
singles against 40-year-oldMLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> All-Star 
Bartolo Colon, whose winless streak against the Tigers extended to 10½ years.

• MLB playoff liveblogs at theguardian.com: Red Sox v Rays, Saturday; Dodgers 
v Braves, Sunday
 