
App: PizzaExpress 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pizzaexpress/id440565075?mt=8>

By: PizzaExpress

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone

What is it?

An app to find your nearest PizzaExpress restaurant, book a table, look at the 
menu, add your favourite outlets and even pay your bill.

Who is it by?

You've heard of PizzaExpress haven't you? They're the one with hundreds of 
branches across the UK usually packed with happy families chowing down on pizza 
and dough balls.

What does it promise?

"The PizzaExpress iPhone app makes your PizzaExpress experience even easier 
and even faster."

Is it easy to use?

All the standard facilities (searching for and saving favourite restaurants, 
looking up menus) are simple to use, but there seem to be teething problems 
with the booking process (which itself begs the rhetorical question: who books 
at PizzaExpress?).

I tried to book dinner for my wife and I and our 14-month-old daughter at the 
Hove PizzaExpress on a Friday night for 6.30pm, and the app told me there were 
no available tables. But when we turned up there was plenty of room.
 Pizza Express – consumer app of the week 
The big innovation – paying for your meal via the app – works gloriously. You 
input a code printed on your bill and the app takes you to a PayPal payment 
page, through which you stump up for your American Hot or Leggere. It's done in 
less than a minute if you have good reception, which won't be true for every 
outlet in the UK (although PizzaExpress is rolling-out free Wi-Fi in all its 
restaurants to ensure smooth payments).

I asked the manager whether she welcomed the innovation and she said it was 
fantastic, especially at peak times as it frees up waiting staff and speeds up 
the process for customers at the end of the meal.

I was pleased to see promotional material for the app on every table, as it 
made me feel confident it would work, but I was still left unclear as to what 
to do once I'd paid. In the end I simply called a waiter who quickly checked 
the till before giving me a thumps-up. It is definitely faster than waiting for 
a member of staff to spot you are ready to pay, find a credit card machine and 
bring it to your table – but some clarity on how you get a green light to leave 
would be helpful. Some may miss the human interaction that comes with paying 
your bill in the traditional way.

Is it fun?

Definitely, but this was probably due to the bill-paying technology – a 
novelty that could quickly wear off.

Is it pretty?

The app takes the essence of the company's art nouveau logo and sprinkles it 
throughout, creating an instantly-recognisable theme that the chain's 
decades-long high street presence has conditioned us to find pleasing.

Should you download it?

Pizzaphiles need look no further, and if you're a regular visitor to 
PizzaExpress restaurants it is definitely worth a look, as the ability to pay 
via the app is quick and easy, and the other add-ons (menus, search facilities 
etc) work well. One big oversight, however, is that you have to download any 
offers/discount vouchers from the website before you can use them on the app, 
which seems crazy – and the booking process didn't work for me. Three out of 
five seems fair.
 