
Plans to bring local buses back under public control are to be dealt a blow by 
a ruling that is expected to judge Tyne and Wear’s pioneering attempt to 
regulate its services as unworkable.

In the culmination of a bitter, drawn-out battle between the regional 
authority in Newcastle upon Tyne and private bus firms, an independent board 
could in effect dismiss a scheme to re-regulate buses, warning that the plans 
would potentially leave the authority liable for millions of pounds in 
compensation for operators such asStagecoach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup>.


After a series of hearings this year, the Quality Contract Scheme board 
chaired by thetraffic commissioner 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/traffic-commissioners> for the 
north-east is expected to set out its conclusions as to whether Tyne and Wear’s 
proposals to franchise services and control routes, timetables and fares pass a 
range of public interest and economic tests.

The operators have argued that attempts to take control of routes would be in 
breach of their economic rights and be appropriation of goodwill. The panel is 
likely to decide that Nexus, the region’s transport executive, could face large 
liabilities to compensateStagecoach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup>, Go-Ahead and Arriva for 
loss of business.


The decision, which is expected on Tuesday, could have huge implications for 
city devolution plans at the heart of the chancellor’s vision of a “northern 
powerhouse”. Manchester and other cities have agreed to changes including 
elected mayors in return for control over local financing and transport, with 
buses a focal issue.


Deregulation of bus services outside London was brought in by the Thatcher 
government in the 1980s. Stagecoach and other transport firms have made the 
bulk of their UK profits from such bus services rather than the trains or 
regulated buses they also operate.

Nexus argued it was paying large subsidies to fund unprofitable routes for 
community benefit, while not being allowed to run public services on profitable 
routes under the legislation. Local authorities are also forced by law to 
provide concessionary bus travel to pensioners.

The transport executive claimed re-regulation would save money and result in 
better services. But operators led by Stagecoach, which runs about 40% of bus 
services in Tyne and Wear, claimed the move would mean higher fares, worse 
services and higher taxes.

Richard Collins, a transport specialist at the law firm Bond Dickinson, said: 
“Whatever the ruling, this drawn-out process has demonstrated that the current 
regulatory structure may not be fit for purpose.

“There is more regulation coming down the pipeline, the buses bill, due next 
year. It may be that, whatever the outcome of this process, new forms of 
partnership between operators and local authorities are likely.


“It’s going to create an interesting dynamic: part of the northern powerhouse 
is about devolving decision making to local authorities and it throws up 
challenges for bus operators.”

 