
Plans to bring local buses back under public control have been dealt a blow by 
a ruling over Tyne and Wear’s pioneering attempt to regulate its services.

In the culmination of a bitter, drawn-out battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/02/bus-battle-test-case-tyne-wear-privatisation>
 between the regional authority in Newcastle upon Tyne and private bus firms, 
an independent board has dismissed a scheme to re-regulate buses, judging that 
it does not provide value for money and would have a disproportionate impact on 
bus operators.

After hearings this year, the Quality Contract Scheme board chaired by the 
traffic commissioner 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/traffic-commissioners> for the 
north-east said Tyne and Wear’s proposals to control bus routes, timetables and 
fares would improve services, but would not provide value for money.

The operators had argued that attempts to take control of routes would be in 
breach of their economic rights. The board judged that Nexus, the region’s 
transport executive, would potentially be causing Stagecoach, Go-Ahead andArriva
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> to lose up to £226m in 
business if the scheme went ahead, and that they should be compensated.

We're ignoring the crisis of our most democratic public transport: buses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/24/tory-spending-cuts-public-transport-system-buses-beeching>
The decision could have implications for city devolution plans at the heart of 
the chancellor’s vision of a “northern powerhouse”. Manchester and other cities 
have agreed to changes including elected mayors and control over local 
financing and transport, with buses a key issue.


Bus services outside London were deregulated by the Thatcher government in the 
1980s.Stagecoach <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup> and 
other transport firms have made the bulk of their UK profits from such bus 
services rather than the trains or regulated buses they also operate.

Nexus argued it was paying large subsidies to fund unprofitable routes for 
community benefit, while not being allowed to run public services on profitable 
routes under the legislation. Local authorities are also forced by law to 
provide concessionary bus travel for pensioners.

The transport executive claimed re-regulation would save money and lead to 
better services. But operators led by Stagecoach, which runs about 40% of buses 
in Tyne and Wear, claimed the move would mean higher fares, worse service and 
bigger taxes.

Tobyn Hughes, the managing director of Nexus, said: “We don’t agree with the 
board’s opinion and we don’t agree with the analysis they’ve made. In terms of 
our aspiration for an integrated transport system, with integrated fares and 
democratic accountability for services, that has not changed in any way.”

He said it would continue to push for change, despite the verdict, pointing to 
recent devolution agreements between the government and the north-east. “The 
government supports the right of devolved authorities to manage their transport 
networks in the way they see fit, and that includes bus franchising in this 
area,” he said.

Hughes added: “It means our plans are delayed. As well as improving transport, 
we were trying to stave off the effects of cuts and austerity and the decline 
in services. This delay will mean some of those ill-effects will come about.”

Stagecoach said the decision had clear implications for the government’s plans 
to devolve control of buses to local authorities in the north, warning that the 
forthcoming buses bill must ensure any proposals to franchise bus networks were 
subject to proper safeguards and a transparent public interest test.

Stagecoach’s chief executive, Martin Griffiths, said: “We welcome the review 
board’s confirmation that the core franchising proposal was unaffordable, 
inflexible, high risk and not in the public interest. Tyne and Wear already has 
90% bus customer satisfaction, among the highest levels of bus use in the 
country, and smart ticketing is being introduced across the region. Franchising 
does nothing to build on that successful, high-quality network.”

He urged the regional authority to abandon its franchising plans and work in 
partnership with bus operators.

But Labour said the decision was disappointing. The shadow transport 
secretary, Lilian Greenwood, said: “It puts the needs of shareholders ahead of 
passengers and critically undermines one of George Osborne’s key northern 
powerhouse commitments. We must reverse the decline in bus services outside 
London and it’s clear that the deregulated model has failed. Labour’s 
councillors in the north-east were absolutely right to push for reform in the 
face of appalling abuse and they continue to have our full support.

“Today’s announcement proves once and for all that the current law is not fit 
for purpose and the onus is now on the government to bring forward new 
legislation. It’s now vital that the government does not cave in to pressure 
and duck the need to include radical measures in its forthcoming buses bill.”

The battle has been closely followed across other cities in the north, where 
similar powers are sought over buses, which provide the bulk of public 
transport in the UK.Transport for Greater Manchester 
<http://www.tfgm.com/Pages/default.aspx>’s chief executive, Jon Lamonte, said 
of the decision: “It reinforces the need for new legislation under the buses 
bill. This was always a difficult piece of legislation and this process has 
proved it.”

He added: “There is every indication that we will get central backing that 
will allow the elected mayor to make the right decision.”

Richard Collins, a transport specialist at the law firm Bond Dickinson, said 
the drawn-out battle between bus operators and the regional authority showed up 
problems with the current regulatory structure. “There is more regulation 
coming down the pipeline, the buses bill, due next year. It may be that, 
whatever the outcome of this process, new forms of partnership between 
operators and local authorities are likely,” he said.

“It’s going to create an interesting dynamic: part of the northern powerhouse 
is about devolving decision making to local authorities and it throws up 
challenges for bus operators.”

 