
There are little more than three years until the 2015 deadline to achieve the 
UN's millennium development goals (MDGs). But, without drastic action, they 
look set to become another set of failed promises to the world's poor.

The eight goals, agreed by global leaders in 2000, aim to cut poverty and 
hunger, increase access to education, healthcare and clean water, improve the 
lives of women and children, and reduce the transmission of major diseases.

They also seek to foster links between the public and private sector and 
encourage greater co-operation between countries in the southern hemisphere.

Next week, ministers from rich and poor nations and the heads of multilateral 
institutionswill gather in Busan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
, South Korea, to discuss how aid can be used more effectively to achieve the 
MDGs and drive future global development.

But how can lasting improvements for the poor be achieved? And how can aid be 
used to greater effect?

Participants at a recent roundtable debate, hosted by the Guardian in 
association with the Stars Foundation, which supports local organisations 
working to improve the lives of vulnerable children, acknowledged how complex 
these questions were.

The debate was conducted under the Chatham House rule, which means comments 
can be reported without attribution to allow for a more open discussion.

The roundtable heard how organisations that receive aid are facing increasing 
pressure to prove the money they have received is making a difference. 
"Results" has become the most important word in aid, said one contributor.

Identifiable outcomes

The dilemma then for organisations is whether to focus on the real needs of a 
community, or on projects that are easy to deliver and produce more 
identifiable outcomes.

Neat one- to three-year projects are preferable to donors than longer-term 
ideas where results are not so obvious. But, as one contributor pointed out, 
changing lives can take 25 years, not three.

"To get a school built, I can almost do that by clicking my fingers. People 
want to see immediate results. But if I want to invest £100,000 in part of a 
business that will generate £15,000 a year over 20 years and build 20 schools, 
I can't get people to buy into it because results are not immediate," added the 
contributor.

Another participant pointed to his experience working for an international NGO 
in Colombia. The organisation was supporting a local partner working with a 
community that had been kicked off its land. "We started to work on the project 
in the late 1990s. In 2009, they got their land back. For the first three to 
four years, the relationship was based on solidarity; you couldn't see the 
obvious importance of the work. Ten years later, we got results." He said the 
project was a risk for the organisation because there were no tangible results 
from the project that could be reported back to donors. But it was a risk that 
paid off.

The meeting in Busan – which will build on previous agreements signed in Paris 
in 2005 and in Accra, Ghana, in 2008 – will discuss how similar long-term 
projects could be encouraged, while finding other ways in which aid could be 
better directed and aligned to the needs of recipients.

The Busan conference will also have to deal with the challenge of finding 
consensus between traditional and new development partners, such as the BRICs – 
Brazil, Russia, India and China – which are now themselves aid donors, as well 
as private sector and philanthropic organisations, which are increasingly 
playing a role in funding development.

"Practically, it will be very hard to come out with anything concrete," said 
one contributor to the roundtable debate.

The very notion of discussing the effectiveness of aid can often be 
problematic, the roundtable heard, because it implies that reducing poverty can 
be achieved simply by tweaking delivery methods and attempting to make 
processes more transparent.

"Across Africa there is an unprecedented level of unemployment, and an 
unprecedented level of landlessness and loss of sovereignty. Governments today 
are more responsive and more accountable to the corporations and financial 
institutions of the world than to their citizens," said a contributor. There 
was also criticism of the MDGs, with one participant calling them a "setback 
for progress in Africa" because they have shifted focus from the specific needs 
of a country on to a general set of international targets.

There is no denying that the legacy of international development policies 
imposed by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the 
1980s and 1990s to accelerate growth and ensure debt repayment still lingers in 
poorer states. Structural adjustment programmes, which forced governments to 
cut spending on public services, such as healthcare, privatise state-owned 
industries and open themselves up to global markets, actually slowed down 
development progress in some countries, such as Nigeria.

But there is evidence that some of the damage done is being reversed, the 
roundtable was told. The IMF reported last month that economic growth in 
sub-Saharan Africa will remain on average above 5% this year and reach nearly 
6% in 2012. One participant said some African countries, such as South Africa, 
were expected to soon experience annual growth rates of 8%.

The pressing question would then appear to be how this economic growth 
trickles down to the most vulnerable and how the gap between governments and 
their poorest citizens can be bridged.

Step forward civil society organisations, such as voluntary groups, NGOs, 
trade unions, faith-based organisations, indigenous peoples movements 
and foundations.

"We need to empower civil society to start coming up with solutions themselves 
because they can push these ideas up to the people in power," a participant 
told the roundtable. "The way to do that is different in different parts of the 
world. There is no blanket way to make this happen."

Civil society groups are increasingly becoming a force to be reckoned with; 
they will join governments and donors to participate in negotiations in Busan.

But civil society still faces huge barriers in some countries, which make it 
difficult for organisations to exist that are not backed by the state. The 
roundtable heard that in some nations there was "serious concern" about the 
oppression of organisations that criticise the government. Rwanda and Ethiopia 
were offered as cases in point. While making progress in achieving the MDGs, 
both countries have been criticised for failing to uphold the rights of their 
citizens.

There are also financial constraints, the roundtable was told. Funding from 
international donors to civil society groups can put limits on the scope of 
their work as donors often stipulate how they want their money spent.

More funds that don't come with restrictions on how they are used, accompanied 
by a shift in attitude from donors to place decision-making in the hands of 
local organisations, is one way forward, the roundtable heard.

One participant said that long-term change can only be achieved if local 
organisations are adequately supported. What people need is well-functioning 
local organisations that can work and push for change internally. But the 
international community has not done enough to strengthen these local groups. 
As the participant pointed out: "The power still rests with us. Have we really 
done anything about that or is the dynamic the same?" The participant added 
that local organisations need funds that don't have restrictions on how they 
are spent so they have the power and resources to make their own choices.

Another contributor agreed. "The best solution is when you create an 
[enabling] environment for people in the country."

Funding with restrictions

One participant said research conducted by the institution he represented 
found an alarmingly high number of organisations relied on income that was 
tied. More than half of the 650 organisations in Africa and Asia that were 
questioned said they had no unrestricted funding.

Not only would a higher percentage of unrestricted funds offer organisations 
more flexibility in how they worked, it would give them more ownership of their 
projects, the roundtable was told.

"[The donor community has] spent trillions on aid over the last 50 years. What 
if we had placed just a small part of that amount in endowment funds for NGOs 
locally?" said one contributor.

This may be easier said than done, however. The report on progress towards the 
Paris agreement found that, six years after it was signed, overall, donors had 
not made any progress in further untying aid.

The question is whether this is likely to change any time soon. Many at the 
roundtable thought it unlikely that traditional government-to-government aid 
will become more flexible, at a time when ministers are having to justify aid 
spending to domestic taxpayers because services are being cut at home.

The past 60 years have shown that there are no easy answers or quick wins when 
it comes to improving the lives of the poor. The roundtable heard that it would 
take a major political and cultural shift in thinking to effect real, lasting 
change. But, as one participant said, if Busan can start to address these 
issues we will start to get somewhere, whether the world meets the MDGs or not.

At the table: Roundtable participants

Jonathan Glennie (chair), research fellow, Overseas Development Institute

Firoze Manji, editor-in-chief, Pambazuka News

Astrid Bonfield, chief executive, Diana Princess of Wales Foundation

Georgie Fienberg, international director, AfriKids Ghana

Jaf Shah, UK chief executive officer, Fred Hollows Foundation

Grethe Petersen, country director, Marie Stopes International

David Cutler, director, The Baring Foundation

David Crook, development director, Stars Foundation

Richard Graham, head of international grants, Comic Relief

Rachael Barber, global head of community investment, Barclays

Julian Gore-Booth, chief executive, interim, Stars Foundation

Nik Hartley, chief executive officer, Restless Development

Roy Trivedi, head of civil society, UK Department for International Development

• Roundtable report commissioned by Seven Plus and controlled by the Guardian. 
Discussion hosted to a brief agreed with Stars Foundation. Paid for by Stars 
Foundation. For information on roundtables visit
theguardian.com/sponsored-content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 