
Key points

In a series of exchanges that almost wholly concerned NHS funding, Jeremy 
Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> first went on the 
attack over what he described as “parity of esteem” for mental health services 
and complaints from police over shouldering the burden of NHS bed shortages. 
May said the government was investing more in mental health and that the number 
of people being put in police cells because of mental health issues had more 
than halved. On the issue of wider health service funding, Corbyn asked why the 
NHS deficit was now £2.45bn, having been in surplus as recently as 2010. May 
said the government would spend £0.5tn on the health service during the 
lifetime of this parliament and that the only party that had suggested cutting 
the NHS budget before the last election was Labour.

Snap verdict

May had a strong finish, but she may be a little unnerved overjust how 
vulnerable she is on the NHS and how easy it was for Corbyn to attack her on 
health. Corbyn started with two focused and very reasonable questions on mental 
health. It was noticeable how May seemed much more comfortable when she could 
talk about the police (her old portfolio) and the issue of mental health 
patients being held in cells, although Corbyn’s ‘this is still not good enough’ 
argument was effective. When he turned to the NHS, he just kept highlighting 
the funding crisis. He was not proposing anything specific, and he effectively 
ruled out any A&E closures (which is not a position many NHS managers would 
support), allowing May to outflank him by stressing the Tories’ commitment to 
localism. But Corbyn was able to shoot down this point with a jibe about the 
NHS Act, which may be four years old but at least is more relevant than 
something Andy Burnham said before the 2010 general election (increased 
spending being “irresponsible”), which was one of the lines May relied on.

Most memorable lines

Jeremy Corbyn to May on the government’s record on mental health service and 
broader NHS funding:

I started out by asking about parity of esteem, all this government has 
produced is parity of failure.

May’s response:

 There is only one party that has actually cut NHS funding: the Labour party 
in Wales.


 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/19/pmqs-may-corbyn-hammond-angela-eagle-was-subect-to-homophobic-abuse-after-challenging-corbyn-labour-inquiry-finds-politics-live>
.

 * Click here <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/series/andrew-sparrow-verdict> to 
read more of Andrew Sparrow’s verdicts on PMQS.  