
It is hard to imagine what an extraterrestrial life form might think if 
confronted with the words "you're human / they are human / we are human / let's 
try to be human / dance!"

Will they break out into an impromptu jig? Or simply wonder what all this 
"human" nonsense is about anyway?

Evidently, enough people want to find out. Adrian Mitchell's poem Human 
Beings, from which the lines above are taken, has been voted the poem that most 
people would like to see launched into space.

They were responding to a poll conducted by the Poetry Society for this year's 
Poetry Day. Just under a thousand people voted and Mitchell's poem, from his 
2004 collection The Shadow Knows, garnered 30% of the vote.

It was one of eight contemporary poems suggested by the Poetry Society, 
although visitors to the website could also vote for a poem of their choosing. 
Andrew Motion, the poet laureate, nominated The Star by George Herbert, Stephen 
Fry recommended Robert Frost's Accidentally on Purpose, while the poet Ian 
McMillan proposed the opening of Basil Bunting's Briggflatts.

Human Beings will be displayed at the National Space Centre in Leicester, and 
the Poetry Society has said that it will continue "to investigate ways to 
launch the poem into space". So don't expect any sightings of boogying aliens 
just yet.

Adrian Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/adrian-mitchell>, who has 
been writing poetry since the late 60s, and describes himself on his website as 
"the shadow poet laureate", said, "I'm very excited that so many people have 
voted for my poem. Human Beings is a poem for peace. It is about the joy of 
being human, but that doesn't mean that it's against animals or alien beings. 
When it goes into space and it's read by aliens, I'd hate for them to think 
that it's anti alternative life forms."

"If the Martians can translate this and interpret it, it will give them an 
interesting view of human nature!" added the astronomer and presenter Sir 
Patrick Moore.
 