
In protesting as he did about the continuance of the war, Siegfried Sassoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/siegfried-sassoon> put himself at 
considerable risk of being court martialled. So this document is proof of great 
courage as well as conviction – courage akin to the bravery he had already 
shown and would show again as a fighting soldier, and to the unflinchingness of 
his poems. As things turned out, he was spared this sort of judgment and sent 
to Craiglockhart War hospital instead, where he met Wilfred Owen and helped him 
to discover his true identity as a poet. His letter of protest is a pivotal 
document, then, as well as a powerful and poignant one.

"A Moment of Reflection" (28 June 1914) by Andrew Motion
(with acknowledgments to Black Lamb and Grey Falcon by Rebecca West)

Although one assassin has already tried
and failed to blow him to pieces,
Archduke Ferdinand has let it be known
he will soon complete his journey
as planned along the quay at Sarajevo,

but for a moment will pause
here,
at the window of a private room in the Town Hall.

He needs time to recover his composure
after finding the blood of his aide-de-camp
splattered over the manuscript of the speech
he delivered so well earlier this morning;
he needs to look around him.
And indeed,
the prospect of an Austrian brewery in the distance
is reassuring,
likewise the handsome red bricks of the barracks
filled with several thousand soldiers of the fatherland.

This is how those who survive him today
will remember him:

a man thinking his thoughts
while waiting until his wife can join him –
the Countess Chotek
with her pinched yet puddingy features,
to whom he will shortly utter his last words,
'Sophie, live for our children',
into deaf ears.

As for his own memories,
the Head of the Tourist Bureau
has now arrived and taken it upon himself
to suggest the Archduke might be happy to recall the fact
that only last week
he bagged his three thousandth stag,

Was this, the Head dares to enquire,
with the double-barrelled Mannlicher
made for him especially –
the same weapon he used to dispatch
two thousand one hundred and fifty game birds
in a single day,
and sixty boars at a hunt led by the Kaiser?

These are remarkable achievements,
the Head dares to continue,
on the same level as the improvement
the Archduke has suggested in the hunting of hare,
by which the beaters,
forming themselves into a wedge-shape,
squeeze those notoriously elusive runners
towards a particular spot
where he can exceed the tally of every other gun.

In the silence that follows
it is not obvious whether the Archduke
has heard the question.
He has heard it.
He is more interested, however,
in the fact that his mind is now stuffed
with an almost infinite number of ghosts
of woodcock, quail, pheasant and partridge,
wild boars bristling flank to flank,
mallard and teal and wild geese
dangling from the antlers of stags,
layer after layer of rabbits
and other creatures that were mere vermin –

a tally that he expects will increase
once the business of today has been accomplished.

Siegfried Sassoon

I am making this statement as an act of wilful defiance of military authority, 
because I believe that the war is being deliberately prolonged by those who 
have the power to end it.

I am a soldier, convinced that I am acting on behalf of soldiers. I believe 
that this war, upon which I entered as a war of defence and liberation, has now 
become a war of aggression and conquest. I believe that the purposes for which 
I and my fellow-soldiers entered upon this war should have been so clearly 
stated as to have made it impossible to change them, and that, had this been 
done, the objects which actuated us would now be attainable by negotiation.

I have seen and endured the sufferings of the troops, and I can no longer be a 
party to prolong these sufferings for ends which I believe to be evil and 
unjust.

I am not protesting against the conduct of the war, but against the political 
errors and insincerities for which the fighting men are being sacrificed.

On behalf of those who are suffering now I make this protest against the 
deception which is being practised on them; also I believe that I may help to 
destroy the callous complacence with which the majority of those at home regard 
the continuance of agonies which they do not share, and which they have not 
sufficient imagination to realize.

• Siegfried Sassoon's statement to his commanding officer explaining his 
grounds for refusing to serve further in the army (Bradford Pioneer, 27 July 
1917)

• This article was amended on 29 October 2013 to correct the homophone in the 
opening sentence.
 