
Labour's decade of investment in policing boosted the strength of the 43 
forces in England and Wales to record levels, peaking at 143,000 sworn 
constables and 16,500 community support officers. But the pressures on public 
spending, and a forthcoming "spike" in retirement rates, means that these 
levels will be impossible to maintain.

The home secretary, Alan Johnson, has guaranteed the police a three-year 
funding settlement up to 2011. Yet, at the same time, he has argued for 
significant efficiency savings by cutting the duplication caused by forces 
having hundreds of IT contracts, as well as separate arrangements for uniforms, 
vehicles and equipment.

It is unlikely that such measures will deliver the savings needed to maintain 
the level of police numbers, nor would that be necessary. As Sir Ronnie 
Flanagan, the former chief inspector of constabulary, said last year in his 
review of policing, there is already recognition within the police that 
maintaining such record numbers is not possible.

Flanagan wisely counselled the politicians to recognise this reality, rather 
than revive an "unhelpful debate" about numbers that would overshadow the drive 
for reform. As the Downing Street strategy unit has pointed out, increases in 
police resources are not necessarily related to changes in productivity, with 
detection and reoffending rates remaining stubbornly poor.

In the face of a populist campaign by the police, Labour ministers scrapped 
all but one general target – improving public confidence – for the police 
service, leaving Whitehall without the effective levers to drive service 
reform. Some form of new, direct local democratic accountability was supposed 
to provide that pressure, but Labour was forced by its own local government 
councillors to drop its plans for directly elected police authority members. 
Instead, Labour now pledges monthly "beat meetings" to influence the priorities 
of neighbourhood policing team.

The Conservatives want to go further. They support the idea of directly 
elected police commissioners, who would set budgets and hire and fire chief 
constables, and gather local views on priorities. Some senior officers have 
described the plan as madness, and warn of the precedent set by the part that 
London's mayor, Boris Johnson, played in the demise of Sir Ian Blair as 
Metropolitan police commissioner.

However, in an era of service contraction, the introduction of elected police 
commissioners might actually provide the police with the political shield they 
need to protect them from public backlash. The commissioners would, after all, 
be someone new to take the blame.

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 