
It was an unforgettable day for me. I joined the demonstrators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/jan/27/egypt-protests> in Cairo, 
along with the hundreds of thousands across Egypt who went on to the streets on 
Tuesday demanding freedom and bravely facing off the fearsome violence of the 
police. The regime has a million and a half soldiers in its security apparatus, 
upon which its spends millions in order to train them for one task: to keep the 
Egyptian people down.

I found myself in the midst of thousands of young Egyptians, whose only point 
of similarity was their dazzling bravery and their determination to do one 
thing – change the regime. Most of them are university students who find 
themselves with no hope for the future. They are unable to find work, and hence 
unable to marry. And they are motivated by an untameable anger and a profound 
sense of injustice.

I will always be in awe of these revolutionaries. Everything they have said 
shows a sharp political awareness and a death-defying desire for freedom. They 
asked me to say a few words. Even though I've spoken hundreds of times in 
public, this time it was different: I was speaking to 30,000 demonstrators who 
were in no mood to hear of compromise and who kept interrupting with shouts of 
"Down withHosni Mubarak <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hosni_Mubarak>", and "The 
people say, out with the regime".

I said I was proud of what they had achieved, and that they had brought about 
the end of the period of repression, adding that even if we get beaten up 
or arrested we have proved we are not afraid and are stronger than they are. 
They have the fiercest tools of repression in the world at their disposal, but 
we have something stronger: our courage and our belief in freedom. The crowd 
responded by shouting en masse: "We'll finish what we've begun!"

I was in the company of a friend, a Spanish journalist who spent many years in 
eastern Europe and lived through the liberation movements there. He said: "It 
has been my experience that when so many people come out on to the streets, and 
with such determination, regime change is just a matter of time."

So why have Egyptians risen up? The answer lies in the nature of the regime. A 
tyrannical regime might deprive the people of their freedom, but in return they 
are offered an easy life. A democratic regime might fail to beat poverty, but 
the people enjoy freedom and dignity. The Egyptian regime has deprived the 
people of everything, including freedom and dignity, and has failed to supply 
them with their daily needs. The hundreds of thousands of demonstrators are no 
more than representatives of the millions of Egyptians whose rights have been 
invalidated.

While public calls for reform in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> long predated the dissent in Tunisia, 
events there were of course inspiring. Now people could clearly see the 
security apparatus could not protect the dictator for ever. And we had greater 
cause than our Tunisian counterparts, with more people living in poverty, and 
under a ruler who has held the reins of power even longer. At some point, fear 
made Ben Ali flee Tunisia. We could emulate the success of that protest; some 
people on Cairo's streets copied the same French slogan, "Dégage, Mubarak". And 
by today, uprisings had also reached Arab states such as Yemen.

Already the authorities are finding their tactics cannot stop the protests. 
Demonstrations have been organised through Facebook as a reliable, independent 
source of information; when the state tried to block it, the people proved more 
clever, and bloggers passed on ways to bypass the controls. And the violence of 
the security services is a risk for both sides: in Suez people have risen up 
against police who shot demonstrators. History shows that at some point 
ordinary policemen will refuse to carry out orders to kill fellow citizens.

More ordinary citizens are now defying the police. A young demonstrator told 
me that, when running from the police on Tuesday, he entered a building and 
rang an apartment bell at random. It was 4am. A 60-year-old man opened the 
door, fear obvious on his face. The demonstrator asked the man to hide him from 
the police. The man asked to see his identity card and invited him in, waking 
one of his three daughters to prepare some food for the young man. They ate and 
drank tea together and chatted like lifelong friends.

In the morning, when the danger of arrest had receded, the man accompanied the 
young protester into the street, stopped a taxi for him and offered him some 
money. The young man refused and thanked them. As they embraced the older man 
said: "It is I who should be thanking you for defending me, my daughters and 
all Egyptians."

That is how the Egyptian spring began. Tomorrow, we will see a real battle.
 