
The police officer who shot dead Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> has said he opened fire fearing 
Rodney was carrying a machine gun capable of firing 1,000 rounds a minute.

The officer, identified only as E7, was giving evidence at the inquiry into 
the death of Rodney, who was killed seven years ago in north London. The 
inquiry also heard E7, had previously shot dead two other people during his 
career.

Rodney was stopped on 30 April 2005 in Edgware, north-west London, by armed 
officers acting on intelligence that an armed gang was on its way to rob a 
drugs gang.

E7 told the inquiry that the officers were briefed that Rodney and the other 
members of the group were armed, possibly with machine guns. Rodney and others 
travelling in aVW Golf were followed by officers who decided to force to stop.

Three unmarked police cars boxed the Golf in and the car containing E7 pulled 
alongside Rodney, who was in the back seat.

E7 said Rodney's movements and body language, including ducking down and 
coming back up again, made him believe Rodney had ducked down to grab a weapon 
from the car floor. The officer said he could not wait or shout a warning 
because: "In half a second he could have nine rounds in the air." He opened 
fire fearing his fellow officers were in danger.

Susan Alexander, the dead man's mother, interrupted E7's evidence, saying: 
"How many lies are you going to tell?" She then left the inquiry chamber. E7 
stopped and appeared to need to compose himself.

Six shots were fired in total, including two that hit Rodney in the head. The 
officer was inches from Rodney when he opened fire.

But the inquiry heard that Rodney's movements that E7 says led him to believe 
the suspect was going to fire might have been caused by another vehicle hitting 
the Golf at 20mph.

E7 said he did not see a weapon in Rodney's hands before opening fire. Rodney 
died at the scene. Firearms were later found in the car.

Sir Christopher Holland, chairing the inquiry, asked: "What could he do to 
avoid bring shot?"

E7 said that the totality of the actions he perceived led him to believe 
Rodney had to be shot.

The inquiry heard that E7 had more than two decades' experience as a firearms 
expert and had received commendations for bravery. It also heard he had been 
recommended for disciplinary action once for leaving his vehicle while on duty. 
He had also been arrested after a fracas in a central London nightclub; he was 
not charged.

In the 1980s, he had shot two men dead in one operation, and wounded two 
suspects in another.
 