
The latest poll <http://www.iranpoll.com/blog/jcpoa> from IranPoll, the 
Canadian outfit linked to Maryland University, is bad news for president Hassan 
Rouhani. Just under three quarters – 74% - of Iranians surveyed on 17-27 June 
say there has been no improvement in the economy as a result of last year’s 
nuclear agreement with world powers. With a presidential election looming next 
year, probably in June, Rouhani’s lead over possible challenger Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad, the former ‘principle-ist’ (or fundamentalist) president, has 
narrowed to eight percentage points from 27 points in May 2015.

Economic growth in the Iranian year ending in March was far smaller than 
expected. A leading Iranian business journalist told me he thought it had been 
0.9% at best. The government anticipates 3.9% growth in the current year. This 
improvement will come from a doubling of oil exports since sanctions eased in 
February, but it also reflects the government loosening monetary and fiscal 
discipline, stimulating economic activity at the risk of higher inflation.


But how widely will any benefits of growth be distributed? Back in March the 
state’s statistical centre reported poverty and inequality had increased in the 
previous 12 months.

And poorer Iranians are the target group for Rouhani’s principle-ist 
opponents. The recent ‘pay cheque scandal’ played into their hands to such an 
extent that many in Tehran believe principle-ists not only publicised the 
details of lucrative pay and bonuses enjoyed by leading executives but 
unearthed them in the first place.

The government’s sacking at the end of June of four bosses of state banks was 
unprecedented. It followed a cabinet meeting whereAyatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, the supreme leader, 
told ministers that that “astronomical salaries” were “an attack on our values” 
and demanded the matter be “seriously followed up and the people informed of 
the results”.

Among those sacked was the head of Refah Bank, whose leaked pay cheque had 
revealed a monthly income in salary and bonuses of 240 million tomans 
[$78,000], far above the basic level for workers of 850,000 [$276] per month.

Principle-ists have been showing nostalgia not just for the egalitarianism of 
the 1979 Revolution and the noble sacrifices of the 1980-88 war with Iraq but 
for the landslide election victory won by Ahmadinejad in 2005 on the slogan of 
‘putting the oil money on the sofreh’ (the dining mat used by poorer Iranians). 
Hence the value of exposing rewards enjoyed by technocrats often associated in 
the public mind with Rouhani and his ally, former president Akbar Hashemi 
Rafsanjani.

Memories can be short. “While corruption always existed,” the business 
journalist told me, “it probably worsened under Ahmadinejad as he made an 
attempt to centralise power and reduced oversight of the government by the 
majles [parliament] and other bodies.” Ahmadinejad’s spending policies – 
including cheap loans – also left the banking sector with a massive burden of 
non-performing loans.

Khamenei has a sharp memory, however, and would be reluctant to see the return 
of Ahmadinejad, who in his second term, after 2009, challenged the leader’s 
authority several times. Ahmadinejad’s deputy, Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei, was 
barred from the 2013 presidential poll by the watchdog Guardian Council, six of 
whose 12 members are appointed by Khamenei, and council might well also bar 
Ahmadinejad next year.

A possible alternative to Ahmadinejad might be Qassem Soleimani, commander of 
al-Quds brigade, the overseas arm of the Revolutionary Guards (IRGC), who has 
enjoyed a strong public profile since 2014, especially in organising the 
military campaign against Daesh, the so-called Islamic State group, in 
neighbouring Iraq.

But Saeid Golkar, lecturer at Northwestern University in the United States and 
senior fellow at Chicago Council on Global Affairs, believes the ‘pay cheque 
scandal’ may have indirectly revealed another potential ‘principle-ist’ 
contender in Parviz Fattah, head of the Imam Khomeini Relief Committee.

“There are strong [popular] feelings against what is seen as corruption,” 
Golkar told me. “That’s why Fattah put his pay cheque online, to show he was 
the people’s man and receiving a monthly net income of 7.34 million tomans 
[$2380], far less than many senior managers. Like Ahmadinejad, he has a simple 
life.”

Fattah also enjoys good links to the IRGC as former director of Bonyad Taavon 
Sepah, the IRGC charitable foundation, and as a former deputy head of Khatam-ol 
Anbia, the Guards’ construction arm. He has a ready-made constituency among the 
5 million families supported by the Imam Khomeini committee.

Golkar points out that principle-ist publications are putting pictures of 
Fattah alongside those of Ebrahim Raeisi, whom Khameneiappointed in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/irans-supreme-leader-key-appointment-ebrahim-raeisi-mashhad-foundation>
 as chairman of Astan Quds Razavi, the foundation that manages the shrine of 
Imam Reza in Mashhad.

“Recently, in Mashhad, in the shrine and in the seminary, they are calling 
Raeisi an ayatollah,” Golkar said. “Ayatollah Khamenei has been reshuffling the 
guard, also in late June appointing Major-General Mohammad Baghari [an IRGC 
stalwart] as head of the general military command instead of [Hassan] 
Firouzabadi. If you put these signs together, Ayatollah Khamenei is thinking 
seriously about the future.”


Rouhani’s close relationship with Khamenei was crucial to the acceptance of 
the nuclear agreement in the face of strong criticisms. But the lack of 
progress in easing sanctions, reinforced by the recent House of Representatives 
vote for legislation that would block sales by Boeing and Airbus aircraft toIran
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, are reinforcing the principle-ists 
narrative that the US is endemically hostile.

While Khamanei has said Tehran won’t renege as long as Washington doesn’t, 
both those who accepted the deal as a positive step and those who did so 
reluctantly as a ‘poisoned chalice’ are losing enthusiasm. The political 
factions in Iran may be shifting again, making Rouhani vulnerable.

The president moved quickly after Khamenei’s intervention in the pay cheque 
scandal, but Golkar is not convinced the president understands the size of the 
challenge he faces: “His focus is on the middle class and big cities. Poorer 
people, and those in rural areas, are saying, ‘Why should I vote for Rouhani, 
he’s a technocrat? These people are getting 240 million tomans a month and I’m 
on just 850,000’.”

The populism of the Iranian principle-ists shows striking similarities with 
populism elsewhere. It is critical of bankers, often anti-intellectual, and 
pushes a notion of national control against an international, or even global, 
elite. Its idea of nation is not just nostalgic but hostile to diversity, and 
extols the values of supposed ‘simplicity’ against the wicked ways of the big 
city – praising the morality police acting against ‘bad hijab’ is a topical 
example.

Such politics is hardly new, nor peculiar to Iran. Philip Mansel, the British 
historian, has long drawn attention to the fragility of cosmopolitan cities, 
which he has again illustrated in his compellingrecent book on Aleppo 
<https://theibtaurisblog.com/2016/03/14/video-a-chat-with-philip-mansel-author-of-aleppo/>
, “Syria’s great merchant city”, now largely reduced to rubble after centuries 
of diversity and success based on trade.

Mansel recently told me that the destruction of Aleppo resulted from “40 years 
of dictatorship”, international intrigue and “the conflicts devastating the 
entire Muslim world from Morocco to Malaya”. But he said it also had roots in 
increasing poverty in the countryside due in part to climate change and 
desertification.


Mansel argues a hostility to urban sophistication goes back to antiquity. “In 
the Old Testament, there were denunciations of Babylon,” he told me. “In French 
history it was the provincials devastating Paris in 1848 or 1871. More 
generally, poorer people dependent on agriculture have been jealous of the 
capital city although it had often benefited them. It happened in the Lebanese 
civil war, people from the mountains from poorer areas thinking they’d been 
snubbed by Beirut.”

Mansel believes the demise of Smyrna, Alexandria and partly Beirut as 
multicultural centres – which he charted in his 2010 book, Levant: Splendour 
and Catastrophe in the Mediterranean – could be repeated elsewhere. “Look 
what’s happening to London now with Brexit. The great dynamic, energetic, 
cosmopolitan London of the last few years might change. There are parallels 
with [Donald] Trump - one’s always been told there are two Americas, the coast 
and the hinterland.”

The Iranian principle-ists’ use of social media is probably still less 
important than networks based on work, mosque and the Basij. But they are well 
aware of the Internet’s potential – IranPoll found 42.8% of Iranians go online 
at least once a week “to become informed about the news”, up from 33.6% in May 
2015 – and their style of operation clear shows parallels with the Brexit 
campaign. As Dhruva Jaishankar of Brookings India recently wrote, social media 
“rather than creating connections with people who possess differing views and 
ideologies, tends to reinforce prejudices … greater information has, rather 
counterintuitively, contributed to a ‘post-fact 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/fact-checking-in-a-post-fact-world/2016/05/19/d37434e2-1d0f-11e6-8c7b-6931e66333e7_story.html>
’ information environment ... populists are willing to cross the lines that 
mainstream parties have flirted with, becoming forces that the centre cannot 
hold.”

Such a perspective subverts common analysis of Iran and its politics.


“Categories of ‘reformist’ and ‘hardliner’ don’t work, this isn’t about 
democratisation,” says Golkar. “There are those who want to interact in foreign 
relations – Rouhani has spoken of the nuclear deal as a model for regional 
problems – and against them are ‘confrontationists’. They have different 
discourses on both the economy and international relations. The competition for 
the next presidential election and the next supreme leader will be between 
‘interactionists’ and ‘confrontationists’.”

In the 2005 presidential election, Ahmadinejad not only promised to put oil 
revenue on the sofreh, he scorned the middle classes and intellectuals. After 
his election, better-off Tehranis made jokes about the president scorning his 
origins: there were problems with the quality of drinking water because 
Ahmadinejad had washed his socks in the reservoir.

Whereas his reformist predecessor, Mohammad Khatami, spoke in universities and 
international bodies of a “dialogue among civilisations”, Ahmadinejad made 
repeated provincial trips around Iran addressing huge crowds of people who felt 
neglected by central government. Those feelings of neglect are just as strong 
today – and president Rouhani has little time to address them.

Philip Mansel, Aleppo: the Rise and Fall of Syria’s Great Merchant City, IB 
Tauris 2016.Gareth Smyth has reported from Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Iran. He 
was nominated in 2005 by the Financial Times as foreign correspondent of the 
year in the British Press Awards.

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 