
Porto's hopes of reaching the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> knockout stages were 
dealt a major blow when they were held at home by Austria Vienna. Paulo 
Fonseca's side were made to pay for a slow start as Roman Kienast smashed in 
Vienna's first goal of the group stage after 11 minutes.

Porto dominated thereafter but only had Jackson Martínez's header shortly 
after half-time to show for it by the end when they were booed from the pitch 
by the home fans. That meant they failed to capitalise on second-placedZenit St 
Petersburg's earlier 1-1 draw against Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/26/zenit-st-petersburg-atletico-madrid-champions-league>
 to leave the Portuguese side a point adrift.

With a trip to Atlético to come to round out their campaign, Porto face the 
prospect of dropping into the Europa League. Vienna had revived their own 
unlikely hopes of reaching the knockout phase when Kienast punished sloppy 
defending fromPorto <https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> full-back 
Danilo.

His clearance from the touchline into the centre of the pitch found only 
Kienast in acres of space. The striker had the time to take a couple of touches 
and size up a right-footed shot from just outside the area which gave Helton no 
chance of making a save.

Porto almost immediately responded when Martínez sent in a looping header that 
hit the crossbar and went over. But Vienna then almost raced down the other end 
and grabbed a second. Only a last-gasp Lucho tackle on Philipp Hosiner denied 
them.

Hosiner was allowed a free run into the area and after easily beating the 
first defender to belatedly react to the danger, it took Lucho's desperate 
challenge to clear as he was about to pull the trigger. The home side's 
frustrations grew as Vienna's Heinz Lindner then thwarted them with some astute 
goalkeeping.

When Porto scythed open the Vienna defence with a flowing one-touch move, 
Lindner was out quickly to save from Steven Defour on the angle. The young 
Austria keeper was then perfectly placed when Martínez flicked on Lica's 
dangerous low cross.

Lindner's opposite number Helton was little more than a spectator for the 
remainder of the half, but Porto were unable to turn one-way possession into an 
equaliser before the break. Fonseca made an attacking change at half-time with 
Silvestre Varela replacing Defour. Three minutes later his side were level 
through Martínez's close-range header.

Josue's corner found its way to the back post where Eliaquim Mangala looped a 
header back across the face of goal. Martínez outjumped his marker on the line 
to direct the ball in.

Porto sensed the chance to make a decisive burst but again Lindner was in the 
way, blocking when Lucho helped on Josue's fizzing centre with his chest. 
Vienna's only threat was on the break. Kaja Rogulj burst onto a James Holland 
through-ball but with men in support tried a shot that Maicon blocked well.

Porto began to show signs of panic and after some pin-ball in the away area 
Martínez and Varela both went for a shot that the substitute eventually saw 
deflect off a defender and over. Lucho turned over a Josué cross at 
full-stretch while a Martínez header hit the back-tracking Mangala to take the 
ball off target and sum up the home side's night.
 