
Port Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> have 
indefinitely banned the woman who ignited a racism controversy by throwing a 
banana at Indigenous star Eddie Betts. The Power completed an investigation 
into the ugly incident after speaking with the club member on Sunday, 
concluding it was racially motivated.

Betts was targeted by the fan in Saturday night’s 15-point Showdown victory by 
the Crows atAdelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> Oval. The 
supporter was seen waving her middle finger at Betts before throwing the banana 
in his direction.

AFL boss apologises to Adam Goodes, saying league should have 'acted sooner' 
on racism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/afl-boss-apologises-to-adam-goodes-saying-league-shouldve-acted-sooner-on-racism>
Betts had just kicked his fifth goal in a near best-afield showing during his 
250thAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> game, and did not notice the 
incident.


Port Adelaide chairman David Koch said before the club spoke with the woman 
that he’d be “absolutely disgusted” if racism was found to be the motivation.


“We’re a club, we’re an industry, we’re a code that doesn’t shirk away from 
these sorts of incidents,” he said.


“If it was racially motivated, not only would she be banned for life from the 
club, we would encourage her to come and sit with our players, our Aboriginal 
players and try to understand what these actions mean to them.”


The club also relied on testimony from Port Adelaide fans in the vicinity, who 
said her action was accompanied by racist sledging through the match.


The club said it would meet with the woman and offer her a chance to take part 
in the club’s Aboriginal cultural awareness programs, pointing out her act was 
completely at odds with its embrace of Aboriginal players and culture.


Port have more Indigenous players on their list than any other AFL side, with 
a rich history of Indigenous representation. They confirmed their seven 
Aboriginal players, led by Chad Wingard, would be a part of a counselling 
process offered, while cancelling her membership.

Koch claimed support from Betts for the club’s educational approach. “Eddie is 
not only an incredible football player but an amazing human being,” he said. 
“He said ‘that’s exactly the thing that you should do’.

“He understands like us ... that the lasting good, if any good can come from 
this, is to make sure no football crowd, no workplace, no family thinks this is 
acceptable behaviour.”


The AFL, Adelaide and Port Adelaide football clubs and Adelaide Oval 
management all released statements on Sunday condemning anti-social behaviour.


The call to action was led by Crows captain Taylor Walker, who tweeted his 
disappointment. “Absolutely disgusting! Shouldn’t ever be allowed back into 
enjoy the football. Very disappointing,” he said.

The incident comes after much of the AFL’s 2015 season was marred by booing 
and racial vilification of Sydney’s Indigenous star Adam Goodes. Goodes, the 
2006 Brownlow Medallist, retired at season’s end and declined a lap of honour 
on grand final day.
 