
The sun shone especially bright, for my father, one day in September of 1974. 
His address to a joint session of Congress in celebration of the 200th 
anniversary of the first Continental Congress, in Philadelphia, was certainly 
one of the great moments of his life. Winston Churchill and Lafayette were the 
only other people not born in America who had been so honoured.

In looking back on it, I try to pinpoint why it was so noteworthy and moving. 
It was noteworthy because he was clearly nervous; rarely did he seem especially 
agitated before speaking engagements. In this instance, however, we just tried 
to stay out of his way. It was not noteworthy because he did an excellent job; 
most of the time he did. For all who attended, the air was charged, the moment 
extraordinary, the well of the chamber commanding.

The reason it was so moving for me was that looking down on him from our seats 
in the balcony, I saw not the distinguished, articulate, and respected man he 
was, but a young man in love whose best girl has just said, "Yes." He had been 
in love with America since he was a small boy; he had made a living and a life 
getting to know her whims and fancies, her history and hopes. He both admired 
and forgave her. In his being invited to speak before the most prestigious body 
in America, I felt him kick his heels in delight, shiver in anxiety, and shed a 
tear in deep-felt thanks and humility.

Throughout his life he resisted, however, all entreaties to write a credo of 
some sort, a W Somerset Maugham The Summing Up. The only time he ever came 
close to such an endeavour was when he was interviewed for an introduction to a 
book called America Observed, a collection of his pieces from the Guardian. 
What strikes me is that despite his concern about America's love of decadence, 
he still had faith in the energy, spunk and generosity of its people: "In 
general, then, there doesn't seem to be any decline in curiosity, 
inquisitiveness, enlisted in the dogged belief that things can be made better, 
that tomorrow ought to be better than today. The stoic and fatalist are not yet 
familiar American types."

Never for a moment stoical in nature, he did on occasion lean into a fatalist 
view. Perhaps one reason he loved America was because it saved him from 
himself, from what, as a small boy in Blackpool, he had feared would be his 
lot. Raised in a culture of stoicism and humble acceptance of limited 
circumstances, his passionate nature, curiosity and inquisitiveness won out 
against a certain inculcated fatalism against which he would always be on guard.

It may be that he was so good at what he did because, as he interpreted 
America for Great Britain and the rest of the world, he endeavoured to 
reconcile and balance his own character and life, a life steeped in centuries 
of tradition and history, and then dramatically injected with the vitality, 
youth, and exuberance of a new nation. His love for both countries was the 
secret of his wisdom and the inspiration for his work.
 