
Scorching pain jerked me out of bed at 5am the morning after my recent 
reconstructive wrist surgery. The agony was possibly from the cadaver bone the 
surgeon had just implanted in me. Or maybe it was the new metal plate and eight 
screws that were suddenly holding my left hand together – all permanent 
fixtures in what just weeks ago was an average human limb.

Anyway, it frickin’ hurt. I went to the bathroom and popped a Percocet, 
regretting that I had strapped on a snowboard in Colorado for the first time in 
some 15 years or, maybe, just regretting the whole embarrassing, nasty spill on 
the first run of the trip.

Curbing pain prescriptions won't reduce overdoses. More drug treatment will | 
Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/prescription-drug-abuse-addiction-treatment-painkiller>
At 8am or so, while grimacing and lying with my wrist propped up on four 
pillows, I called my hand surgeon and casually checked in. I was secretly 
hoping he’d let me know why the fire burning in my wrist wasn’t being 
extinguished by the nerve blocker pinned to my chest or the opioids I was 
regularly ingesting at this point. The doc informed me I had gotten behind the 
pain. There was little to do but ride it out.

I decided to try one more solution – pot. I live in Washington DC, where 
marijuana is legal both medicinally and recreationally. I used my one good hand 
to pack a little pre-crushed weed into a small one-hitter.

As the lighter struck, the relief seemed instantaneous. Hours of excruciating 
pain and heavy pill popping went up in the thick, black billows of smoke. It 
allowed me to go from popping a highly addictive pill every two hours to taking 
one every four to six hours.

There’s nothing universal, though, that can be drawn from one person’s 
experience of marijuana as pain relief. Surely my observations are backed up 
scientifically, right?

Not so fast. Marijuana has remained politicized, even as opioid abuse and 
heroin addiction are running rampant across the nation. In the US – even in the 
23 states, along with the District of Columbia and Guam, that have legalized 
marijuana to one degree or another – the drug is still federally listed as a
Schedule I drug <http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml>, meaning it has “no 
currently accepted medical use and a high potential for abuse”. Uncle Sam views 
a bag of weed as the same as a hit or two of acid, or as a capsule of heroin.


That leaves huge, often insurmountable, hurdles for researchers. The headache 
of filling out all the forms to be able to legally test weed has left it 
largely unresearched, except by novices like me or the plethora of cancer 
patients and epileptics who attest to its medical benefits. It’s time to put 
marijuana under the microscope to see if it’s a scientifically valid 
alternative to the narcotic regimes that have become harmful standard of care 
for treating pain.

The Drug Enforcement Agency is currently considering 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Health/federal-reclassification-marijuana-major-impact-medical/story?id=38308268>
 whether to reclassify pot as a Schedule II drug (think Adderal and Ritalin), 
which would lower the research hurdles for studying its medicinal potential. 
But with pot’s status as a Schedule I drugreaffirmed 
<http://www.vice.com/read/marijuana-is-still-a-schedule-i-drug-judge-rules-415> 
by a federal judge just last year – and with prisons still bursting with 
inmates serving time for pot-related charges – that change is far from certain.

In the meantime, a few lawmakers have proposed an alternative: to set up a new 
classification, Schedule 1R, for marijuana alone.

Pregnant women with addictions need healthcare, not handcuffs | Hernandez D 
Stroud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/12/pregnant-women-addiction-healthcare-not-handcuffs>
The Maryland congressman Andy Harris is a doctor who is viewed as marijuana’s 
biggest foe in Washington. He single handedly, and proudly, spearheaded the 
effort to block Washington DC’s leaders from setting up a regulatory system so 
that weed could be sold like alcohol in the nation’s capital. But even Harris 
admits he lacks data to back up his anti-pot claims. He joined forces with the 
pot proponent Earl Blumenauer, an Oregon congressman, and Morgan Griffith, of 
Virginia, who supports limited medicinal pot.

Their proposal would drop the barriers around medical research and encourage 
the National Institutes of Health and the DEA to work together to set up a new 
regime under which researchers could freely study the effects of marijuana.

Then we’d at least know if marijuana holds a pain-relief answer for many more 
people – like maybe veterans or other poser snowboarders like me? After decades 
of waging a “war” on drugs, the government should know that already, but at the 
very least, it should allow researchers of all persuasions to show the public 
the pros and cons of marijuana.


Either way, the next time I have major reconstructive surgery, I’m baking a 
huge batch of pot cookies before I go under the knife. Don’t even get me 
started on how the THC gave me an appetite that the narcotics stripped me of, 
sometimes for weeks. I know the pros of pot. I’d love for someone to show me if 
there are any cons.
 