
My day starts at 7am every morning, Monday to Friday.
 Carer support worker Alix Richards. Photograph: Carers Network 
As a carer, my first task is to support my adult son – who has moderate 
learning disabilities, dual sensory impairment and airway-related issues – to 
get ready for his day. After many years of practice we now have this down to a 
fine art. At 8am, we catch the bus to meet my son’s personal assistant and then 
I dash off and catch my second bus toCarers Network 
<http://www.carers-network.co.uk/>, where I have worked as a carers support 
worker since December 2013. Carers Network is a London-based charity that 
provides support, information, advice and grants for unpaid carers in the 
Westminster, Hammersmith and Fulham area.

My role is to offer unpaid carers confidential support in their caring role. I 
aim to take away any stresses or worries a carer may feel and to empower my 
clients, giving them the tools to carry on caring and look after their own 
well-being.

I get into the office at 9am and my first job of the day is to have an 
informal catch up with my colleagues, sharing any important information. We 
allocate new carer referrals; each support worker has a specific area of 
knowledge and the most fitting person is allocated to each carer – my 
specialism is learning disabilities. I then check my calendar and get my 
paperwork ready for appointments with my clients.

One of my main jobs is to carry out carers’ assessments, which are a useful 
way of gaining a complete picture of the carer’s role, how this affects their 
life, and determining what support they feel they need, if any. A carer’s 
assessment helps the local authority determine the level and nature of support 
a carer can be offered to help them to continue caring without detriment to 
their own well-being.

Carers deserve a livable income | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/31/carers-deserve-a-livable-income>
From April, as part of the new Care Act anyone who provides unpaid care or 
support to an adult family member or friend can arrange to have a carer’s 
assessment, irrespective of whether the person they care for has eligible 
needs. For the first time, if a carer has eligible needs of their own, they 
will have the right to support from the council.

This is good news. Caring can take its toll both physically and mentally and 
so it’s important that the right level of support is offered to all carers. As 
a result of the reform, millions of carers could potentially get additional 
help such as respite care or direct payments.

Part of my job is informing carers of their new rights before the reforms come 
into play so that they can take the necessary next steps – which will be to 
apply for a carer’s assessment.

Another important part of what I do is to provide information and advice to 
carers, especially those new to their caring role or people who don’t realise 
that they are carers. This can range from details on local support groups, 
which I also facilitate, to information on the best way to get ready for an 
assessment. The provision of information is a key part of the new Care Act and 
local authorities will be at the heart of providing this; again, this is a very 
positive move.

Want to write for us about working in social care? This is how
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/aug/14/write-about-working-in-social-care>
I started work as a carer support worker in 2008 after volunteering at a local 
charity as an information and advice worker. Before this I had been a full-time 
carer for my son for 15 years. I have worked hard over the years, training and 
learning the legal side of the role, but am also able to draw upon my own 
experience and have a genuine understanding of how this often unplanned role 
can rapidly take over one’s life. Having said that, this personal connection is 
not a prerequisite for the role of carer support worker. Instead, what is 
needed is patience, empathy, compassion and a drive to understand the wider 
policy that affects the day-to-day job.

Further information about the Care Act, and what it means for carers and the 
people they look after, can be found at:www.gov.uk/careandsupport 
<http://www.gov.uk/careandsupport>. 
 