
When PricewaterhouseCoopers began planning its new London headquarters, it put 
sustainability at the heart of the project in the hope that the new building 
would set a new benchmark in sustainable design.

The site at 7 More London, close to Tower Bridge in south-east London, is the 
firm's largest UK building, housing some 5,500 staff.

Working with construction firm, Overbury, interior designers from BDP and the 
architects, Fosters and Partners, PWC set itself two overriding goals.

It wanted to create a building which reflected its own sustainability goals.

And it consciously aimed to raise the bar in terms of sustainability design, 
proving that such an approach made good business, as well as environmental, 
sense.

Inevitably those goals meant that what emerged was highly innovative. Indeed, 
the building was the first to achieve an "outstanding" rating under the 
environmental building standard Breeam, with assessors saying the building 
"encouraged a new approach to environmental design".

Innovations included meeting half of the building's energy needs through low 
and zero carbon technologies, generating 25% of power on-site including using 
solar panels to heat water, and using 80% recycled aggregates.

The use of a chiller heat recovery system means waste heat from chillers is 
used to warm the building in cooler weather, while the design includes water 
sub-metering, low-energy lighting and extensive recycling facilities throughout.

Emissions are now rated at being a third the level found in other new 
buildings of a similar size and design. Some 40% of the reduction in emission 
is down to the UK's first and largest office tri-generation plant, which uses 
recycled cooking oil from London restaurants, shops, offices and hotels to 
produce heating, cooling and energy.

Sustainability is also dictating the way the building is used. It has become a 
social enterprise hub housing not only PWC's school for social entrepreneurs, 
but also a sustainable restaurant that is also being used to encourage 
fledgling social entrepreneurs.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 