
Schooling is an intimate process. It's about the conversations between pupils 
and teachers, and how good that adult is at feeding the mind of a child. It's 
not about schools built to award-winning designs, or management structures, or 
the freedoms schools have to "innovate", or how "Swedish" the system is.

There has been a massive investment in school buildings in recent years. The 
BuildingSchools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> for the Future 
(BSF) project has a 10-year budget of £55bn, whereby every secondary school 
will be refurbished or rebuilt. Behind that there is an enormous industry of 
ICT, construction experts, and private financiers: there is a lot of money to 
be made.

This scheme must be rethought – first, by asking whether every school is 
actually in need of modernisation, and then by asking whether too much 
investment is being thrown at the BSF contractors. Savings could be made to 
ensure that what is happening inside classrooms doesn't suffer funding cuts.

Labour's reforms have focused on secondary school structures with academies 
and trust schools. The Conservatives are proposing a turbo-charged model of 
independent "Swedish-style" academies. On the face of it, bad secondary schools 
are much more of a problem than bad primary schools, so they get more political 
attention. But the really productive investment would be to shift funding to 
the very youngest children. The funding pyramid – whereby the amount spent 
increases throughout a child's education, right up to university – needs to be 
inverted and invested in pre-school teaching to enable more solid educational 
foundations to be laid.

If school budgets are hit, there is very little that headteachers can do to 
make savings, without looking to the staffing budget. But this must be 
protected, and even improved, so that every child has excellent instructors in 
their classroom right from the very start. This should mean, at an early age, 
more specialist and highly qualified teachers, and the smart use of smaller 
class sizes for the children who need it most.

Let's scale down the excesses of the school rebuilding programme should be 
scaled down, and the savings invested in our children's future. is put on hold, 
the savings must be used to invest in the future.

Polly Curtis is the Guardian's education editor

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 