
PricewaterhouseCoopers recently published its Global Entertainment and Media 
Outlook 2014-18 
<http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/global-entertainment-media-outlook/segment-insights/internet-advertising.jhtml>
, analysing where consumers and advertisers are spending their media dollars. 
The report reveals that online will become the largest advertising segment, set 
to rise to $194.5bn (£114.8bn) by 2018. Mobile will also overtake classified 
advertisements this year, and video will see accelerated growth, with revenue 
rising at a 23.8% CAGR (compound annual growth rate). It's encouraging to see 
this appetite but further shifts in understanding audiences across different 
devices are needed to capitalise on mobile and video trends.

The report found that advertisers are increasingly looking to programmatic and 
native solutions to improve display advertising performance. This is an 
emerging trend but one which has seen slower uptake than hoped perhaps because 
it's radically different. However, forward-thinking brands, publishers and 
rights-holders who are using this intelligent approach are reaping return on 
investment (ROI) and increasing their advertising revenues.

So why has programmatic become so crucial to understand now? Consumers are 
sharing more content than ever before, with billions of sharing data points 
across digital channels. The complexity and sheer volume of this data produced 
by the millisecond is hard to picture. But it needn't overwhelm marketers. It's 
actually a opportunity to better target consumers and prospects in a timely and 
relevant way, at scale. This is where programmatic comes in: processing this 
information must be intelligently automated. Sophisticated algorithms can 
understand characteristics, analyse consumer behaviours and bring a previously 
unavailable form of business intelligence to help brands gain an in-depth 
understanding of their audience. This enables them to engage with customers 
effectively with the right products and services when they might be considering 
a purchase, increasing visibility, engagement and ROI.

Up until now, some have assumed programmatic is a one-dimensional offering 
such as just real-time bidding. This is a misperception; the concept of 
"real-time bidding" is simply the practice behind buying and selling 
advertising impressions in an open marketplace, akin to an auction model. This 
is where brands are (in theory, at least) able to buy and sell online display 
advertising in real-time, one ad at a time, and serve them to the public. 
However, as with most software, your desired outcome is totally reliant on the 
information you input and the way in which you use the data. How often have you 
been served an ad for a pair of shoes or a train ticket which haunts you after 
you've already made the purchase? Real-time bidding is an important trading 
component but it is the entire marketplace that is becoming programmatic. This 
enables brands to collect, evaluate and optimise all forms of digital content 
and media so they can serve targeted offers, messages and ads across all 
channels. Marketers can then identify customers in real-time, in the right 
place, and on the right device – this is the power of programmatic, which is 
helping brands to retain or win new customers.

By taking a programmatic approach, a little known but critical trend called 
"dark social", can also be overcome. Contrary to popular belief, social 
platforms such as Twitter and Facebook are not the leading ways to share 
content, accounting for only about 25% of all shared items. Dark social is the 
other 75%, which has no referrer data – so you can't trace how someone arrived 
at your website. This mainly occurs with email, instant messages and whenever 
someone is moving from a secure site to a non-secure site. In essence, this 
large pool of potential customers is invisible to most analytics programmes and 
therefore not accessible to marketers who need to connect with these 
increasingly fragmented audiences. Smarter tracking of shared content is 
required to combat this. Marketing teams must also consolidate the data and 
track the volume of shares and referrals that occur, and see which channels are 
the most effective source for driving new customers.

In a nutshell, by using programmatic, marketers can connect the dots between 
content, audiences and media buying to ensure brands are genuinely reaching 
their target audience based on their likes, preferences and behaviours right 
here, right now. This is a hugely powerful asset for brands. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers has reaffirmed the necessity to invest in programmatic. 
Organisations that implement these practices will have a competitive edge and 
can build lasting conversations with their fragmented audiences while creating 
new revenue opportunities.

Rupert Staines is EMEA managing director of RadiumOne 
<http://www.radiumone.com/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 