
I have often wondered whether there's something different about the ways in 
which women, rather than men, create community. One slightly disgruntled wife 
of a mad, male communitarian (Bronson Alcott) confided to her diary 150 years 
ago: "A woman may live a whole life of sacrifice and at her death meekly says, 
'I die a woman.' A man, on the other hand, passes a few years in experiments in 
self-denial and simple life, and he says, 'Behold a God.'" Men possibly have 
a tendency to beat their chest, to bang the drum, to go for the grand gesture. 
Whereas women communitarians seem – if you'll allow me a massive generalisation 
– simpler, but also subtler; more inclined to plant seeds than show off the 
finished plant.

Take, for example, the case of Liz Christy. She was an artist living in 
Manhattan in the 60s and 70s. Realising that there were as many as 15,000 acres 
of wasteland in New York, she founded the Green Guerillas movement (whose 
rather brilliant, 60s-ish slogan is "It's your city – dig it"). Christy 
inspired communities to reclaim abandoned common ground, showing how such 
spaces could simultaneously nurture both produce and protest, create both 
social bonds and great beauty. At a time when cities were, in most people's 
minds, the antithesis of the rural, Christy created a community farm and garden 
in the centre of the metropolis, winning an urban forestry award. She died of 
cancer aged 39 in 1985, but remains the godmother of all urban diggers.

Although completely different, Chiara Lubich has been another big inspiration 
for us. Born Silvia Lubich in Trento, in Northern Italy in 1920, she changed 
her name when - as bombs rained down on her city in the WWII - she was 
converted to the idea that "love was the only ideal that no bomb could 
destroy". She set up the famous Focolare movement, a hugely successful 
organisation that now campaigns for universal brotherhood. What's fascinating 
about Lubich is that while she was a very orthodox Catholic, she was also 
exceptionally ecumenical: one of the stated aims of the organisation is the 
move "towards universal brotherhood with followers of various religions and 
people of other persuasions, including atheists". That's probably why she 
advocated something I've long been drawn to: the idea of undercover 
Christianity, of believers who demonstrate their beliefs through actions, not 
words – because charity, unlike doctrine, is never divisive.

Another prophetic voice is that of Sister Miriam MacGillis. For 30 years she 
has worked at Genesis Farm in New Jersey, run by the Dominican Sisters. 
Inspired by the ecotheology of Thomas Berry, they embrace scientific discovery 
as sacred revelation, believing that all reality is "permeated by the presence 
and power of that ultimate Holy Mystery".

It would be easy to go on, listing great "wimmin" who we admire (the list 
would include Adriana Zarri, the late, great Italian hermit; certainly 
Eglantyne Jebb, founder of Save the Children; Mairead Corrigan Maguire and 
Betty Williams, co-founders of the Peace People movement in Northern Ireland 
who rejected "the bomb and the bullet"; and Helen Nearing, the pacifist and 
back-to-the-lander who inspired an entire generation of communitarians).

But what intrigues me is whether there really is anything different about the 
way women build community. There are plenty of stereotypes, of course: that 
whereas men often create groups that sometimes attempt to negate the nuclear 
family, women build communities around them. "Focolare", after all, means both 
"hearth" and, figuratively, "home" in Italian. Another widespread notion is 
that peace movements always rely on the less strident, more sensitive half of 
the population, those who care more about their children's lives than the 
conquest of territories or resources.

In the end, I'm not sure any of those stereotypes are useful. Perhaps it's 
enough to recognise, in the words of the old Chinese proverb, that when 
sleeping women wake the mountains move. And, as Yosano Akiko wrote 100 years 
ago, "the day the mountains move has come".


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 