
Women make up more than half the world's people but only a fifth of the 
world's decision-makers. Women are under-represented in formal politics, and 
often have little voice in making decisions within important political spaces 
such as the household and the workplace. Their lack of access to education and 
resources puts them at a severe disadvantage in the economic sphere.

Everyday women around the world face discrimination, poverty, violence and 
abuse. This is especially true for women who are already marginalised: 
disabled, indigenous, those living with HIV, informal workers, Dalits, migrant 
women.

Women's political rights are vital to securing and retaining all other rights. 
Women who have a voice can transform their lives.

Case study 1

Star Chimaliro, woman living with HIV, Malawi
Star Chimaliro is a woman living with HIV in the Mzimba district of Malawi. 
She has a one year-old baby daughter Mutisunge Jere, while her first born child 
is three years old. When Star was pregnant with Mutisunge, her husband began 
falling ill often. She became suspicious and decided to go for voluntary HIV 
testing and discovered that she was positive.

Star is a member of the Khaputa support group, an organisation involved in 
home-based care for people living with HIV (PLHIV) in the community. Members of 
the support group come from nearby villages and comprise different 
denominations and religions. All of them, like Star, are living with HIV.

"Women living with HIV and AIDS suffer from a lack of confidence, fear, stigma 
and intimidation from political parties. It is necessary to build their 
capacity and strengthen their confidence so they can participate effectively in 
politics."
Daphne Gondwe, Chairwoman, Coalition of Women Living with HIV and AIDS, Malawi

Case study 2

Prem and Girija - construction workers, Delhi, India 
94% of India's working women work in the informal sector, in low paid, 
difficult or dangerous jobs such as construction, street vending, brick making, 
agriculture or rag picking. Decent working conditions are essential to 
alleviate poverty but as in many other parts of the world, the labour laws that 
do exist are not applied or are easily evaded. Despite India's formal 
commitment to national and international legislation to protect women's rights, 
workers are increasingly vulnerable, exploited and oppressed

As Delhi prepares for the Commonwealth Games in 2010, thousands of women like 
Prem and Girija come to find work as labourers. They stand at crossroads each 
morning waiting to be selected by construction companies. The work is 
incredibly demanding – tiring, hot and unsafe. It is especially hard for women 
who are pregnant or have young children.

In 2008, a historic law granting social security to unorganised workers in 
India was passed by both Houses of Parliament. SEWA (the Self Employed Women's 
Association) played a major role in getting the law passed. The law gives 
millions of unorganised workers in India access to health and maternity 
benefits, pensions and disability cover and other benefits. Construction 
workers like Prem and Girija are among the over 40 million women workers who 
shall benefit from this law.

Case study 3

ACOBOL- the Association of Women Councillors of Bolivia 
ACOBOL (Asociacion de Concejalas de Bolivia or the Association of Women 
Councillors of Bolivia) was set up in 1999. ACOBOL's aim is to represent and 
defend the rights and interests of its members and to promote equitable 
political participation. It particularly works in the area of political and 
gender-based violence directed towards women councillors.

ACOBOL runs a programme to strengthen the capacities of women standing for, 
and already elected to, municipal posts in Potosí, Oruro and Beni, in 
particular in the area of legislation and equitable municipal administration. 
The programme is also a unique forum for women from all political parties to 
confront challenges that face them as women politicians.
 