
Publishers are playing literary agents at their own game, seeking out new 
talent for themselves and cutting out the industry’s powerful middlemen.

Executives within HarperCollins, Jonathan Cape, Little, Brown, and Tinder 
Press are inviting “un-agented submissions”, marking a dramatic cultural shift 
for an industry having to readjust to developments such as self-publishing, as 
well as the often huge advances demanded by agents for coveted titles.

Next month Tinder Press, Headline publishing group’s literary imprint with 
authors such asAndrea Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> and 
Patrick Gale, is holding an “open submission” fortnight. Although its 
publisher, Mary-Anne Harrington, said the company was not abandoning agents, 
she added: “It could be that, between us, we’re perhaps drowning out other 
fresher voices.”

Acknowledging that publishers have suddenly become proactive, she added: “We 
all feel that it’s incumbent on us not just to sit waiting for agents to send 
us things. We have to take the initiative.”

As editorial director at Jonathan Cape, Alex Bowler invited “fiction of high 
calibre and imagination” with a single tweet. He is still wading through almost 
5,000 manuscripts. Three have real promise, he claims.

Katie Espiner, publisher of HarperCollins’s new imprint, Borough Press, held 
an open submission after wondering why she was allowing other people to make 
decisions for her: “I wouldn’t do that in any other part of my life.”

The company’s open submission period last April produced one success from some 
400 manuscripts. On 12 February, Espiner published a debut novel titledGalina 
Petrovna’s Three-Legged Dog Story, by Andrea Bennett.

Bennett, 45, from Ramsgate, who manages 4us2, a charity for disabled children, 
used to work as a Russian translator for investment banks. She submitted her 
novel to a dozen agents before hearing of HarperCollins’s open submission. Some 
never replied, although a couple sent “nice rejection letters … One sent a 
rejection about an hour after I’d sent her three chapters, so I don’t think 
she’d even read them. A bit dispiriting!”

Literary agents are also becoming more creative in seeking new writers. The 
Curtis Brown agency has a creative writing course that has found 15 debut 
novelists in two and a half years.

But Jonathan Lloyd, the agency’s chairman, is sceptical about the new 
publishers’ trend. “They don’t have the resources, time and energy to deal with 
the flood of manuscripts that they’re going to get. And they won’t be filtered.”
 