
In the past few weeks, we've seen an entirely predictable attack on the public 
sector, with the political parties promising to "cull" quangos and get rid of 
layers of unwanted bureaucracy.

Public managers are bound by professional codes of conduct not to answer back. 
But if there is one thing the past year of economic turbulence should have 
taught us, it is that the public sector provides the final backstop for those 
in extremis – whether they are banks or abused children. In hard times, we want 
more public services, not fewer. And we need good leaders of those services.

In recent years, there has been a greater crossover of staff from the private 
sector into the public sector at a senior level. The aim has been to import 
expertise, and the result is almost always humility when those used to the 
business world encounter the reality of life in the public eye.

You think running a big company is demanding? Wait until you attempt to 
ensure, say, that everyone receiving a state pension is paid the correct 
amount, on time. Add to the mix the transparency of the public sector, which 
means that every mistake is leaped on, and the fact that political masters are 
constantly changing and impatient for results, and it's clear that public 
sector leadership calls for complex skills and capabilities.

Assuming a new era of hyper-lean public services, what kind of public managers 
will we need?

They will need to be able to motivate a demoralised workforce that includes 
highly intelligent, specialised professionals who often don't appreciate being 
"managed". They will need to be able to set out a clear vision of how their 
organisation is going to reach its targets. They will need to be able to 
withstand intense political, regulatory and media scrutiny. And they will need 
to be innovative and creative, able to work in new ways, in partnerships across 
government. They will also need the financial acumen and professional toughness 
to manage all these things within severe budgets.

New qualities may be needed, with leaders able to combine strength with more 
consensual approaches, leading from the front but taking people with them. We 
may want to look for examples of such leadership from other places, such as the 
voluntary sector, and the government may want to accelerate its existing drive 
towards greater diversity within the highest echelons of public leadership – a 
drive that has, as yet, had relatively limited success.

In an era of austerity, good leaders will have to implement some tough 
spending decisions and see them through, in the face of fierce opposition.

But many senior managers privately admit to impatience with politicians for 
failing to make clear where cuts will fall. Once the worst is known, leaders 
can grasp the nettle and work with their staff to reshape services.

Should we pay our leaders well for this difficult job? Within bounds, yes, we 
should. But we'll need our leaders to justify their rewards, and that means 
better ways to assess success and failure, including a greater emphasis on what 
they achieve for those they serve and how all their staff are rewarded.

Jane Dudman is the editor of the Guardian's Public website

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 