
Alison Jackson's new film, Sven: The Coach, The Cash & His Lovers, is either 
an incredibly sharp satire of our irredeemably tabloid-ised, fame-addled 
popular culture, or a symptom of it, or both. At one level, Sven... is a 
straightforward documentary about the outgoing England manager, deploying 
archive footage and talking-head commentary from congruent personalities, 
including former football players Graeme Le Saux and Les Ferdinand, and 
football journalists Jim White and James Richardson.

It is also, however, an exercise in imagined voyeurism, using Jackson's 
trademark lookalikes and grainy CCTV film stock to depict scenes we have never 
seen - but have been encouraged to envisage - and using interview contributions 
from those involved with the non-football aspects of Eriksson's life (Faria 
Alam, Max Clifford) as well as those who, for reasons surpassing understanding, 
are interested in these (like the inexplicably employed Amanda Platell, whose 
presence in this film it would be nice to be able to regard as a grotesque 
lampoon of fatuous, prurient Daily Mail variety moral self-righteousness).

Jackson's bogus set-ups in Sven: The Coach, The Cash & His Lovers include: 
Eriksson and his assistant Tord Grip on English road trips, reading porn and 
eating weird Swedish food as they struggle to find a town called Sheffield 
Wednesday; Eriksson being yelled at down the phone by a fishwifeish Victoria 
Beckham; Eriksson in the sauna swapping tales of the bedroom with David 
Beckham; Eriksson carefully stacking his dishwasher before seeing to Faria Alam 
on a kitchen bench; Eriksson fleeing a bombardment of crockery flung by an 
enraged Nancy Dell'Olio; Eriksson being the only man left alive who wouldn't 
suspect that an Arab offering large amounts of money for nebulous reasons might 
be a News Of The World reporter in drag; Eriksson braiding Rio Ferdinand's 
hair; Eriksson blowing the nose of a tearful David Seaman after England's 
quarter-final exit at the 2002 World Cup; Eriksson engaging in a session of 
mutal naked herring-smearing with fellow Swede Ulrika Jonsson.

It all amounts to a well-crafted hallucination of what Eriksson's life might 
be like if everything printed about it in tabloids was true. Platell's 
contributions in particular supplement the illusion, if inadvertently, by 
epitomising the absurd interest that her depressingly prevalent mindset 
professes to take in such matters. Of the Eriksson/Jonsson liaison, she 
actually remarks that "it's not very often as a journalist that you're 
staggered by a piece of news". This is true enough - it's just that jolting 
most hacks out of our ennui requires hijacked planes hitting office blocks, or 
similar, rather than two consenting adults having sex, with or without the 
involvement of fish.

This is all amusing knockabout stuff, even if the richest comedy is 
unintentional, like the straightfaced assertion of Faria Alam - a woman whose 
only claim on public attention is a willingness to sell the details of her sex 
life for money - that she was attracted to Eriksson because "he has this 
mystery about him... that's the way I am." The question is: what's the point?

"I'm depicting what exists in the public imagination," says Alison Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/alison-jackson>. She has done this 
before, of course. In her book, Private, her television series, Double Take, 
and previous films, The Secret Election and Not The Royal Wedding, Jackson 
examined the classes of people about whom we are constantly told more than we 
should want to know - politicians, royalty - and presented the popular myth as 
truth: the Queen playing with her corgis, the Blairs cavorting in the pool, 
David Beckham displaying an "El Becks" tattoo across his rump.

"We live our lives through screens now," continues Jackson, "whether they are 
televisions or our computers or our phones, and screens are hugely addictive. 
There is a gap between the facts, and how the media portrays stuff, and that's 
what these images fill. I'm especially interested in how we think we know 
people through imagery - it goes straight from eye to psyche, which makes it 
very powerful, and very seductive. It also makes it very easy to lie."

For celebrities and filmmakers both. Jackson's portrayal of Eriksson is 
faithful to the tabloid myth: a bespectacled Scandinavian iceberg concealing a 
bonfire perceived only by those who get close to him. She shows the apparently 
vague, disengaged, barely interested manager who nevertheless manages to rouse 
his players to such feats as England's splendid 5-1 tonking of Germany in 2001. 
She also shows the outwardly cool, wan, even henpecked man who is somehow 
capable of weakening the knees of attractive women decades his junior (Faria 
Alam is predictably excruciating on this front, reminiscing about what a 
"giving" lover Eriksson was). When asked if it matters how accurate any of this 
is, Jackson's reply is an untrumpably astute summation of modern celebrity 
worship.

"We know," she says, "that when we see something, we can't really believe it, 
but we're at a stage now where we don't care." One beneficiary of this 
syndrome, and a key cast member of Sven..., is Andy Harmer, who for the last 
eight and a half years has made a living as a David Beckham lookalike. Working 
with Jackson, he has been mobbed by fans from Tokyo to Madrid - whose ardour, 
weirdly, barely dwindles when they realise he's not the real thing.

"I think," says Harmer, "that even if they realise I'm not David Beckham, 
people can still take my picture and try and convince their friends they've 
seen him, so they play along." That, at least, is the case in Spain and Japan. 
In Britain, as Jackson suggests, the increasingly indiscriminate cult of 
celebrity has advanced to the extent that someone who looks like someone famous 
becomes famous in their own right. "When I started," says Harmer, "people came 
up to me because they thought I was David Beckham. Now, they come up to me and 
say, 'You're the lookalike guy.' Some even know my name, which is bizarre."

Harmer is touchingly protective of his doppelgänger, admitting to unease with 
some of Jackson's suggestions. "I do have reservations," he says. "I don't mind 
doing the tongue-in-cheek stuff, but I don't like to get into stuff to do with 
his [alleged] affair, I don't think it's right. Anything that gets too 
personal... I don't think it's on."

Jackson is a little more relaxed about the possible reactions of her principal 
subject. "What can I say?" she asks. "I don't want Sven to be furious about it. 
I wouldn't want to upset him. I haven't made the film to wind him up. And I 
hope he wins the World Cup." She is not alone in hoping that her film's opening 
sequence, showing a bathtub full of naked England players giving Sven the bumps 
as he brandishes the Fifa trophy, has the qualities of oracle.

"If they win it," says Andy Harmer, whose fortune could be made by a couple of 
well-placed free kicks this summer, "then everyone is invited to my party." 
Jackson describes Sven..., and her work in general, as having "one foot in 
fantasy and one foot in reality" and this is precisely what grants it its 
potence: in the area of the media she is contemplating, so does everything. All 
tabloid/celebrity journalism is, to a greater or lesser extent, a fraud, if a 
much less artful one than Alison Jackson's meticulously constructed set-ups. 
When the stories which are printed about the famous are utter rubbish - which 
they are, frequently - the media pretend they're true and the readers pretend 
to believe them. When the stories are actually correct - when, for example, an 
England football manager has sex - the media pretend it matters, and the 
readers pretend they care.

· Sven: The Coach, The Cash & His Lovers, Mon, 9pm, More4; Thu,10pm, C4
 