
Alison Steadman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman>, 62, was 
born in Liverpool. She left school at 16, then attended the East 15 Theatre 
School in London. Her films include Shirley Valentine and Life Is Sweet, while 
on television she has appeared in Abigail's Party, The Singing Detective, Pride 
& Prejudice and, most recently, Gavin & Stacey. She stars in Alan Bennett's 
Enjoy at the Gielgud Theatre, London, from January 27.

When were you happiest? 

When my son was born and I realised I was a mum.

What is your greatest fear? 

That we will drown in plastic waste.

What is your earliest memory?

Holding my grandfather's hand when he was ill in bed the week he died. 

Which living person do you most admire, and why?

I have great hopes for Barack Obama. 

What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?

I repeat stories (like my mum used to).

What is the trait you most deplore in others?

Lack of understanding and tolerance.

What was your most embarrassing moment?

Playing a pregnant woman, and not being able to find the padding - I shoved a 
cardie under my dress, and spent the whole play walking around with a sleeve 
dragging along the floor.

Aside from a property, what's the most expensive thing you've bought? 

I once bought the most expensive moisturiser in the shop and it brought me out 
in spots. Lesson learned.

What is your most treasured possession?

A framed photo of my mother in her early 20s. I always keep it in my dressing 
room for inspiration.

What would your super power be?

To rid the world of plastic.

What do you most dislike about your appearance?

Middle-age spread.

Who would play you in the film of your life?

Catherine Deneuve, but she'd never get the Liverpool accent.

What is your most unappealing habit?

Fussing too much when I have guests.

What is your favourite word?

'Cheeky'.

What is the worst thing anyone's said to you?

A critic once said she wanted to lift a carpet, put me under it and hold it 
down until I stopped moving.

To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?

I didn't go to a retirement party once for someone who had been special to me 
and he died shortly after.

Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?

David Attenborough, so I could hear all his wonderful stories. He's the best.

What is the worst job you've done?

Washing dishes when I was a student.

What do you owe your parents?

Everything - especially memories of laughter in the house, and security.

What does love feel like?

Friendly and warm.

Which living person do you most despise?

Mugabe comes high on the list.

Which words or phrases do you most overuse?

'I'll tell you what ...'

What has been your biggest disappointment?

Not making a movie with Jimmy Stewart or Cary Grant.

If you could edit your past, what would you change?

I would never have smoked - I gave up years ago.

If you could go back in time, where would you go?

Pre-industrial revolution, to smell the air and taste the water.

When did you last cry, and why?

When I read about the abuse of Baby P.

How do you relax?

A walk in my local woods, a cuppa in a cafe, then a movie and a meal.

What single thing would improve the quality of your life?

An extra room. 

What do you consider your greatest achievement?

Earning a living as an actor for 40 years.

What song would you like played at your funeral?

The Intermezzo from Cavalleria Rusticana.

How would you like to be remembered?

As an honest person who liked a laugh.

What is the most important lesson life has taught you?

Be humble. 

Where would you most like to be right now?

Watching wildlife somewhere with David Attenborough.

Tell us a joke.

Q: Your dog's got no nose. How does he smell? A: 'Orrible!
 