
Labor has “40 years of evidence” to back its claim Medicare would face 
privatisation and service cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/23/campaign-catchup-labor-baits-coalition-medicare>
 in an “American-style health system” under a future Coalition government, the 
deputy opposition leader, Tanya Plibersek has told the ABC’s Q&A program.

Plibersek’s response to a question on whether Labor’s so-called “Medi-scare” 
campaign was “just another desperate pre-election gamut” prompted the finance 
minister,Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, to deny there was 
ever “a plan to privatise” Medicare, which was “in very good shape”.

But Plibersek said the Coalition showed its agenda through attempts to charge 
patients for GP visits – then engineer those costs through the “backdoor” by 
freezing GP rebates – and raise the cost of prescriptions, x-rays and blood 
tests.

Plenty of noise about jobs and Medicare, but deathly silence on so much else | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/plenty-of-noise-about-jobs-and-growth-and-medicare-but-deathly-silence-on-so-much-else>
“At every opportunity, the Liberals are trying to get you to put your hand in 
your pocket and that’s what a privatised American-style health system looks 
like,” she said.

She said this approach dated back to Labor’s introduction of Medicare 
forerunner Medibank “and the Fraser government privatised it”.

Economic questions and the local impact of “Brexit” – the British vote to exit 
the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/27/brexit-live-george-osborne-economy-corbyn-shadow-cabinet>
 - were repeat themes on the panel talk show ahead of the federal election on 
Saturday.

Plibersek found herself weighing in as the only critic of the Coalition’s 
$50bn company tax cut proposal, on a panel that included the economist Chris 
Richardson, the academic Marcia Langton and the broadcasterAlan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones>.

Richardson, Langton and Jones all backed Cormann’s argument that company tax 
cuts led to jobs growth, the finance minister arguing they could even lead to 
growth in revenue.

Plibersek cited the failure of the US president Ronald Reagan to expand his 
tax base with cuts as proof the Coalition’s “trickle down” approach to economic 
growth was mislaid.

Richardson said the political fallout of Brexit could be worse than the 
economic, suggesting it was unlikely to test Australia’s need to tackle its 
budget deficit by forcing stimulus measures.

He said while the deficit was not “out of control”, it was a problem that 
needed fixing amid a “temporary [economic] boom, permanent promises” scenario 
that spawned major spending commitments like Gonski education reforms and the 
National Disability Insurance Scheme.

Labor was correct to point out the government’s “zombie measures” to aid the 
budget that would never pass, Richardson said.

But the problem was “zombie measures would exist whoever is in government” 
since both major parties in opposition were “increasingly willing to be 
populist” on questions of economic reform.

Coalition’s company tax cuts: more than 40% of benefit flows overseas, report 
finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/coalitions-company-tax-cuts-more-than-40-of-benefit-flows-overseas-report-finds>
Jones said the cost of government debt could fund “a brand new primary school 
every 8 hours” at $40m and neither major party was serious about tackling 
deficits by making a case to voters for spending cuts as Paul Keating 
successfully did three decades ago.

The panel was asked about whether the Brexit vote, with its eclipse of the 
British youth consensus in a highly divisive referendum, should serve as a 
warning

Jones dismissed as “alarmist nonsense” concerns about Brexit, which was “a 
vote” and paled in significance beside an event like the collapse of the Lehman 
Brothers bank during the global financial crisis.

But Jones said he had received “a stack of correspondence” from people 
concerned about the divisive effect of a plebiscite on marriage equality as 
proposed by the Coalition.

“I think we should avoid it,” he said.

The broadcaster said the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, should stay true to 
the support for a parliamentary vote on the issue which he first outlined to 
Jones when the minister for telecommunications.

Other topics before the panel included the relegation of Indigenous issues to 
the margins of discussion during elections, and the Coalition’s opposition to a 
royal commission into banks and lack of specific initiatives to aid first 
homebuyers in an increasingly unaffordable property market.

Langton said after “watching elections for 50 years”, the “same old answer” to 
why Indigenous issues were overlooked was the bipartisan fear of alienating 
racists by backing “lazy Aborigines”.

“Everybody wants Aborigines to shut up during the election because both sides 
of politics – and I’m not even talking about the Greens here, there’s no point 
– don’t want a backlash from the racist backblocks,” Langton said.

Jones, who claimed “people don’t quite understand what is intended” by an 
Indigenous push for a treaty besides constitutional recognition, said that 
political neglect was comparable to the experience of any voter “west of the 
Dividing Range”.

Most families better off under Labor's childcare policy, modelling finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/most-families-better-off-under-labors-childcare-policy-modelling-finds>
Cormann was confronted by Jeff Morris, a whistleblower in the Commonwealth 
Bank financial planning scandal, on how a Coalition government could oppose a 
banking royal commission when financial industry scandals continued to unfold 
on its watch and it took major donations from banks.

Cormann said the government thought it better to arm the Australian Securities 
and Investments Commission to take action where royal commissions and other 
public inquiries could not.

Morris said if ASIC genuinely was a “tough cop”, the scandals would not be 
recurring, prompting Cormann to say some of these had occurred under opposition 
leader Bill Shorten’s watch as finance minister.

Jones upbraided Cormann for government inaction on badly conflicted financial 
planning which left “decent people being thrown under buses”, saying: “Frankly, 
nothing is happening, Mathias”.
 