
It's a strange thing, but one that seems universally true: offer people a good 
fact, joke or story and they'll press it on the next 10 people they meet. In 
evolutionary terms, this is rather encouraging. It suggests that we have 
survived as a species by sharing our precious resources rather than hoarding 
them like Rolos or old phone chargers. Because although facts don't fill our 
bellies or pay our bills, they do remind us just how strange and unlikely the 
world is, and in so doing, operate as an alternative currency, a sort of black 
market of wonder.

With that in mind the team at QI have taken to gathering our favourites 
together annually. The latest offering, 1,339 QI Facts to Make Your Jaw Drop, 
offers an unbeatable 9.12% uplift on last year's volume, with enough polished 
nuggets of unlikely information to fill 130 boxes of crackers. There are the 
straight-down-the-line "wow!" statistics (A pint of milk in a supermarket can 
contain milk from more than 1,000 cows; only 5% of the world's population has 
ever been on an aeroplane; in the first quarter of 2012, Apple sold moreiPhones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> than there were babies born in 
the world), some unlikely connections (Mo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah>, Sir Roger Bannister, Sir Chris Hoy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chrishoy>, Jason Kenny and Sir Steve 
Redgrave <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sir-steve-redgrave> were all born 
on 23 March; JRR Tolkien and Adolf Hitler both fought at the battle of the 
Somme; the first private detective agency was started by a criminal), and some 
wonderful walk-on parts by humans (Enid Blyton played tennis in the nude) and 
animals (fruit bats enjoy fellatio).

These are good, but they aren't my favourites. The real pleasure in compiling 
a book like this is the cumulative effect of facts arranged in close proximity. 
It's shocking to learn that a "heart attack" is a modern phenomenon not 
recorded until 1925. But add to that the fact that the human heart is not on 
the left-hand side of the body, but in the middle, and we're in a familiarQI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/qi> no-man's land where nothing we 
were taught at school seems to stand up to scrutiny. And even more 
extraordinary is the next revelation on page 43: each time a fertile man's 
heart beats, he makes 1,500 new sperm. Yes, gentlemen, if it takes you 10 
minutes to read this article, you'll end it 1.2 million sperm to the good. Use 
them wisely.
 QI host Stephen Fry (centre) with panellists from a recent episode: (from 
left) Alan Davies, Jo Brand, Danny Baker and Marcus Brigstocke. Photograph: 
BBC/Talkback 
Other favourite segues include the leap from this improbable statistic: after 
just four moves in a game of chess, there are 318,979,564,000 possibilities for 
the layout of the board, to this unlikely meeting: the 1978 chess final at HM 
Prison Wormwood Scrubs was between Moors murderer Ian Brady and disgraced MP 
John Stonehouse. And what about the discovery that cockroaches first appeared 
appeared 120 million years before the dinosaurs, whereas the Himalayas were 
formed 25 million years after the last dinosaur died out. That puts geological 
and biological time into a new and revealing perspective – but isn't as 
unnerving as the discovery that if a cockroach touches a person, it immediately 
runs away and washes itself. I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here must be almost 
as unwatchable for cockroaches as it is for sentient humans.

As well as astonishments, the book is full of surprises. Who knew "dogging" 
meant "jogging with a dog" in German, that Vikings had a word for "uneasiness 
after debauchery" (kvweis) or that according to the official Velcro website 
there is no such thing as Velcro (its name is "hook and eye fastener" and its 
one of many Velcro™ products, thank you very much)?

And from surprise it's a small leap to frivolity. Such as the revelation that 
in the 2009 Star Trek film, Zachary Quinto could only manage the Vulcan salute 
after his fingers were glued together. Or that the craggy Norwegian explorer 
Thor Heyerdahl once spent hours waiting for a taxi at the BBC only to find that 
the driver had been there all along, waiting for "four Airedales".

If you think this is just one more manifestation of a modern obsession with 
trivia, or an inability to deal with the deep seriousness of life, bear in mind 
that such list-making has a long and noble pedigree. As Galileo himself once 
wrote: "Facts which at first seem improbable will, even on scant explanation, 
drop the cloak which has hidden them and stand forth in naked and simple 
beauty."

John Mitchinson is head of research for the quiz show QI and co-author of 
1,339 QI Facts to Make Your Jaw Drop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571308941>
, published by Faber
 