
App: QR Reader

By: TapMedia Ltd

Price: Free (or 69p if you don't want adverts, but they are very unobtrusive)

Available on: iOS/Android

What is it?

You know those little magic eye puzzles you see everywhere (including on our 
App of the week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/series/consumer-app-of-the-week> features)? 
This that lets you scan those; doing so takes you to a web page. The app then 
lets you share the url via email, Twitter, Facebook and other social networking 
sites. It also lets you create your own QR codes.

What does it promise?

"Fast and effective with the real-time auto detect mode", whatever that means. 
A lot seems to be made of the app's "real-time" scan mode, although I'm not 
sure what the alternative would be (perhaps someone could enlighten me).

Is it easy to use?
 QR code for the QR Reader Android app 
Yes. Once you've installed it you just need to click on it and the scanner 
opens automatically. Hold your camera over your QR code of choice and the magic 
happens. Well, in theory, at least – but it doesn't always work. My attempt to 
read a small code on an advert in a newspaper resulted in an endless "scanning" 
message, regardless of how steadily I tried to hold the phone or how close it 
was to the page.

Subsequent attempts have been more successful (although when you scan codes on 
the tube you have to wait until you emerge above ground to be taken through to 
the web page). It's quite easy to find all the features once you have scanned 
in a code; it's quite difficult if you haven't (it turns out you need to touch 
the icon in the bottom righthand corner).

Is it fun?

It really depends what the QR code reveals. Although there is a small frisson 
of excitement when your first scan works successfully.

Is it pretty?

There's not much to it. The icon takes you straight through to a camera view 
so you can start scanning. The rest is fairly clean but uninspiring.

Should you download it?
 QR Code for the QR Reader iPhone app 
Yes. Then, rather than searching for something in an app store you could just 
scan the code to download it. And although most of the QR codes you see at the 
moment are just portals to more marketing for a product, some companies are 
using them more innovatively. For example, child car seat manufacturer Britax 
is using them on seats with a link through to a fitting video. This is just the 
start – the future lies in small black and white mazes
 