
App: Quidco <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/quidco/id436115342>

By: Maple Syrup Media

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>

What is it?

A money-saving app offering discount vouchers, in-store deals and cashback.

Who is it by?

Quidco is "the UK's largest cashback and voucher codes website".

What does it promise?

"The UK's first 'check-in for cash' tool, the Quidco app provides the user 
with all of the money-saving offers available nearby, including vouchers, bar 
code vouchers and in-store cashback deals. It also presents cash incentives and 
bigger offers for users who enter certain restaurants and high street stores 
and check-in".

How does it work?

There's a lot going on here. On the one hand it's a simple voucher app, 
offering instant discounts when users flash a voucher code or barcode on their 
iPhone screen at the point of sale. But the app is boosted by a cashback for 
purchases facility that means users can obtain cash simply by buying products 
at participating stores listed on the app.

Even better is the addition of a check-in cashback facility, whereby users 
receive cash merely for entering a store – you don't even have to buy anything. 
Participating retailers and restaurants have provided Quidco with the 
coordinates of each of their branches so the app is able to detect when you are 
on one of the premises for a valid check-in.

Is it easy to use?

Using the app itself is straightforward. I went into a branch of Halfords and 
was rewarded with 20p merely for walking through the door, looking at a bottle 
of Turtlewax and then leaving. But I only did this after trying to kid the app 
by "checking-in" at Majestic Wine from the comfort of my desk – sadly, the 
geo-location was accurate enough to spot I was nowhere near the store. After 
leaving Halfords, I immediately walked back into the store to get another 20p 
but you can only check-in to a retailer once a fortnight.

To make yourself eligible for cashback on purchases, you of course need to 
register with Quidco and input the long number on the front of your debit or 
credit card into the app (or on to the website). Then, after 24 hours, any 
purchases made with that card will earn you cashback at the likes of Debenhams, 
Sports Direct, Halfords, NCP, Blockbusters, Cineworld, Little Chef and Austin 
Reed. The highest rate of cashback is on offer from Halfords (7.8%) and Austin 
Reed (up to 5.4%), though NCP car parks and Cineworld both offer 4.5% – which 
is 90p in your pocket if you spend £20 on movie tickets.

Is it fun?

It's great to get money for nothing, but perhaps the most amusing part of the 
app is the discclaimer users get when they download it: "You must be at least 
17 years old to download this application" due to "frequent/intense alcohol, 
tobacco, drug use or reference to these" – it's a freakin' discount voucher app 
not a torturous adult movie about heroin addicts.

Is it pretty?

An aqua blue-on-white colour scheme is certainly refreshing, like surfing a 
Quidco wave or popping a Quidco mint, but though the clarity of design aids 
navigation it is a tad monotonous. But who cares when you're getting 25p just 
for darkening Gap's door.

Should you download it?

A small quibble would be that Quidco charges a £5 membership, meaning it keeps 
the first £5 in cashback that members earn each year. This applies to any 
cashback earned through the website, and any in-store cashback earned (although 
once you've earned £5 the rest is yours from then onwards). However, with the 
cash check-ins, the money is yours.

Let's face it, there's a reason the app shot to number four on the iTunes App 
Store's free list within days of release (it is currently number nine), and 
it's because everyone loves a bargain. So at the very least it's worth a look.

Android users can expect the Quidco app to be available in a few months and an 
iPad version is expected in a few weeks.
 