
The scenes of unbridled celebration following the 2005 Ashes victory, when a 
glazed-eyedAndrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> 
stumbled on to the parade bus after a sleepless night of partying and team mate 
Kevin Pietersen joined him with a tankard of beer, were as memorable as the 
result itself.

This time round, following a wait of two-and-a-half years – rather than 18 – 
to win back the tiny but highly prized urn, the England team's euphoria was of 
a lower order. Yesterday, there was no public boozing or victory parade through 
the crowd-lined streets of central London. Indeed, it has emerged that for some 
the spirits were substituted by moments of reflection bordering on the 
spiritual.

After night fell over the Oval on Sunday and the crowds dispersed to the local 
bars, England's management spent an hour sat round the cricket square in quiet 
contemplation, watching foxes scurry across the pitch.

Inside the dressing room, players from both sides marked the moment of 
England's 2-1 series win with a drink together. Then, with the doors shut and 
the cameras gone, an iPod was plugged in and Flintoff's favourite song, Elton 
John's Rocket Man, was played in honour of the team's retiring talisman.

The England players left the Oval shortly after 11pm on Sunday to return to 
their hotel in east London. There the celebrations continued in a manner 
befitting of a team flying to Belfast today ahead of a one-day international 
against Ireland on Thursday.

Flintoff, so often the inspiration for phenomenal behaviour both on and off 
the pitch, spent the evening with his family before heading to hospital last 
night for surgery on his problematic right knee. His injury has forced him to 
retire from test cricket though last night, Ladbrokes was offering 16-1 on a 
comeback.

England's victory with a day to spare allowed the surgery to be brought 
forward 24 hours, giving him a bit longer to prove his fitness before a one-day 
tour of Bangladesh next March.

The post-series party was "pretty low-key by my standards", Flintoff said 
yesterday. "We had a room in the hotel for friends and family and celebrated a 
memorable day – it wasn't too crazy," he said.

"I remember 2005 – contrary to popular belief. 2005 was fantastic, it almost 
snuck up on us. I lived for the moment then and celebrated hard. But this time 
it was something which I savoured."

Flintoff said he spent the evening with his wife, Rachael, his young children 
and his father, who he thanked for his support throughout his career.

"It was very different but in a lot of ways far more enjoyable. Last time we 
had the open-top bus, and I probably ruined that for everyone – this time 
around I enjoyed it more.

"My life has changed in a lot of ways since 2005 and obviously the way we 
celebrated was different, and in a lot of ways more special.

"At the end yesterday there was obviously euphoria at being involved in an 
Ashes victory again, and with the realisation I'll never walk out in whites 
again – but there was lots of emotion at seeing the missus, kids, mum and dad."

Flintoff emerged from the team hotel at about 10.30am yesterday and appeared 
to be showing no ill effects from the previous day's exertions. However, he did 
nip in to a nearby shop for a few cans of Red Bull energy drink.

Holly Cawdron, 19, from Rye, East Sussex, stayed at the same hotel and said 
the team appeared to have had a quiet night.

"They were all really well-behaved, none of them looked drunk. They all looked 
compos mentis. None of them were falling over. We went to bed at 3am. I'm not 
sure if they were still up. We didn't hear any noise."

So it may not quite have been a party like 2005, but that didn't stop spin 
bowler Graeme Swann describing the celebrations as "massive". And yesterday 
Gordon Brown wrote to the England captain, Andrew Strauss, congratulating the 
team on producing "yet another wonderful showcase for cricket" and inviting the 
squad to a Downing Street reception.

"There have been many outstanding performances this summer on both sides, but 
throughout the series you have led England from the front, with patience, 
resolution and courage," Brown wrote.

But England were warned by former Australian fast bowler Rodney Hogg not to 
get carried away. His country's side in 2005, he said, had been full of 
superstars. "This time it has been pretty average."

The Australian players headed out to West End nightclub Boujis to drown their 
sorrows, but back home the inquest began with pressure mounting on the captain,
Ricky Ponting <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting>, who has the 
unenviable record of being the first Australian skipper in a century to lose 
the Ashes twice.

Some commentators suggested the country's selectors had failed to tap into 
talented players from minority communities and that the current team remained 
"as solidly Anglo" as in the pre-1939 days of the legendary Don Bradman.

"Ashes to crashes," reported the Age newspaper, as the country came to terms 
with its team falling in world rankings from first to fourth.

In England, eyes are now focused on how the team performs during the one-day 
internationals and 20/20 games to come. The England captain, Andrew Strauss, 
emphasised that the team was keeping the Ashes glory in perspective when he 
summed up the series' performance. "When we were bad we were very bad. When we 
were good, we managed to be just good enough."
 