
The radio industry is to copy the government's car scrappage scheme as it 
tries to persuade listeners to go digital.

The car scheme, introduced by Alistair Darling, allows drivers to collect up 
to £2,000 if they trade in their old vehicle for a less polluting one. Its 
radio equivalent could involve a 20% discount on a new digital set if you bring 
in one of the 100 million or so analogue ones estimated to still be in 
circulation.

Industry executives hope that the idea will quash a potential rebellion among 
FM radio listeners as the deadline for switching off the analogue radio signal 
approaches in a few years' time. They also hope that family members will pick 
up sets belonging to older relatives and hand them in.

The government has set a date of 2015 for turning off the analogue signal, 
although that is regarded as an aspiration rather than a concrete policy 
objective and it is a target that few in the radio industry expect it to meet.

A spokeswoman for Digital Radio UK, the organisation set up to drive 
switchover, said of the scrappage scheme: "It is something we are looking at we 
want to do." Its members include the BBC, commercial radio stations andArqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva>, the company that owns the digital 
radio network and licences frequency to radio stations.

There is confusion amongst many older listeners about the need to purchase new 
sets and the industry fears a potential backlash from consumers angry about the 
end of analogue radio.

The former Conservative minister Lord Fowler, who chairs the Lords 
Communications Committee, told peers last week that it was "quite a sensitive 
issue" with the public.

"The person who has actually got three radios which have suddenly become 
redundant, it is going to be quite an issue" he said.

Digital Radio UK has already held exploratory talks with leading retailers, 
including Currys owner DSG International, and leading manufacturers.

"The idea is that stores will accept analogue sets in part-exchange for new 
digital models, which will be far cheaper by the time the signal is switched 
off," said a senior radio industry source.

One idea being touted by senior industry executives involves sending a 
shipment of outmoded analogue radios to an African country, where they are one 
of the main sources of communication and theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> World Service is popular.

The event would generate huge publicity and could form the centrepiece of a PR 
campaign in the run up to switchover, when the public will be persuaded to dump 
their old sets.

Although the process of switching off the analogue signal will not begin until 
digital stations make up 50% of all radio listening, the industry is fearful of 
a middle class revolt against the plan.

Concerns have also been raised about the cost of disposing of millions of 
analogue sets.

There are thought to be more than 100m analogue radios in the country, with 
around 50m in regular use. Many households own more than one.

There are also plans being drawn up for huge recycling bins to be placed in 
city centres around the country, where consumers can dump their unwanted 
analogue sets.

Currently, just over 20% of all radio listening is via digital. The government 
target is for digital listening to reach 50% of the total before the two-year 
switchover process can begin.

Sales of digital radios were disappointing when they were first launched at 
the start of the century, although they have picked up recently as the 
technology has improved and prices have fallen.

Around 500,000 digital radio sets were sold over Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/26/radio-digital-2020-switchover>, 
taking the total number of sets in the UK to 10.5m, up from 8.5m at the end of 
2009. They can now be bought for under £50.

Critics say its popularity would grow if there were more digital radio 
stations, pointing out that the vast majority can also be listened to on 
analogue.

Freeview, the free digital TV service backed by the BBC, has helped to hasten 
the migration from analogue to digital TV – partly because it gives viewers 
access to dozens of digital TV channels they would not otherwise be able to 
receive.

The BBC, which dominates UK radio with a 50% audience share, is key to the 
success of the project. The corporation has launched a portfolio of digital 
stations, including Radio 5 Live Sports Extra and 6Music.

But digital radio was dealt a huge blow in 2008, when Channel 4 abandoned 
plans to launch its own digital network in partnership with other commercial 
broadcasters.

The Digital Radio UK Spokeswoman said: "Digital radio UK is working with the 
radio industry on a number of initiatives to drive digital radio take-up and 
encourage the responsible recycling of analogue sets. Future details will be 
available as the projects progress."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 