
In his presentation on the future of the BBC, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/08/tony-hall-bbc-digital> Tony Hall 
referred to a clip of a small child trying to open a magazine and deduced that 
"to a toddler, a magazine is a tablet that's broken". But whereas more people 
are reading magazines than ever before, the radio industry is the branch of the 
media finding it hardest to attract its next generation of users. One of the 
reasons is that they're not terribly sure what a radio is. It's got no screen, 
does only one thing and – get this – it thinks it knows what you want to listen 
to.

This is not a problem any of the senior people at this week's Radio Festival 
<http://www.radioacademy.org/events/radio-festival-2013/> can solve but it will 
have a huge bearing on their future. On the one hand the radio industry is 
spooking its most satisfied customers, the over-50s, with the threat of a 
digital switchover and the brand new set in the kitchen that doesn't sync with 
the old one in the bathroom; on the other the customers it has to really worry 
about aren't complaining because they aren't customers. Adam Bowie, who is in 
charge of strategy and planning at Absolute Radio, reckons the question "what 
is a radio?" is something the industry doesn't think enough about. He observes 
that most of the radios in John Lewis are skeuomorphic in design, ie 
backward-looking and intended to evoke the voice of Jimmy Young and the smell 
of Horlicks, possibly a clue to where the manufacturers see the sales growth 
coming from.

Radio futurologist James Cridland agrees: "FM radios have a real problem with 
young people in that they just look a bit boring. Very soon the absence of a 
skip button or an instant programme guide will begin to look archaic."

Both of them look forward to something multi-functional in nature but don't 
know exactly what it might be. While smartphones and computers have levels of 
user-friendliness that are almost sinister, the radio industry has failed to 
make the leap to a device that is both useful and, more importantly, a cool 
toy. While tablet and smartphone apps like Tune-In and the UK-centred Radio 
Player make the job of navigating the UK's bewildering number of historically 
local but now virtual stations more congenial, they're unlikely to light a fire 
in a 15-year-old heart. Cridland points out that in India, where almost all 
mobiles are sold with an FM tuner inside, 94% of all radio listeners do so on 
their mobile phone. In the UK, it's estimated that only 1% of radio listening 
is currently through a mobile app – most of that over wifi; 11% is via the 
internet and TV, and it's growing but not dramatically.

Amid this uncertainty the ever-consolidating radio giants are looking 
nervously over their shoulders at Apple and Google, both of whom are loitering 
with something which may not be radio as they understand it, but will probably 
be close enough for some young people. At the same time the BBC's announcement 
of its Playlister seems an acceptance that services like YouTube and Spotify 
are too big to ignore, and ultimately that it too will have to fish where the 
fish are.

All media talk about platform-neutrality but all media is about habit. 
Technology shatters these habits. For every person delighted to have more 
choice in ways to access sound entertainment, via their TV, their phone or the 
internet, there's somebody else who stops listening.

Radios don't break and don't often need replacing. Similarly, while 40% of new 
cars have DAB fitted we're all hanging on to our cars longer than ever. The car 
is one place where this habit dies hardest and where it's most likely to be 
given a new lease.

As veteran radio hand Trevor Dann said to me: "My children weren't really sure 
what a radio was for until they started driving."
 