
Radio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4>, the jewel in the crown of 
the BBC's radio empire, is to enter a new era next month, seeking to become an 
online information and entertainment service as well as a national broadcasting 
station.

The aim is to create a "bigger Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4" by rapidly improving access to 
the station's vast archives, as advances in technology make live radio and 
daily schedules less central to the BBC's output.

The first stage of the opening up of Radio 4's cache of speech, news and drama 
programming to the public is timed to coincide with the US presidential 
election on 6 November. "Radio 4 can now offer listeners much more as we break 
out of our schedule and begin to reveal our archive," said Gwyneth Williams, 
the station's controller, this weekend. "We are just beginning to test the 
considerable potential the website has by using some of the best of Radio 4's 
past content on a subject and joining it to current events."

Radio 4's editors will select current and past programmes organised around 
contemporary topics which listeners can choose online.

The experiment begins on 1 November with the release of many of the late 
Alistair Cooke's Sunday-morningLetter from America programmes. Cooke, a Radio 4 
institution, broadcast his personal views of politics and culture from across 
the Atlantic for more than 50 years. Listeners will be able to download any of 
920 episodes from an archive that reaches back to the 1940s and covers many 
significant events up to Cooke's death in 2004.

"Alistair Cooke – his very name invokes the art of writing for radio," said 
Williams. "I am hugely excited about this extraordinary archive. I can see 
Alistair, as I listen, telling his stories and drawing in listeners with his 
easy authority and knowledge of history, his reporting skills and his passion 
for America."

Williams's personal highlights include Cooke's dramatic letter describing the 
assassination of Bobby Kennedy, which he witnessed from an adjoining room (he 
said the shots sounded "like someone dropping a rack of trays"), and a letter 
about George Romney, Mitt Romney's father and governor of Michigan, who led a 
national poll for president in 1968 but went on to lose the Republican 
nomination.

The Radio 4 controller's wider aim is "to burst out of the schedule", she 
says, with collections of related programming – including arts interviews with 
American authors and composers, whileDesert Island Discs will feature American 
guests.

"We can point our audience, for instance, to Melvyn Bragg's brilliant In Our 
Time on the Statue of Liberty, broadcast in 2008, or to his programme on 
Benjamin Franklin, as well as to theNews Quiz USA that has just been 
broadcast," she said.

In many homes the tuning dial on a radio set is already obsolete and it seems 
likely that, within a decade, the set itself will have been replaced by 
computers, tablets and smartphones. Listeners will choose programmes by theme 
and genre, instead of simply tuning in to their favourite station. This switch 
in behaviour is already established in the nation's television viewing habits.

The Letter From America archive launch is part of a range of events also 
planned to markBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio's 90th year 
and it will add to more than 16,000 hours of audio already available on the 
station's website, including every Reith Lecture since they began in 1948.

Cooke was born in Blackpool in 1908, but his fascination with America began in 
the early 1930s when he studied at Yale and Harvard as a Commonwealth Scholar. 
He spent a summer in Hollywood, befriending Charlie Chaplin and became the 
BBC's film critic in 1934.

A 1946 letter from the BBC Talks Department describing the new Cooke show to 
the editor of theRadio Times has been unearthed by Zillah Watson, who compiled 
the archive.

"American Letter will be something new in British broadcasting," the document 
reads. "In this weekly personal letter to Britons, Alistair Cooke will try to 
give listeners in this country some of the intimate background to American 
life, pictures of regions and places, and profiles of important American 
personalities."

Accurately predicting the tone of the 2,869 instalments of the programme that 
followed, the note explained there would be a stress "on the springs of 
American life, whose bubbles are the headlines, rather than on the bright 
headlines themselves".

To accompany the archive, Radio 4 and the BBC World Service will both broadcast
In Alistair Cooke's Footsteps, a four-part series presented by Alvin Hall in 
which Hall travels across America to find out whether Cooke's letters are still 
relevant today.

"Rediscovering these vital broadcasts has been a riveting journey through 
recent American history," said Watson. "From the golden age of 50s America, to 
the disillusionment of the Bush years via JFK, civil rights and Watergate, this 
is an astonishing record of the great years of the American century.

"And now they will all be available, crisply digitised from the original tapes 
and supported by transcripts for reference."
 