
Cutting costs and reducing the multibillion pound government subsidy for the 
rail industry are expected to feature high on the agenda this week as train 
operators meet the new secretary of state for transport, Philip Hammond.

The Department for Transport (DfT) was one of the hardest-hit ministries when 
the government announced a £6.2bnreduction in public expenditure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/24/george-osborne-6-25bn-spending-cuts>
 last week, with the DfT asked to slash £683m from its £15.9bn annual budget. 
The owner of Britain's rail tracks and stations,Network Rail 
<http://www.networkrail.co.uk/>, has been ordered to trim costs by £100m as 
part of the cuts programme but the industry has received clear signals recently 
that the government's annual rail expenditure of £5bn must be reduced further.

The Association of Train Operating Companies (Atoc) meets Hammond on Wednesday 
with the knowledge that public funding of the industry will be the main issue. 
A rail industry source said the government appeared to be taking the issue of 
cutting costs seriously, when previous attempts by train operators to reduce 
expenditure were unsuccessful.

"Because of the deficit problems, the government now seems to be taking a 
serious look at cost control. It has been sounding us out about how the DfT and 
the industry, working together, can get the best value for money," said one 
source.

Major figures from the rail industry are scheduled to attend, including 
executives from the five big public transport groups: Arriva, FirstGroup,
National Express <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalexpressgroup>, 
Stagecoach and Go-Ahead.

The politically sensitive issues of fare increases and service cuts have been 
discussed within rail industry circles but it is not known whether they will be 
raised with Hammond. Fare increases are capped at the rate of inflation plus 1% 
but under one scenario, that cap could be increased and a proportion of the 
extra revenue shared with the DfT, which could then reduce its annual subsidy. 
The government spent £5bn on the rail industry in 2008-2009, with ticket sales 
generating around £6bn.

Service cuts would also save cash because fewer or shorter trains consume less 
energy and require fewer staff. They also cost less money in terms of track 
access charges, one of Network Rail's main sources of income, which are 
effectively subsidised by the state.

However, given the likely backlash from middle-class voters, an easier option 
for Hammond could be to sanction a fare increase of the retail prices index, of 
RPI+1% in July, in line with the previous government's policy. With RPI running 
at more than 5%, commuters face a fare increase of at least 6% when fare levels 
for next year are set by using the 2010 RPI level in July.

A spokesperson for Atoc said: "We're ready and willing to work with the 
government to ensure that the railways can deliver value for money for 
passengers and taxpayers. Proposals which we have put forward on franchise 
reform, for example, would save the taxpayer money by allowing train companies 
to make improvements to services more quickly and effectively."

An independent report 
<http://www.guardianpublic.co.uk/public-services-2020-public-services-commission-report>
 into a government-funded £7.5bn intercity train programme is imminent and it 
is understood that the author, Sir Andrew Foster, harbours doubts about the 
scheme. The former chairman of the Civil Aviation Authority, Sir Roy McNulty, 
is chairing a value for money review of the rail industry that is due to report 
next year

Network Rail, which reports annual results on Thursday, receives around £4bn 
per year from the government in direct grants, and train operators received 
around £1bn in 2009. That subsidy is increasing due to so-called cap-and-collar 
payments that top up revenues at franchises that are failing to meet turnover 
targets.

But the biggest focus on costs will be at Network Rail, which is due to spend 
£35bn between 2009 and 2014, largely funded by direct government grant and 
state-underwritten debt. The majority of that investment is considered 
untouchable by the company because it covers day-to-day maintenance and 
operations costs. A formal interim review of the 2009-2014 funding settlement 
is possible.

However, it is understood that Network Rail is looking to make cuts in the 
£8bn enhancements programme, with platform-lengthening schemes among the 
potential targets if the government scales back an order for 1,300 train 
carriages. Those cuts will have to be deep if they are to deliver a meaningful 
cost saving. Because Network Rail funds its enhancement programme with 
long-term debt, even slashing £4bn from the budget will reduce the DfT's 
subsidy by just £400m over the next four years.

The company is also considering cuts to an extra £3bn of spending on two 
further projects:the Crossrail scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/davehillblog/2010/may/28/boris-johnson-crossrail-government-cuts>
, which will establish a new train link from Heathrow Airport through central 
London; and electrification of the great western line and a section of the rail 
network in the north west.
 