
Randy Lerner has delivered a rallying cry to Aston Villa's players and urged 
them to stay "in charge of their own destiny" in their bid to avoid relegation.

Villa are only five points clear of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> bottom three ahead of 
Saturday's encounter at Liverpool and their owner is keen to avoid a scrap to 
stay up this season.

They have also had to contend with a lengthy injury list and the captain 
Stilian Petrov's diagnosis with acute leukaemia on Friday.

The Villa manager, Alex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish>, said: "Randy went to see 
Stilian on Monday and the following day came up and spoke to the lads. He said 
a few words about Stan [Petrov] and said we were all standing toe to toe to 
support him.

"But he also told the players to be strong themselves and be in charge of 
their own destiny for the remaining eight games.

"He told the lads to have the confidence and belief in themselves and for the 
youngsters to really make a go of it. It was good for (Lerner) to do that with 
the boys."

Villa were missing eight senior players for last weekend's defeat by Chelsea 
but McLeish has faith in the youngsters he is having to play.

He said: "At the end of the day, if you are good enough, you are old enough 
and it doesn't matter about age."

McLeish has revealed his determination to show leadership to his players while 
coping with the setbacks suffered by Fabrice Muamba and Petrov in recent weeks.

The Bolton midfielder Muamba, who played under McLeish at Birmingham, suffered 
a cardiac arrest last month. McLeish admits it has been a traumatic time but 
knows he has to focus on playing matters at Villa.

He said: "You have to show that you still have the focus, the passion, 
everything that goes with concentrating on the game itself.

"You get these traumatic times in life and you have to deal with them. You 
move forward and show leadership and get everybody playing to the best of their 
ability and believing in themselves."

Petrov is poised to return to Birmingham after having his first period of 
treatment for the illness in a London hospital.

McLeish said: "He's had three days of treatment. I think he is coming back 
today. I know the doctor was scheduled to go back down to London today but I 
think Stilian is coming back for a few days and it is ongoing.

"He does request we don't do a daily bulletin because the team have obviously 
got important matters ahead. But the support over the last week for him has 
been fantastic and he has been really lifted by that.

"It has made him even more determined to try and get rid of the illness as 
quickly as possible. We are not going to see too much of him but I'm sure he 
will pop in from time to time."
 