
On May 10 senator Rand Paul <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rand-paul> 
will travel to Iowa to attend a decidedly innocuous-sounding Lincoln Day dinner 
being held by the state's Republican party. Paul will give a speech and press 
the flesh with local party dignitaries in the city of Cedar Rapids, smack in 
the middle of the American heartland and far from the corridors of real power 
back in Washington DC.

It sounds like just another day of low-level humdrum politicking. But, of 
course, that could not be further from the truth. IowaRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> will be the first to cast 
their votes in the GOP's presidential nomination battle for 2016 and Paul – a 
Tea Party favourite and rising star of the conservative right – is almost 
certain to have his name on that ballot.

It has been a remarkable rise. Just four years ago, Paul was an eye doctor 
living in a small town in Kentucky and little heard of outside the 
libertarian-leaning circles that idolised his father, right-wing Texas 
congressmanRon Paul <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ronpaul>.

Now Paul, 50, is a senator and firmly established as the inheritor of his 
father's political movement. He is a leading light of the Republican party and 
hotly tipped to run for the White House himself. When he speaks in Cedar Rapids 
it won't be an obscure dinner function. It will be one more careful step on an 
ambitious road to power for a man rapidly becoming used to creating national 
headlines.

Paul has never been more in the spotlight. This week he gave a speech to the 
Hispanic Chamber of Commerce in which he came out in favour of immigration 
reform, putting him at the forefront of Republican efforts to woo a demographic 
seen as vital to any political movement seeking power in the US.

That came on the back of Paul winning the straw poll last weekend at the 
powerful conclave of conservative activists known as CPAC. Held at a fancy 
convention complex outside Washington DC, the gathering saw a veritable beauty 
parade of "new generation" conservatives vie for attention. But Paul came out 
on top, pipping Florida senator Marco Rubio by 25% to 23%.
 'There is no way the GOP is going to get anywhere without Rand Paul' says one 
supporter. Photograph: Alex Wong/Getty Images 
No doubt part of the reason behind that win was Paul's performance when he 
launched a recent remarkable 13-hour filibuster on the floor of the Senate 
against aspects of Barack Obama's controversial drones policy. The move, which 
began as a lonely stand in an empty chamber, eventually rallied support across 
the party's right, went viral on the internet and even won over a Democrat to 
join him.

For Michael Graham, an influential conservative radio talk show host, Paul's 
emergence has been an exciting breath of fresh air. "I am hopeful that he runs 
for president in 2016. He shows the value of having a clear ideology and 
advocating for it," Graham told the Guardian.

That ideology – a libertarian-soaked philosophy of small government, free 
markets and strict constitutionalism – has been to a large extent inherited 
from his father. Over successive failed presidential campaigns Ron Paul turned 
from laughable outsider to respected gadfly to the head of an enthusiastic 
grassroots conservative movement whose overwhelmingly young followers have a 
major impact on the Republican party.

When the congressman retired last year it was in front of an audience of 
thousands gathered in Tampa, Florida, determined to make their mark on the 
Republican national convention that followed shortly after. It also came after 
his supporters waged a campaign at the state party level that successfully took 
over several state party organisations.

Rand Paul has now largely inherited those fans, many of whom refer to 
themselves as the Liberty Movement. Evan Kenney, who was a delegate in Tampa, 
is a member of that movement and now running for local office in Massachusetts 
where he is a student.

He welcomed the passing of the torch from father to son, not least because the 
younger Paul's political skills appear more smooth and polished. "Ron Paul was 
a purist, but Rand Paul can do a much better job of doing the politics. He has 
a more moderate approach and feel, but it is the same end game," Kenney said.

That difference was on full display this week. Whereas Paul senior has been 
against immigration reform and is famously irascible in his speeches, the 
younger Paul peppered his talk in favour of reform with Spanish phrases, humble 
anecdotes about his Texan childhood and quotes from Pablo Neruda and Gabriel 
García Márquez.

But while Paul has embraced the idea of immigration reform, he was far more 
concerned about solving a political problem – how to win over Hispanics – than 
a policy one. His speech contained much sentiment, but few specifics. Nor did 
it mark a transformation of Paul away from the Republican right: just days 
before he had announced the introduction of legislation in the Senate aimed at 
effectively outlawing abortions by counting fetuses as citizens.
 Rand Paul is his father's son: 'Ron Paul was a purist, but Rand Paul can do a 
much better job of doing the politics.' Photograph: Joe Skipper/Reuters 
That Paul should grow up a libertarian-leaning conservative is no surprise 
given his father's politics – though he is not named after libertarian heroine
Ayn Rand <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ayn-rand> as many mistakenly 
believe. But as a child, growing up in the town of Lake Jackson,Texas, just 
outside Houston, Paul was present at his father's first ever political speech 
in 1974. As a teenager he would travel to Washington DC to work as an intern in 
Paul's congressional office and, in 2007 and 2008, he campaigned on his 
father's presidential run.

But now Paul is definitely stepping out of his father's shadow, driving the 
Liberty Movement and many of its beliefs into the Republican party. "The father 
was very provocative, the son is more politically astute," said Doug Wead, a 
consultant who has long been close to the political circles around the Paul 
family. Wead added that Rand Paul had already gone a long way down the path of 
making his father's followers into a core part of the GOP coalition.

"There is no way the GOP is going to get anywhere without Rand Paul. They 
can't win a general election without him either somewhere on the ticket or with 
him as an enthusiastic backer of the candidate," Wead said.

Yet for much of Paul's adult life that would have seemed a ridiculous 
statement. He initially followed his father's footsteps, not into politics, but 
into medicine. Paul went to Baylor University and then won admission to Duke 
University's prestigious Medical School in North Carolina. He graduated as an 
eye specialist in 1993, two years after meeting and then marrying Kelley Ashby. 
The couple, who now have three children, moved to Kelley's home state ofKentucky
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/kentucky>, and Paul joined an eye clinic 
in the small university town of Bowling Green.

Paul's work was a success, and he quickly moved his growing family out of a 
one-storey home and into a gated community about five miles from downtown. He 
joined a local Presbyterian church, where Kelley became a deacon and their 
children played instruments at church events. "He's a good man. He's very 
committed and devoted person, whatever he does," said pastor Michael Covington, 
though he noted that Paul had recently switched congregations and joined a 
local Methodist church.

Though Paul had little to do with Republicans in Bowling Green, he did start a 
local group called Kentucky Taxpayers United, which was a sort of "Tea Party 
before the Tea Party" that campaigned on reducing government spending. It 
folded in 2000 but saw Paul appear on local television, and his letters were 
published in newspapers.

Then, as he helped his father run for office in 2007 and 2008, the financial 
crisis hit the US and the real Tea Party was born. Paul became active in the 
explosive movement and still maintains close links with its adherents in the 
state. The Louisville Tea Party is holding a "Stand with Rand" gala next month 
at which Paul will speak. The group's president, Sarah Durand, heaped praise on 
Paul. "We are very proud of him. He is one of the few people in Congress who 
defend the constitution," she said. "When you meet he is very down to earth. 
When he talks to you he's very honest. He will be upfront. He does not give you 
lip-service like other politicians."

That sort of devotion – and the fiery energy of the Tea Party movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tea-party-movement> – saw Paul jump into 
politics as the 2010 mid-term elections loomed. First he entered the Republican 
primary as a rank outsider against the establishment figure of Trey Grayson, a 
protege of powerful Kentucky senator Mitch McConnell. "If there's ever a year 
for an outsider who has never held office before, this is the year," Paul told 
a crowd as he announced his bid. He was right. Backed by endorsements from the 
likes of Sarah Palin, Paul beat Grayson by 23 points. That pitted him against 
the Democrat Jack Conway in November as the Republican elite moaned that such 
Tea Party rebellions would cost them seats. But Paul beat Conway too.

Yet the ideological fervour and plain-speaking that has seen him become a hero 
to many has got him into trouble too. During the 2010 campaign Paul made 
remarks critical of the landmark Civil Rights Act, seeing parts of it that 
outlawed racism in private businesses as an example of government interference 
and thus anathema to some true libertarians. Briefly, in the face of the 
resulting media storm, Paul went into retreat, cancelling an appearance on Meet 
The Press.
 Paul walks to a waiting vehicle as he leaves the Capitol late at night after 
his filibuster. Photograph: Charles Dharapak/AP 
Similarly he was rebuked, even by fellow Republicans and social conservatives, 
last year when he joked about gay marriage at a meeting inIowa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa>. He said: "The president recently 
weighed in on marriage and you know he said his views were evolving on 
marriage. Call me cynical, but I wasn't sure his views on marriage could get 
any gayer."

But, despite such gaffes, Paul is largely a sure-footed politician. Those who 
know him both in politics and his personal life describe a dedicated, focused 
man whose eyes are set firmly on his career path – a road that is currently 
headed towards running for president in 2016.

The vehicle for that journey will remain the Republican right. As 
conservatives shift their stances on issues like immigration, or try to project 
a softer, more sympathetic image, his core beliefs will be largely unchanged. 
He remains the champion of the Tea Party, libertarians and constitutional 
conservatives, just as his father was before him. Indeed, far from declining 
after Ron Paul stepped aside, Rand Paul is now taking that same movement into 
the Republican mainstream.

"He shows his personality, which is dogged and determined. Often times a 
movement needs a firebrand. Sometimes you need someone from those extremes. He 
is exactly where he needs to be," said Covington.
 