
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> has hit out 
after it was revealed that historic shares held by Rangers in Arsenal were sold 
by Craig Whyte.

With Rangers in administration, negative stories about the regime presided 
over by Whyte as owner have emerged on a daily basis. The latest revelation 
centres on Whyte selling theArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> shares, which formed a link 
between the clubs dating back to 1910, for £230,000 to the Russian businessman 
Alisher Usmanov's Red & White Holdings. Those funds were not even paid into 
Rangers' own bank account.

Rangers came to Arsenal's aid during a financial crisis, buying two shares at 
the time. Twenty years later the London club handedRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 14 shares for free in gratitude 
for their help, cementing a relationship between the two clubs.

McCoist said: "I'm extremely disappointed in some of the things unfolding – 
not least the situation with the Arsenal shares. That's a particularly sore one 
for a Rangers supporter. I don't think me voicing any opinions at this moment 
in time – pointing fingers of blame or saying this, that or the other – is 
going to help anybody.

"With that in mind I'll keep my own counsel on my own views. But selling the 
Arsenal shares was a really sore one. Something like that is your history, your 
heritage. Not only that, it's a great story between the two football clubs. So 
that was really sad."

When asked his views on the fact that funds raised by selling a portion of 
Rangers' future season ticket income were used to pay off an £18m debt to 
Lloyds Bank, as part of the Whyte takeover, McCoist added: "It came as a shock 
to me but not a surprise. The longer the process was going, everybody was 
pointing in that direction."

McCoist said he would welcome a meeting with Whyte for clarity on a number of 
issues. There has been no contact between the pair since Rangers entered 
administration. "I might get the opportunity to do that. I don't know what the 
future holds," the manager added. "It's not just me. Every Rangers supporter 
and member of staff all deserve answers to questions.

"I would like to find out an awful lot of things and I'm not even sure Craig 
would have the answers to all the questions. We are asking the administrators a 
lot of questions at the moment, as you can imagine, and they are doing their 
level best to answer them. But a lot of them they can't answer at the moment.

"Hopefully one day we can sit down, whether it's with the administrators, 
Craig or the previous board, and get the full story. That would be what 
everybody would want. Whether we get it or not, I don't know. But I think 
everyone deserves it."

McCoist reiterated, then, his support for the Scottish FA's investigation into 
events at Rangers since Whyte took over last May. "I would encourage any 
investigation of any description by anybody that will clarify what's happened 
at our football club and help us move forward," he said.

Administrators from Duff & Phelps are due to confirm next week what level of 
staff cuts, if any, will be necessary at Ibrox. Senior Rangers players have 
asked what cost-cutting measures are required – they could yet offer to defer 
or take a drop in wages – but have been given no specific figures.

"I haven't been told that people have to go," McCoist said. "There are one or 
two options and ideas. As yet I haven't been told names or specific bodies that 
have to go. It's still a possibility and the situation will be clearer in the 
next few days."
 