
Representatives of Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> will 
hold informal talks with the Scottish FA on Tuesday after the association 
issued charges against both the club and Mike Ashley relating to the Newcastle 
United owner’s growing influence at Ibrox.

Under an agreement signed by Ashley, the Sports Direct owner cannot take on 
more than a 10% shareholding or exert meaningful influence at Ibrox. Ashley’s 
stake remains at 8.92% but he is widely regarded to be highly influential at 
the beleaguered Scottish club.

A hearing between the parties is scheduled for 27 January but Ashley’s 
prominence is likely to have increased even further by then.Ashley already has 
a firm grip on commercial and merchandising rights at Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/21/mike-ashley-tighten-grip-rangers-stormy-agm>
 and is expected either to subsidise a share issue or loan funds to allow the 
club to continue trading.

The Ashley issue was raised at what proved to be an understandably stormy 
Rangers annual general meeting at Ibrox on Monday morning. Shareholders berated 
club directors from the moment of their arrival, with the Rangers chairman, 
David Somers, causing particular acrimony with his contrary attitude towards 
questions from the audience.

Derek Llambias, the former Newcastle managing director who has been appointed 
as the Rangers chief executive, was forced to deny he is on the payroll of any 
Ashley company. Somers was adamant that Ashley has insisted “Rangers must 
survive” and that the club are “fortunate” to be able to call on secured but 
interest-free loans from the tycoon, which total £3m thus far.

Llambias received a lukewarm reaction after asking shareholders to judge him 
on previous off-field work at Newcastle and how Rangers’ business affairs are 
conducted from now on. “Not everything I do will be popular but everything I do 
will be in the club’s long-term interests,” he claimed. The chief executive 
warned, though, that Rangers must continue to cut costs.

Addressing the issue of onerous contracts, which have proved a drain on 
Rangers’ resources, Somers claimed: “With a number of contracts we’ve just 
said: ‘Sod you, we will see you in court.’”

The notion that Kenny McDowall will be only a stop-gap team-management 
solution was apparently dismissed. McDowall has stepped up to replaceAlly 
McCoist, who was placed on gardening leave on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/21/ally-mccoist-rangers-gardening-leave>
. Billy Davies is regarded as McCoist’s most likely replacement but the club 
appear willing to stick with McDowall until the summer at least.

“Kenny has our full support,” said Llambias. “He is in charge until the end of 
the season and perhaps beyond.”
 