
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> and Charles 
Green, the manager and chief executive of Rangers, have been issued with 
notices of complaint by the Scottish Football Association over comments made in 
the media.

Green faces a charge of bringing the game into disrepute for claiming 
"bigotry" was one of the reasons behind his club being denied entry to the 
Scottish Premier League.

McCoist has allegedly breached disciplinary rules as a result of comments he 
made about the SFA's judicial panel in April, when he demanded the panel 
members be named publicly.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> and McCoist have until 
17 August to respond, with a principal hearing date of 30 August set for both 
cases to be heard.

The charge against Green relates to a breach of the SFA's articles of 
association "insofar as … Charles Green brought the game into disrepute and did 
not act in the best interests of football by not behaving towards other members 
with the utmost good faith, all by making comments in a media interview which 
suggested that decisions taken concerning the future of Rangers FC were 
motivated, in part, by bigotry".

The former Sheffield United chief executive made the comments in an interview 
at Glebe Park before Rangers' Ramsdens Cup tie against Brechin on 29 July.

Green told BBC Scotland: "Some of it has been driven by bigotry, some of it's 
been driven by jealousy and some of it's been driven by all the wrong motives."

Green's Sevco consortium purchased the assets and business of Rangers when the 
club were consigned to liquidation over the summer.

SPL clubs then voted against the newco being admitted to Scottish football's 
top flight before Scottish Football League sides voted in favour of Rangers 
playing in the Third Division. Their first game takes place at Peterhead on 
Saturday.

McCoist faces three counts of breaching disciplinary rules for calling into 
question the independence of the judicial panel that sat in April to hear a 
case against Rangers and their former owner Craig Whyte.

The Light Blues manager is also charged with "not acting in the best interests 
of Association Football" by calling for the panel members to be named in public.

Rangers were hit with a 12-month signing embargo and fined £160,000 after the 
hearing into the club's financial affairs. Speaking the day after the verdict 
was delivered, McCoist told Rangers TV: "I found out the decision last night 
and I was shocked and absolutely appalled by the way this supposedly 
independent judicial panel was coming down on us in this form.

"Who are these people? I want to know who these people are. I'm a Rangers 
supporter and the Rangers supporters and the Scottish public deserve to know 
who these people are, people who are working for the SFA.

"Make no mistake about it, this is an SFA decision. They have appointed the 
panel so therefore they are working for the SFA, but who are they? I think we 
have a right to know who is handing out this punishment to us, I really do."

McCoist later defended his calls for transparency after Strathclyde police 
confirmed they were investigating alleged threats made against the panel after 
the SFA said their identities had been "compromised".

Rangers successfully challenged the ban on signing players in the court of 
session but have since accepted the transfer embargo after gaining SFA 
membership last month.

Rangers' chairman, Malcolm Murray, said the club would "vigorously defend" 
Green and McCoist. He said: "We are disappointed by the decision to convene 
disciplinary proceedings. The club has already provided the SFA with what it 
regards as a clear and compelling explanation of Mr Green's remarks.

"We will defend both Ally McCoist and Charles Green vigorously at the 
respective hearings. In keeping with the principles of free speech we will 
defend the right for people to express their opinions in good faith."
 