
The notion that divorce between Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> and Rangers will be 
anything but amicable has been confirmed by the club’s board revealing their 
manager has reverted back to a full salary of £750,000 upon delivery of his 
resignation.

After growing disenchanted with life at Rangers, McCoist handed in his notice 
at Ibrox last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/12/ally-mccoist-tenders-resignation-rangers-manager>
 but, with a 12-month rolling contract in place, has that same period to serve. 
The manager had earlier taken a voluntary salary cut to around £400,000 per 
year but it was always unclear how that would impact on either a sacking or the 
serving of notice.

On Monday morning, the Rangers board released a statement to the stock 
exchange with the apparent aim of increasing scrutiny on McCoist’s earnings. 
The 52-year-old will meet with directors this week;Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> seemingly cannot afford to pay 
McCoist off and, with the manager not of a mind to walk away without any reward 
at all, a stand-off has ensued. Gardening leave for McCoist has been widely 
speculated as the most sensible short-term solution.

The stock exchange statement read: “The company announces that Alastair 
McCoist, manager of the first team squad, has resigned. His service contract 
dated December 28, 2010, which was subsequently amended, has a 12-month notice 
period. “The directors will hold discussions with Mr McCoist to seek an 
amicable solution in the best interests of the company, and expect to be in a 
position to make a further announcement before the end of the week. During the 
notice period, Mr McCoist’s salary will increase significantly to £750,000 per 
annum.”

McCoist reported for work as normal on Mondaymorning but his departure is 
surely edging ever-closer. McCoist had refused to comment on his future on 
Friday, the same day reports of his resignation had broken. It is understood 
McCoist was left angered about the leaking of that information from within 
Ibrox, hours before a league clash at Queen of the South which Rangers lost 
2-0. The team lies nine points adrift of Hearts in Scotland’s second tier, with 
the Edinburgh club holding a game in hand. Off the field, Rangers are in a 
similarly poor state. They recently reported a loss of £8.3m, whilst confirming 
the same figure needs to be raised within 12 months. Derek Llambias, the former 
chief executive of Newcastle United, has taken an increasingly hands-on role at 
Ibrox after being parachuted into position by Mike Ashley.

The Scottish FA has been unable to confirm more than “dialogue” with Ashley’s 
lawyers as it attempts to clarify the extent of the Newcastle owner’s influence 
at Ibrox. Ashley is only an 8.92% shareholder.
 