
Rangers have agreed a pay-off deal with their former manager Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>, nine months after he left 
his post.

A 12-month notice period was triggered after McCoist – Rangers’ all-time 
leading goalscorer – fell out with the previous administration running the club 
last season as his side’s promotion bid faltered. He was thenplaced on 
gardening leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/21/ally-mccoist-rangers-gardening-leave>
 only hours before a stormy annual general meeting but has continued to pocket 
his £15,000-a-week salary since.

Dave King – who took over as the Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> chairman in March – held talks 
with the 52-year-old earlier in the summer and has now been able to agree a 
deal to terminate McCoist’s contract “on commercial terms which are favourable 
to the club”.

King confirmed: “Yes, it has been agreed with immediate effect. It’s nice to 
have it behind us in the sense that there seemed to be an issue. I think I said 
repeatedly – there shouldn’t really be an issue. Our view has always been that 
Rangers football club has had a contract with Ally McCoist.

“Ally very generously previously worked for free during a difficult time for 
the club. He then worked for half-price during a difficult time for the club. 
He then moved on and had every right to enforce his contract.

“It was obviously developing as an issue and I reached out to Ally on my last 
trip to Scotland at the end of July and said: ‘Listen, Ally – shouldn’t we be 
sitting down and seeing if we can’t do something here?’ He was very receptive, 
very open to that. He chatted to me about some issues I wasn’t aware of such as 
the labour legislation. I said: ‘Ally, that’s fine. Go find out all the things 
you need to know. Let’s figure it out, let’s stay in touch and when I’m back 
again on this trip let’s get together and see if we can reach an agreement’.

“We met [on Wednesday] and reached agreement in about four or five minutes. 
We’re delighted that Ally has been generous enough to agree to the termination 
of the contract on commercial terms which are favourable to the club.”

King added: “I don’t know if he’s got another job to go to. I heard there is a 
possibility of that. But my real focus was on the Rangers situation. Could we 
do something that recognises the service Ally has given over the years? Ally is 
a hero, our all-time greatest goalscorer. We look forward having him and his 
mum back in the directors’ box. It’s where he belongs. I’m pleased it’s now 
resolved.”
 