
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> insists he 
does not plan on walking away from Rangers any time soon – and wants talks with 
the new chief executive, Derek Llambias, over signings. The manager has 
tendered his resignation but insists he will see out the full 12-month notice 
period stipulated by his contract.

The club’s record scorer hopes to meet Llambias – whose role was confirmed to 
the London Stock Exchange at 7am on Friday morning – to discuss strengthening 
his squad. McCoist said: “I’ll have to have a discussion with Derek regarding 
what the plans will be for the future. I spoke to him today regarding his own 
position and he and I will certainly sit down and discuss [adding to the 
squad], because that will be one of the topics that needs to be discussed.”

The club’s board announced on Monday that McCoist had decided to quit after 
three and a half years in charge. It is understood that the football board 
chairman, Sandy Easdale, and his PLC brother James want McCoist to go now but 
talks with Llambias on Wednesday broke down without a settlement. The manager 
refused to divulge details about those talks at his weekly pre-match press 
conference or reveal the reasons behind his decision to resign.

But when asked if he planned to see out the full 12-month notice period set 
down in his one-year rolling contract, he said: “Yes. Absolutely. I don’t know 
if it’s realistic or not but I expect it to happen because it is in the 
boundaries of the contract, which I look to honour. Whose court is the ball in 
now? I wouldn’t say the ball is in anybody’s court. I think it has been made 
quite clear by the board and myself that it is business as usual.”

News of McCoist’s resignation emerged just hours before Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were due to take on Queen of the 
South last Friday night. McCoist, who famously said he “did not do walking 
away” after the club’s liquidation crisis, batted off questions about why he 
had chosen to resign following the shock 2-0 defeat at Palmerston.

And a week later, he was still in no mood to disclose why he was choosing to 
bring his reign to an end. “I would keep that private,” he said. “I wouldn’t 
comment at all about why I have made that decision but now that I have, I can 
assure the Rangers supporters, who are the most important people, that I am 
100% focused on continuing the job.

“The most important thing is to say that it is business as usual. That is 
exactly how it has been. Our last game was not good enough so we are 
concentrating all our efforts on tomorrow against Livingston.

“Have I been considering this for long? Not really. It was a very difficult 
decision but once I had made it, there was no turning back. And I can assure 
everybody I am 100 per cent committed and focused (on the job) for the 
remainder of my contract. The Rangers fans would expect nothing less than that.”

A statement released to the Stock Exchange on Monday confirming his impending 
departure also revealed that under the terms of McCoist’s contract, his salary 
would almost double to £750,000 a year. That was seen by many fans as an 
attempt to heap pressure on the manager at a time when the business needs 
£8.3million before April 1 just to keep the lights on.

McCoist, though, insisted he “wasn’t surprised” that the board had chosen to 
announce those details. He also tried to play down reports claiming he had 
fallen out with former Rangers strike partner Mark Hateley.

The duo helped fire Walter Smith’s side to nine successive titles but 
headlines this week suggested McCoist was angry over the Englishman’s close 
relationship with the Easdales.

McCoist said: “Mark and I go back a long way. We’ve been through a lot 
together. I’ve not had the chance to speak to him but we definitely will have a 
chat – there’s no problem about that. We are big boys, we will sit down and 
have a chat.”

The former Scotland striker had been in charge for only a year before Craig 
Whyte’s chaotic reign as owner brought the Glasgow giants to their knees.

The 52-year-old insists he would be sad to say goodbye to Rangers once the end 
finally comes. He said: “Would I miss the job? That’s a good question! I would 
think you would have to miss the job. I don’t think there is any doubt about it.

“It’s been a massive, massive part of my life so you would definitely miss it. 
Have I enjoyed it? At times, yes.”
 