
From a Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> saga which has 
taken tedium to new levels there is an extensive list of wrongdoing and a 
lengthy cast who have played a part in trouble at Ibrox.

Yet it would be ludicrous for the names of Allan McGregor, Steven Naismith, 
Steven Whittaker and Steven Davis to feature anywhere near such a rogues' 
gallery. That quartet of players were the most high-profile to refuse the 
option to transfer their contracts post-liquidation. Southampton agreed a fee 
for Davis at a later date but the others moved to English sides for free.

Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>, the Rangers 
manager, has previous for criticising the actions of those players and used his 
club's annual general meeting on Friday to fire his latest broadside. This time 
McCoist hailed the squad who won last season's Third Division – no mean feat, 
apparently – in contrast to those who "headed for the hills".

Each of the quartet is playing in England's top flight as Rangers, for now, 
spend Saturdays in Scottish football's nether regions. In career terms this was 
a no-brainer but still a difficult decision for individuals who had a clear 
affinity with Rangers.

McCoist's sentiment was misplaced. As among the highest earners at the club, 
McGregor, Naismith, Whittaker and Davis took pay cuts of 75% after Rangers 
entered administration in a bid to stave off liquidation and save low-paid jobs 
at the club. Part of that plan worked. The manager has praised those who stayed 
behind, including Lee Wallace and Lee McCulloch. Neither player, it should be 
noted, would easily command his lucrative Rangers wage elsewhere.

McCoist was paid more than £800,000 for managing a team in Scotland's bottom 
tier – not his fault, and a legacy contract issue, but something which he 
should consider when taking swipes at others. McCoist is unquestionably a 
legendary Rangers figure and has worked amid unforeseen circumstances but he 
has been handsomely rewarded for his trouble.

Charles Green, the outspoken Yorkshireman, when he assumed control at Rangers 
in the summer of 2012, expressed his upset at players exercising their right to 
depart. Given the earlier financial hit taken by those players, Green, like 
McCoist, was grandstanding. Green, who had no prior connection to the club, 
took it on himself to lambast players publicly for having the temerity to look 
after their own careers after more than doing their bit – on and off the field 
– for Rangers. It would be sad if supporters even now have some grievance 
against those individuals.

Given the subsequent proof of chronic cash burn at Ibrox, if not at the time, 
it became obvious that Rangers would have been plunged into financial chaos 
again, had every player opted to honour contracts worth millions of pounds. 
Green was perfectly aware of the value these internationals could command on 
the open market, which is the salient point here.

If Green's stance did partly resonate, by implying that players could assist 
Rangers by raising transfer funds, again subsequent events have undermined 
that. Rangers' need for funding is so immediate, because so many individuals 
have profited at the club's expense. Who would really have benefited from 
player sales?

Before Rangers' agm, McCoist was guilty of contradictory behaviour. Having 
stated it would represent "suicide" for him to vote against the deeply 
unpopular board, he handed his share voting rights over to a supporters' club 
which was, at best, highly unlikely to share such a view.

Perhaps McCoist had a change of heart, realised these votes were immaterial in 
any case. Either way, it is Rangers' immediate future which should be of more 
concern than needless digs at a group of players who history should show did 
nothing wrong.
 