
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> will begin pre-season 
training on Thursday with only three senior players having committed to Charles 
Green's newco and others advised not to accept this month's wages should they 
wish to leave Ibrox as free agents.

The chaos surrounding the stricken club will be reflected at Murray Park, 
where PFA Scotland representatives will be present to ensure the newco company 
honours players' contracts. Lee McCulloch, Lee Wallace and Kyle Hutton are the 
only senior professionals to agree for their contracts to be transferred from 
the 'old' Rangers to Green's company, so far.

Eight players have refused the switch and claim to be free agents, although 
that figure is likely to rise by the time the manager,Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>, conducts training. The 
eight – the captain Steven Davis, Allan McGregor, Kyle Lafferty, Jamie Ness, 
Steven Naismith, Steven Whittaker, Sone Aluko and Rhys McCabe – were accused of 
"opportunism" by Green on Wednesday. The Rangers legend Sandy Jardine, who 
remains involved with the club, claimed greed was the motivating factor and 
that players had reneged on last season's agreement to take a 75% wage cut in 
exchange for reduced transfer fees this summer.

He said: "There was an agreement reached over wage cuts and they got a great 
deal because they could leave for rock bottom prices and now they have seen an 
opportunity. In many ways it's greed. If we don't have money from fees for 
players leaving – which we are completely entitled to – then what are we 
supposed to build on: fresh air?"

PFA Scotland, however, maintains players are legally entitled to walk away 
under Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) regulations and will 
oppose any challenge from Green. The organisation's chief executive, Fraser 
Wishart, has cited newco Rangers' anticipated exclusion from the Scottish 
Premier League, "added to the three-year ban from European competitions, the 
uncertainty over which league they will play in and what further sanctions the 
football authorities may impose" as mitigating factors.

Rangers' staff are due to receive their monthly salary on Thursday and players 
have been advised that to accept the money from Green's Sevco company would 
amount to an intention to transfer. The former Sheffield United chief 
executive, who has yet to provide the Scottish Football Association with full 
details of his consortium, has reiterated his intention to pursue players – and 
any clubs they join on a free transfer – for damages.

"I'm very, very disappointed of course," said Green on the rush for the Ibrox 
exits. "Particularly so late in the proceedings. It is clear in the 
regulations, if someone has an objection they have to notify within 24 hours, 
this is nearly two weeks. I think this is just opportunism. We will definitely 
challenge it, yes."
 