
A woman is raped in a forest by a bandit, and her samurai husband murdered. In 
court, the victim and her attacker give contradictory accounts of what 
happened, while the dead man, communicating through a medium, offers another 
differing interpretation. Finally, a fourth account is given by a woodcutter 
who claims to have witnessed the attack. But whose version can be believed? 
Rashomon, which won the Grand Prix at Venice as well as the Oscar for best 
foreign language film, is an example not only of the great Kurosawa at the 
height of his powers – working with his regular collaborator, the imposing 
Toshiro Mifune – but of cinematic storytelling at its most daring. With its 
multiple contradictory flashbacks conspiring to present truth as an amorphous 
entity,Rashomon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rashomon> has been hugely 
influential on film structure and vocabulary in the 60 years since it was made.

But this formalist significance should not overshadow the picture's visual 
eloquence, and the extraordinary cinematography by Kazuo Miyagawa, which uses 
the intricate woodland setting as a metaphor for the story's tangled emotions. 
"[The] strange impulses of the human heart would be expressed through the use 
of an elaborately fashioned play of light and shadow," wrote Kurosawa of his 
preparations for the film, which he adapted in part from the short story, Yabu 
no Naka (In a Grove), by Ryunosuke Akutagawa. "In the film, people going astray 
in the thicket of their hearts would wander into a wider wilderness …" The 
bristling beauty of the film emerged from Kurosawa's quest to reconnect with 
the roots of the art form, which he worried were in danger of being eclipsed. 
"Since the advent of the talkies in the 30s," he said, "I felt we had misplaced 
and forgotten what was so wonderful about the old silent movies. I was aware of 
the aesthetic loss as a constant irritation. I sensed a need to go back to the 
origins of the motion picture to find this peculiar beauty again ..." There may 
be something a shade too reassuring about the final deference to truth and 
idealism. But this is easily offset by the rigorous psychological work-out to 
which Rashomon – arguably Kurosawa's greatest work – subjects its audience.
 