
Ravi Bopara has offered a glowing endorsement of Alastair Cook's capabilities 
as England captain and is certain he has the full backing of his team-mates.

Cook hinted that his time in charge could be close to an end in the immediate 
aftermath ofSunday's heavy seven-wicket defeat to Australia in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/19/australia-england-third-odi>.

The loss conceded the one-day international series and, after the Ashes 
whitewash, left Cook without a win over Australia since arriving Down Under.

The 29-year-old is set to make a decision on whether to go on as captain after 
he leaves the tour at the end of the ODI series early next week.

Bopara admitted he was shocked to hear Cook's words after the game, but 
remains certain his old Essex team-mate remains the best man for the job.

"I think naturally Alastair would be down. We've lost three games out of three 
and that's a natural reaction straight after the game," Bopara said. "I am 
surprised [by his comments]. I think he's the right man for it. I would love 
for him to carry on in both formats. I do believe that your best player should 
be your captain and I still believe that he is our best player.

"Batting at the top of the order he's the type of guy that will go out and 
score hundreds for England. 100% the other players see it the same way."

Bopara began his cricket education alongside Cook as teenagers at Essex and 
spoke with him after Sunday's loss. The 28-year-old concedes his old friend had 
lost some confidence, but believes the experience will make him stronger.

"He may have lost self belief, a little bit, but speaking to him yesterday I 
strongly got the impression that he's the right man for the job," he said. 
"It's just a tough time. He's the sort of guy who will turn it around. I think 
this is good for him and he will come out a much better person.

Cook's captaincy record before heading to Australia was impressive after he 
led England to a rare Test series success in India immediately after taking 
over the leadership 15 months ago.

An Ashes win followed in the summer, while in the 50-over format England went 
within a whisker of winning the Champions Trophy in June.

Bopara believes Cook's own personal record is also untouched – he has over 100 
Tests of experience and is the youngest batsman to reach 8,000 runs – and that 
the left-hander would grow from his troubled winter.

"Let's just remember he is one of our most experienced players. He's got a lot 
of experience, he knows what he's doing," he said. "One of his strengths is he 
has a very good record as a captain. Previous to this Ashes tour he has a very 
good record. I don't believe everything should be blamed on the captain, even 
though everything gets put on the captain.

"It's not just about Alastair it's about the rest of the team as well. We want 
to win because we're here to win. We don't just want to win to make someone 
feel better. We want to win because that's what we're paid to do."
 