
Winning tip

Les Caprices d'Antan, Gascony

This traditional restaurant with new owners is tucked away in an ivy-covered 
corner of the square in the sleepy village of Lannepax. The food is little 
short of magnificent, and not just the usual confits and steak. I had lamb's 
brains in chervil cream sauce, shredded chicken in a pot with hints of north 
African spices. The wine is good local red and rosé and included in the price. 
Service is fun, attentive but never over the top. I asked the waitress the 
secret of their success. "The kitchen is led by women," she smiled. Set lunch 
for four was €58 (the evening menu is more expensive).
• Place de la Mairie, +5 62 65 76 92. 
Mondebat

Avignon

House in St Quentin la Poterie 

A great-value house to rent in the middle of a medieval village, between 
Avignon and Nîmes. The village has 30 potters, vineyards and olive groves. 
Beautiful. Next door to Uzès, the first duchy of France.
• freewebs.com/houseinthegard <http://www.freewebs.com/houseinthegard>. Sleeps 
4-6. Fully booked until 4 Sept; from £325 per week in Sept and £250 in Oct - 
prices "negotiable".
mirrorman

Aix-en-Provence

Hotel Des Arts

Clean, cheap and basic accommodation within the town centre, next to the Cours 
St-Louis. Perfect for those on a budget just wanting a base and roof over their 
head in the evening. Double room €52.80 per night, B&B.
• 0033 4 42 38 11 77.
goshorty82

Marseille

The Caravelle bar, Hotel Belle Vue

Great bar with a small balcony with views of the old port and Notre Dame. Go 
between 6 and 9pm for amazing nibbles served with every drink: olives, 
sardines, chicken wings, squid ..
• +4 96 17 05 40, hotelbellevuemarseille.com 
<http://www.hotelbellevuemarseille.com>.
francescafrance

Bordeaux

Wine tasting 

Last year, my girlfriend and I drove around Bordeaux with a tent and a stove 
and managed to eat great food and taste a lot of excellent wine on a very small 
budget. The vineyard owners welcome you with open arms and at no point did we 
feel pressured to buy the wines we tasted. If you let on your ignorance, most 
owners, rather than sneering, proudly launch into a long presentation about 
their wines, their grapes and their history. This is probably the best way to 
taste wines that usually you wouldn't be able to afford. The tourist centre is 
amazingly helpful and will provide you with all the maps, routes, or any other 
information you might need.
• bordeaux.com <http://www.bordeaux.com>.
dwaynebradley

Vaison-la-Romaine

The third weekend in September is the Journées du Patrimoine when France 
flings its cultural doors open wide and squashes many entrance fees. If you're 
in Vaison la Romaine, head for the Roman ruins or the medieval citadel for 
guided tours.
• journeesdupatrimoine.culture.fr <http://www.journeesdupatrimoine.culture.fr>.
Welshlyn

Paris

Musée du quai Branly gardens

The gardens surrounding the Musée du quai Branly are free to enter and 
beautifully designed, with lots of nooks and terraces. They even host parts of 
museum exhibitions such as the current TARZAN! exhibition (runs until 27 
September), which has sound effects hidden in the garden and is great for kids. 
You can also view the Eiffel Tower while eating a lovely chocolate cake in the 
museum cafe.
• quaibranly.fr <http://www.quaibranly.fr>.
taddylad71

Bargain bikes

The Vélib bicycle system in Paris is a great idea. I was there for five days 
with my partner and checked my credit card statement the next month to discover 
to my delight that I had been all over the city for just €6. You tap in your 
credit card details for a small hire rate, then hoick the rather clumsy, heavy 
bikes out of their stand. Examine the bike before you select it as some have 
flat tyres or wonky seats that won't budge. If you dock the bike back into 
another station within 30 minutes, the ride is free, if you keep it for longer 
you pay by the hour. It's an excellent way to see Paris and fun.
• velib.paris.fr <http://www.velib.paris.fr>.
Lucerm
 