
WINNING TIP: Old Market Hall, Helsinki, Finland

This market has been selling Finnish delicacies to locals and tourists for 
more than 120 years. Look out for berries, game and seafood. It's a great place 
for meeting friends over a cup of coffee and a cinnamon bun. Or try fried 
reindeer slices with potato mash and lingonberry sauce followed by oven-baked 
cheese with Arctic cloudberries and cream. Most importantly: stock up on 
sausages and beer for an evening of sauna, skinny-dipping and barbecue.
Monday to Friday 8am-6pm, Saturday 8am-4pm, Eteläranta, South Harbour
Miffle

UK
 Photograph: Alamy 
Brixton market, London
A stroll down Electric Avenue takes you past well-established British 
fishmongers and more recently arrived Portuguese grocers. Further into the 
market are the Caribbean staples – salt fish, plantains, green bananas and 
cassava. Butchers cater for many different communities. Some are halal, some 
sell pigs' trotters and tails, others have Brazilian sausages or Colombian 
delicacies. There are new shops and stalls in the Granville Arcade: small 
independent coffee shops, bakeries and an old-fashioned sweet shop.
Monday to Saturday 8am-6pm (Wednesday till 3pm), Electric Avenue, 
brixtonmarket.net <http://brixtonmarket.net/>
Kadku

Edinburgh farmers' market
In the lee of Edinburgh Castle, this weekly market attracts independent food 
suppliers from as far away as the Black Isle, north of Inverness. The setting 
is so picturesque that almost every week there is a professional photographer 
or TV film crew in attendance. I buy bacon from Puddledub Pork, jam from the 
Strawberry Shop (from Perth), and delicious Laprig Fruit apple juice.
Saturday 9am-2pm, Castle Terrace, edinburghfarmersmarket.co.uk 
<http://www.edinburghfarmersmarket.co.uk/>
KenWilson

Doncaster market
The market has been at the heart of the town since medieval times. There are 
around 400 shops, stalls and stands. The real treats for foodies are the 
outdoor fruit and vegetable market and the indoor fish and meat markets. 
Stallholders are great Yorkshire folk always ready to chat, offering cooking 
tips and advice – whether you want it or not.
Tuesdays, Fridays and Saturdays 8.30am-4pm, tinyurl.com/6kt73w3 
<http://www.doncaster.gov.uk/leisure_in_doncaster/shopping/markets/doncaster_markets.asp>
AilsaEJ

France
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Provençal market, Antibes
The market building is a riot of colour and competing smells. Spices of 
brilliant hues vie with fresh vegetables from the surrounding small holdings. 
Cheeses of all shapes and sizes, unnamed animal parts fashioned into sausages. 
By 10.30am the stallholders are relaxed and gossiping.Les menagères have gone 
home with their purchases and only the tourists remain. By 1pm the building is 
swept clean and the Antibois sit in its shade drinking their pernod.
Daily except Monday, 6am-1pm, daily from 1 June to 1 September, Cours Masséna, 
antibes.co.uk/markets <http://www.antibes.co.uk/markets/>
Curzon

Marché Bastille and Marché d'Aligre, Paris
Here's my tip for a Sunday epicurean market outing. These markets are 
conveniently close yet delightfully different in atmosphere. Marché d'Aligre: 
with its village atmosphere you might catch yourself fantasising that you are 
in a vintage French film, rubbing shoulders with locals as they shop for every 
type of food from fishheads and tripe to organic bread and wild mushrooms. Less 
than a mile away is Marché Bastille, where you'll find a vast, glorious feast 
as most traders offer morsels for tasting (dégustation) of every kind of food 
for free. As you munch your way through the happy throng you'll find food for 
the soul and mind too as street performers and assorted, small, political 
manifestations (demos) are on hand to entertain and educate …Bon appétit!
d'Aligre: Tuesday to Sunday 7am-1pm, Place d'Aligre, marchedaligre.free.fr 
<http://marchedaligre.free.fr/>; Bastille: Thursday and Sunday 7am-2.30pm, 
Boulevard Richard Lenoir
Mspithy

Avignon and Colmar food markets
These markets are very different, but are both brilliant showcases for 
regional produce and less aimed at tourists than many others. In Avignon in 
spring, there is new-season garlic, artichokes and other bounty from the south 
of France. Up in Alsace, and planning ahead, Colmar market has the autumn 
treats ofvin nouveau and flammekueche, plus all the ingredients you need for a 
heartychoucroute garnie.
Avignon: daily except Monday, 6am-1.30pm, Les Halles, Place Pie, 
avignon-leshalles.com <http://www.avignon-leshalles.com/>; Colmar: daily except 
Monday, approx 8am-5pm, Le Marché Couvert de Colmar, 13 rue des Ecoles,colmar.fr
 <http://www.colmar.fr/marche-couvert,23471,fr.html>
Maggie57

Italy

Mercato di mezzo, Bologna
Just off Piazza Maggiore is one of the most tantalising sights in the world – 
a warren of streets dedicated to the best fresh produce in Italy. Cheese, 
salami, fish, chocolate, fruit, vegetables, bread, pastry, and even a Chinese 
takeaway – all will arouse your taste buds. And on Viccolo Ranocchi – heralded 
by the single word Vino – is the ancient Osteria del Sole, where you can take 
your food and buy a drink to wash it down.
Monday to Saturday (not Thursday) 7am-1pm, 4.15pm-7.30pm, Thursday 7am-1pm, 
Via Pescherie Vecchie
Umami

Spain

Mercat de St Antoni, Barcelona
This market is similar to the Boqueria but with fewer tourists, and the fruit 
stalls have the most incredible selection. Pick something you've never seen 
before – chances are it will be local and beautifully fresh. The stallholders 
know enough English (or at least have good enough miming skills) to tell you 
how to eat it, so go find a park and try something excitingly new – I dare you.
Monday to Thursday 7am-2.30pm, 5-8.30pm, Friday and Saturday 7am-8.30pm, Comte 
d'Urgell,mercatdesantantoni.com <http://www.mercatdesantantoni.com/>
Teacup2

La Boqueria, Barcelona
Staying in a self-catering apartment in Barcelona? The tapas bars may be 
tempting, but we were won over by the variety and quality of food on sale at 
this vibrant market. Being on the coast there is a wide selection of fresh fish 
and seafood, as well as meats, chorizo and other sausages, fruit and 
vegetables, herbs and spices.
Rambla, +34 93 318 25 84, boqueria.info <http://www.boqueria.info/>
gdeanouk

Hungary

Great Market Hall, Budapest
The Great Market Hall is on the Pest side of the Liberty Bridge. The building 
is of beautiful neo-Gothic construction with intricate, heavily decorated roof 
tiling. The market itself is used by the people of the city for vegetables, 
meat and fish, but it's also a tourist mecca with lots of traditional salami 
and paprika on sale. The sights and smells of this market are unforgettable, 
but its setting is the cherry on the cake.
Monday to Friday 6am-5pm, Saturday 6am-2pm, Vámház körút 1, tinyurl.com/63q6wah
 <http://www.budapest-tourist-guide.com/great-market-hall.html>
Sipi

Japan
 Squid at Tsukiji fish market, Tokyo. Photograph: Matthias Schrader/Corbis 
Tsukiji fish market, Tokyo 
Tsukiji fish market, in the centre of the city, is the biggest in the world. 
You need to get there for 5am, but it's well worth the pain. Visitor numbers 
are strictly limited and to get in on the action you need the early start. 
Don't miss breakfast at one of the tiny sushi restaurants in the outer market. 
Perch at the counter and feast on the freshest, tastiest sushi and sashimi.
Daily except Sundays and occasional Wednesdays, 5am-1pm, 5-2-1 Tsukiji, 
tsukiji-market.or.jp <http://www.tsukiji-market.or.jp/tukiji_e.htm>
troutiemcfish

Cambodia

Psar Kandal market, Phnom Penh
These narrow alleyways full of stalls crammed closely together are where the 
locals buy their food, rather than in shops and supermarkets. Banana flowers, 
mini mangoes, herb and spice stalls selling fresh galangal, ginger, chillies, 
turmeric; fish stalls with live fish in tanks and enormous aluminium basins 
full of squid and shellfish; egg stalls selling fresh and preserved eggs of all 
sizes and hues, meat and medicine and drink stalls. Everything is displayed 
beautifully in large baskets or on rattan mats.
Every morning, Kandal Market near Wat Ounalom
KittyD

Thailand

Ayutthaya night market
The central night market of world heritage site Ayutthaya is a wonderful, 
friendly place for all the family. Wander among the many steaming food stalls 
picking your dish from the bizarrely exotic (stir-fried frogs) to the 
ubiquitous and downright delicious (pad Thai) then settle on a table by the 
river, taking in the stunning views of some of the many lit up temple ruins. 
You can catch a boat from here to see many more ruins at night.
Every night, Th U Thong
Cabnfevergirl

Australia
 Photograph: Alamy 
Sydney fish market
No trip to this wonderful city is complete without a trip to its famous fish 
market – a real foodie's paradise. You can have a guided tour or you can take a 
course at the Seafood School. Best of all, you can eat delicious, freshly 
landed seafood on the quayside, but watch out: you may have to share your meal 
with the locals – cheeky pelicans that come right up to the table in the hope 
of a free lunch.
Daily 7am-4pm, Bank Street, Pyrmont, +61 2 9004 1100, sydneyfishmarket.com.au 
<http://www.sydneyfishmarket.com.au/> 
MellyMel66

USA

Dekalb farmers' market, Decatur, Atlanta, Georgia
This began as a small produce stand in 1977, and has grown into a true world 
market serving up to 100,000 people a week. Fascinating place – if you are 
looking for a fresh, unusual ingredient you'll find it here.
Daily 9am-9pm, 3000 E Ponce De Leon Avenue, dekalbfarmersmarket.com 
<http://www.dekalbfarmersmarket.com/>
MikeFinn

Dominica and St Lucia


Creole day markets, Roseau and Castries
Dominica and St Lucia both hold special food markets during their Creole Week 
festivals at the end of October. Stunning displays of local fruits, vegetables 
and spices are created for the event. Market vendors wear traditional costumes, 
stalls are festooned with brightly coloured madras fabrics and decorated with 
tropical flowers. Visitors can also sample the delights of a fresh jelly 
(young) coconut, sugar-cane juice or a more substantial meal from a roadside 
snackette.
Roseau, Dominica: last Saturday in October, Old Market Plaza; Castries, St 
Lucia: last Saturday in October, Jeremy St
Dorival
 