
Winning tip: Senja Island, Norway

There can't be many places where the scenery is quite as dramatic as Senja, 
where jagged mountains plunge into fjords. Hire a car and drive round the 
island – with each tunnel you exit, and each new fjord view, you will think it 
can't get any more astounding, but it does. Even better, there are hardly any 
tourists – most go to the nearby Lofoten Islands. Get in touch with Bent at 
Senja Mountain Lodge (senjalodge.com <http://senjalodge.com/>): he'll take you 
off-piste skiing, climbing or snowshoeing.
Rebecca Day

Finland

Hotel Kakslauttanen, Lapland
At my favourite winter wonderland in the Arctic Circle you stay in traditional 
log cabins with open fires, private saunas and outside hot tubs. You can also 
spend a night in a heated glass igloo where you can see the northern lights 
from the bed. Or try husky sledding, a snowmobile excursion to the forests on 
the Russian border, ice fishing with the local Sami people, or a reindeer 
safari. This is a perfect location for Christmas, a romantic break or a family 
adventure.
kakslauttanen.fi/en <http://www.kakslauttanen.fi/en/>
Elainefp

Karaoke, Arctic style, in Lapland
There is no experience more surreal than seeing local people in Lapland 
singing karaoke. It is more melancholy than the Portuguesefado, more 
entertaining than Las Vegas. The women arrive on skidoos, then peel off their 
helmets and overalls to reveal cocktail dresses and dancing shoes. The karaoke 
is a window into the minds of Arctic people. Where else will you hear 1980s big 
hair heavy metal followed by Lady Gaga, Frank Sinatra, and a Russian ballad? 
The Finns say that in Lapland no normal rules apply, and I have to agree.
wanhamestari.fi <http://www.wanhamestari.fi>
bigsoulmama

Sweden

The Aurora Retreat, Junosuando
The bright blue skies and startling snowy landscape during the day and a night 
sky lit by the dancing northern lights take your breath away. Coming back here 
after a day's husky driving, snowmobiling, crosscountry skiing or sledging is 
perfect – cosy and intimate, lovely home-cooked food and roaring log fires. For 
those wanting something less adventurous there is yoga, massage, cooking and 
trips to visit Santa. With temperatures averaging -30C, it's a real bonus that 
all the necessary outerwear and boots are provided.
auroraretreat.se <http://auroraretreat.se>
Triciamaryb

Norway

Walking on Svartisen glacier
Visit Svartisen glacier from Holandsfjord to an arm called Engabreen, which 
appears to reach down and tickle the fjord with its icy fingers. The magical 
blue ice draws you nearer but the screeching and groaning remind you of the 
hidden dangers. Ice caves and deep fissures abound, so book a guide if you wish 
to explore. They'll equip you with rope, ice picks and crampons for your 
unforgettable hike. The walk lasts about five hours and should be booked in 
advance.
visitnorway.com <http://www.visitnorway.com/en/Product/?pid=128588>
FarawayVisions

Greenland

Qeqertarsuaq, Disko Island
Qeqertarsuaq is the largest village on Disko Island, off the west coast of 
Greenland, with a population of about 1,000. After you've spent days trekking 
on glaciers in 24-hour daylight, climbing virgin peaks and wading through 
thigh-deep snow drifts while eating ration-packed foods, the village is 
exquisite. It offers stunning views of a bay filled with monstrous icebergs, 
and opportunities to scuba dive in the incomprehensible cold or catch and eat 
the freshest, purest cod you have ever had. This is where adventurers become 
enthralled for life.
qaasuitsup.gl/en <http://www.qaasuitsup.gl/en>
adavidson

Canada

Sea skiing, Baffin Island
Try a skiing experience with a difference in the Canadian Arctic. Wrap up warm 
and ski straight out of the door of your beachside cabin and out on to the sea 
ice. Ski past the fishing boats moored for winter on the frozen ocean waters 
and glide upriver through the mountains where, if you're lucky, you may come 
across one of the locals fishing at their ice-hole for a few Arctic char for 
dinner.
visitcanada.com <http://www.visitcanada.com>
Beckslottie

Iceland
 Photograph: Ian Yates/Corbis 
Blue Lagoon, Grindavík
A geothermal spa that helps to relax every muscle in your body, cleanse your 
skin and provide an incredible volcanic setting for all that. Spending a day 
here is rather too easy, with 37C to 39C waters, containing an array of 
minerals and algae for those aching limbs. Even visiting as a 17-year-old, I 
loved being pampered beyond belief. There is even a hotel on site so that the 
tranquillity can be extended for as long as you like.
bluelagoon.com <http://www.bluelagoon.com>
adavidson

Norway

Lofoten Islands
Endless days in summer, endless nights in winter. In summer, wild flowers 
compete to make the most of their short season, and sitting by the sea at 
midnight, watching white-tailed sea eagles and reading your book by the light 
of the sun, you may even experience an algal bloom turning the warm sea 
brilliant turquoise. In winter, a wonderful place to see the northern lights 
with (relatively) mild temperatures due to the Gulf Stream. From February to 
May, you may find the smell of drying cod somewhat overpowering. The only other 
downside is that you'll always suffer from the urge to go back there!
lofoten-info.no <http://www.lofoten-info.no/>
Sladatlantic

Finland

Ylläs in Finnish Lapland
Dress for the weather and you will fall in love with this place. If it's fun 
you're after, you need a week to do it all: skiing, dog sledding, ice fishing, 
reindeer sleighs, snowmobiles, meeting the local Sami people. The pristine snow 
is another option, with miles of walking trails that cannot be beaten for peace 
and solitude. Or be a big kid and travel to Santa's official home,Rovaniemi 
<http://www.visitrovaniemi.fi/In_English.iw3>. Add to this first-class hotels, 
romantic log cabins, blazing log fires and you have it all. I stayed at the 
Äkäs hotel, in unspoilt Äkäslompolo near Ylläs, where they gave me a wakeup 
call when the northern lights appeared.
yllas.fi/en <http://www.yllas.fi/en>
Pmartini

Sweden

Arvidsjaur 
I first visited Arvidsjaur when I was a young teen. My auntie and I went just 
after Christmas for our annual holiday together. On our first night we 
witnessed the aurora borealis from just outside our spa hotel, Laponia. Over 
three days, we went husky sledging, travelled across frozen lakes on skidoos 
and ate fantastic local food. For a snowy holiday somewhere peaceful and 
beautiful, Arvidsjaur is perfect.
hotell-laponia.se <http://www.hotell-laponia.se/en/>
KaySmythe 
 