
I welcome Nicky Morgan to the world of education as the new secretary of state 
(Going, going … Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/cameron-sacks-toxic-gove-promotes-women-reshuffle>
, 16 July). This Sunday we will be screening a sneak preview of Art Party, a 
feature film starring John Voce as Michael Grove at the Latitude festival. 
Grove's character is based on Morgan's predecessor. All people involved in 
education are reeling from the last four years of Michael Gove's education 
reforms. His main mistake was to confuse the different subjects – mathematics, 
history, English, art etc – with educational standards. He thought certain 
subjects had innately high standards and some were substandard. These illogical 
and prejudicial views led Michael Gove to make a complete mess of the national 
curriculum.

He constructed a hugely complex system for valuing subjects that marginalised 
everything he thought was not worthwhile – including, surprisingly, creativity 
in the arts and design.

Other people will tell Morgan about problems with free schools, and academies. 
How Gove with one hand gave growing control over schools to local businesses 
and religious groups, which has led to huge difficulties over accountability, 
and how with the other hand he tried to control schools through the curriculum. 
But it is his diminishment of the arts in schools that has alienated every 
person I have met in my attempt to better advocate the arts to government since 
2010.

I welcome Morgan's appointment. She has talked about her frustration with the 
Conservatives' negative approach. Well, she has just replaced a man for whom a 
negative approach has spelled his demise. She should feel validated in the idea 
of showing children a future that has a positive message. The arts in schools 
provide a beating heart of hope. Art is about design and drawing the future. 
Creativity is future-gazing.

Until Tuesday I had been planning to run in Gove's Surrey Heath constituency 
in the next election to flag up the place of creativity and design in our 
schools. I even bought a camper van from which to conduct my campaign. Morgan's 
constituency, Loughborough, is further for me and my camper van to travel.

I hope Morgan will listen to teachers, children and parents. I hope she 
understands that not all kids are the same. That kids hugely intelligent at 
maths and science should be encouraged to enjoy and contribute to the culture 
of our country, and that gifted creative kids must not be told their subjects 
are not worth studying.

I hope Morgan gets the fact that British design depends on kids being visual 
and able to draw. I encourage her to visit the Nationwide Art Party on 21 
August, GCSE results day, and do everything in her power to reverse the 14% 
decline in children choosing the arts in schools since 2010. Please do ask 
children to choose the arts at school and be all that they can be.
Patrick Brill (AKA Bob and Roberta Smith)
London

• Mr Cameron reveals his true judgment of the worth of women by appointing 
Nicky Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan> as education 
secretary but leaving her in post as women's minister. Well, it's not a 
"proper" job is it? Easy enough to sort out Gove's mess at the same time.
Jill Marks
Broseley Wood, Shropshire

• If Nicky Morgan was known as the "minister for straight women" (Cameron 
scrapes off the 'barnacles' but stokes up trouble on the Tory right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/cameron-barnacles-trouble-tory-right>
, 16 July) then surely she will now be the "secretary of state for straight 
children's education".
Professor Rebecca Boden
Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire

• Despite Kenneth Baker's claims to the contrary there have only been two 
Conservative education ministers who have radically reshaped the English 
education system. One was Rab Butler, who in 1944 forged a system out of 
disorganised fragments shattered by war; the other wasMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, who dismantled a 
functioning system, shattering it by rhetoric and calumny. With all its faults 
Butler's system lasted 70 years; will Gove's "non-system", with its still 
greater fault lines, last even seven?
Professor Colin Richards
Spark Bridge, Cumbria

• You suggest that Iain Duncan Smith, unlike Michael Gove, survived the 
reshuffle because his policies are popular (Education secretary showed zeal but 
failed to win voters over. That's why he lost his job and Duncan Smith didn't 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/tale-of-two-careers-michael-gove-iain-duncan-smith>
, 15 July). This might not be the only explanation.

Employment and support allowance, replacing incapacity benefit: over 700,000 
people waiting – endlessly – to be assessed by Atos. Personal independence 
payment, introduced last year to replace disability living allowance: by March, 
349,000 claims made but fewer than a quarter decided; most claims now taking 
between six and 12 months to process. Universal credit, Iain Duncan Smith's pet 
project, designed to "make work pay": about a million people predicted to be on 
the benefit by now; claimant count this April, 5,880. (Not to mention millions 
of pounds wasted on failed IT systems.)

Is it not possible that, despite the fact that a cabinet post does indeed make 
work pay, there may have been a shortage of candidates for Mr Duncan 
Smith's job? 
Patricia de Wolfe
London

• The list of new ministerial appointments shows a refreshing example of this 
government's commitment to transparency. George Freeman MP has joined the 
government as a health and business minister, a new role straddling the 
Department of Health and Department for Business. Quite coincidentally, before 
entering parliament he had a career in the biomedical venture capital industry. 
Is this also a rare example of the revolving door in reverse? At least there 
can be no further doubt about the government's agenda for the NHS.
John Kehoe
Ramsbury, Wiltshire

• There was a careers conference in Cambridge on Monday and Tuesday. Tuesday 
morning was special. Was this, I wondered, the first time a gathering of 
careers advisers had burst into applause at the news that someone had lost 
their job?
Dr Lyn Barham
Bath

• Michael Gove's appointment as Conservative chief whip is good news. It is 
hard to think of a job better suited to his talents. Tory MPs will now be able 
to appreciate at first hand all the courtesy, charm and tact that teachers know 
so well. The news that Mr Gove is to be given an enhanced broadcasting role in 
the runup to the general election will also be widely welcomed, not least in 
the Labour party.
Donald Mackinnon
Yardley Gobion, Northamptonshire

• Has David Cameron never read House of Cards by Michael Dobbs?
Hazel Davies
Notre-Dame-du-Bec, France
 