
WINNING TIP: Sahara desert gardens, Algeria

We used a company based in Algiers to do a tour of the gardens – yes, gardens! 
– of the Sahara. Flying from Algiers to El Oued we could see great green 
circles in the desert. They weren't crop circles, but potato fields. We visited 
an English garden in a palace in El Oued and toured plantations and gardens in 
Tam and Djanet in the south of the country, before ending up back in the 
beautiful private gardens of the Hotel St George in Algiers and the nearby 
botanical gardens.
expertalgeria.com/saharagardens.html. Check the Foreign Office website for 
travel advice:fco.gov.uk 
<http://www.fco.gov.uk/en/travel-and-living-abroad/travel-advice-by-country/middle-east-north-africa/algeria>
desophia

Chile
 Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/REUTERS 
Stargazing in the Atacama desert
In the driest desert in the world, a company called Space runs stargazing 
tours. The view of the night sky is fantastic – there are more stars than you 
could ever imagine and we were able to spot Mars, Saturn and Sirius as well as 
many constellations. French astronomer Alain talks you through the signs of the 
zodiac and entertains with hilarious stories. Temperatures fall below zero at 
night but the hot chocolate at the end will warm up those freezing toes. Also 
not to be missed in the Atcama is the sunset at Valle de la Luna – watching the 
colours appear over the lunar landscapes is out of this world.
spaceobs.com <http://www.spaceobs.com/>
Bex871

Iran

Toudeshk Cho, Dasht-e Kavir desert
The charismatic and very genuine Mohammad Jalali started fishing overland 
cyclists off the highway when he was 19, and offering them a (somewhat cracked) 
roof to sleep under in the tiny desert community of Toudeshk Cho. Over eight 
years, his reputation has grown, and he has shown more than 1,000 travellers a 
true desert experience. Mohammad has founded Silk Road NGO, a charity aiming to 
preserve village life. I found his tour of Toudeshk Cho – from how to store 
water safely to keeping camels in and cats out – fascinating. An evening trip 
to the "moving sands" dunes was stunningly beautiful, and eating with his 
family in an oasis at the bottom of a mountain we had just scrambled up hugely 
exciting as it involved spaghetti, rather than the Iranian staple of kebab! The 
village is conveniently located on the main highway between touristy Esfahan 
and Yazd in central Iran – it's very easy to reach, just hop off any bus on 
that road.
$15 a night including food; donations to the charity welcome. +98 913 9165 
752, silkroadngo@yahoo.com. Check the Foreign Office website,fco.gov.uk 
<http://www.fco.gov.uk/en/travel-and-living-abroad/travel-advice-by-country/middle-east-north-africa/iran>
CloJo

United Arab Emirates

Al Ain by 4x4
Not many tourists visiting Dubai and Abu Dhabi experience the local heritage 
and deserts that make up so much of the character of the Gulf. One easily 
accessible side trip from the main tourist centres is to Al Ain, part of the 
ancient Silk Road junction post of Buraimi, which the UAE shares with Oman, 
where some of the most beautiful areas of desert can be easily reached by 4x4. 
Colours are brightest November to March. If you approach Al Ain from Abu Dhabi, 
bright green date palms stand against glowing red dunes and a deep cobalt sky 
as you pass the town of Al Yahar. From Dubai the approach is through Al Foah on 
the outskirts of the town, through quite different shades of paler sands and 
the soft green of the ghaf trees, branches drooping gently until they are 
clipped into a perfect horizontal line by grazing camels. If you're lucky, it 
will rain. Local families adore desert rain; they pile into truck-sized SUVs 
and drive out for a desert picnic. Stop at a respectful distance to observe and 
you will almost certainly be invited to join them.
Marilyn

Arabian Adventures
Ignore the bling of Dubai's five-star hotels and head out instead for an 
overnight safari in the spectacular rolling red dunes half an hour south of the 
city. My wife organised a birthday convoy of 4x4s, hotdogging overyardangs 
accompanied by the screams of fear and delight as we flew over crescents of 
ochre sand dunes. An evening camp in a natural bowl, eating a birthday dish of 
barbecued quail, was topped by an undamaged and proudly presented black forest 
gateaux served under the gaze of a herd of wild camels. You get a comfy 
mattress in your tent, the chance to pee in the sand under Ursa Major and 
fresh, unbroken eggs for breakfast transported carefully by gentle Palestinian 
drivers.
arabian-adventures.com <http://www.arabian-adventures.com/>
Scousetone

Jordan
 Wadi Rum. Photograph: Eitan Simanor/ Alamy 
Camping with Bedouins in Wadi Rum
Wadi Rum is how I imagined a desert to be – beautiful, playful sand beneath 
your feet, rather than ugly harsh rocks. Bedouin guides take you bombing around 
the desert in 4x4s, stopping to explore beautiful scenery, jump off sand dunes, 
and try a little rock climbing. Expect to camp and eat in simple Bedouin camps 
with basic amenities, in the middle of the vast desert. Wadi Rum can be enjoyed 
as a day-trip from Petra, but budget two to three days to properly appreciate 
it.
wadirum.jo <http://www.wadirum.jo/>
Muldoon84

Oman

Driving from Muscat to Salalah
On the 1,000km-plus drive from Muscat south to Salalah, capital of Dhofari 
province, you pass through the most extreme, silent, brutally hot, lunar 
landscape for eight hours, occasionally filling up at petrol stations manned by 
lonely south Indian attendants. Then, if you go during the Khareef, or monsoon 
season, all of a sudden you hit a thin film of rain, fog and brilliantly green 
hills. You battle for the road with camels in scenery that more resembles 
Switzerland than Arabia. It is a surreal and demanding expedition, but well 
worth it.
PRPringle

Namibia

Sossusvlei Lodge
It's a modern lodge, beautifully decorated, on the edge of the Namib Desert. 
Perfect for trips into the spectacular dunes. Friendly staff, great food and a 
very relaxing atmosphere. Units are built with adobe bricks typical of Arabian 
villages and tents similar to those of the Bedouin.
sossusvleilodge.com <http://www.sossusvleilodge.com/>
Bluebottle3

US
 Stovepipe Wells, Death Valley. Photograph: Beatrice De Gea/AP 
Death Valley national park
A road trip through California's Death Valley is really just like it is in the 
movies: driving miles upon miles through atmospheric, desolate landscape, 
passing only the odd Harley Davidson, and signs to helpfully tell you there's 
"no gas for next 100 miles". The Eureka Valley sand dunes in the northwest of 
the park are spectacular and the hike to the summit is well worth the effort 
for the amazing views. Stay at the nearby Stovepipe Wells Village and enjoy a 
cold beer on the porch while gazing over the dunes and desert as the setting 
sun turns everything red. Magic.
On Hwy 190 between Panamint Springs and Furnace Creek. 
<http://www.stovepipewells.com/>
http://www.stovepipewells.com <http://www.stovepipewells.com/>; nps.gov/deva 
<http://www.nps.gov/deva/index.htm>
littleD
 North Shore Yacht Club. 
Palm Springs to the Mojave
Begin your adventure in Palm Springs with a night in a classic mid-20th- 
century motel such as The Horizon (thehorizonhotel.com 
<http://www.thehorizonhotel.com>). You could sign up for an architectural tour 
with Robert Imber (psmoderntours@aol.com <mailto: psmoderntours@aol.com>). Then 
head south-east and camp in Anza-Borrego desert state park (parks.ca.gov 
<http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=638>). Next up are the desolate shores of the 
dazzling Salton Sea. Drive up to its North Shore Yacht Club. This fantastic 
building, designed by Albert Frey in 1959 and frequented by the likes of Dean 
Martin, has just been restored and reopened as a museum (saltonseamuseum.org 
<http://www.saltonseamuseum.org>). Follow eery Box Canyon Road 20 miles up to 
Joshua Tree national park (nps.gov/jotr <http://www.nps.gov/jotr>). Camp again 
– there is nothing finer than waking at dawn in the Mojave desert. Continue to 
the north side of the park and check into the 29 Palms Inn (29palmsinn.com 
<http://www.29palmsinn.com>). You can turn your desert experience into art on a 
printmaking course with Gretchen at the Creative Center (
29palmscreativecenter.com <http://www.29palmscreativecenter.com>).
desertrocklady

Kenya


Lake Turkana
It is 45C and the gale-force winds that began when we crossed the northern end 
of the Chalbi desert three days ago are still going strong, but the view of the 
Jade Sea makes up for it all. We are at Lake Turkana in northern Kenya, the 
largest desert lake in the world. The blue-green water comes from algae and 
changes colour with the light. Getting here we came through some amazing 
scenery, including some sections of volcanic desert that reminded us of 
Iceland. This morning it was too windy to take the boat out (fine by us as this 
is the home of the largest concentration of Nile crocodiles in the world) so we 
visited an El Molo village. The El Molo are the smallest ethnic group in Kenya 
and live by fishing, with a lifestyle hardly touched by the 21st century. 
Gametrackers have their own camp, where accommodation is in the igloo-shaped 
palm huts of the Turkana tribe. If you want to go where few others do, this is 
the safari for you. One day we travelled for five hours without seeing another 
vehicle.
gametrackersafaris.com
 <http://www.gametrackersafaris.com/>sueclaydon

Libya


Waw an Namus
Desert perspectives are intriguingly misleading, none more so than in the 
approach to this remote and enormous crater. After six hours of relentless, 
mostly featureless high plain desert, you are suddenly peering down into a 
mile-wide crater. The palm trees at the bottom are picture postcard stuff. Waw 
an Namus means Oasis of Mosquitoes in Arabic, but this must be historical. We 
were not troubled at all and stargazing from deep down at the bottom with the 
perfect rim framing the shimmering-density of the Milky Way was unforgettable. 
You'll need a travel company to get there as the tarmac finished 300km from it. 
The rest of the way was a track but it certainly wasn't a beaten one.
blagg
 