
Steve Bruce's rebuilding work at Wigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic> could be more extensive 
than he feared this summer after Antonio Valencia's agent claimed Real Madrid 
had made their first move to sign the winger and Paul Scharner declared a 
desire to leave the JJB Stadium.

Wigan's manager had his hopes of qualifying for Europe undermined in January 
by the departures of Emile Heskey, Wilson Palacios and Ryan Taylor and is 
resigned to losing Valencia at the end of this season.

Diego Herrera, the winger's agent, said: "Wigan revealed last week that there 
has been an offer fromReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> but they haven't told me any 
details about it. I don't know how much the offer is and I haven't yet talked 
to anyone from Madrid about details of a contract, so I don't know how long 
they would want him for. Wigan have not confirmed anything to me about 
Manchester United's interest.

"I know there are other clubs interested but as far as I know there's nothing 
official. I have yet to sit down with Antonio and see what he wants.

"We've not yet talked about which club he would prefer. Honestly I think it's 
really difficult that he remains at Wigan. I would anticipate that he leaves 
this summer. We have to see what will happen in the next few weeks. We're not 
in any rush."

The threat of Scharner's departure, however, will be of major concern to Bruce 
as the fine Wigan team he established continues to unravel. "I feel this summer 
is the time for me to make the next step in my career," said Scharner, the 
versatile Austrian who has attracted widespread interest since joining the club 
for £2m from Brann in 2006. "I'm looking towards getting a regular starting 
place in the Austria national side. My absolute aim would be to play in the 
Champions League."

Wigan will at least have money to spend this summer, having banked over £15m 
from the January sales of Heskey and Palacios to Aston Villa and Tottenham 
Hotspur respectively, and will be keen to encourage an auction for Valencia 
given the interest from Madrid and possiblyManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. But Bruce has 
confirmed that he will not turn Amr Zaki's loan spell into a permanent deal 
following a dramatic dip in the Egyptian striker's form and discipline in the 
second half of the season. He is also yet to make a decision on Mido, Zaki's 
fellow Egyptian who is now in the final week of his loan move from 
Middlesbrough.
 