
The man who inspired Asne Seierstad's smash hit The Bookseller of Kabul, Shah 
Muhammad Rais, is to start selling Afghan books into the UK, including the 
memoir he penned as an angry response to Seierstad's book.

"Since the establishment of our business around 35 years before, we have been 
trying to reach customers anywhere in the world," said Rais today, after 
signing a deal with the UK arm of Indian distributor Motilal Books to bring up 
to 500 titles to the UK. "Afghanistan is still an unexplored country. The world 
should know and understand the real picture, the real image of Afghanistan. All 
mistakes are repeated because the world doesn't have enough knowledge about 
Afghanistan."

Seierstad wrote The Bookseller of Kabul after spending time living with Rais 
and his family in Kabul. It became an instant bestseller, but Rais took issue 
with the way Seierstad portrayed the country. "It gave a very wrong picture of 
the culture of the Afghan people. Unfortunately many people who read the book 
got a negative image of Afghanistan," he said today. The book he wrote in 
response to Seierstad's Once Upon a Time There Was a Bookseller of Kabul – the 
bestselling title in his own chain of shops, which he describes as "half 
fiction, half reality" – will be just one of the books brought to the UK as 
part of the deal with Motilal, alongside cookbooks, fiction, poetry, government 
literature, travel and political writing.

Rais met the UK managing director of Motilal, Ray McLennan, at the Frankfurt 
Book Fair, where McLennan was quick to spot an opportunity. "I think it's very 
important we get source material from Afghan authors as much as possible, so 
this is very exciting," said McLennan. "He tells me he has got 80 books written 
by British officers in the 18th and 19th century about their time in 
Afghanistan ... There are books about Afghan wildlife, another couple of 
hundred by contemporary Afghan authors."

McLennan intends to assess Rais's titles on a case-by-case basis as he sends 
them to the UK, with the intention of getting the operation up and running by 
mid-August. All books will be put on to Amazon, with any that sell particularly 
well then sold to wholesalers. "Most will be of interest for academic library 
suppliers for universities to study around the world," McLennan said. "I don't 
think this will be a massive commercial activity, but I'm enjoying the 
adventure of it."

Rais is a publisher as well as a printer and bookseller. He currently has 
three bookshops in Kabul, as well as a mobile shop anda website 
<http://www.shahmbookco.com/> selling both local language and English titles. 
He is also close to completing another book, about Afghanistan and the war, 
which he hopes will soon find foreign publishers: "It's very important for me 
to explain why Afghanistan is so important," he said.

McLennan anticipated that the new book would be auctioned off to the highest 
bidder before the Frankfurt Book Fair this autumn. "We are still putting the 
finishing touches to that project, so it is not fleshed out fully," he said. 
"It will be a major contribution to the future of the world's relationship with 
Afghanistan, a benchmark publication."
 