 When worldwide Muslim fury over cartoons of the Prophet spread to Britain, the 
flag-burning protests outside the Danish embassy in London appeared to be an 
entirely spontaneous outpouring of anger.
Inquiries by the Guardian have shown, however, that a key role in organising 
the demonstration was played by an Islamist sect whose supporters have 
repeatedly been linked to violence and terrorism.

Al-Ghurabaa, the organisation which takes credit for the protest, is 
essentially the same organisation as al-Muhajiroun, a sect which claims to have 
disbanded more than a year ago and whose founder, Omar Bakri Mohammed, was 
excluded from the UK last summer, shortly after he fled to Beirut.

They are uniquely British organisations which share the same leadership and 
same incendiary rhetoric. Their websites appear to be registered to the same 
house in north London. They hold an identical allure for a small but bitterly 
disaffected group of young British Muslims. And their members say they owe 
allegiance to the same "spiritual leader": Bakri. The organisation may be 
banned, under both its guises, after the terrorism bill reaches its final stage 
in the Commons on Wednesday. Already, however, there is evidence that 
supporters of al-Ghurabaa - which means the strangers - are reorganising 
themselves under several new names, such as al-Firqat un-Naajiyah and Ahl al 
Sunnah Wal Jamaa'ah: the Saved Sect, and the Messenger and his Companions.

Asked yesterday what the group would do if banned, Anjem Choudary, Bakri's 
right-hand man, said: "It may push a lot of people underground, and that is 
something the government should be concerned about."

Al-Ghurabaa, like al-Muhajiroun, makes no secret of its adoration of Osama bin 
Laden, and both are openly homophobic. Its website also espouses the murder of 
any who insult the Prophet.

In the wake of the Danish embassy demonstrations, al-Ghurabaa's website was 
offering a series of articles and essays, some harmless, others bizarre, and a 
few which will be seen as offensive.

One, entitled A Nation Built Upon Lies, declares that the "widespread" 
dishonesty of western society can be traced to children's stories about tooth 
fairies and Santa Claus, and to the failure to teach creationism in schools.

Another, headlined the Lion Roars Again, hails Osama bin Laden as a man of 
"honour and dignity", whose roar causes the US to "shiver with fear and panic".

An essay about the cartoons was entitled Kill Those Who Insult Muhammad. 
Others were entitled There is No Room for Homosexuality in Islam, Homosexual 
Today Paedophile Tomorrow, and Homosexuality: A Crime.

Last year Ali Hussain, an undercover reporter, offered an insight into the 
thinking of members of al-Ghurabaa and al-Firqat un-Naajiyah after spending 
several weeks with them.

Many were young Bangladeshis living in council flats and houses in the East 
End of London. Some were still at school, while others lived on benefits. One 
explained to him that to work was to contribute to the system of the kuffar, 
the unbeliever. The Prophet had lived off the state and attacked it at the same 
time: "All money belongs to Allah anyway." An equally earnest young man told 
him that he and his brothers showed their defiance by driving without insurance.

Bakri's challenges to the kuffar were far more ambitious, however: Hussain 
tape-recorded him describing the bombers of 7/7 as "the fantastic four" and 
heard him telling his young followers that their victims were not innocent 
because they did not live in accordance with Islamic law.

In the immediate aftermath of the attacks, Bakri declared in private that "for 
the past 48 hours I'm very happy". In public, however, he went to some lengths 
to avoid being identified as the organisation's leader.

Al-Ghurabaa's website denies that it is the same organisation as 
al-Muhajiroun, although the site not only appears to be registered from the 
same address, but uses the same web hosting firm in Germany. A mobile telephone 
number which is given as a point of contact has appeared previously on 
al-Muhajiroun material.

The website also denies any connection with Bakri. However, within the books 
section of the website, the only volumes advertised last week were texts by 
Omar Bakri, or by his "students".

The leading figures of al-Muhajiroun are now at the forefront of al-Ghurabaa 
and al-Firqat un-Naajiyah. They include Choudary, 38, a lawyer from Ilford, 
east London, Abu Izadeen, 30, a convert from the East End previously known as 
Trevor Brooks, and Abu Uzair, 37, formerly known as Sajid Sharif. Izadeen has 
described the 7/7 suicide bombers as "completely praiseworthy", while Uzair has 
declared that it is "OK" for bombers to attack Britain, because "the banner has 
been risen for jihad inside the UK". Several leading members of al-Ghurabaa 
were expelled from Lebanon after visiting Bakri last year.

Bakri, 47, launched al-Muhajiroun on February 16 1996, shortly after his 
departure from Hizb ut-Tahrir, the Islamic Liberation party. Born in Syria, he 
had established the British branch of Hizb shortly after his arrival in the 
country 10 years earlier, but was now declaring himself to be not only 
organiser, but spiritual leader, of his own Islamic sect. The name he chose, 
meaning the exiles in Arabic, evoked the 7th century flight of the Prophet and 
his early followers from Mecca to Medina.

While Abu Hamza, the preacher who was widely scorned as his partner in the 
double act of radical British Islam, constructed a power base at Finsbury Park 
mosque in north London, Bakri used small meetings in rented halls and harnessed 
the internet.

Hamza attracted a devoted following from the capital's Arabic and 
Afro-Caribbean populations; Bakri established himself as the mouthpiece of 
radical British Asians. His adherents were young people who had had their fill 
of the traditional leaders in the mosques. Critically, his supporters were 
rarely Arabic speakers.

Bakri was always careful to avoid inciting violence in Britain. Violent 
incidents overseas, however, were a different matter.

Al-Muhajiroun <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> supporters have 
emerged as suicide bombers in Tel Aviv and jihadis in Kashmir. Moscow called 
upon the British government to ban the organisation after members were found to 
be fighting in Chechnya. It once had a base in Lahore, Pakistan, and made no 
secret of sending supporters for training in terrorist camps. Bakri infamously 
hailed the 9/11 hijackers as the "Magnificent 19".

Bakri's announcement that he was "disbanding" al-Muhajiroun, in October 2004, 
was followed three months later by his warning that a "covenant of security" 
under which Muslims lived peacefully in Britain had been violated, both by the 
government's failure to accept Bin Laden's offer of a truce, and because of 
increasingly tough anti-terrorism measures.

Six months after that, the the 7/7 suicide bombers claimed the lives of 52 
commuters. Two of the attackers are strongly suspected of having links to 
al-Muhajiroun, and there remains at least the suspicion that they were inspired 
by Bakri's pronouncement.
 