
Radical anti-Islamic groups are posing a growing threat to Australia’s 
security, according to the country’s head of intelligence.

The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation’s director general, Duncan 
Lewis, saidReclaim Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reclaim-australia>, in particular, 
was of interest to Asio.


Authorities charged a man affiliated to the rightwing group under commonwealth 
counter-terrorism laws for the first time in August for allegedly collecting or 
making documents to prepare for terrorist acts.


Arrests as violent clashes break out at Reclaim Australia rallies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/22/five-people-arrested-as-violent-clashes-break-out-at-reclaim-australia-rallies>
Lewis said Reclaim Australia had “offered violence” in the past and he 
expected its members would continue to do so when they confronted pro-Islamic 
groups.


“To the extent that there is a possibility of violence, or there is indeed 
violence being offered, that is of interest to us,” he told a Senate committee 
late on Tuesday night. “That is business for Asio.

“It is a real problem and it is something that we’re very, very acutely aware 
of and I have people working that particular issue.”


Asked by the Greens senator Nick McKim whether the threat from such groups was 
growing, Lewis said it had – primarily over the past 18 months.


“Yes it is, but I wouldn’t describe it as going up in any vertical way. It’s 
come off a low base and it’s now more present than it was.”


Lewis also revealed that up to 70 children of Australians have been exposed to 
extremist groups in the battlefields of Syria or Iraq.

He said these children had either travelled to the conflict zones with their 
Australian parents or been born there.

He said Asio was investigating about 190 people in Australia who were actively 
supporting groups such asIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> 
through recruiting, fundraising or seeking to join themselves. That included 
about 40 Australians who had returned from Syria or Iraq.

MPs question Asio chief’s request to moderate language on Islam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/17/mps-question-asio-chiefs-request-to-moderate-language-on-islam>
“The long-term impact of the returnees will be a security issue for this 
country’s intelligence and law enforcement agencies for many years to come,” he 
said.

Lewis confirmed that up to 68 Australians were believed to have been killed in 
the conflicts – 11 of them since May. About 110 people were still fighting or 
engaged with terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq.

“As Isil’s territory continues to contract, it’s expected that many of those 
Australians who are supporting Isil in Syria and Iraq will be killed or 
captured,” he said, using another acronym for Islamic State.

Lewis warned that, for the sake of national security, action would be taken 
against anyone who returned to Australia after committing a terrorist attack.

To date, Asio has recommended the cancellation or refusal of more than 190 
passports of Australians linked to extremist groups. More than 20 visas for 
non-Australians have also either been cancelled or refused.

Asio backs down in bid to keep security assessment 'law' secret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/20/asio-backs-down-in-bid-to-keep-security-assessment-law-secret>
“Let me be absolutely clear: the threat of terrorism in Australia is real and 
present in our community,” Lewis said. “It required vigilance by both the 
Australian community and abroad, and governments of all levels to continue to 
combat it.”

The intelligence head also highlighted the existential, insidious and 
strategic threats posed by foreign espionage. Though he couldn’t provide 
specific details, he said the threat was ongoing and pervasive.

“It’s more significant than many in our community would realise.”
 