
Christian Horner, the Red Bull team principal, is almost certain to achieve on 
Sunday what he describes as their greatest achievement of all. With a lead of 
82 points Red Bull need a maximum of five points to become only the fourth team 
to win a hat-trick ofFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
constructors' championships.

Horner's view is hardly impartial but Red Bull's astonishing achievement in 
maintaining their high plateau of excellence is the talking point of the 
paddock.

The BBC commentator David Coulthard drove not only for Red Bull but for two of 
the other three teams to achieve this feat, McLaren and Williams (Ferrari, 
twice, were the others). Coulthard said from the paddock here on Friday: "I'm 
totally unsurprised. BecauseRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> are the only one of the major 
teams totally focused on Formula One.

"McLaren have electronics, road cars and other things and I don't know about 
anyone else but I've never been successful at giving 100% to more than one 
thing.

"At various times McLaren have been the class of the field. At no time have 
Ferrari been able to say that, although they've had a great package. But Red 
Bull [whose soft drinks empire is run completely separately] have an ability to 
find solutions to the problems that they find during the course of a season. It 
is a really good formula.

"McLaren are an amazing organisation – I know from nine years experience there 
– but for some amazing reason they've not won a constructors' title since 1998.

"They don't just want to win; they want to dominate. They have the big factory 
and the perfect facilities to make that possible. It's difficult to understand 
why they haven't had more success in recent years."

Alain Prost, who won four drivers' championships, drove for McLaren, Williams 
and Ferrari and was involved in two of the team hat-tricks.

He said: "If you look at what they have done in the past few years, if you 
look at what they have put in place, the financial stability on one side, 
Adrian Newey's position and the whole technical team and the line-up of their 
drivers, with Sebastian [Vettel] and Mark [Webber], it cannot surprise anybody.

"It is obvious that they are the strongest team in Formula One. And the 
continuity is part of that success. The whole thing was so built that the 
success was always likely to continue."

Meanwhile another former world champion, Damon Hill, said: "It's very easy to 
feel satisfied after the first win but then quite hard to steel yourself to do 
it again because it is a gargantuan effort to keep up that pace of development 
and keep everyone motivated. It gets harder and harder for a team to keep 
winning.

"For a driver it's not so hard, when they've won one or two. But someone has 
to build the car, someone has to keep the pressure on, to keep coming up with 
the developments, and that's a big strain on human resources."

Hill added: "Adrian Newey [designer] will say it's not just him; it's his 
team. But it is hugely him. And you have to say that Christian Horner [team 
principal] has put this whole thing together and motivated the team and chosen 
Adrian and the other people, including the drivers. So Christian, too, must go 
down as a very key player in this and the whole Red Bull success."

In Abu Dhabi recently Horner tried to spread the praise throughout the team. 
It was a noble but vain effort to take the spotlight away from Newey and Vettel.

Hill has it right; Horner's own contribution, his ability to motivate a team 
time and again, should not be underestimated. Newey and Vettel have been 
extraordinary but Horner is the best team boss out there.
 