
Christian Horner <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/christian-horner>, the Red 
Bull team principal, has defended designer Adrian Newey for the tight packaging 
of the new Renault engine which has left the world champions on the back foot 
as they leave for Australia and Sunday's opening Formula One grand prix in 
Melbourne.

All four Renault <https://www.theguardian.com/business/renault> teams have 
struggled with the power unit but the way Newey shoehorned the new 1.6-litre V6 
turbo engine into the narrow space available has caused specific overheating 
issues.

"We aggressively pushed the boundaries on the packaging of the car, as Adrian 
always does, to try and get every bit of aerodynamic advantage," Horner said. 
"Pushing the boundaries in all areas is whatFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> is all about. It's about getting 
the most out of every single element.

"We took a step over the line at the first test [in Spain in January]. We then 
engineered our way out of that for Bahrain, and cooling now isn't an issue with 
the car at all."

Newey, the greatest Formula One designer of them all, scarcely needs 
defending. But if he does need people to stand up for him, Horner is the man to 
do it, adding: "Adrian's probably the most competitive person I've ever met. 
For sure, he's working tremendously hard at the moment. But we can't control 
all aspects of the vehicle. Collectively with Renault, I'm confident we'll get 
on top of it.

"Sometimes to find the limit you've got to go over where the limit is, 
otherwise you don't know where it is. We'd rather make a quick car reliable 
than a reliable car quick. It's far harder that way round, and I think 
fundamentally the car we've got is good."

Red Bull's problems persisted in the two sessions in Bahrain and, in 12 days 
of testing overall, they have failed to put together a single race-distance 
simulation.

"Adrian is a great designer because he takes gambles and sometimes they don't 
pay off," explained the BBC's F1 commentator Ben Edwards in a recent interview. 
"It does seem that there has been an installation problem. The way they have 
packaged the power unit has made it more difficult for them than the others. 
But he's very adept at turning it around."

Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> have been double world 
champion in the past four seasons but they are so far behind pre-season 
favourites Mercedes that they will be happy to simply finish Sunday's race.

Horner added: "The split between chassis and engine is obviously different in 
our team than it is at Mercedes and Ferrari. We're not totally integrated. We 
have an extremely close working relationship, and there's an awful lot of 
exchange of information and ideas.

"The bottom line is Mercedes have got a bit of a march on people. They 
invested more, they invested earlier. They've got themselves into a good 
position. If Mercedes were to finish two laps ahead of the opposition in 
Melbourne, that wouldn't be a surprise, based on what we've seen in preseason 
testing. It's massive.

"Reliability is going to be a key element. The other element is the 
restriction in this amount of fuel, and how you run your race, and Melbourne is 
one of the highest-demanding circuits. A dry race with no safety cars is going 
to put a few teams under pressure with regard to fuel economy."

Newey added: "From what we can see at the moment, all the Mercedes-powered 
teams are in pretty decent shape and we're not. We're on the back foot, and a 
lot of ground to catch up. But the guys at Renault are just as competitive as 
we are here. All of our 47 grands prix have been with Renault power."

To Newey's credit, he has produced an eye-catching car and one that is likely 
to prove competitive provided the over-heating and other engine issues can be 
solved.

They are likely to get stronger as the season progresses and double points in 
the final race in Abu Dhabi in November – brought in specifically to undermine 
their dominance after they won the last nine races of 2013 – should help them. 
A grinning Horner said: "I was voting for double points from Silverstone 
onwards."
 