
Adrian Newey, the incomparable Red Bull designer, is full of boffin-like 
articulacy but, when he was asked howSebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> might improve as a driver, 
he was momentarily stumped.

He stroked his head amid the cameras and glaring lights that had invaded the 
team's motorhome and said: "He's not going to get worse, that's for sure. He's 
going to continue to develop, though it's difficult to see how he can develop 
from this season."

Newey scoured his memory for Vettel weaknesses. "His driving has gone from 
very talented but slightly raw at times in, let's say, 2009, to incredibly well 
rounded now. In 2009 and 2010 you could occasionally criticise him for making 
slightly ill-judged moves and hence having accidents.

"You could criticise him, possibly, for not being able to overtake. I think 
some people, possibly, felt that, if he didn't start from pole and control the 
race from the front, then he was not so good. You really can't make those 
criticisms any more. It's difficult to see a chink in his armoury. He learns 
all the time."

As faras Newey is concerned, Vettel and his Red Bull had entered Formula One's 
pantheonlong before Sunday's victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/27/sebastian-vettel-wins-f1-title-indian-gp>
. The title was merely another staging post for an extraordinary driver.

"Like other great drivers he can drive while considering and planning what 
he's going to do next, and then get out of the car and continue to analyse and 
learn what happened so that next time he's got that tiny bit more knowledge." 
Newey said.

"I see it with him all the time. Every time he gets in the car he gets in with 
a bit more knowledge than he had last time."

It is not just the essence of his driving or the sequence of podium-topping 
performances that have impressed Newey.

"It is how you achieve it and how you conduct yourself and to me Sebastian 
thoroughly deserves to be considered one of the all-time greats because of 
that," Newey said.

But what about Malaysia early in the season, when the 26-year-old defied team 
orders to rob his team-mate, Mark Webber, of victory, a move which damaged the 
popularity of the German?

"He knew he shouldn't have done it and got tongue-tied in his excuses 
afterwards. But he's a young lad. We all learn from our mistakes. And for me 
that is one of the great things about Sebastian. He makes mistakes but he 
always learns from them. I'm not saying he will disobey team orders again but 
he will have learned how to handle things.

"He's very humble. The success and fame that he's achieved over the past four 
years would have gone to the headsof many people but it hasn't with Sebastian. 
His feet are totally on the ground. He's a very private person. He's also a 
very bright lad."

While praise is heaped on Vettel and Newey, the crucial role of the team 
principal, Christian Horner, is sometimes overlooked. His ability to gather 
together the leading talents in the sport and keep them motivated is key to Red 
Bull's success; he is the outstanding team chief of his time.

Horner preferred to talk about Vettel. "He has raised the bar," he said. "He 
is 26, he has driven in 117 races, won 36 and won four championships. He hasn't 
done that by mistake. He has done that with natural ability, a fantastic work 
ethic – he critiques himself – and engages and inspires people around him.

"We would not have won four titles without Sebastian but it's all about a 
team. The fact is you cannot have just the best designer or a great driver – it 
is the team." And Horner is the leader of that team.
 