
The mastermind behind arguably the biggest upset in Australian domestic 
football history believes it is timeA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> teams started giving more 
opportunities to part-time players.

Redlands United shocked A-League champions Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united>, coming from a goal down 
to win 2-1 in the FFA Cup on Wednesday night in front of a small but heaving 
crowd at Brisbane’s Perry Park.

Semi-professional Green Gully stun Central Coast Mariners in FFA Cup upset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/semi-professional-green-gully-stun-central-coast-mariners-in-ffa-cup-upset>
It marked the third time a semi-pro team has beaten an A-League side in the 
FFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ffa-cup> – Adelaide City toppled 
Western Sydney Wanderers two years ago, while Green Gully defeated Central 
Coast Mariners on Tuesday night.

Redlands boss Matt Chandler believes it is proof there is plenty of untapped 
talent below the top tier, plugging away in the National Premier Leagues – if 
A-League coaches care to look.

“It’s amazing, now, for Australian football that the NPL is now producing more 
and more teams that can compete with A-League teams in a one-off battle,” 
Chandler said. “I do feel there’s a number of players in the NPL that could 
actually play in the A-League.

“Especially in Queensland we’re underestimated – obviously in Melbourne and 
NSW there’s some superb sides, but there’s a number of good sides that play in 
this league. We’re sitting fourth or fifth, that shows the depth of the league 
in this state.”

Chandler could barely wipe the smile off his face after the historic victory, 
which seemed out of the realms of all possibility when Ryan Kitto put Adelaide 
ahead on the hour mark.

Redlands had spent most of the night on the back foot, camped in defence and 
struggling to keep Guillermo Amor’s men at bay. But a howler from Eugene 
Galekovic opened the door for Queensland’s second-oldest club, and Michael Lee 
swept into an open net to level the scores in the dying moments.

Belief grew from there. Lee then provided the cross for Paul O’Brian, who put 
Redlands ahead eight minutes into extra-time, and they hung on for dear life to 
the final whistle. “It’s a huge achievement, we can’t underestimate what we’ve 
just done here tonight,” Chandler said.

Redlands will now advance to the round of 16, and Chandler believes few teams 
will want to face them now. Amor, meanwhile, said Adelaide was disappointed, 
but not embarrassed. “This is football. Sometimes, it can happen - it shouldn’t 
happen, but sometimes it does,” he said.

Melbourne Victory’s star striker Besart Berisha has been cleared of injury 
after limping off in his side’s 3-1 win over Newcastle Jets.

The prolific Berisha scored after just five minutes but raised concerns for 
coach Kevin Muscat when he exited the match midway through the first half. The 
club, however, confirmed post-match that Berisha had been taken off as a 
precaution after suffering from stomach cramps.

Newcastle drew level just after the break with a sublime chipped effort from 
debutant Wayne Brown. The Victory were pushed hard in miserable conditions in 
Newcastle, before they went ahead with a dubious second-half penalty that was 
converted by Oliver Bozanic, while substitute George Howard extended the lead 
late on.

Second-half goals saw Bonnyrigg White Eagles collect a 3-0 win over fellow 
Sydney side Manly United and the final match of the night saw Canberra Olympic 
triumph 1-0 in the nation’s capital over the visiting Surfers Paradise Apollo.
 