
Australia can have stronger economic growth, much lower greenhouse gas 
emissions and a better environment – without individuals needing to make major 
lifestyle changes – if politicians take tougher action to reduce greenhouse 
emissions now, ground-breaking new modelling has found.

The CSIRO <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro> Australian 
National Outlook study upends traditional assumptions about the domestic impact 
of taking part in strong international action on climate change, finding that 
ambitious global action opens a possible “win-win” outcome for Australia even 
in the near term.


Australian insurers keep customers in the dark about climate risks, report 
finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/02/ausralian-insurers-keep-customers-in-the-dark-about-climate-risks-finds-report>
The dramatic rethink occurs because storing carbon through reforestation and 
other land use changes becomes a more profitable revenue earner than some 
existing farming, providing income that more than makes up for reduced fossil 
fuel exports or the costs of Australia meeting its own deeper greenhouse gas 
reductions.

“These win-win outcomes occur because carbon sequestration becomes more 
profitable than beef and other agricultural production across large areas of 
Australia (up to 58m hectares) ... in a world taking stronger action to reduce 
emissions,” 17 academics associated with the study explain in an article in the 
prestigious international journal Nature.

“Stronger abatement incentives also promote electrification and the use of 
biofuels in road transport, reducing oil imports. These economic gains outweigh 
the costs of more stringent national emissions targets, as well as the impacts 
of lower global demand for (and value added from) Australia’s 
emissions-intensive exports, relative to moderate national and global 
abatement.”


A team of 40 researchers from CSIRO have integrated modelling of global 
economic demand and climate policy ambition with possible Australian government 
policy choices on climate, water, energy use and agricultural land use as well 
as individual choices about working hours and consumption, to look at possible 
scenarios for Australia’s economic and environmental future out to 2050.


The inconvenient truth about Direct Action comes from Turnbull himself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/25/the-inconvenient-truth-about-direct-action-comes-from-turnbull-himself>
They conclude that government choices will make the biggest difference, and 
Australia has the chance to combine strong growth and a strong environmental 
performance without any major shift in the attitude of its citizens to 
consumerism, and without any startling new technological developments.


“Decoupling economic growth from environmental pressure before 2050 would not 
require a change in societal values, but is not automatic ... It is not 
projected to occur under existing trends, and requires, in our scenarios, 
collective choices to increase global and national abatement efforts,” the 
study finds.


The research shows that it would be in Australia’s best interests to push for 
much tougher global climate action and to build a higher effective carbon price 
into its domestic calculations than is currently the case.


It considers a moderately ambitious scenario where Australia starts with an 
effective carbon price of US$15 per tonne this year, a “strong scenario” with a 
starting carbon price of US$30, and a “very strong” scenario with a starting 
price of US$50 a tonne. The Coalition’s “Direct Action” policy has bought some 
greenhouse abatement for around A$15 a tonne, about US$10 at the current 
exchange rate.

“Across all scenarios analysed, we found that those scenarios where Australia 
and the world take stronger action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions show 
higher long-term economic growth and better environmental outcomes compared to 
scenarios that continue current trends,” the study found.

In the Australian debate, higher effective carbon prices have been rejected 
because of the potential impact on household electricity bills. According to 
the CSIRO research, household electricity bills would be 11% to 12% higher by 
2050 under the “strong” scenario or 32% higher under the “very strong scenario” 
compared with no policy action. But it argues affordability would be about the 
same because households would enjoy higher incomes and energy efficiency would 
improve.

Most Coalition voters do not believe in human-induced climate change – CSIRO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/04/most-coalition-voters-do-not-believe-in-human-induced-climate-change-csiro>
The win-win scenarios occur when government policy unlocks emissions 
reductions across all sectors – with electricity, industrial emissions and 
transport delivering 40% to 75% of cost-effective national abatement by 2050 
and land-based carbon storage (or sequestration) supplying 30% to 40% of total 
abatement in the “strong” and “very strong” scenarios. The study says 
reforestation becomes attractive under an effective carbon price of $A40 to 
$60, which Australia would reach by 2020 with very strong global abatement (on 
track to 2°C) and before 2030 in the strong global abatement scenarios.

“Stable and predictable policy settings are also required, as to be effective 
in reducing emissions carbon plantings must be maintained for a 100 years or 
more,” the study finds.

Direct Action originally required 100-year pledges for carbon sequestration 
projects but has since reduced that to 25 years for soil carbon. Many business 
groups expect Direct Action to be modified when the Turnbull government 
conducts a review in 2017, after the next federal election.

The study measures the importance of carbon capture and storage technology to 
the long-term future of coal in global electricity generation – predicting it 
would increase by between 10% and 51% by 2050 if CCS is available and fall by 
between 7% and 63% if it is not.
 