
"Colombia is not what they tell you it is," Doña Teresa says firmly from a 
faded house with a makeshift tin roof she has rented on the outskirts of Bogota 
for the last six years. It is not her home, but a temporary refuge which has 
helped over two-thousand women and their families who arrive in the Colombian 
capital everyday, having been forced from their homes and who form part of the 
western world´s greatest humanitarian crisis.

Colombia is famed for having dramatically transformed its national security 
over the past decade. Having suffered one of the world´s longest civil wars 
which has raged violently across the country between left-wing guerilla groups 
and paramilitaries for decades, and forced many to become refugees in their own 
country, Colombia´s international reputation was little more than war, drug 
trafficking and kidnapping.

Although the armed groups remain, today we generally hear a different story. 
The rescue of Ingrid Betancourt in 2008, held hostage for six and a half years 
by the county´s leading guerilla group, the FARC, sealed Colombia´s 
international reputation for having built a safer country where the government 
was winning the war against the guerrilla.

But in many ways, the character of the internal conflict has merely 
transformed in character, rather than being brought towards a resolution. 
Despite an easing of the violence and displacement over the past decade, the 
conflict has effectively been pushed into more isolated areas of the country. 
In 2009 figures of those displaced by the violence rose again and the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) estimates current figures to 
stand at 3.3 million.

In reality, Colombia´s population of internally displaced people (IDPs) is the 
second highest in the world, second only to Sudan and with higher numbers than 
Iraq. "How can they say that things are better in Colombia when people arrive 
here helpless everyday?" continues Teresa, with a look of real desperation. She 
understands the country´s situation more than anyone, having become a refugee 
herself in 2001 and now through her tireless work of her charity Yo, Mujer (I, 
Woman) which she set-up in 2004 to provide a safe haven for women who arrive 
desolate in the nation´s capital.

Most IDPs in Colombia are displaced from rural areas as the paramilitary and 
guerilla groups forcibly claim land from innocent people to cultivate that 
lucrative cash crop to fund their campaigns, cocaine. The Colombian refugee 
crisis is as a result peculiarly characterized not by refugee camps, but by a 
large concentration of displacement to urban areas. According to UNHCR, the UN 
refugee agency, figures, 82% of IDPs seek refuge in less than 10% the country´s 
departments, with most seeking safety and anonymity in the country´s large 
urban areas. Like here, in the impoverished Bogota neighbourhood of Ciudad 
Bolivar where Teresa runs her charity. The area clings desperately for life to 
the hills on the outskirts of the city and the country´s internal refugees are 
absorbed into the folds of the city streets, remaining dangerously invisible, 
not only to the people who also call this city home, but also to the 
international world.

Many who arrive from the countryside to the capital have no comprehension of 
their rights or how city-life itself works, leaving them further debilitated in 
their already devastating circumstances. Yo Mujer was primarily set-up to help 
to help women understand and realize their rights as refugees and carries out 
vital work in helping people rebuild their lives and deal with the traumas 
which coerced them from their homes. "These people have nothing and have 
experienced terrible suffering", reflects Teresa, "Someone has to be strong".

Finding this support for the capital´s refugees is a constant struggle, 
however, as gaining access to official aid remains complicated and jobs are 
scarce. Despite USD 550 million now pledged annually by the Colombian 
government to support the crisis, the UNHCR cite difficulties in effectively 
administrating funds. This is certainly the experience the majority of the 
people who arrive at Yo Mujer. Erika arrived in Bogota in August 2009, and 
despite constant attempts to gain more State support, to date she has only 
received 150,000 Colombian Pesos, the equivalent to USD 77.

Although the State offers basic help to those registered in new areas, there 
is presently no effective, lasting solution. The Colombian Constitutional Court 
has stated that measures taken to help internally displaced people had been 
insufficient and that there has been a failure to fulfill the rights of the 
country´s internally displaced people.

For many of those displaced, their dream solution is to return home to the 
life they know, but it is often too dangerous and simply not an option. One 
woman says she has not been able to contact her family in her coastal home town 
for two years, "I learnt not to do that." she says sadly. "When I was first 
displaced I contacted my family back home and the guerillas tracked me down 
again, so I had to move again, and then a third time so they can´t find me." In 
2002, the Colombian government announced its objective to return 30,000 people 
to their homes by 2006, but the majority of the people who return only arrive 
to face more threats, displacement, and even death.

Realizing access to rights is vital if these people are able to begin to 
rebuild lives in the new places they are forced to call home. However, with the 
dynamic of the conflict changing, armed groups are now turning their attention 
to those people in Colombian society who are working to fight for the rights of 
the country´s refugees. Added to the administrative difficulties of funds are 
more and more serious threats received by Colombia´s activists and human rights 
workers, which Amnesty International cites as being a grave cause for concern.

The Colombian Government has pledged to take many positive steps to help 
resolve the problem, which has seen it delegate more money towards the crisis 
and work more closely with international organizations such as the UNCHR. 
However, there remains much to be done and in the meantime, the work of Doña 
Teresa and Yo Mujer remains vital in filling the void in helping the country´s 
hidden victims.

On the last Tuesday of every month Teresa and hundreds of other women make a 
simple attempt to be seen. Dressed all in black, they come out of the shadows 
in silent protest in the heart of the Colombian capital, "Colombia is a 
beautiful country, but there is still much suffering", says Teresa, "we just 
need that to be recognised".

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 