
I would love to paint only a rosy picture of what goes on here, presenting the 
place as some kind of Arcadian idyll, a serene oasis of simplicity and peace. 
But while it is wonderful and fun and we all, I think, have a lot of time for 
each other, I always want to write about the thorny, difficult stuff as well: 
the stuff that doesn't work and the areas where we fall short.

We've all, recently, become aware of one issue that is very detrimental to our 
shared life together. We've spoken about it among ourselves, so I have no 
qualms in writing about it very publicly – resentment. It's that corrosive, 
corrupting feeling of not having enough, or of doing too much; a feeling that 
one has been slighted or ignored and needs revenge. As Malachy McCourt once 
said: "Resentment is like taking poison and waiting for the other person to 
die." It destroys your insides and your soul, but achieves nothing. And the 
less it achieves the more you imbibe.

There's always lots, of course, to feel resentful about. Some people here have 
more money, or more time, or more sleep, than others. Some are more healthy and 
active, others more ailed, more contemplative. Equality is a mirage we talk 
about but never find. But it's not even the big things, it's the tiny ones, 
that really cause resentment. Who moved the dial on the toaster so that my 
toast is now black? Who left the lights on or the door open? Who's taken the 
scissors and not put them back? Some people, understandably, resent the fact 
that they're here at all because it means life has dealt them a crappy hand.

Personally I find that I resent – and when I'm being rational I know this is 
daft – all the resentment. That's the trouble, the poison multiplies and the 
infection spreads. I should be experienced enough in communal living to know 
that you shouldn't ever expect gratitude, but I still find myself occasionally 
thinking, "I just don't know why I bother."

I don't want to give the idea that we're all seething here. There's actually a 
lot of love and laughter. But sometimes there is, bubbling below, this 
resentment and I often wonder how to leech it. The principal way, I suppose, is 
to have a very clear common purpose so that we're pulling in the same direction 
rather than one against the other. That way we take ourselves and our egos off 
centre-stage to serve something greater. It might be my imagination, but I 
sense that resentment recedes here when we've got a new guest or two who really 
need our help. It's as if the burnt toast and lost scissors don't matter any 
more because we've all got to serve someone who is really struggling with life.

It helps that no one here appears to bottle much up. We're pretty blunt and 
things get raised, contradicted, debated and sorted out. Until, that is, the 
next issue arises. Sitting regularly in the chapel, side by side and in 
silence, also helps. It lets peace come between you. And a serious 
understanding of forgiveness goes a long way.

But by far the best way to deal with the poison of resentment is with the 
vaccine of gratitude. I was interested to read recently, in an intelligent 
piece about self-help by Oliver Burkeman, that keeping a log-book of gratitude 
really does make people more contented. I quite like the idea of keeping one 
here, even if it sounds a little contrived and cheesy. Because without it, you 
forget all those antidotes to resentment: the fact that someone emptied the 
compost bin that you'd been meaning to do for days, or hung out your forgotten 
laundry; that someone did the raised beds while you were away.

Unfortunately, though, two of us still ended up this morning spewing poison at 
each other. It's the only time in 18 months it's happened, but it still feels 
terrible: it's crazy to dedicate years of your life trying to create a gentle, 
caring place if you can still end up being really hurtful over something 
completely trivial. When your six-year-old daughter asks, "Daddy, why did you 
say the f-word?" you know you've had a very bad day.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/ profile/tobias- 
jones <http://theguardian.com/ profile/tobias- jones> or visit windsorhillwood. 
co.uk <http://windsorhillwood. co.uk>
 