
Most university departments will be in a state of frenzy right now with the 
deadline for submitting to theResearch Excellence Framework (REF) 
<http://www.ref.ac.uk/> only days away. As the last Ts are crossed and Is 
dotted, the approaching deadline may come as a relief to those heads of 
departments and staff involved in the submission process. But for many 
academics, the process to date has been pretty grim.

Dennis Leech, a professor in economics at the University of Warwick and expert 
on the variable outcomes of UK voting rules, submitted four research papers to 
the REF, all of which were rejected for being "below the standard required in 
terms of quality". While economics is recognised as a distinct discipline, 
Leech's work is interdisciplinary, spanning economics, political science and 
operations. Simply put, it doesn't fit into one subject area.

"The government's policy is to promote interdisciplinary research, REF itself 
says it makes allowances for interdisciplinary research, but universities don't 
seem to be doing it and regard it as a risk," says Leech.

After making a Data Protection Act request – which offers a more complete 
picture about an individual REF submission case – he discovered his research 
hadn't been flagged as interdisciplinary. The work was simply judged as 
economics. Three of the papers he submitted had been published inPublic Choice, 
a highly rated interdisciplinary journal 
<http://link.springer.com/journal/11127>.

REF replaced the previous Research Assessment Exercise 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research_Assessment_Exercise> (RAE) as the system 
for assessing the quality of research in UK higher education institutions on 
the basis of three weighted factors: outputs (65% of score), impact (20%) and 
environment/sustainability (15%). Universities can make submissions in 36 units 
of assessment, or subject areas. Their research is then assessed by an expert 
sub-panel in each of these areas. The REF will determine the research funding 
that each university receives, which will be announced in December 2014.

"The REF framework suggests a straitjacket set of incentives that you must fit 
into," says Leech. Young people are going to see disincentives to straying 
outside familiar boundaries,which will have a "tremendous effect" on the 
quality of UK research, he believes.

The University College Union, for which Leech is Warwick joint president, 
claimed last month that interdisciplinary research at Warwick was being 
frequently excluded from the REF submissions process. A spokesperson for the 
university denies this, responding: "If anyone has failed to notice that the 
university not only values interdisciplinary research, but has in fact actually 
built its research strategy around it, then they have not been being paying 
much attention." The university also credits its interdisciplinary approach for 
the significant increase in grant money it received for the last academic year.

Yet Leech is not alone in worrying about the effect of the REF on 
interdisciplinary research. Paolo Palladino, a professor in history at 
Lancaster University and active voice in the interdisciplinary community of 
history and social studies of science has also been excluded from the REF, and 
says the "culture of secrecy" around the submission process is a real problem.

Palladino says: "Staff are tied even more tightly to departments at the very 
same time as those departments, acting on current experience, are forced by 
exercises like REF to become synonymous with disciplines. I am now being asked 
effectively to abandon my interdisciplinary commitments for research that meets 
with the approval of REF."

In response, a spokesperson for Lancaster University, says: "Individuals have 
been communicated with on a one-to-one basis at department level regarding the 
status of their outputs. Lancaster has a strong and longstanding commitment to 
interdisciplinary work and will submit it to the REF where it is a considered 
to be part of a body of work that is internationally excellent in quality."

Palladino predicts a bleak future for interdisciplinary research, which he 
says will end up being conflated with cross-disciplinarity, so that any 
collaboration between academics in different disciplines is defined as 
delivering interdisciplinarity.

Semantics aside, there's no denying this complex issue is only gaining 
traction. So how do senior management view interdisciplinary research? Kevin 
Schurer, pro vice-chancellor at the University of Leicester and a professor in 
history, says, "some interdisciplinary research may present too much of a risk 
to be submitted, in that it is not strong enough in any single discipline to 
attract a grade which reflects the research underpinning it."

Schurer himself is no stranger to the problems of getting interdisciplinary 
research submitted: "In the lastResearch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> Assessment Exercise, I had two 
such pieces crossing the sciences and humanities which, despite being in 
highly-rated science journals and being relatively well-cited, were not 
submitted because they may not have been well-received by the history panel, 
due to relative small level of history content, and were thought too risky to 
cross-refer to the biological sciences panel, as the research was not central 
to that unit either."

These views fit with the reputation of higher education as a risk-averse 
sector. But the issue goes far beyond the university itself.Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/research> councils, while 
favouring interdisciplinary research when it enables them to distribute shared 
funding, are still subject to clearly defined boundaries between disciplines. 
Some academics argue that this makes them part of the problem and leads to the 
generation of unequal funding streams.

And then there's the debate around definitions of 'quality', which John 
Holmwood, professor of sociology at the University of Nottingham, sees as an 
"issue of disciplinary organisation and power", one that reflects the changing 
policy environment for funding research.

Holmwood believes interdisciplinary research challenges disciplinary 
hierarchies through the creation of new forms of critical knowledge, such as 
gender studies, postcolonial studies, cultural studies, none of which are 
acknowledged in the impact agenda for REF.

For Holmwood, one of the main things that goes against interdisciplinary 
research is the way research is assessed in the REF through the construction of 
small scale subject panels. He explains: "The problem is where someone has to 
be a judge of work in an area where there is no representative of the area to 
temper any negative judgement," adding that "the size of REF subject panels 
make this likely to be the case".

Another common worry is the impact this will have on research innovation and 
those early career researchers trying to forge a career path in academia. With 
a drive to publish in high impact journals, Elizabeth Dzeng, a PhD student at 
the University of Cambridge, says there is a concern that researchers won't 
stay true to their own understanding of quality research and conform to a 
journal's definition of quality in the hope of getting published.

With a 2012 study showing <http://arxiv.org/pdf/1105.1227.pdf> that top 
ranking journals "span a less diverse set of disciplines than lower ranking 
journals", this could disincentivise young researchers engaging in 
interdisciplinary research.

The sacrifice of academic freedom is a big price to pay, not just for 
interdisciplinary researchers but academia at large. As for Dzeng, she has come 
to understand the path she needs to take to get published, where the 
manuscripts she submits to medical journals will need to be written through a 
more "objectivist mindset", rather than through the "interpretative framework" 
that she feels is more appropriate for her project.

Share your thoughts on the effect of the REF on interdisciplinary research in 
the comments below.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 