
Antonio Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> tries 
not to think about that night any more, the indescribable pain, the fear that 
flashed through his mind when he looked down at his leg and realised it had 
been snapped like a dried twig, his foot hanging back to front. And, above all, 
the hideous sense that his four-year-old daughter, Domenica, was watching it 
all unfold in the Old Trafford crowd.

On the stretcher Valencia raised his arm towards the stands. At the time, it 
looked like he was thanking the crowd for their solemn applause. In fact, it 
was to show the tattoo of Domenica's name on the inside of his arm. "All I can 
remember now is the pain, the worst pain of my life," he says, "but my first 
thought was to do that for her and show her I was going to be all right."

This was in September, a Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> night against Rangers, a 
seemingly innocuous challenge from Kirk Broadfoot and then those ghastly 
moments when Valencia's team-mates went over to see their stricken colleague 
then, one by one, turned away, covering their faces, and it became apparent to 
everyone inside the stadium this was an injury that could break a footballer's 
career.

What has happened since identifies Valencia as a remarkable man. His leg was 
mangled: a snapped bone, a dislocated ankle, ruptured ligaments. But he has not 
just returned to the team well ahead of schedule but done so with a vitality 
and impetus that has seen him supplant Nani, the club's player of the year, as 
a near-certainty to face Barcelona at Wembley .

"I never thought it could happen like this," Valencia admits. "I thought I 
might make it back for the last couple of games, maybe when the league had been 
decided. Or maybe play the odd weekend in three, something like that. To come 
back so soon and to be playing in decisive games from the word go ... no, 
that's not something I thought would be possible."

It is a testament to the Ecuadorian's courage and application because, though 
they never said it in public, there were obvious concerns behind the scenes at 
Old Trafford that Valencia might have suffered permanent damage. They had been 
in this position before. Alan Smith suffered the same kind of injury as a 
United player in 2006 and, by his own admission, has never been the same player 
since. For Valencia, a winger reliant on speed and reaction, there was a point 
when insecurity took hold.

"I was worried. You start to think about the other players who have had that 
type of injury and never really recaptured it their form, players who never 
really got back to the level they were at before."

He would take encouragement from his hours with the club's chaplain, John 
Boyers. "His kind words gave me inspiration." More was provided by Sir Alex 
Ferguson. "The manager came to see me in hospital, [the assistant manager] Mike 
Phelan as well. They didn't set me any targets, they just said: 'Look, these 
things happen in football, don't worry, take it easy, take all the time in the 
world, all the time you need, and everything will be fine.'

"I sat down with the medical people and started to talk about the process of 
getting back and it was only then I started to get my head right. I started to 
think: 'Yeah, I'm focused now, there is something to aim for.' But I was 
worried. Certainly in the initial stages, I was very worried."

The recovery was "boring at first," a daily grind of swimming, gymnasium work 
and hours upon hours inside a zero-gravity treadmill designed by Nasa to 
simulate what it would be like on the moon, and introduced to Carrington to 
allow injured players to build up their leg muscles. "I used that machine for 
the first three months," he says. "It was great because you can put in the same 
physical effort that you put in on the field without putting any strain or 
weight on your leg at all."

His comeback match was "the greatest feeling", coming off the bench for the 
second half of the FA Cup defeat of Arsenal in March. The first few games he 
was "a little tentative". He recalls the Champions League tie in Marseille and 
being annoyed at himself for not putting everything into a tackle. But that was 
a one-off. "Once you start to warm up and look at the players' faces, the 
adrenaline kicks in and you don't think about it so much."

The return of the man who was signed to take over from Cristiano Ronaldo has 
unsettled Nani, leading to a marked deterioration in form, but it has scarcely 
mattered such is the way Valencia has slipped back into the side so seamlessly. 
He has started almost all of United's big matches in the past two months, 
quickly dispelling the fears over his future, and at the same time reminding us 
why Wayne Rooney once said the first name he wanted to see on the team-sheet 
was that of the Ecuadorian.

"His is the first name I look for as well," Valencia says of Rooney. "When the 
manager tells us the team he always starts with the goalkeeper, then goes from 
right to left, so I am mentioned quite early on – but then I have to listen out 
to see if Wayne is mentioned as well. He is a bright, intelligent, gifted 
player, and it is a pleasure to play with him. Though, to be honest, I am happy 
to hit anyone with one of my crosses."

Despite six months out, Valencia played enough games to warrant a Premier 
League winner's medal. Now, there is the prospect of his first Champions League 
medal and it could well be that, if Carles Puyol plays on the left side of 
Barcelona's defence, this will be one of the key battles of the final.

"Of course we can win," Valencia says. "We are Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, we are a big club and 
we will go there playing the football that we know we can play."
 