 It is one of Ulster's many ironies that while some of the steam seems to be 
draining from the Rev Ian Paisley, the forces of Paisleyism seem likely to 
advance as Northern Ireland polarises further.
On the surface, Rev Paisley continues to be the same sulphur-and-brimstone 
voice of paranoid protestant unionism, still attacking the Pope and Roman 
Catholics but focusing against the protestant establishment in the shape of the 
Ulster unionists. However he has become a little quieter of late.

And David Trimble has almost replaced the Pope as his chief figure of hate. 
Rev Paisley dubbed the Good Friday agreement "the greatest betrayal ever 
foisted by a unionist leader on the unionist people."

Although age and illness have knocked some decibels off his foghorn voice, his 
message seems to be getting through, as shown by the DUP's September 2000 
victory in the Antrim South byelection. Lord (Gerry) Fitt, the former SDLP 
leader, is sure that Paisley's DUP will win more seats from the David Trimble's 
UUP while Sinn Fein will advance further at the expense of the SDLP at the 
imminent general election.

It is the class aspect of Dr Paisley and Paisleyism that outsiders most 
frequently miss. I still remember my shock a quarter century ago when I saw him 
chatting warmly with Bernadette Devlin (now McAliskey), the brilliant young 
republican newly-elected for Mid-Ulster. What could he possibly have in common 
with this Roman Catholic demanding a united Ireland? The answer was simple: 
they were both working class, and hated both the British and the Ulster 
establishment. Dr Paisley's church and party represent the poor of protestant 
Northern Ireland, while the Ulster unionists speak for its middle classes. On 
social legislation he almost invariably votes with Labour.

He was ordained into his Free Presbyterian church by his father, a dissident 
Baptist. After local schools in Ballymena, he obtained his enormous biblical 
knowledge at the South Wales Bible College, Belfast's Reformed Presbyterian 
Theological College and South Carolina's Bob Jones University.

Dr Paisley began in politics in 1959 by forming the Ulster protestant 
association to prevent Belfast's dockworkers from being seduced by Gerry Fitt's 
Marxism. In 1964 he was jailed for three months for protesting the "Romish 
tendencies" of established Presbyterians. He was jailed for six weeks for 
blocking a largely Catholic civil rights march in 1968. He established the 
protestant Unionist party in 1970, capturing North Antrim in 1971 from 
patrician Henry Clark in 1971, when the Democratic Unionist party emerged. He 
was elected to the European Parliament in 1979.

The 1997 general election saw the Rev Paisley revert to his traditional 
campaigning ground. His manifesto was based around a pledge of no participation 
in talks involving Sinn Fein unless weapons decommissioning occurred first. In 
June 1998 the DUP took 20 seats in the new Northern Ireland assembly but he saw 
this success tempered in November 1999 with the appointment of Sinn Fein's 
Martin McGuiness as education minister - Dr Paisley described him as a man 
"whose hands drip with blood."

Ask Aristotle about Ian Paisley 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4037,00.html>
 