
To the tens of thousands of people flocking to east London this weekend for the
Tall Ships festival, 
<http://www.royalgreenwich.gov.uk/info/100003/community_and_living/1589/tall_ships_festivals>
 La Esmeralda is just another magnificent ship to admire among the many moored 
around Canary Wharf.

Almost 400ft long, the four-masted vessel, launched in 1953, is used as a 
training vessel by the Chilean navy and, for between six and seven months a 
year, tours the world promoting Chilean interests. But La Dama Blanca, or The 
White Lady, as she is also known, has a dark history, one that many Chileans 
want acknowledged if their country is ever to confront its bloody past.

A series of human rights reports, including those by the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights of the Organisation of American States, Amnesty 
International, the US Senate and the Chilean Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, record that in the autumn of 1973 the ship was used to detain and 
torture victims of the Pinochet regime, who included aBritish-Chilean priest, 
Father Michael Woodward 
<http://tyglobalist.org/in-the-magazine/theme/forgetting-the-esmeralda/>.

They detail how the vessel was berthed in the port of Valparaíso, following 
Augusto Pinochet’s coup d’état. A 1986 US Senate report suggested that as many 
as 112 people were detained, of whom 40 were women. Rape, the use of electric 
shocks, mock executions and beatings were reportedly used on the ship. Also on 
board was Woodward, who, having been tortured onshore, was taken off the vessel 
for treatment at a naval hospital, but died of his injuries in transit. His 
remains are allegedly buried in a mass grave under a road.

Claudio Correa, a former Chilean government official who lives in London, was 
held on the ship with Woodward. He told theObserver that he was transferred 
from a military academy to La Esmeralda where specialist teams were employed to 
torture its occupants over several days. “They tortured people with no 
sentiment,” he said. “They were enjoying it.”

A Facebook campaign has been set up urging people to protest against the 
vessel’s arrival in London and other European ports. One protester called 
Carolita explains that its continued use “reaffirms the Chilean navy’s lack of 
respect for human rights and lack of remorse for actions that have been 
condemned around the world”, adding that “it is unjust to expect victims to 
forgive and forget when the perpetrators do not express regret and remorse”.

The site carries testimony from one of the torture victims who recalls how 
they were constantly beaten: “It was a sight from hell. The red lights. The 
torturers dressed in party regalia and wearing black masks.”

Perhaps because of its controversial past, the vessel has been a rare visitor 
to the UK. Last seen in London in 1998, the organisers of the festival have 
distanced themselves from its arrival.

“Although La Esmeralda is not part of our event, we are very happy that she 
will also be in London during Sail Royal Greenwich 2015,” says Sjors Mooyman of
Sail Greenwich Ltd <http://www.sailroyalgreenwich.co.uk>, the event’s 
organiser. “This beautiful tall ship is a real addition to the tall ships’ 
experience. We understand and recognise that this ship may have been used for 
torture by the Pinochet regime, but we appreciate the ship for its aesthetics 
and maritime values. We should not judge the ship itself for misuse by a 
terrible regime in the 1970s.”

But this argument did not satisfy the Chilean exiles protesting outside the 
vessel yesterday afternoon. Theyclaim that,  
<http://www.chilescda.org/2015/08/funa-esmeralda-torture-ship-not-welcome-in-the-uk/>
under international law, including the European Convention on Human Rights, 
European governments should prevent the vessel from entering their countries’ 
ports. “We are here to raise awareness of the fact this ship was used as a 
floating torture centre,” said Carol Concha Bell, whose grandfather was 
tortured by the Pinochet regime. “We are outraged that this is being promoted 
as a family day out.” Ana Maria Pelusa, another torture victim said: “We are 
here because we want the Chilean navy to acknowledge what happened on board 
Esmeralda and tell us where the victims are. It’s 2015 and these basic 
questions still haven’t been answered.”

Correa said La Esmeralda should be allowed to visit Britain, providing people 
were made aware of its history. “It’s OK for it to come here, but it is 
important to tell the truth about the past. There are a lot of stories that 
nobody knows.”

'This beautiful tall ship is a real addition to the tall ships’ experience'
Sjors Mooyman of Sail Greenwich  