
The Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> wasn't just brilliant 
sport. It was also a most welcome riposte to the pessimists, cynics and the 
armchair psychologists who blindly trot out the cliches that Test cricket is 
dying and that the English are a nation of innate losers.

In fact, watching some of the most popular sporting cliches being disproved 
before our eyes has been one of the great pleasures of the summer.

First, Test cricket is not dying in England. A great Test series unites not 
just fans of sport, but anyone who likes to follow a narrative to its 
conclusion. It is as if the country is simultaneously turning the pages of the 
same novel. Where Twenty20 is a snappy newspaper article, a great Test series 
is A Suitable Boy.

Cricket's appeal often slips through the net of quantitative measurement. Of 
course, there are more football fans going through the turnstiles. But that 
takes no account of depth of feeling. Cricket provides a common thread for a 
whole summer, seeping into the nation's collective subconscious. That may be 
hard to prove in terms of market share, but it is true all the same.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> is loved in different, subtler ways.

That is no thanks to the army of cynics who greet every English wicket with 
the same weary national stereotypes. Playing cricket for England has become a 
double challenge. Not only are you playing against the opposition, but you are 
also fighting the default media position that you are doomed to fail.

Just before the Oval victory, England played badly and lost at Headingley. 
Although this left the series poised at 1-1 with one match to play, the media 
hurled itself into an orgy of self-loathing. We were too soft, too complacent, 
and much too English.

The logic was that our players should look more like Russell Crowe and talk 
like Mick "Crocodile" Dundee. The truth is quite the opposite: a great 
sportsman doesn't excel by copying a foreign template but when he is brave 
enough to be himself. Sport is as much about voice as skill, and it is hard for 
English teams to find their natural voice when they are being told not to be 
themselves.

When England win, the opposition have succumbed to "an English batting 
collapse", when England lose they revert to their "innate Englishness". Hence 
Englishness is not a question of nationality at all, it is the media's word for 
failure. But now, having won consecutive home Ashes series, surely there is no 
longer a market for navel-gazing articles bemoaning the uselessness of being 
English?

Another cliche ready for extinction is the idea that leadership demands being 
the pre-eminent alpha male. Those who say thatAndrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> is "not a natural captain" 
mean only that he does not conform to the barroom stereotype of 
warrior-in-chief. In fact, he only got the captaincy after other, more famous, 
players had already been promoted, testament to the skewed wisdom that there is 
something "positive" and "bold" about burdening your most celebrated player 
with the captain's armband.

The idea that captaincy is a celebrity beauty pageant has been exposed as 
obviously absurd. Captaincy, particularly in cricket, demands making good 
decisions, under constant pressure, over a period of five days. Surely 
intelligence is a good start in that endeavour?

For too long intelligence has been seen as a handicap rather than an asset. 
Mike Brearley may be England's most revered captain, but we are often told the 
game has since "moved on", implying that modern captaincy is about clapping 
your hands to "get the lads going". That lasts for about 30 seconds. What about 
the remaining five days?

Strauss has faced subtle resistance on the grounds he is polite, dignified and 
unashamedly public-school educated. Indeed, the resistance to him, to borrow 
from a popular concept, has been all too English. The worst legacy of the 
professional-amateur, class-ridden divide is counter-intuitive: in our rush to 
become uniformly professional, English cricket has run scared of anyone who 
seems remotely officer-class.

But the England captain need have only one distinguishing characteristic: that 
he is the best man for the job. That it took so long to get to Strauss – and 
that he responded to the challenge so well – suggests the real solution to the 
question of Englishness is not phoney egalitarianism but genuine meritocracy. 
Let's not forget to raise a glass to that.
 