
John Banville

1 Who doubted he would be heard by the angelic orders?

2 Who had a precursor in a princedom by the sea?

3 Who worked all day, and got half-drunk at night?

Mary Beard


1 Immortalised by Shakespeare, which Roman festival involved naked men rushing 
through the streets of Rome (with a little flagellation en route)?

2 JG Frazer's The Golden Bough opens with a weird Roman cult based near Lake 
Nemi. Why was being the priest of this cult (the "Rex Nemorensis") a dangerous 
business?

3 Ovid and Propertius both celebrate the "birthday of Rome" in their poetry. 
What ancient festival took place on that day, and why might you have got your 
ankles burnt at it?

Helen Dunmore


1 In which story does the narrator feel "a little brushing kiss" against his 
palm, and know that the ghost of his dead child is hiding behind his chair?

2 Who screams and beats on the glass as she is driven away through bombed-out 
London by the ghost of a long-dead lover?

3 Which picture tells the story of an infant's abduction from which English 
country house?

Geoff Dyer


1 Which American poet went to visit Ezra Pound in 1967 to ask for his blessing?

2 According to Bob Dylan, what were Pound and Eliot doing in Desolation Row?

3 Who wrote that "Eliot loved the music halls / (and he probably loved 
pantos). / Pound took the rubbish out ofThe Waste Land / and put it all into the
Cantos"?

David Hare


1 Which film actor said: "A party isn't a party without a drunken bitch in 
tears"?

2 Which fellow-actor heckled Paul Newman's performance in Sweet Bird of Youth 
by yelling out from the stalls: "You don't speak for me, buster"?

3 Which fellow-actor and playwright said: "All that English audiences need, 
deserve or want is me and Noël in terrible plays written by ourselves"?

Robert Harris


Margaret Thatcher has made frequent guest appearances in novels in the past 40 
years. Name the novels from which these three appearances are taken:

1 "[Sir Sidney Ryden] wondered if madam would be a more suitable form of 
address or perhaps ma'am, as one called the Queen. She looked at him hard and 
he shifted uncomfortably. He found the new prime minister's strictures about 
smoking something of a strain, and longed for a cigarette. In the old days, 
with Callaghan and Wilson, these rooms had seldom been without clouds of 
cigarette smoke …"

2 "She was wearing a long black skirt and a wide-shouldered white-and-gold 
jacket, amazingly embroidered, like a Ruritanian uniform, and cut low at the 
front to display a magnificent pearl necklace. Nick peered at the necklace, and 
the large square bosom, and the motherly fatness of the neck. 'Isn't she 
beautiful,' said Trudi Titchfield …"

3 "Maura had stripped the prime minister of her outer garments and dressed her 
in one of the flannelette shifts, scrubbed her face vigorously with carbolic 
soap and cold water, and had cut her hair to a jagged two or three inches all 
over. The woman Grady had steeled himself to face was seemingly gone, and in 
her place was the inmate of some turn-of-the-century charity ward …"

John Lanchester 


In this year when we've heard so much about Dickens, we haven't heard nearly 
enough about his forceful, energetic, spectacularly untalented friend Edward 
Bulwer-Lytton. Time to fix that:

1 On Bulwer-Lytton's advice, Dickens changed the ending of one of his mature 
masterpieces from something sad and complicated to a much more conventional 
happy ending. Which novel was affected?

a) Little Dorrit

b) Great Expectations

c) David Copperfield

2 Bulwer-Lytton was part inventor of the word Bovril. True or false?

3 This is generally agreed to be the worst opening sentence of any novel: "It 
was a dark and stormy night; the rain fell in torrents – except at occasional 
intervals, when it was checked by a violent gust of wind which swept up the 
streets (for it is in London that our scene lies), rattling along the 
housetops, and fiercely agitating the scanty flame of the lamps that struggled 
against the darkness." Which Bulwer-Lytton novel is that from? And is it true 
that the same novel features the first occurrence of the phrase "the great 
unwashed"?

a) Last Days of Pompeii

b) Pelham

c) Paul Clifford

Hilary Mantel


1 Who was witnessed by Elizabeth Bowen: "A high altar on the move"?

2 Who was memorialised by John Aubrey: "Oval face. His eye a dark grey. He had 
auburn hair. His complexion exceedingly fair – he was so fair that they called 
him the lady of Christ's College"?

3 Who infatuated Henry James, though: "… magnificently ugly – deliciously 
hideous … a low forehead, a dull grey eye, a vast pendulous nose …" ?

Terry Pratchett


1 Mark Twain was overjoyed to learn the word "lagniappe". What does it mean?

2 What was the name of the killer who Twain talked to over coffee?

3 What new-fangled piece of technology caused Twain to lose all his money?

Annie Proulx


1 A book about the Tour de Mont Aigoual bicycle race was published in 1978 by 
Uitgeverij Bert Bakker in Amsterdam. An English translation by Sam Garrett was 
published in 2003 by Bloomsbury, New York and London. What are the Dutch and 
English titles of the book and who was the celebrated author?

2 WF Hermans's Beyond Sleep is a comedy about a hapless geology grad student 
and his journey to Finnmark to find meteorites. He visits Professor Nummedal in 
Oslo, who has aerial photographs vital to the search. But Nummedal insists on 
dragging him through the streets in search of a particular delicacy. What was 
the dish that lured the professor?

3 On 3 January 1935, under the auspices of the Cardiff Naturalists' Society, 
Mr Clifford W Collinson, FRGS, delivered a children's lecture – "Nine Lands in 
Ninety Minutes". Collinson is better known for his 1926 book describing his 
adventures in the Solomon Islands. What was that book?

Ian Rankin


1 In which book, published this year, does a forensic anthropologist rue 
(erroneously, as it transpires) the end of the Inspector Rebus series?

2 Which rock star included a chapter called "Cocainus" in his memoirs, 
published in 2012?

3 Which 2012 novel is set in a town on the fictitious Firth of Stoun?

Will Self


1 Which famous film director animadverted in his autobiography on the perfect 
dry martini, and suggested that coinnoisseurs believed that the only addition 
necessary to the gin was a ray of sunlight passing through a bottle of Noilly 
Prat and hitting the bottle of gin?

2 In which novel do the two protagonists always drink gimlets, and what is the 
recipe for this cocktail given by one of them?

3 What does Inspector Maigret have sent up from the Brasserie Dauphine during 
long interrogations at the Quai des Orfèvres?

Helen Simpson


1 What was the name of the talking horse in the Grimm brothers' tale "The 
Goose Girl"? (It was adopted as his nom de plume by a German novelist about a 
century ago.)

2 What is the back-to-front title of Samuel Butler's satirical novel of 1872?

3 Tolstoy donated the royalties from one of his novels to help fund the 
resettlement of several thousand of the Doukhobors, members of a pacifist 
vegetarian Christian sect, in their migration from Russia to Canada. Which of 
his novels was this?

Claire Tomalin


1 When did Dickens twice refuse Queen Victoria's invitation to meet her, and 
why?

2 Where and when did the Emperor Napoleon III and the Prince Consort raise 
their hats in salute to Dickens?

3 Which monarch did Dickens describe as "my favourite ruffian"?

Rose Tremain


1 Which great 20th-century drama ends with the words: "We're free! We're 
free!"?

2 In which 19th-century French masterpiece does the heroine receive the gift 
of a rare coin each birthday and New Year?

3 Where are the fictional characters Darl, Tell, Cash and Dewey Dell headed, 
and why?

Sarah Waters


1 Which author, when asked to compose her own epitaph, suggested "Excuse my 
dust"?

2 Which poet's epitaph finishes with the words "awful but cheerful"?

3 Which writer's final words were, reportedly, "What is the question?"?

Irvine Welsh


1 In Alan Warner's novel The Man Who Walks the old girl was watching an 
episode ofOne Man and His Dog on satellite TV. What language was it dubbed into?

2 What was the name of teacher Patrick Doyle's object of desire in James 
Kelman'sA Disaffection?

3 In the book We So Seldom Look on Love, Canadian writer Barbara Gowdy wrote 
about what sexual predilection from a female perspective?

2012 The year in question

1 Who didn't publish a sequel this year?

a) Rose Tremain <https://www.theguardian.com/books/rose-tremain>

b) Andrew Motion

c) Alan Garner

d) Irvine Welsh <https://www.theguardian.com/books/irvinewelsh>

2 Which fictional detective came out of retirement in November?

a) DI Rebus

b) Commander Adam Dalgliesh

c) Inspector Wexford

d) Inspector Morse

3 Which of these is not a genuine title?

a) Fifty Sheds of Grey

b) Fifty Shades of Chicken

c) Fifty Shades of Feminism

d) Fifty Shades of Fiscal Policy

4 Who co-wrote a serial novel about zombies?

a) Margaret Atwood

b) China Miéville

c) Neil Gaiman

d) Ursula K Le Guin

5 Which love affair is the subject of this year's Orange prizewinner?

a) Achilles and Patroclus

b) Mark Antony and Cleopatra

c) Paris and Helen

d) Odysseus and Penelope

6 Which of these is not a quote from Martin Amis's Lionel Asbo?

a) "Dawn simmered over the incredible edifice – the stacked immensity of 
Avalon Tower."

b) "Who let the dogs in? Who? Who?"

c) "'The main role of the semicolon,' he read in his Concise Oxford 
Dictionary, 'is to mark a grammatical separation that is stronger in effect 
than a comma but less strong than a full stop.'"

d) "The sky was a cold iron-grey, like the underside of a shield."

7 Which comedian confirmed his reputation as a children's author?

a) David Walliams

b) Frankie Boyle

c) Dara O'Briain

d) Stewart Lee

8 Which writer who died in 2012 … surprisingly never learned to drive?

a) Nina Bawden

b) Adrienne Rich

c) Gore Vidal

d) Ray Bradbury

9 … took revenge by depicting an ex-husband or ex-lover in a novel as so 
promiscuous they were "capable of having sex with a venetian blind"?

a) Gore Vidal

b) Helen Gurley Brown

c) Nora Ephron

d) Maeve Binchy

10 … was born in Africa and had a second life as a jazz critic called Francis 
Newton?

a) Maurice Sendak

b) Eric Hobsbawm

c) Barry Unsworth

d) Gore Vidal

11 Victoria Beckham has a tattoo taken from …?

a) King Lear

b) The Song of Solomon

c) A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man

d) Tennessee Williams

12 Whose belatedly published poetry included the cheery line "And every

winter things get worse"?

a) William Golding

b) Kingsley Amis

c) Evelyn Waugh

d) John Fowles

13 Whose book was written in the voice of their real-life spouse?

a) Philip Hensher

b) Rachel Cusk

c) Dave Eggers

d) Lionel Shriver

14 What percentage of authors on this year's Man Booker prize shortlist were 
self-confessed former heroin users?

a) 0%

b) 33.33%

c) 50%

d) 66.66%

15 "The village seems strange; this is separation as if my beloved has left 
it. / The grief of separation is so cruel that it is not scared of anyone" 
comes from an anthology of poetry from which armed nationalist movement ?

a) Basque separatists ETA

b) The Taliban

c) Zapatista Army of National Liberation

d) Tamil Tigers

16 Joseph Anton, the codename that Salman Rushdie adopted while he was in 
hiding, and the title of his memoir, is taken from

a) Joseph Conrad's The Secret Agent

b) The names of two secret agents who guarded him

c) A combination of Conrad and Chekhov

d) A short story by Chekhov

17 "A severed head fell from its spike, splashed"– this line is taken from:

a) Bring up the Bodies by Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>

b) "The Thames, London 2012" by Carol Ann Duffy

c) Song of Achilles by Madeline Miller

d) Death of Kings by Bernard Cornwell

18 Which author called Twitter "the ultimate irresponsible medium"?

a) Jonathan Franzen

b) Martin Amis

c) JK Rowling

d) Neil Gaiman

19 Which poet and editor makes a cameo appearance in Ian McEwan's Sweet Tooth?

a) Craig Raine

b) Ian Hamilton

c) TS Eliot

d) Don Paterson

20 Where might you find anatomically-shaped pasta?

a) Fifty Shades Freed by EL James

b) Nigellissima by Nigella Lawson

c) Vagina by Naomi Wolf

d) Back to Blood by Tom Wolfe

21 What highly praised non-fiction book this year contained this line:

"I slept that night in a Neolithic dormitory on a seabed of chalk"?

a) Walking Home by Simon Armitage

b) Strands by Jean Sprackland

c) The Old Ways by Robert Macfarlane

d) Sightlines by Kathleen Jamie
 