
The Guardian, June 12 1954 

Senator Joseph McCarthy was all over the front pages again this morning, but 
the instinct that put him there was for once not his. It looked as if, finally, 
an impulse of moral revulsion had galvanised the country and braced the 
backbone of an incongruous variety of his victims. The Department of the Army, 
a middle-aged coloured woman, the spectators at a session of the Senate's 
permanent sub-committee on investigations, two Democratic senators, and a 
suddenly blithe host of columnists and radio critics were moved to furious 
protest at the senator's tactics and his stature.

The army published a long report that documented in shocking detail the 
threats of McCarthy's chief counsel, the young Mr Roy Cohn, to "wreck the army" 
if a McCarthy investigator, David Schine, was not consistently given 
preferential treatment after he had been drafted into the army as a private. 
The army insisted at one point that a policy of special treatment for any army 
private was not in the national interest; whereupon Mr Cohn, who is all of 27, 
told the army he would give it "a little national interest" by showing it up in 
public "in its worst light".

Inevitably there was standing room only in Washington yesterday when the 
Senate subcommittee [which under McCarthy's chairmanship sought to expose 
leftwing infiltration and espionage in government and the military] called Mrs 
Annie Lee Moss, a middle-aged coloured woman, who was suspended by the army 
signal corps after Senator McCarthy had described her as a "code clerk" whose 
"communist record" was known to the army. Mrs Moss was a cafeteria worker who 
quietly told the subcommittee yesterday that she had never been in a code room 
in her life. Mr Cohn tried to establish her personal connection with a staff 
member of the Daily Worker, but it turned out that the man she knew was a 
coloured man who happened to have the same name.

At one point Senator Stuart Symington, Democrat of Missouri, asked if she knew 
who Karl Marx was. "Who's that?" she gravely asked, and the crowd laughed 
itself silly. When she finished her testimony and stepped down from the stand 
Senator Symington leaned into his microphone and angrily cried: "I may be 
sticking my neck out, but I think you are telling the truth. And if you're not 
taken back in your army job, you come around and see me. I am going to see that 
you get a job."

Senator McCarthy was mercifully absent from these rebellious proceedings 
because he was busy composing a broadcast reply to Adlai Stevenson's 
condemnation of him at Miami last Saturday, to the first outright attack made 
on him by a Republican senator, Ralph Flanders of Vermont, and to a trenchant 
analysis of his methods televised to a national audience last Tuesday night by 
the celebrated American commentator Edward R Murrow, and sponsored by the 
Aluminum Company of America.

Senator Flanders on Tuesday vindicated the honour of the Republican party on 
the floor of the Senate by suddenly putting the rhetorical question: "What 
party does he belong to? One must conclude that his is a one-man party, and 
that its name is McCarthyism, a title which he has proudly accepted." Senator 
Flanders then launched into the first open attack on McCarthy by a Republican 
in this session of Congress.

Next day President Eisenhower sent a letter of commendation to Senator 
Flanders and told his news conference that the senator had done the country "a 
service" by calling attention to "the danger of us engaging in internecine 
warfare and magnifying certain items of procedure and right and personal 
aggrandisement."

But it may be that the spark that has set off this fiery and so righteous 
explosion of popular indignation was laid, with deliberate courage, by Mr 
Murrow. He came to great fame in America during the war through his broadcasts 
from London. He is a tireless news reporter and, in his weekly television 
dramatisation of the news, a consummate showman. Last Tuesday night Mr Murrow 
gave over his whole half-hour to a pictorial analysis of "McCarthyism" by 
projecting visual excerpts from the senator's speeches and sessions of his 
sub-committee. It was McCarthy exposed by McCarthy, and Mr Murrow added only 
the sparest narrative comment. But at the end, after the huge audience for this 
programme had seen McCarthy merciless, McCarthy jocular, McCarthy cunning, 
McCarthy sentimental, Mr Murrow looked his audience in the eye and ended with 
these words: "This is no time for men who oppose Senator McCarthy's methods to 
keep silent. Or for those who approve. We can deny our heritage and our history 
but we cannot escape responsibility for the result. There is no way for a 
citizen of the republic to abdicate his responsibilities. As a nation we have 
come into our full inheritance at an early age. We proclaim ourselves - as 
indeed we are - the defenders of the free world, or what's left of it. We 
cannot defend freedom abroad by deserting it at home.

"The actions of the junior senator from Wisconsin have caused alarm and dismay 
among our allies abroad and given comfort to our enemies. And whose fault is 
that? Not really his. He didn't create the situation of fear, merely exploited 
it, and skillfully. Cassius was right: 'The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our 
stars, but in ourselves.'"

The response of televiewers across the country has been a stunning endorsement 
of Mr Murrow. So far the comments, by telephone, telegram and letter, are 
running about 15 to one in his favour. Hence the surprising rally of candour in 
public men who have stayed astutely silent for three years. Hence President 
Eisenhower's relieved approval of Senator Flanders. Hence a morning chorus of 
suddenly uninhibited newspaper columnists praising Murrow for "laying it on the 
line". Hence the confident laughter of the big audience at yesterday's 
subcommittee hearing. Hence the delayed righteousness of Senator Symington, of 
Missouri. Mr Murrow may yet make bravery fashionable.
 