
The critical moment in Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray's radio debut 
came about 45 minutes in, when Keysey – as he will inevitably be styled in his 
new chummy man's world on TalkSport – brought us the hot news that you could 
buy a pack of tiles for £14.99. "Get yourself down to Wickes," said Keys, "for 
ceramic wall tiles at only £14.99 a pack." It was his first live commercial.

A colleague tweeted that the Keys and Gray show would not work unless the two 
showed some contrition. Having presented onTalkSport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport>, I can confirm that there is 
nothing quite like a live commercial to instil a feeling of humility, and 
underline your place in the media world –and, in the case of Keys and Gray, 
that they have been very naughty boys. Further contrition not necessary. 
Although I should like to think the commercial department had a word about Keys 
rather rushing his later live ad for floor tiles (£8.99 a pack, down from 
£17.99, in case you missed it).

Talksport is a hugely successful radio station; the cash cow in UTV's stable. 
It has achieved this by using chaps such as Alan Brazil on the breakfast show 
to flog wall tiles, betting sites, insurance for vans, and all the other stuff 
it is pointless advertising on those commercial stations playing Michael Buble, 
Justin Bieber and Bruno Mars all day to to people with no wish of getting 
involved in grouting.

In this world, Keys and Gray are a superb signing for the station, on name 
alone. It does not really matter what their show is like. They could broadcast 
in Swedish, and advertisers wanting to reach a male audience would beat a path 
to their door.

However, I have to confess I shall miss the pair's predecessor, Mike Parry. 
Parry's great gift was to be able to spout total bollocks (pardon me, but there 
really is no other word) with absolute conviction. Among the "ideas" floated on 
Parry's morning show was the notion that racehorses should be fitted with wing 
mirrors to avoid collisions, that shops should sell individual shoes for people 
with one leg, and that someone would one day run the 100 metres in one second.

Compared with that, Keys and Gray's show is pedestrian. It's professional, 
packed with big names like Ray Wilkins and Will Carling, but frankly humdrum, 
unless you still have an appetite at 12.45pm on Monday to be discussing Wayne 
Rooney's goal from Saturday lunchtime.

Conspiracy theorists will have relished the fact that Keys's first two guests 
– following a Sunday paper story accusing the former Sky man of racism – were 
Paul "Incey" Ince and Dion Dublin. He made a point of calling each of them 
"buddy" several times during the conversation. In fact, someone tweeted after 
the first hour: "Black guests, check. Jewish guest (Avram Grant), check. Next, 
Germaine Greer discussing 3-5-2."

Afraid not. The sole female voice on the show was newsreader Faye Carruthers. 
And despite numerous plugs of the phone number, not a single caller was taken 
on air. Perhaps Keys and Gray were being shielded from pranksters and 
nay-sayers, who might have diverted attention from those reasonably priced 
tiles.

It was, I suppose, a fairly assured debut, but you would have to really, 
really like football to be a regular listener, because that is the sole topic 
for three very long hours. I once got into an argument about TalkSport, parts 
of which (Hawksbee and Jacobs mostly) I love, with someone who said, "They just 
dribble on about football all day". And in Keys and Gray they have two 
consummate dribblers.
 