
TalkSport, the radio station that bills itself as the place "for men who like 
to talk sport", has given a new home toRichard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray. The former 
Sky Sports pair should fit in with other presenters unafraid of expressing 
views that are liable to land them in hot water.

TalkSport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport> has often courted 
controversy, from Alan Brazil, who was censured by Ofcom for referring to Japan 
as "the Nips" during the 2006 World Cup; to Jon Gaunt, who was sacked for 
calling a local politician "a Nazi"; and to Adrian Durham, who argued that the 
Arsenal midfielder Andrey Arshavin should be booed and "not welcomed back into 
England" after Russia won the right to host the 2018 World Cup.

All that has not stopped the broadcaster from giving a berth to the two men 
who were caught red-handed a fortnight ago, making sexist comments about the 
assistant referee Sian Massey and uttering crude remarks to colleagues.

TalkSport has not bitten the hand that fed it its biggest story in years, Keys 
having used an hour-long interview on the station a fortnight ago to deliver 
the longest career suicide note in history. Keys' return to the Blackfriars 
studio – the scene of an apology that backfired spectacularly and led to his 
resignation hours after Gray had been sacked – suggests that he is willing to 
put his hand back in the fire. His interviewers two weeks ago, Andy Jacobs and 
Paul Hawksbee, skilfully gave him just enough rope.

Gray and Keys will take over the 10am-1pm slot from Monday, succeeding the 
perennially bickering Mike Parry and Mike Graham, whose discussions were laced 
with bouts of purest Littlejohn and whimsical diversions on the height of 
the crossbar.

Moz Dee, the TalkSport programme director, said that Keys and Gray would stick 
to sport, rather than being encouraged to offer opinions on current affairs as 
some of the station's broadcasters, such as Brazil, Ronnie Irani and Darren 
Gough, are wont to do in surreal flights of blokeish ramblings.

"The events of the last couple of weeks have been a lesson and have changed 
them," Dee said. "One thing that hasn't changed however is that they are two 
iconic broadcasters. I think it's a sensational coup."

TalkSport has rehabilitated Stan Collymore. The former Liverpool striker is 
now an engaging, thoughtful pundit who has put behind him bad publicity 
concerning his conduct towards the television presenter Ulrika Jonsson and 
revelations over his fondness for "dogging".

Keys and Gray may be able to engineer similar reputation surgery in their 
stint on the radio, but they should be careful not to be too successful. After 
all, as Keys said on TalkSport two weeks ago, when digging himself into a hole 
by alluding to the well he and his "mate" had sunk for others to drink from, 
"success breeds envy".
 