
Ricky Ponting <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting> has given his 
strongest hint yet that Andrew Symonds's Test exile will be over when selectors 
name their Ashes squad tomorrow. The all-rounder has endured off-field dramas 
and injury problems over the past 12 months, fuelling speculation that he will 
be overlooked for the series.

But Ponting believes selectors will find room for the 33-year-old Queenslander 
in their 16-man squad. "I wouldn't be surprised [if Symonds is named]," the 
Australia captain said. "He's had his share of battles over the last 12 months, 
obviously the well documented stuff off the field, and he's worked his way back 
into domestic cricket pretty well and played well for us over in Abu Dhabi and 
Dubai.

"He's a great guy to have around the team, there's no doubt about that, and 
obviously the selectors are going to have some tough decisions to make in the 
coming hours."

Ponting indicated that pacemen Brett Lee and Stuart Clark are likely to win 
recalls after missing the Australian summer through injury. Ponting insisted he 
has not yet seen the squad chosen by Andrew Hilditch, David Boon and Merv 
Hughes, but stressed the importance of striking a balance between experience 
and youth.

"With Stuart Clark and Brett [Lee] more than likely coming back into our 
squad, [Ben] Hilfenhaus, [Peter] Siddle and [Mitchell] Johnson did an amazing 
job for us over in South Africa so there are going to be some tough calls to be 
made there somewhere – luckily I'm not a selector I guess," he said, adding 
that he is unsure if selectors will opt to load the squad with extra batsmen or 
all-rounders.

"Having spoken to Andrew Hilditch a fair bit over the last couple of weeks, 
there were some tough calls to make around all-rounders and around spinners as 
well," he said. "Obviously the cards were laid on the table the other day with 
the spinners not getting contracted so that's one that's probably going to look 
after itself.

"Which ever way we go, whether it's all-rounders or spare batters – or 
specialist batters – we're going to have all bases covered. Which ever way we 
go we'll have a very strong squad."
 