
Ricky Ponting <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting> has appealed 
to Australian cricket fans to stick with his inexperienced Test side, 
forecasting more peaks and troughs until it gathers momentum.

Ponting became only the second Australian captain to lose two Ashes series in 
England in 119 years following a heavy defeat at The Oval last weekend.

"We're all in this together, working through a difficult transition period," 
Ponting wrote in a column for the Australian newspaper today, after the first 
of the Australian Test players returned to Sydney. "It's going to be a 
rollercoaster ride for a while."

The 2005 loss was a huge upset, but the 2009 series was expected to be a 
tighter contest between two moderately talented teams. Even so, some critics 
have called for Ponting's dismissal as national captain in the wake of the 2-1 
series loss.

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia responded by 
backing the 34-year-old batsman, even though the loss to England plunged 
Australia from No1 to No4 in the international Test rankings, behind South 
Africa, India and Sri Lanka.

"Our seesawing between good and bad in this series was due to inexperience," 
Ponting said, adding that the holes left by the retirements ofShane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, Glenn McGrath and Matthew 
Hayden were difficult to fill. "We have lost a number of great players over the 
past couple of years and we can't expect the next generation to step straight 
in. But they will be better players for their exposure in a tough series like 
this. They will learn to do things differently under pressure.

"We can't mask our disappointment, but a lot of the indicators were that we 
were good enough," Ponting said. "At the beginning of the series I thought we 
would win and said as much, but we fell at the last hurdle. We've got a really 
good group. I'm confident we're in for a … a good summer against the West 
Indies and Pakistan."

Ponting backed his fast bowlers – Mitchell Johnson, Peter Siddle and Ben 
Hilfenhaus – to return to form. "Despite the inconsistency of inexperience, 
they finished as the three leading wicket takers in the series, which is a 
terrific effort given how little Test cricket they have played between them," 
he said.

Ponting also tipped the 20-year-old opener Phil Hughes to make a name for 
himself on the international stage, despite being dropped after two Tests when 
he showed signs of being susceptible to short-pitched bowling.

But Warne, who retired from Test cricket as the game's most prolific wicket 
taker after Australia regained the Ashes 5-0 in 2006-07, said it was time to 
look to the future and stop talking about the transitional nature of the squad.

"There has been a lot of talk about this being an Australian team in 
transition. This team is inexperienced and quite a few of them were playing in 
their first Ashes series but there comes a time when the transition period is 
over," Warne wrote in the Daily Telegraph. "The question is: How long is a 
transition period?

"It hurts a bloody lot losing the Ashes. The vultures are circling and looking 
for answers, but to me, it's pointless and destructive. It is more constructive 
for the people who make the decisions to sit down and work out how to move 
forward ... Decisions need to be made when the dust settles."

Warne said somebody should be made accountable for the "staggering" blunder 
not to include a spinner at The Oval, where "the wicket looked like a desert 
even before the game started".

He also criticised a schedule containing too many one-day internationals – 
such as a cluster of series in England, South Africa and India in the next few 
months – for the state of the Test team.

"There are only nine Tests between now and the next Ashes series in Australia 
at the end of next year – but a ludicrous amount of one-day cricket in the same 
period," he said. "I'll say it again, one-day cricket should go. It has evolved 
into Twenty20. Cricket only needs two forms of the game, not three. Something 
needs to be done about scheduling: It's been going on too long.

"How can we expect the players to play well in Test cricket when they are not 
even going to play a domestic first-class game before the first Test of the 
summer?"
 