
Ricky Ponting <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting> arrived back 
in Sydney after the rigours of a long-haul flight prepared to concede for the 
first time that it might be time for Australia to follow England's lead and 
consider splitting the captaincy in Test and one-day cricket.

Immediately after Australia's Ashes defeat at The Oval, Ponting had spoken 
defiantly of returning to England to have another crack as Ashes captain in 
four years' time, but a long-haul flight can be an exhausting business and by 
the time he walked almost unnoticed through Gate 1 at Sydney Airport, he was 
disorientated enough to concede he faced an uncertain future.

The very fact that Ponting was returning home for roughly 10 days' 
recuperation before rejoining the latter stages of the one-day series indicated 
his exhaustion after a heavy schedule and he made no attempt to resist 
suggestions that Australia would benefit from him handing over the one-day 
captaincy to Michael Clarke to prolong his career at Test level.

"There's absolutely no reason why that couldn't happen," Ponting said. "It has 
happened in the past with Australian teams. Those are things that need to be 
thought long and hard about, but if it means that I'm going to be better off 
for Test matches and bigger series when they come around …

"I've got a lot to offer the team, as a batsman and as a captain. If it ends 
up getting to the point where I'm not the captain, my hunger and determination 
to keep playing this game are as good as ever. If that's with a 'c' next to my 
name, as captain, all well and good. If it's not, I still think I have a lot to 
offer."

Clarke leads Australia against Scotland in Edinburgh on Friday. Ponting will 
miss both Twenty20 internationals at Old Trafford and at least the first two 
ODIs. Depending on any discussions that he might hold withCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia officials to discuss the 
fallout from the tour, it cannot entirely be ruled out that he might not return.

Only the second Australia captain to lose two Test series in England, 
following Billy Murdoch in the late 19th century, he had his game face back on 
when he voiced his determination to make another Ashes tour of England, whether 
as captain or not. It would be a brave man who would risk a hat-trick.

"The flight home was a good time to reflect and think about things," he said. 
"Having a pretty bitter and sour taste in my mouth at the end of that Test 
match, I'd love to be able to go back and give it one more crack, I've got to 
worry about that the next 12 or 18 months and see if all that hunger or 
commitment is still there.

"Right at the moment it most definitely is. It's probably higher right now 
than ever before. Who knows: 2013 might be something achievable." he said.

"Ricky Ponting has got my full support and I think he's the best man to be 
captain," said Stuart Clark on his return to Sydney, who has been excluded from 
the one day squad. "I think it's ludicrous that anyone says any other." Simon 
Katich added to the debate that Ponting was the man to lead them back to the 
top. "Eleven of us had an opportunity to win the Ashes – you can't just blame 
it on one person," Katich said. "The guys that got given the opportunity to 
play in the Tests, we didn't make the most of those opportunities to win us the 
Ashes, so we're the ones that have a direct outcome on the result.

"I think our preparation was fine. You can always look for plenty of excuses, 
but the bottom line is when we're out there when the pressure was on, we didn't 
take our chances."

Ponting had been unaware that people were calling for his head. "Leaders are 
judged on results whether in business or sport," he said. "The support from the 
selectors and Cricket Australia has been good, but I think that the buck stops 
with me. My job is to get the most out of players and it is my responsibility 
to achieve results. If not, there will need to be answers and a review – and 
that is happening right now."
 