
Rio de Janeiro mayor Eduardo Paes has described Australia’s Olympic committee 
as a “source of aggressions” against Brazil after it banned the team’s athletes 
from visiting the city’s favelas during the Games in August.


 Australia’s team chef de mission Kitty Chiller told News Ltd media on Sunday 
that their Olympians would be barred from going to the urban slums, even on 
official tours, in accordance with advice from a security expert.

Rio de Janeiro's metro extension may not be finished before Olympic Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/olympics-2016-rio-de-janeiro-metro-line-extension-troubles-traffic>
 “There is still much unfamiliarity about Rio and Brazil,” Paes told Brazilian 
media. “There is a certain dramatisation. And between us, the Australian 
committee has been a source of aggressions to Brazil.”

 Rio’s favelas are among the most violent and crime-ridden areas of the city.

 Australian Olympic Committee president John Coates, a member of the 
International Olympic Committee’s coordination commission, said in April 2014 
that Rio’s Games preparations were the worst he had ever seen and critically 
behind schedule.

 Coates was more generous in a January assessment, however, saying he felt 
“very positive” about the delivery of the Games. AOC spokesman Mike Tancred was 
also upbeat about the preparations in a statement on Wednesday but reiterated 
that the favelas remained off-limits.

 “We have a team of 450 athletes, there is no way we could manage, or police, 
visits to the favelas by our athletes,” Tancred said. “[Our security expert] 
has advised that it would be impossible for us to allow our athletes to visit 
the favelas because we could not control visits involving a large number of 
athletes going to different places at different times.”

 Tancred said Australian athletes would “certainly engage with the residents 
of Rio and they will join in the fun on Copa beach”. “But the favelas are areas 
we cannot control and the personal safety of our athletes must come first,” he 
said.
 