
The County Square shopping centre in the heart of Ashford, Kent, looks less 
like a hub of thriving activity and more like a high street graveyard, where 
collapsed brands come to die.

HMV is shut, across the way sits an empty Jessops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jessops>, while another empty plot still 
has the outline of a closed Jane Norman. Game, Peacocks and Clinton Cards – all 
rescued from the brink of collapse – are also in the centre, dotted between the 
empty stores.

At the Internacionale store, staff are nervous their site could be the next to 
close, after the fashion chain entered administration just last week. One 
member of staff said: "We've been told we're safe for now, but staff at the 
stores that shut were given just a week's notice."

One of the biggest sites in the shopping centre has been empty since 2005 
while in the town centre, the Park Mall has a derelict formerAdams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/adams> – the childrenswear company that 
went bust more than three years ago – while another empty store has a sign in 
the window saying the business there shut in 2008.

Ron Wooden and Angela Forder have run Lesley's Florist for 10 years. They have 
had to cut staff hours because the closure of many local businesses has led to 
a fall in lunchtime trade.

Wooden said: "If rates were brought down, it would create more jobs in the 
town, which could be what's needed to get Ashford thriving again.

"For us, the problem is the local council, who need to improve their services. 
We don't feel like we're getting the service are rates are paying for. They 
pedestrianised the town centre a few years ago, but it doesn't seem to have 
made any difference and if anything, it's made things worse."However, it is not 
just Ashford that is suffering; the bleak picture is repeated across town 
centres up and down the country. Springboard, which monitors footfall and 
vacancy levels, said the number of empty shops had increased 1% in the last 
year and was now nearly 12%.

And where high street retailers once pointed the finger solely at the internet 
for their demise, they are increasingly blaming business rates, claiming these 
leave new stores unable to open, and existing retailers unwilling to expand.

The issue is so serious that the British Retail Consortium is calling it the 
biggest problem now facing retail. Helen Dickinson, the director general of the 
BRC, has summoned 25 chief finance officers and tax experts from the biggest 
retailers to her offices in central London on Monday to thrash out how to 
tackle the issue.

She said: "This is the biggest issue facing retailers on the high street. The 
issues are complex and far-reaching but without addressing this, nothing else 
can be achieved.

"There is widespread recognition that business rates have become overly 
onerous on retail. The more cost that is associated with opening on the high 
street, the less likely people are to open new stores."

Business rates are charged on all commercial buildings in the same way as 
council tax is charged for a home. However, the rates are calculated through 
the value and rent of the properties in 2008.

Retailers argue that rents have collapsed dramatically since 2008 and in some 
cases they are now paying more in rates than they are in rent. To make matters 
worse, the government has extended its review date from 2013 to 2015 to provide 
"stability", according to ministers.

In Scunthorpe, Des Comerford, who runs clothes store Fallen Hero 
<http://www.fallenhero.co.uk/> and chairs the Keep Scunthorpe Alive campaign, 
revealed that his annual rates bill is £44,000 a year, far higher than his 
current rent, which he managed to reduce earlier this year by negotiating with 
his landlord.

He said: "We're fighting for survival, which might sound dramatic, but we 
really are. The political will just isn't there. We've had good times and bad 
times, but since I've been trading in the town since 1972, this is the worst 
I've ever known.

"The biggest burden for us is business rates. While I'm aware it's probably 
one of the biggest contributors to the exchequer, something has to be done 
because it's spiralling out of control.

"Without shops, conveyancers are going out of business. There's no work for 
local builders in the stores and fewer people are coming to the city because 
there's less choice. When M&S shut on the high street in 2011, our footfall 
fell 33% overnight and never recovered, but the rates bill keeps going up. I 
now employ nine staff while two years ago I had 19. Any chance of expansion is 
just impossible with rates the way they are."

Back in Ashford, Gavin Wood, who has run Pet Essentials since 1996, said his 
rates had increased by 50% in four years and were now the same as his rent, 
having just negotiated a 10% rent reduction.

He said: "Our landlord has realised that without a rent reduction we would 
really struggle. It's just a shame the government can't be flexible too and 
recognise the impact it is having on the high street.

He said: "I used to employ five staff on a Saturday, but trade has fallen so 
much I only need two. I know the council are trying to improve things but it 
just doesn't seem to be working."

And it is not just small businesses that are angry over business rates rising.

Sainsbury's chief executive Justin King has been banging the drum for months 
and recently revealed that for every £1 his company saved from the decision to 
reduce corporation tax, he has paid an extra £2.50 in business rate rises. But 
he is not alone in seeing business rates rise faster than any other tax 
payment, and subsequently destroying swaths of the high street.

Terry Duddy, chief executive of Home Retail Group, said recently that he 
believedComet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/comet> and Jessops went 
bust not because they were squeezed by internet competitors, but because of 
high business rates.

A report in May by PricewaterhouseCoopers found that the business rate bill 
for the country's 100 biggest retailers is now higher than their corporation 
tax bill. It found that for every £1 of corporation tax paid, the retailers are 
now paying £1.44 in business rates, and corporation tax rose 6% between 2008 
and 2010, while business rates rose 30%.

Retail expert Christine Cross, who wrote the report, agreed that business 
rates was one of the biggest issues facing the high street.

She said: "We believe that in looking at the impact of government tax policy, 
and indeed for policymakers going in future, it's important to look at all 
taxes that come from business to pay for public services. Corporation tax is 
important but it's one of many taxes and to look at it alone only gives part of 
the picture as to why attracting businesses to the UK is important."

And perhaps finally politicians are sitting up and taking notice.

The business select committee of MPs is holding an inquiry into the state of 
the British high street, holding evidence sessions where every businessman has 
raised business rates and called for a government review. Meanwhile, the 
opposition front bench has begun calling for greater action on the issue.

The shadow business secretary, Chuka Umunna, said: "There was huge 
disappointment at the last budget that the chancellor didn't address business 
rates. It needs to be looked at and there's a real question of how they are set.

"Whenever I meet retailers on the high street business rates, rents and access 
to finance are the biggest issues I hear, especially for smaller businesses. 
You have to look at the multiplier affect for the future. What will happen to 
the tax take if more stores end up closing?

"There is enormous frustration at what is seen to be an unlevel playing field 
between conventional stores and online retailers, who people don't feel pay 
their fair share of tax."

Online retailers still pay business rates on their buildings, but because 
these warehouses are away from town centres, where rents are low, the bills are 
far lower. It has led to calls that the burden should be spread to internet 
businesses too.

But, with barely any spare cash, the government could not fund any reduction 
and working out who could stump up has left politicians and businesses 
scratching their heads.
 