
Aston Villa are finalising a shortlist that they hope will lead to a swift 
managerial appointment being made, possibly as early as the start of next week, 
afterAlex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> was put 
out of his misery and sacked on Monday.

Wigan Athletic's Roberto Martínez and Paul Lambert at Norwich City are the 
early frontrunners, with Swansea City's Brendan Rodgers also likely to come 
under consideration as Villa step up their search for a young and hungry 
manager capable of reinvigorating the club.

Martínez is the early favourite for the post and it is understood that Villa's 
failure to land him last summer, when they were looking for a successor to 
Gérard Houllier and eventually turned to McLeish, would not discourage the 
Midlands club from trying to lure the former Swansea manager again. Lambert, 
who was coy when questioned about his future following Norwich's 2-0 victory 
over Villa at Carrow Road on Sunday, is in Villa's thoughts as well but is also 
believed to be on West Bromwich Albion's radar as they pursue a replacement for 
Roy Hodgson, the new England manager.

While it is unclear at this stage how easy it would be prise Martínez from 
Wigan – Dave Whelan, the club's chairman, said last month that the Spaniard 
"will go to one of the top clubs in Europe with my blessing" — Norwich have 
sent out a defiant message regarding Lambert.

"We would not welcome any inquiry for our football manager or any of the 
club's football players," David McNally, Norwich's chief executive, said. "We 
will do everything we can and fight this as hard as we have ever fought."

McLeish's dismissal at Villa came as no surprise after a disastrous season in 
which the club did not secure theirPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> status until the 
penultimate match. They finished the campaign in 16th place, only two points 
clear of safety and amid mounting unrest among the club's supporters.

Attendances fell away dramatically and McLeish faced ferocious abuse towards 
the end of the 2-1 defeat at home against Bolton Wanderers last month, which 
was watched by Randy Lerner and proved to be a tipping point for the Villa 
owner. From that point on McLeish's position was untenable and it became a 
matter of when and not if he would be sacked.

Paul Faulkner, the club's chief executive, flew to America last week to hold 
talks with Lerner about McLeish's position as concern grew about the path the 
club were on with the Scot in charge.

Faulkner met McLeish on Monday and told the manager that his three-year 
contract had been terminated before he had got as far as 12 months, leaving 
Villa facing another seven-figure sum in compensation on the back of the £12m 
spent in "exceptional charges" in 2010‑11 relating to changing the club's 
"management personnel".

Villa's fans, however, will deem that almost any price is a price worth paying 
to get McLeish out of the club. They never accepted him from the moment he 
arrived, although that had more to do with his record of being relegated twice 
with Birmingham City and a reputation for playing dull football than the fact 
that he came from their arch-rivals. Villa won only seven Premier League 
matches during McLeish's time in charge and managed 37 goals in 38 fixtures. 
Entertainment was conspicuous by its absence.

Lerner's comments in the statement that Villa released on Monday afternoon 
were damning in relation to both McLeish's tenure and Houllier's nine-month 
reign. "We need to be clear and candid with ourselves and with supporters about 
what we have lacked in recent years," Lerner said. "Compelling play and results 
that instil a sense of confidence that Villa is on the right track have been 
plainly absent. The most immediate action that we can take is to look carefully 
at our options in terms of bringing in a new manager who sees the club's 
potential and embraces our collective expectations."
 