
Roberto Mancini has challenged his Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> players to show they have 
the competitive strength to ensure the defeat by Manchester United does not 
have further repercussions for their season.

Mancini wants his players to demonstrate there is no hangover from the 2-1 
loss at Old Trafford when they faceAris Thessaloniki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aristhessaloniki> at the Kleanthis 
Vikelides stadium in the last 32 of the Europa League on Tuesday. The Greeks 
have one of the more impressive home records in European competition, unbeaten 
in 24 games over the past 40 years, but Mancini believes his team will be glad 
to have a quick opportunity to lift some of the gloom that has engulfed the 
club since the weekend.

"It's very important that we bounce back," Mancini said. "I don't think we 
will have a problem mentally, but when you have played so well away from home, 
when you think you have deserved to win but you lose, it can be very hard. It's 
important for us that we have a game so quickly and we need to go on a run now."

Mancini's determination to avoid another bad result can be gauged by the 
decision to bring a strong squad to Greece, mindful of the fact that Aris also 
beat Atlético Madrid in the group stages and that players can possibly be 
rested for Sunday's FA Cup fourth-round replay against Notts County.

James Milner is missing with a hamstring injury and Nigel de Jong is still 
unfit but Mario Balotelli's place on the flight is merely a case of 
reintroducing him to a competitive environment after his latest absence with a 
knee injury. Michael Johnson, out for 16 months after a wretched run of 
injuries, has also returned to the squad and Shaun Wright-Phillips is in line 
to start his first match since City rejected a transfer request in the last 
week of January, with Mancini challenging the winger to re-establish himself at 
the club. "He wanted to leave because he wanted to play more matches and I can 
understand this. Now it's important that when he gets the chance he plays with 
100%."

City's travel plans were disrupted by Joleon Lescott arriving at Manchester 
airport without his passport and, after a delayed flight, the defender revealed 
he had spent Saturday evening playing a City-versus-United challenge match with 
Wayne Rooney on an X-Box computer link. Typically, Rooney won. "He's given me a 
hard day," Lescott summarised, "but I think I will beat him next time."

Manchester City (4-2-3-1): Hart; Boateng, K Touré, Lescott, Kolarov; Vieira, 
Barry; Wright-Phillips, Tevez, Jô; Dzeko.Subs Given, Kompany, Zabaleta, 
Richards, Silva, Johnson, Balotelli

Referee A Mallenko (Spain).
 