
Robert Plant/Alison Krauss, on tour

For rockers, it was the Led Zeppelin reunion that was the big news of 2007. 
For the band's singer Robert Plant, however, it often seemed that the biggest 
deal was actually the album he'd just made with bluegrass/country singerAlison 
Krauss <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alisonkrauss>. All round, it's hard 
not to sympathise with Plant's point of view. After some uncomfortable post-Zep 
years trying, Mick Jagger-like, to chase the zeitgeist, he has lately found a 
comfortable role for himself as a guardian of roots music. It's this position 
that informs Plant/Krauss's Raising Sand. Produced by Dylan collaborator T Bone 
Burnett, it's a surprisingly cool record, filled with snaking guitar lines and 
dusty grooves, the pair's harmonies making a delicate job of the decidedly 
earthy material. Worthy of your love - every inch of it, in fact.

路 NIA, Birmingham, Mon 5; Apollo, Manchester, Wed 7; CIA, Cardiff, Thu 8

Black Acid, on tour

If his former group Death In Vegas managed to mix dirge rock with big beat, 
for his new one, the New York-based Black Acid, producer Richard Fearless is 
evidently trying something more ambitious. A mixture of three-chord rock, 
slurred vocals and backwards noises, this may as well be the soundtrack to an 
imaginary movie called Being Bobby Gillespie, a terrifying Charlie 
Kaufman-scripted trip inside the mind of the Primal Scream frontman. Death 
disco, heavy krautrock, horror soundtracks and smack rock boogie are duly 
present on the band's forthcoming debut, to which elegant dissipation is surely 
the only response. All this would be so much black trousers and aviator shades, 
were it not for Fearless' evidently firm hand on the musical tiller. Familiar 
as his many references sometimes are, he's definitely not afraid to mix up the 
medicine.

路 The Legion, EC1, Mon 5; Nice N Sleazy, Glasgow, May 6; Roadhouse, 
Manchester, Wed 7; Crawdaddy, Dublin, Thu 8

ATP Vs Pitchfork Rye

Some people don't grow out of arguing about their favourite bands, and that's 
the principle underlying this season'sAll Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties> festival. Generally 
an event curated by one designated act - this time last year it was the Nick 
Cave-affiliated Dirty Three - on this occasion, it reprises the soundclash 
format, with two different teams choosing what's going to appear. On the one 
side, there's the organisers, whose tastes run from the more leftfield side of 
indie rock to the fringes of the avant garde. On the other, there's Pitchfork, 
the music website which has done more than any other to re-popularise the wordy 
and the kind of nerdy dork rock - Shins, Modest Mouse, Decemberists, etc - that 
was so popular in the early 1990s. It makes for an interesting mixture: 
Sebadoh, Black Mountain, Howlin Rain and Red Kross represent for the former, 
Hot Chip, Vampire Weekend and Dirty Projectors for the latter.

路 Pontins Camber Sands Holiday Centre, Rye, Fri 9 to May 11

Silver Jews, on tour

Smart Alec? The Silver Jews may be your spiritual home. A group initially 
formed around the waspish David Berman and the no less wry Stephen Malkmus, 
this was a band arguably too ironic to exist for very long in its original 
form. Never a group to take itself seriously as a commercial prospect 
(recording its early albums on a Walkman), of late things have become a little 
more orthodox for Berman's group. His remarks are no less tart (he's described 
Will Oldham as "yesterday's papers"), but the band's former edgy sound has now 
developed into country rock, while their new album, Lookout Mountain Lookout 
Sea, demonstrates the warmth of the voice with which Berman delivers his 
prickly messages.

路 Concorde 2, Brighton, Wed 7; City Varieties, Leeds, Thu 8; ABC, Glasgow, Fri 
9
 