
It is a Monday morning in the heart of Dublin. In a light, airy room situated 
in the shadow of the city's looming Croke Park stadium, two dozen schoolgirls 
in matching navy blue jumpers sit attentively on coloured beanbags. The room is 
lined with bookshelves. High up on one wall there are a series of framed 
posters entitled "Ten Rules for Writing Fiction", compiled by different 
well-known authors. In Anne Enright's rules, there is the warning: "Only bad 
writers think that their work is really good." Number One in Richard Ford's 
list is: "Marry somebody you love and who thinks you being a writer's a good 
idea."

The girls, aged eight, nine and 10, are not at that stage quite yet. They gaze 
around the room wide-eyed, cowed into silence by the excitement of unfamiliar 
surroundings and a morning off school.

"Does anybody know why you are here this morning?" asks a woman standing at 
the front.

A tentative hand goes up. "To write a story," comes the reply from a pupil 
called Sophie.

"That's right – and we're here to help you."

The girls' legs jiggle in anticipation. This is Fighting Words, a workshop  
<http://www.fightingwords.ie/>set up by the author Roddy Doyle in 2009 to 
encourage creative writing in students of all ages across Ireland. Since its 
inception, the centre has seen several thousand come through its doors. The 
majority are from local primary schools in Ballybough, an economically deprived 
area of Dublin, but other students have travelled hundreds of miles. Fighting 
Words, which relies largely on volunteer staff and offers all its lessons free 
of charge, has proved so popular that sessions are booked up a year in advance. 
"The interest is huge," says Sean Love, the executive director and co-founder. 
"We're obviously filling a gap that is not filled in formal education."

In a climate of arts cuts and economic gloom, the centre relies on private 
donations to keep going – its operating costs are about ¤300,000 a year 
(£250,000). To this end, Fighting Words is about to issue a hand-printed, 
collector's edition of short stories written by Annie Proulx, Colm Tóibín,Joyce 
Carol Oates <https://www.theguardian.com/books/joyce-carol-oates> and Salman 
Rushdie among others. It is hoped that the sale of the book will raise enough 
for the centre to stay open for a further two or three months.

Within 20 minutes, today's group has chosen (via a scrupulously conducted 
vote) a main character for their story called Dude the Vampire. They are then 
encouraged to invent a sidekick (Blackie the Bat) before coming up with a plot 
and dialogue for their characters, which is typed up by a volunteer on a laptop 
and projected onto a large screen so that everyone can read it. Rose, a 
final-year art student, is on hand to draw illustrations.

The collective method of writing throws up some interesting suggestions. When 
asked what Dude the Vampire's greatest wish might be, a small girl in the front 
row with long dark hair, held back by a sparkly pink scrunchie, puts up her 
hand. "He wants to eat a monkey," she says.

There is a gentle laugh from a bespectacled man in a leather jacket, sitting 
unobtrusively at the back of the room. The man isRoddy Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roddydoyle>, the Booker prize-winning 
novelist whose first novel,The Commitments, caused a sensation on its 
publication in 1987. Doyle went on to become one of Ireland's most prolific and 
beloved writers: every Dublin taxi driver I meet has read at least one of his 
books. "I'm not recognised that much," Doyle insists. "I'm just a bald man in 
glasses and there's a rash of them in Dublin. It'd be different if I had a 
mohican."

When Doyle established Fighting Words, the intention was not only to inspire 
children and young adults who might otherwise be struggling with literacy to 
write, but also to regenerate a down-at-heel part of the city where many 
children do not have English as their first language, and which had provided 
the backdrop for several of Boyle's own books.

The centre, which takes its name from a common Dublin expression meaning words 
used to advance an argument, was also partly a response to a lack of creativity 
in Doyle's own education. The Christian Brothers who ran his secondary school 
gave him no encouragement to write fiction. For years, Doyle simply assumed he 
didn't have the talent or discipline to put pen to paper. Today's children, he 
says, deserve better.

"When I was growing up, the exam system didn't allow you to write fiction, so 
you never did," he says. "There was an absence of thought [about creative 
writing] which seems daft in retrospect." Doyle didn't start writing regularly 
until he became an English and geography teacher in his 20s. "I didn't have the 
discipline until then."

The discipline of writing, he explains, is particularly important for the 
young people who come here. "It's the freedom to challenge your mind, to admit 
failure and then to start again. Schools don't really allow failure and yet 
it's a valid part of any endeavour, not just writing.

"I think this…" Doyle gestures to the group of schoolgirls now sitting bent 
over desks, attempting to write their own endings to Dude the Vampire's story, 
"opens their heads to the value of their own decisions and willpower to 
rewrite. It's about working hard to make something good enough. That's the deep 
satisfaction." He mentions a group of young women who came in after being on a 
government work scheme. "They'd been failed by the education system," says 
Doyle. "They didn't think they could write. But I can see the difference from 
when they first come in – it's visually apparent – and it's a quick transition 
from thinking 'I can't do anything' to 'I can do something'."

As Sara Bennett, manager of Fighting Words, puts it: "I can see kids' 
imaginations sparking. We offer a space to be free to be creative."

Part of the centre's success derives from the quality of the teaching. Doyle, 
a father of three whose work includes several children's books, can relate 
easily to the students and lives round the corner. He is a frequent presence, 
as is fellow Booker winner,Anne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-enright>. The patrons of Fighting Words 
include illustrious literary figures such as Colum McCann, Maeve Binchy and 
Lorrie Moore.

"Everybody here's very nice about my writing," says 17-year-old Hannah Gaden 
Gilmartin, who has been coming to Fighting Words' weekly drop-in sessions for 
young adults for the last 18 months. "Sometimes I just get a general idea and I 
want it to work with certain characters, so I'll just start writing and Roddy 
Doyle or whoever is here to help out will come and look at what I've done and 
make some suggestions and then I get on with it. It's always very constructive 
advice, phrased in a helpful way.

"It's a good opportunity to be creative. There's not really the opportunity to 
do creative writing at school. Writing makes me feel excited. Even if it's 
going really well, you're looking forward to doing the next bit, to the next 
scene coming up. I think I do want to be a writer when I leave school."

Hannah is currently hard at work on her first novel – a fantasy with a 
protagonist called Jan. She's "not 100% sure yet" what is going to happen. 
According to Doyle, the majority of stories produced at Fighting Words are: "A 
never-ending battle between love and violence." Even with the eight-year-olds? 
He smiles. "Especially with them."

It was a trip to visit his friend the author Dave Eggers in America that 
inspired Doyle to start Fighting Words. In 2002, Eggers had founded826 
Valencia, a non-profit organisation <http://826valencia.org/> to help children 
and young adults develop writing skills, in the Mission District of San 
Francisco. The centre, built behind a shop selling "pirate supplies" such as 
tubs of lard and eye-patches, offers free workshops and field trips as well as 
publishing an array of student-authored literary journals. It has been such a 
success that it now has seven more chapters in the US and has inspired projects 
as far afield as Australia and Kenya.

Doyle wanted to do something similar and started looking for premises. An 
estate agent took him to a disused office space near the famous Croke Park 
stadium and it was this building that would become a state-of-the-art creative 
writing centre in the heart of the city. Fighting Words was the first centre of 
its kind in Europe and saw 11,000 children through its doors in the first 17 
months, but similar initiatives have sprouted up in its wake, including the
Ministry of Stories in London <http://www.ministryofstories.org/>, brainchild 
of author Nick Hornby and art entrepreneurs Ben Payne and Lucy Macnab.

Like Fighting Words, the Ministry of Stories, which opened in 2010, chose for 
its location a city neighbourhood caught between deprivation and regeneration – 
Hoxton, east London. Funded by the Arts Council, the Ministry is fronted by a 
shop selling "monster supplies" (a jar of "thickest human snot" being a prime 
example) and has formed a link between disparate, co-existing communities: the 
young professionals in technology start-ups bustling around Old Street; the 
well-off residents of gentrified Georgian housing; and those that live in 
nearby council estates, afflicted by one of the highest rates of child poverty 
in the country. It was also a part of London badly affected by last summer's 
riots.

The effect of such projects is, by its nature, difficult to quantify but 
Macnab believes that the process of a child sitting down to write a story, then 
giving them a copy of their published work, can have enormous impact on a young 
person's self-worth.

"We're encouraging and motivating young people to write and have confidence in 
their voice. I think writing and being able to express oneself is really vital 
for being able to take part in society," she says. "There's a confidence that 
comes with getting it right. And then there's the social nature of talking 
about writing, where people are enthusiastic about listening to you and seeing 
your work honoured and respected and enjoyed by others. All of those things are 
important."

Key to this is getting children engaged in the first place. Although Doyle has 
no pirate or monster merchandise on offer at Fighting Words, he and Sean Love 
did introduce some "anarchic" elements of their own, including an unseen editor 
called Editor McConkey who is famously grumpy and makes comically disparaging 
remarks to the students through a frosted window in one of the bookshelves. The 
playfulness is crucial in getting introverted, sullen or nervous children 
engaged.

Today, Editor McConkey's avowal that "Girls can't write stories" has already 
been met with a shrieking chorus of disapproval. At the end of the session, 
Editor McConkey will admit that he was wrong before handing out a printed 
booklet of "Dude and Blackie's Plan to Destroy the World" to each pupil. One 
third of the story is left blank for the children to fill in their own endings.

The girls are clearly thrilled. "In my ending, Dude destroys the world but 
then he's lonely," says one of them, shiny-eyed. "So he brings the world back 
again with a special weapon."

"For these children, writing is important – even to the ones who don't read a 
lot," says Doyle. "The idea that they'll have their name on a book means 
everything to them. Whereas if you put it on the internet, it doesn't mean 
anything."

Love agrees: "Getting a book for them is a huge moment. The physical object is 
important."

This reverence for the physical object itself is reflected in Fighting Words's 
latest fundraising drive:a limited-edition, hand-printed book 
<http://www.stoneyroadpress.com/> comprising 10 specially commissioned 800-word 
short stories by some of the world's leading writers, plus an exclusive etching 
by the Irish-American Turner prize nominee Sean Scully. Each of the 150 copies 
has been individually signed by the authors – Proulx, Tóibín, Oates, Rushdie, 
Enright, Russell Banks, John Banville, Richard Bausch, David Mitchell, and Sam 
Shepard – and will sell for ¤1,950 (around £1,625). It is a mark of how highly 
Fighting Words is regarded (and a measure of Doyle's charm) that the 
compilation has attracted such notable contributors.

"We sat and made a list of the people we most wanted and because of their 
great generosity, we didn't have to go far beyond the original 10," says Doyle. 
"The hardest thing was actually getting the stories delivered to people to 
sign."

The stories, printed on oversized pages of blotting paper thickness, were not 
the kind of thing you could pop in a letter-box. Instead, they were carefully 
packed into slim wooden containers and shipped, complete with pencil, for the 
authors to sign. "The worst to get to wasAnnie Proulx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx>," recalls Doyle. "She said she 
lived down a lane. When you say 'a lane' in Ireland, it's 25 yards. A lane in 
Annie's case was 47 miles through snowy ravines in Wyoming."

There was no set theme for the stories submitted and no restrictions other 
than word count. Proulx has written about last year's floods in Australia. 
Banville's story is about his time working the night-shift on a newspaper. 
Oates's tale revolves around a soldier returning from Afghanistan.

Back in the classroom at Fighting Words, it is tempting to wonder how many of 
these young girls will go on to become world-famous writers. At the end of 
their session, they file out onto the street shepherded by teachers. The 
children are in high spirits, chatting about the morning's events, and each one 
clasping a stapled sheaf of A4 containing their illustrated story. On the back 
cover, there is a photograph of each individual child. Beside it, there is 
space for them to add their own author biography.
 