Thrill rating 4/10 
Danger rating 2/10

Fitness rating 6/10

In a nutshell ...

If you're after a sport to build stamina and condition your body in the 
inimitable way that cross-country skiing does, but without having to bother 
with actually locating all that snowy stuff, then roller skiing is the perfect 
solution - whether through a royal London park or down a country lane. You even 
get to use ski poles!

Developed in Scandinavia (of course), where cross-country skiers use this 
method to challenge themselves during the off-season, roller skiing was adopted 
by the British army to build up soldiers' endurance levels.

There are two techniques: "skating" (very like inline skating) and "classic". 
The classic technique mirrors traditional cross-country skiing (legs forward 
and back, arms pumping, and the occasional "tuck position" for downhill 
sections when you desperately try to get your breath back while wishing it was 
downhill all the way). Happily for the uphill sections, the roller skis' little 
rubber wheels have ratchets to prevent you rolling backwards into an 
embarrassing heap.

What's the buzz?

Believe it or not, roller skiing uses an astounding 90% of the body's muscles 
- cyclists, put that in your saddle and smoke it. Roller skiing's also loads of 
fun, and can be done practically anywhere - towpaths, business parks, disused 
airfields and cycle lanes (we love cyclists really). There's even off-road 
equipment for skiing on dirt tracks. But, as Iain Ballentine from Roller Ski 
advises, withhold your inner Franz Klammer and stick to a "gently sloping 
surface, not too steep - and if you're using a public road, it needs to be 
traffic-free."

Thrill a minute?

This is a sociable, slow-burner of a high rather than an adrenaline-fuelled 
dice with death (hence the traffic-free roads) - and all the better for that. 
But the feeling of knackered satisfaction at the end is hard to beat. Roller 
Ski offers introductory courses in London and the south for beginners going at 
a leisurely pace of up to 10mph, either as one-day intensive lessons or 
two-hour group classes. These offer a gentle introduction to the sport's 
techniques, so you can fall flat on your face in a friendly, supportive 
environment.

Adrenaline peak

The endorphin rush of roller skiing right the way up a hill, before adopting 
that tuck position and whizzing past fellow roller skiers on your way down 
again.

Where to do it

Huntly Nordic and Outdoor Centre in Aberdeenshire boasts 800 metres of 
purpose-built tarmac roller-ski track. It is located next to the river Deveron 
at the Hill of Haugh in Huntly, and runs courses for adults and children. The 
London Region Nordic Ski Club runs monthly training courses for beginners and 
intermediate skiers at the Hillingdon cycle track in Hayes, which last for five 
hours (bring a packed lunch). Roller Ski runs classes in a variety of training 
venues across London (including Hyde Park) and Surrey. All of the above offer 
skis and poles for hire.

Who can do it

Roller Ski says that kids as young as 13 can do it. Age is less important than 
height, as the poles start at 1.4 metres in length.

What to take

Light jogging clothes that you can move comfortably in.

Typical prices

A one-day Roller Ski course costs £55, including equipment hire and lunch. The 
Huntly centre runs a summer course for kids, costing £20 a week for one hour a 
day. London Nordic club training sessions cost £20 for non-members; equipment 
hire is a further £10.

Impress your pals 

The oldest ski museum in the world can be found inside the Holmenkollen ski 
jump in Norway. Take a visit and look out for skis from the Viking age - roller 
skiing wasn't so popular back then.

Video clip rollerski.co.uk/downloads/video.wmv 
<http://www.rollerski.co.uk/downloads/video.wmv>

Good links

rollerski.co.uk <http://www.rollerski.co.uk>

nordicski.co.uk <http://www.nordicski.co.uk>

Londonnordic.org.uk/RollerSkiing.html 
<http://www.londonnordic.org.uk/RollerSkiing.html>

abc-of-skiing.com/rollerskiing.asp 
<http://www.abc-of-skiing.com/rollerskiing.asp>
 