
In Italy the championship, like others in Europe, was suspended at the 
outbreak of the first world war. At the time William Garbutt's Genoa Cricket 
and Football Club led the Girone Nazionale, the precursor toSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. The title for that year 
would be assigned to them after the conflict. Playing up front for theGrifone 
was a striker by the name of Percy Walsingham. By this writer's reckoning he is 
the last of 13 English footballers to be a champion of Italy.

Not since those trailblazers who spread the game across the globe has anyone 
matched Walsingham's achievement. Gerry Hitchens came close in the 60s but had 
the misfortune of leaving Internazionale and Cagliari in the years that they 
claimed the little tricolor shield known as theScudetto. In the modern era 
England has had no one to rival the success of Wales's John Charles or the 
Republic of Ireland's Liam Brady at Juventus.That might change with Ashley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/07/roma-ashley-cole-proposed-move>
.

In Roma he has joined a club going places. Since the takeover by American 
investors three years ago they have been transformed into a global outfit. 
Partnerships with Nike, Disney and Volkswagen have been announced. Construction 
of a privately owned 52,500-seat stadium is expected to start soon. Under their 
president, James Pallotta, they are a modernising force seeking to effect 
change in a decadent environment. In that regard they are allies withJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> off the pitch.

On it, however, their rivalry and the likelihood of it being sustained over a 
prolonged period is at a height probably not seen since the 80s and the days of 
Paulo Roberto Falcão and Michel Platini. They are the elite. Right now, though,
Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> perhaps have more upward 
mobility. In part that is because Juventus are at the top and have been for 
three years, a dominance the Old Lady has not known since 1933. How can they do 
better in Serie A? Antonio Conte pondered this at the end of last season. It 
would be "impossible to improve" on what Juventus had achieved under his 
management.

They were unbeaten in the league in his first season. Statistically they were 
better in his second, picking up more points, more wins and more goals. Then in 
his third they made history by becoming the first team to break the 100-point 
barrier in Italy, with a 100% home record. Roma were the runners-up despite 
playing football evocative of Paolo Sorrentino's Oscar winner The Great Beauty, 
a film set in the Eternal City, and also etching their name into the record 
books.

They opened the campaign with 10 straight victories, a landmark in Serie A, 
and finished it with 85 points, the highest the club had ever achieved. That 
total would have been sufficient in five of the last six years to stitch the
Scudetto on their giallorosso shirts. "We're a little like Cristiano Ronaldo 
and theBallon d'Or in the Messi years," Roma's coach, Rudi García, told 
L'Équipe jokingly. "But Cristiano won it [again] in the end." Will Roma this 
season? Thecalcio cognoscenti think so. For them the tipping point came on 15 
July whenConte stunned Italian football by resigning from Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/15/antonio-conte-leaves-juventus-italy-manager>
.

As if losing "the emblem of their renaissance" was not traumatic enough, the 
timing, theidentity of his successor, Massimiliano Allegri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/16/massimiliano-allegri-juventus-coach-conte>
, plus Allegri's past with the playmaker Andrea Pirlo at Milan, and the 
continued anxiety over Arturo Vidal's future, left many anticipating a shift in 
the balance of power from Turin to the capital.

The swing of opinion would do well to bear the following in mind: Conte left 
behind the best squad in Italy and a fierce winning mentality. Allegri is also 
a better coach than many make out. Had he not decided to stay at Milan a year 
ago, he would have been in García's place at Roma. His name was top of the 
shortlist, as it supposedly was for the Italy post when it became available 
this summer. Still, his appointment has not reassured everyone. It has divided 
fans. Things are uncertain and that has led some to discern vulnerability in 
Juventus.

Roma keep going from strength to strength, adding to the impression that the 
gap has closed. Walter Sabatini, their transfer master, has been dubbed The 
Wolf of Trigoria (Roma's training ground). The man is some trader and this 
summer he has been buying more than he has been selling.

His deals have had a twofold impact. First they have added quality and 
quantity, equipping Roma for a title challenge and their return to the 
Champions League. They now have real depth at every position except perhaps at 
centre-forward. Secondly they have cocked a snook at their rivals.

In the hours that followed Conte's decision to step down, Sabatini appeared to 
take advantage and do the biggest deal of the transfer window in Italy, 
swooping for one of Juve's primary targets, the Verona winger Juan Iturbe. He 
also noticed Lazio's negotiations for the Cagliari centre-back Davide Astori 
had stalled and won the race to sign him, leaving fans of Roma's "cousins" 
infuriated. Moves like these have only enhanced the impression that an edge has 
been obtained.

Roma have kept their stars. The rock at the back, Mehdi Benatia, is not for 
sale while Miralem Pjanic signed a new contract before the World Cup. And so 
the mood is buoyant. Expectations are high and how Roma cope with that pressure 
will be a storyline to follow. But after coming so close to theScudetto in 2008 
under Luciano Spalletti, then in 2010 under Claudio Ranieri, and last year 
under García, this team feel due though not entitled to success. Then there is 
Francesco Totti. Imagine for a moment if Roma's captain, 38 next month, got to 
relive the emotions of 2001 when he won his one and only league title. And just 
imagine if, 100 years on from Percy Walsingham, an Englishman becamecampione 
d'Italia.
 