
Letter from America No 1781, April 1 1983

One day he's the screaming eagle, the next he's a purring dove. These 
quick-change roles can best be illustrated by two speeches the president made 
in the past week or two, which express a puzzling or maybe two puzzling sides 
of his character.

First, let me say that whatever else he is, Mr Reagan is nothing remotely as 
shivery and calculating as he appears in the puppet shows and horrendous 
caricatures paraded by the unilateralists and others who claim a monopoly on 
sincerity and peace-mongering. He is so amiable, so genial and thoughtful, that 
there are Democrats who've resolved not to accept social invitations to the 
White House for fear of being infected and debauched by the president's sunny 
and beguiling manner.

But between one day and the next, between a happy morning meeting in the White 
House and an evening speech somewhere off in the country, Mr Reagan, having 
given everybody the idea that he's going to play it cool on this policy or 
that, then appears in Florida or Texas and starts to exhale fire and brimstone.

The "Star Wars" speech and the "Darth Vader" speech are rather frightening 
examples. The Darth Vader speech - and that's what, for convenient filing, the 
White House calls it - was the one the president gave before that throbbing 
audience of evangelicals in Florida, in which he called the Soviet Union "the 
evil empire run by Godless men". After he'd left Florida, with the applause 
still tingling in his ears, Mr Reagan was astonished to read and hear that the 
speech, and most of all the characterisation of the Soviet Union, was deplored 
of course abroad, but all around the United States as well.

Then whether by accident or design, but I'd guess by the natural trend of his 
character to make impulsive amends, he made what they call his "Star Wars" 
speech. That was the one in which he foresaw, and even proposed, an 
anti-ballistic system that would have laser beams exploding, way up in the sky, 
any missiles the enemy cared to launch. There's no doubt, I think, that the 
president thought of this as a friendly suggestion. He went so far as to say 
that once the thing was perfected, he'd be happy to share it with the Soviets, 
provided,

I imagine, they are prepared to wait so long. The president says it may take 
till the end of the century, or beyond, before we've got this trick in perfect 
shape.

The Russians - Mr General Secretary Yuri Andropov, that is to say - responded 
to both speeches, the nasty one and the nice one, in one breath, which is not 
surprising. Call a man the leader of an evil empire, of a country also 
described as "the focus of evil" in the world, and you shouldn't be surprised 
if he comes back and calls you a liar and a lunatic.

Then, having vented his proper spleen, Mr Andropov got down to the substance 
of the Star Wars proposal. He said it violated the 1972 Soviet-American 
anti-ballistic missile treaty. Not so, Mr Reagan said. The United States was 
not testing or manufacturing such things yet. You may wonder, as I did, whether 
this treaty is distinct and separate from the first Salt (strategic arms 
limitation) treaty of the same year. No matter.

I finally dug out the text, and this is what that Salt treaty says: "Each 
party undertakes not to develop, test, or deploy anti-ballistic missile systems 
or components, which are sea-based, air-based, space-based, or mobile 
land-based." Well, Mr Reagan is offering to develop, at least, an 
anti-ballistic missile system, assuming a laser is a missile that is 
space-based. Clearly, wouldn't you say Mr Andropov is correct? A conclusion we 
shouldn't be hesitant about, even if Mr Andropov is Darth Vader.

Playing chess

Letter No 1991, April 17 1987

I was sitting down to lunch in New York with a man of venerable years and a 
great range of interests ... He is also, you might say, a professional talker.

I asked my companion how he felt about the general line or drift of the arms 
control talks so far; that means after the summit in Reykjavik between Ronald 
Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev. The old man looked at the slice of lime bobbing 
like a lifeboat amid the icebergs of his tomato juice, and he shot me a sly 
smile. "Did I ever tell you," he asked, "about my first encounter with the 
Canadian chess player?"

The required answer is, "Of course not, please do tell." I gave it.

"Well," he said, "I'd just arrived as a young American student at the London 
School of Economics. I soon discovered that there was a permanent group of 
maniacal chess players. One day, a young-middle-aged pleasant man came up to 
me. He asked me if I'd like to play a game. I beat him easily. Next day, we 
played again. This time, I beat him in a dozen moves.

I went off to drinks with some other students, and they greeted me as if I'd 
been Alekhine or Capablanca. 'Is it true,' they asked, 'that you twice 
slaughtered the Canadian?' They were aghast and agog. He was the Canadian chess 
champion.

"When I ran into him again, he offered me a game. From then on, we played 
certainly once a week for the next three years. Every time I was massacred."

The old man neatly rescued the lime, squeezed it, and looked at me sideways, 
expecting me to say, "How come?" I said, "How come?"

"Well, the first two times, the Canadian assumed he was playing with, if not a 
champion, with somebody within hailing distance of his standard. He noticed a 
rather startling move or two of mine and decided I was a bold but calculating 
player. Because he was attributing to me this sophistication, his expertise was 
fatal. Evidently, he talked later with some of the boys and discovered he'd 
been beaten by a tyro. After that, the three-year blitz."

I said, "You know, I wrote a piece years ago ... if I had a thesis, it was 
that Russians are the best chess players in the world, and we always interpret 
their motives as if they were playing draughts." "That's it," the old man said.

"At Reykjavik, Ronald Reagan was me, and Mikhail Gorbachev was the champion of 
all the Russias. He must have been totally thrown when Reagan blurted out, 'Why 
not abolish all nuclear weapons?' What was this cunning move? Reagan, of 
course, had never dreamed of offering to abolish all nuclear weapons. He got 
carried away."

Since then, Mr Gorbachev has seen that Mr Reagan was carried away not by 
cunning but by ideology. Mr Gorbachev has accordingly been able to go back to 
his own game.
 