
Letter from America No 2627, June 18 1999 

When you see on television some protest rally, I mean a spontaneous protest - 
people suddenly taking to the streets, brandishing fists, howling insults, 
waving posters - do you ever wonder who planned the spontaneousness of it all.

This struck me with new force this week when we saw everywhere - on 
television, the front pages of every newspaper, the cover stories on magazines 
- the face of a sweet old lady with golden spectacles, her white hair swept up 
and topped off with a ropey knot, sitting alongside the President of the United 
States and speaker of the House. She is the heroine of a ceremony in the 
Capitol Rotunda, where, before an audience of about a thousand and the Congress 
(including a senator in his 90s who, 44 years ago, was the old lady's bitterest 
enemy), Miss Rosa Parks was awarded a rare honour, the Congressional Gold 
Medal, as a "living icon for freedom in America".

Let us, to use the Victorian novelists' fancy phrase, turn back the pages of 
history to see how and when and why this old black lady, now 86, earned this 
singular honour.

By the grace of my beloved, long-gone editor there is on my shelves a little 
pamphlet, brown-edged with age, a collection of reprinted daily dispatches of 
mine from the south, written from various towns in the spring of 1956 - two 
years after the supreme court abolished the segregation of the races and one 
year after a bus boycott in the capital city, Montgomery, state of Alabama. If 
you don't already know the facts of that famous boycott, they are simply told.

On a December day in 1955, four blacks went aboard a city bus and sat where 
they'd never sat before, in the forward section reserved always for whites. The 
bus driver, following the city law, asked them to move to the back. The three 
men complied. The fourth, a woman, refused.

A firm, upright little woman of 42, she was asked again, and once more said 
no. If the bus driver had decided to make nothing of it, he could have been 
prosecuted for flouting the city law, and the company could lose its licence. 
This was well understood on both sides.

The bus driver called two policemen, and still refusing to budge, she was 
arrested and taken off, charged and released. I put this down just as flatly as 
that in my piece. I didn't even print her name. It was, of course, Rosa Parks. 
And the legend has grown and shone and blazed, of one coloured woman who took 
it upon herself on a whim to stand out at last against the separation of blacks 
and whites on a southern bus.

In that original piece, and right after that humdrum recital of the facts, I 
find this sentence: "That same afternoon, thousands of printed handbills 
mysteriously dropped on the doorsteps of the coloured homes in the neighborhood 
urging a boycott of the bus line, to begin two days later." And so it did, and 
went on for over a year, till the blacks got more reforms than they had 
protested and sued for.

In shorter words, Miss Rosa Parks's decision to stay in a forward seat was the 
first move in a planned boycott of the bus company and the city law, a campaign 
organised long before by the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP) and run by a young, bland, handsome black parson, name 
of Martin Luther King Jr, who while I was in Montgomery, flew in from Atlanta 
twice a week to buy little vans for use by the boycotters.

We could leave it there, having made the seemingly mean point that Miss Rosa 
Parks just happened to be chosen as the cat's-paw or dupe of a boycott campaign 
well planned beforehand. Well, it's not so. She did the choosing. She was not 
just another bus rider. She was the secretary of a city chapter of the NAACP 12 
years before she stood, or sat, her ground in 1955. The first time she was 
thrown off a bus was for using the white entrance - at the front. That takes us 
back to 1943, the middle of the second world war, in which her brother had 
served both in Europe and in the Pacific. He came home unhurt, but she watched 
in disgust, helpless disgust, to see her brother, in uniform, picked out by 
rednecks, or white trash, for especially bigoted treatment. From that time on, 
she was a prominent civil rights activist (this is all, remember, 10 or more 
years before the supreme court's ruling abolishing segregation). May 1954 is 
always given, and rightly, as the Bastille Day - the day that started the 
revolution for equal black rights.

Well, only a couple of months before Rosa Parks chose to be the cat's-paw on 
that bus, she heard the sickening news (it sickened this country) of a black 
teenage boy from Chicago who had been murdered just for being found, a 
northerner, walking through a town in Mississippi. The white men who killed him 
on a lark were acquitted by an all-white jury. Rosa Parks, the 86-year-old 
lady, so belatedly honoured, now recalls: "It was not that I was just fed up in 
December 1955. I'd been fed up my whole life, as far back as I can remember, 
with being treated as less than a free person." So, she stayed put on that bus, 
knowing there'd be unpleasant treatment, and nasty telephone calls. She didn't 
know she and her husband would receive death threats for another 12 years, 
which forced them, eventually, to move to the middle west, to Detroit. It 
wasn't the end of her activism. She joined the 1963 March on Washington, was on 
the frightening but now famous march from Selma, Alabama, to Montgomery, the 
city of her notoriety and her persecution and, now, her glory.

So, after all, Rosa Parks was no accidental heroine. For her, December 1955 
was not the start of anything. It was the end of her rope, the last straw of 
her tolerance of harassment and shaming and white beastliness. That gold medal 
and that resolution of Congress passed in April were little enough compensation 
for a lifetime's crime - of being black.
 