
The "disappearance" of the poet Rosemary Tonks in the 1970s was one of the 
literary world's most tantalising mysteries. Bizarre theories abounded as to 
her whereabouts – if she was still alive. As the poet Brian Patten put it in a 
BBC radio feature about her in 2009, she "evaporated into air like the Cheshire 
cat". One contributor imagined her living in Cuba, "smoking cigars 
in a doorway". Other commentators over the years have made her into a nun; 
consigned her to a sect; had her communing with the ghost ofCharles Baudelaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/07/my-hero-charles-baudelaire-roberto-calasso>
; or put her in a shed at the bottom of someone's garden. For some reason, 
these mythmakers always required her to be living in poverty.

Having tried to visit her myself, 10 years ago, I knew all these theories to 
be far from the truth. But out of respect for her declared wish, maintained by 
her family, that she should be left in peace, I kept her address and situation 
secret. Tonks died last month at the age of 85 (all the existing records had 
her as four years younger). She had indeed been living as a near-recluse – but 
out of choice, quite comfortable in her circumstances. Even so, she remained 
restless in spirit, defiantly independent and quite alone in her continuing 
search for God, for she was ever alert to the "brainwashing", manipulative 
tendencies in the religious groups she encountered.

Known only as Mrs Lightband, the married name she had kept, she moved into Old 
Forest Lodge, an unremarkable three-storey house tucked away behind Bournemouth 
seafront, in 1981. There was no nameplate or number on the front door or garden 
gate; the curtains were kept closed, and neither knocks on the door nor letters 
were answered. Here she established her new identity, which meant turning her 
back on anyone connected with her old life, whether literary friends or family. 
I let her know about the radio programme – both the first broadcast and the 
repeat – by postcard, in case she threw letters away without opening them. I've 
since learned that she had two radios and two televisions, so she wasn't 
totally out of touch with the outside world; it was just that she chose only to 
engage with it on her own terms.

Rosemary Tonks was a writer from childhood. "Miss Bushman-Caldicott", a story 
she wrote while at school, was broadcast on BBC radio in 1946. Her first 
published book,On Wooden Wings: The Adventures of Webster, which she also 
illustrated, followed in 1948. In 1949, aged 20, she married Michael (Micky) 
Lightband, an engineer (later a financier) six years her senior. Her occupation 
on the marriage certificate is given as "writer".

Between 1963 and 1974, she published two epoch-defining poetry collections and 
six acerbic, satirical novels; wrote trenchant reviews for leading journals and 
newspapers; and collaborated with the BBC Radiophonic Workshop on an 
experimental sound-poem, "Sono-Montage".

Menard Press's Anthony Rudolf praised the "visionary quality" of the poems she 
published inNotes on Cafes and Bedrooms (1963) and Iliad of Broken Sentences 
(1967): "They seem to me to have bypassed the Movement poetry of the 1950s and 
to have emerged from the 1940s poetic matrix of Nicholas Moore, George Barker 
and JF Hendry, poets she would have read in her early 20s. It is a hyper-urban 
angst-ridden poetry, with ancestry stretching back to Baudelaire's Spleen de 
Paris and the Francophile English symbolists."

Interviewed by John Horder for the Times in 1967, she spoke of Baudelaire and 
Rimbaud as her direct literary forebears: "They were both poets of the modern 
metropolis as we know it and no one has bothered to learn what there is to be 
learned from them … The main duty of the poet is to excite – to send the senses 
reeling."

Among other admirers of her work were Cyril Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
("Miss Tonks's hard-faceted yet musical poems have unexpected power") and Al 
Alvarez ("real talent of an edgy, bristling kind"). Decades later, her mostly 
unavailable work is admired by poets includingAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion>, Jo Shapcott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jo-shapcott>, Matthew Sweeney, Matthew 
Caley and John Stammers, who borrowed the title of his collection,Stolen Love 
Behaviour, from one of her poems.

Living in Hampstead and mixing with socialite writers such as Dame Edith 
Sitwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edith-sitwell>, a near-neighbour, 
Tonks became the toast of London's literary parties, one of very few published 
female poets of that time. She was not noted for supporting the sisterhood, 
however, and was taken to task byJane Gapen in the New York Review of Books 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1973/nov/29/women-and-poetry/> for 
an unsympathetic review of Adrienne Rich'sDiving into the Wreck, which "should 
be reviewed from a feminist outlook … It really hurts that a woman would say 
this about another poet".

Yet the literary world both attracted and repelled her, and she was to turn 
against its materialism, false values, betrayals and indulgence, as she was to 
follow Rimbaud in renouncing literature itself: "The mistakes, the wrong 
people, the half-baked ideas, / And their beastly comments on everything. Foul. 
/ But irresistibly amusing, that is the whole trouble" ("The Little Cardboard 
Suitcase").

Her mother's death in 1968 was the first in a series of misfortunes and crises 
that sent her life spinning out of control: a divorce she didn't want; a 
burglary in which she lost all her clothes; a lawsuit costing thousands of 
pounds; and ill-health, including incapacitating neuritis in her left arm and 
one good hand (her right was withered from polio). She turned her back on 
Christianity, believing the church had failed her mother, and instead looked 
for help from mediums, healers, spiritualists and Sufi "seekers". The inspiring 
presence in her house of a collection of ancient artefacts, including oriental 
god figures, led to her approaching a Chinese spiritual teacher and an American 
yoga guru. All these she repudiated in turn.

After her marriage collapsed, she found herself living alone, just a few doors 
away from her ex-husband (soon to be joined by a new wife), doing Taoist 
meditation, writing reviews and working on a new novel. She later attributed 
her next life disaster to difficult Taoist eye exercises, which involved 
staring for hours at a blank wall, turning the eyes in and looking intensely at 
bright objects. In 1977, on New Year's Eve, she was admitted to Middlesex 
hospital for emergency operations on detached retinas in both eyes. This was 
her reward for "10 long years searching for God". Returning home after a 
month's recuperation at a health hydro in Tring, she found herself totally 
helpless. Hardly able to see beyond a few feet, she rarely left the house, 
couldn't cook and became emaciated, all the time suffering from agonising pain 
in her eyes and permanent headaches.

An invitation to visit her aunt Dorothy in Bournemouth in 1979 gave her a way 
out. Resting in her flat for several months, her eyesight began to improve, 
until she could even read a page of a book. That book was the New Testament, 
which came to symbolise a new life in which she finally discovered spiritual 
truth in the Bible itself.

She decided to settle in Bournemouth, and in 1980 tried for several months to 
sell her London home. But each time a buyer turned up, the sky would darken and 
there would be a foul smell in the house, or so she told her cousins. This 
happened so often that she ruled out coincidence. She cleaned every room 
obsessively and threw out all her books on spiritualism and the occult, to no 
avail. Finally, believing that the religious artefacts that filled the house 
must be exerting some malign power, she packed them all into five suitcases and 
deposited them in the vault of Barclays Bank in Hampstead. The very next day a 
young couple came to see the house in bright sunshine, loved it and bought it.

Arriving back in Bournemouth, she resolved to free herself of all remaining 
kinds of "bondage". She had broken with her last healer, who had failed to cure 
her eyesight problems, having realised she had become psychologically dependent 
upon him. Next to go were sleeping tablets, which she had been on for most of 
her life; she shaved a little more off each tablet with a razor each day and 
managed to wean herself off them completely after a year.

Still aware of some supernatural occurrences, she embarked on an act that 
saddened her family when they learned of it after her death: she decided to 
destroy her priceless collection of oriental treasures. A bequest from an aunt 
by marriage, they were "graven images" that had to be burned by fire, according 
to the second commandment. Retrieving the five suitcases from London, she 
filled two garden incinerators with more than 40 artefacts, itemised in a 
handwritten list titled "The burning of some idols (11 August 1981)", and set 
fire to them. These included Chinese silk robes, carved Chinese letter seals 
and other artefacts of marble, terracotta, porcelain, plaster, mother of pearl, 
ivory, wood and stone, from China, Korea, Japan, Africa, Greece, Bali and 
Persia. She smashed and hammered at the Tang and Sung figures until she got the 
remnants down to "dog-biscuit size".

She still had the manuscript of an unpublished novel, about a man's search for 
God, written during the six years leading up to her eye operation; but a medium 
had recounted the entire plot to her, complete with detailed descriptions of 
all the characters, which meant the book must be dangerous and could lead 
others astray. Into the incinerator it went. Then she suppressed all her 
published work, made sure no one knew her new address, and obliterated the 
person she had been. That October, she travelled to Jerusalem and was baptised 
near the River Jordan, experiencing what she called her "second birth", the day 
before her 53rd birthday.

The treasures passed on to Tonks from her aunt are lost for ever. The one 
great gift she has left us – her poems – survive only in the libraries of 
collectors, and could be brought back to life for a new generation of writers 
and readers were her family to authorise their republication. As I understand 
it, there is no ban on republication in her will, which must have been written 
many years after she ceased to be Rosemary Tonks, so that her books didn't even 
exist for her by then. The woman who destroyed that priceless collection given 
to her on trust seems to me a very different person from the author of those 
marvellously edgy and timeless poems.

She mellowed in her more peaceful later years, and is said to have been much 
loved by staff at the Days hotel just around the corner from her house, where 
she went to have Christmas dinner every year on her own. She even made one 
friend there, who remembers her as kind, happy and always laughing. Finally, in 
November 2012, she wrote to a dearly loved cousin she had cut off years before 
to apologise: "I was boxed up, under the most frightful, frightful mental 
pressure. I was not myself. All my decisions were wrong, inhuman, appalling. 
Give me time, please, I long to explain it to you." But that was the last 
letter.

She continued to live in the Bournemouth house until last summer, when she 
downsized to a flat overlooking the sea after selling, giving away or 
destroying most of her possessions. A fortnight before her death on 15 April, 
she was taken to a local nursing home, suffering from the late stages 
of ovarian cancer. She was buried on Thursday 1 May, near her mother in the 
graveyard of the church of St Thomas a Becket, Warblington, Hampshire, without 
a funeral or any ceremony, in line with her wishes: the body was only a vessel 
for the spirit. If her instructions are followed, the name on her headstone 
will be "Rosemary Desmond Boswell Lightband".
 