
What kind of test do Ecuador pose England?

Reinaldo Rueda’s team finished above Uruguay on goal difference in qualifying 
for Brazil, their third World Cup out of the past four, but are regarded as the 
weakest of the six South American sides competing. That said, they have enough 
experience and talent on the counterattack to trouble England in Miami. 
Ecuador’s qualification campaign centred on a formidable record at their home 
stadium in Quito, winning seven and drawing one (against Argentina) of eight 
matches at the Atahualpa, but they failed to win on their travels. Not for the 
first time the contrast raised the theory that Ecuador’s place in Brazil owes 
everything to Quito’s location 2,800m above sea level. “Ecuador qualified 
because we have good players working well, not because of altitude,” Rueda 
said. Their best at a World Cup is their last-16 place in 2006, whenDavid 
Beckham’s free-kick gave England a 1-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/jun/26/worldcup2006.match2>, and a 
friendly against Roy Hodgson’s team is viewed as ideal preparation for a Group 
E campaign against two European sides, France and Switzerland, plus Honduras.

How will they line up?

Rueda usually adopts a 4-4-2 or 4-5-1 formation that is heavily reliant on the 
speed and trickery of its wingers, the captain, Antonio Valencia, on the right 
and Jefferson Montero on the left, to punish teams on the counterattack. 
Midfield is Ecuador’s strong point, with Cristian Noboa of Dynamo Moscow the 
main supply to the flanks and Segundo Castillo providing cover for a slow and 
often criticised defence. Everton supporters may be surprised to know that is 
the same Segundo Castillo who made nine appearances for their club during a 
season-long loan in 2008-09. The 32-year-old is unlikely to face England and 
almost missed the final cut for the World Cup after suffering a knee injury in 
a collision that left the Mexico midfielder Luis Montes with a broken leg 
during Saturday’s 3-1 defeat in Arlington, Virginia. Ecuador are still coming 
to terms with thedeath last July of the former Birmingham City striker 
Christian Benítez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/01/christian-benitez-died-heart-failure>
, the country’s third-highest goalscorer, who died of a cardiac arrest in Qatar 
aged 27. The burden of replacing Benítez and carrying the national team’s 
attack has fallen toFelipe Caicedo, once of Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/03/world-cup-2014-ecuador-felipe-caicedo>
.

Who are the key players?

As captain, a key component of Rueda’s system and a national figurehead on 
account of playing for Manchester United,Antonio Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> is the obvious choice 
but Montero will also shoulder heavy responsibility at the World Cup. The 
left-winger has not flourished as expected in Europe, where he joined 
Villarreal in 2009 but struggled to secure a regular spot and was loaned to 
Levante and Real Betis, but he was a major influence on qualification for 
Brazil. Montero can be inconsistent, he has been indulged, yet he can be highly 
effective. He has also been linked with a post-World Cup move from the Mexican 
club Monarcas Morelia to Swansea City. Enner Valencia emerged as a potent 
striker late in the qualifying campaign although his opportunities may be 
limited by Caicedo.
 