
History weighs heavy on the shoulders of Angelo, the last prince of Belmonte, 
as he paces the vaulted corridors of his grand palazzo by the sea. Staring down 
at him are portraits of his ancestors - cardinals, ambassadors and ministers, 
even a Pope. When he finally slips away, a remnant of Italy's long-forgotten 
monarchy will be lost for ever.

Like Prince Salinas in Lampadusa's The Leopard, a noble melancholy hangs about 
him as he ponders his family's demise amid the mementoes that decorate his 
silent, private apartments. Angelo - 13th Prince of Belmonte, 6th Prince of 
Muro Leccese, 13th Duke of Acerenza and Grandee of Spain 1st Class, 6th Duke of 
Corrigliano d'Otranto, 10th Marquess of Argensola, 15th Marquess of Galatone, 
9th Marquess of San Vicente, 7th Marquess of Castellabate, 12th Count of 
Copertino, 14th Baron of Badolato, 14th Baron of Belmonte, Baron of Rocca 
Cilento and Tresino, Seigneur of Veglie and Leverano - confesses that this 
romantic reflection sometimes gets the better of him and he will fall to 
singing old Neopolitan love songs as the waves lap the shore under a shimmering 
Mediterranean moon.

Fictional Prince Salinas broods magnificently amid the sweltering heat of 
Sicily; Angelo does the same a little further north, on the shores of the 
Cilento peninsula, in the 'Magna Grecia', at the southern tip of the Bay of 
Salerno. But that brooding doesn't last long. Angelo is a generous host and a 
dazzling smile is never far from his lips; indeed, he loves nothing better than 
to sit around a table with friends and laugh at life, which is fitting in a 
place built for pleasure.

This imposing place (Angelo still doesn't know every room) was raised 400 
years ago as a huge hunting lodge. Successive kings of Spain and Italy came 
here to pursue the hapless fauna and relax, away from the scheming courts of 
Madrid and Naples. Today, it offers hospitality to less exalted visitors; 
people from all over the world who enjoy its glorious setting, its discreet 
apartments and the realisation that they are holidaying in the home of a real 
prince who they will probably meet, strolling amid the hibiscus, jasmine and 
oleander of the gardens or out in the pretty harbour town of Santa Maria di 
Castellabate, which snuggles up against the walls of the palazzo. To walk about 
it with Angelo is to hear faint echoes of the old days of deference. 
'Principe', the locals murmur as he strolls past, smiling, shaking hands and 
calling everyone by name. 'I know everybody hereabouts,' he told me. ' My 
family has been here so long ...'

Of Spanish origin, they first arrived in a 10th-century invasion. By 1300, 
they had occupied the impressive fortress that hangs on a hill above the 
palazzo at Castellabate, an ownership that continued until the 1930s, when 
Angelo's great-grandfather thought the castle brought bad luck and sold it. He 
was right: its new owners all died violent deaths.

Today, the gracious palazzo and the nearby wild coastline of the Punta Licosa 
are all that remain of the Belmonte estates which once covered swathes of 
southern Italy and Spain and were famous for their olives and wine which made 
the family rich and powerful. With this wealth they built a huge, frescoed 
palace in Naples and consolidated their influence in the region: Belmonte wine 
filled the cellars of Madrid when Carlo III of Naples became King of Spain.

Now you can sense something of this high life in this gracious setting. 
Apartments, all named after scented herbs and flowers in the five-acre garden, 
have been carved out of the main building (Angelo keeps to himself on the north 
side of the palazzo's courtyard) and others - built discreetly among the 
cypresses and palms of the gardens - bring the room count to 50. Some, 
converted from storehouses, still have large iron rings in their high, vaulted 
ceilings where bails of corn, figs and carob were hung to dry in the breeze off 
the sea.

Builders have been in this winter, updating some of the rooms in the main 
palazzo, creating a bar and restaurant in the main courtyard and improving the 
poolside bar so that it now looks out over the sea.

Life is a languid affair here. Breakfast is taken at a civilised hour at the 
edge of the pool and the rest of the day is given up to the garden or the 
private sandy beach, which is reached through a tiny door in the walls. Both 
lunch and dinner can be enjoyed out in the open under umbrellas on the lovely 
belvedere with spectacular views out to sea. At night, Capri twinkles 
romantically in the distance. Seafood is, naturally, a speciality. Be sure to 
sample the limoncello, made at the palazzo with lemons from the garden.

Naturally, this is a favourite place for weddings and for location shooting. A 
particularly large smile spreads across Angelo's face when he recalls the 2003 
Pirelli calendar being created on his beach, in his gardens and at his 
favourite hideaway, Punta Licosa. His fictional counterpart would have summoned 
a coach and four, but Angelo climbs into his BMW and drives the few miles there 
when he feels the need to walk and think. It's a coastline of rocky coves and 
pine-fringed paths; a wild, untamed place that anyone can visit, either by road 
or by boat.

You might take your car and head for Paestum, the spectacular ruin that lies 
45 minutes north of Santa Maria di Castellabate. Three massive temples, built 
by the Greeks, tower over the ironing-board flatness of the surrounding marshes 
that lead to the sea - marshes that once harboured the malaria that drove away 
the city's population and left it a romantic, ghostly ruin.

In conversation up in his private apartments, Angelo is proud that his family 
played a significant part in the preservation of Italy's more famous ruin at 
Pompeii. A great-great-great uncle, when minister of culture, established the 
National Museum at Naples, which exhibits the bountiful treasures of the 
devasted Roman city. Other keepsakes preserve the memory of Antonio Pignatelli 
who, as ambassador, signed the peace treaty between Napoleon and the King of 
the Two Sicilies; of Pope Innocenzo XII (1691-1700) and of Cardinale Decano 
Gennaro Pignatelli di Belmonte, who was chief cardinal from 1908 to 1948.

And, here, to complete the parallel with The Leopard, can be found the 
palazzo's private chapel. Angelo recalls his grandfather's strict instructions 
that all the family and the estate workers should gather here for devotions 
with the family priest; prayers murmured through slanting rays of sunlight in 
the still afternoon heat of an Italy long past.

Essentials

Stephen Pritchard travelled to Palazzo Belmonte with CV Travel 
<http://www.cvtravel.co.uk> (020 7384 5855). A three-night stay in May, with 
breakfast, car hire and return flights to Naples from London, costs from £510 
per person for Mandorlo Piccola, a suite for two, with air conditioning and 
balcony. A seven-night stay in July/August with breakfast, and flights to 
Naples from London, costs from £890 per person for Mimosa, an apartment for 
four. Reduced rates are available for extra adults and children.
 