
Russia's supreme court this morning ordered a new investigation into the 
murder of the campaigning journalistAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, in a move her lawyer 
said gave Russia's heavily criticised authorities a fresh opportunity to catch 
her killer.

The court sent the case back to Russia's prosecutor general for further 
investigation, upholding a complaint from Politkovskaya's family. The move 
follows a bungled trial earlier this year, which saw four people accused of 
involvement in her death acquitted by a jury.

Today Politkovskaya's lawyer, Karinna Moskalenko, cautiously welcomed the 
supreme court's decision. It comes almost three years after Politkovskaya – a 
journalist, writer and a polemical critic ofVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, and his proxies in 
Chechnya, was shot dead in the hallway of her Moscow apartment block.

"Whether the general prosecutor will use this opportunity, we don't know. We 
can only hope,'" Moskalenko told the Echo of Moscow radio station this morning. 
She added: "So far, this hasn't happened. Three years have passed since this 
tragic event, and the truth still hasn't been uncovered."

Politkovskaya's paper, Novaya Gazeta, also welcomed the judgment. "It is a 
very important step on the way towards investigating this crime," it said. "We 
are pleased there are still some people inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> who recognise the law. We hope this 
will lead to a detailed examination of the case," it added.

Russia's authorities claim they have been unable to identify who ordered her 
killing. They have also failed to catch her assassin – who slipped into 
Politkovskaya's building and then shot her four times as she emerged from the 
lift. Investigators have named the hit-man as Chechen Rustam Makhmudov. They 
say he has fled abroad.

In June, Russia's high court ordered a retrial in the case of Makhmudov's two 
brothers, Dzhabrail and Ibragim, who were charged with involvement in 
Politkovskaya's death together with a former Moscow policeman, Sergei 
Khadzhikurbanov, and Lt Col Pavel Ryaguzov, an officer in Russia's FSB spy 
agency.

A jury acquitted all four in February. Defence lawyers described their 
three-month trial as an embarrassing fiasco, and said the investigation into 
Politkovskaya's killing was shoddy and inadequate. The defendants are currently 
being re-tried at the same military court in Moscow – this time without a jury.

Politkovskaya's children, Ilya and Vera, have repeatedly pressed for a full 
and proper investigation into their mother's murder. They acknowledge that 
there was insufficient evidence to convict the four defendants, accused of 
providing logistical support to her killer, but have said publicly they believe 
the four were "involved" in her death.

During the investigation, much relevant material simply vanished, including a 
photo of Makhmudov, who apparently fled to westernEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> using a false passport. Video 
footage showing the assassin entering Politkovskaya's block also disappeared. 
Critics say shadowy officials, possibly with connections to Russia's 
intelligence agencies, have deliberately frustrated the inquiry.

During her fearless reporting career Politkovskaya, 48, reserved her most 
vicious criticisms for Ramzan Kadyrov – Chechnya's Kremlin-appointed president. 
Kadyrov has denied involvement. Over the last three years, however, several 
other of Kadyrov's enemies have met brutal deaths – most recently the human 
rights activist Natalia Estemirova, who in July was abducted from her home in 
Grozny, Chechnya's capital, and shot.

Politkovskaya, a close friend of Estemirova's, was relentlessly critical of 
Putin, whose rise to power followed the Russian army's second bloody entry into 
Grozny in late 1999. Putin dismissed Politkovskaya three days after her murder 
as "insignificant", adding that she was "well known only in the west". Later, 
however, he described her as a "rather sharp critic" of Russia's government, 
"which is good".
 