
After playing hard to get 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/nov/29/china-pulls-out-aid-partnership-busan?INTCMP=SRCH>
, China is back at the negotiating table, partly due to some brokering from 
Andrew Mitchell, the UK international development secretary, who arrived in 
Busan, South Korea, for the fourth high-level forum on aid effectivenesshere on 
Tuesday.

The peripatetic minister has managed to persuade China, an aid donor with a 
penchant for African infrastructure projects, to re-enter talks on a draft 
outcome document that seeks to reverse the fragmentation of the international 
aid.

As important as it was to bring India and China on board, said John 
Rwangombwa, the Rwandan finance minister, it was also essential to implement 
past and present agreements. "The proof of the pudding is how we implement the 
agreement," he said. "We've had good documents in the past in Paris and Accra, 
but we have yet to implement them."

Those two agreements set out principles such as ownership of aid programmes by 
recipient countries, transparency and mutual accountability. In negotiations on 
a final draft outcome document,Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>
 has pushed hard for funnelling aid through national systems so that recipient 
countries control the money themselves, building up government institutions in 
the process – capacity building in aid jargon.

Rwanda has also wanted firm commitments of ending tied aid – which has been 
shown to reduce the value of aid by 30% – as a way of building up domestic 
industry.

"While donors may not be entirely to blame for bypassing these systems where 
they are weak, or non-functional, why not use aid to build up and strengthen 
such critical systems?" asked Paul Kagame, the Rwandan president, in his speech 
at Wednesday's glitzy opening ceremony, with more than a touch of the Oscars 
about them.

Rwangombwa said only 45% of aid went through its budget system, and that he 
would like the figure to be 100%. However, Rwanda has areputation for 
authoritarian government 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2010/08/02/rwanda-attacks-freedom-expression-freedom-association-and-freedom-assembly-run-presi>
 and with some donors, particularly the EU, putting democracy and human rights 
at the heart of its aid programme, this might present a problem.

Rwangombwa said there was lots of subjectivity in assessing good governance, 
but that in any case Rwanda planned on developing the country on all fronts and 
was not forgetting about democratic values.

Tony Blair, who is advising the Rwandan government, has praised the country's 
economic progress. He believesits "direction of travel" politically 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/29/tony-blair-busan-optimism-africa?INTCMP=SRCH>
 is the right one.

Rwanda also received praise from Yukiko Omura, vice-president of the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (Ifad). She said Rwanda had 
achieved self-sufficiency in food production despite its mountainous and swampy 
terrain.

"Instead of thinking of the swamps as useless, Ifad helped turn the swamps 
into rice paddies through simple irrigation techniques so that water can be 
controlled," said Omura. "The government was completely committed to 
transforming agriculture. Government and local communities worked together – it 
was quite impressive." Omura said Rwanda's agricultural transformation showed 
the importance of ownership of aid programmes by government's receiving 
assistance, a point that was made forcefully by Kagame.

In his speech, the Rwandan leader criticised donors for failing to live up to 
the bargain of mutual accountability, one of the principles of the Paris forum 
on aid effectiveness.

"The principle of mutual accountability has not been applied equally or 
fairly," he said. "While there are more demands on developing countries to 
account, there has been reluctance from some donors to do the same. And often 
this is accompanied by the introduction of issues unrelated to aid performance 
either as an excuse not to act or to delay commitments."

Kagame also bemoaned the fragmentation of what he called a "huge industry", 
which Busan is supposed to rein in. "Developing countries spend more time and 
energy agreeing on procedures and accounting to donors and an ever-increasing 
number of related non-state actors than in actual development work, often 
responding to endless questioning that no answers can fully satisfy."
 