
Milwaukee star Ryan Braun drew a standing ovation in his return from a drug 
suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/23/ryan-braun-brewers-suspended-ped-drugs>
, then was ruled out in the first call overturned under baseball's expanded 
replay system as the Brewers beat the Atlanta Braves 2-0.

Braun went 1 for 4 and stole a base in the fourth inning that helped set up a 
two-run double by Aramis Ramirez. In the sixth inning Braun was ruled safe at 
first base but the call was reversed after umpires reviewed instant replay.


Jimmy Rollins hit a grand slam and pinch-hitter John Mayberry Jr. had a 
two-run double in the Philadelphia Phillies' wild 14-10 victory over theTexas 
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/texas-rangers> in the only 
interleague game of the Major League Baseball opening day.

Marlon Byrd and Cody Asche also homered for the Phillies, who scored their 
most runs in an opener since beating the Boston Beaneaters 19-17 in 1900. Cliff 
Lee (1-0) matched his career high by allowing eight runs and struck out only 
one, but the left-hander made it through five innings.

Tanner Scheppers, the first pitcher since Fernando Valenzuela for the 1981 Los 
Angeles Dodgers to make his first big league start on opening day, gave up 
seven runs over four innings, including the slam by Rollins that made it 6-0 in 
the second. Mayberry had his tiebreaking hit in the fifth off Pedro Figueroa 
(0-1) for a 9-7 lead.

The World Series champion Boston Red Sox opened with a 2-1 loss as Nelson Cruz 
celebrated his Baltimore Orioles debut by hitting a tiebreaking homer in the 
seventh off Jon Lester (0-1) in the American League. Signed as a free agent in 
February, Cruz hit 27 homers last year with Texas during a season marred by a 
50-game suspension stemming from an investigation of performance-enhancing 
drugs.


After missing two seasons recovering from knee surgery, Boston center fielder 
Grady Sizemore marked his return from a 922-day absence with a second-inning 
single for his first hit since September 2011. The three-time All-Star for 
Cleveland later hit his first home run since July 15, 2011, also at Camden 
Yards.

In the National League, at Cincinnati, Yadier Molina's homer broke a 
seventh-inning tie, leading St. Louis Cardinals to a 1-0 victory over the Reds. 
Adam Wainwright (1-0) used his refined sinker to finally get the best of the 
Reds, who have hit him like no other team. Wainwright allowed three hits in 
seven innings, fanning nine.

In other NL games, the Pittsburgh Pirates blanked the Chicago Cubs 1-0, the 
Florida Marlins trounced the Colorado Rockies 10-1, and the Washington 
Nationals beat the New York Mets 9-7.

In the AL, the Detroit Tigers edged the Kansas City Royals 4-3, the Tamps Bay 
Rays downed the Toronto Blue Jays 9-2, the Chicago White Sox defeated the 
Minnesota Twins 5-3, the Seattle Mariners thumped the Los Angeles Angels 10-3 
and the Cleveland Indians shut the Oakland Athletics out 2-0.
 