
Since the launch of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (UN MDGs) 
ten years ago progress towards reducing maternal mortality has been negligible. 
The divide between the industrialised world and the least developed countries 
is most extreme when it comes to maternal health, with 99% of maternal deaths 
occurring in developing countries. Why has progress been so slow and what is 
needed for MDG5 on improving maternal health to be realised?

In a hospital in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, 25 year old Rukia Pendeza recovers 
from an operation to repair an obstetric fistula caused by prolonged, difficult 
childbirth at the age of 15 that left her unable to control her urine and 
faeces, alienated by her community, and her child stillborn. Talking to BBC 
Correspondent Daniel Dickinson, she recalls, "people used to laugh at me… They 
didn't want me near. I couldn't help in the fields. I just stayed at home for 
those ten years."

Rukia's story is common, with around 1,200 Tanzanian women thought to be 
affected each year, fewer than half receiving the medical treatment they 
desperately need in order to lead normal lives. In spite of significant 
progress towards MDGs on universal access to primary education and reducing 
infant mortality, Tanzania is one of ten countries accounting for almost two 
thirds of maternal deaths in the developing world, with between 7,500 and 
15,000 women and girls dying each year as a result of complications associated 
with pregnancy or unsafe abortion such as haemorrhaging, infection, eclampsia, 
and obstructed labour. The great tragedy, highlighted in the UN Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) 2009 State of the World's Children report, is that 80% of maternal 
deaths could be prevented by ensuring that women have access to essential 
maternity and basic health-care services - a challenge in Tanzania where over 
12 million people live in poverty and 75% of the population live in rural 
communities.

On paper, the Tanzanian Government is committed to improving maternal health; 
the National Poverty Reduction Strategy and Road Map to Accelerate Reduction of 
Maternal, Newborn and Child Deaths align with MDG5 goals. But in reality 
maternal care has been insufficiently prioritised, with improvements 
concentrated in urban areas while rural health clinics struggle to provide 
adequate skilled maternal and emergency obstetric care. Consequently only 43% 
of all births are attended by skilled health professionals compared with 98% in 
the developed world.

Although the Government is working with organisations like Marie Stopes 
International and the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) to strengthen fragmented 
health systems and equip and staff clinics better, progress towards MDG5 is 
being undermined by socio-cultural, ethnic and religious norms that, along with 
financial constraints, prevent women from making positive decisions about their 
own health. In developing countries decisions about marriage, family planning 
and maternal care often lie in the hands of unknowledgeable husbands and 
mothers-in-law, particularly in rural communities where poverty, practices such 
as female genital mutilation and the prevalence of illnesses such as anaemia 
and malaria place women at greater risk of the consequences of not seeking 
skilled care. Dr France Donnay of the UNFPA argues, "the very existence of 
[obstetric fistula] is the result of gross societal and institutional neglect 
of women that is, by any standard, an issue of rights and equity." The 
empowerment of women and girls to make well-informed life and health choices is 
crucial in the face of stark statistics showing that the leading cause of death 
for 15-19 year olds in developing countries is directly linked to complications 
in pregnancy, with an estimated 70,000 girls dying globally every year.

UNICEF Executive-Director Ann Veneman believes education is the key to 
empowerment as girls who complete their education are more likely to marry 
later and have fewer pregnancies - the first step in reducing maternal deaths, 
according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). In Tanzania, where an 
estimated one in four girls have their first child by the age of 18, the 
empowerment of women is unlikely to be achieved while gender disparities in 
secondary education and the systematic exclusion of pregnant girls from school 
persist. And yet gender equity and the inclusion of women are necessary for the 
realisation of many of the MDGs. For UNICEF's Tessa Wardlaw, "saving mothers' 
lives is not only a moral imperative, but a sound investment that benefits 
their children, their families, their communities and their countries. Indeed, 
there is a clear connection between maternal health and other Millennium 
Development Goals, such as eradicating extreme poverty, reducing child 
mortality, and combating HIV and AIDS and other diseases."

But who is ultimately responsible for improving maternal health? Government 
commitment is needed if there is to be sufficient investment in effectively 
planned public health programmes that prioritise access to continuous maternal 
and childcare from pregnancy through into childhood. The 2005 World Health 
Report identifies families and communities as being at the heart of empowering 
mothers and mothers-to-be to take up available health care services. And it is 
through interventions such as the grassroots White Ribbon Alliance, the WHO-led 
Safe Motherhood Initiative and the UN Foundation mHealth4Development that the 
developed world can help shift the focus of development agendas in favour of 
maternal health and support efforts to enhance service capacity and promote 
community-based behaviour change.

For Rukia, family support and targeted national efforts to improve treatment 
of obstetric fistula have given her hope of " …go[ing] to church... help[ing] a 
bit in the fields… go[ing] shopping and [doing] all the things that other 
people normally do". She is an example of how access to appropriate maternal 
health care can improve the chances of rural families who rely on the 
contribution of women to the household economy to lift themselves out of 
poverty. In the words of Dr. Gertrude Mongella, former President of the 
Pan-African Parliament, "care for mothers, newborns and children is at the 
heart of human progress and a country's well-being."

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 