
Ivory Coast secured a place in the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> quarter-finals by 
beating Burkina Faso 2-0.

The result eliminated Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso> with one round of matches 
remaining while the other Group B teams, Angola and Sudan, retain hopes of 
progressing.

Salomon Kalou opened the scoring in the 16th minute and Bakary Koné headed in 
an own goal in the 82nd to hand victory to the pre-tournament favouritesIvory 
Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> despite another 
unconvincing performance from their Premier League-based stars.

"I'm satisfied with the spirit of the group, though it's true that there are a 
lot of things to improve," the Ivory Coast coach, François Zahoui, said.

Earlier Sudan twice rallied from defensive errors to draw 2-2 with Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jan/26/sudan-angola-africa-cup-of-nations>
 at Nuevo Estadio de Malabo.

The final group matches will be played on Monday, when Sudan play Burkina Faso 
and Ivory Coast take on Angola.

"It was an incredible injustice that we lost this match," said the Burkina 
Faso coach, Paulo Duarte. "Burkina Faso played a great match, had a great 
attitude, but they scored two goals. Football is like that."

Didier Zokora returned to the Ivory Coast starting lineup after serving a 
suspension and was the only change from the 1-0 win against Sudan, with Igor 
Lolo dropping to the bench.

Ivory Coast took the lead when Kalou pounced on a low cross that brushed off 
Yaya Touré and hit a left-foot shot past Daouda Diakité in the Burkina Faso 
goal.

Despite a front line of Didier Drogba, Kalou and Gervinho, Ivory Coast looked 
disjointed in attack and Yaya Touré struggled to impose himself on the game 
from an advanced midfield position. Gervinho was in a particularly wasteful 
mood.

"It was a big game between two big teams," Duarte said. "If there was going to 
be a winner in the first half then I think it would have been Burkina Faso. We 
played fantastic football."

The attraction of watching Ivory Coast's England-based players swelled the 
crowd, with empty seats much less noticeable for the west African derby than 
for the earlier match between Sudan and Angola.

After half-time Ivory Coast were again struggling for control against 
neighbours rated more than 50 places below them. Kalou pulled up with an 
apparent muscle strain and was replaced by Max Gradel with 25 minutes to go.

"I hope he will recover soon because he is a very important player for us," 
Zahoui said.

Burkina Faso's Moumouni Dagano headed against the top of the crossbar in the 
72nd minute but Ivory Coast avoided a nervy finish when Koné headed a deep 
free-kick over his own goalkeeper in the final stages.

"It's very important to get through the next round," Zahoui said. "Our 
objective is to finish in first place in the group."
 