
From the author of Between Shades of Grey comes another gripping, 
heart-breaking novel, inspired by the worst disaster in maritime history. Told 
from four intertwining perspectives, this is a book that is sure to delight all 
historical fiction fans and people who enjoyed Sepetys’s first novel.

Joana, Florian, Emilia and Alfred are four young people from four different 
European nations ravaged by the second world war. The book follows each 
character’s journey toward the Wilhelm Gustloff, an overcrowded ship that seems 
to be their only hope of escaping the Red Army. As each character fights for 
their survival and their stories converge, we discover how their lives have 
been shaped by tragedy and betrayal and how they are all still haunted by their 
pasts.

Sepetys is clearly an ambitious writer; this is a relatively short novel yet 
told from four different perspectives. Although these four narrative voices 
have the potential to become indistinguishable or possibly confusing, Sepetys 
is successful in delineating each character and this is an original and 
compelling way of telling the story. Readers are able to gain an insight into 
four different stories, four different ways of seeing the world and it’s 
absolutely fascinating. A Lithuanian nurse, a German soldier, a pregnant Polish 
girl, and a Prussian thief: all of these are fictional characters and yet they 
bring the historical setting alive. The secondary characters are also well 
drawn; we may not gain much insight into their pasts but they are certainly 
vivid and believable. The only drawback of this unique way of telling the story 
is that there is less backstory to each character than there would have been 
with one or two perspectives. Although readers will come to know all the 
characters, the amount of words allocated to each character isn’t that much 
more than in a short story and many important plot points are only briefly 
narrated. This meant that the story didn’t drag, but it bothered me in the 
final chapters where a little more information about what happened to the 
characters would have given the conclusion more of an epilogue feel.

One only has to read the author’s note at the end to realise that Sepetys has 
written about an often-overlooked historical disaster so that the memory of 
those who lost their lives in this tragedy are never forgotten. “When the 
survivors are gone, we must not let the truth disappear with them” she writes, 
“Please, give them a voice.” The hard-hitting conclusion is testament to this, 
when the characters are forced to forget their own personal struggles in a 
horrific struggle for survival. While the four main characters are all 
fictional, the events in this novel are all real and, needless to say, the 
historical accuracy is exemplary. Without cramming the novel with too much 
historical information or dull explanations, Sepetys is able to transport her 
readers to another time.

In this time of endless YA romances, it is very refreshing to see a novel 
where the romance doesn’t dominate. This is not to say it’s not a beautifully 
written and important part of the novel but the romance doesn’t define either 
of the characters or detract attention away from the central tragedy.

After her beautiful debut, Between Shades of Grey, Sepetys has written a more 
complex book, which is just as heart-breaking. This compelling read deserves a 
place on your bookshelf beside Elizabeth Wein and Monica Hesse.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368749/s/salt-to-the-sea/>
 