
Samir Nasri believes Yaya Touré’s “head is in the right place” for the 
decisive phase of Manchester City’s title defence and Champions League 
challenge after the midfielderled the Ivory Coast to the Africa Cup of Nations 
triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/ivory-coast-ghana-africa-cup-of-nations-final-match-report>
 in Equatorial Guinea earlier this month.

Touré, 31, is set to make his first appearance for the club since the 
tournament finished in Saturday evening’s home game against Newcastle United. 
The champions will hope to avoid losing ground to Chelsea, who could be 10 
points ahead by the time City’s match begins. The league leaders play Burnley 
at Stamford Bridge in a 3pm kick-off.

While Wilfried Bony <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wilfried-bony>, 
City’s new £25m striker and Touré’s international team-mate, is set for his 
debut, Nasri, who is a close friend of Touré, believes the victory in 
Equatorial Guinea will allow the midfielder to focus on the closing 13 league 
games and the last 16 Champions League tie with Barcelona, the first leg of 
which is on Tuesday.

“I’ve spoken with Yaya and it was something that he was waiting for, now he 
has it and his head is going to be in the right place and we know how important 
he is,” said the Frenchman, who believes both Touré and Bony could be vital.

“Yes, especially after their win they are going to come back very happy. 
Wilfried Bony, we just hope he’s going to continue his run he had with Swansea, 
scoring goal after goal and we’ll see at the end of season.”

Despite the gap to Chelsea, Nasri is insistent the champions have not given 
the title defence up. “No, because the two times we won the league we were 
behind as well and we just caught them at the end,” he said. “The season is 
still long, the Champions League is going to come as well and we’re going to 
have a lot of games. So hopefully they [Chelsea] are going to make a mistake 
and we are going to try to get in behind and try to sneak in at the end.”
 