
Ratna Begum is collecting water from an illegal water pump at Dhaka city's 14 
Outfall Slum. Ratna shares this pump with 150 other families. Although she 
knows it is contaminated, and by midday reduced to a trickle, it is Ratna's 
only option. A few steps from the water pump is an open latrine, a ramshackle 
corrugated iron structure. The area around them is strewn with waste. It is 
little wonder that her four-year-old son Shawan suffers with recurring 
respiratory problems.

Just two minutes' walk away, in another section of the slum, it is an entirely 
different story. Kajal Islam is busy cleaning a communal toilet block. The 
spotless facilities are shared between 40 families, who share the 
responsibility of cleaning and maintenance and pay monthly bills to D-WASA, 
Dhaka's water board.

Around another corner are what the local aid agencies term "bad 
interventions", a communal latrine and a well installed by the Department of 
Public Health Engineering just a few years ago, without any community 
involvement. The toilet block is abandoned, unhygienic and in disrepair. The 
well is filled with rubbish. Both are a waste of space in an area where every 
inch of land is precious.

Here, in a small corner of a sprawling slum which almost 30,000 people call 
home, the complex relationship of providing water and sanitation to these 
landless people is clearly visible.

Traditionally sanitation, the disposal of sewage, has been a logistical issue, 
the domain of engineers. In terms of development policy, sanitation has 
received lack of investment. Yet sanitation underpins all development efforts 
and is most effectively tackled by health professionals as well as engineers. A 
recent report by the NGO WaterAid argues that poor sanitation and unsafe 
drinking water may be the world's biggest killer of children under five. More 
children die from diarrhoea each year than malaria, measles and HIV/Aids 
combined. Pneumonia is responsible for even more deaths. Both are attributable 
to poor water and sanitation. Malnutrition is the underlying cause in 53% of 
child deaths, and more than half of deaths related to malnutrition are 
attributable to diarrhoea. Improved sanitation has also been proven to increase 
economic productivity, reduce healthcare costs and improve educational 
prospects.

WaterAid has been working to achieve just that in Dhaka since 1996. Dhaka has 
a population of over 12 million people, at least a third of whom live in one of 
more than 4,000 slums, or bostees, across the city. Those in the crowded slums 
exist with the most basic facilities, have no claim to their land, and live 
with the constant threat of eviction. Slum dwellers include garment workers, 
rickshaw pullers and scores of council workers. Seventy per cent of 
Bangladesh's economy is generated in Dhaka and, without the contribution of 
those in the slums, the city would grind to a halt.

WaterAid, along with its local partner organisations, has brought effective 
sanitation supplies to over 150 slums.Sanitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sanitation> has long been a 
dirty word, but the approach by the organisations in Dhaka is to make it a 
community issue. Hygiene awareness campaigns are run to inspire the community 
to demand better services. Water and sanitation follow.

Benguntila slum in the Mirpur area of Dhaka has been working with WaterAid's 
local partner DSK for four years. DSK has been assisting the urban poor to gain 
access to water and sanitation since 1992, and the DSK model is now replicated 
across the developing world. The first step is always to assess whether the 
slum community is sufficiently motivated and organised to want to establish the 
new facilities. People from the slum form a community based organisation (CBO) 
to implement the water and sanitation strategy. Facilitated by the DSK, the CBO 
negotiates with the water company and city corporation to get legal provisions 
in place.

Community thinking

Through western eyes, Benguntila is a community in a close-knit, old-fashioned 
sense. In the meeting hall, members of the CBO gather to tell their story. The 
walls of the hall illustrate the stages in the water and sanitation process: a 
hand-drawn map of the entire slum from 2004 pinpoints sites of open defecation, 
hanging latrines and illegal water pumps. A recent map charts the progress, 
mapping the 12 legal water points, homes with latrines and the community toilet 
blocks.

Another wall charts what policy terms "community monitoring". Pictures of 
"good hygiene practices" top a chart, and each member of the community is 
rewarded with a tick for carrying out these habits, while any reported 
misdemeanours result in a cross next to the household name. This forms part of 
the safe hygiene promotion that is the lynchpin of the water and sanitation 
model across Dhaka's slums. Women's groups and adolescent girl groups meet 
monthly to learn the benefits of clean food preparation, the importance of hand 
washing, toilet cleanliness and safe menstrual hygiene. Children promote good 
hygiene through drama, dance and song, spreading the message to friends, family 
and neighbours. Unicef's Shafiqul Alam is a real advocate of this special brand 
of pester power, saying: "You may not listen to your partner, but you'll listen 
to your child." The message they spread is saving lives. In Benguntila slum, 
seven children died of diarrhoeal disease in the years before the water and 
sanitation facilities. Thankfully none have died since, and the health of the 
entire community has improved.

Mahatma Gandhi once said, "Sanitation is more important than independence." In 
Dhaka, sanitation is empowering the urban poor. Along with hygiene education 
and clean water, sanitation is improving health, education and economic 
prospects. In this poor country, with a rapidly growing urban population, 
changes cannot happen overnight. Water and sanitation developments are 
mobilising slum communities and giving them a voice. The government is 
responding with changing attitudes towards slum dwellers and their rights.

For people like Ratna Begum and her neighbours, let's hope that this attitude 
translates to more widespread action.
 