
I am not surprised that Tehran has been somewhat paralysed over Riyadh’s 
decision to break off ties after an Iranian mob attacked the Saudi embassy 
following the execution of the leading Saudi Shia cleric, Nimr Baghir al-Nimr, 
on 2 January. Since PresidentHassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani> assumed office in August 
2013, he has failed to formulate responses to Saudi policies challenging Iran, 
so prompting criticism from hardliners that his lack of leadership fans 
Riyadh’s intransigence.


The failure is clear in statements issued by Rouhani’s aides since Riyadh 
severed ties and other Gulf Arab states downgraded relations. Mohammad Javad 
Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, has spent the better half of his time talking 
to western counterparts rather than trying with Iran’s Arab neighbours to find 
a way to reduce tensions with Riyadh.

Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> expected mass western 
condemnation of the Saudis’ execution of Nimr. Only when this failed to 
materialise did Tehran’s UN ambassador, Gholam Ali Khoshroo, express regret 
over the attack on the Saudi embassy in Tehran.

Iran’s belated letter to the UN Security Council, saying 40 people had been 
arrested for the embassy attacks, came only onceSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> had already filed a complaint 
and the council’s 15 members had condemned Iran - so putting Tehran at odds 
with the international community as it tries to end the controversy over its 
nuclear programme.

Neither did much result from Iran’s attempts to build a wedge between Riyadh 
and the European Union through President Rouhani’s offer after the severing of 
ties with the Saudis to fight alongside the Europeans against Sunni extremists. 
Yes, the EU is sympathetic to Iran’s position, and wary of Saudi Arabia, but 
Europe has never been a reliable partner for Iran.

The EU wants to ensure the continued flow of oil and gas, and to protect wider 
business interests within the region, but has neither the power nor the 
commitment to take sides in a long battle of wills between Tehran and Riyadh. 
If it did, the conflict in Syria would be long resolved.

Aside from engaging Europe, Iran’s response has been rhetorical. Ayatollah Ali 
Khamenei <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, the 
supreme leader, has said the Saudis will face “divine vengeance”.

Eshaq Jahangiri, a vice president, has suggested Saudi Arabia will suffer from 
severing diplomatic ties but did not elaborate. Hamid Aboutalebi, nominated by 
Iran as UN ambassador but refused a visa in 2014 by the United States, has 
warned the Arab states not to act against Iran given Iran has cards to play. 
Again, he did not specify which cards Iran might be holding.

President Rouhani’s own response to the break-up of ties, criticising Nimr’s 
execution as well as the mob attack, came fully 24 hours after the Saudi 
embassy was assaulted. While his statement seemed reasonable, its timing 
suggested it was a means to appease hardliners who still fault Rouhani’s 
inaction over the accident in Mecca in 2015 that led to the death of over 450 
Iranian pilgrims performing the hajj.

Such distressed statements by Iran’s authorities reflect the simple fact that 
Iran has been outmanoeuvred. They also reveal Iran’s lack of any clear or 
consistent policy towards Saudi Arabia.

The severing of diplomatic ties was a slap across the face. Iranian officials 
have consistently bragged to me that even in hard times, the Saudis and 
Iranians had retained embassies in each other’s capitals. Now, Tehran’s efforts 
trying to be both conciliatory and firm only point to the bind it is in.

As a conservative president, Rouhani is anxious to strike a middle ground at 
home. That includes not being either too hostile or too friendly towards Saudi 
Arabia, with which Iran has had historical rivalries.

 He has done so in his own style, which means avoiding direct responsibility 
for controversial policy and instead passing decisions to aides. Nowhere was 
this more clear than over the nuclear agreement with world powers, which Zarif 
received a free hand to negotiate, despite the red lines that Iran’s leader, 
Ayatollah Khamenei, sought frequently to draw in the course of the talks. 

 When I first spoke to the Iranian president in New York in September 2013, he 
asked for my opinion on how a tricky interview could best be handled. I was 
impressed that President Rouhani felt at ease asking for help and taking 
advice, but also detected a tendency to delegate decisions.

This style also serves to keep open the Iranian president’s options with 
domestic opponents. Rouhani tends to avoid criticism by allowing those around 
him to take on the task of convincing the Iranian public about his foreign 
policy. That way, he remains more immune to the barrage of onslaughts from both 
hardliners and reformists.

President Rouhani must show the same courage he expects in other Iranians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/jun/29/iran-president-rouhani-support-mohammad-hossein-rafiee>
But Rouhani remains vulnerable over foreign policy. An immediate challenge is 
a growing popular dislike in Iran of Saudi Arabia due to the beheadings of 
Iranian pilgrims convicted of various crimes and the death of hundreds more 
during the hajj. Popular sentiments have an impact on the political elite, who 
themselves fault Riyadh, often in public, for encouraging the growth of Sunni 
extremism, including the Islamic State, in Iraq and Syria.

While the government in Tehran aims to contain criticism of the kingdom, 
negative views about the Saudis fester as Rouhani fails to achieve progress in 
fixing ties or to offer any credible alternative.

 When I interpreted for the Iranian president at the UN General Assembly 
meetings in New York in September 2013, I felt concern over relations with the 
Saudis. Amir Hussein Zamaninia, a close Rouhani advisor, told me the president 
would not accept an invitation to Saudi Arabia extended to him by the lateKing 
Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-abdullah>. While I believed 
this would upset Riyadh and damage Saudi-Iranian relations, I avoided making 
any comments.

It did not surprise me that when, around a year later, nothing came of talk 
about Zarif going to Riyadh. Nor that he received a cold shoulder when he went 
to pay condolences when King Abdullah died in January 2015.

 Back at the UN in September 2013, I did tell Hesamuldin Ashna, a senior 
communications adviser to Rouhani, that Iran could not expect to reap the full 
benefits of a nuclear deal with the US (which was Rouhani’s most important 
foreign policy goal) without improving ties with Saudi Arabia. Ashna was not 
convinced those ties were as critical as I suggested, forcing me to stress that 
repairing them could take the full eight years of a two-term Rouhani presidency.

While it was understandable that neither Zamaninia nor Ashna would admit to me 
any concerns they had over the Saudis, I was left with a nagging feeling they 
did not recognise the level of hostility Riyadh felt towards Tehran over its 
nuclear goals, a hostility that went back even before the presidency of 
Rouhani’s predecessor,Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-ahmadinejad>.

 After his trip to New York, Rouhani delegated policy towards the Gulf Arab 
states to Zarif, who may feel less comfortable in discussions with Iran’s Arab 
neighbours than with the west. Other Iranian officials who have taken on the 
mantle of repairing relations with Saudi Arabia have only confused matters. 
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who had been close to King Abdullah, fell out with 
the king once he and Rouhani were forced, probably under pressure from 
hardliners in Iran, to reject an invitation to the hajj in October 2013.

Ali Shamkhani, Secretary of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council and a 
native Arabic speaker, played a key role reaching out to Saudi Arabia under 
Abdullah, but he has also issued mixed statements. On one hand, Shamkhani has 
offered friendship to Riyadh to resolve differences, but he has also been vocal 
in criticising the kingdom for fuelling unrest among Iran’s ethnic Arabs and 
Sunni populations.

Hussein Amir-Abdollahian, Iran’s deputy foreign minister for Arab affairs, has 
certainly called for better understanding between Iran and the Gulf Arab 
states. But when I spoke to him in Tehran in June 2014, he did not anticipate 
the clearly pending departure ofNouri al-Maliki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nouri-al-maliki>, who was facing widespread 
unrest in Iraq, and instead stressed Iran’s support for the besieged Iraqi 
prime minister.

After repeated calls for Maliki’s departure by both the Saudis and the US, it 
was only in July that Tehran reluctantly dispatched Shamkhani to Baghdad to 
seal an understanding over a new prime minister, Heidar al-Abadi, who took 
office in September.

Another dimension to Iran’s lack of outreach to Saudi Arabia is Rouhani’s hope 
that Tehran can replace Riyadh’s close relationship with Washington with one of 
its own. Long before Rouhani became president, he and his team dreamed of a 
‘grand bargain’ with the US, which is a concept Iran’s Arab neighbours find 
unsettling because they fear it implies a threat to their own interests.

 In this whole process, Tehran ignores the obvious. The Arab states of the 
Gulf region are still the preferred partners for the US due to a longer history 
of friendship. Even before the Iranian Revolution, Washington was more at ease 
with Saudi Arabia, given the Shah’s regional ambitions, and even then the Arab 
states resented Iran’s unwillingness to see them as equal partners in the 
social, cultural and political development of the Gulf region.

The US-Saudi friendship will not suddenly end, even though Washington and the 
EU are openly condemning Riyadh’s human rights record. Trade between Saudi 
Arabia and the west still outweighs their differences over political reform in 
the kingdom, as does a mutual agreement between Washington and Riyadh to 
contain Iran’s influence in the Middle East.

 This prospect will not change when a new president assumes office in 
Washington at the beginning of 2017. None of the US presidential candidates 
promise to be a better option for Iran than PresidentBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>.

Prospects for Iran’s relations with Saudi Arabia depend on both sides refusing 
to see ties with the US as a replacement for a partnership between them as 
neighbours. A shared recognition that their political differences result partly 
from instability in the Middle East in which the US has self-admittedly played 
a role could help them rekindle the political and religious connections that go 
back to the establishment of formal friendship ties in 1929. Since then, Riyadh 
and Tehran have severed relations three times, only to recognise subsequently 
that their ties needed urgently to be repaired.

Banafsheh Keynoush, previously an accredited interpreter with the European 
Commission and interpreter for four Iranian presidents, is the author ofSaudi 
Arabia and Iran: Friends or Foes? 
<http://www.palgrave.com/page/detail/saudi-arabia-and-iran-banafsheh-keynoush/?sf1=barcode&st1=9781137576279>
, to be published next month.The Tehran Bureau is an independent media 
organisation, hosted by the Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau 
<https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 