
Saudi Arabia is on course to execute 150 people or more, for a second 
consecutive year, becoming one of the most frequent users of state executions 
to carry out judicial sentences, figures compiled by the human rights group
Reprieve <http://www.reprieve.org.uk/> show.

The group also claims its figures show the kingdom is increasingly using 
secret courts to impose the death penalty on drug offenders, juveniles and 
political prisoners.

Many Gulf states use the death penalty and there is concern that executions 
are becoming the “new normal”. The Reprieve figures show 150 people have been 
executed this year, close to the 2015 high of 158, and way above the 2014 
figures of 87.

Reprieve also suggested that although Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> was the Gulf state most likely 
to use the death penalty, other states such as Kuwait were lowering the age at 
which the death penalty can be used.

Reprieve also finds that a large number of those killed were “state security” 
cases, involving people tried in secret courts – this includes political 
dissidents, and people who were tortured into “confessions”.

'Rebel' Saudi Arabia woman who posted photo without head scarf is arrested
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/saudi-arabia-headscarf-woman-twitter-arrest>
Many of those executed were arrested for drug offences, including quite a few 
foreign nationals, some of whom could well have been trafficking victims.

In January Saudi Arabia executed 47 people all in one day.

The numbers include juveniles – raising fears for those children who remain on 
death row, including Ali al-Nimr, Dawood al-Marhoon and Abdullah al-Zaher, who 
were arrested in relation to protests. Al-Mahroon was arrested aged 17 in 2002. 
Ali al-Nimr will turn 22 next week.

David Cameron, the former British prime minister, publicly called on the Saudi 
authorities to halt the planned executions of Ali, Dawood and Abdullah last 
year, and Reprieve understands that the UK foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, 
raised the cases with his Saudi counterpart as recently as September.

But Reprieve argues the UK should not just be focussing on seeking assurances 
that the death sentences will not be carried out, but in asking Saudi Arabia to 
commute the sentences and release the juveniles.

It claimed Dawood al-Marhoon was being seriously mistreated in a death-row 
prison, adding “we have had reports that he has been beaten and threatened with 
solitary confinement as payback, after he complained about a previous instance 
of abuse. It’s also emerged his health and that of other juveniles is suffering 
in prison. For example, the jail is reportedly ignoring a doctors’ advice on 
the food that should be given to juvenile prisoners.

 Over two-thirds of all countries have now abolished the death penalty in law 
or practice. In the US, 18 states plus the District of Columbia have abolished 
it, and seven more have not carried out an execution in at least 10 years.

Saudi Arabia: beheadings reach highest level in two decades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/02/saudi-arabia-beheadings-reach-highest-level-in-two-decades>
Nevertheless, 2015 saw a large increase in the use of the death penalty 
worldwide. At least 1,634 people were executed, a rise of more than 50% from 
the previous year and the highest numberAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> has recorded since 
1989. This total does not include China where thousands more are likely to have 
been executed, but the relevant data is treated as a state secret.

 The Reprieve research was published as the British foreign office minister 
Tobias Ellwood along with the US secretary of state, John Kerry, met Saudi King 
Salman and crown prince Mohammed bin Nayef in Riyadh to discuss peace efforts in
Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>. 

They were joined by leaders from Oman and the United Arab Emirates, and 
discussion focussed on the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, as well as efforts to 
restart the UN-led peace process.

Saudi foreign minister Adel al-Jubeir speaking at a joint news conference 
denied reports the US was scaling back its arms support to Saudi Arabia in 
protest at the conduct of its air campaign in Yemen.

Jubeir said: “This news that has been leaked contradicts reality. The reality 
is that converting regular bombs to smart bombs would be welcome because smart 
bombs are more accurate.” There were also reports that the US was scaling back 
its intelligence cooperation, but Kerry gave no hint of disapproval of the 
Saudis in his remarks.

The war in Yemen has also allowed extremist groups to flourish , as the local 
affiliate of the Islamic State group claimed responsibilityfor a suicide 
bombing on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/suicide-bomber-kills-at-least-10-soldiers-in-yemens-aden-say-officials>
 in the southern port city of Aden that killed at least 49 soldiers lined-up to 
receive their pay.

Kerry’s visit to Saudi Arabia is probably his last before a new administration 
led by President Donald Trump takes office.
 