
The days of the human journalist are numbered. And I for one am thrilled about 
it. Because, really, who wants to wade through reams of subtlety and context in 
a carefully constructed news report when they could just baldly skim through a 
list of horrible facts generated in bulk by an unfeeling automated newsbot? 
Nobody, that's who.

However, a few dank corners of the industry are still sadly forced to rely 
upon the infallible whims of humanity, and film criticism is chief among them. 
This is a terrible shame because, as it stands, film criticism is simply far 
too subjective. Look atUnder the Skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156833/under-the-skin> – some people 
declared it a masterpiece, but others absolutely hated it. One opinion has to 
be definitively right, but which?

So much of film reviewing depends of the context of the viewing circumstances. 
Did Peter Bradshaw give Eat Pray Love such astinging one-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/23/eat-pray-love-review> four years 
ago because it's a genuinely bad film, or because he banged his big toe on the 
hot tap as he got out of the bath that morning? Nobody knows. Similarly, is 
Citizen Kane really one of the best films ever made or – as I suspect – is it 
simply the case that every single person who has ever reviewed it was already 
in a really good mood because they happened to get one of those accidentally 
all-chocolate Kit Kats from a vending machine right before they sat down to 
watch it? It's genuinely impossible to tell.
 As Above So Below … hand-me-down script 
But I am here to tell you, brave citizens of the 21st century, that the future 
of film criticism is finally here. A purely data-led form of film criticism 
that does away with pointless frivolities like comparison and opinion. A truly 
objective way of letting people know what a film is like without being sullied 
by unnecessary humanity.

Which is to say I just watched a horror film with a heart-rate monitor on.

Ostensibly this was all part of a study by Brunel University to research the 
effects that films have on the human body. I was measured and weighed and asked 
to fill in a questionnaire about my feelings, before being strapped into a 
wireless heart-rate device and made to watchAs Above, So Below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/as-above-so-below>, a sort of fitfully 
effectively found-footage, spelunking-based remake of Event Horizon that broke 
into the US top 10 this week.

The results, I was told, would demonstrate in uncertain terms what I thought 
of the film. And I was all for this. After all, you can kid your brain, but 
it's not as if you can fool your heart, is it?

Before the film began, my fellow audience members and I all sat in silence for 
10 minutes, until our hearts had reached their normal resting rates. Then there 
was a loud noise, the woman next to me shrieked, and the film began.
 Photograph: Brunel University London 
In the spirit of this brave new world of journalism from the heart I won't 
sully the art by telling you about the plot, but I will tell you that our 
collective heart rates started beating about eight beats per minute faster than 
usual about four minutes in, which means that's probably when something quite 
scary happened. Then our heart rates dropped considerably for the next 
half-hour or so, so that's when you should probably go to the toilet or wander 
off and call your mum or something.
Then there are three bits, spaced about 10 minutes apart, that caused our 
heart rates to spike upwards quite dramatically. This could be because the film 
has a good understanding of genre pacing, but alternatively it could signal the 
moment that the house lights inexplicably came on in the middle of the film, or 
when the woman next to me screamed so loudly that everyone at the screening 
briefly thought she was being physically assaulted.

Someone's heart rate hit 82bpm right at the end of the film – the highest of 
anyone's throughout the entire movie – which either means that As Above, So 
Below ends on a truly horrifying note, or just that there was a weirdo at the 
screening who happens to be really, really scared of credit sequences.

So there you have it – the first ever legitimately objective, data-led film 
review. This is the future. Get used to it.
 