
In Nahr el Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon, there is a silent conflict 
that is claiming the lives of women and children. Huda, a community midwife, 
sits on the frontline, a cramped shelter that is home to five young children 
and their parents. In the summer heat, the small room is oppressive. In the 
corner, the father of five cleans the mud of the soles of his work boots. 
Behind him, his wife stands with her youngest child on her hip. It is a fraught 
but quiet battleground. Huda clears her throat and begins her explanation 
again; the last pregnancy had left the mother very weak, she is very anaemic; 
another pregnancy now would be too much of a risk. The father shakes his head, 
"my wife is young, she will have many more children. She is ready to have more 
children. We want at least thirteen children." Huda looks up to the woman 
behind him. She shifts the infant to her other hip keeping her eyes firmly on 
the floor. "Shukran, thank you" her husband says, "you can go now."

In the midday brightness outside the shelter, Huda sighs and scribbles a quick 
note on her file. "This is the story," she says as we pick our way through the 
narrow walkways of the UN camp, home to thousands of Palestinian refugees, "in 
many of the homes I visit, the husbands are against our work. They fight us. We 
have a strong programme here. Women have access to doctors, nurses and clinics. 
We also invite them to attend workshops that teach them about risks to watch 
out for, in particular, the importance of spacing out pregnancies to protect 
her and her unborn child. Mothers I speak to are eager to attend but on the day 
their seats are empty. For many women, the greatest barrier to safe motherhood 
is the father."

In the camp, the threats to maternal health remain significant. Medical Aid 
for Palestinians (MAP) who run a major community maternal and child health 
programme in the camp, report that over half of the mothers their midwives 
visit are anaemic and most have poor access to running water or adequate 
sanitation. Women tend to have large numbers of children, with families of 
eight often crowded in to shelters of just sixteen square feet. The youngest 
mother that MAP supports is only fourteen years old.

Back in the alleyways of the camp, Huda is locked in an animated conversation 
with a small group of five year old boys. "They all want to be doctors" she 
laughs, as we move on to the next appointment. Whether as doctors or fathers, 
these boys are likely to play a crucial role in the health of their community, 
particularly the health of the women and children. A recent survey carried out 
by the Palestinian Women's Humanitarian Organisation found that 93% of women 
still require the permission of their husbands before they leave the house. 
Because of the authority men can hold over the family unit, not just in the 
camps of Lebanon but right across the world, they are often the gatekeepers to 
successful maternal and child health.

Huda recalls the defiance of the husband early that morning and remarks that 
this attitude is rooted in an entrenched sense of identity. "For many men, 
large families are an important status symbol. They are uneducated about the 
dangers of childbirth, the risks to the mother and the potential negative 
effects on her wellbeing."

NGOs are often seen as outsiders interfering with traditional ways of life and 
bringing in new ideas that threaten the status quo. Programmes that tackle 
reproductive and sexual health in an attempt to improve the safety of pregnancy 
and motherhood are too often misunderstood and rejected by male figures in the 
community. This rejection poses a hidden risk to safe motherhood and one that 
needs to be tackled if the Millennium Development Goal is to be achieved.

In the local MAP clinic, Consultant Nurse Maggie is recording the results of 
the day's home visits. "There are several international NGOs here working 
alongside the United Nations to improve the chances of safe motherhood. For 
once, the international community seems to be talking the same language," she 
smiles ironically, "However, without the buy-in from the men in the community 
we are all knocking at closed doors. Involving the fathers in projects and 
educating them alongside women is key to achieving of goal of safe motherhood," 
she asserts, "but we must be prepared to talk their language."

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 