
Sunday's final match of the season between Celtic and Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> was too one-sided to offer much 
in the way of a contest, but it was as ever a riot of colour and noise, another 
reminder that if the quality of football served up by Scotland's two biggest 
teams has fallen off in recent years then their meetings remain undiminished as 
a spectacle. In the circumstances it was hard to believe we may never see its 
like again. But we might not.

Every week is a big week when a football club is battling against financial 
maelstrom but this week promises to be the biggest in the 140-year history of 
Rangers. "It's show time," the club's managerAlly McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> said on Sunday in the 
aftermath of 3-0 defeat that was clearly the least of his worries. By this, 
McCoist meant his club is on the cusp of extinction.

There are plenty who will lose very little sleep over this prospect, not least 
the banks ofCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans at 
Sunday's match who divided their the time between glorying in their team's 
on-field superiority and revelling in their opponent's financial ruin. Having a 
party while Rangers die, as the chant goes.

Let them have their fun. Mockery is a staple of football rivalry, even if on 
this particular occasion it blithely ignores an essential truth; Scottish 
football needs Rangers. It needs the name. It needs the fans. It needs the 
financial muscle. It needs occasions such as Sunday's derby match.

Convincing sceptical fans of other Scottish clubs that Rangers are worth 
preserving is hard work, not least because of the lordly manner in which the 
previous owner but one, Sir David Murray, conducted affairs at Ibrox at a time 
when, it turns out, the club was in thrall to some business practices that 
might kindly be described as "financial doping".

Indeed such is the byzantine mess Murray, and his successor Craig Whyte, left 
behind – the details of which have been brilliantly catalogued and exposed by 
the Orwell Prize-shortlisted blogRangersTaxCase.com 
<http://rangerstaxcase.wordpress.com/> – it seems unlikely the club in its 
existing form can survive. More will be revealed in the coming weeks, including 
the outcome of a tax tribunal that could add £70m to Rangers' debt. Suffice to 
say, most dispassionate observers believe that without the arrival of a 
benefactor with money to burn the most likely outcome is liquidation.

This would take the story into a whole new dimension, one for which the 
small-town mentality of Scottish football is not equipped. In recent months 
there has been an effort to inject some 21st century professionalism into a 
1970s bureaucracy but such changes take years to bed in, not months. In the 
absence of strong leadership, or indeed any rules outlining what action to take 
when dealing with a liquidated club, panic has gripped those who run the game, 
which in turn has spawned a potentially ruinous expediency.

Under proposals due to be considered by Scottish Premier League clubs on 
Monday, a newly-constituted Rangers would be allowed back to remain in 
Scotland's top league, albeit with the "punishment" of a short-term points 
penalty as well as some financial restrictions.

There is a certain neatness to all of this in that it preserves the status quo 
– and small-town bureaucracy loves nothing more than the status quo – while 
paying a whisper of homage to that inconvenient old biblical chestnut about 
wrongdoers being punished.

The problem with allowing a Rangers "newco" to remain in the SPL is not that 
it isn't enough of a punishment, but that it is the wrong punishment. 
Admittedly, it would keep Rangers – or at least a form of Rangers – in 
Scotland's top league. But for how long and at what price?

A recent survey of Scottish football fans revealed the depth of opposition to 
the idea of parachuting a newco Rangers back into the SPL. Heaven knows 
football has a long history of ignoring what fans think, but for any sport to 
thrive or at least survive there must be a core belief in the fairness of 
competition. Without that trust there is nothing. Football's bureaucrats know 
this but in their love of hard cash and self-preservation they chose to ignore 
it. Fans don't allow themselves the luxury of amorality.

If that sounds like a romanticised view from the terraces then ask yourself 
this: what would be the point in watching Scottish football if you knew that no 
matter how badly Rangers (or Celtic for that matter) behaved or how recklessly 
they conducted their business they could never be thrown out of the league? 
There would be no point. That isn't romance, it is reality. A reality that 
would corrupt and erode what little trust is left in Scottish football after 
these last few months.

It is bad enough that those who run Scottish football seem so desperate to 
embrace such a ruinous idea. What makes it even worse is that a far better 
solution is open to them, one identified by McCoist himself at the end of last 
week. "There is an argument that morally it's the right thing to do, that 
Rangers should go into Division Three if it's a newco or liquidation. It might 
be the correct thing to do," he said.

The Rangers manager made the mistake of going on to argue against such 
impeccable logic, suggesting the Ibrox club is a special case and should be 
treated as such. Forgive McCoist for his blinkered thinking and hope he, like a 
growing number of people, comes round to the view that Rangers in the Third 
Division is not a disaster but an opportunity for the club, and for Scottish 
football, to start again.
 