
The Scottish Football Association's problem in punishing Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> for the ills of the club under 
the ownership of Craig Whyte lay in the range of sanctions available.

But shock was the common sentiment as the SFA announced the imposition of a 
12-month transfer embargo on the stricken Ibrox club. Rangers were unlikely to 
be raiding La Liga for talent this summer but the difficulty of Ally McCoist's 
job has multiplied on account of the penalty, even if few would be surprised if 
the year-long ban is reduced after the inevitable appeal.

Alongside the transfer ban came fines totalling £160,000 for Rangers and 
£200,000 for Whyte, the discredited owner and former chairman. Already, Whyte 
has wished the SFA the best of luck in recouping his share of the bill.

The alternative punishments lay in a range of heavier or delayed financial 
penalties which, with Rangers in administration, were surely a waste of time. 
The club's place in the Scottish Cup could have been at risk due to non-payment 
of ticket monies to Dundee United; those who consider that an illogical penalty 
should remember the Scottish FA has previous for kicking teams out of that 
competition simply because team-sheets had been filled out incorrectly.

Rangers are charged with bringing Scottish football into disrepute during 
Whyte's nine-month tenure; around £9m was not passed on to Her Majesty's 
Revenue and Customs during that time, with Whyte's earlier ban from acting as a 
company director not disclosed to Scotland's football authorities.

This placed the SFA in a tricky position, whereby a firm message must be sent 
out to other member clubs while taking into account that Rangers' immediate 
future is already decidedly bleak. Whatever punishments were issued, the 
association would stand accused of either going unreasonably easy on Rangers or 
kicking them when they are down.

Law is routinely administered in the light of test cases, but the lack of 
proper SFA scrutiny over who runs clubs is partly responsible for this Rangers 
debacle. This is the same governing body which allowed the late Brooks Mileson 
to preside over Gretna's freakish rise through the leagues before the club were 
sharply consigned to oblivion. If a reasonable fit-and-proper person tests had 
been in place, all manner of charlatans would never have swanned around 
Scottish football's boardrooms down the years.

The current farce is highlighted by Whyte being banned from taking any 
position within the game north of the border while continuing to hold 85% of 
Rangers shares.

Still, Rangers' core argument against the SFA penalties is not a reasonable 
one. It is no surprise the club's administrators attempted to differentiate 
between Whyte and the club in making their presentations to the judicial panel. 
Even if, in reality, that is akin to asking political analysts to criticise 
David Cameron but not the Conservative party.

Whyte owned and ran the club – he didn't work in the mail room. It is folly to 
claim nobody else at Ibrox realised what a shambles he was presiding over. To 
date, those administrators have been unable to name a preferred bidder to take 
over or demonstrate their earlier insistence that Whyte is immaterial to any 
takeover process. Issues of whether or not Whyte retains security over Ibrox 
and the Rangers training ground are also relevant.

When the SFA routinely fines Hearts for the wild utterances of Vladimir 
Romanov, the Edinburgh club cannot dodge penalties on the basis the Lithuanian 
is "only" their owner.

It is a consistent and curious aspect of Scottish football culture that anyone 
on the receiving end of a punishment looks for an agenda from those handing it 
out. A more adult approach would be in considering what mistakes triggered 
penal attention in the first place. In Rangers' case, errors translate to gross 
mismanagement.

In football terms, McCoist is being forced to handle an almighty debacle, one 
which will surely get a lot worse before it improves. How competitive Rangers 
can hope to be in the top flight next season remains open to debate. And, 
still, there is the prospect of further penalties arriving after the Scottish 
Premier League's scrutiny of allegations of Rangers players holding dual 
contracts.

Rangers' most valuable players can leave Ibrox for knockdown fees this summer 
by virtue of deals struck when they agreed to significant salary cuts when the 
club entered administration. If Rangers' ownership is not resolved to the 
extent that those contract clauses are removed – and there is no sign it will 
be – then first-team players will leave without being replaced. Onlookers can 
only speculate as to how many years it will take them to recover. Celtic's 
short-term dominance has been set in stone.

Rangers fans are already vehement in their anger towards the SFA, a contrast 
to the self-harming and blinkered support of Whyte they displayed earlier. Such 
discord would be better served towards not only Whyte, but also those who 
helped the completion of his takeover last May, be that Sir David Murray or the 
Lloyds Banking Group.

The result of that transaction has been absolute disaster for a club who once 
prided themselves on being one of Britain's biggest. The SFA did not make a 
mockery of that status – those running Rangers did.
 