
The damage is already done. Now it’s just a question of how severe it’s going 
to be. Australia’s most important statistical record has been compromised by a 
counterproductive and poorly argued decision to retain name and address data 
for everyone who is legally obliged to fill in our personal details and life 
circumstance on 9 August.

The proposal to keep names and addresses on file so that the census can be 
linked to other datasets was proposed and rejected in 2006 and 2011 on the 
grounds that the risks to privacy through malice, incompetence or misadventure 
were simply too great.

2016 is census year! But you can stick your census in your ear, you won't get 
any data here | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/mar/30/2016-is-census-year-but-you-can-stick-your-census-in-your-ear-you-wont-get-any-data-here>
Our office uses census data practically every day. Our costed plan to end 
homelessness is premised on 2011 census figures, and so is our work on public 
transport and urban redevelopment. The ability to access reliable demographic 
information is something policymakers have relied on for decades. Until fairly 
recently, most Australians trusted the census, and the overwhelming majority of 
us – outbreaks of the religion of Jedi notwithstanding – contribute diligently 
to the snapshot of Australia once every five years.

This is one of the reasons I am so pissed off with the damage the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
(ABS) is doing to its own reputation and the integrity of the dataset. By 
ploughing ahead despite well-founded warnings by privacy experts, digital 
rights organisations and security professionals, the ABS has invoked a growing 
campaign of civil disobedience that will inevitably compromise the whole 
rationale for the census.

As a cost-saving measure, the process now steers people to complete the census 
electronically. It’s likely that this will raise the barrier to participation.

You can still fill in a paper form, but now you have to request it, and by all 
accounts the “hotline” the ABS set up to take these calls is in meltdown and 
it’s nearly impossible to get through. People who don’t easily fit the ABS 
categories, like nonconformity with gender binaries, have to take additional 
steps; they either need to request the paper form or call theCensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/census> Inquiry Service to request 
a special login just so they can answer “other” to the gender question online. 
People who don’t check their snail mail all that often could miss the memo 
altogether and be subject to fines.

Bill McLennan is the former head of the Australian Bureau of Statistics, and 
his scathingtakedown of this proposal 
<https://independentaustralia.net/life/life-display/privacy-and-the-2016-census,9279>
 is well worth a read. His assessment is that the ABS cannot legally compel 
people to provide their names and addresses.

The ABS, represented by the treasurer, has not legislated these changes. They 
reached the decision after conducting a rapid internal assessment, which the 
AustralianPrivacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> Foundation said 
was flawed and in no way independent. No human rights or civil society 
organisations were consulted in that process.

In an age where privacy is under assault from all quarters, does this even 
matter? It does. The United States – Australia’s Five Eyes mass-surveillance 
partner – routinely allowed the Department of Homeland Security to access 
census data on Arab Americans. Further back in history, in 1940s US, census 
data was infamously used to locate Japanese Americans for locking up in 
internment camps.

Closer to home, in the face of spirited movements against native forest 
destruction, coalmining and coal seam gas, state governments have embarked on a 
rush of legislation to ban various kinds of nonviolent protest. The federal 
government and an enfeebled opposition passed laws that could see doctors and 
journalists imprisoned for exposing child abuse in detention centres. Ditto for 
mandatory data retention.

The federal government took us to a double-dissolution election under the 
pretext of a bill that strips fundamental human rights from building and 
construction workers. We have a resurgent far-right busily mainstreaming 
demands for an end to Muslim immigration. This is not an age in which 
governments, present or future, can be trusted, either with the powers that 
they have or their willingness to change the laws governing how census data 
could be accessed or used in the future. In the years since the last census, 
the willingness of governments to invade our privacy without consultation has 
become painfully clear.

The safest way to protect digital privacy and identity is not to collect more 
information than is absolutely necessary. If personal information is collected, 
it should be retained no longer than is absolutely necessary. Organisations and 
individuals with vast expertise in the area have been compromised; the US 
Department of State, Sony Corporation, the Department of Immigration and Border 
Protection, the Democratic party of the US, the director of the CIA.

The Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/australian-bureau-of-statistics-reports-14-data-breaches-since-2013>
 the ABS itself has had 14 data breaches since 2013. A longitudinal record of 
names, addresses and intimate personal details is a tempting target for anyone 
from criminals to identity thieves to hate groups to foreign governments. And 
of course there is the internal risk – police forces and government departments 
in Australia are compelled to respond to staff misuse of private information 
alarmingly often.

Hundreds referred for prosecution for failure to complete census
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/hundreds-referred-for-prosecution-for-failure-to-complete-census>
The ABS’s insistence that name and address records will be separately stored 
is a poor substitute for destruction of the data, which itself is a poor 
substitute for keeping that information retention optional in the first place.

In the lead-up to 9 August, every person has to weigh up the decision to 
complete the census. Leaving your name and address blank on a paper form is an 
option some are considering. If you’re overseas you’re off the hook. You may 
decide to try your luck with aCommunity Event for Networking and Sense Under 
the Stars (C.E.N.S.U.S.) <https://www.facebook.com/events/641445136002950>. 
Maybe you’ll take your chances and just boycott it completely, or perhaps you 
think that these fears are overblown and are content to just fill it out.

Whatever your answer, the ABS’s refusal to engage in a public process and the 
hasty and secretive implementation of proposals that have twice previously been 
rejected, has left people standing against this proposal with little recourse 
aside from civil disobedience.

There is still time for sense to prevail: the ABS should delay census day for 
a couple of weeks, fix this mess and restore the high degree of confidence and 
trust that it has earned over many years. At the very least, the ABS should 
make it clear they won’t beprosecuting people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/hundreds-referred-for-prosecution-for-failure-to-complete-census>
 who leave their name and address fields blank.

Choose to do otherwise, and the ABS will have no one to blame but itself for 
the 2016 #censusfail.
 