
I’m one of the lucky ones: severely dyslexic and with a tendency to isolate, 
my teenage years were marked by regular phone calls to my parents and meetings 
with teachers. The conversations would usually follow a fairly routine pattern: 
“Tom’s behind with his work” or “Tom’s not actually turning up to lessons he 
doesn’t want to go to.”

My parents would nod and look concerned. Then would come the suggestion: “We 
think he’s doing too much drama.” My parents would look confused and reply: 
“You do know that it’s drama that keeps him coming to any lessons at all. If 
you cut the drama he would just stop attending school completely.”

I was lucky because drama was available and well taught at my school, because 
my parents understood me – and because they understood what drama could do for 
me.

My whole education was filtered through the prism of drama and theatre. I 
learned about history from Shakespeare – and along the way quite a bit about 
humanity as well. Studying John Osborne opened my eyes to politics and Joe 
Orton unlocked a world of queer counterculture. When teachers said: “We’re 
worried he’s retreating into a fantasy world; he’s not facing reality,” my 
parents would have to remind them that for me, theatre was more real than 
geography – it wasn’t a fantasy world; it was my reality. As the character of 
Irwin says in The History Boys: “It’s no fun teaching the stage struck.”

This isn’t a particularly unusual story; it’s one I share with countless 
others. I now come across teenagers studying forGCSEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses> and A Levels on a regular basis. 
They often have a similar story to mine. I would say 90% of young people I meet 
who enjoy acting tell me it’s because it improves their confidence. But then 
our stories diverge; I saw drama as a way of contextualising the world around 
me; I thought plays could change the world. Many of todays GCSE students simply 
think theatre can change their mood. It’s not that they aren’t political, 
bright and articulate; it’s simply that they don’t seem to be connecting their 
politics and their view on the world with the work they do in drama classes.

Yes art is therapeutic, but it isn’t therapy.

When I ask drama students what they are studying, they often list Stanislavski 
or Meisner. They’ll talk about the process of acting, but they never talk about 
what theatre is about. It’s like learning to cook by reading recipe books but 
never actually cooking or eating the food. So when the artistic director of the 
National Youth Theatre, Paul Roseby, was reported by the Stage as saying that
GCSE drama had become “irrelevant” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/nov/03/drama-gcse-irrelevant-national-youth-theatre>
, I couldn’t help but agree with him. But he then went on to suggest that we 
should therefore scrap GCSE drama and thread drama into the core curriculum. At 
this point, I find myself passionately disagreeing with him.

The idea that taking drama off the syllabus will somehow strengthen its worth 
in schools is as barmy and as cryptic as Alice in Wonderland. Thanks to league 
tables, schools base almost their entire worth on exams. Teachers will often 
remind us of the soft lessons learned in schools, but the institution will 
still make education about the grades.

If you take GCSE drama off the syllabus, it’s unlikely any state funded school 
will be able to justify keeping specialist drama teachers on the payroll – and 
so teaching of drama will fall to English teachers, who are often just not 
trained or able to teach drama well. Then how do you integrate drama into the 
core curriculum? How can a Geography teacher be expected to teach using drama? 
It’s as unreasonable as expecting drama teachers to teach geography.

But there is a more fundamental problem with this argument. Theatre isn’t 
there to educate. Shakespeare didn’t write the history plays as a teaching aid. 
Sure, they educate, but they aren’t educational – that’s not the sole purpose 
of going to the theatre. By threading drama through the core curriculum, you 
reduce it to role-playing as a teaching aid. And it’s not like we haven’t tried 
it before“integrated teaching” 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrative_learning> was popular in the 1970s 
among educationalists, but I’ve never heard of a teacher talk about the 
experience positively.

The problems with GCSE drama aren’t confined to drama; it’s a problem with 
GCSEs in general. Ask a leading mathematician or scientist if the GCSE syllabus 
is relevant and they’ll tell you no. So let’s scrap all GCSEs and start again – 
let’s create an holistic education system that genuinely teaches that 
humanities and sciences are just different ways of exploring the same 
fundamental questions. But in the process, let’s not reduce drama to a teaching 
aid.

Thomas Hescott is a theatre director and writer <http://thomashescott.com/>, 
who you can follow on Twitter@MrThomasHescott 
<https://twitter.com/MrThomasHescott>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 