
Ireland's former richest man Sean Quinn has avoided prison for at least 
another fortnight after the high court in Dublin granted his legal team a 
13-day adjournment.

Quinn's son Sean Jnr was also released from prison on Friday after serving a 
three-month sentence for contempt of court – a charge that he, his father and 
his cousin Peter Darragh Quinn were all found guilty of earlier this summer.

They were found guilty after it emerged the Quinns had moved assets worth 
millions of euros out of reach of the formerAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>. The bank alleges the 
Quinn family owe the now state-owned institution more than €2bn (£1.6bn).

Sean Quinn Jnr walked hand in hand his wife, Karen Woods, from Dublin's Four 
Courts to an awaiting BMW car.

His father's legal team from Belfast told the court Quinn Snr's life would be 
at risk if he went to jail. They told the court that the bankrupt businessman 
wants to co-operate with the IrishBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Resolution Corporation and purge 
his contempt.

They have secured a 13-day adjournment to get up to speed on the case despite 
IBRC's concerns about delay.

The bank's lawyers contend Quinn has done nothing to obey orders aimed at 
reversing a scheme to strip him of his valuable assets.

They say that new evidence shows the Quinns are still in control of these 
companies and any substantial delay could mean certain assets will be lost for 
ever. His defence team countered that he is a 66-year-old who has had two major 
heart operations with his liberty at risk.

Peter Darragh Quinn is effectively hiding from the Republic's authorities by 
fleeing toNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. 
There are no legal measures in place for extradition because the case is a 
civil matter rather than a criminal one.

Sean Quinn Snr lost his fortune in the international property market during 
the Celtic tiger boom years borrowing hundreds of millions of euros from the 
Anglo Irish Bank. The global recession and the property crash led to the 
collapse of the bank which was then nationalised as part of a state rescue plan 
of the debt-ridden Irish banking system.

The Quinn business empire, built on a cement-making operation and a highly 
successful insurance firm, became the victim of over-reach into the property 
market. The Quinns personify the demise of the Celtic tiger economy and its 
over-confidence in a property boom.

His fate has divided public opinion in the Republic in Cavan and Fermanagh, 
where the Quinns created thousands of jobs. Up to 5,000 people turned up last 
weekend for a rally in support of the family in its battle with the IBRC and 
the courts in Dublin. But there is little sympathy for the Quinns away from the 
family base.
 