
I must go down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky, and all I 
need is a neoprene wetsuit, an inflatable kayak, a telescopic fishing rod, a 
body board, a power kite, a slimline collapsible barbecue, two moon chairs, a 
windbreak, and several large dry bags jammed with other essential gadgets. How 
did I ever manage in the past? When I was 10 years old I went to Pembrokeshire 
and had a fabulous time on those miraculous beaches with no more than a pair of 
swimming trunks. Now I was taking my daughter Maddy, also 10, and we had a 
classic VW campervan filled with everything the outdoor sports megastore can 
offer. We were on the hunt for the perfect beach, and we had the modern armoury 
to enjoy that spot to the utmost.

Now, I don't know if you have ever considered what makes the perfect beach, 
but clearly it is not sand so hot it burns your feet, disease-laden tropical 
sandflies, shark attacks and head-splitting falling coconuts. No. Any search 
for sandy coastal perfection should be contained within the limits of Tenby in 
the south and Cardigan in the north – the Pembrokeshire coast. It'sa stretch 
that has at least 243 beaches of unparalleled beauty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2013/jul/18/top-10-secret-secluded-beaches-wales>
, and the kind of limpid aquamarine saltwater that has sent poets into raptures.

Before arriving I got out the two Ordnance Explorer maps 
<http://www.shop.ordnancesurveyleisure.co.uk/products/paper-maps/paper-maps-ordnance-survey-great-britain/paper-maps-ordnance-survey-great-britain-os-explorer-map/south-pembrokeshire/pid-9780319241615>
 of the county and went along the coast marking every beach, then read every 
online and published comment I could find. There are whole forums out there 
where people trade favourite spots. There is alsoDaniel Start's book, Wild 
Swimming Coast 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780957157330&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
, which is particularly strong on Pembrokeshire. In addition, we had the
Cicerone guide to the coastal path 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781852843786>
, which is practical and informative. From all this information, a few names 
shone out, demanding a visit. We had a list. We had a mission.


As we headed towards St Davids at a stately 30mph, Maddy entertained me with a 
tailback count: "Three cars behind us. Four. Five." And so on. Those classic VW 
vans – ours was a 1980 production called Daisy – just trail admirers everywhere 
they go. Our firstcampsite was at Caerfai Bay <http://www.caerfaibay.co.uk/> 
which I had telephoned just one day ahead. It was the height of the season but 
this one-day-in-advance strategy never let us down. Caerfai came with numerous 
recommendations. It was one of our top potential spots.

Pulling up to the cliff edge, we donned wetsuits, grabbed body boards and ran 
down to the cove. High tide. No beach at all. Just some big rocks and a load of 
smashed plastic mixed with seaweed. Pounding surf. Far too dangerous. Caerfai 
is one of those Pembrokeshire beaches that only has sand below high tide. So we 
changed our clothes and had a walk along the cliff. In the evening, I studied 
the tide table that I'd printed out. If you are planning any kind of swimming, 
boating or perfect beach searching in Pembrokeshire, it is pretty much 
essential to keep up with the tides: your beach may not exist for more than a 
few hours a day.

Next afternoon we were back down at Caerfai at a better time, with several 
dozen others. This beach's proximity to large campsites and St Davids does make 
it busy. I scored it seven out of 10; Maddy gave it zero – but her opinion was 
influenced by the fact that the powerful breakers had stolen one of her new 
flippers. She was so upset, in fact, that I got out of bed in the night, at low 
tide, and searched the base of the cliffs with a torch, finding nothing except 
lots of other plastic rubbish and the uncomfortable truth that we were as 
guilty as anyone in adding to it.
 Barafundle Bay, often voted Britain’s best, and rated 10 by Kevin and Maddy 
for its clean sand and water. Photograph Alamy 
The tides roll clockwise around Britain so the flipper had probably moved 
northwards to Whitesands Bay, one of Pembrokeshire's most popular surfing 
beaches and our first stop next morning. With St Davids close at hand as well 
as a big campsite, this is also a busy place, but it's very well organised and 
large enough to absorb a crowd. We rated it nine.

The following day was blustery but not actually raining. We examined all the 
beaches that line the curve of St Brides Bay, starting with Solva, which is 
really a long creek dotted with boats. It's not for swimming, but is lovely and 
boasts a great cafe (Thirty Five Cafe 
<https://en-gb.facebook.com/pages/Thirty-Five-Cafe-Solva/128450823841849>, 
right at the end of the creek). Newgale (rated a seven again) was broad and big 
fun, though not as pretty as most. Surfers love it as you can camp close enough 
to hear the waves and there are lifeguards. Further down the coast were 
Druidston (eight) and Broad Haven (seven) and the charming cove of Little Haven 
(eight).

Now we were approaching our destination: West Hook Farm 
<http://www.westhookfarm-camping.co.uk/> on the Marloes peninsula. This proved 
to be the best campsite we visited: basic but clean facilities, loads of space, 
and a glorious clifftop panorama. We jumped into wetsuits and ran 500m along 
the cliff path to reach Martin's Haven. This is a tiny stony cove best suited 
to snorkelling and rock-pool exploration. We swam out along the east side and 
were rewarded by a view of a big edible crab scuttling between the kelp. He 
evaded our hungry fingers.
 Maddy and Daisy at Caer Fai 
Returning to the camp, I left Maddy and explored further along the coast to 
Musselwick, a marvellous clifftop walk. The air was light with butterflies and 
the sea roared far below. Unfortunately, the tide had just beaten me to the 
sand. A regular visitor, fishing for sea bass from the rocks, told me this 
beach is accessible only two hours either side of low water. It looked like it 
would be worth the wait.

After stocking up at the small shop in Marloes village next morning, we set 
out for Marloes Sands, which is about a mile from the last road. This keeps the 
hordes away but not Hollywood – they love it. The latest in a long line of 
films to use this location was 2012'sSnow White and the Huntsman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/may/31/snow-white-and-huntsman-review>. 
It's a fabulous spot: a great sweep of clean sand backed by cave-riddled 
cliffs. After a few hours' bodyboarding and breakfast, we hunted in the huge 
mysterious rock pools, catching tiny flatfish in a bucket. An entire day passed 
in blissful beach activity before we awarded it a 10 and trekked back to the 
van.

Next day was gloomy and rain-splattered, perfect for driving past the Milford 
Haven oil refineries. Looking at this petrochemical monstrosity now, it's hard 
to imagine how it ever got past the planning department in the late 1950s. Back 
then, however, there was the Suez Crisis and fears about petrol supplies. We 
stopped at Pembroke Castle to while away a little more of the drizzle, 
wondering if this massive crenellated fortification from the 12th century was 
also, in its day, considered a monstrous carbuncle.

The sun made a watery appearance as we rolled back into idyllic countryside, 
then through the village of Bosherston toTrefalen Farm 
<http://www.ukcampsite.co.uk/sites/details.asp?revid=6021>, another amazing 
clifftop campsite, though without much in the way of facilities. There was just 
time to don wetsuits and take a swim between the two sandy coves below the 
cliff. Maddy and I both awarded it eights for having such great caves and 
archways to explore.
 Whitesands Bay. Photograph by Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
Next day we wandered inland through Bosherston's famous lily ponds, spotting 
the otters that live there, then walked down toStackpole Quay 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/stackpole/>, Pembrokeshire's smallest harbour 
and a real gem. Apparently the sea wall is a favourite base for extravagant 
jumps into the water, but not at low tide. Fortunately the National Trust cafe 
there is not governed by the sun and moon: we filled up before turning west 
along the coast toBarafundle Bay 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/may/13/stackpole-estate-pembrokeshire-walk>
. This beautiful broad stretch of sand has been voted Britain's best beach many 
times and it is easy to see why: a lovely hinterland of woods and pastures, 
clean water and sand, plus a walk long enough to deter the crowds. We swam out 
to the famous three arches then I carried on alone back across the bay to 
explore the caves on the other side. Barafundle received the same 10 as Marloes 
Sands, but I'd say if you add in the lily ponds, cliffs and Stackpole cafe, it 
just about squeezes in as top beach.

Our week over, we strolled back along the cliffs. We'd found some great 
beaches but these had only whetted our appetites. After Stackpole Head Maddy 
spotted a gorgeous stretch of sand: there was no path down but we could see a 
line of footprints in the sand. How had they got there? A marathon swim? Kayak? 
Above the high-tide mark was a pile of driftwood.

"Plenty for a fire" she pointed out, "We could swim around and camp out for 
the night."

Our search for beach perfection was, I could see, only just beginning.


• This article was amended on 22 July 2013. An earlier version referred to 
Bosherston as Boshington.
 