
Another Conservative minister has been accused of blurring the role of a close 
adviser after an outside consultant with clients including BAA, Sky and Morgan 
Stanley was given a job in his department and handed out business cards bearing 
its name.

Greg Barker, the minister for climate change, worked closely in opposition 
with Miriam Maes, a Dutch-born environmental expert who also runsForesee 
<http://www.foreseeltd.co.uk/>, a company paid to advise multinational 
companies on climate change policy.

She was given a departmental staff pass to enter the building and continued to 
advise the minister after her departmental contract expired in May. Until 
Monday she claimed on her website to be an adviser to Barker.

A source close to the ministry said Mae was given business cards, which was an 
unusual move. "She handed them out to people she met in ministerial meetings," 
the source said.

The Department for Energy and Climate Change (Decc) has denied she was a 
formal government adviser to Barker, saying instead that she advised his 
department, which is a wholly different position.

"In her capacity as a delivery adviser to Decc on energy efficiency, she was 
given a business card," a Decc spokesman said.

Maes has now been asked to change her website to reflect that she is an 
adviser to the ministry and not the minister, the spokesman added.

"Miriam Maes is an expert in energy efficiency and worked for Decc on a 
consultancy basis as a delivery adviser between September 2010 and May this 
year following a competition. She was not appointed as an adviser to the 
minister of state, and we have asked Ms Maes to make that clearer on her 
website in order to avoid any misunderstanding," the spokesman said.

"The competition [for her job] was run by inviting a number of candidates 
considered to be energy efficiency experts to submit tenders. Miriam was 
appointed following sifting and an interview."

On Monday, Foresee's website <http://foreseeltd.co.uk/about.html> said: "In 
September 2010, Foresee's CEO, Miriam Maes, was appointed as delivery adviser 
to the minister of state for energy and climate change Gregory Barker in the 
Department for Energy and Climate Change."

On Tuesday, after the ministry was contacted by the Guardian, the wording was 
changed to say: "In September 2010, Foresee's CEO Miriam Maes was appointed as 
delivery adviser to the Department for Energy and Climate Change."

The Labour MP John Mann said the case raises questions for Barker and the 
government following Liam Fox's resignation over his relationship with an 
unofficial adviser,Adam Werritty <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>
. Werritty also handed out business cards claiming he was an adviser to the 
minister but Maes, at least, was known to the ministry.

"Greg Barker should have fully declared his past relationship with this 
person, whether it is written in the rules or not. There needs to be 
transparency about all ministerial connections with advisers. We need to know 
whether Barker was involved in her appointment, whether she stayed within her 
remit and if she is a special adviser who has been brought in through the back 
door, just like Werritty," he said.

Unlike in the Werritty case, Decc says it was fully aware that she was his 
adviser before he joined the ministry.

Barker has not declared any meetings with Maes or Foresee Ltd in attendance. 
The ministerial code states that ministers may meet many people and 
organisations and consider a wide range of views as part of the formulation of 
government policy, but should declare their encounters. "Departments will 
publish, at least quarterly, details of ministers' external meetings," the code 
says.

Her company received eight payments from Decc for "technical advice", between 
November 2010 and June 2011. These total £30,413.20.

Maes has worked for multinationals for 30 years. Her climate change 
consultancy company advises a number of companies including BAA, Sky, Morgan 
Stanley, Royal Mail and Centrica.

Special advisers, who are employed to advise ministers on political issues, 
are required to register their business interests with the parliamentary 
authorities.

Maes appears to have broken company law in registering companies under two 
different identities. Under the name Miriam Maes, she has registered 20 
directorships, and has resigned from all of those positions. Under her other 
identity Maria Henrica Maes, she has registered 13 directorships, including 
that of Foresee Ltd, and has resigned from nine of those.

Maes admitted that she has used two identities to register at Companies House 
but said that this was because she used both her real names Maria Henrica and 
her nickname of Miriam whilst registering companies. "There has been no serious 
breach as I am the same person," she said.
 