
The clothing chain American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> has once again had one 
of its ads banned for apparently sexualising a child – just six months after a 
similar ruling.

A web page advertising the retailer’s Lips Print thong bodysuit showed four 
images of a female model, one showing her from the back with her buttocks 
visible.

The Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Standards 
Authority (ASA) ordered the ad to be removed after receiving a complaint that 
it was irresponsible and offensive because it portrayed a sexualised image of a 
model who looked under 16 years of age.

American Apparel said it believed the image did not represent an underage 
model and said the female shown was 20 years old.

The company said the ad depicted the bodysuit from various angles and included 
an image of the thong component, adding that it was consistent with standards 
contained in similar campaigns.

But the ASA said: “We considered the model had a youthful appearance and that 
some consumers were likely to regard her as being younger than 16 years of age.

“The model was shown looking back at the camera over her shoulder with her 
buttocks visible. We considered that readers were likely to interpret the 
model’s expression and pose as being sexual in nature.”

It went on: “In conjunction with the youthful appearance of the model, we 
considered the ad could be seen to sexualise a child. We therefore concluded 
that the ad was irresponsible and was likely to cause serious offence.”

It ruled that the ad must not appear again in its current form, adding: “We 
told American Apparel to ensure future ads did not include images that 
inappropriately sexualised young women or were likely to cause serious offence.”

In September, the ASA banned an ad for American Apparel’s “back to school” 
range for “inappropriately sexualising” girls and potentially normalising 
predatory sexual behaviour.

The ASA said the two ads, which both showed the model photographed from behind 
from a low angle, imitated voyeuristic “up-skirt” shots taken without the 
subject’s consent or knowledge.

It also disputed American Apparel’s assertion that the ads were not part of 
its school campaign, saying they featured in its “school days” or “BTS” – which 
it understood to stand for back to school – lookbook.

And it noted that it was not possible to determine the age of the model 
because her face was not visible.

The ASA said at the time: “We considered that, from the context in which the 
ads appeared, it was likely that those who viewed them would understand that 
the model was, or was intended to appear to be, a schoolgirl.

“We considered the ads had the effect of inappropriately sexualising 
school-age girls and were therefore offensive and irresponsible for that reason 
too.”
 