
The Almighty plays a central part in the hallowed 12 steps of Alcoholics 
Anonymous. Six of them make reference to God, Him or Power. In one step, 
members vow to hand “our will and our lives” to God while another implores Him 
to remove their shortcomings.


Now the organisation’s religious undertone – and its utility in fighting 
alcoholism – has come under fire inCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, where an atheist has lodged a human 
rights complaint alleging AA discriminated against him.

For more than two years, Lawrence Knight has watched his complaint snake 
through the Ontario Human Rights Tribunal. Earlier this year, the tribunal said 
the complaintraised a number of complex legal issues 
<http://www.canlii.org/en/on/onhrt/doc/2016/2016hrto208/2016hrto208.html?resultIndex=12>
 and recommended it go to a full hearing.

Women now drink as much alcohol as men, global study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/24/women-drink-alcohol-men-global-study>
More than 23 years sober, Knight says he always found that the world of AA was 
an uneasy fit. “I come from a long line of humanists,” said the 59-year-old.

We Agnostics <http://www.aatorontoagnostics.com/>, a Toronto secular AA group 
created in 2010, seemed the perfect solution, offering all the support and 
companionship of AA but without the trappings of God. Here the 12 steps were 
still followed – each carefully rewritten to scrub out any mention of God or 
prayer.

But the group’s separation of church and sobriety didn’t sit well with some. 
In 2011, We Agnostics and Toronto’s other secular AA group,Beyond Belief 
<http://www.aabeyondbelief.com/>, were delisted from the Toronto AA website and 
directory, in effect removing them from the city’s network of 500 weekly 
meetings.

The decision prompted tears and shock among the three dozen or so people who 
had embraced the secular groups. “It was painful. It’s shunning,” said Knight. 
“It was unbelievable that an organisation that can’t kick anybody out, and that 
prides itself on that, had kicked us out.”

Members of the secular groups – worried that their hard-won efforts at staying 
sober were now in jeopardy – vowed to push forward. What emerged was a parallel 
system of sorts, one that has today swelled to about 350 members in 12 secular 
AA groups across Toronto.

As the secular movement grew in numbers, Knight and others continued to push 
to be brought back into Toronto’s AA fold. They appealed to the city’s 
coordinating body, urging them to reconsider the decision. “We ran into a brick 
wall,” said Knight.

Frustration drove him to lodge a human rights complaint two years ago, 
claiming that AA had discriminated against his group on the basis of creed. 
While directed at Toronto’s coordinating body, the complaint also names the 
highest levels of the organisation in North America. “They didn’t make any 
decisions directly,” said Knight. “But there is something that they did do, in 
my opinion, and that is the fact that there have been agnostic meetings for 40 
years, but they haven’t clarified anything; they didn’t have any human rights 
protocols in place.”

The result is a scattered approach to secularism around the world. In some 
places, such as New York City, secular groups are allowed to operate freely and 
under the umbrella of the local AA hierarchy. Other secular groups – from Des 
Moines to Vancouver – have been treated similarly to those in Toronto, pushed 
out and left to their own devices over their rejection of God.

Knight’s complaint will head to mediation in the coming weeks. To date, AA has 
argued to the tribunal that it is a special interest organisation, a status 
that affords it the right to restrict its membership.

The dispute hints at a broader question being asked among the group’s two 
million members worldwide as they seek to incorporate 12 steps first penned in 
the 1930s into modern times: How important is God and religion in AA’s quest to 
empower people to fight alcoholism?

Some, like Knight, argue that AA’s curative power lies not in religion, but 
instead in the fellowship it fosters. A growing body of research, he pointed 
out, now suggests that the roots of addictionare tangled in isolation and 
loneliness. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/12/johann-hari-chasing-the-scream-war-on-drugs>

The argument clashes with the Toronto coordinating body, which has argued to 
the tribunal that a belief in the higher power of God is a bona fide 
requirement for groups in Toronto.

Officials in Toronto declined to comment, while a spokesperson from AA World 
Services in New York City said the organisation was unable to comment as the 
matter was before the Human Rights Tribunal.

Knight is hoping that the human rights complaint will force the organisation 
to definitively address the long-simmering issue. “Alcoholism kills more people 
than it saves. It’s killed a lot of my friends, it’s killed a lot of my family, 
it’s an insidious thing. And the best support system in the world is AA.”


But the strength of that support hinges on AA being accessible to all. “The 
point is that anybody should be able to go to a meeting and not feel 
intimidated, not feel forced out or that they have to believe in something that 
somebody else believes,” he said. “Because that’s just ludicrous in this day 
and age.”
 