
In Napoli, putting mozzarella in the fridge is reasonable grounds for divorce. 
To pour wine for your neighbour at table with the bottle held in your upturned 
palm is mob code for 'Your time's up, pal'; the ingredient that turns meat and 
tomato sauce into Neapolitan ragu is love. These and everything you ever wanted 
to know about olive oil, the exact origins of the Margherita pizza and how to 
cook a tasty fish supper on an oxyacetylene lamp are the kinds of thing you 
learn on a Diane Seed cooking course.

Thirty-two years ago, advised to spend some time in the sun for her health, 
Seed closed her eyes and stuck a pin in a map of Europe. Her aim took her to 
Terrachina, just south of Rome, where began two love affairs - one with a 
handsome Italian gynaecologist, the other with Italy. Soon, she moved to Rome. 
She spent 15 years teaching English, while pursuing her untrained love of 
cooking in every market, shop and restaurant she could find. In 1987, her book 
Top 100 Pasta Sauces sold a million copies and has been followed by eight 
titles on Italian and Indian cookery. She has become Italian food expert for 
Marks & Spencer and works for the International Olive Oil Council.

Seed realised that the network of friends and colleagues she had built up 
across the country made her uniquely placed to offer tours exploring the 
authentic cookery on which she is now an authority. Four years ago, she put on 
her first trip to the 'heel' of Italy, and now offers trips to Puglia (Greek 
influence, the best pasta, great veg), Rome (seasonal selections from all over 
the country), Sicily (wildly diverse influences - French, Arab, Spanish) and 
Campania, taking in the Amalfi coast and Naples. It was on the latter trip that 
I joined Seed and 14 tourists from Australia, America and the UK, with a range 
of foodie credentials - from restaurant writers to world shopping champions 
with a taste for culture and a great meal.

After a welcome dinner at Seed's apartment in a Roman palazzo, we moved to our 
mountain base, in Sant'Agata Sui Due Golfi. This region traditionally has a 
'Mediterranean' diet, rich in vegetables, pasta, fish and olive oil, much 
trumpeted for the health benefits 'discovered' by US professor Ancel Keyes. 
'The idea of the happy peasant skipping around the Italian hills bursting with 
health has become something of a legend,' says Seed, 'and that kind of diet is 
now more the domain of privileged Americans and Australians. Trattorias serving 
that traditional, simple cooking are dying out in Italy's cities. But I have 
found family-run places which hand secret recipes down from generation to 
generation.'

Our first lesson, in the kitchen of a secluded seafront restaurant at the end 
of an unmade road, had as its centrepiece a fish simply baked in a huge crust 
of rock salt and drizzled with an olive oil and lemon juice dressing. More 
controversial, however, was the pasta course, the regional speciality of 
spaghetti con zucchini. Two families have confidentially claimed authorship of 
this famous recipe to Seed, and we came no closer to knowing its secrets that 
night. As we left the restaurant, she said with a sigh: 'They left something 
out of the zucchini sauce on purpose. That's how much rivalry there is here. Oh 
well, shan't ask them to teach that again.'

The next day, our teacher was another family-trained local restaurateur, the 
sister-in-law of our hostess from the night before. As she showed us how to 
prepare green tomato and pecorino sauce, tomato and aubergine sauce, an 
antipasti selection, huntsman's-style chicken and a salad, she rolled her eyes 
good-naturedly at our tale of the great zucchini swindle and gave her version 
of the story. 'When my restaurant closed for a year for refurbishment,' she 
told us, 'I helped out in their kitchen. The chefs watched over my shoulder and 
stole my secret touches. But they made sure I never saw exactly what they were 
doing!'

Other excursions included a trip to a tiny bungalow in a mountain village, 
boasting a Tardis-like handmade mozzarella plant in the front room. The hands 
of the family who run it are alarmingly scarlet from years of plunging them 
into near-boiling water to work the just-fermented cheese into its 
characteristic texture. A batch of the local hooch, limoncello, was prepared 
for us, and a trip to a food market in central Naples had half our group 
transfixed as a feisty little octopus made repeated breaks for freedom from his 
washing-up bowl on a seafood stall. Alan, we called him.

Afternoons off allowed excursions to many nearby hotspots - Capri, Sorrento, 
Amalfi, Positano and Ravello are all within easy reach. There were even a few 
opportunities to dress up of an evening, with visits to two of the swankiest 
restaurants in the area - one of which, Sant'Agata's triple-starred Michelin 
Don Alfonso, provided a spectacular seven-course blowout on our last night. Not 
that Seed has sold out her peasant side. 'This isn't trendy cooking,' she says. 
'I can't bear pretension about food.'

But the trip's greatest asset is Seed's own encyclopaedic knowledge of 
everything from the region's mythological significance to the best gelati café 
in Sorrento, to the slightly racy rumours about the lineage of the 
Oriental-looking chef in the next village. Being in the party of 'La Signora 
Inglese', as she is known across Italy, guarantees you at least an extra 
helping of charm and, more often than not, an extra course or two.

As she prepared to drop us off in Naples for some sightseeing, Seed pointed 
out a famous cake shop.'The first cakes sold in Naples were made in convents 
and sold to raise money for the church,' she told us. 'It's said that the nuns 
would spread out the flour, eggs and sugar mixture on marble benches and sit on 
the dough, chanting as they worked it with their bare cheeks.'

Fact file 

Diane Seed hosts six-night trips in Campania on 14 October and 4 November this 
year. The £1,200 price includes accommodation, transport within Italy and all 
meals except one evening, but does not include flights.

Roman kitchen courses (six nights, £600, flights and accommodation not 
included) run on 1 July, 26 August, 16 September, 7 October, 11 November and 2 
December.

A trip to Puglia (six nights, £1,600, not including flights) will run on 2 
September.

A new itinerary - in Sicily - is planned for next year.

For further information, contact by email at dianeseed@compuserve.com 
<mailto:dianeseed@compuserve.com> or fax on 00 39 06 679 7109.

Details of Diane Seed Gourmet Adventure holidays can also be found on her 
websitewww.italiangourmet.com <http://www.italiangourmet.com>.
 