
I am absolutely shattered. I knew it was going to be a tough 24 hours when I 
put a large gash in my knee with a drawknife. Off to A&E for a few stitches. 
Then, after an uncomfortable night, the human dawn chorus – that'll be the baby 
– got me up long before sunrise.

The Busker was already up, wandering through the woods with the rifle on the 
look-out for rabbits for supper. It was a beautiful morning: the stars still 
visible as the sky lightened from dark to light blue. I fed the pigs and 
checked to see if the geese had laid any eggs. They're supposed to start laying 
around Valentine's Day, but we haven't seen any of their pure-white eggs yet 
this year.

The only task for the day was to plant 300 trees. It went slightly against our 
principles to get in paid help because we try to do everything ourselves (not 
because we're obsessed with self-reliance but more because we're on a 
shoestring). But we knew that putting so many trees in the ground in one day 
was probably beyond us without the help of a pro, so we called on Pete, a local 
forester from Longerview Forestry.

He rolled up before 8am and we quickly found a system. I laid out stakes with 
the point where I wanted the "whips" and Pete came up behind me and put them 
in. Whips are the tiny saplings – about knee or thigh high – that you plant by 
placing them in a slit that you've made with your spade. People tend to think 
tree planting involves digging a huge hole, as that's what you normally see on 
ceremonial plantings by princes and politicians. But this was just a quick 
slit, bundle up the roots, slip them in, and close up the slit with your boot.

Sounds like a breeze, but we quickly came up against all sorts of problems. It 
was tricky trying to place the stakes in non-geometric lines. However hard I 
tried, it's hard to be consciously random. Because I was spacing them 2m apart, 
the whole first batch looked dangerously like the road plan of a Roman city: 
all perpendicular and perfectly parallel. Unless you're a bit of a neatness 
freak, it seems unnaturally ordered. There were other difficulties. Being an 
old quarry the ground is rock hard in places and lots of the stakes would just 
snap like uncooked spaghetti as we tried to drive them in.

However over the next few hours we found a good rhythm. Since it was 
Wednesday, our volunteer day, all sorts of people rolled up: C and P and D 
helped us smack in the stakes and put the green guards over the whips to 
protect them from the deer and rabbits. The Busker was in charge of the shrubs, 
putting in yellow and red dogwoods, spindles and guelder roses.

By lunchtime we had done about 200 trees and the entire landscape looked 
completely transformed. In between the large log stacks from the felling, were 
masses of vertical guards. Although you couldn't see the trees inside the 1.2m 
tubes, you could almost glimpse the future: that clearing by the chickens is 
where we are going to put the bell tent; inside that semi-circle of invisible 
oaks is where we will dig a large pond; that clearing by the cave is where the 
sauna/sweat-lodge might go.

The afternoon was hard work since we had left the stoniest area until last. 
Energy levels were flagging. Our hands were covered with the green goo from the 
tanalised stakes and our shoulders were aching from whacking them in. Up on the 
rocky plateau it was much harder to get them to go in vertically so some of the 
guards ended up looking more like the leaning tower of Pisa.

But by half-four we had planted all 300 and it looked great. For the first 
time since we moved here almost two years ago the place finally looks like a 
working woodland. My daughters Benny and Emma took a ribbon and tied it round 
one of the rowans, since today was their grandmother's birthday. We tied 
another ribbon round an oak for our friend Pam.

And then off to feed the pigs again, have supper, shut up the chickens and 
geese, do the washing up, get the kids to bed and change the bandage on my 
gammy knee. It's relentless, hard work, but always rewarding.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 