
We're bound for an unusual "cottage". It's a sleeper coach, charmingly called 
Wendy, after the character from Peter Pan which was published a year before the 
carriage was built in 1905. As well as the website's road directions to 
Aberporth, there is a picture with big black arrows showing how to get from car 
park to carriage. Even we can't screw up with this amount of spoon-feeding.

Someone once told me that 75% of self-catering visitors bring all their food 
with them in the car boot, instead of buying it fresh on arrival. I have since 
endeavoured, when feasible, to buy locally. So it's helpful to get an email 
response from the cottage company recommending not only a farm shop, but also a 
local smokery, before we leave.

We're on a roll this time — first my bloke and I find the Rhydlewis trout 
fishery and smokery off the A487 at Sarnau with ease. Here a chatty woman sells 
us eggs, packets of smoked trout and rashers of bacon. Finding the Llwynhelyg 
farm shop is a lot easier than spelling it and there we scoop up handfuls of 
purple sprouting broccoli, new potatoes, and a packet of Welsh butter. Before 
we know it, we've even found the right car park, and hit the Ceredigion 
Heritage Coast footpath in search of Wendy.

"Blimey, how far is this place?" asks my bloke as we drink in the views of 
rock and sea on one side, fields edged with bungalows on the other. Here she 
is, long and thin, brown and cream, looking out across Cardigan Bay, and very 
old-fashioned indeed. Through a gate and we're aboard, like the Famous Five off 
on an adventure. While one sticks the kettle on in the surprisingly normal 
kitchen at one end of the carriage, the other fetches luggage. (No prizes for 
guessing who does what.)

The oak interior is cosy but very simple, there are thoughtful touches like a 
vase of flowers on the dining table (yes, there's a dining room), a packet of 
Welsh cakes, and the ornate solid fuel burner in the sitting room has been 
beautifully laid for our arrival. The bathroom, at the opposite end to the 
kitchen, has a large shower cubicle, but could do with a shelf to put 
toiletries on. Unlike normal trains, mercifully the loo neither has a spooky 
electric door nor a puddle on the floor. We pick a bedroom and dump our bags on 
a large shelf. The mattress is on a wide built-in shelf (so we call it Platform 
Two) and there's a small wardrobe.

We settle down on the small leather sofa, resting our mugs on an old trunk 
which doubles as a coffee table and munching the Welsh cakes, which look like a 
Passover version of scones. Apart from the occasional walker who strides by the 
gate, there is nothing out there except grass and sky.

Walking to bed down the narrow corridor which is aglow with little wall 
lights, I keep expecting the carriage to lurch and send me flying. "If they 
painted that picket fence white instead of brown we'd think we were at a 
station," says my bloke, pulling up the blinds in the morning. We tumble into 
jumpers and jeans and walk along the path to the beach at Tresaith, scanning 
the blue horizon for dolphins and seals. We're unlucky, but there are gannets 
aplenty divebombing into the sea.

Back on board, we eat delicious trout and eggs at a table and bench on a small 
"veranda" which has been added to Wendy's front. (In the visitors' book one 
guest writes of taking the mattresses outside to sleep on hot summer nights.) 
We sip tea, gazing at our sea view, content to do nothing much at all.

• sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>

• underthethatch.co.uk <http://www.underthethatch.co.uk>. Three-night break 
from £225
 