
"Self-care is one of the great ideas that the NHS has to grasp. At the moment 
they think too much that healthcare professionals should be looking after 
everyone all the time. But patients should be helped to do more for 
themselves." Safina Wahid is a tutor with the Expert Patients Programme 
Community Interest Company, a not-for-profit social enterprise that used to be 
run by theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. She teaches people in 
Yorkshire with long-term medical conditions such as diabetes, arthritis and 
heart problems, and their carers, how to better manage their situation.

Wahid, 32, began teaching after finding that an EPP CIC course called Looking 
After Me helped her to cope with the demands of looking after a husband with 
bipolar disorder, two young children and her own reliance on anti-depressants.

"On my course I learned about positive cognitive thinking, the reinforcement 
of action planning, better breathing techniques and guided imagery, in which 
you imagine you're somewhere you really love, with all your problems elsewhere 
locked in a box. All those can help you stay calm, reduce time off work, 
increase your energy and self-confidence, and make your pain seem less severe. 
They also reduce the demand onGPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps>, 
hospitals and rehabilitation services."

Co-production, as it is known in the jargon, involves the patient tackling the 
illness in partnership with their clinician, rather than being passive 
recipients of care. It is seen by its supporters as an innovative and 
cost-effective solution to rising levels of chronically ill people.

"Given the growing number of people with a long-term condition – 15.4 million 
in England alone – we need people to be able to self-care as much as possible. 
But to make that change the government and NHS need to become aware of the 
overwhelming effect that these self-care programmes have on patients' and 
carers' quality of life and put more money into them."

Behind the programme is the idea that patients can be as knowledgeable as 
clinical professionals in the day-to-day management of their condition. Wahid 
says: "GPs need to realise that these programmes exist and really encourage 
patients to use them, because they help you to take control of your life."
 