
It has been described by previous holders of the post as the second hardest 
job in America – certainly the most glamorous civic one – and for the past 12 
years has been filled by the polished, autocratic, paternalistic boots of the 
financial data billionaire Mike Bloomberg.

On 10 September, New Yorkers will begin the process of electing a successor 
with themain party primaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/13/new-york-mayor-democratic-debate-weiner>
. The mayoral election itself is on 5 November.

It is a contest that, on the Democratic side, has become an extraordinary 
battle involving disputes over sex, race, gender and family values, as well as 
an evaluation of Bloomberg'sNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, which many feel has become more 
economically and racially polarised during his era.

The tone of the political season was defined, less than two months ago, by a 
sexual scandal involving Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/29/anthony-weiner-wanker-mayor-candidate>
, the former city congressman, who is one of the Democratic candidates. 
Frontrunners in the party's race are the Italian-American DemocratBill de Blasio
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/13/bill-thompson-christine-quinn-nyc-runoff>
, the city's elected public advocate, and Christine Quinn, the New York city 
council speaker and Bloomberg's designated successor.

De Blasio is a progressive candidate with a wife of African descent; he 
champions the outer boroughs and depicts the Bloomberg era as unfeeling and 
undemocratic. Polls suggest he may pull far enough ahead to prevent a run-off 
between the top two Democratic candidates on 1 October. But that's only if 
Quinn, the candidateendorsed by the New York Times  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/25/opinion/sunday/two-endorsements.html>and 
much of the liberal political establishment, fails to counter depictions of her 
as a tough, Manhattan-focused, Bloomberg-lite who shows little feeling for the 
issues affecting middle-class families.

With de Blasio having 32% support among likely voters and Quinn battling Bill 
Thompson, the African-American candidate who came close to beating Bloomberg in 
2009, in the high teens, the New York mayoral race is in the midst of an 
unexpected turnaround.

But the prospects of the candidates – seven on the Democratic side, four on 
the Republican ticket – are closely tied to the shifting sensibilities of a 
large number of uncommitted voters who are more likely to identify candidates 
they would not support than ones they would.

"There are not enough issues being talked about and the candidates are not 
staying on track with the issues that are being talked about," says Pamela 
Garcia, a community activist in the Flatbush area of Brooklyn.

Garcia had come to a forum to press the candidates on education, widely 
considered to be an area of weakness in Bloomberg's record. She felt the 
candidates and voters were too easily distracted by issues related to their 
personal lives.

"Whenever you have a candidate whose personal life is somewhat different to 
the norm, or you have one who has admitted to adultery, or another who speaks 
highly of his wife who had a relationship with another woman in the past, it 
makes you pause," Garcia says. "But you still have to be clear-sighted over the 
real issues."

Garcia is referring to Quinn (who is married to Kim Catullo, a woman), to 
Weiner (whose "sexting" recidivism destroyed his candidacy) and to De Blasio, 
who has presented his wife Chirlane, a former lesbian, and Afro-haired 
15-year-old son Dante as proof of his modern, middle-class, multicultural 
credentials.

De Blasio has benefited from a proposal to tax the wealthiest New Yorkers for 
universal pre-kindergarten education, and from a recent legal ruling which 
concluded that senior city officials had turned a blind eye to evidence that 
the city's police department's stop-and-frisk policy was conducted in a 
"racially discriminatory manner". In a TV ad,Dante de Blasio takes direct aim 
at Bloomberg, 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/son-big-hair-deblasio-big-lift-nyc-mayor-race-article-1.1441104>
 promising his father will be the "only one who will end an era of 
stop-and-frisk that unfairly targets people of colour".

With her ties to Bloomberg and his unpopular policing policies, that is a 
position Quinn, who depends on a large turnout of women and gay voters to win, 
cannot reasonably hope to emulate, and her campaign's attacks on De Blasio have 
largely missed the mark. Quinn recently took issue with Chirlane de Blasio over 
a comment she interpreted as suggesting that, as a childless woman, Quinn could 
not identify with family issues.

The candidate said she took "great personal offence to the comment, as does my 
wife". But that backfired after the De Blasio campaign was able to show that 
Chirlane had been misquoted by Maureen Dowd, the queen ofNew York Times 
columnists.

Still the dispute hinted at an issue, primarily among women, over gender and 
equality that is likely to be resurrected if Hillary Clinton runs for president 
in 2016. The Hollywood star Susan Sarandon had expected to support Quinn to 
become the city's first female mayor. But after Quinn backed Bloomberg in 2008 
in a move to extend term limits, allowing him to serve a third term, and failed 
to support paid sick-leave legislation, Sarandon switched her endorsement to De 
Blasio. "It became clear to me that as a woman, you can't just vote your 
vagina," she said. .

But in New York's tribal political environment, sex can hardly be disqualified 
as an issue and by invoking the "vagina vote", Sarandon appeared to counter 
feminist writer Gloria Steinem who had earlier released a campaign video 
supporting Quinn.

"Imagine how much it will mean to girls and young women, and young men, too, 
to see that it's possible to have a woman in what is always said to be the 
second most important job in this nation," Steinem offered.

Recast as a postmodern family values and sexual equality contest, the mayoral 
race is as much about looking beyond the traditional white male mindset of 
Bloomberg and Weiner as an illustration that the white vote in New York is on 
the verge of becoming a minority vote.

With time running out and De Blasio the candidate to beat, his rivals are 
expected to recalibrate their attack for the final televised debate on Tuesday.

But attacks will not settle the question of whether the city is heading in the 
right or wrong direction after 12 years of Bloomberg rule. It is clear that 
whileManhattan has been transformed by development 
<http://www.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2013/08/18/reshaping-new-york/> – the 
Bloomberg campaign draws attention to 400 miles of bike paths and 
three-quarters of a million new trees – the outer boroughs have not seen 
similar improvements.

With his slogan of "a tale of two cities" hinting at economic disparity 
between Manhattan and his strongholds of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx, De 
Blasio is offering a clean break from Bloomberg. In a city where white 
residents are becoming a voting minority, and barring any last-minute upset, 
that appears to be a winning position.

Still, voters like Garcia worry that De Blasio's promises will prove as empty 
as those made by others before him. In July he was arrested for civil 
disobedience during a protest over plans to close a Brooklyn hospital and sell 
the buildings.

"We know hospitals are closing every year," says Garcia, "and it's not a big 
deal to join a protest.

"What would be a big deal would be to describe a way to find the funds to keep 
the hospital open after you've been elected to office."
 