
I am an independent sexual violence adviser (ISVA) at Respond 
<http://www.respond.org.uk/>, a charity working with people with learning 
disabilities who have suffered trauma and/or sexual abuse. I am the only ISVA 
specialising in people with learning disabilities in the UK and I cover 13 
London boroughs.

Preventing child sexual exploitation: in an ideal world my job wouldn't exist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/aug/14/preventing-child-sexual-exploitation-in-an-ideal-world-my-job-wouldnt-exist>
I have spent most of my life working with survivors of violence but it was by 
chance that I ended up at Respond. After running aRape Crisis 
<http://rapecrisis.org.uk/> centre in Kent for 10 years, I felt it was time to 
move back to London and frontline work. I worked for a national charity, until 
its strict retirement criteria of 65 meant I had to leave. I knew it would not 
be able to cater for one of my clients, because she had a learning disability, 
so searched for another service that could. I found Respond and took her there 
to meet the ISVA, who happened to be leaving. That was five years ago.

Sarah

Today, like most days, will be spent away from the office. My first 
appointment is a strategy meeting in west London for Sarah, a woman in her 
forties, with mild/moderate learning disabilities. I am there to advocate on 
Sarah’s behalf. Others attending are a social worker, a support worker and a 
sexual offences investigative techniques officer – apolice constable assigned 
to victims of rape and sexual assault.

Sarah didn’t want to come; she didn’t want to miss her class at college. She 
was raped last winter by someone who had befriended her on a bus. She told me 
that her world collapsed that day. Since then we have had to fight to get her 
rehoused and increase her support hours. Like most of my clients, I feel that 
if only social services had put strategies in place for Sarah years earlier, it 
might have saved her going through this nightmare and saved the taxpayer tens 
of thousands of pounds.

She had been typical of many women with learning disabilities who often live 
isolated lives, making them vulnerable. Had she had some safeguarding measures 
put around her or, at the very least, been given some practical and emotional 
support, this situation might never have arisen.

I have always valued the unique experience of working with the remarkable 
women and men who strive to overcome abuse

At today’s meeting the police officer told us that the Crown Prosecution 
Service will be pressing charges. We discuss the likely timeline and social 
services agree to continue her increased support hours. The trial will probably 
be at least six months away. We arrange a meeting with Sarah the following 
week, after the initial hearing, to explain the procedure to her.

Pam

Next up, I am meeting Pam at a day centre. She suffered abuse throughout her 
childhood and also ended up vulnerable and isolated, and became targeted for 
sex by men in her area. She’s come a long way since we first started working 
together and is now living a safe and fulfilling life. I have a quick tea with 
her and catch up with her news. I tell her about Respond’s women’s group, a 
weekly support group for women with learning disabilities who have experienced 
trauma. Together we fill out the referral form.

Evidence based practice makes things better for vulnerable people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/aug/13/evidence-based-practice-social-work-vulnerable-people>
Jean

Then it’s over to Southwark crown court, for a pre-trial visit. My client, 
Jean, is very anxious about an upcoming court case. We meet at London Bridge 
and walk over to the court. I work to reassure her, explaining where she will 
go in to the building on the day and how she will be safe. We go straight to 
the witness service area and meet a volunteer who shows us round the courtroom. 
When leaving, Jean seems reassured. “It’s not like telly,” she says.

I grab a sandwich en route to my next client who has recently moved into a new 
flat. Besides wanting to see how she’s doing, I need her to sign a consent form 
for criminal injuries compensation and check that the details of her claim are 
correct. I explain that the processing of the claim will take about two years.


‘I go home on the bus ... this transition time helps to clear my head’

 The writer, Annie Rose. ‘It was a series of weird connections that led me 
here.’ Photograph: Annie Rose 
It can be a tough job but, despite the heinous nature of rape and sexual 
assault, working with those who are struggling to survive and those who 
overcome such destabilising experiences is the most rewarding job I know. It 
was a series of weird connections that led me from support working in Chiswick 
Women’s Aid in the early 70s, through to managing the East Kent Rape Crisis and 
onto my present role as the ISVA at Respond. I have always valued the unique 
experience of working with the remarkable women and men who strive to overcome 
abuse and trauma.

The care and camaraderie of the support network who strive to make a 
difference help to make this a job I would not trade for any other. Yet the 
core concept of sexual abuse and people with learning disabilities does not 
seem to permeate society’s consciousness; nor does it receive the attention it 
is owed by the statutory services. My status of being the only Home 
Office-funded learning disability ISVA in the UK is a sad testament to that 
fact.


It was my passion and anger that led me to work with this client group in the 
first place, and these strengths keep me going now, but it can be very, very 
tiring. On this day, as every other, I will go home on the bus. It takes longer 
than the tube, but I value this transition time as it helps me to clear my 
head. I get home just in time for The Archers – all is well in the world, 
except in Ambridge!

Names of clients have been changed

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.



 