 There will be few wet eyes among the political classes if Shaun Woodward fails 
to find a seat to contest in time for the general election. He made himself a 
political orphan in December 1999 when he resigned from the Conservative party 
and announced his intention to sit on the Labour benches. Many - in his new 
party as well as his old one - found this sudden conversion shocking. He had 
never hidden his support for one nation Conservatism, but he had continued 
anti-Labour diatribes until hours before he crossed the floor.
Nonetheless, Conservatives who complained that Mr Woodward's defection was 
driven solely by ambition missed the point. Far from thriving in his new party 
he has been forced to wander the country as a political curiosity, awaiting a 
possible Millbank raid on a safe Labour constituency with an ageing, pliant MP 
willing to be kicked upstairs to the Lords in order to squeeze in this prize 
defector.

Many doubt that this raid will ever take place. In 1997 Labour found a haven 
in Newport East for another former Tory, Alan Howarth, now a Labour minister. 
But Mr Howarth's defection, abandoning the safe seat of Stratford on Avon, was 
considered over three years and taken in two stages, including years as a 
semi-detached Tory. In contrast, Mr Woodward's defection seemed almost petulant.

The spark which led him to walk out was the Conservative party's defence of 
section 28, a never used piece of legislation restricting the right of local 
authorities to teach same-sex education in schools. When Labour proposed 
abolishing the section, Conservative whips made it clear that their MPs were 
expected to vote against.

Similar anger at this leaden-footed approach to homosexuality later caused 
Ivan Massow, a prominent young Tory, to defect. In both cases, the defections 
left Tory wets still in the party disappointed that the defectors had not 
chosen to stay and fight their corner.

Ill feeling against Mr Woodward is undoubtedly compounded by his wealth. He is 
married to a Sainsbury heiress, Camilla, the daughter of former Tory minister 
Sir Tim Sainsbury. He is said to be the only Labour MP with a butler and lives 
in grand style in Oxfordshire.

This has not stopped him playing up his modest beginnings as the son of a 
porter and a barmaid. And there is certainly no doubt that he was a clever, 
ambitious young man. After a double first in English literature at Jesus 
College, Cambridge, he entered television, becoming a producer at the BBC and 
working on programmes such as Panorama and That's Life.

In 1990 he was headhunted by the Conservative party chairman, Chris Patten and 
became communications director at central office. With Saatchi & Saatchi, he 
devised the "Labour Tax Bombshell" posters which helped swing the 1992 election 
in John Major's favour. Mr Woodward had joined the Conservative party in 1988 
and was pipped at being selected that year for the seat of Woodspring by Dr 
Liam Fox.

In 1995, after Douglas Hurd announced his retirement, he was selected for 
Witney in preference to Francis Maude. Once in the Commons, he was one of the 
few who backed Stephen Dorrell for the leadership, before switching to the 
equally Europhile Kenneth Clarke.

In his maiden speech he defended country sports - a stance not likely to go 
down well with the Labour opponents of fox hunting who will now decide whether 
or not he gets a chance to continue his Westminster career.

Ask Aristotle about Shaun Woodward 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5668,00.html>
 