
"We came here as champions and we intend to go home as champions." It's not 
every day a Middlesbrough player gets to make such a bold declaration but then 
again, Mohamed Shawky isn't an average Middlesbrough player; he's a 
below-average Middlesbrough player; for now.

Since joining Middlesbrough from Cairo giants Al Ahly last summer, Shawky has 
appeared just twice for Boro, for 45 minutes against Spurs in the Carling Cup 
and a full 90 minutes in the Premier League victory at Fratton Park. Such 
inactivity has given him a degree of anonymity in Middlesbrough that clearly 
isn't matched in Africa. As he relaxes in the Pharoahs' team hotel in Kumasi 
ahead of tomorrow's daunting Cup of Nations semi-final against Ivory Coast, 
Shawky is, along with captain Ahmed Hassan and elegant playmaker Mohamed 
Aboutrika, the most sought-after face for autograph hunters and well-wishers.

Hardly surprising, really, when you consider that he played every minute of 
Egypt's triumphant 2006 campaign and was an equally key midfielder in the Al 
Ahly team that reached two Champions League finals - winning one - in the three 
seasons he was with them before heading to the Riverside. Polite and genial, he 
smiles and chats happily with his admirers and, when accosted by a GU hack at 
large, humbly admits that the adulation he enjoys from Pharoahs fans contrasts 
markedly with the indifference he inspires in Boro fans, most of whom wouldn't 
recognise him even if he sat down beside them on the bus. Literally.

"It's true!" he chortles. "I often get the bus around Middlesbrough when I'm 
buying groceries and not many people seem to give me a second look. But when 
people do recognise me, they're very nice and friendly. Sure, the weather's a 
bit cold from time to time, but so what? The club and the city are warm. I'm 
very happy there."

Not yet fully conversant in English, Shawky bristles when, presumably due to 
an error by the Egyptian FA official who has kindly agreed to act as our 
interpreter, I suggest he's been illuminating dance floors all across the 
north-east. "What are you talking about?" he protests, an exasperated frown 
distorting his hitherto genial visage. "I go to work, do my best there and go 
straight home, unless I need something at the shops. That's it. My life is 
simple and focused."

In fact, what I'd asked was whether he's finding it difficult to adapt to 
English football. "Oh right," he says, satisfied the slur was unintentional. 
"It's very different to what I've been used to - much quicker, much more 
physical. And the mentality is different too; the level of professionalism and 
thoroughness is incredible. But that's all what makes it so challenging and 
exciting.

"People say that having Mido there must makes things easier and that's true - 
we get on very well and he's been really helpful - but even if he weren't 
there, my determination would be the same. I really want to succeed with 
Middlesbrough and the manager, like myself, is confident I'll do so."

Though he's hardly used him, Gareth Southgate has praised Shawky's eagerness 
to adapt and insists that, once he becomes accustomed to the fury of the 
Premier League, he'll be able to showcase the neat passing and furtive running 
that, along with ferocious long-range shooting, are his trademark. "He 
[Southgate] is a good coach and I enjoy working with him. He tells me that he 
sees me playing the same role for Middlesbrough that I do for Egypt. Even while 
I'm here in Ghana he's been watching all our matches and he rings me almost 
every day, encouraging and reassuring me."

Southgate could come to rely on Shawky in the way the Egypt manager Hassan 
Shehata does. After losing the likes of Mido and Mohamed Barakat to injury 
prior to the tournament, Shehata, who is aiming to become the first manager 
ever to retain the trophy, had to fast-track a handful youngsters into the 
squad, making Shawky, at 26, one of the team's senior influences.

"The experience and intelligence of players such as Shawky are one of the 
factors that has helped us get this far," said Shehata yesterday. "Against
Angola in the quarter-final <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vdh2g90o_ao>, for 
example, when times was running out and our opponents were desperately trying 
to get an equaliser, they kept possession of the ball perfectly, while all the 
time probing."

Shawky shrugs at such compliments. "We've lost some good players since 2006 
but the guys that have come in have plenty of qualities of their own and I 
really don't need to offer much guidance. But about 70% of the team are from 
2006 and we still play the same system - that's why I think we've a great 
chance of beating the Ivory Coast. Yes, they're a very strong side but don't 
forget that we beat them twice in 2006."

That last comment is chorused by several other Egyptian players. None of them 
pointed out that the first victory was in a group match for which Les Elephants 
fielded a second-string side, having already qualified for the next round, and 
that the final only went to penalties because Didier Drogba missed two sitters. 
And that was in Cairo. And the Ivorians have got even stronger since then.

Drogba, Salomon Kalou, Aruna Dindane, Abdel Kader Keita, Arouna Kone, Bakary 
Kone - the Ivorians boast an array of attackers that only Brazil, Argentina 
and, possibly, France can rival. Given that fact, and bearing in mind how cagey 
Egypt were in the final two years ago, it seems likely that the fluid 3-5-2 
formation the Pharoahs have used to overwhelm the likes of Cameroon and Angola 
in this tournament will collapse into a 5-3-2 tomorrow. But Shehata is adamant 
his team, in keeping with the spirit of enterprise that has already made Ghana 
2008 the best international tournament since Euro 2000, will attack.

"I think both teams will play offensively," said Shehata. "My team is fit and 
I prepared them for the physical and psychological demands of this tournament 
by playing three friendlies in eight days last January. But I think the 
Ivorians are probably more powerful so I don't want the game to go extra-time - 
we plan to win this in 90 minutes."

"If that's what the coach tells us to do, then that's what we'll strive to 
do," says Shawky simply. "Like I said, we came here as champions and we intend 
to go home as champions.

Can't see it happening myself. But Egypt will certainly be the Ivorians' 
toughest opponents so far. Les Elephants were iffy against Nigeria and met both 
Mali and Guinea when those sides were shorn of their most influential players 
(Mahamadou Diarra and Pascal Feindouno being suspended, and Frédéric Kanouté 
picking up a half-time injury). Yaya Touré has been outstanding but he will 
probably have to up his game even further to disrupt the cohesion of Shawky, 
Aboutrika and Hosni Abd Rabou.

"If we retain our trophy, I'll go back to Middlesbrough tired from having 
played six intense games in 19 days," admits Shawky. "But I assure you, I'll be 
no less determined to succeed."
 