
In 1961, when Truman Capote was considering an actress for the part of Holly 
Golightly in the film adaptation of his novelBreakfast at Tiffany's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/breakfast-at-tiffany-s>, Marilyn Monroe was 
his choice. But Paramount insisted on giving the part to Audrey Hepburn, the 
waifish former model who was far more in the style of Jackie Kennedy, the 
country's new first lady, than the troubled Hollywood star.

Capote was dismayed by the choice, but Hepburn went on to make the role her 
own, so much so that her image in the movie - swept-up hair, little black dress 
- has come to evoke an entire era. Standing outside Tiffany's jewellery store 
in New York in the film's opening scene, impossibly soignée in a sculpted 
evening gown, Hepburn represents both the elegance of the period and a sense of 
class barriers about to break down. Locked out of the shop, which has not yet 
started business for the day, Hepburn still manages to convey - as she does 
throughout the film - an unshakeable conviction that its doors will one day 
open for her.

"She's a phoney," says Martin Balsam, playing a visiting Hollywood agent who 
knows Golightly's secret small-town background, "but she's a real phoney." The 
film is set in a time of optimism, two years before Jack Kennedy's 
assassination, and of innocence, just before the sexual revolution arrived to 
sweep away both its certainties and its paradoxes.

Golightly seems like a girl on the make, a sophisticated New Yorker with her 
sights set on a rich husband. But through all the wild parties, she remains 
untouched, gradually revealing her true self to George Peppard, playing an 
impoverished author who has moved into the apartment upstairs. Hepburn lives on 
her own, in a stylish flat, but she inhabits a moment when a woman's career 
consists of a good marriage and virginity remains a unit of exchange. (Is 
Holly, as she appears to be in the film, a virgin? In one of its many 
ambiguities, she assures a bemused Peppard that her marriage to a Texan horse 
doctor was annulled rather than ending in divorce.)

Holly may be brittle and sophisticated, but she is also unknowing, claiming 
not to realise that the "weather reports" she carries for a drug dealer in Sing 
Sing are coded messages to his accomplices. The movie relies heavily on her 
childlike screen presence to preserve the pristine sentimentality that lies 
beneath its couldn't-care-less facade. This is most evident in the final scene 
between Hepburn and an extremely wet (in both senses) Peppard, but it also 
emerges earlier in the film, when Hepburn climbs through a window in his 
apartment at four in the morning, escaping from an over-enthusiastic admirer, 
and finds him in bed. "Do you mind if I just get in with you for a minute?" she 
asks, snuggling up beside him. Peppard holds her like a child until she wakes 
in tears from a nightmare and exits through the same window.

 After a performance that appears to mistake dullness for reticence, and 
asexuality for inexperience, it isn't surprising that Peppard never made the 
leap into the major roles predicted for him. But the scene is striking for 
other reasons: one of them a sense of how differently Monroe would have played 
it, the other a realisation of the paradoxical qualities that made Hepburn a 
major star, but only briefly.

Unlike Monroe and Doris Day - with whom she perhaps has more in common - 
Hepburn does not feature in Women in Film: an International Guide, the 
authoritative volume edited by the feminist critic Annette Kuhn, with Susannah 
Radstone. She is famous for a handful of movies, including My Fair Lady in 
1964, but her film career was effectively over by 1968, when she divorced her 
first husband, the actor Mel Ferrer, and moved to Rome with her second, an 
Italian psychiatrist called Dr Andrea Dotti. A brief comeback in the 1970s 
produced only two movies, both of them undistinguished. Robin and Marian, in 
1976, cast Hepburn improbably as Maid Marian in a medieval caper in which a 
middle-aged Robin Hood returns to Sherwood Forest after years in exile; and 
Bloodline, an adaptation in 1979 of a Sidney Sheldon novel, which was candidly 
described by one critic as "unbearable".

A few more films followed in the 1980s, after her divorce from Dotti, but it 
seemed as thoughHepburn's heart was no longer in cinema. Towards the end of her 
life she lived with another actor, Robert Wolders, who shared her Dutch 
background, and threw herself into a new career as a roving ambassador for the 
UN children's agency, Unicef. When she died of colon cancer at her home in 
Switzerland in 1993, her first husband was a pall-bearer at her funeral, 
signalling her capacity for enduring friendship in an industry notorious for 
feuds and rivalries.

What is not clear is whether Hepburn tired of cinema or whether she 
recognised, pragmatically, that she was too much of her era to enjoy a lengthy 
acting career. An exact contemporary of Jackie Kennedy - both were born to 
wealthy parents in 1929 - Hepburn's background was cosmopolitan. Born near 
Brussels, Edda Kathleen van Heemstra Hepburn-Ruston has often been described as 
Dutch because she grew up in the Netherlands with her parents, a Dutch baroness 
and an Anglo-Irish banker. Commenting on her gamine appearance, critics 
recalled that she spent her childhood in Nazi-occupied Holland, where food was 
in short supply and the family was sometimes reduced to eating tulip bulbs.

Yet this ignores the fact that Hepburn began her modelling career as 
slenderness was becoming the order of the day; her willowy good looks were the 
precursor of a style that would, within a few years, be democratised by Twiggy 
and Jean Shrimpton. And even if Hepburn was perceived as having class, it was 
not in a straightforward way; Holly Golightly cheekily appropriates the manners 
of the rich in Breakfast at Tiffany's and Eliza Doolittle, three years later in 
My Fair Lady, has painfully to acquire them. This suggests that Hepburn's most 
important films are about reinvention, specifically what it means to be a 
woman, at a time of increasing gender insecurity.

Unlike Monroe, only three years older but seeming to belong to an earlier 
generation, she does not use her sexuality in an overt way. The threat her 
beauty might pose is instead deflected by an emphasis on her infantile and 
androgynous qualities. "It was a face beyond childhood, yet this side of 
belonging to a woman," Capote wrote of Golightly, perfectly capturing the 
yearnings and anxieties with which men were beginning to regard women shortly 
before the sexual revolution got going.

Yet if Hepburn's screen persona represents an experiment in the modernisation 
of femininity, its limitations are also writ large - and not just because of 
its dependence on her youth. She had actually been around as an actress since 
the early 1950s, when she won an Oscar for Roman Holiday, and was 32 by the 
time she took on Holly Golightly; when she retired in 1968, aged 39, she may 
not have relished the character parts that would soon beckon in an incorrigibly 
ageist business.

 Yet there is also a sense in which Hepburn's onscreen modernity, like Holly 
Golightly's, was only skin-deep. Her trademark look, all sculpted hair, 
cigarette holder and picture hats, was the antithesis of the hippie déshabillé 
that came into fashion as the 1960s progressed. It was also, again like 
Golightly, essentially the product of a series of male constructions, 
principally the couturier Hubert de Givenchy, who dressed her for Breakfast at 
Tiffany's and came to regard her as something of a muse. It is here that the 
parallel with Jackie Kennedy becomes most insistent. At the beginning of the 
1960s, the first lady and the Oscar-winning actress looked like a new type of 
woman: chic, daring, informal, breaking with postwar convention. Within a few 
years, the shallowness of that alteration would be exposed by a much more 
radical reappraisal of contemporary femininity, rethinking everything from the 
shape of women's underwear to the desirability of marriage. It marked the end 
of a brief, intoxicating phase in which women had been offered a new vision of 
themselves, only to discover it was mostly cosmetic.

Hepburn herself, the most reticent of stars, may have been happy to step back 
and allow other actresses such as Julie Christie and Jane Fonda to carry on the 
experiment in movies such as Darling and Barbarella. Both these films - 
released in 1965 and 1968 respectively - are so quintessentially products of 
the nascent sexual revolution that they put Breakfast at Tiffany's, and its 
androgynous star, in their proper perspective. With her huge eyes and parted 
lips, Hepburn may have looked for a moment like the face of the 1960s. But, as 
the new print of Blake Edwards's film reveals, both she and the forces that 
created her belong firmly in the previous decade.

It is perhaps this paradox that makes her perfect for nostalgic revivals. 
Hepburn's short heyday was on the cusp of two extraordinary decades, a social 
change which her teasing image - child-woman, both innocent and experienced - 
embodies. As a former model, she may have had more awareness than some of her 
contemporaries that her shelf-life was limited, leaving the screen by choice - 
unlike Monroe - before her audience became jaded. Never achieving superstar 
status, she also managed, as her perennial return to the fashion and arts pages 
confirms, to remain something of an enigma.

Breakfast at Tiffany's is reissued next Friday.
 