
Pharmaceutical group Shire gained ground after new problems at one of its US 
rivals, helping push leading shares higher despite a certain lack of enthusiasm 
for Alistair Darling's pre-election budget.

Shire added 31p to £15.09 as US regulators said they may take control of one 
of Genzyme's manufacturing plants, which was temporarily shut last year due to 
a viral contamination, for an extended period and could impose charges on the 
company. The plant produces cerezyme, a treatment for Gaucher disease, and its 
problems have givenShire <https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> an 
opportunity to gain market share for its rival treatment.

Elsewhere the budget had little effect, with traders saying there was not much 
unexpected in the speech. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, 
said it was "a safe play budget which lacked anything radical."

Banks, however, moved higher as the chancellor refrained from spelling out any 
details about a much expected bank tax. Tim Hughes at IG Index said: "It seems 
the idea of no tax yet - even if its eventual rate is uncertain - is better 
than a tax now."

So Lloyds Banking Group ended 1.2p higher at 64.2p - helped by Merrill Lynch 
saying the shares could double within two years - andRoyal Bank of Scotland 
rose 0.43p to 44.49p.

Away from the budget, miners were in demand after upbeat comments from 
Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation, up 7p at £12.01. The company reported 
an expected 61% fall in full year earnings but made optimistic noises about the 
outlook, saying it expected demand from China and other emerging markets to 
grow, with the US and Europe more stable. After buying copper and cobalt 
producer Camec, it is on the lookout for further acquisitions.

Overall the FTSE 100 edged up 4.25 points to 5677.88, despite an opening fall 
on Wall Street after disappointing US new home sales and news that credit 
agency Fitch had downgraded its rating on Portugal's sovereign debt.

Aviva was the biggest faller in the leading index, down 17.7p at 383.9p as the 
shares were traded for the first time without the 15p a share dividend. At the 
same time Standard & Poor's equity analyst Tony Silverman moved from buy to 
hold and cut his target price from 460p to 437p. He said:

Our forecasts are unchanged but we now feel the opportunity for Aviva's shares 
to perform on the basis of IFRS profit prospects has probably passed for now, 
and that after the summerAviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> risks being swept up in 
concerns over the impact of Solvency 2 on regulatory capital.

Still in the sector Resolution, the acquisitive vehicle linked recently with 
the likes of Legal & General, confirmed it was in talks about further 
takeovers, but analysts believe these are likely to be medium sized targets. 
The company reported a £41m profit for 2009 compared to £1m loss, but this only 
included a two month contribution from Friends Provident, bought last year. 
Chairman Michael Biggs said:

We see 2010 as a decisive year for many financial services groups as they 
redefine their business models in the aftermath of the global financial crisis 
and in the face of increasing regulatory burdens.Resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/resolution> is in dialogue with a number 
of owners of UK life assurance and asset management businesses whilst, at the 
same time, remaining highly disciplined on delivering the mid-teens return we 
seek on behalf of public market investors.

Resolution, which this week lost its place in the FTSE 100, moved up 0.6p to 
78p.

Elsewhere BG - recently the subject of takeover talk - dipped 18p to 1157.5p 
despite news that China National Offshore Oil Corporation will buy 3.6m tonnes 
a year of liquefied natural gas from BG's Queensland Curtis plant in Australia 
under a 20 year deal worth around $40bn in total.BG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup> also reported encouraging test 
well results from the Tupi project in Brazil's Santos basin. The news comes a 
day after the company sold its three US power stations for $450m, half what it 
paid for them.

Intercontinental Hotels lost 21p to £10.19 as UBS repeated its sell 
recommendation. It moved the group off its "least preferred" list but added:

We remain concerned about InterContinental Hotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/intercontinentalhotelsgroup>, [its sell] 
rating reflects our belief that American franchised hotel income will not 
recover until 2011 and recovery will be slow. In addition, the company will 
have no room growth in 2010.

British Airways dipped 2p to 245.5p. But there are growing hopes a merger 
agreement with Spain's Iberia could be struck before too long, perhaps as early 
as this week. The two signed a memorandum of understanding about a deal in 
November and one stumbling block, BA's pension deficit, was eased recently 
following an agreement with its unions (even as strike talks were failing). 
Iberia's board is due to meet tomorrow and a deal is likely to be high on the 
agenda.

But Smiths Group rose 17p to £11.56 as it reported a 12% increase in half year 
profits despite difficult trading conditions, partly helped by cost cutting. 
The technology group makes - among other - things airport x-ray scanners, and 
has seen some benefit during the six months from the increase in airline 
security. Analysts at Credit Suisse raised their target price from £11.20 to 
£12.50 following the figures, with an outperform rating. They said:

Smiths has reported a strong set of results with earnings before interest and 
tax of £207m, 2.4% ahead of our and 3.5% ahead of consensus forecasts. The beat 
came primarily from the medical and detection divisions. In the first half 
Smiths' management delivered margin improvement in every division with group 
operating margin improving 190 basis points year on year.

Among the mid-caps Arriva accelerated 33.5p to 750p on talk it could be at the 
centre of a European bid battle. It has already received an approach from 
Deutsche Bahn, and yesterday the French government reportedly suggested it 
would back any rival offer that its own rail company SNCF might want to make. 
Earlier this year talks about a link up betweenArriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> and SNCF's Keolis 
subsidiary came to nothing.

Lower down the market Vernalis lost 14p to 61p as the biotech company said an 
experimental drug for diabetes-related neuropathic pain failed to show any 
benefits in clinical trials.

Finally fashion retailer Supergroup - the business behind the Superdry brand 
worn by the likes of Zac Efron - soared 40p to 540p in its first day of trading.
 