
Countdown to America's first earth orbit

The Guardian, February 22 1962

The morning of Colonel John Glenn's 11th date with an orbit dawned without 
clouds over Cape Canaveral and without high waves off Bermuda. And so at last 
the 18 tracking stations around the globe, the recovery ships, the 1,500 expert 
watchers were alerted for a "Go", the syllable the American people have been 
waiting to exhale since the middle of December.

Twenty seconds from the word, the umbilical cord dropped away and Mercury 
Control intoned the countdown in seconds. There was the deep low-frequency 
rumble modulating to an enormous whoosh of sound and a vicious tongue of flame. 
Soon the Atlas rocket was a fiery keyhole, and then an acorn and then a 
snowflake. Within a minute or so the army of workers at Canaveral and the 
500-odd reporters had lost all visible connection with their personal project 
and were at one with the silent crowds on the Florida beaches, in railroad 
stations and airports from New York to Seattle: gaping in extraordinary silence 
at giant television screens and hearing the elated exchange between Glenn and 
Mercury Control: "On trajectory ... booster engines off ... tower gone ... go, 
baby, go ..."

Explosion of the Challenger space shuttle

Letter No 1928, January 31 1986 

I doubt that many of us would have been watching this launch if the 
schoolteacher, Christa McAuliffe, had not been aboard. There have been 56 
planned missions, and in the past few years, only the manned flights have been 
televised, and then not always live: the lift-off is taped at the launching and 
then replayed briefly on the evening news. For several years now, the work of 
NASA - the National Aeronautics and Space Administration - has been no big deal 
to the ordinary citizen. The missions have become so routine that I suspect 
only space buffs could call off many names, or any names, of the astronauts of 
the past few years. To most people, John Glenn, who has long been Senator John 
Glenn, is the one unforgettable name: the first American to orbit the earth, 
and that's coming up 24 years ago in February.

But, it was the president's idea of putting a schoolteacher in space that 
galvanised anew the popular interest. When the invitation went out over a year 
ago, there were more than 11,000 applicants. The selection committee, which 
combined a national council of school officers with a half dozen experts from 
NASA, went quickly through those 11,000 letters and chose only 114 teachers to 
interview. All of them first submitted to thorough physical examinations and 
psychiatric screening and were reduced to 10 finalists.

Christa McAuliffe was 12 years old when Alan Shepard launched America's manned 
space programme in May 1961, with a 15-minute sub-orbital flight. That was 
inspiring stuff at the time, but was dimmed nine months later by Glenn's 
complete orbit of the earth. Christa McAuliffe watched the Shepard liftoff, and 
in her letter of application she wrote to NASA: "I watched the Space Age being 
born, and I would like to participate."

If not the space star of the crew, she became the vivid human link with all of 
us. For while the senator who had completed a space mission was a veteran 
fighterpilot in Vietnam, Christa McAuliffe was the first ordinary citizen to go 
into space.

To me, when the nightmare sharpness of the horror has blessedly blurred with 
time, there will be, I'm afraid, one picture that will retain its piercing 
clarity. It is the picture of an inquisitive, innocent, middle-aged woman and 
her affable, granity husband - Christa McAuliffe's parents - craning their 
necks and squinting into the Florida sky, and watching the sudden fireball and 
looking a little puzzled as first-time spectators might, as if this were part 
of the show, part of the unexpected magic.
 