
Letter No 741, October 28 1962

Today was one of those New York days that are almost as crystalline in January 
as they are in June or October. Like many millions of other people, I put the 
clock back last evening to justify staying up later than usual. A couple of 
friends came in, the man a member of the United Nations secretariat, and 
between bouts of personal talk we tuned in the bulletins every half-hour in the 
hope (which seemed to be draining away) that the United States would not feel 
it essential to use force to destroy the Russian missile bases in Cuba. More 
photographs were coming in to the Pentagon and being rushed to the White House, 
and they showed that way down below, Russian technicians and their Cuban help 
had been working overtime on Friday and Saturday to finish the bases and mount 
the missiles and confront the United States with a dreadful accomplished fact, 
which the president in the long, long week behind us had laboured to thwart.

Then we heard that Mr Adlai Stevenson, US Ambassador to the United Nations, 
had told the delegates of 13 nations (from Nato and Latin America mostly) that 
unless work on the missile bases was voluntarily stopped, the United States 
would take military action to eliminate them in exactly 48 hours.

I ought to point out that Mr Stevenson was the man who, in April of last year, 
went before the Security Council of the United Nations and defended with 
passionate sincerity the good faith of the United States; who honestly 
ridiculed the Soviet charge that the invasion of Cuba (which was then in its 
earliest stages) had been planned and assisted by the United States.

Mr Stevenson had no public way open to him to recover his self-respect. For he 
had made his honest defence of American motives before he was informed that the 
abortive invasion was in fact an American show. Mr Valerian Zorin, the Soviet 
chief delegate, brought this up, with relish, on Thursday evening, when once 
again Mr Stevenson brought easels and photographic blow-ups into the Security 
Council to force the answer to the question Mr Stevenson had hammered at Mr 
Zorin, and which Mr Zorin airily waved away. That question, in Mr Stevenson's 
words, was: "Let me ask you one simple question. Do you, Ambassador Zorin, deny 
that the USSR has placed and is placing medium and intermediate range missiles 
and sites in Cuba? Yes or no?" Mr Stevenson is a man of great dignity and 
patience, but Mr Zorin's face began to crack, somewhere between a smirk and a 
sigh, and in that split-second Mr Stevenson leaned forward and rasped out, 
"Don't wait for the interpretation. Yes or no?" Mr Zorin replied that he was 
not in an American courtroom and had no wish to answer a prosecutor's question. 
"You'll get your answer," he said, without deigning to look at the now 
crouching figure of Stevenson, "don't worry".

It was at that moment that Mr Stevenson leaned even further forward and said a 
sentence that will surely, if only from its repetition in film clips, pass into 
the lexicon of famous American phrases like "Don't shoot till you see the 
whites of their eyes" and "You may fire when ready, Mr Gridley." "I am 
prepared," Mr Stevenson rasped out, "to wait for an answer till hell freezes 
over, if that's your decision. And I'm also prepared to present the evidence in 
this room." Which he promptly did.

Mr Zorin, at the time, was simply obedient to his instructions. "Falsity," he 
shouted, "is what the United States has in its hands, false evidence, 
forgeries." Between then and now, Mr Khrushchev himself has given the lie to Mr 
Zorin's lie; only this morning the Soviet leader said to the president: "The 
weapons you describe as offensive are grim weapons. You and I both know that 
they are."

When the history of this, the longest week, comes to be written, I think that 
the decision to entrust an ambassador (and this ambassador) with the final 
warning will be seen to be a masterstroke of diplomacy and goodwill. Below the 
surface of even the most world-shaking events, the actors remember old grudges. 
The role Mr Stevenson was asked to play (or by default was allowed to play) in 
the Bay of Pigs disaster was humiliating to him and damaging to the honesty of 
the Kennedy administration in its first showdown with communism in this 
hemisphere. But in the second, the much more momentous showdown, since it was 
not between a giant and the other giant's puppet but between the titans 
themselves, it was crucial that nobody should infer a clash of wills in the 
Kennedy cabinet.

When we went to bed last night, we had this small and honourable satisfaction 
to set against the immensity of the risk, the trembling of the fingers on the 
nuclear buttons. When we woke up this morning the glad tidings came pealing in, 
breaking into Mozart and Gilbert & Sullivan and solemn sermons and rollicking 
hymns up in Harlem: the news that Mr Khrushchev had accepted unconditionally 
every point of Mr Kennedy's demand for the dismantling of the Cuban missile 
bases under UN supervision.

An hour ago, a neighbour of mine, who is a hi-fi buff and mighty proud of an 
amplifier that practically fills the building, telephoned me and asked me to 
listen to the raging sound of his gramophone. He was playing, Oh, What a 
Beautiful Morning! It was corny, but it was spontaneous and good, and I looked 
out over the riffling waves of the reservoir in Central Park; a bird rose from 
the water and was airborne and soared off to the ocean. I should like to say it 
was a dove. It was, however, a seagull whose clean swinging flight I shall 
remember till the day I die.
 