
Silence is Goldfish is one of the most difficult books I’ve ever had to 
review. Partially, because it’s unlike anything I’ve read before, and partially 
because it’s unlike anything I’m likely to read again – Silence is Goldfish is 
different. It’s written in a way that’s doubtlessly powerful, yet has these 
themes and messages hidden between it’s pages, wrapped together with an almost 
simplistic and real narrative voice. Silence is Goldfish is like a book and a 
best friend all in one, bound together with wit and emotion and beauty. And 
that’s why this might just be the hardest review I’ve had to write, because 
I’ve somehow got to give back a little of what this book gave to me.

It’s told in the voice of Tess; after finding out that her dad isn’t her real 
dad (her mum used a sperm donor), she adopts silence as a “protest”. (I put 
that in speech marks because you realise throughout the book what it truly is.) 
I think it’s best to leave it at that, because although it’s not a 
murder-mystery-thriller-twists-at-every-page kind of a book, it’s still so 
exciting and enrapturing: it’s unpredictable and it has storylines you wouldn’t 
expect, exploring relationships between families (Tess’s own and other 
parent-child relationships between characters such as Henry and Isabel), 
between teenagers and between teachers. I’ll let you discover what I mean for 
yourself, but every relationship develops as the reader is shown more and more 
of how Tess views the world and the people in it.

What I might love most about Silence is Goldfish is Tess, its narrator and 
main character. Sometimes in these books with realistic themes and difficult 
families, the main character is described as confident and beautiful, with a 
love interest and a dozen friends. Tess isn’t like that, because everyone knows 
someone like her, and everyone’s BEEN her. Everyone’s been or known the 
slightly more introverted one, the one who isn’t classically stunning (Tess is 
described as overweight), and crucially Tess doesn’t have a gorgeous guy fall 
in love with her from the second page in.

YA can almost be like a fantasy sometimes, preparing teenagers for a life of 
perfection that doesn’t exist, and Silence is Goldfish just breaks every 
stereotype and proves good, solid YA fiction can exist without a typical plot 
line, a stunning protagonist and a mysterious boy to fall in love with. Tess 
has crushes on teachers, a need to be liked, and she notices things, things 
other people might not (for example, the colour of the mug her ex-teacher drank 
from every day). She has so much anger inside her that’s simply softened by 
this vulnerability that Pitcher writes so beautifully: because Tess is just a 
teenager. I noticed it in Ketchup Clouds, I noticed it in My Sister Lives On 
The Mantelpiece, and I notice it here: Pitcher’s ability to so persuasively 
encapsulate the root of every insecure, individual teenage voice is quite 
frankly startling. Sometimes I would genuinely pinch myself after putting the 
book down (and I only put it down once or twice, I read it in three sittings) 
that Tess didn’t actually exist, that is wasn’t actually her and her goldfish 
telling me her story of finding out who she was into my ears.

Annabel Pitcher: 'we don't have to aspire for more, more, more to be happy' - 
children's books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2015/sep/30/annabel-pitcher-silence-is-goldfish-interview>
This brings me on perfectly to the idea of Tess’s goldfish. I’m not sure what 
it was, a kind of physical metaphor perhaps. Tess has a toy goldfish that 
speaks to her, expresses her doubts, the parts of her mind she finds difficult 
to face: its ‘comments’ were often incredibly witty and had me laughing quite 
loudly on a stuffy aeroplane, but particularly towards the end, it became a 
very poignant symbol of freedom and hope - I’ll let you figure out why for 
yourself. Mr Goldfish gave a sense of continuity to the book, and carried the 
story along, providing a new dimension and insight to what went on in Tess’s 
head.

Tess’s relationship with her father and mother was also incredibly well 
written, and the characterisation of the often dislikable Jack was brilliant: 
his chapters and lines were drenched with this arrogance, but then the little 
specks of care would shine through, and I was never quite sure whether I liked 
him or hated him. His character would usually have been associated with a step 
father, but every part of his character, from his struggles as an actor with 
the agent that never turned up, to the disappointment he feels for Tess, was 
excellently written.

As well as cyber bullying (which also takes a significant role in the story as 
Tess’s classmates debate the reasons for her silence), another real theme was 
never really knowing people: from Tess, to Jack, to the school bully Anna and 
the teachers at Tess’s school, these examples really made me think, and draws 
me to my overall conclusion on the book.

Silence is Goldfish is a rare gem of a book: it features the kind of 
protagonist we need more of. Not the feisty, popular heroines we wish we could 
be, but the grounded, empowered heroines we are. And if there’s one thing I got 
from this book, it’s this: you never quite know the whole story, which can take 
an entire book, plus a goldfish to find out.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/342758/> 
Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 