 Running to be leader of the Liberal Democrats and mayor of London is probably 
less impressive than campaigning for two years to jail three men for the brutal 
murder of a teenager in your constituency. But then, Simon Hughes, Liberal 
Democrat MP for Southwark and North Bermondsey is at his most impressive as a 
constituency MP and party spokesman, not as a man who might have been third 
party leader. Mr Hughes seems happy as an also-ran. Having been defeated in 
1999 in the hard fought contest for the leadership of the Lib Dems, he seems 
cheerful as Charles Kennedy's "shadow home secretary".
A quick-striding, hyperactive "muscular Christian" with the demeanour of a 
young vicar forcing old ladies to cross the street against their will, there 
have always been more questions about Mr Hughes' behaviour than about his 
undoubted talents and unmatchable energy. Mr Hughes advocated closer links with 
Labour moderates, but only until Paddy Ashdown became a Blair intimate. Then he 
warned Sir Paddy against becoming a "lapdog".

Mr Hughes was acutely described as a man with Peter Pan's ability to levitate 
without warning and about as much attachment to the real world. His ability to 
levitate was evident from the moment he astonished the political world in 1983 
by winning his working class bastion, Bermondsey, as a Liberal, after the 
previous MP Bob Mellish resigned. Mr Hughes was assisted by disputes within the 
Labour party over their choice of Peter Tatchell, the Australian leftwing 
campaigner as their candidate.

When Mr Mellish made it clear he would prefer a Liberal victory to a Tatchell 
victory, Mr Hughes won the seat by 9,319 votes - a record swing of 44%. An 
obsessively hardworking constituency MP, who required police protection for 
three months after he helped put a murderous local gang behind bars, Mr Hughes' 
majority had nevertheless shrivelled to 3,387 by 1997.

He has a messianic self-image, explained - if not excused - by the fact that, 
while the son of a brewer, he was head chorister at Llandaff Cathedral school 
and head boy at Christ College, Brecon. He was also president of the student 
union at Selwyn College, Cambridge University and at the College of Europe, 
Bruges. He became a Liberal at 20 while studying at Cambridge.

Mr Hughes' spectacular win in Bermondsey helped him become his party's 
spokesman successively on environment, education, health and social welfare. 
Always a crusading radical, he voted eight times as often with Labour as with 
the Tories and led the 1986 attack on the Owen-Steel proposal for an 
Anglo-French nuclear missile.

The great test of the exasperated affection in which his party held Mr Hughes 
was during the 1999 contest to succeed Paddy Ashdown as leader of the Lib Dems. 
He concentrated so hard on that battle with Charles Kennedy that he even gave 
up his battle against Ken Livingstone to become mayor of London. But despite 
his barnstorming campaign, he lost by 57% to 43%.

Ask Aristotle about Simon Hughes 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-2594,00.html>
 