
Shoppers have spent more than $9bn (£6bn) in the first 12 hours of China’s 
Singles’ Day sales, topping last year’s total for the world’s biggest online 
shopping day.

Total gross merchandise volume, a measure of sales, matched the 2014 Singles’ 
Day figure of $9.3bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/china-singles-day-1111-expected-to-break-records>
 just after midday, the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba said. “The 2015 sale 
has eclipsed last year’s final results in a little over half the time,” it said.

Forget Black Friday and Cyber Monday: 100m shoppers splash out on China's 
Singles' Day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/china-singles-day-1111-expected-to-break-records>
By about 10pm local time, shoppers had splashed out almost $13bn, according to 
a company blog.

Earlier, Alibaba’s chief executive, Daniel Zhang, said “the whole world will 
witness the power of Chinese consumption” on Singles’ Day on Wednesday. 11 
November is not a traditional Chinese festival butAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> has been pushing it since 2009, 
first marketing it as an “anti-Valentine’s Day” – 11/11 being a date heavy on 
ones – with hefty discounts to lure the country’s singletons and 
price-sensitive buyers.


Another of China’s main online retailers, JD.com, said it had completed more 
than 20m transactions by about 5pm. About an hour and a half later, one-day 
orders had passed the combined total of the five previous Singles’ Days, it 
tweeted.

Alibaba said its logistical division and its partners would use more than 1.7 
million personnel, 400,000 vehicles, 5,000 warehouses and 200 planes to handle 
deliveries.

With sales hitting new highs year after year, Singles’ Day has become a 
lucrative business opportunity embraced by all online retailers inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, with competition between them 
turning increasingly fierce. China’s online population of 668 million is the 
world’s biggest.


The event has received vocal support from the government at a time when 
China’s economic expansion is slowing and Beijing is trying to transform the 
growth model into a more sustainable one driven by consumption.


Chinese premier Li Keqiang’s office phoned Alibaba chairman Jack Ma hours 
before the promotion began, “congratulating and encouraging the creation and 
achievement of the 11.11 event”, said a posting on a social media account of 
Tmall, the group’s business-to-consumer arm.

Buyers showed off their purchases on social media, with many lamenting that 
they had spent far too much money. “I can only afford to eat dirt for the next 
half year,” said a post on Sina Weibo, with an attached screengrab showing she 
had bought 42 items.

But some consumers also expressed concerns about fake products. “Good luck. 
Hope you guys will not get phoney products or things that turn out to be 
useless,” said a Weibo user.

China's 'singles day' blamed for baby formula shortages in Australian 
supermarkets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/11/chinas-singles-day-blamed-for-baby-formula-shortages-in-australian-supermarkets>
Headquartered in the eastern city of Hangzhou, Alibaba does not sell products 
directly but acts as an electronic middleman, operating China’s most popular 
consumer-to-consumer platform, Taobao, which is estimated to hold more than 90% 
of the market.

Nasdaq-listed rival online marketplace JD.com reportedly filed a complaint 
with the government last week, accusing Alibaba of monopolising the market by 
restricting suppliers from participating in other operators’ promotion events 
on 11 November.

But Alibaba – listed on the New York Stock Exchange – shrugged off the 
allegations, asserting that it owns the Singles’ Day brand. “Today the chicken 
reported on the duck, accusing the duck of monopolising the lake,” said a 
spokeswoman for Alibaba’s promotional event, according to a Chinese media 
report.

Before the shopping spree, Alibaba mounted a television spectacular at 
Beijing’s Water Cube Olympic swimming venue, featuring Chinese and foreign 
celebrities including James Bond actor Daniel Craig, and Hollywood star Kevin 
Spacey in his role as President Frank Underwood from the Netflix series House 
of Cards.

In comparison with Singles’ Day, desktop sales for the five days from 
Thanksgiving until Cyber Monday in the US last year stood at $6.56bn, according 
to internet analytics firm comScore.
 