
Britain's national parks are under threat from major roads and housing in an 
"act of vandalism" resulting from the coalition's changes to the planning 
system, SirAndrew Motion <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion> has 
warned.

Motion, the former poet laureate, spoke out as president of the Campaign to 
Protect Rural England, as the group published a report showing the relaxation 
of planning laws is starting to have an impact on protected areas from the Peak 
District to the Yorkshire dales.

The group said David Cameron's planning reforms are paving the way for 20 
major developments in areas of natural beauty, despite promises from ministers 
that these would be protected.

They include a development of over 500 houses partly within the protected Kent 
downs, home of the white cliffs of Dover, and proposals for a major new road 
between Sheffield and Manchester through the Peak District national park.

There are also plans for a caravan park on the edge of the Yorkshire dales and 
a theme park in a Berkshire forest – on a site of special scientific interest.

Motion warned beautiful landscapes "may one day only exist in the mind or on 
the printed page" unless planning laws are tightened.

"I want to make it clear that I do not think our politicians are deliberately 
setting out to degrade and destroy our landscapes," he said. "However, they 
have created an atmosphere where all development is seen as good development. 
When even our protected countryside is at risk, what hope is there for our 
unprotected but equally loved 'ordinary' countryside?"

Campaign groups have repeatedly raised fears that the coalition's new planning 
guidelines make it easier to build on green spaces because they include a 
"presumption in favour of sustainable development".

Following the planning changes, Eric Pickles, the communities secretary, 
promised they would "defend areas of outstanding natural beauty, and other 
important environmental designations".

"Nothing will change that today. Nothing will change that tomorrow," he said 
at the time.

However, the CPRE report said it has found evidence contradicting "repeated 
assurances from ministers that planning reforms safeguard our most treasured 
landscapes.

"Government policies mean that national parks and areas of outstanding natural 
beauty, which should have the highest level of protection in planning, are 
increasingly threatened by damaging developments.".

Nick Boles, the planning minister, has also signalled he is considering 
allowing more development in national parks because they should be more than 
just wilderness.

Speaking to MPs, Boles said there was a danger of some rural communities in 
protected areas becoming "embalmed" if they were not allowed to grow.

Earlier this year, the minister said people must be realistic about the need 
for more housing, which would mean building on "environmentally uninteresting" 
green spaces. He has also provoked the ire of countryside lovers by suggesting 
housing provides more human happiness than fields.

• This article was amended on 28 October 2013. An earlier version named the 
Campaign to Protect Rural England as the Campaign for the Protection of Rural 
England.
 