
As a marketer, whether or not you are actively using programmatic right now to 
reach your audience online, the technology is already having a profound impact 
on how consumers interact with brands and how brands achieve greater return on 
their marketing investment. As the rapid rise of programmatic continues, it is 
important to understand its powerful potential and opportunities that exist.

Programmatic buying – using technology to automate the purchase of media – has 
demonstrated unprecedented efficiency. Consumers are constantly connected to 
their devices and this shift in lifestyle presents new challenges for brands 
with how, when and where to connect with their audience to achieve the very 
best digital results.

Programmatic will continue to gain momentum this year and is on track to 
become the main engine in digital trading. According to the IAB UK, ad spend 
has grown 15.2% in the UK in 2013 on a like-for-like basis and the industry is 
now measured at £6.3bn.

Marketers need to understand the advantages of implementing a programmatic 
strategy to their media mix and what it will deliver, as well as avoiding some 
of the pitfalls in planning to ensure maximum success and ROI.

Here are the six things marketers should consider before choosing a 
programmatic partner:

1) Multi-platform approach is key

The advantage of trading across multiple demand-side platforms (DSPs) means 
you can take advantage of every opportunity. The strengths of each DSP can be 
singled out and capitalised upon to better the performance of your campaign. In 
the future, it is easy to see that having multiple views of inventory through 
multiple platforms is not only a distinct advantage but will also promote 
competition and value. Working with multiple DSPs and exchanges ensures brands 
reach as many of their customers and prospects as possible.

2) Understand the technology offering

While it is not necessary to know the deep inner-workings of each technology, 
it is important to have a basic understanding of how it is working for your 
brand. Any programmatic partner worth working with should be ready and willing 
to answer any questions you have about the technology powering your campaigns 
and what is unique to their specific approach.

3) Creative really matters

Effective creative drives engagement with consumers and in many cases a 
campaign is only as good as its creative. Taking the time to develop a well 
thought out creative strategy for your online brand identity is key. Clear 
calls to action are important, along with varied creative that speaks at 
different times of day, platform and location. It is important to have a 
programmatic partner that works with you in real time to create the best 
possible strategy, recommendations and outcomes.

4) Speak the same language when it comes to measurement

Programmatic buying can be an incredibly effective tool for marketers, but you 
need a clear line of communication with the team advising and executing your 
campaigns.

There are still limitations in the space that can affect the insights 
available.

When it comes to data and key performance indicators, such as customer 
lifetime value, purchase size and cost per acquisition, the more you can share 
with your programmatic partner, the better equipped they will be when 
optimizing your campaigns.

5) There is no 'one size fits all' solution in programmatic and transparency 
is key

Every brand campaign has unique objectives, whether it is awareness, 
engagement, action or sales. A proactive programmatic partner will craft a 
custom-made programmatic solution by understanding the complexity of the market 
alongside data.

This partner will be looking to deliver improved ROI and meet your marketing 
goals within the budget invested.

Unlike the black box approach used by many players in the programmatic space, 
it is important that your partner provides full and transparent campaign 
performance and learning with insights that can feed directly into a brand's 
CRM strategy and future planning.

6) Quality over quantity

At the dawn of programmatic buying there was a perception that only remnant 
inventory was available with poor or non-visible placements on sites. In 
addition, there was fear of fraudulent data and results.

In today's programmatic marketplace, this could not be further from the truth. 
RTB platforms, the IAB and third-party services have all helped shape a brand 
safe environment with clear red flags for fraud. This allows optimisation teams 
the ability to instantly shift budget if any suspicious activity appears to be 
occurring. A programmatic partner should provide site lists and regular reports 
that include impressions, spend, clicks, CPM and any other details and data 
agreed.

An established and quality-focused programmatic partner should be a constant 
and reliable resource for you. Once you've found a good match for your brand, 
you can start to reap the benefits that come with proactive programmatic media 
campaigns.

Veerle De Lombaerde is global product director at The Exchange Lab 
<http://www.theexchangelab.com/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 