
Two important staff surveys carried out in early 2010 made it clear to 
construction firm, Skanska UK, that they needed to be better at engaging 
employees, clients and supply chain firms in sustainability.

Over the next year a host of initiatives were put in place to make sure that 
sustainability ran in the deep in the business and went beyond mere words. The 
aim was to move the organisation from "vanilla" to "deep green", Skanska UK 
says.

Past sustainability initiatives tended to be much like sheep dipping, giving 
all employees the same generic training. The new programme carefully targets 
initiatives on groups that can bring about behavioural change in the business, 
and involves clients and suppliers as well as staff.

Although more time consuming and technically challenging to implement, the new 
approach is already proving to be more productive, not least in helping to win 
new work with clients that have a shared commitment to sustainability.

Initiatives have ranged from introducing three new staff and supply chain 
awards, to a popular cycle-to-work scheme and low-carbon company cars.

Sustainability is now being given proper airtime at twice-yearly senior 
management conferences and managing directors now regularly make environmental 
site inspections. Jonathan Porritt has also led sustainability master classes 
for the firm.

To map the move from vanilla to deep green, Skanska now uses colour palette 
workshops to introduce a common language and tools to assess how successfully 
the company, clients and suppliers are embedding sustainability in their 
businesses.

Three subsequent surveys, including one by the London School of Economics, 
have been carried out to assess progress. Interviewees were carefully chosen to 
include some who were leading and some who most needed leadership.

As a result, Skanska now feels it has created the right foundations to develop 
a culture of sustainability, which it admits will take time, effort and a 
little faith to complete.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 