
App: Skobbler GPS Navigation 2 – satnav

By: Skobbler GmbH

Price: £1.49

Available on: iOS. A lite (and free) version is available on Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>

What is it?

A low-cost alternative to the big name satnav offerings such as TomTom (49.99) 
or AA Satnav (£24.99), which also benefits from a "hybrid" system that allows 
users to download maps on to their phone to be used offline and avoid roaming 
charges. It features an information section showing the position of local 
amenities, such as bars, places to visit and hospitals.

What does it promise?

"Get true turn-by-turn navigation with an unbeatable price-performance ratio 
and many extras: worldwide online navigation, installable maps as optional 
upgrades, a comprehensive map mode, category search, portrait or landscape 
display modes and much more."

Is it easy to use?

Quite, if you're prepared to have a play around before you actually set off. 
The welcome screen on theiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 
is split into five categories: Navigation, Map, Category, Upgrades and 
Share/Help. From the icons (or indeed their names) it is not immediately 
apparent what most of them do.

Click on Navigation and you can enter either your destination address by 
postcode and/or street and house number. As the app hunts for this it flashes 
up some information about your destination, tips, and what looks like a 
disclaimer of sorts, but it takes you to the map screen before you have a 
chance to read it. I hope it wasn't too important.

Once on the map screen a blue arrow shows your orientation and the route you 
require is marked in blue with smaller arrows along it indicating the direction 
you should take. A slightly robotic female voice gives directions. Once in this 
satnav mode you can press the ladybird icon to register any bugs you notice: a 
missing speed trap, a one-way road, or a wrong turn perhaps. Tapping the screen 
anywhere takes you into a menu where you can alter some map functions such as 
2D/3D view or route information – but I think a lot of this is unnecessary.

As well as entering a destination postcode each time, you can store 
favourites: your home address, recent destinations, enter geographical 
coordinates, or link to your contacts book (assuming you have entered 
addresses).

The Map category seems superfluous (it doesn't do anything you can't do on 
Google Maps, so why bother including it in a paid-for satnav?); the Upgrades 
area allows you to download installable maps of countries (£2.49), continents 
(£4.99) or the world (£7.49) to use offline, which absolves you of the need to 
use 3G and suffer its associated costs; and the Share/Help area lets you 
contact Skobbler, look at other users' reported bugs, and look through an Ideas 
Log to see people's suggestions on improving the app.

Everything accessed via the Category tab, however, is a bit rubbish. It is 
supposed to list by category (eating out, accommodation, transport, shopping, 
health etc) all the amenities close to you, and then direct you to them. Given 
that I live on the edge of one of Brighton's main hotel areas, the fact the app 
offered only 15 to choose from suggests it's not comprehensive. And there are 
other annoyances: under the shopping category the supermarkets are listed under 
"S" for supermarket – it doesn't tell you which supermarket it is.

Is it fun?

I still marvel at how clever satnavs are, and I delight in being told where to 
go instead of driving with a half-folded road atlas balanced atop my steering 
wheel. But I fear that, certainly beyond the basic direction dissemination, the 
whole app isn't quite as clever as it thinks. And you can't even download any 
amusing voices.

Is it pretty?

Steel silver is the colour scheme throughout the non-map sections of the app, 
with a shimmering ice-blue hue when you click on your desired category or 
subsection. When in the actual satnav function it's less futuristic, based as 
it is on the OpenStreetMap (OSM) system. But that's OK: you don't want to be 
distracted while driving, after all.

Should you download it?

Definitely. The big-name satnav are hugely expensive, and while they offer 
more comprehensive features, in their most basic function they do no more than 
Skobbler, which is direct you to a chosen destination.

I've never got lost using it, and although the vocal instructions are 
sometimes a little late (I would take the second exit at the roundabout but 
I've just driven past it), it has always got me successfully from A to B in 
good time.

Given that one of Skobbler's main selling points is that it is 
community-based, and the OSM has about 250,000 users creating and updating 
existing maps, the system is always improving. Users are also encouraged to 
make corrections and update the maps themselves. Using stored maps offline is 
also a great feature, as is the ability to remove maps you don't need, so your 
phone's memory doesn't fill up.

One last warning: as with anything on a phone that involves heavy use, it's 
more than capable of draining your battery on a three-hour car journey.
 