
Life is full of things you never expected to find yourself missing but which 
still manage to inspire a weak leer of wistful longing. Public lending 
libraries. Aloof and gentlemanly television newsreaders. Laughably simplistic 
safety razors with no more than three blades and a single scented moisture 
strip. Nostalgia seems to be one of the few things that is still as good as it 
used to be – and it also strikes unexpectedly.

Sky Sports' broadcast of Manchester United's midweek defeat of Chelsea was 
anchored by the journalistically refined Jeff Stelling, given spunk by the 
think blurts of Jamie Redknapp and leant a scowling gravity by the coiled, 
wincing interventions of Graeme Souness. At the time I assumed it was simply 
this urge to fetishise the departed that created a feeling that something vital 
was missing. It was more than that though. This is something of a U-turn, not 
to mention a confession. But I really missRichard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray.

Without them Sky Sports – and therefore the periphery of almost all 
significant TV football – is not so much sub-standard as strangely meandering 
and limp. There is a block-shaped, bull-necked void at its heart, an absence of 
that sense that all is as it should be in aSky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> world where everything is top, 
top, top, top, top.

Post Would-You-Smash-It, post Tuck-That-In-For-Me-Love I bayed for the gallows 
with the rest of them. I jeered from office Sky's duo of founding monolithic 
Easter Island heads. But that's all over now. Like beating your dad in an 
arm-wrestle, this has been an oddly deflating victory. Can't we just have them 
back?

This isn't just a longing for the old certainties, the TV football equivalent 
of theOstalgie of post-Soviet greybeards missing their daily tin of Stalinist 
Spam. Although it is slightly that. Looking back there was something epic – 
epically banal, epically insular – about the cracked, self-mythologising 
personal fiefdom of Keys and Gray. They were so vividly in tune with the 
annihilating corporate muscle of Sky Sports and its Premier League. There was 
at least a perverse honesty in their preening, pinstriped self-regard. Without 
them the evil empire seems to have lost its pantomime charisma, or at least its 
identifiable – and punchable – face. It's like we're watching a Darth 
Vader‑less Star Wars, or (with Stelling in the main chair) the Death Star 
presided over not by Governor Tarkin, but by Mr Barraclough from Porridge.

Post-Keys and Gray it was supposed to be about more than this. With their 
playhouse decisively torn down I imagined some hidden realm of forensic 
footballing insight might finally be accessible, a gear-change into deep 
thought, the opening of the footballing third eye. This hasn't really happened. 
Instead, Ray Wilkins, previously a likable part-timer, has been given free rein 
to incant his belief in "staying on your feet", while Redknapp continues to 
fidget and ramble, occasionally sparkling with accidental insight like some 
tousled piano-playing man‑child genius.

The basic problem is that good TV football journalism is now almost impossible 
to replicate. There simply isn't the time. The golden era of football 
presentation came in the mid-70s when Jimmy Hill, a man with just the right 
strain of informed and energetic egomania, would commentate on a game, 
commandeer a private plane back to west London (on which his greying beard 
would be touched up with mascara) and then passionately analyse the match you'd 
just seen him commentate on.

By contrast Match of the Day's current migrainous banality is no accident: 
these lolling satin-shirted sofa fondlers have simply been watching TV feeds in 
Television Centre, their view fatally restricted, their experienced glazed by 
distance. Alan Hansen, in particular, worries me. He has been lashed to the 
upholstery for 15 years now. He is a miracle in many ways, still talking on cue 
and without noticeable hesitation. But this system has wearied him. He comes 
before us with abdominals slackened, temples dulled, eyes in mono focus.

The simple answer to this is that there is just too much talking around 
televised football. Hill would talk simply because he had a tactical itch to 
scratch. But the game is now presented as storied light entertainment, a branch 
of mainstream celebrity gush, and so the talk is largely peripheral and 
hyperbolic. And this, it turns out, was what Keys and Gray were good at. Their 
talk was a kind of seamless white noise, a muscular background thrum that spoke 
directly to the banality of its production.

There is another thing. I am one of those who was watching at the beginning of 
new football. We are the Sky generation, like it or not, and Keys and Gray were 
there from the start. They are, perhaps ludicrously, deeply familiar figures. I 
have even found myself worrying about Gray a little, wondering what he does in 
the evenings now, picturing him sloping about in his dressing gown behind his 
new-build gates, toothless, shrunken, detumesced in some fundamental way.

This is, no doubt, a lone note of regret, and in any case before long some new 
corporate figurehead will rise to rail against – a solid decade of Gary Neville 
and Ben Shepherd perhaps. For now, though, and against all imperatives of taste 
and judgment, I do still miss those evil sexist bastards.
 