Thrill rating 10/10 
Danger rating 6/10

Fitness rating 5/10

In a nutshell ...

Fancy jumping out of a perfectly good aeroplane? Want to know how it feels to 
hurtle toward the ground? Try a tandem skydive, in which you are strapped to an 
instructor who is wearing the parachute. A plane takes you up to around 3,500 
metres; you jump out and free fall for 30 to 45 seconds before the chute is 
deployed at about 1,000 metres. Then you glide down gently for up to five more 
minutes.

What's the buzz?

Isn't it obvious? Experiencing the adrenaline rush of free fall - but in a 
very safe environment. Also, after the parachute is released, most instructors 
seem to enjoy doing a bit of aerobatics, twirling you around until you are 
almost in a horizontal line with the chute. If you're really lucky, you might 
even get to fly into a cloud.

Thrill a minute?

Not exactly - you'll have an early start at the airfield, and there's no 
guarantee you will jump as it's so weather dependent. You may even go up in the 
plane only to go right back down in it again. There will, of course, be a 
safety briefing and demonstration of how to hold your body shape on the way out 
of the plane and on the free fall part of the descent, but after that the 
waiting around can get a bit tedious - so even if no one is brave (or daft) 
enough to want to jump with you, take someone along for company.

Adrenaline peak

Fear levels starts to peak as you sit on the plane, imagining what's about to 
happen. You may be able to see the altimeter climbing up, then levelling off at 
jump height. The tension feels quite unbearable when staff open the plane door; 
your emotions are all over the place! Depending on the size of the plane, you 
might have to sit on the edge by the door with your feet dangling down and then 
shuffle out, or you might jump out from standing - make that, be pushed out by 
the instructor strapped to your back. The first few seconds of free fall are an 
adrenaline overload, but then you get used to the feeling and can even start to 
enjoy it (possibly). And start making plans for your first solo dive ...

Where to do it

Log on to the British Parachute Association's website (bpa.org.uk) to find 
your nearest "drop zone".

Who can do it

It's not very physically challenging as the instructor does all the work. 
There are weight restrictions (15 stone for men, 12st 7lb for women, although 
there is a certain amount of leeway) because the instructor has to absorb all 
your weight on landing, poor thing. There's also a minimum age of 16, and 
under-18s may need parental consent. If you're over 40, you'll have to complete 
a medical form and get your doctor to sign it.

What to take

Warm clothes (it's a bit cold at altitude) but nothing too bulky, as they have 
to fit under your jumpsuit. Goggles and a hat will also be provided, but you 
must bring gloves. It's a long day, so take food and drink in case you don't 
fancy the delights of the skydivers' snack bar - and a hefty book, too, for all 
that waiting around.

Typical prices

£260 for a weekend tandem jump, or around £200 for a charity jump.

Impress your pals

As a skydiver free falls and gains speed, so there is an increase in the air 
resistance pushing up from below. This force counters the force of gravity and, 
once these forces are equal, the skydiver no longer accelerates and is said to 
have reached "terminal velocity" (a slightly unfortunate phrase).

YouTube searchwords 'skydiving swindon'

Good links

bpa.org.uk <http://www.bpa.org.uk>

skydive.co.uk <http://www.skydive.co.uk>

tandemfreefall.co.uk <http://www.tandemfreefall.co.uk>

ukparachuting.co.uk <http://www.ukparachuting.co.uk>

bpslangar.co.uk <http://www.bpslangar.co.uk>
 