Thrill rating 6/10 
Danger rating 4/10 

Fitness rating 6/10

In a nutshell ...

Racing through forests and woods behind a team of between two and six Siberian 
huskies (or Alaskan malamutes, or Samoyeds), all harnessed to a sledge, if 
there's snow, or a rig on wheels. Rallies take place all over the UK, and you 
can expect doggy-power to pull you at speeds of about 25mph - with no 
suspension or effective breaks. This, of course, makes stopping a little tricky 
should your dogs decide to explore the woods in search of rabbits or a deer ...

What's the buzz?

Opt for a "driven experience" and it's quite a relaxing adventure - sit back 
and enjoy the (admittedly fast and bumpy) ride in a four-wheel rig with 
mudguards, suspension and plenty of chances to admire the scenery.

Alternatively, you could track down an organised sled dog fun day where there 
are teaching events for beginners. Be warned: you'll need to have strong leg 
muscles to be able to help the dogs, so it's physically hard work - but then 
that's the real joy, of course, having to scoot the sledge up an incline or 
help control it on a decline. For dog lovers, sled dog rallies can make great 
spectating days out for all the family -and you could even help out by being a 
race marshal.

Thrill a minute?

Sled dog races are exciting even before the off when, with all the teams 
raring to go, it can be very noisy and seem a little frantic. But once under 
way, the real thrill comes as you run at full speed, working well as a team 
with perfect timing and coordination (you never know, you might even catch the 
team in front). After the last turn it's a thrill to see the finish line, with 
all the spectators yelling their teams home - that bit gets pretty noisy, too.

Adrenaline peak

To compete as a musher (driver) in a rally. But first you'll need to complete 
a lot of training - and then get hold of your own dogs and equipment. If you're 
serious about being a musher, it takes a lot of commitment (and money) to train 
the dogs - they have a special diet just like human athletes do.

Where to do it

Many UK forests and parks permit rallies during the racing season; these range 
from one-day events to three-day spectaculars. There are endurance races, too, 
and night rallies with torches.

Who can do it

Rally organisers sometimes put on beginners' coaching sessions, and the only 
real restriction for these is a basic level of fitness. If you plan to race 
it's a good idea to join one of the breed associations, as this may enable you 
to get insurance to cover you, the rig and the dogs both at races and during 
training (otherwise you must sort out cover yourself). While training dogs is 
banned in most parks, the Forestry Commission does allow a certain number of 
permits per forest.

What to take

To race, you'll need your trained dogs (it would be rather embarrassing if you 
forgot those), plus all the equipment and food for you and them. Strong, warm, 
weatherproof clothes are a must even on a driven experience day.

Typical prices

Rally entrance fees are normally £20-£30 per race. If you're serious about 
racing, though, you're looking at about £2,500 for the dogs, rig and training 
equipment.

Impress your pals

Claim you are in training for the Iditarod - the world's most famous sled dog 
race, across 1,150 miles of frozen Alaskan wilderness. And if they believe that 
...

YouTube searchwords 'sled-dog aviemore'

Good links

huskyracing.org.uk <http://www.huskyracing.org.uk>

mwa.co.uk <http://www.mwa.co.uk>

siberianhuskyclub.com <http://www.siberianhuskyclub.com>

absasleddogracing.org.uk <http://www.absasleddogracing.org.uk>

sled-dogs.co.uk <http://www.sled-dogs.co.uk>

exelement.co.uk/experience/dog-sledding 
<http://www.exelement.co.uk/experience/dog-sledding>
 