
The cheapest cover for an iPad mini costs £29.95 at Apple’s UK store. John 
Lewis sells one for £12.95. But if you visit China’s biggest internet site and 
have one shipped to your door in the UK, it costs just £1.37. Welcome to 
AliExpress, the English language version ofAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba>, the Chinese internet giant 
which is challenging Amazon for global dominance.

Alibaba is the biggest e-commerce site in China, with 400 million active 
buyers. Ona single day in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/11/alibabas-singles-day-sales-up-60-to-94bn>
 it rang up sales of £9bn – double John Lewis’s sales across the entire year. 
It will come as little surprise that the firm’s founder,Jack Ma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/19/jack-ma-profile-alibaba-powerful-humble-billionaire>
, is China’s richest man, with a fortune estimated at $29bn. So should we be 
junking Amazon and Argos and buying from AliExpress?

After testing prices and delivery, my conclusion is … not for a long time yet. 
First impressions is that AliExpress is like Poundland on steroids … and then 
some. It is a gateway to every manufacturer in China, and flogs every 
conceivable consumer item at prices that fail to make any sense, especially 
given that delivery is usually included. Right now it’s pushing Halloween: 66p 
for a full-size witch’s hat; zombie scars for 72p; a scary clown mask (OK, 
maybe not) for £6.82. Quite how a seller in Hangzhou produces and distributes 
it to your door for little more than the cost of a Royal Mail stamp is not 
explained.

But Amazon it ain’t. For a start, AliExpress is not a retailer itself, rather 
a giant marketplace for Chinese retailers to push their wares, with brands 
popular in the west notably absent. For example, try buying a laptop from 
Lenovo – a Chinese company – such as its Ideapad 100, which can be found on 
Amazon for £384. On AliExpress you can buy Lenovo motherboards, replacement 
keyboards, batteries etc – indeed almost everything to do with the laptop, 
except the laptop itself. At John Lewis, the electricals department is 
currently pushing GoPro Hero5 cameras, but on AliExpress they can’t be found – 
although you will be offered page after page of GoPro steadiers, batteries, 
mounts and covers.

Alibaba and the 40 facts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/18/alibaba-and-the-40-facts-ipo> 
But don’t let that put you off entirely. Where AliExpress hits its stride is 
with the near-copies that Chinese factories knock out at ultra-low prices, and 
arguably ultra-low quality. There are no GoPros, but there are thousands of 
“sports action cameras” starting at £24, compared to GoPro’s £159 at John Lewis.

Are they counterfeits? Some are likely to be – while Alibaba says it is 
determined to stamp out the fakes, forums are littered with complaints around 
the issue. Even more worrying is the question of safety. There can be no 
guarantee that goods bought from outside the EU meet usual safety standards. 
It’s not just electricals: children’s toys bought directly from China may not 
meet European standards, and beauty products may contain harmful chemicals.

Yet AliExpress has its fans. On a forum on the moneysavingexpert website one 
user says: “My purchase history from AliExpress is now over 150 purchases. I 
love it! My wife has a huge collection of office dresses from Ali, costing 
£10-£15, good quality and fit. Tools, many watches, trainers. One of my recent 
favourites? A set of real ceramic-blade kitchen knives at £7.82 delivered!”

Others are much less enthusiastic: “I will never ever buy again directly from 
China. Complete waste of time and money. Everything I’ve bought has gone 
straight into the bin. Last item to be delivered stank so badly I am surprised 
Royal Mail delivered it! As they say – buyer beware,” said another.

But in an age when Amazon and Argos fight it out to deliver to your door 
within an hour, with talk of drone ’copter drops, the most striking thing about 
AliExpress is its delivery times. Most items are marked for delivery in 60 
days’ time. That’s right: 60 days.

That alone will mean that the bosses at Amazon and Argos are unlikely to be 
trembling at the challenge from AliExpress, for now at least.
 