
A sly grog operation that targeted an Indigenous community in western NSW has 
exposed gaps in the law that create “the potential for fatal consequences”, the 
deputy state coroner has found.

Sandra Boney, 40, her brother Norman Boney, 46, and her partner Roger John 
Adams, 37, died in hospital early last year after drinking an unknown quantity 
of homemade alcohol at the Walli Reserve near Collarenebri, in north-western 
NSW.


Their deaths caused immense grief within the Walli Reserve community, which 
friends and relatives struggled to deal with.

“The sadness that you feel, there are no words for it,” one relative, Lavinia 
Flick, told the inquest.

The moonshine had been distilled at home by Mary Miller, a local woman who 
owned a second-hand shop in Collarenebri.

She was using a still to make and sell the toxic moonshine, something deputy 
state coroner Helen Barry said exposed a “gap” in Australian law.

It is illegal to distill alcohol without a licence in NSW and Australia, or to 
erect a still with a capacity of more than five litres. A still of less than 
five litres, however, can be legally purchased to distil water or essential 
oils.

“In practice, a person can possess the 5-litre still and can illegally 
manufacture alcohol; but because there is no licensing requirement, that 
activity is likely to remain undetected unless there is a catastrophic event 
such as in the loss of lives such as those of Sandra, Norman and Roger,” Barry 
wrote.

“Because of the gap in the legislation, there is the potential for fatal 
consequences.”

The coroner, who delivered her findings on Tuesday 
<http://www.coroners.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Boney%20Boney%20and%20Adams%20(2).pdf>
, suggested reforms to require all individuals with a still to be licensed, 
regardless of the equipment’s capacity, and to mandate stronger warnings on the 
distilling equipment itself.

She said she intended to send her findings to the attorney general, George 
Brandis, and the finance minister, Mathias Cormann.

The three victims had all struggled with alcoholism in the past, but the 
inquest heard that prior to consumption of the moonshine, they had led 
“relatively healthy” lives and participated in life on the reserve.

Miller’s supply of the moonshine saw her become the subject of a police 
investigation. She was never charged, but the coroner made a scathing 
assessment of her actions on Tuesday.

“Mary Miller was considered by many persons at Walli Reserve to be a friend,” 
Barry said.

“That is simply not the case. Mary Miller sold for profit contaminated alcohol 
to vulnerable members of the community.”

The coroner also dismissed Miller’s claim that she had not sold the trio the 
moonshine.

Miller said she had instead used a “bartering” system to trade the homemade 
alcohol with members of the reserve. Barry said the evidence led to the 
“overwhelming and only conclusion” that she was selling moonshine to residents 
of the reserve.

NSW police said on Wednesday that they noted the findings, and that 
investigations were ongoing, making it inappropriate to comment further.

Flick, a relative of Adams, told the inquest Miller had targeted alcoholics in 
the reserve.

“Mary targeted people with alcoholism – she targeted people with an addiction 
and disease – it was our people that were affected by it,” she said.

The court found it “impossible to disagree” with that conclusion. 

The deputy state coroner also noted the profound impact the deaths had on the 
community, many of whom attended the inquest hearing. Barry said their “grief 
and sadness was palpable”.

“Sandra, Norman and, Roger were much loved and valued members of the community 
at the Walli Reserve and it is clear that their deaths have had a profound 
effect on the family and the community.”
 