
Getting the green light for an expensive primetime TV drama, especially one 
with a largely black cast, has never been easy. That's despite the fact that 
black audiences, starved of images and (even more so) narratives about 
themselves, usually come to these shows with a sense of purpose. So all credit 
to theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for allowing an adaptation of 
Andrea Levy's acclaimed novel Small Island to interrupt the usual Sunday night 
bonnet-fest. It is a rare opportunity for black audiences to see our lives, 
histories, challenges, loves and achievements portrayed on the small screen. 
The first episode inspired my wife, not given to rash impulses, to phone 
friends and family to remind them it was on BBC1, only to learn (with a smug 
glow) that they were already watching.

I've been associated with three so-called "black shows" in the UK to date: 
South of the Border, Deep Secrets and Mike Phillip's provocative Blood Rights. 
Each programme required a Herculean feat to bring it to the screen. Why? While 
I've always believed that African-Caribbean stories were, at the very least, 
equal to those of the other human tribes, the executives on the sixth floor of 
BBC'sTelevision <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Centre –and 
also at ITV, although the BBC is just about the only game in town these days – 
have traditionally held a different view. As experts on ratings and 
demographics, they know that bagging a big audience for a 'black' show is a 
tricky business. They also think, somewhat cynically, that they have the nous 
to hoodwink their audience.

Some bizarre creative choices in Small Island vividly illustrate this. In a 
revealing digression from the novel, the production presents us with not one 
but two heroines – one white, the other black. This is the BBC hedging its bets 
over the thorny question of whether a primetime audience will track a 'black' 
story. The former is Queenie, played by the excellent Ruth Wilson, recently 
arrived in London from a Yorkshire pig farm, with elocution lessons as 
insurance to ensure she never has to go back up north. Equally desperate to 
escape her bruising orphaned childhood in rural Jamaica, is Hortence, Naomie 
Harris' highly-strung schoolteacher, who discovers husband Gilbert, played by 
the admirably versatile David Oyewolo, living in a grubby room in Queenie's 
boarding house.

Given more screen time, it is perhaps not surprising that Queenie is the more 
sympathetically drawn of the pair, and it is her fears and desires we take to 
heart. In contrast, the portrayal of the newly arrived immigrants, Hortence and 
Gilbert – facing the biggest challenges of their young lives – is often 
superficial (check out Gilbert's Stepin Fetchit moments). It seems that Small 
Island's writing (Paula Milne) and direction (John Alexander) are generally 
more assured around more familiar white characters and situations – the 
exception being their portrayal of interracial sex.

Do we need shows that celebrate the arrival, experiences and fairly rapid 
integration (within 50 years!), of immigrants into modern multicultural 
Britain? You bet.Andrea Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> 
can justifiably claim that she provided the BBC with great source material for 
the task. Small Island seems a missed opportunity. It's about time Auntie 
stepped up to the plate.

• Tony Dennis is the original producer on the BBC's Silent Witness plus Sky's 
Jozi-H, a Canadian/South African co-production.
 