 Small Island, Andrea Levy's affectionate, Orange prize-winning comedy of 
errors, misunderstandings and prejudice at the onset of West Indian immigration 
to Britain, was last night voted Whitbread book of the year.
Its expected double victory - unique in book awards -brought joy to its 
author, born on a north London council estate to Jamaican parents who arrived 
in 1948, and to all those who feel that the experience merits recognition as a 
rich phase in the history of both small and larger islands.

It marks a long hoped-for watershed in which, as she said in a recent Guardian 
article, "some of the bestselling books in this country have come from authors 
who would once have been seen as 'minority interest' and have now become 
publishing gold".

When her win was announced late last night, she said, in a reference to the 
Tory politician Enoch Powell's notorious "rivers of blood" speech in the late 
1960s: "Most of all I would like to thank all those people in Britain who work 
hard to make sure the rivers in this country never run with blood, only with 
water."

But Small Island was run close for the £30,000 award by John Guy's biography 
of Mary Queen of Scots. Based on archive papers which he finds were officially 
doctored to put the beheaded Scots queen in a criminal light, Guy's book, My 
Heart Is My Own, topped Levy's novel on the Whitbread website yesterday and 
gave it a close shave in the bookies' odds.

The judges' chairman, the author and ex-ITN newscaster Sir Trevor McDonald, 
said the contest was "very, very close" but Small Island finally emerged a 
clear winner.

"It is a beautifully observed novel of a period of English history which many 
people seem not to know very much about", he said.

"It is about a stage in the life of the West Indian diaspora of people who 
came over here to fight against the tyranny of Hitler's Germany. It is 
wonderfully observed, with great light touches. It is a great light story".

Asked if he had backed the novel Sir Trevor, who was born in Trinidad, said: 
"Strangely enough, I was not one who was pushing this book".

He also praised the three other shortlisted books: the first novel, Susan 
Fletcher's Eve Green; the children's section winner, Geraldine McCaughrean's 
Not the End of the World; and Michael Symmons Roberts' poem collection Corpus.

Scott Pack, head buyer for Waterstone's, said: "Small Island is a joy to read. 
We are delighted with the result."

But last night an acute question mark was raised over the Whitbread's method 
of picking its winners by the disclosure that the three judges in each section 
at the shortlisting stage do not read all the books entered by publishers for 
the longlists, which in some cases total more than 100 .

The prize organisers are understood to split up the entry, and give a third to 
each judge, who is discouraged from reading or supporting titles outside his or 
her quota of 40 or so books.

Then each judge is required to put forward three books from their quota for 
inclusion in the shortlist, which is whittled down to five titles by argument.

"I was not allowed to choose or speak for anything not on my list," one judge 
said last night. "I was very sad about that".

The news that their books are not fully read is likely to shock some authors 
who are not already cynical.

The wider disquiet it raises is that some works, such as abstruse or 
experimental literary novels or stories with a popular slant, may perish in the 
process simply because the judge who has them in his or her list is 
unsympathetic to the genre. It means that a single judge at an early stage is 
arbiter of their fates.

"For judges to read the whole longlist, the Whitbread would need to pay 
properly", the judge said.

The prize pays the total of 15 judges who pick the five section shortlists 
£700 each, which could be as little as £14 for each title they read in their 
quota of a large entry. The Booker prize for fiction pays fewer judges £3,000 
each for reading the whole of an entry which can total 140 novels.

"To do it properly, you would really have to get people who read for a 
living," the judge said. "It's worrying when you get judges who are not 
literary readers."

'Determined to speak in an English manner'

· An extract from Small Island, by Andrea Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> (Review, £7.99):

This was the day I was going to present myself for a position as a teacher at 
the offices of the education authority and no pained-face, fool-fooly man was 
going to imperil my elation.

Gilbert's explanation for how I might travel to this place called Islington 
took him more than an hour. The man insisted I take a note, then proceeded to 
deliver his instruction in one babble of 
turn-left-turn-right-no-wait-go-straight-on. The only lull in this breathless 
litany occurred when he asked, "You write this down?"

I am not a writing machine. Was it little wonder that when the man finally 
finish the only note I had written on the paper was the word "bus"?

"This the only thing you write?" he said. "You speak too fast," I told him.

It was with one long agitated breath that he blew the words into my face, 
"Come. I will go with you."

Anyone hearing Gilbert Joseph speak would know without hesitation that this 
man was not English. No matter that he is dressed in his best suit, his hair 
greased, his fingernails clean, he talked (and walked) in a rough Jamaican way. 
Whereas I, since arriving in this country, had determined to speak in an 
English manner. It was of no use to imitate the way of speaking of those about 
me, for too many people I encountered spoke as a Cockney would. All fine 
diction lost in a low-class slurring garble. No. To speak English properly as 
the high-class, I resolved to listen to the language at its finest. Every day 
my wireless was tuned to the most exemplary English in the known world. The 
BBC. The Light Programme - Woman's Hour, Mrs Dak's Diary, Music While You Work, 
and of course the news. I listened. I repeated. And I listened once more. To 
prove practice makes perfect, on two occasions a shopkeeper had brought me the 
item requested without repetition from me. With thanks to that impeccable 
English evidenced on my wireless, I was understood easily.

But Gilbert was still sucking on his teeth. Every two bells the man said "cha" 
and could not, no matter how I tried, stop himself exclaiming, "Nah, man," with 
every utterance. I worried that the refined and educated people at the 
education authority might look aghast at me if Gilbert Joseph were anywhere 
near. But I have to confess: "Hortense, 'bus' is not enough instruction to see 
you delivered safely." So I agreed. "Okay," I told him. "You may accompany me."
 