
Jane Austen used to satisfy the curiosity of friends and family by telling 
them what would happen to favourite characters after the novels in which they 
appeared had ended. When she came to the Guardian Book Club to talk aboutSmall 
Island, Andrea Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> was asked 
to do the same. Near the end of the novel, a baby, called Michael, is born: 
what are his future relationships with the novel's four main characters (and 
narrators)? We had the author with us – so now we could find out.

"A lot of people who have read the book have asked what happens next," Levy 
admitted. She even confessed to spinning some easy after-stories – in which 
Hortense and Queenie stay in contact, while Queenie separates from bitter 
Bernard – to satisfy persistent inquiries. But one member of the audience 
insisted the question of the child's fate was prompted by the novel's 
historical texture. She calculated baby Michael would be "exactly my age", and 
argued that he would surely want to know who his father was. Wasn't such 
inquisitiveness the norm now?

"I'm really quite curious as to how Hortense would have coped with this." The 
reader was determined that Hortense and Gilbert would not lie to the child, and 
the author agreed.

Another reader suggested that it was strange to think of the baby as a "real 
person". Seeing the novel as a carefully engineered construction, she described 
the traumatic birth that is the climax of Small Island as a focus for the 
prejudices that the novel had set out to explore. "We have these four people in 
a room and suddenly – the denouement – how are they all going to react?" The 
dramatic scene came from an abstract idea, she thought. "I didn't see baby 
Michael as a person so much as a vehicle for your bringing people together and 
making them confront how they were going to deal with their prejudices."

The novelist agreed that hers was a novel driven by an idea about revisiting 
history. A couple of readers spoke powerfully of the novel as a representation 
of experiences that their own parents might have had. To others, it was, as one 
member of the audience approvingly put it, "a history lesson". Was that a role 
of her novel?

Levy said that she was motivated by ignorance about the involvement of West 
Indian servicemen in the second world war. "The ignorance was mine as well," 
she said, and research for the novel a kind of necessary correction. Writing 
novels had made her fascinated by the entanglement of British and Caribbean 
histories. One reader suggested that this involvement was implicit in the 
different applications of the novel's title, "which I saw as an ironic comment 
on both prejudice and small mindedness" – the latter being found in both 
Britain and Jamaica.

The title seemed to be used with careful intent, encouraging the reader to 
notice the resonance of the phrase as used frequently by Gilbert, and once, 
crucially, by Queenie. But it came out of the novel after it was written, 
discovered rather than devised, Levy told us.

At different stages of the evening the author read out four short extracts, 
representative of the four voices of the novel. Levy told us that she had 
started writing the novel in the third person, before realising that it was 
crucial to keep within the limits – within the minds and the voices – of her 
four main characters. A reader commented on the Book Club website about the 
symmetries this produced, notably between the two women, who "both married men 
they disliked as a means to facilitate that move to the big city to secure a 
better life for themselves".

But our ignorance of other characters was also part of the method. A reader 
talked of the peculiar role given to Michael Roberts, who kept coming into the 
novel to shape the fates of those characters, yet whose viewpoint was never 
represented. His irresistible charm relied on our not knowing him. Some 
characters are best left unexplored.

John Mullan is professor of English at University College London. From next 
week he will be looking atThe Siege by Helen Dunmore. Join him and Helen 
Dunmore for a discussion on Wednesday 16 February at 7pm, Hall One, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG. Tickets: £9.50 online at kingsplace.co.uk or 
£11.50 from the box office: 020 7520 1490.
 