
Look up "contrition" in the Premier League Dictionary and this is the picture 
you'll find next to it. Behold, the promotional leaflet for the latest venture 
from former Sky Sports presentersRichard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray, who 
respectively resigned and were sacked from the network's football coverage in 
January after a series of sexist incidents.
 Click on Gray and Keys' after-dinner speaking flier to read it in detail 
It was on the day of his resignation, you may recall, that Richard quavered 
apologetically that he and Andy had "failed to change while everything had 
changed around us" – so what a pleasure it is to see the emergence of 
Keys'n'Gray Mark II: reconstructed, remorseful, and altogether more affordable. 
But we shall come to an intriguing discussion of their fees later. For now, 
just call them Smash It and Nice It (but don't bank on them doing anything for 
charidee).

The pair do indeed have jobs on the radio, and seemed to have dragged their 
act forward into the 1950s with a show on talkSPORT. But how delicious to find 
them moonlighting in "Smash It!".

Contrary to your assumption, this is not a recherche George Bernard Shaw 
two-hander, but appears to be a direct reference toone of the aforementioned 
incidents that saw Richard and Andy part company with Sky 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/jan/29/richard-keys-andy-gray>. 
To recap, we lay our scene in the studio, off-air but on-camera, where Richard 
is attempting to persuade pundit Jamie Redknapp to discourse on the nature of 
his relationship with some young lady. "Did you smash it?" inquires Richard. 
"Mind you, that's a stupid question. If you were anywhere near it, you 
definitely smashed it."

Anyway, parsing the leaflet, Lost in Showbiz is thrilled to see that the 
Abbott and Costello of hanging-out-the-back-of-it are being touted as the last 
word in after-dinner speaking, on the basis of their legendary "easy banter". 
"There is just no one better in the business, just like the old days, quality 
banter with football expertise," reads the pull quote from Britannia 
Construction. High praise indeed – while the leaflet goes on to say the pair 
will take "anything that's thrown at them" from the floor.

One can but dream. I am particularly drawn to the promise of anecdotes from 
their career, and very much hope it includes the time Andy was exposed for 
making drunk and lecherous advances towards a series of wildly unimpressed 
women in the bar of a La Manga hotel, before demanding of the concierge: "Eh, 
senoreo, where's the fucking taxio?"

Strictly speaking, this is not Keysy and Grayey's first foray into live 
events. Earlier this year the pair announced a theatre tour that would showcase 
their fabled banter. According to the promotional material for it, "Richard 
Keys andAndy Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> need no 
introduction." They certainly didn't. They didn't need an introduction in 
Southend, or in Kent, or in Clacton, or in any number of other venues, as the 
tour was cancelled owing to poor ticket sales.

Remarkably, though, their belief in their own "banter" is indestructible. 
Consider the evidence. Despite Andy and Richard's assertion that they were "the 
driving force behind Sky Sports' rise to football supremacy", the network has 
just about managed to stay afloat without them. Despite claiming to be 
"synonymous with the rise of Premiership football throughout the world", the 
league somehow still happens without Andy glossing its every irrelevance with a 
bellowed "that'll be a HUGE talking point on Monday" and bristling with pompous 
aggression at any referee with the temerity to enforce the rules. And despite 
their belief that they are "great company", their stage show had to be 
cancelled due to public indifference. Yet despite all these despites, their 
fierce and fundamentalist belief in the allure of their "banter" continues. 
Lost in Showbiz would actually go so far as to bet that it is imperishable. In 
the event of a nuclear holocaust, I have every confidence that the only thing 
left standing would be Richard and Andy's belief in their banter, manifested as 
a ghostly soundtrack of them drolly inviting some female underling to fellate 
them, playing as the radioactive ash fell like snow.

Something for us all to look forward to, anyway. Meanwhile, it seems time to 
do the leaflet's bidding, so I call the pair's manager – one Georgina 
Brassington – to discuss booking them. I would love it if the Guardian could 
book Richard and Andy for a party, I tell her, but I must ask how much they 
cost?

"They'll come out for £9,000," explains Georgina, "but they're not VAT 
registered so there isn't VAT on top."

I see. Well, it is not for this column to comment on the tax arrangements of 
Messrs Keys and Gray, so Lost in Showbiz goes on to ask what form the act 
takes. "Anything," she says. "They'll do anything. They'll do any presentation, 
they'll speak for 40 minutes – whatever you want. They have been going down an 
absolute storm. They've got SO much banter."

Yes. Yes, I think I'd vaguely heard. Do they talk about their sacking? "For 
the first few shows I did with them they weren't allowed to," says Georgina, 
"but they can now, and they always say they will answer any question asked in a 
Q&A."

Do they do that hilarious riff on the female lineswoman? "They don't tend to 
talk about the female referee [sic]," says Georgina, "but if the question comes 
up, then they definitely will."

I hope it's not all sackcloth and ashes. "Oh no, not at all. It's just great 
banter."

Well, as I say, I'd love them to play the Guardian party. But I'll just have 
to ask the people who decide these things. "Great," says Georgina. "To be 
honest, they have done mostly male environments with me, but they do adapt to 
whatever the event is."

I see – so if it was Mary Warnock's birthday party, they could do that? "Yeah, 
they'd be great with that."

And on that bombshell, my ducks, I'm off to make a submission to the boss.
 