
Until you see a place for yourself, the idea you carry around of it is like a 
dog-eared pack of postcards, each a snapshot filed away in your head after 
hearing somebody else's holiday anecdote. These collages of secondhand 
memories, elaborated with misplaced detail, often turn out to be a lot more 
alluring than the place itself. What a letdown it is, for instance, to turn up 
at 'the most remote and romantic beach in Cornwall' to find a pile of discarded 
fags and a sodden copy of Heat magazine blowing around.

My earliest glimpse of the sun-drenched glamour the adult world might hold 
came from my grandparents' slides of their trip to the Amalfi Coast. The images 
were projected on to a spindly legged screen set up on the swirls of their 
living room carpet. My little sister and I had plenty of opportunity to absorb 
these pictures that clunked on and off in front of us because we seemed to see 
them every visit. Whether we badgered our grandparents into putting up the 
projector or they themselves were strangely obsessed with the process I can't 
remember.

And with the slides came the stories. Nana would tell us in particular about 
her magical encounter with the Blue Grotto - a shimmering cavern at the base of 
Capri's cliffs which had been an essential stop on the 19th-century European 
Grand Tour. My grandparents' visit to the Costiera Amalfitana was a response to 
the second big wave of tourist interest in this area of Italy. Its scary 
coastal road, tracing the twists of the cliffs and then beetling down to the 
sea, and its rakish associations with the international jet set had given the 
area an attractive appeal for tentative adventurers like them. Once my father 
left home, they had the money to experiment with travelling 'on the Continent'.

Although my grandfather had no appetite for foreign food and regarded my 
mother's 1970s risottos with undisguised suspicion, the two of them always 
talked about this Amalfi holiday with enthusiasm - adopting a tone of 
familiarity whenever they mentioned Pompeii, Sorrento or Positano.

Finally retracing my grandparents' steps this spring was fun, partly because 
it was so easy. Not much has changed from my picture memories. Some of the 
hotels look a little run down, but the Miramalfi, where Rod and Doris Thorpe 
stayed, was still perched resplendent above the Tyrrhenian Sea (it really is 
called that). Although the management says the hotel has just been refurbished, 
the decor still harks back to the late 1950s. It is the stark, spacious look 
that is being aped all over London today.

It was nice to think, as I sat in the bar sipping my Campanello (a long 
cocktail made with local limoncello and Campari), that this was where Nana had 
also looked out at the sea 40 years before.

In search of the effortless glamour with which my imagination had steeped this 
area since girlhood, I drove inland and uphill to Ravello. When it comes to 
high-brow style, it's still hard to beat this place. The hilltop town revolves 
around its music festivals inspired by past resident Richard Wagner. Chief 
concert venue is the composer's former home, Villa Rufolo, where you can stroll 
through the gardens, full of sunburst flowerbeds, and be stopped short by 
exhilarating aerial views of the coastline. In one cafe where I worked through 
a plate of cakes, I learnt from the menu that in 1962 Jackie Kennedy declared 
them 'the most delicious ice creams and puddings in the world'.

But this brush with bygone celebrity was as nothing compared with those 
waiting on Capri. Every other upmarket trattoria has photographs of visiting 
stars from Hollywood's golden era. In many cases these proud mementoes have 
been augmented by snaps of modern-day stars, from Catherine Zeta Jones and 
Michael Douglas to the ubiquitous George Hamilton who, judging from the number 
of photographs of him I have randomly come across so far, seems to have eaten 
in more restaurants in more countries than would be humanly possible even for a 
film star of his age.

Capri is a phenomenon. Not only was it the home of Roman emperors - Tiberius 
moved his government here in 26 AD - it continues to attract the rich and 
powerful. Regular hydrofoils from the mainland take 20 minutes, making day 
trips easy. When you ascend from the port to the main town by funicular you are 
confronted with a piazzetta packed with chic ice-cream parlours and designer 
shops. I was still feeling a little queasy after the crossing, but the effect 
was doubled by the ostentatious show of wealth. One of the tiny streets leading 
to the famous five-star Quisisana Hotel ought to have been called Salvatore 
Ferragamo Street, it was so dominated by designer outlets. If anything, Capri 
was more chi-chi than my childish impressions led me to expect. In fact, it is 
too fashionable for its own good.

Once stunning simply because of its geography and easy style, it is now a 
plutocrat's playground. As a girl, I picked that up while hearing Nana's 
evocation of the wonders of the Blue Grotto; my parents had a different take on 
their whole expedition. I may have been easily won over by Technicolor shots of 
my grandparents posed against the Bay of Naples, but my mother referred instead 
to their visit to the 'Gracie Fields grotto' in a way that would have instantly 
demoted the cultural tonehad I known then that Gracie and her Italian home were 
thought risible in some circles.

Well, Capri gets the last laugh. Luxury hotels and spas are going up all along 
the walk to the remains of Tiberius's Villa Jovis and not many people I know 
could afford to stay in any of them. I waited for the boat back to Amalfi 
alongside a family of Brits who had stayed at the Quisisana and were all 
dressed up as if they were going to a wedding. On my other side were a Swiss 
family, each clutching designer shopping bags.

On the way to Naples airport the next day I stopped at Pompeii, a place of 
historic interest for me, but not only Roman history. My sister had been 
refused entry 20 years before because the staff were on strike, and 20 years 
before that Nana had twisted her ankle on an ancient cobble. It occurred to me 
that since the explosion in cheap travel most places in Europe are now layered 
with family memories for lots of people.

The memories of my grandparents' trip may not be buried under ash like those 
of Pompeii, but after their deaths more than a decade ago they have often 
seemed as distant. It was good to bring them to life again.

Factfile

Vanessa Thorpe travelled to the four-star Hotel Miramalfi, Amalfi, with Italy 
specialist Citalia (0870 909 7555;www.citalia.com <http://www.citalia.com>). 

Prices start at £512 per person and include three nights' half-board staying 
in a twin room with sea view and balcony, transfers and return flights with 
British Airways from Gatwick to Naples (or from Manchester, Bristol, East 
Midlands & Glasgow at a supplement). For seven nights, the cost would be from 
£739 per person.

Car hire costs from £23 per day (based on Group B car for two-three people)

How the Italians holiday

Donatella Versace heads to the celeb honeypot island of Capri, and the 
stunningly elegant Capri Palace Hotel & Spa in Anacapri, which has fantastic 
views over the Bay of Naples. It has a classical architecture of columns, 
arches and vaulted ceilings and, in contrast to Versace's glitzy creations, 
interiors are simple and white. Donatella is a great fan of the spa's 'Leg 
School', a course of beauty treatments for the pins, which would sooth them if 
they get too wobbly on the hotel's yacht. Book through Elegant Resorts (01244 
897 777;www.elegantresorts.co.uk <http://www.elegantresorts.co.uk>). A week 
from £1165 includes flights.
 