
I'm puffing up a hill above Glencoe called Buachaille Etive Beag when the wind 
hits me. Up until now it's been hot work, even though it's February and the 
snow underfoot is soft. Yet even from here I can see that the ridge to the 
summit high above us glistens with ice. That tells me it's blowing hard and 
cold up there. When I finally escape the lee of the mountain's broad back, I'm 
shocked by the wind's strength and have to stiffen my own back to make progress.

Half a dozen of us are walking in line, all leaning into the wind, plugging 
our mountain boots into steps in the snow made by the figure in front. We're 
each in our own world of effort, hidden behind anorak hoods cinched tight to 
stop them flapping.

Doug Drysdale brings up the rear, a mother hen sheltering his Gore-Tex chicks 
from danger. An instructor with Outward Bound, Doug proves the point that all 
you need to have fun is someone canny enough to persuade you that you already 
are. Because, despite the cold and wind, we really are having fun. Mountain 
walking is not going to be everyone's ideal winter break. It can be physically 
exhausting and uncomfortable. But if you want a truly wild experience that 
strips your soul down to its bare essentials, then striding across a vast, 
empty landscape for hours on end with the wind in your face is a good place to 
start.

What's more, you don't have to fly halfway round the world to experience it. 
Scotland's mountains in winter aren't just an interesting alternative to bigger 
or more exotic ranges like the Himalayas. They are among the most compelling 
landscapes on the planet. The skiing isn't often great, but Scottish mountain 
walking is always available and always worth the effort. The joke goes that if 
the Highlands were 4,000 miles away, they would be full of English trekkers.

Buachaille Etive Beag means, in Gaelic, the Little Shepherd of Etive. His big 
brother, Buachaille Etive Mòr, towers an extra 60 metres above the A82 as you 
enter this stark valley from the south. If you've ever driven along this 
hauntingly beautiful road, you'll remember him. The little shepherd lurks in 
the background, but lesser peaks often give the best views and this is no 
exception. Anyway its summits are both Munros, peaks over 900 metres (3,000ft) 
- desirable to those who collect such things.

At the col, or pass, between the mountain's two peaks, Doug brings us to a 
halt for lunch and a little light instruction on how to use the crampons and 
ice axe we're carrying in anticipation. In truth, it sounds more rugged than it 
is. Walking in winter, like ice skating or surfing, requires some essential 
kit, but using it is (by comparison) straightforward. Our top tip for coping 
with crampons involves waddling like a duck so you don't snag the points in 
your trousers.

If the gear is easy to use, the environment is more demanding. There's a lot 
of weather, as we're discovering, and in the middle of winter it can be a whole 
lot worse. Mountains are weather factories, and it's useful to know what's 
rolling off the production line before you get in the way. The night before, 
Doug had sat us down and gone through the forecast, and what that might mean as 
the day unfolded.

Then there's the snow and ice. This stuff is fickle beyond words, from fluffy 
powder to something approaching the cubes that come out of your freezer. 
Scotland's west coast, with its maritime climate, is notorious for the 
temperature range you can encounter in the space of a few hours, from +12C to 
-10C or worse. Such shifts, not surprisingly, have a dramatic impact on the 
stuff you're walking across - Drysdale's lecture on spotting avalanche 
conditions gets our close attention.

After the heavy stuff comes the reward. When we reach the top, the view is 
staggering. In summer, Buachaille Etive Beag is rugged enough. In winter, it's 
like stepping into an undiscovered world. The tops are smothered in dazzling 
white, while the glens between are dark or reveal the glint of water. To the 
north, beyond the rugged hills that flank the other side of Glencoe, called the 
Aonach Eagach, are the Mamores. Beyond them is the humped mass of Ben Nevis.

To the west, where the Atlantic meets the mountains, winter sunshine is 
breaking through the clouds. And yet, around 50 miles to the east, is the 
Cairngorms national park, an area larger than Luxembourg that is essentially a 
fragment of the high Arctic in the heart of the Highlands.

The high Cairngorm plateau is more rounded and bleaker than these hills, with 
their spectacular ocean view. And it's that variety and diversity in Scotland's 
mountain landscapes which is so compelling.

People spend a lifetime exploring the hills that surround me, stretching 
beyond the horizon in all directions. In fact, I think I may be one of them.

· Ed Douglas joined an Outward Bound Snow and Ice course based at Loch Eil, 
near Fort William (outwardbound.org.uk <http://www.outwardbound.org.uk>). 
Winter walking courses are also available at the Scottish National Outdoor 
Adventure Centre in the Cairngorms (glenmorelodge.org.uk 
<http://www.glenmorelodge.org.uk>)

Mountaineering

Thrill rating 7/10

Danger rating 8/10 

Fitness rating 10/10

In a nutshell ...

You could be on the summit of Mont Blanc - everywhere you look there are 
snow-draped crags and mountains, the sun glares out of a brilliant blue sky and 
the air you breathe is peppermint fresh. But you're actually in the UK, having 
"topped out" on a Scottish Munro (a peak over 900 metres high) on your first 
winter mountaineering course - and you're converted for life. Next step the 
north face of the Eiger. Maybe ...

Despite global warming, at some point every winter Britain's highest 
mountains, especially those of Snowdonia, the Lakes and in particular the 
Scottish Highlands, take on a truly Alpine aspect and experienced winter 
mountaineers will pull out ice axes, crampons and plenty of fleeces to explore 
the wildest, most exhilarating landscapes in Britain. A weekend's winter 
mountaineering course will get you safely out among those snowbound peaks.

What's the buzz?

"Our clients get a real buzz out of realising there's such an amazing resource 
here in the UK that, with a few basic skills, they can go out and explore 
safely," says Nick Carter of Inverness-based Alpha Mountaineering. "Their new 
skills can get them to the top of amazing winter landscapes, where they can 
look down at what they've climbed with a real sense of success and 
exhilaration."

Thrill a minute?

Safety is everything in winter mountaineering, so progress up steep 
mountainsides, snow gullies and perhaps even a frozen waterfall is slow and 
sure, with a constant lookout for changing snow and weather conditions during 
the course of the day. But the thrill and sense of achievement of reaching your 
chosen summit, or clambering the last few metres up your first snow gully, is 
never to be forgotten.

Adrenaline peak

A winter classic such as the Aonach Eagach ridge above Glencoe provides a 
constant low-level adrenaline flow from the moment you step on to the ridge 
until, two totally committed miles later, your cramponed boots move on to less 
vertiginous terrain. And the spectacular views across the winter mountains 
ensure you're surrounded by "adrenaline peaks", in both senses of the word, all 
day.

Where to do it

The Scottish Highlands boast the UK's most consistent winter conditions. Alpha 
Mountaineering offers courses throughout the Highlands, with highly experienced 
mountain guides who have climbed in most of the world's major mountain ranges.

Who can do it?

Experienced summer hill walkers and rock climbers with a liking for snow will 
love winter mountaineering. You need a good level of fitness, however, as 
you'll be carrying more gear than you would in the summer hills, and walking 
and climbing across snowbound landscapes is far more demanding than summer 
hiking.

What to take

All your usual summer kit plus extra warm clothes and, of course, a helmet, 
ice axe, crampons and rope, the latter three of which you'll be taught to use 
on the course. Oh, and a camera - a pic of you standing on top of Snowdon in 
full winter raiment will easily convince friends you just spent a weekend in 
the Alps.

Typical prices

Alpha Mountaineering charges £160 per person per day for one-to-one 
instruction, and up to £200 per day for three or more people.

Impress your pals

Still not convinced that British hills cut it? Well, the team that completed 
the first successful ascent of Everest in 1953 (courtesy of that dynamic 
climbing duo, Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay) trained on the flanks of 
Snowdon - while Scotland in full winter conditions is still considered one of 
the most testing winter playgrounds for climbers.
Alf Alderson

YouTube searchwords 'ben vorlic summit'

Good links

alphamountaineering.co.uk <http://www.alphamountaineering.co.uk>

glenmorelodge.org.uk <http://www.glenmorelodge.org.uk>

thebmc.co.uk <http://www.thebmc.co.uk>

heartofsnowdonia.co.uk/pybrenin.htm 
<http://www.heartofsnowdonia.co.uk/pybrenin.htm>
 