
Beach

Beach-hop by kayak, Brazil

The stunning old colonial town of Paraty may be a classic Brazil pitstop but • 
you can get a completely new perspective on it with Original Travel's kayaking 
trips around the surrounding coastline. Part of a wider itinerary that also 
takes in Rio, the two-night kayaking element sees exploration of the Costa 
Verde's fishing villages, mangroves and mountains by day and camping on idyllic 
jungle-backed beaches by night.

• From £2,645pp for a tailor-made tour, including BA flights, transfers, six 
nights' accommodation and all equipment, meals and guides on the kayaking trip. 
020-7978 7333,originaltravel.co.uk <http://www.originaltravel.co.uk>. 

Follow the surfers, Mexico

When it comes to sniffing out beaches, surfers are like bloodhounds. Around a 
decade ago, Mexican surfers began trickling out of Puerta Vallerta, the 
resort-laden goliath on the Pacific coast, and heading northwards. The fishing 
village Sayulita was one of their first ports of call, where small wooden boats 
dot the beach and locals munch on seafood at the thatched El Costeño restaurant 
on the sand. Further up the coast, San Francisco (San Pancho to the locals) is 
the latest outpost, where the beaches are even less crowded and the pace of 
life snail-like.

• In Sayulita, stay at the Villa Amor (villaamor.com <http://www.villaamor.com>
) with doubles from £60pn. In San Francisco the Paradise Villas (
villasparadise.info <http://www.villasparadise.info>) has doubles from £55pn.

Go wild, Cambodia

The Cambodian coast is one of south-east Asia's least developed stretches, 
strewn with wild beaches and the kind of isolation that disappeared from 
Thailand decades ago. Wild Frontiers is running an organised trip to the area 
in November, and the itinerary looks superb. After setting off from Phnom Phen, 
guests will stay at a remote eco-lodge in the Cardamom Mountains, before 
heading to the coast, where a chartered boat will beach-hop down the coast for 
two days. The two-week trip will also include stops at Bamboo Island and Rabbit 
Island; the latter is home to a handful of families, beach huts and 360 degree 
panoramas.

• 020-7736 3968, wildfrontiers.co.uk <http://www.wildfrontiers.co.uk>, price 
tba.

Adventure

Join a gay adventure group, worldwide 

With the gay travel market carving a growing niche, it was only a matter of 
time before the launch of adventure tours exclusively aimed at gay and lesbian 
travellers. In 2009 Intrepid Travel, working in partnership with gay-owned and 
managed Out Adventures, launches its small-group adventure holidays to 45 
destinations, focusing on responsible travel ranging from Turkey to Thailand. 
Open to gay travellers and their friends and family, the trips include a 15-day 
Spain family tour from Madrid to Cordoba.

• From £1,215pp (plus €400 local payment) inc B&B accommodation, land-based 
travel and some meals 020-3147 7777,intrepidtravel.com 
<http://www.intrepidtravel.com/outadventures>

Take a hike in the wilderness, Greenland

Adventure tourists have two new reasons to head north next summer. Adventure 
Camp Greenland offers new seven-day, multi-activity trips in the Ammassalik 
wilderness - around 100km south of the Arctic Circle - in July. Award-winning 
tour operator Wilderness Journeys is also launching low-impact 17-day 
sea-kayaking trips to Greenland in July and August. Kayaking was supposedly 
invented by local Inuit hunters, so it's an appropriate way to explore the 
landscape and polar wildlife.

• Adventure Camp Greenland (0029 9 981 543, eastgreenland.com 
<http://www.eastgreenland.com>), seven days from €1,890pp inc everything but 
international flights. Wilderness Journeys (0131-625 6635,wildernessjourneys.com
 <http://www.wildernessjourneys.com>), 17 days from £3,095pp, inc flights, 
activities, accommodation and most meals.

Explore 'secret' Wales, Snowdonia

Walking holiday specialist Upland Escapes focuses on off-the-beaten-track 
destinations, including the Mercantour in France and Slovenia's Julian Alps. 
New for its 2009 spring programme is Wales - which doesn't sound so different 
until you realise that the trips will be in the Rhinog Mountains. This "secret" 
corner of Snowdonia combines rocky wilderness and miles of sandy beach.

• From £100pp inc two nights' B&B accommodation, handbook of local information 
and self-guided walks, maps and 24hr phone support.
01367 851111, uplandescapes.com <http://www.uplandescapes.com>

Trek off the beaten track, Taiwan

Keen hikers in search of new territory should strike out for Taiwan in 2009. 
Ramblers' new 19-day walking tours, launching next November, take in Taipei, 
Sun Moon Lake, Alishan, Kenting National Park, Taroko Gorge and the largest 
Buddhist monastery in Taiwan, Fo Guang Shan. KE Adventure Travel, meanwhile, 
has announced a new, 12-day trek in the island's Jade Mountain area.

• Ramblers (01707 331133, ramblersholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.ramblersholidays.co.uk>), from £2,650pp inc flights, transfers, 
guides and full board. KE Adventure Travel (01768 773966,keadventure.com 
<http://www.keadventure.com>), from £1,295pp inc transport, guides, most meals 
and accommodation (can also arrange flights, from £950 rtn).

Venture into a troubled country, Angola

War-torn Angola has been off-limits to all but the most fearless travellers 
for a long time. Now, although travel still needs to be carefully negotiated, 
trips are possible. Imaginative Traveller is one of the first operators to 
re-enter the region, launching 4WD safaris there next September. The 14-day 
trips will take in the colonial city of Lubango, visits to Himba tribes, 
high-level hiking and national parks. The highlight will be a 230km beach 
drive, sandwiched between towering dunes and notoriously treacherous surf.

• From £3,110pp inc flights, transport, 11 nights' accommodation, most meals 
and activities. 0845 077 8802,imaginative-traveller.com 
<http://www.imaginative-traveller.com>.

Experiences

Howl at the moon, Italy

The X Factor may be over for another year, but you could compete in 2009 if 
you give Andalucian Adventures' new singing holidays a go. They're launching in 
both Spain and Italy, but if you're not in winner Alexandra's league, plump for 
the Italian one. The highlight of the Abruzzo-based trip is a night-time foray 
to howl at wolves in the Apennine mountains - so even the tone deaf should 
sound at home.

• From £889pp for seven nights inc transport, full board, singing tuition and 
guided walks. 01453 834137, andalucian-adventures.co.uk. Flights to Rome 
Ciampino from East Midlands, Prestwick, Liverpool and Stansted from £55rtn. 
0871 246 0000,ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>.

Celebrate Darwinism, Sussex - or the Galapagos Islands

In 2009 it will be 150 years since Darwin's On the Origin of Species was first 
published, and 200 years since the famous naturalist was born. Various travel 
companies are launching itineraries that celebrate these events, from HF 
Holidays' "Charles Darwin: Natural Born Naturalist" five-day walking breaks in 
Sussex to Voyages Jules Verne's 17-night "Treasures of Ecuador" tour, a 
blow-out expedition that includes a seven-night luxury cruise to the Galapagos.

• HF Holidays (0845 470 7558, hfholidays.co.uk <http://www.hfholidays.co.uk>), 
five days from £339pp inc four nights' full board and activities. Voyages Jules 
Verne (0845 166 7003, vjv.co.uk), seven nights from £3,505pp inc flights, 
transport, accommodation, most meals and activities.

Turn up for the books, Scotland

Whisky and literature may be a classic combination, but Wigtown Book Festival, 
in southwest Scotland, believes its 2009 autumn festival-within-a-festival, 
Whisky & Words, will be a first. Based around Bladnoch Distillery, it will 
include events about various writers including Rabbie Burns, as well as music, 
dancing, tastings and talks from distinguished drinks writers. It's all part of 
Homecoming 2009, a year-long programme to celebrate Burns's 250th anniversary.

• StenaLine Wigtown Book Festival, 25 September to 5 October. 01988 403222, 
wigtownbookfestival.com <http://www.wigtownbookfestival.com>.

Find art on the streets, Lithuania

Vilnius is the Baltic capital that got away. While Tallinn and Riga have been 
pounded by stag parties, Vilnius, without a budget airline link to the UK, has 
been largely spared. Next year the Capital of Culture torch comes to the 
Lithuanian capital. At the beginning of May, street musicians will be given 
free rein of the entire city centre, a privilege that will be passed on to 
contemporary artists during the aptly titled Art in Unusual Places event in 
September. For the latter, residents in the district of Uzupis, a 
self-proclaimed "republic" of artists, will be particularly active.

• culturelive.lt <http://www.culturelive.lt>

Join Istanbul's cool crowd, Turkey

Over the last few years, trendy Istanbulites have been scampering for the 
shores of Alacati, a popular wind-surfing spot renowned as a summer nightlife 
hub. The Alacati Beach Resort first saw the opening of Babylon, a cult Istanbul 
gig venue and nightclub that has opened a beach bar and a stage for audiences 
of up to 4,000 people. Next came Otto, whose Istanbul club is in a converted 
power station and one of the city's hottest nights.

• Alacati Beach Resort (alacati.com <http://www.alacati.com>), doubles from 
€100pn . If you want to stay away from the action, the Tas Otel (tasotel.com 
<http://www.tasotel.com>) has doubles from €90pn. 

Hotels

Go boutique in Egypt, Cairo

Opening in February, set in a 1920s house, among a garden of date palms and 
fruit trees, Villa Belle Epoque promises to be Cairo's first boutique hotel. 
With 13 bedrooms and a pool, it's likely to make an ideal oasis from the chaos 
of the Egyptian capital. If you can drag yourself away, the hotel also offers 
cultural tours of lesser-known areas of Cairo, including art galleries and the 
new Egyptian textile museum.

• From £690pp for three nights inc rtn flights and transfers. 0845 057 1819, 
balesworldwide.com <http://www.balesworldwide.com>.

Have a fashionable night, Edinburgh

Taking the trend for design hotels a step further, Missoni, the Milan-based 
fashion house known for its brightly coloured knitwear, is launching a series 
of branded hotels in 2009. The first is scheduled to open in Edinburgh in May. 
A collaboration with the Rezidor hotel group, the new hotels will feature 
architecture by Matteo Thun and interiors by Rosita Missoni. Expect very 
covetable bathrobes.

• 00 32 2702 9200, hotelmissoni.com <http://www.hotelmissoni.com>.

Visit a spa with six pools - plus beach, Sweden 

In March, the latest design-led hotel opens on Sweden's Bohuslan coast, an 
hour from Gothenburg. A stylish bolthole is nothing new in Sweden, but this one 
is different. Set within a nature reserve, and overlooking a fjord, the Vann 
Spa Hotel raises the bar. Vann means "water" in the local dialect, and guests 
staying in its 156 rooms can choose between six different pools - including hot 
ones, cold ones, forest pools and flower pools - as well as access to a private 
beach.

• Doubles from SEK775 (£65), B&B00 46 523 44 200; vann.se <http://www.vann.se>.

Camping in style, Madagascar

Romantically set on the bank of the Mandare River, shaded by tamarind trees, 
the new Mandare River Camp is the first African-style luxury tented camp to 
open in Madagascar. Its six tented rooms feature handmade wooden furniture, 
biodegradable chemi-loos, solar-powered electricity and private verandahs - 
perfect for some lazy wildlife viewing.

• Several UK tour operators are offering stays in 2009: Audley Travel (01993 
838585,audleytravel.com <http://www.audleytravel.com>), Wildlife Worldwide 
(0845 130 6982,wildlifeworldwide.com <http://www.wildlifeworldwide.com>) and 
Rainbow Tours (020-7226 1004,rainbowtours.co.uk <http://www.rainbowtours.co.uk>
), which has a nine night trip including three nights at the camp, plus four in 
a hotel in Anjajavy and two in a hotel in the capital, Antananarivo, as well as 
flights from London from £3,595pp.

Family

Sleep in a gypsy caravan, France

Spent a night in a yurt? Arrived at a festival with a Cath Kidston tent? If 
you thought the trend for "cool" camping had gone as far as it could, you'd be 
wrong. Next summer sees Canvas Holidays adding gypsy caravan-style 
accommodation to its programme of family camping holidays in France. The 
roulottes de campagne sleep up to five people each and are available at four 
rural locations across France: Limousin, Poitou-Charentes, Midi Pyrénées and 
the Auvergne. The catch? You can forget the open road, as the roulettes are 
permanently grounded within campsites - albeit small, rural ones.

• From £168 pp pw. 0845 268 0827, canvasholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.canvasholidays.co.uk>.

Join conservation projects in South Africa 

Tapping into a growing demand for family friendly conservation holidays, 
Conservation Africa's new family experience is a South African project aimed at 
giving families with children aged eight and over a chance to participate in 
local conservation efforts. Its two-week trips in the greater Kruger area take 
families out on bush walks, night drives and community visits but, unlike more 
traditional safaris, also give visitors the chance to help record animal 
numbers and breeds, and spend time doing voluntary work in local communities.

• From £2,290 (adult) or £1,690 (child) inc flights, transfers, accommodation, 
meals and activities. 0845 520 0888,conservationafrica.net 
<http://www.conservationafrica.net>.

Give your teens a real adventure, worldwide

Proving that Disneyland and beach holidays aren't the be all and end all of 
family trips, adventure tour operator Exodus is launching "proper" small group 
adventures for families with children aged 11 and over in 2009. Called Teenage 
Kicks, these range from treks around Mont Blanc, Nepalese teahouses and the 
Inca Trail to desert adventures in Sinai and gorilla-tracking in Rwanda. One of 
the most popular is likely to be an ascent of north Africa's highest mountain, 
Mount Toubkal, taking in Berber villages and Marrakech along the way.

• From £699pp for eight days inc flights, accommodation, guides and most 
meals. 0845 863 9601,exodus.co.uk <http://www.exodus.co.uk>.

Take a toddler-friendly trip, Morocco

Toddler tourism may have kicked off in the UK when hit children's TV show 
Balamory generated a massive spike in visitors to Tobermory - but now larger 
tour operators are getting in on the act. Explore's Toddler Tours, launching in 
2009, will see four tours catering especially for families with under fives, 
staying in "toddler friendly" hotels, and encompassing suitable activities. Its 
Souks and Mountains trip includes Marrakech, Essaouira's beaches and foothills 
of the Atlas Mountains.

• From £745pp inc flights, transfers, seven nights' B&B, guiding, activities 
and some meals. 0845 013 1537,explore.co.uk <http://www.explore.co.uk>.
 