

I've watched a lot of reality TV auditions, mainly from behind a cushion, and 
often wondered what kind of a masochist would choose to go through that kind of 
humiliation. Why people who know that they are average at best rock up in their 
thousands, desperate to have Simon Cowell, Piers Morgan and their cronies treat 
them with withering disdain.

So when the BBC invited me to audition for Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips> and Nigel Lythgoe 
for their new reality dance show, So You Think You Can Dance, I politely 
declined. I do not Think I Can Dance. In fact, I am very aware of my lack of 
any talent in this arena. I dance like my legs and arms have been put on 
backwards, in a windmill of flailing limbs. I was kicked out of ballet at age 
three for being "ungainly". I have already been judged in this field, and 
frankly it didn't go well.

But after a whole host of Derren Brown-style persuading tricks from the 
Guardian, this 36-year-old, slightly overweight woman found herself at the 
Hackney Empire theatre in London, dressed like the mum of one of the Kids From 
Fame, and feeling like she might vomit. The only thing that had got me there 
was a promise from the BBC that I would be auditioning alongside a number of 
other members of the press, and we would be taught a choreographed routine.

They lied. There were indeed other members of the press, most of them 
wondering if they were being punished for something, but there was no 
choreography. Like the perky parade of spandex-clad auditionees who had been 
taking to the stage and demonstrating their talents all morning, we were 
expected to audition individually, "freestyling" on the main stage to Fire 
Burning by Sean Kingston. I pointed out that I do neither "free" nor "style", 
and was told to "just come out and bust some moves", whatever the hell that 
means. I have never come so close to running away from anything.

It was awful. I flailed my limbs, bobbed about a bit and tried to put in a bit 
of Beyoncé booty-shaking, which was really just a bit pathetic. Halfway through 
I realised why it all felt so very wrong – I haven't danced sober since 1987. 
At one point I caught Arlene's eye, and she was giving me the kind of pitying 
look normally reserved for abused donkeys.

After the longest few minutes of my life, we all lined up for the judges' 
comments. I can only assume that they don't get the opportunity to get their 
own back on the press very often, because they were brutal – nasty Nigel 
Lythgoe is not a very nice man. My only vaguely positive comment came from the 
third judge, the choreographer Priscilla Samuels, who pointed out that I have 
hips, which could definitely move. No, really - why not just call me fat and be 
done with it.

So what did I learn from this experience? 1) If it sounds even vaguely like a 
bad idea, don't do it, even if Guardian TV says please. 2) Don't believe what 
the BBC tells you, they are giant fibbers, and... 3) Don't ever, ever agree to 
take a cameraman with you.
So You Think You Can Dance will be on BBC1 early next year.
 