
Songs are hot property. Of course, some are here one day, gone the next. But 
big rock anthems and pop ballads can take incredible journeys from their 
original release via cover versions to background music in computer games, and 
via adverts to fodder for pop wannabes on TV talent shows.

Classic songs can continue to earn hundreds of thousands of pounds a year in 
reasonably quiet times and that can go up to millions when they hit the jackpot 
again with a big-selling cover. These sums are driving a lively secondary 
market both in recording rights and in music publishing, which covers rights to 
the song itself rather than the recording.

Songwriters and musicians often sell on the rights to their songs and 
recordings to music companies for a lump sum; a good catalogue can go for 
millions. Jeremy Lascelles, who runs independent music company Chrysalis, sums 
up what a catalogue compiler is looking for: "Great classic songs stand the 
test of time. They get played on radio around the world on a repeated basis, 
they are the sort of songs people will cover, they are the sort that people 
will license to anything from film or TV or commercials, computer games or 
corporate videos, all those areas which are very fertile areas of activity for 
us."

London-based Chrysalis spent $7.5m this summer on the catalogue of American 
singer-songwriter Richard Marx. It now has the rights to the sentimental ballad 
'Right Here Waiting' as well as the well-known songs 'Hazard', 'Endless Summer 
Nights', 'Now and Forever' and 'Dance With My Father'.

The anatomy of a catalogue deal is similar to that of a company buyout. There 
is a long process of due diligence, but on songs rather than business 
operations. In Marx's case, Chrysalis flags up the fact that he has written 37 
Top 30 hits, including 13 US number ones. Lascelles also notes the "songs that 
had not been that extensively exploited, that were very coverable and reusable 
in a market 20 years down the line from when they first came out".

"They have obviously endured remarkably well. When you are doing this kind of 
transaction you analyse the income over a period of time and they have 
continued to earn very steadily over a number of years without much high-level 
exposure. So we figured if we can do what we think we're good at and exploit it 
more creatively and more actively, we will add extra value."

Being "coverable" is a key earner in an era of talent-spotting shows such as 
The X-Factor.

"Who would have ever guessed – Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> himself would certainly not 
when he wrote 'Hallelujah' all those years ago – what would have happened to 
that song?" says Lascelles.

X-Factor winner Alexandra Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke> had a Christmas number one 
with Cohen's 1984 song, following in the footsteps of Jeff Buckley, Rufus 
Wainwright and other artists who have tackled it.

Burke's version will have caused a "huge spike" in an already solid stream of 
revenues, says Lascelles. He believes 'Right Here Waiting' is "a song that 
ought to be well in contention for that kind of usage. It's a classic, easy, 
universal sentiment: 'I'll be right here waiting for you'."
 