
There's one building that is central to our life here together. It is, 
appropriately, the first building you see as you come up the drive. It's a 
place that sustains us and gives us strength, peace and serenity amid much 
weakness and noise. We used to call it the "explosives chamber" since we were 
told (this is probably a rural legend) that it was where they used to store the 
explosives for the quarry. It's a building we now call "the chapel".

Now "chapel" is a fairly grandiose term for something that's not much more 
than a stone shed. There are only three pews and even they're pretty basic as 
we planked them out of a cypress we felled. They're normally covered in chicken 
shit as the place is also used to store chicken and pig feed and the birds come 
in to pick up the scraps. There are also old sinks, broken tiles, rusty bikes 
and wonky ladders in there. It's a bit of a mess basically, but it's a good 
place.

But that one word, "chapel", creates colossal misunderstandings. Many people 
are repelled by it, and put off, too, by the simple description we use to say 
what we're up to: "traditional Christian hospitality". The closest thing we've 
had to hate mail came from someone who thought that we were scary, religious 
nutters who were hellbent on converting every wayfarer who wandered into the 
woods.

Now, I can understand why someone might be put off by religion in general and 
by Christianity in particular. The history of the church isn't always a story 
of glorious altriusm – far from it. But I'm keen to clear up any 
misunderstandings about our "chapel". One of our models for that building is 
the House of Silence at Neve Shalom – Wahat Al Salam, which means, in Hebrew 
and Arabic respectively, "oasis of peace". It's a village in Israel that tries 
to usher in "peace, equality and understanding" between Arabs and Jews. Their 
"pluralistic spiritual centre" is also called "Doumia-Sakinah", a name that 
comes both from Psalm 62 ("to thou Lord silence [doumia] shall be as praise") 
and the Qur'an ("he sends tranquility [sakinah] into the hearts of the 
believers…").

I hope that our space is, in its tiny way, equally ecumenical. I'm pleased 
that in the last few months we've shared our silences with a couple of Jewish 
guests, with a Muslim one, with plenty of Christians and – by far the greatest 
number – with busloads of atheists. As I've said before, the advantage of 
silence is that it unites rather than divides. In that sense, our chapel is 
more like a Quaker meeting house, with a candle and a bell but no imposed 
iconography. We do have a more overtly Christian compline in the evening, but 
if anyone present is uncomfortable with that, we simply revert to silence.

So far, so multicultural. But I've never believed ecumenism means the erasure 
of all signs and expressions of faith. That path leads to secular 
fundamentalism. So I find myself pulled in two rather contradictory directions: 
on the one hand yearning to share a sacred space with all humanity, regardless 
of what they believe; but at the same time reluctant to erase our own 
inspiration just to make us appear more attractive.

The central issue, I suppose, is whether our silences are imposed or 
cherished; whether they're forced on us because none of us can agree on 
anything, and anything we say might be offensive; or whether we truly come 
together in those silences and try to heal the wounds of division.

All of which is fairly highfalutin stuff for a three-pew chapel covered in 
chicken shit. And what we're wrestling with is nothing more than a micro 
version of what all multicultural societies are struggling with: how to offer 
hospitality to others without betraying your own traditions or beliefs. For us 
it's an issue which is slowly coming to a head because the chapel is about to 
be converted into guest accommodation as we're desperately short on space. 
We're designing our own "house of silence" from scratch and all sorts of issues 
– its name, its iconography, orientation and so on – are coming to the fore. 
All advice gratefully accepted.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 