
"Imagine if…" are two inspiring words that have the power to bring about real 
change, according to technology company Sony – but only if you give people the 
right environment to explore ideas, share knowledge and dare to dream.

That, in a nutshell, is what inspired Sony to launch its open planet ideas 
crowdsourcing project, in partnership with the World Wildlife Fund and the 
design group, IDEO.

Sony was looking for a way to get people, from diverse and often untapped 
audiences, thinking in new ways about the sustainability challenges we all face.

So in September 2010, it set up an online open forum. Members of the public 
were invited first to share their ideas about the sustainability challenges 
that most concerned them and, then, to use seven innovative Sony technologies 
to invent new ways to tackle them.

It was the first time Sony had run an open forum using a social networking 
model and the company undoubtedly knew that taking this route entailed the risk 
that it could prove a costly failure.

Despite that, Sony stuck with the idea because, it says, it was entirely in 
keeping with its corporate goal: to inspire people to imagine a better and more 
sustainable future and then to work with them to build it into reality.

The forum attracted over 400 concepts from users. From these an expert panel 
chose seven leading ideas, and then boiled that list down to three.

Eventually the panel picked the winner, GreenBook – a cross-platform, open 
software application using geo-location and social gaming techniques to bring 
friends together on volunteering projects. The project is the idea of Paul 
Frigout, who goes under the digital name, Siniuc.

"We believe GreenBook will breathe new life into the age old concept of 
volunteering through the application of cutting edge social technology" – 
Morgan David, head of Sony's broadcast and professional research labs

Reaching new audiences

Sony wanted to find a way to make sustainability more relevant to wider group 
of people. It wanted to reach a new audience, beyond those who are already 
green-aware and active. Creatives and technology enthusiasts were its new 
targets.

Although a challenging audience to reach, Sony saw that the involvement of 
these people would be vital if it was to inspire fresh thinking about how 
technology could be put to the service of sustainability.

Hence the strong accent put on creating a space for shared thinking, debate 
and collaboration. The approach proved successful, with visit times to the site 
averaging over 10 minutes, much longer than would have been achieved using 
traditional media or communication channels, Sony believes.

This was not an exercise in promoting fanciful ideas and far-fetched schemes. 
The test was to find practical and effective uses of technology that could be 
readily realised.

This is clearly evident in Youtube footage, posted by Sony on the Open Planet 
site <http://www.openplanetideas.com/>, showing the expert panel deciding – 
unanimously – why the Greenbook concept should be realised. The panel clearly 
wanted a concept that could be successfully implemented and that was likely to 
have wide social impact.

"Greenbook will enable people to come together to support and give their time 
and energy to their local area" – Jean-Paul Jeanrenaud, corporate relations 
director at WWF International

What appealed to the panel about Siniuc's GreenBook project was its potential 
to reinvent community activism for the Facebook generation and to promote local 
volunteering within communities, a fact that was endorsed by voluntary 
organisations, such as Timebank, who took a look at the concept.

GreenBook is now being developed and progress on the project continues to be 
logged through the open planet site.

As Jean-Paul Jeanrenaud, puts it: "We feel this is an exciting concept that 
will enable people to come together to support and give their time and energy 
to their local area and address some of the key environmental challenges that 
we are facing today."

Sony's Morgan David added: "We chose this idea because of its huge potential 
to bring people together and motivate participation. We believe GreenBook will 
breathe new life into the age-old concept of volunteering through the 
application of cutting edge social technology."

In terms of engagement, the strengths of the open planet scheme are clear and 
go beyond just raising awareness. It stands or falls on the willingness of 
participants to enter into a genuine dialogue with each other, taking a real 
two-way approach to communication, unlike some more prescriptive sustainability 
campaigns.

Gaining new insights

Sony saw direct benefits too. Not only was sustainability pushed up the 
company's own agenda because of the project, but the company also discovered a 
new and exciting way to engage with its consumers.

This was the first time the company had shared intellectual property so openly 
with the public. It gained some genuine insights about the concerns of its 
customers and the role they thought technology companies should play in 
combating sustainability challenges.

Indeed, Sony believes the understanding it got through using an open forum was 
far deeper than it would ever have achieved through traditional market research 
and customer surveys.

In choosing Sony as this year's category winner, our own judging panel spent 
some time discussing what "communicating sustainability" really meant.

Did it just mean providing information to help consumers? Was it about telling 
people about the company's efforts and accomplishments? Or was it about 
enabling an actual and measurable change in behaviour?

The judges agreed it was probably a mixture of all three, but stressed that 
the last was very important.

Although still in the early stages, the panel felt Sony's project had big 
potential to inspire large-scale change using communications in an innovative 
way.

That gave Sony the edge. Its initiative was seen as "a bigger play" than some 
of the rival schemes and the judges applauded the "bold, creative, vivid and 
exciting" language Sony used to describe its project.

Our judges were also clearly impressed that Sony had launched such a bold 
scheme, at a difficult time for the company in some of its key markets.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 