
Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba>
 says it is buying Hong Kong’s leading English-language newspaper, the South 
China Morning Post.

Alibaba group said on Friday that it signed a deal with publisher SCMP group 
to buy the Post and the company’s other media assets, which include magazines, 
outdoor advertising and digital media.

Alibaba in talks to buy South China Morning Post publisher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/27/alibaba-in-talks-to-buy-south-china-morning-post-publisher>
The newspaper said in a story on its website that the purchase price is not 
being disclosed.

It is the latest media-related acquisition for Alibaba and gives control of 
Hong Kong’s most prominent English-language publication to a mainland Chinese 
company.

In October, Alibaba bought up all the shares in video streaming site Youku 
Tudou it didn’t already own for $3.6bn(£2.37bn). Earlier this year, it invested 
about $200 million for a stake in Shanghai Media group’s financial information 
companyChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Business News. It also 
has a stake in Sina Weibo, which runs a Twitter-like microblog service.

The acquisitions are part of Alibaba’s strategy of diversifying away from its 
core internet shopping business by tapping rising demand for online content 
from Chinese consumers.

The 112-year-old Post was once reputed to be the world’s most profitable 
newspaper on a per-reader basis although its fortunes have suffered in line 
with the wider decline in the traditional newsprint industry as readers shift 
to online news sites.

Its influence has also been overtaken by Chinese dailies since Beijing took 
control of the city from Britain in 1997, although it still retains an 
important position among the city’s English-speaking elite.

“Why is Alibaba buying into traditional media, considered by some a sunset 
industry? The simple answer is that we don’t see it that way,” Alibaba’s 
executive vice chairman, Joe Tsai, said in a statement. He added that the deal 
would combine Alibaba’s technology with the SCMP’s journalism heritage “to 
create a vision of news for the digital age.”

The Post has a wide international following for its China coverage, which will 
likely be heavily scrutinised under its new ownership for any signs that it’s 
being softened. Tsai said the newspaper’s reporting would be “objective, 
accurate and fair.”

The newspaper’s magazine division has a license to publish the local 
Chinese-language editions of Cosmopolitan and Harper’s Bazaar. It also has a 
stake in the Bangkok Post newspaper. It took its first step into e-commerce in 
October by buying a majority stake in fashion site MyDress.com.

The newspaper’s current owner, Malaysian sugar tycoon Robert Kuok, bought it 
through his Kerry group from media mogul Rupert Murdoch in 1993.

SCMP Group’s net profit has declined for the past four years, falling last 
year to HK$137m (£11.6m) on HK$1.2 bn in revenue, according to its latest 
annual report.

Its stock has been suspended from trading on Hong Kong’s stock market since 
February 2013, when the number of shares freely traded by the public fell below 
the exchange’s minimum requirement.
 