
Mzilikazi wa Afrika, investigative journalist, Sunday Times and chair, Forum 
for African Investigative Reporters
 Mzilikazi wa Afrika Photograph: Mzilikazi wa Afrika 
Mzilikazi wa Afrika is multi-award winning journalist working for the Sunday 
Times investigations unit in Johannesburg, South Africa. He is also the 
reigning chairperson of the Forum for African Investigative Reporters (FAIR), 
an investigative journalism organisation with members from 36 different African 
countries.

Mzilikazi is one of the doyens of South African investigative journalism with 
a career dating back to 1995 when he started as a freelance reporter for the 
Witbank News in Mpumalanga Province.

Justin Arenstein, consulting strategist, African Media Initiative

Bio to follow 

Kojo Baffoe, editor, Destiny Man, entrepreneur, writer, MC & speaker
 KOJO BAFFOE Photograph: Photographer: Shaun Mallett/KB 
Editor of the men's business and lifestyle magazine, DESTINY Man, Kojo Baffoe 
is an editor, writer, poet and entrepreneur with origins in Ghana and Germany, 
raised in Lesotho, and based in Johannesburg. He has a B.Commerce (majors in 
Economics, Marketing & Business Administration) from University of Natal, and 
has been involved in a number of sectors, including Retail, Management 
Consulting, Publishing, Events, IT and Media (Television & Print).

John Mark Bwanika, founding partner and director, The Medical Concierge Group 
Limited
 John Mark Bwanika Photograph: John Mark Bwanika 
John Mark is a medical doctor with 4 years' experience in HIV clinical 
research.

At The Medical Concierge Group, he's capitalizing on the surge in internet and 
mobile phone use to provide easily accessible, affordable and quality health 
care to Ugandans.

Through social media and internet messaging platforms like Facebook, Twitter 
and WhatsApp, he's able to improve healthcare access to the largely youthful 
and technology savvy population.

With a team of doctors at a medical call centre; using Google mapping 
technology, the public gets information on location of different health 
facilities with the appropriate services they seek.

His team is also using GPS tracking technology to improve Uganda's emergency 
ambulance services.

Nikiwe Bikitsha, broadcast journalist and columnist 

In almost 20 years of news journalism and broadcasting Nikiwe has covered the 
major political and economic events of the day. News organisations she has 
worked for include the 24 hour news station eNCA ,Talk radio 702 and the Mail 
and Guardian. Nikiwe has interviewed high profile leaders such as President 
Jacob Zuma, former president Thabo Mbeki, former US vice president Al Gore, and 
former UN chief Kofi Annan as well as UN head of women & former SA deputy 
president Phumzile Mlambo Ngcuka.

Erik Charas, founding and managing director, Charas LDA
 Erik Charas Photograph: Matthew Jordaan/World Economic Forum / Matthew Jordaan
Erik is an engineer and social entrepreneur with extensive background in 
private and public sectors in Mozambique and sub-Saharian Africa. He is the 
founder of Jornal @Verdade, the largest and most read Portuguese newspaper in 
Mozambique. It is the largest daily online news portal, making extensive use of 
mobile and social networks to engage and provide access to information to it's 
readers. Erik serves as a member of the African policy advisory board for ONE, 
the global organisation co-founded by rockstar Bono, to advocate on issues 
related to poverty and resource extraction transparency in Africa. Erik 
considers himself an African entrepreneur and an anti-poverty, pro- 
transparency social activist.

Adi Eyal, director, Code for South Africa

Adi is the ultimate data nerd - last night he dreamt about an uber algorithm 
to scrape the government gazette for routes of minibus taxis. Trained as a 
computer scientist he worked for the dark-side before he came to realisation 
that data can be used for good. Since then he has been exploring how to make 
your grandmother care about data and how it can improve her life, just that one 
little bit. He runs Code for South Africa, a non-profit organisation promoting 
informed decision-making through technology and open data.

Malik Fal, managing director, Omidyar Network Africa
 Malik Fal Photograph: ON 
Based in Johannesburg, Malik is the managing director of Omidyar Network 
Africa. With more than 15 years of experience in social entrepreneurship, 
business, and development, primarily in the African context, Malik brings a 
wealth of expertise to his role leading Omidyar Network's investment strategy 
and operations in Africa.

Malik joined Omidyar Network in early 2012, prior to which he served as 
managing director of Endeavor South Africa. From 2006 to 2009, Malik was the 
business director of Microsoft Africa, a role in which he led business 
planning, strategy, and marketing throughout the continent. Before Microsoft, 
Malik oversaw the Africa practice of the consultancy firm OTF Group (formerly 
part of The Monitor Group). He also spent six years at Pepsi-Cola 
International, managing operations across southern Africa, and several years as 
a consultant for The Monitor Group. Malik led multiple successful consulting 
engagements, including initiatives with the World Bank, USAID, the Bermuda 
tourism industry, and the presidency of Rwanda. His diverse career has given 
him a deep understanding of business strategy in emerging markets and the 
distinct roles of government, private sector institutions, and individuals in 
the pursuit of sustainable development.

Ferial Haffajee, editor-in-chief, City Press
 Ferial Haffajee Photograph: Ferial Haffajee 
Ferial Haffajee is editor-in-chief of City Press. Previously she held the same 
position at the Mail & Guardian. She is also an alumni of the Africa Leadership 
Initiative, a project of the Aspen Institute.

Ferial sits on the board of Gender Links which is geared to improving the 
media's coverage of development and gender empowerment.  She is a previous 
winner of the Shoprite-Checkers woman of the year award, The Media magazine's 
women in media award, a Sanlam financial journalism award and the Naspers 
group's most prestigious internal prize, the Phil Weber award. In 2008, she was 
named a Young Global Leader by the World Economic Forum. 

Ferial has also worked at Financial Mail and at the SABC in both radio and 
television.

She sits on the boards of the International Press Institute and the World 
Editors Forum.  In addition, she chairs the SA National Editors Forum's ethics 
and diversity committee.

Anton Harber, professor, Wits University
 Anton Harber Photograph: Picasa/Anton Harber 
Anton Harber was a founder-editor of the South African Weekly Mail (now the 
Mail & Guardian). He is now Caxton Professor of Journalism at the University of 
the Witwatersrand, chair of the Freedom of Expression Institute and writes a 
weekly column in Business Day. He is the author of Diepsloot (Jonathan Ball, 
2011), winner of the Recht Malan Prize, The Gorilla in the Room (Mampoer 
Shorts, 2013). He co-edited the first two editions of The A–Z of South African 
Politics (Penguin, 1994/6), What is Left Unsaid: Reporting the South African 
HIV Epidemic (Jacana, 2010), and Troublemakers: The best of SA's investigative 
journalism (Jacana, 2010).

Emma Kaye, founder and CEO, Bozza
 Emma Kaye Photograph: EK 
Emma has been named one of the top 10 women in Science & Technology in Africa, 
has twice been voted as one of the top 50 women globally in mobile 
entertainment, elected one of South Africa's top business women and one of the 
20 most powerful women in technology in Africa for 2013.

Emma's latest venture, Bozza, confirms that mobility has socio-economic 
significance in Africa. Bozza is the trusted marketplace to discover the next 
generation of African talent.

Stephen King, partner, Omidyar Network
 Stephen King. Photograph: Stephen King 
As partner at Omidyar Network, Stephen brings exceptional experience in 
applying media and technology to create positive social impact. Based in 
London, Stephen leads the global government transparency investment area. His 
portfolio includes FrontlineSMS, Global Voices, mySociety, Refugees United, The 
XYZ Show and Ushahidi.

Prior to Omidyar Network, Stephen served as the chief executive of the BBC 
World Service Trust, where he led a period of sustained growth that included 
building programmes in more than 40 countries in the developing world. Stephen 
helped establish the trust's international reputation as one of the largest and 
most successful organisations using media and communications to improve the 
lives of the world's poor and promote better governance and transparency 
worldwide.

Alon Lits, general manager, Uber
 Alon Lits Photograph: Alon Lits 
Alon Lits joined Uber as its first General Manager in Africa in August last 
year. Alon began his career in the leveraged finance division of Investec Bank 
Limited, where he provided debt and preference share financing solutions to 
public and private companies in South Africa, as well as Africa's largest 
private equity funds. Before joining Uber, Alon interned with the emerging 
market focused private equity fund - LeapFrog Investments - focusing on 
investment opportunities throughout Africa.

Alon is born and raised in South Africa and is passionate about South Africa 
and Africa. Alon holds and MBA from INSEAD and is also qualified as an 
Associate of the Faculty and Institute of Actuaries in the UK.

Thabang Mabuza, founder - chief resource officer, Ulwazi Resource Consulting 
(Pty) Ltd
 Thabang Mabuza Photograph: Thabang Mabuza 
Thabang Mabuza considers himself a Social Entrepreneur who is passion about 
creating spaces for young people to collaborate and cocreate. Formerly 
chairperson of the Nelson Mandela Children Fund youth club and a 2013 Brightest 
Young Mind and an ambassador for a network of Active Change Drivers, an 
external consultant for the World Economic Forum on Africa and Switzerland.

Naima Mclean, writer, poet, vocalist and actress
 Naima Mclean Photograph: Naima Mclean 
Born in New York city and raised in cities across Africa, Naima is performer 
at heart, as her degree in theatre and performing arts suggests. She has 
performed and sung throughout Europe and South Africa, and acted in numerous 
productions by internationally renowned South African directors.

Naima fuses soul, spoken word, hip hop, pop and a variety of other genres to 
create a distinct style she calls "Urban Soul". Her debut album, Things I Wish, 
was musically directed by RJ Benjamin, and saw its live debut at the 2011 Cape 
Town Jazz Festival. A personal highlight for Naima was being asked to open for 
internationally renowned RnB singer Joe Thomas on his tour to South Africa 
later that year.

Koketso Moeti, campaigner and blogger, Amandla
 Koketso Moeti Photograph: Amandla 
Koketso Moeti is a campaigner and blogger, with an interest in mobiles, social 
change, local government and socio-economic rights issues. She currently serves 
at the up and coming amandla.mobi which aims to build the first pan-African 
multi-lingual mobile citizen platform, turning every cellphone into a democracy 
building tool so that no matter your language or where you live, you can take 
action on issues you care about, organise your community and amplify impact in 
the real world. She also works at Local Government Action, focusing on digital 
communications and community engagement and is part of the Activate! Change 
Drivers network.

Lee Molefi, editor, Live Magazine South Africa
 Lee Molefi Photograph: Livity 
Lee is a Johannesburg-born writer, photographer & filmmaker whose owned two 
guitars over the course of his life. He's currently the editor of Live Mag SA's 
VIP Campaign and is thinking about getting a piano next. He aspires to the 
simpler things in life, like becoming a social commentator through his films & 
he enjoys critical thinking and discussing SA politics. He generally thinks 
people in horror flicks should just call the cops; believes in an impending 
African cultural revolution & would like to find the right meaning for the term 
"Shangaan Roulette". He is also a former Johannesburg editor of Live Magazine 
SA, a youth-orientated print & digital magazine.

Ranjeni Munusamy, associate editor, Daily Maverick

Ranjeni is a prominent commentator on South African politics. She has over 20 
years experience in journalism and communications. She has worked at several 
South African publications as a political correspondent, including the Sunday 
Times, and as head of communications in the Ministry of Higher Education and 
Training. Ranjeni previously served as advisor and speechwriter to senior South 
African political leaders, as well as communications strategist and media 
trainer for South African political and labour organisations.

Bitange Ndemo, chair, Alliance for Affordable Internet

Bitange is the immediate former permanent secretary of Kenya's Ministry of 
Information and Communication. After his tenure with the Government, he went 
back to his job as a senior lecturer at the University of Nairobi's Business 
School, where he teaches entrepreneurship, and research methods. Most of his 
research centers on small and medium enterprises in Kenya with an emphasis on 
social enterprise. Bitange holds a PhD in Industrial Economics from the 
University of Sheffield in the UK and an MBA and bachelor's degree in finance 
and accounting from the University of Minnesota. He is a honorary chair of the 
Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) and an advisor to the Better than Cash 
Alliance, a global initiative to digitise payments.

Gustav Praekelt, founder, Praekelt Foundation
 Gustav Praekelt Photograph: Praekelt 
Gustav Praekelt is the founder of the Africa-based Praekelt Group - a leader 
in the creation of mobile platforms and services for the majority world.

His belief in the power of mobile phones to transform lives inspired him to 
establish the Praekelt Foundation in 2006 - A social business that develops 
scalable mobile solutions for social good, whose programmes have reached over 
50 million people across 15 countries in Africa.

In 2013 he co-founded the JoziHub, a technology startup launchpad and 
co-creation space in the heart of Johannesburg dedicated to creating 
sustainable change in Africa.

Eric Obuh AKA Vocal Slender
 Eric Obuh Photograph: Eric Obuh 
Eric Obuh (popularly known as Vocal Slender) was the dumpsite 
scavenger/musician featured in the 2010 award winning BBC's Welcome to Lagos 
documentary where he hustled daily by selling scraps to make money so as to 
visit the recording studio to produce songs for his dancehall album.
In 2011, he founded Ghetto Love Empowerment Foundation – which gives material 
and psychological supports to the children and youths of the ghettos/slums in 
Lagos, Nigeria and more importantly challenging them with his story and journey 
to stardom.

He has been privileged to inspire many students and youths in schools, 
religious settings and conferences with his transformational story.

In April 2013, he was a recipient of the Google Africa Connected Prize for his 
amazing web success story. Eric uses social media platforms particularly 
YouTube and Google+ to share his music and videos to his numerous fans 
worldwide and in return raise awareness, attract support and gain more 
follower-ship about the plight of the underprivileged children in Ajegunle and 
other slums of Lagos.

Currently, Eric is waste-recycling ambassador for wecyclers - Nigeria's only 
recycling venture with a focus on community engagement.

Ory Okolloh, director of investments, Omidyar Network Africa

Omidyar Network Africa is a philanthropic investment firm. Prior to joining, 
Ory was Google's policy manager for sub-Saharan Africa. She was responsible for 
managing government relations and driving the implementation of policies that 
increased internet access and supported the growth of local online content. Ory 
is also the co-founder of Mzalendo, a website that tracks the performance of 
Kenyan Members of Parliament. She is a board member of the Africa Media 
Initiative, a member of the World Bank's Council of Eminent persons, an 
advisory board member of Code for All, and a member of the World Bank Service 
Delivery Indicator Committee.

Dickens Olewe, journalist, Star newspaper
 Dickens Olewe Photograph: Dickens Olewe Dickens Olewe Dickens Olewe 
Dickens Olewe is a journalist at the Star newspaper. He leads the Star's 
online team. Olewe led the launch of the Star's website in 2011, and 
subsequently set up and continues to manage the website's social media 
platforms. Olewe has been selected as a Knight Fellow at Stanford for the year 
2014-15, his innovation proposal is to establish an African drone journalism 
corps, with newsroom-based teams using unmanned aerial vehicles across the 
continent to improve real-time reportage.Olewe has been running AfricanSkyCAM, 
a drone journalism project funded by the African News Innovation Challenge. 
He's lead projects to establish collaborative journalism and data journalism.

He's a member of the Hacks/Hackers Nairobi chapter. He has been invited to 
speak and participate in different conferences on citizen journalism, 
collaborative journalism and media trends.

Sugan Palanee, markets leader, Africa, EY, South Africa
 Sugan Palanee, Head of Markets.Ernst & Young.Pix for the Financial Mail‚Äôs 
Ernst & Young Corporate Report by Jeremy Glyn on the 19/06/2013. Photograph: 
Jeremy Glyn/E&Y 
Sugan is the Africa markets leader for EY and leads the firm's Black Economic 
Empowerment Strategic Services Division in South Africa. His clients include a 
number of listed organizations and various multinationals across the African 
continent. Sugan serves as an adviser to the South African Department of Trade 
and Industry on Black Economic Empowerment issues.

Khadija Patel, managing editor, South Africa Votes 2014 

Khadija heads the South Africa Votes 2014 project, she is a writing fellow at 
the University of Witwatersrand's Institute for Social and Economic Research 
(WiSER) but still a journalist at heart.

Chris Roper, editor-in-chief, Mail & Guardian

Chris is the first editor-in-chief of a major South African newspaper to come 
from a digital background, and he works agnostically across several media 
platforms. He was founding portal manager of Vodacom World Online, portal 
manager for MWEB, South Africa's largest ISP, editor-in-chief at 24.com, South 
Africa's largest online publisher, and editor of the Mail & Guardian Online. He 
has worked for many print publications in various capacities, and most 
recently, he was a finalist in the 2013 Sikuvile Awards for the Columnists 
category (the first ever online-only finalist).

Alan Rusbridger, editor-in-chief, Guardian News & Media
 Alan Rusbridger Photograph: VIVEK BENDRE/th 
Alan Rusbridger has been editor of the Guardian since 1995. He oversaw the 
integration of the paper and digital operations and the Guardian is now the 
third largest English-speaking newspaper website in the world with 100 million 
unique browsers every month. During his editorship the paper has fought a 
number of high-profile battles over libel and press freedom, including cases 
involving Neil Hamilton, Jonathan Aitken, the Police Federation, Trafigura, 
freedom of information and Wikileaks.

The Guardian broke world exclusive stories by publishing NSA documents leaked 
by Edward Snowden and was recently awarded the Pulitzer prize, the highest 
accolade in US journalism. In April the Guardian was named newspaper of the 
year and won the top digital prize at the British press awards.

Rusbridger and reporter Nick Davies received the UK's Media Society Award for 
their revelations and coverage of the phone hacking story in the Guardian. 
Rusbridger has been awarded the Goldsmith Career Award for Excellence in 
Journalism by Harvard's Joan Shorenstein Centre and received the Burton 
Benjamin Memorial Award for lifetime achievement in the cause of press freedom 
from the Committee to Protect Journalists.

Toby Shapshak, editor and publisher, Stuff
 Toby Shapshak Photograph: TSd talk 
Toby writes and speaks about innovation, and how it differs in Africa. He is 
the editor and publisher of Stuff magazine. He also co-hosts a TV show on CNBC 
Africa, and writes a weekly column for the Financial Mail. He believes Africa 
is a mobile-driven continent and has spoken at TED Global in June 2013 about 
how Africa is solving real problems for the rest of the world. He ran the Mail 
& Guardian website when it was the first news site in Africa, shadowed Nelson 
Mandela when he was president, and covered the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission.

David Smith, Africa correspondent, Guardian News & Media
 David Smith Photograph: DS 
David is the Africa correspondent of the Guardian and Observer newspapers in 
the UK. He has held that position since April 2009 and is based in 
Johannesburg. He travels across Africa covering news, politics, culture and 
sport, with assignments so far including the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi in 
Libya, civil war in Ivory Coast and South Sudan, religious violence in Nigeria, 
Somalia and the Central African Republic and elections in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Kenya and Zimbabwe. In South Africa he has reported on 
the football World Cup, Marikana mine massacre, death of Nelson Mandela and 
murder trial of Oscar Pistorius.

Loren Treisman, executive, Indigo Trust

Indigo Trust is a grant making foundation which supports technology-driven 
projects in Africa, with a particular focus on innovation, transparency and 
citizen empowerment. Loren holds a PhD from Cambridge University and has 
expertise in international development, governance, health and the use of new 
technologies to stimulate social change. She regularly writes in the 
international press including the Guardian, CNN and BBC and presents at 
international conferences.

Gavin Weale, CEO, Livity Africa
 Gavin Weale Photograph: Gavin Weale 
Gavin is an award-winning social entrepreneur and publisher from the UK. He 
has spent a large part of his career working alongside two of the UK's leading 
social entrepreneurs, Sam Conniff and Michelle Clothier at Livity UK, the 
London-based youth engagement specialists.

Originally from a journalism background, Gavin led the development of the Live 
Magazine project for Livity over ten years, transforming a small local youth 
zine into a nationwide print and digital media channel that is 100% created by 
young people. He led successful bids for major European Social Fund (2004) and 
Home Office Preventing Violent Extremism funding (2008), the latter leading to 
the opening of a second Live Magazine in east London aimed at engaging 
disaffected young Muslims.

Pontus Westberg, digital projects officer, UN-Habitat 
 Pontus Westberg Photograph: PW 
Pontus is the digital projects officer at the United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme, UN-Habitat. In this capacity he supports various digital 
initiatives, including coordinating the Block by Block project, in which 
UN-Habitat and Mojang use Minecraft to engage citizens in urban public space 
projects. He has worked with ICTs and digital media in Europe, Africa and Latin 
America for the last ten years. He holds an MA in Global Media and 
Communications from the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), 
University of London and resides in Nairobi, Kenya. Twitter:@pontusw 
<https://twitter.com/pontusw>

Click here to apply for your place » 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/apr/15/activate-johannesburg-apply-now>
 