
Kate Bulkley, media and technology analyst and commentator

Alec Ross, senior advisor for innovation, US State Department

Herman Heunis, CEO and Founder, MXit

Jeremy Heimans, co-founder and CEO, Purpose

Jeremy Heimans is co-founder and CEO of Purpose.com, a home for building 
social movements to help solve major global problems. Purpose has built global 
movements to fight cancer (with LIVESTRONG) and eliminate nuclear weapons in 20 
years (with Global Zero, a new initiative led by more than 200 world leaders 
and endorsed by President Obama) and is currently building a national movement 
to change America's food culture with Jamie Oliver. Purpose recently launched 
All Out, the world's first global movement organization for LGBT people and 
their allies.

In 2007, Jeremy co-founded Avaaz.org, the world's largest online citizens' 
movement, with more than eight million members. In 2005, he 
co-founded GetUp.org, an Australian political movement and internationally 
recognized social movement phenomenon that today has more members than all of 
Australia's political parties combined. In 2004, he co-founded an advocacy 
group in the US presidential elections that ran a highly publicized online and 
media campaign, raising millions of dollars in small online donations. 

In 2011, Jeremy received the Ford Foundation's 75th Anniversary Visionary 
Award and World Economic Forum at Davos named him a Young Global Leader. His 
work has been recognized in publications like The Economist and the New York 
Times.  Jeremy began his career with the strategy consultants McKinsey and 
Company. He was educated at Harvard University and the University of Sydney. He 
is a citizen of Australia and the Netherlands, and lives in New York.

Ory Okolloh, manager, policy and government relations, Google

Ms. Ory Okolloh is the Google Policy and Government Relations Manager for 
Africa.  She is also a co-founder of  Ushahidi and served as the 
organization's  Executive Director from inception until December 2010, and the 
co-founder of Mzalendo, a website that tracks the performance of Kenyan Members 
of Parliament.

Ms. Okolloh graduated summa cum laude with a B.A. degree in Political Science 
from the University of Pittsburgh, and with a J.D. from Harvard Law School.  
She was previously a summer associate in Covington and Burling, Washington DC 
and a Chayes Fellow at the World Bank's Department of Institutional Integrity.

Ory is a frequent speaker at conferences including TED, World Economic Forum, 
Poptech, CGI, Techonomy, and the Monaco Media Forum on issues around citizen 
journalism, the role of technology in Africa, and the role of young people in 
reshaping the future of Africa.

She has been recognized as one of the Most Influential Women in Technology in 
2011 by Fast Company, one of the top 100 Global Thinkers by Foreign Policy 
Magazine, a Huffington Post 2010 Game Changer, and as a Young Global Leader by 
the World Economic Forum.   Ory is also the recipient of the Monaco Media Forum 
Award, and the World Economic Forum Tech Pioneers award.

Stephen King, director, investments, Omidyar Networks

Stephen brings Omidyar Network exceptional experience in applying media and 
technology to create positive social impact. Based in London, Stephen leads 
Omidyar Network's global Government Transparency initiative. His portfolio 
includes FrontlineSMS, Global Voices, mySociety, Refugees United, The XYZ Show, 
and Ushahidi, where he is a board member.

Prior to Omidyar Network, Stephen served as the Chief Executive of the BBC 
World Service Trust, where he led a period of sustained growth that included 
building programs in more than 40 countries in the developing world.

Stephen is a board member of CARE International in the U.K. He holds an MA in 
Oriental and African Studies from the University of London.

Michael Birch, founder, Jolitics and chief monkey, Monkey Inferno

Michael Birch is co-founder and Chief Monkey of Monkey Inferno in San 
Francisco. Monkey Inferno is a personal incubator working on five consumer 
internet and mobile ideas in parallel, these include Jolitics.com, a Political 
Networking site, and WaterForward.org, a charitable venture on behalf of 
charity: water.

Prior to Monkey Inferno Michael co-founded a series of internet business with 
his wife Xochi. These include BirthdayAlarm.com, Ringo.com and most notably 
Bebo.com which sold in 2005 to AOL for $850m.

Zaw Thet, founder and chairman, Palindrome Advisors 

Zaw Thet, CEO and co-founder of 4INFO, is a veteran of the technology/wireless 
industries, setting the bar for how companies reach and engage consumers on 
their mobile devices. 4INFO was founded in 2004, and under Zaw's leadership, 
has become the largest independent mobile media company in the US: managing 
mobile media, marketing, and advertising for thousands of top tier publishers 
and advertisers and tens of millions of users every month.

In addition, Zaw is an angel investor, board member, and advisory board member 
for a select group of private technology companies in the mobile, social 
networking, and media/advertising sectors. Zaw is frequently quoted in the 
national press on telecommunications and media issues in outlets such as The 
Wall Street Journal and The New York Times. He is a featured speaker at 
technology, mobile and digital advertising conferences, recently appearing at 
TechCrunch Disrupt, South by Southwest, CTIA, IAB, ad:tech, iMedia, and the 
4A's. Business Week named Thet as one of the "New M-Commerce Barons" in 2006.

Zaw is also committed to non-profits, serving on the national board of After 
School All Stars (ASAS), founded by Governor Schwarzenegger and now the largest 
non-profit of its kind, serving over 85,000 underprivileged 6-8th graders in 
schools across the US. Zaw's passion for the non-profit sector led him to found 
Palindrome Advisors, a nonprofit organization whose mission is to change how 
leaders give back. With over one hundred Founding Advisors, Palindrome links 
the nonprofit world with executive level leaders that give back through a 
number of programs, including but not limited to: serving on the board of a 
nonprofit (the Palindrome Pledge), mentoring the next generation of 
entrepreneurs (Palindrome Startups), engaging in volunteering programs and 
nonprofit-based salons, and dedicating time and resources to building tools 
specifically for nonprofit partners.

Zaw was selected by The United Nations Foundation as one of ten of the 
brightest entrepreneurs under the age of 40 to help the UN achieve a new level 
of innovation and impact in solving global problems. Together they form the 
first class of the Foundation's Global Entrepreneurs Council - the next 
generation of great thinkers who pledge to help the UN create a better world.

Prior to founding 4INFO, Thet was part of the early social networking industry 
at Spoke Software and was a special consultant to the San Francisco 49ers. 
While at Stanford, Thet's entrepreneurial spirit drove him to take a leave of 
absence after freshman year and start his first company, GetInventory, a 
web-based supply chain management company. Thet graduated from Stanford 
University with degrees in Political and Computer Science, where he was a 
President's Scholar. He has an MBA from the Stanford Graduate School of 
Business, where he was a Soros Fellow.

Chris Smart, founder, Cambridge Enterprise

Charles Cotton, partner, Acacia Partners

Perry Chen, co-founder and CEO, Kickstarter

Perry Chen is co-founder and CEO of Kickstarter, the largest funding platform 
for creative projects in the world. Prior to Kickstarter, he co-founded the 
Southfirst gallery in Brooklyn, NY. Perry lives in New York and, sometimes, New 
Orleans.

Tom Thirlwall, founder, Bigballs Film

Sarah Dyer, director of new media, Beatbullying

Sarah is Director of New Media at Beatbullying. She is a multi award-winning 
interactive designer with nearly twenty years' experience in new media, with a 
particular interest in the way young people use the internet. Before joining 
Beatbullying, she worked as Creative Director at a number of agencies servicing 
prominent Third Sector clients such as Save The Children UK, Equality and Human 
Rights Commission, Womankind Worldwide and Action Medical Research.

Sarah was instrumental in the design of the CyberMentors website which is 
revolutionising the provision of mentoring and counselling online and is 
currently working with her team on a major new platform development being built 
in Python and Erlang, which is underpinning the next generation of CyberMentors 
websites. She also led the hugely successful and award-winning Big March 
campaign from a social media and development perspective.

Sarah speaks regularly at conferences on social media, design and development 
issues.

Rakesh Rajani, founder, Twaweza

Rakesh R. Rajani is the Head of Twaweza (meaning 'we can make it happen' in 
Swahili), a ten-year initiative to enhance access to information, citizen 
agency and public accountability in East Africa. Until the end of 2007 he 
served as the founding Executive Director of HakiElimu, an independent 
organization that promotes citizen engagement in education in Tanzania. 
Rakesh's interests include the connections between information, imagination and 
public action; political economy of policy making; and budget transparency and 
public engagement.

Rakesh advises/serves on several boards, including Revenue Watch 
International, Aidspan – a watchdog of the Global Fund, the International 
Budget Partnership (IBP), ONE, the Foundation for Civil Society in Tanzania 
(FCS), and the Hewlett/Gates Foundations initiative on Quality Education in 
Developing Countries (QEDC). He has also been a fellow of Harvard University 
since 1998, most recently involved in its Joint Learning Initiative on Children 
and AIDS (JLICA). He has written and/or edited over 300 papers, popular 
publications, and op-eds in English and Swahili.

Rakesh did his university education in the US at Brandeis and Harvard, 
graduating summa cum laude and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.

David Edelstein, director, The Grameen Technology Centre

David Edelstein is Director of the Grameen Foundation Technology Center and 
Vice President of Technology Programs at Grameen Foundation.  As the leader of 
Grameen Foundation's work in technology, he guides programs that create 
innovative and sustainable approaches to employing technology for the benefit 
of the world's poor.  This includes efforts to develop services that can be 
accessed on widely available mobile phones, in domains such as health and 
agriculture, to improve lives and livelihoods.  It also encompasses efforts in 
technology for microfinance, including an open-source software initiative 
designed to accelerate the growth of microfinance institutions (Mifos) and 
efforts to enable the poor to transfer funds using  mobile phones.
 
Before joining Grameen Foundation, David spent three years at Microsoft, 
designing business models to provide affordable technology products for people 
in emerging markets. David also worked in Brazil for four years with the 
consulting firm McKinsey & Company, where he developed business strategies 
tailored to the needs of consumers and businesses in developing countries.
 
Previously, David conducted economic analyses and evaluated public policy with 
the White House Council of Economic Advisers and with Resources for the Future. 
He holds a Bachelor's degree in Environmental Science and Economics from Colby 
College and a Master's degree in Economics and Public Policy from Princeton 
University.

Christian Sarkar, co-founder, $300 House Project

Christian Sarkar is the co-founder of $300 House project, an online collective 
at 300house.com which is using an organic, ecosystems-based approach to tackle 
the challenge of affordable housing at the base of the pyramid.  In his spare 
time, Christian is an online business strategist and the founder of Double Loop 
Marketing, a thought leadership agency for individuals and organizations. His 
clients include some of the world's smartest people.

Salem Avan, chief information systems officer, UN Peacekeeping

Dr Joel D Selanikio, chief executive officer and co-founder, DataDyne.org

A practicing pediatrician, former Wall Street computer consultant, and former 
CDC epidemiologist with a passion for combining technology and public health to 
address inequities in developing countries, Dr Selanikio leads DataDyne's 
pioneering efforts to develop and promote new technologies for health and 
international development, including the award-winning EpiSurveyor mobile data 
collection project.

Named by Forbes magazine as one of the most powerful innovators of 2009, Joel 
Selanikio is a winner of the 2009 Lemelson-MIT Award for Sustainability and the 
2009 Wall Street Journal Technology Innovation Award for Healthcare IT. His 
work has been reported on by The Economist, The Wall Street Journal, the BBC, 
and the Washington Post, among others. He is a member of the Clinton Global 
Initiative, and a participant in the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland 
and the annual Renaissance Weekend retreat.

In his former role as an officer of the Public Health Service, Dr Selanikio 
served as the Chief of Operations for the HHS Secretary's Emergency Command 
Center in the aftermath of 9/11. In 2005, he was given the Haverford Award for 
Humanitarian Service for his work in treating tsunami victims in Aceh, 
Indonesia (for which he was profiled in the Washington Post).

Dr Selanikio holds a bachelor's degree from Haverford College, and an MD from 
Brown University, and is a graduate of the Epidemic Intelligence Service 
fellowship of the CDC. He continues to practice clinical pediatrics both as an 
Assistant Professor at Georgetown University and on the Emergency Response Team 
of the International Rescue Committee, and is a Fellow of the American Academy 
of Pediatrics.

Karen Corrigan, CEO and co-founder, Happiness Brussels

Pierre Omidyar, founder, eBay and Omidyar Network

Dr Vanessa Neumann, senior fellow, Foreign Policy Research Institute

Dr Vanessa Neumann is a Senior Fellow at the Foreign Policy Research 
Institute. She holds a Ph.D. in political philosophy from Columbia University, 
where she is now an Associate of the University Seminar on Latin America at the 
School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA). From 2005-2007, Dr Neumann 
was Adjunct Assistant Professor of political philosophy at Hunter College of 
The City University of New York. A native Venezuelan, Dr Neumann has worked as 
a journalist in Caracas, London and the United States. She is Editor-at-Large 
of Diplomat, a London-based magazine to the diplomatic community and a regular 
contributor to the Washington, DC-based magazIne The Weekly Standard on Latin 
American politics. She has also written for The (London) Sunday Times, The 
Guardian, The Daily Telegraph and Standpoint, been interviewed for The New York 
Times, the BBC, Al Jazeera English and Caracol radio, and spoken on Hugo 
Chávez's Bolivarian Revolution at Columbia and Yale Universities.

Kulveer Ranger, Mayoral advisor for Environment and Digital

Jamie Drummond, executive director, ONE

Marieme Jamme, president, Spot One Global Solutions

Mariéme Jamme is a London-based CEO, blogger, technologist and social 
entrepreneur with a passionate commitment to helping empower her fellow 
Africans through education, leadership, social entrepreneurship and economic 
development.

Philanthropist and currently the CEO of Spot One Global Solutions, a UK based 
company that helps IT organizations (Editors and Software Vendors) gain a 
foothold in Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Asia.

She recently founded Iconsience a think tank uniting business experts and 
like-minded individuals in a friendly atmosphere to brainstorm ethical 
scenarios for sustainable business, social, technological and environmental 
development in Africa.

Mariéme is also an international speaker, and co-founder of Africa Gathering, 
the first global platform bringing together entrepreneurs and others to share 
ideas about development in Africa. She has forged a worldwide reputation as an 
advocate for education, good governance and health on the African continent.

A frequent attendee of TED Conferences and organiser of TEDx's , Marieme has 
spoken at various conferences around the world about Africa, good governance, 
poverty, women in Africa, sustainable development, education and new media & 
technologies.

Mariéme uses her knowledge of African dialects and languages to facilitate 
communication between governments, investors, businesses and communities in 
Africa. Recently helped Google, IBM, Shell, organise conferences in Africa. She 
advises and supports many women and children's charities such as the NSPCC, 
Oxfam, Plan International, the White Ribbon Alliance, the Gates Foundation, the 
Acumen Fund, Weforest, Cancer Research, the Hunger Project, and the Freedom 
Project.

Prior to leading the Spot One team, Mariéme worked as an asset manager at 
Citibank, JP Morgan and Lloyds TSB and in various software companies such as 
Primavera INC (now Oracle), Microsoft, Osiatis and CA. Since then, she has been 
working closely with businesses, investors and governments in Africa to 
encourage accountability and help them increase investment in education, 
agriculture, infrastructure and new technologies.

Her current work includes advising the UK Home Office on how to help members 
of the African Diaspora transfer their knowledge and skills to their countries 
of origin and acting as a mentor for the black youth in London as part of the 
Mayor Mentorship program.

Marieme is also a member of the Advisory Panel of the Guardian Newspaper 
Global Development sections for which she now contributes regular articles.
Recent departures in new directions for Mariéme include her appointment in 
Washington DC as a judge for Africa Rural Connect, a programme of the US 
National Peace Corps that pools ideas aimed at meeting the needs of African 
farmers, a seat on the Board of Free Generation International, an organization 
fighting human trafficking and slavery and She has recently become a board 
director of the Hive Colab in Uganda, business accelerator and incubator for 
East African technologists.

Mariéme will present in May 2011 to the State Department in the USA how 
African are using social media.

Mariéme is a mother of one child who is now 10 years old.

Aleem Walji, practice manager for innovation, The World Bank Institute

Aleem Walji is the Practice Manager of World Bank Institute's Innovation Team. 
He oversees the Development Marketplace program which provides social 
entrepreneurs access to early stage, mezzanine, and growth financing for the 
delivery of public goods. Mr. Walji also oversees projects focused on Open 
Government, Transparency and Accountability. As part of his role, Aleem leads 
efforts related to Open Data, Open Innovation and managing the Bank's 
competition management platform designed to surface solutions to complex 
development problems.

Prior to joining WBI, Aleem served as a Head of Global Development Initiatives 
at Google.org, with a focus on eastern Africa. He led efforts related to 
increasing transparency and accountability in government and supporting the 
growth of small and medium-size enterprises in Africa. Aleem was also the first 
CEO of the Aga Khan Foundation in Syria. His particular interests lie in rural 
economic development, entrepreneurship, and public-private partnerships. He 
completed his bachelor's degree in Near Eastern Studies and Anthropology from 
Emory University and his master's degree in International Development and 
Regional Planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Sobia Hamid, founder, DataGiving 

Dr Sobia Hamid is the CEO of DataGiving, a Cambridge-based technology startup 
launched in 2010. DataGiving provides an innovative online data platform for 
charities to easily publish information in real-time to consumers about their 
projects. Sobia founded DataGiving whilst completing her Ph.D. in Genetics at 
the University of Cambridge. An avid promoter of building global collaborations 
using creative and innovative technologies, Sobia is passionate about 
facilitating change for the common good. Sobia was the winner of the TedxCam 
2010 Open Data Challenge Hackathon with the 'jaw-dropping' (BBC) online app 
Ventropy, that impactfully communicates the needs of projects on the 
microfinance site Kiva.org. Sobia is a UnLtd Social Entrepreneurship Catalyst 
Award Winner.
 