
App: Speedtest.net Mobile Speed Test 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/speedtest.net-mobile-speed/id300704847?mt=8>

By: Ookla

Price: Free

Available on: iOS and Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>

What is it?

An app to test the speed of your broadband, be it in the home or office, 
allowing you to determine if you are obtaining a good service from your 
internet provider.

What does it promise?

Ookla is a "global leader in broadband speed testing and web-based network 
diagnostic applications", while the app itself claims to be the "most popular 
broadband testing tool on the internet. With millions of tests performed every 
month across hundreds of servers, Speedtest.net is the ultimate resource for 
bandwidth testing and related information."

Is it easy to use?

It's child's play. Simply tap the huge "Begin test" button in the centre of 
the screenand the app will download something and upload something to determine 
the speed of your connection.

Is it fun?

It is surprisingly satisfying to see your broadband connection tested and your 
long-held belief in the quality of your internet provider confirmed. In my 
case, my Orange broadband was clocking up speeds of 8Mbit/s for downloads and 
6Mbps for uploads – the advert promises speeds of up to 20Mbps.

Is it pretty?

It's lovely – full of metallic surfaces and glowing blue neon buttons, while 
the speedometer-like testing dial adds a flash of scarlet to the proceedings. 
Shame about the pop-up adverts though.

Should you download it?

It can be a useful way of checking whether you are receiving the service 
you're paying for – you wouldn't fork out for dodgy food in a restaurant, so 
why pay for sub-standard broadband?
 Speedtest code2 
The problem with this kind of heavy-tech product is that the end-user doesn't 
really know whether the results are accurate. Moreover, some may find the app's 
general lack of helpful information frustrating – for example, there is nothing 
to help users determine how the results they obtain compare with, say, the UK 
average or rival providers. (For background: the average broadband speed, 
according to Ofcom, is now about 7Mbps, though most providers quote speeds of 
up to 20Mbps. A handful – BT and Virgin among them – now offer super-fast 
broadband at up to 30-40Mbps, though you'll pay for the privilege.)

Also, the app carries out a "ping" test, but does not explain what this is and 
why it is doing it.

If the app shows that you have a poor connection speed you should carry out 
the test again at different times of day, and also run it closer to your 
wireless router in case thick walls in your home or distance are having an 
effect.

Then, armed with the results of your test, you should get in touch with your 
provider to see if it can help speed-up the connection – it might check your 
line for faults, for example. If not, you might consider switching to a 
different provider.

Ofcom's code of practice insists customers are given an indication of the 
typical range of speeds they can expect their line to support. During the first 
three months of their contract, if their line speed falls significantly short 
of those estimates and the ISP cannot resolve the problem, customers must have 
the option to leave their contract without penalty. So perhaps this app is 
best-used in the early months of a new broadband contract.
 