
1) Trust. Staff would be more motivated and and productive if they had more 
freedom to exercise professional judgement and were less constrained by 
targets, paperwork and micro-management. How would you restore professional 
autonomy and remotivate public services staff?

This is a valid criticism. When we came into power, we focused on correcting 
decades of underinvestment and poor results inpublic services 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/publicservices>. And thanks to the reforms 
professionals led, as well as to massive investment, waiting lists were 
slashed, crime is right down and school results are up. But yes, now that we 
have corrected that huge underinvestment and modernised public services, we are 
reducing targets. For example, we have eliminated the many national targets for
policing <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/police> and replaced them with a 
single target – to increase public confidence that crime is being tackled 
locally. Now we want to go further. As we introduce national entitlements to 
core services, we will do away with detailed guidance and regulation.

2) Staff and pay. There are too many unproductive jobs, too far from the 
frontline. There are too many managers, and top salaries are too high. Where 
would you make staffing cuts, will you cap executive pay, and what role in any 
shake-up would there be for alternative providers, such as the private, social 
enterprise and voluntary sectors?

We have overseen a revolution in the use of social enterprises and voluntary 
groups in delivering services – now worth £7.8bn per year to the third sector, 
double their value in 2000. On staffing, we are focused on frontline staff. 
Compared to 1997, there are now 14,400 more police officers, 41,000more teachers
 <https://www.theguardian.com/education/teacher-shortages>, 40,000 more doctors 
and over 70,000 more nurses. But we also cut 86,000 civil service posts between 
2004 and 2007. We've had to be tough on senior pay. Government is seeking a pay 
freeze for senior civil servants, judges, senior NHS managers, GPs, hospital 
consultants and public body chief executives for 2010-11.

3) Sure Start principles. There's too much spending on "picking up the pieces" 
services or knee-jerk policy responses to media headlines. How would you 
rebalance investment to encourage longterm preventative services such as Sure 
Start or prisoner rehabilitation schemes, and in which policy areas?

We are believers in early intervention both for the money it saves and for 
what it achieves for families across Britain.Sure Start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/16/government-sure-start-education-children>
 is a great example – along with extended childcare, one-to-one tuition in 
primary school and family intervention projects, we are investing heavily in 
the "early years". This does not enjoy political consensus – some have said we 
are "obsessed" with this age group. They're right. Prevention is critical for 
us in healthcare. For example, in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, our health checks for all 40- to 
74-year-olds will detect major killers early, preventing at least 9,500 heart 
attacks and strokes a year, and 4,000 people a year from developing diabetes.

4) People power. Listen to those who use services. Too much spending reflects 
the needs of providers, not users. How would you ensure user "voice" is 
incorporated into commissioning, design and provision of services? How far 
would you hand spending power to users, such as through individual budgets?

I agree about the role of "user voice", but we need to go way beyond that. We 
need to give people more power. First, more choices, for example in hospitals 
andsocial housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/jun/28/social-housing-entitlements>. 
Second, more information – for example local crime maps and school report 
cards. And ultimately, more control over their own budgets in areas such as 
skills and social care, so they can manage services around their own unique 
needs. But we also need everyone to have more power. To protect against 
postcode lotteries, national entitlements – for example to see a cancer 
specialist in two weeks – are critical, and sadly opposed by some.

5) Scrap grandiose schemes. The billions spent on national databases, such as 
those for children, and huge IT systems are better spent on frontline services. 
In a funding squeeze hospital- and school-building schemes should be scaled 
down. Do you agree?

There is much we can do to improve our use of technology, and that will be a 
core part of our Operational Efficiency Programme in the coming months and 
years. As for capital spending, our school- and hospital-building programmes 
should never be seen as grandiose schemes – they are about fundamental 
improvement to local schools and hospitals. Going forward, capital investment 
will fall as the spending brought forward as part of the fiscal stimulus to 
fight recession comes to an end. And new schools and hospitals, rebuilt once, 
will last a generation.
 