
1) Trust. Staff would be more motivated and and productive if they had more 
freedom to exercise professional judgement and were less constrained by 
targets, paperwork and micro-management. How would you restore professional 
autonomy and remotivate public services staff?

One key step to getting the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and 
education working better is to motivate those who work there. Top-down, 
command-and-control management has done great damage. Staff have much to 
contribute but are currently treated as a cost rather than as a resource. We 
believe in turning every hospital into an employee-owned trust so that every 
member of staff has a say in how it's run. In education, the government needs 
to extend the freedom academies have to all schools in the state system. 
Teachers would no longer be directed how to teach, and innovation and 
creativity would be encouraged. The Department for Children, Schools and 
Families could be massively downsized, cutting out the micro-meddling and 
endless top-down and costly initiatives. This would allow more money to be 
devolved to schools, strip out political interference and restore confidence in 
standards.

2) Staff and pay. There are too many unproductive jobs, too far from the 
frontline. There are too many managers, and top salaries are too high. Where 
would you make staffing cuts, will you cap executive pay, and what role in any 
shake up would there be for alternative providers, such as the private, social 
enterprise and voluntary sectors?

Bureaucratic overheads are too large and there is an insidious fat-cat 
culture. We would scrap central NHS targets and unnecessary quangos, and reduce 
the admin burden on trusts. We would halve the size of the Department of 
Health. We would abolish strategic health authorities. Health quangos cost more 
than £1.3bn a year, employ more than 25,000 people and pay 25 executives more 
than the prime minister. These quangos should not be exempt from the financial 
reality facing the rest of society.

Redundancies and pay cuts should occur primarily among senior staff, 
protecting frontline staff and services. There must be a role for alternative 
providers. I welcome a bigger role for social entrepreneurs, as is now 
happening in, for example, community care.

3) Sure Start principles. There's too much spending on "picking up the pieces" 
services or knee-jerk policy responses to media headlines. How would you 
rebalance investment to encourage long-term preventative services like Sure 
Start or prisoner rehabilitation schemes, and in which policy areas?

Our education system too often perpetuates inequality by leaving children from 
disadvantaged backgrounds behind, and the government's endless gimmicks and 
initiatives often don't kick in until it's too late for intervention to work. 
Infant class sizes should be cut so that young children get the extra attention 
they need. Our plans to invest £2.5bn in a pupil premium would guarantee 
schools that took disadvantaged children the extra cash they need to give these 
pupils the additional support they need. Schools would be able to offer 
catch-up classes, more one-to-one tuition and additional weekend and summer 
classes. The key is to ensure that children who are struggling from an early 
age do not fall further behind, but are supported so that they can access the 
opportunities available to others and get the very best from life.

4) People power. Listen to those who use services. Too much spending reflects 
the needs of providers, not users. How would you ensure user "voice" is 
incorporated into commissioning, design and provision of services? How far 
would you hand spending power to users, such as through individual budgets?

People are better able to determine the priorities of the NHS locally – not 
Whitehall and unelected officials. Primary care trusts (PCTs) would be renamed 
local health boards, and the majority of board members would be elected. There 
is scope to extend individual budgets into certain areas of healthcare – to 
deliver more personal care at a lower cost – and this is already happening with 
disability. The potential is considerable. This concept turns the traditional 
model of public services on its head. But it could be transformational, 
delivering better health and wellbeing and closing the inequality gap between 
those who have choice, because they can afford to buy the right services with 
their own money, and those who have had to rely on too often poorly performing 
public services.

5) Scrap grandiose schemes. The billions spent on national databases, like 
those for children, and huge IT systems are better spent on frontline services. 
In a funding squeeze hospital and school building schemes should be scaled 
down. Do you agree?

We are already committed to scrapping big databases like ContactPoint, the ID 
card scheme and the so-called "super-database". The NHS IT system has been a 
costly failure, running massively over cost and failing to provide clinicians 
with what they need. We would abolish Connecting for Health, the Choose and 
Book system would revert to being what it was originally designed for – an 
electronic appointment-booking system - and we'd abandon the National Care 
Records Service. Future NHS IT systems should be built from the bottom up – 
locally commissioned to national standards.
 