 In the Marvel comic book, Spiderman has the ability to cling to any surface. 
Yesterday, his namesake, a man who shimmies up buildings with just tape on his 
fingers and a pair of old climbing boots, found himself in the middle of his 
very own cartoon: he got stuck three-quarters of the way up London's 800ft No 1 
Canada Square tower at Canary Wharf.
Frenchman Alain Robert <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alain-robert> was 
defeated by something very British: cold, wet and windy weather. And unlike the 
real Spiderman, he couldn't shoot a web out from his wrist and swing across to 
the safety of the adjacent HSBC tower. Instead, in an all too human manner, Mr 
Robert had to be rescued by a window cleaning lift.

Mr Robert's escapade, in rush hour yesterday morning, infuriated the owners of 
the tower, who described it as "irresponsible". Mr Robert's climb presented a 
safety risk to the 45,000 people who worked in the tower, any one of whom could 
have been hit by his body if he fell off or traumatised by the sight of him 
hurtling to the ground, a spokesman said. It is understood that the group is 
considering legal action against Mr Robert, who successfully climbed the tower 
in 1995.

The spokesman said: "He got himself in a position around the 40th floor where 
he could neither go up nor down which meant we had to send down a window 
cleaning cradle to get him up. He was up there for quite some time, it was 
clear he needed assistance. He was very pleased to climb into the cradle."

But a spokesman for Mr Robert said the window cleaning cradle had been sent 
down to obstruct his path. "Because it was wet, it was very dangerous. 
Basically, when the cradle came down to stop him, if it had not been wet, he 
would have climbed around it. If it had been ideal conditions, it would have 
just been a hindrance. But the guy is not a lunatic. The fact that he has got a 
skill and talent to do this does not mean that he will act stupidly," he said. 
"He allowed the police to arrest him and pull him into the cradle, because he 
did not want to endanger his or anyone else's life."

Mr Robert makes a habit of climbing the world's tallest buildings without the 
aid of ropes or other equipment. He has climbed the Eiffel Tower and more than 
30 skyscrapers, including New York's Empire State Building and the Petronas 
twin towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. In 1982 he fell off a building and 
cracked his skull.

On his website Mr Robert says: "To dare: it is also to dare to fail": 
yesterday he did just that.
 