
I’m very much a morning person, so I’ll be up with the crows and ready for an 
early start. Often, my work with thechild protection in sport unit (CSPU) 
<https://thecpsu.org.uk/> is quite active, taking me all over the country to 
visit different sports organisations. The CSPU was established by the NSPCC in 
2001, in partnership with Sport England and Sport NI, and works closely with 
sports bodies to help them set up systems to keep children safe from harm.


Life after care: the 'tool belt' for vulnerable young women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/03/life-after-care-the-tool-belt-for-vulnerable-young-women>
When I’m going to the office in Leicester, I’ll be in by 8am. All our roles 
take us far and wide, so it’s quite rare for the team to all be in together. 
However, when we can, we’ll try to car share to get to work. It’s great to have 
that opportunity to catch up with each other – and it’s also good for the 
planet.

When I get to my desk, the first thing I’ll do is go through child protection 
enquiries we have received overnight from various sports bodies. These enquires 
may include concerns from coaches or club officials about individual children 
or an organisation’s safeguarding policies, and always take absolute priority. 
We also hear a lot from people at grassroots level, such as coaches, volunteers 
and parents. It feels great to support the efforts of people who want to do 
their bit to make sport safe and enjoyable for all children.

With a satisfyingly clear inbox, I might then review an edit of some short 
videos that the unit has commissioned. These will feature common safeguarding 
issues, backed up with written commentary and guidance. We’ve found that these 
work brilliantly as training tools for people delivering safeguarding training 
across the sports sector. These resources get widely used bysports coach UK 
<http://www.sportscoachuk.org/>, who’ve now delivered safeguarding training to 
nearly half a million coaches.

Since I joined the unit in 2002, it’s been really exciting to see effective 
child protection systems implemented by so many sports bodies. However, working 
in a sector where safeguarding has not traditionally been a focus can be a 
challenge. Many of the people we work with have multiple roles, only one of 
which relates to safeguarding children, and they are often working as 
volunteers. To improve our reach and influence, we’ve invested in providing a 
wide range of advice, guidance and toolkitsthrough our website 
<http://www.thecpsu.org.uk/>. 

Now we’ve put child protection on the radar of so many sports organisations, 
we’re also well-placed to help them safeguard specific groups of children who 
we know are particularly vulnerable. One focus at the moment is disabled 
children, so, after a quick sandwich for lunch, we often host a multiagency 
meeting to discuss this. Our role is to help knit together a wide range of 
organisations (sports governing bodies, national disability sports partners, 
disability inclusion bodies and training providers) to promote the inclusion of 
disabled children in sports activities, as well as to address their additional 
safeguarding needs.

I help abused children heal through play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/22/i-help-abused-children-heal-through-play>
We often round off the afternoon running a workshop for sports organisations’ 
lead safeguarding officers. The purpose of this is to help them understand how 
to safely recruit coaches and other volunteers for sports clubs. Lots of people 
feel particularly confused about the role ofdisclosure and barring scheme (DBS) 
checks 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/disclosure-and-barring-service/about>
. As well as answering DBS questions, our role is to emphasise the importance 
of including other safe recruitment steps to help ensure someone’s suitability 
for a role involving children. These include obtaining sound references, 
writing clear job descriptions, providing safeguarding training and developing 
codes of conduct.

Our days are always very busy so my evenings tend to be fairly low key. I like 
to relax with my two dogs, (collie crosses) and am a keen follower of most 
sports. At the weekends I up the ante a little and despite recently turning 
sixty, I play in a friendly football league every Sunday. I try my very best to 
emulate some of Nottingham Forest’s past stars, usually with very limited 
success.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 