
It finally feels as if the long, gruelling winter is behind us. Today the sky 
is an infinite blue, and although it was still bitterly cold before sunrise the 
temperature has been rising ever since. I've seen the bees going in and out of 
the tiny snowdrops. The daffodils are out. The geese are finally laying their 
majestic white eggs again.

Suddenly everything looks different – what appeared dead only a few weeks ago 
is now performing a slow-motion explosion. The paths through the woods are 
peppered with primroses. The green points of the arum lilies are beginning to 
poke through. The ground, mud-brown last time I looked, is covered with the 
incredible, large red dots of the scarlet elf cup fungi. They grow on damp, 
dead sticks and we've got plenty of those around here.

Although we've had a couple of hardy people camping in January and February, 
it's now a more mainstream option. So we put down sheep fleeces and a sofa bed 
in the bell tent. And you can tell it's getting just a tiny bit warmer because 
the earthen floor we made months ago – that great mix of clay, manure, sand and 
straw – is finally dry. It looks beautiful and you can see the flecks of 
chopped straw in the hard, dark clay. I'm not sure, though, that I'll try it 
again. There's obviously a reason why such floors are more common in Africa and 
central America rather than in Somerset: it needs a hot climate to dry, and if, 
lacking that, you need a dehumidifier on it for months, it rather detracts from 
the floor's eco credentials.

Every available windowsill in the house now has seed trays full of tomatoes, 
chard, peppers, chillies, spinach, broccoli, aubergines and all the rest. The 
shallots are in and the seed potatoes are chitting. Rhubarb leaves are 
unfurling on the end of their fat red stalks. We've bought half a dozen 
scaffolding planks to make two more large raised beds.

What interests me is how every season brings its own issues to resolve. Who, 
for example, should pay for all the seeds and associated costs of growing our 
own? At the moment we all pay for food here by putting 30 quid a week into a 
communal kitty. Kids put in half that. If someone can't afford it they don't 
have to contribute and we manage to get by. We eat, I reckon, pretty well. On 
the rare occasions that we have a surplus at the end of the week, the money 
goes into a surplus tin to pay for, for example, chicken feed.

But now we're debating whether it's fair to take the money for seeds and so on 
out of the kitty. Some say definitely not; others say yes, absolutely. Is it 
fair that someone here in March pays for something we won't harvest until the 
summer? And what about if that person in March is eating the chutney or honey 
that were the fruits of last year's labours? And who should pay for the 
air-rifle pellets thanks to which we'll have plenty of rabbit, wood pigeon and 
squirrel? And the baker's fondant with which we feed the bees? Everyone loves 
our honey, so should we all share the costs as well as the benefits?

In a way they should be easy questions to answer: it's cheaper to buy seeds, 
pellets and fondant than veg, meat and honey in the shops, so if we all chip in 
we'll all save. But people have different means, tastes and commitment. Are 
vegetarians exempt from pellet costs? And those who don't like kale or chard? 
I don't know when our much-craved simplicity became so complicated.

Much as we all yearn for fairness, I'm afraid that being fixated on it can be 
counterproductive. If you have rotas for everything, and if you constantly 
quibble about pennies, you quickly eradicate goodwill and spontaneity. 
Everything can become institutionalised and you lose sight of the fact that 
we're trying to help each other, rather than just ourselves. The bottom line is 
that someone needs to say: "This is how it's going to work, so let's get 
on with it." It's a question of leadership – but that's a thorny issue for 
another day.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/ profile/tobias- 
jones <http://theguardian.com/ profile/tobias- jones> or visit windsorhillwood. 
co.uk <>
 