
My friend Brenda, the acupuncturist, first told me about the Stackpole Inn. 
"Great walking," she said. "It's known for its food and I've heard they now 
have rooms."

Brenda heard right. The Stackpole Inn, a freehouse in the Pembrokeshire 
national park listed in both the AA and Michelin pub guides, added four 
bedrooms in May. On this basis, I invited Tom who, like me, enjoys sleeping and 
eating.

After negotiating Pembroke, we seemed to head for nothing but fields and sky. 
And then we spotted the Stackpole Inn, a low grey house with tiled roof set 
back from the road with a large sloping lawn.

Minutes later, we were shown to our room in a standalone building by publican 
Chris Jewell, a former marketing man who runs the inn - popular with fishermen 
and walkers - with his wife Kim.

"Coo, this is nice," we chorused, once he'd left. Who says walkers have to 
sleep in hair shirts on hard bunks with no heating?

The room was light and spacious with Velux windows allowing in plenty of 
natural light. It was clad in seasidey tongue and groove and painted in 
restfully pale tones offset by blue soft furnishings - twin beds with bedheads 
covered in a nautical print and striped ticking cushions. Carved wading birds 
on a chest of drawers and framed moody shots of fishing boats added a nice 
flourish. The shower room was a gleaming white affair with towels neatly rolled 
up in a wicker basket. (The shower gel smelled a bit like Pledge but perhaps it 
was heavy duty post-walking strength.) All in all, fantastic for the price. We 
felt pretty pleased with ourselves as we crossed the car park to the Inn for a 
drink before dinner.

The bar and eating areas which flanked it were standard pub interior fare. 
Nothing standard about the beers though, brewery in Llanelli and Reverend James 
from Brains turned out to be corkers.

In summer, Chris explained, pulling pints, they had huge a fish board with 
lobster, crab claws, sea bass, local mackerel and dover sole, but this was more 
steak-and-ale pie season. As we studied the specials board, a steady stream of 
folk asked at the bar for tables for dinner. We went for chicken liver pâté, 
and a warm goat's cheese salad, followed by a special of grilled hake steak, 
and Welsh rack of lamb.

"This tastes better than it looks," said Tom of his pâté. My tasty warm salad 
of olives, capers and mixed leaves lost something in the looks department too, 
being almost obscured by a doorstep of, admittedly good, cheese.

The lighting ensured we had a good view of our neighbours. "There's about 15 
quid's worth of peas in that bowl," one Brummie neighbour remarked to her 
husband as she passed him the veg.

My hake, ugly and untrimmed, sat on a potato mountain, which was a shame 
because the fish was perfectly cooked and the sauce deliciously tomato-ey. Tom 
thought his lamb was on the fatty side.

Next morning, breakfast was hit and miss (in fact, we almost missed it 
completely so cocooned were we in our sun-filled room). Tom pronounced his full 
Welsh "a good meal", but I gave up on scrambled eggs so dry they resembled 
popcorn.

For pub accommodation? Beer? Couldn't have wished for better. I just can't 
help thinking we missed out on something those pub guide inspectors must have 
found.

· The Stackpole Inn, Pembrokeshire (01646 672324, stackpoleinn.co.uk 
<http://www.stackpoleinn.co.uk>). Doubles/twins £55 per night B&B. Dinner 
around £20.50 per head for two courses excluding drinks.

Over to you

Post your own review of Badwell Ash Holiday Cottages on our blog at 
theguardian.com/travel <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/travel>, or share tips at
theguardian.com/beenthere <https://www.theguardian.com/beenthere>.
 