
At Frozen Light <http://frozenlighttheatre.com/> we create theatre for 
audiences with profound and multiple learning disabilities (PMLD). While in a 
lot of ways our creative process is similar to that of other theatre companies, 
there’s a handful of key areas we look at to make sure the work we create is 
relevant to our audience.


It can be challenging for people with PMLD to access mainstream productions, 
so our focus is to give our audiences the opportunity to participate in the 
arts in a theatre setting. Here are some of the things we’ve learned along the 
way in making our work more accessible, but these are lessons that can be used 
when creating other theatrical experiences for other types of audience.

Multi-sensory theatre 

There’s no doubt that immersive, interactive theatre is on the rise. With 
success stories such as Punchdrunk’sThe Drowned Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZKNNMombV8>, in which participants were 
invited to interact with the work’s diverse sets, we know that audiences like 
to explore different kinds of environments. This is particularly important for 
audiences with PMLD, so we try to make every element of our production 
multi-sensory to create a more immersive experience.

In our current production of The Forest, audiences can smell the damp forest 
leaves and the burning of firewood. In the penultimate scene, the audience 
experiences wind, rain and thunder. These sensory moments highlight what’s 
happening in the play, making it more inclusive and accessible.

But when making multi-sensory work you need to consider how sensory elements 
might impact upon the storytelling. How can it add to the story as opposed to 
distract from it? This is a question we ask ourselves constantly in rehearsals.

Another tip for theatre-makers: expensive doesn’t necessarily mean better. 
Pricey interactive projections have their place in theatre, but can be 
overused. We’ve found that some of our most simple props are the most 
effective. For example, for this production, rather than project the moon 
appearing, we use white helium balloons with small LEDs in them to make a moon 
that can be felt as well as seen. We also use balloons filled with rice as a 
way to explore rain.

Think outside the box and the usual conventions of theatre. Spend a lot of 
time playing with different materials in rehearsals.


Break the fourth wall

As learning disability charity Mencap <https://www.mencap.org.uk/> puts it: 
“Any event, no matter how awesome, is unlikely to have any relevance to most 
people with PMLD if it takes place some distance from them.”

By engaging directly with the audience we break the fourth wall still used in 
more traditional theatre. We speak directly to the audience throughout the 
production, as well as singing a name song to each individual, which 
personalises the experience. Through these one-to-one interactive moments we 
are able to connect with our audience on a personal level, breaking down the 
barrier between actor and audience.

Our tip for others? When breaking the fourth wall it’s crucial to make the 
audience feel safe and to create an environment in which the theatregoers feel 
comfortable engaging with the performers. There needs to be trust; audience 
members need to know that it’s OK to join in and not feel victimised if they 
don’t.

Quality not quantity

We have an intimate audience of six people with PMLD and their companions. 
There are three actors on stage, which enables each performer to spend some 
quality time with individuals on a one-to-one basis. For many of our audiences, 
it will be the first time they have ever been to the theatre.

It can be a nightmare getting a show with such small numbers programmed, as 
venues will always make a financial loss. This work would not be possible 
without substantial subsidy. But that doesn’t mean we skimp on creating a 
tailor-made production each time to ensure our audience gets ahigh-quality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/24/quality-is-crucial-for-disability-arts-poor-work-fails-artists-and-audiences>
 theatrical experience made specifically for their needs.

It can be tempting to change your work if it means fitting a particular 
funding bid or being programmed in more venues. But creating the best theatre 
means not compromising on your artistic principles. So know why you make the 
artistic decisions that you do and be ready to explain them – others will come 
to respect you and your practice.


Know your audience

In the devising process we are always thinking of our audience. We ask 
ourselves: what will it mean to them? When creating a new production it can be 
too easy to get lost in the show and forget for whom you’re making it. 
Ultimately, if the production doesn’t meet their needs, we’ve failed to create 
something for people with PMLD. This applies to all types of theatre.

Amber Onat Gregory and Lucy Garland are artistic directors of Frozen Light 
<http://frozenlighttheatre.com/>

The autumn tour <http://frozenlighttheatre.com/current-production/tour-dates/> 
of The Forest begins on 29 August

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 