
In the past, North Korea has appealed to two very specific breeds of 
traveller: those who wished to catch a glimpse of the country's closed society 
and to understand its eccentric brand of "socialism" - and those who loved 
steam engines.

In the late 80s I went on a tour which catered for both categories - to the 
equal alarm of our minders from the state travel agency. The trainspotters ran 
to the end of railway platforms to photograph clouds of smoke, quite unaware 
that in North Korea (as previously in the former Soviet Union), railway 
stations are considered strategic military sites.

The political tourists went for unauthorised walks in the early morning, asked 
awkward questions about the family life of the Kim Il-sung dynasty, and took 
unauthorised photographs out of bus windows.

Today the opportunities for the trainspotters are more limited: there are 
fewer trains, because of the country's fuel shortage, and even more nervousness 
around railway stations. Earlier this year I was chased away by guards for 
trying to photograph the late colonial facade of Pyongyang Central.

And those interested in North Korean politics now face a problem which did not 
exist before: how far should they intrude on a society in deep and painful 
trouble?

In other countries where deprivation is rife, tourists' consciences can be 
salved by the thought that some of the dollars they spend will be going into 
the local economy. Pedicab drivers and small stall owners can benefit directly. 
In North Korea - where foreigners are issued with their own special currency - 
it is hard even to buy a pencil in a department store.

To ask searching questions of one's guides - the only North Koreans with whom 
a tourist can have a real conversation - also presents a dilemma. When they 
insist that "the difficulties are only temporary", or that no one is trying to 
cross the border to find food in China, is there any point in pressing further?

To trap the guide into an incautious admission may be seriously damaging - for 
the guide's own health.

The standard tour includes a visit to Myohyangsan where every gift ever 
presented to the late Kim Il-sung and the current ruler Kim Jong-il, his son, 
is on display in a monumental museum.

Visitors last winter said that this was the only heated building they entered 
- apart from the luxury Koryo Hotel in Pyongyang.

What is the right etiquette for the model tourist in a state socialist country 
where most of the population has no heating and little food? Does one smile 
politely while peering at the saloon car from J Stalin, the massage chairs from 
Japan, and the cut glass decanters from foreign shipping agents hoping for a 
contract? Or does one denounce this monstrous and narcissistic waste of 
resources?

North Korea needs to "come in from the cold" in more ways than one, and the 
recent diplomatic recognition by Britain and other western countries has been 
long overdue.

Yet the money paid for an expensive tour to a few limited tourist sites under 
close supervision might be better donated to Unicef or the World Food Programme 
- to help the North Koreans who most need it.
 