 As long as video footage survives, nobody will be allowed to forget the moment 
when a young, local, openly gay Blairite temporarily halted the career of 
Michael Portillo by taking the supposedly safe north London seat of Enfield 
Southgate from him. It was impossible to forget his shy sideways glance of 
triumph, or Portillo's attempt to conceal his utter surprise.
How Stephen Twigg's career progresses depends largely on whether he hangs on 
to the seat, which he secured by a 1,433-vote majority in 1997. Then, Mr 
Portillo did not bother to defend it, sure he would win with ease. Its 
recapture is now a top Tory priority and failure to do so would be a terrible 
blow for William Hague.

But Mr Twigg is more than an historical curiosity, and if he loses next time 
there is little doubt that his party will find him another seat at the earliest 
opportunity. A wunderkind utterly loyal to New Labour, he has demonstrated his 
abilities as a member of the education select committee. His charm and good 
looks attracted many admirers, particularly among the Liberal Democrats, who 
found his advocacy of PR appealing - he has been a regular sight at the Liberal 
Democrat party conference, as well as a sought after figure at Labour fringe 
gatherings.

In fact, only Labour's hard left has remained immune to his boyish amiability, 
mainly because of his pre-election role in orchestrating the removal of 
leftwing Liz Davies as the candidate for Leeds North East. It is not clear 
whether that episode had more to do with their clashes on Islington council 
(where he was Labour's chief whip and Liz Davies a fellow councillor) or his 
communist parents, who, he claims, taught him "tolerance, solidarity and 
equality". They took him on anti-Vietnam marches.

Curiously, he joined the Labour party at 15 because, as a moderate he was 
alienated by the more extreme Young Socialists. He ran the school paper at 
Southgate comprehensive, clashing even then with his local MP, Michael 
Portillo. He was Labour's infant prodigy, becoming secretary of his local 
branch at 17 and, at 18, Enfield's delegate to annual conference in 1984.

At Balliol College, Oxford, he joined the Labour club and won a debate against 
Edwina Currie at the Oxford Union. Having emerged from the closet - "Chris 
Smith's coming out [as gay] in 1984 helped give me the confidence to come out 
soon after" - he became the first openly-gay president of the NUS in 1990.

His first step into politics proper was winning a byelection to Islington 
council, where he became council leader Margaret Hodge's protege: research 
assistant, then chief whip, and then deputy leader. He caught the attention of 
Tony Blair at the Clause IV conference in April 1995 when he slapped down 
Arthur Scargill, and was soon being hailed as one of the party's rising stars.

He became general secretary of the Fabian Society just before being selected 
to fight the hopeless seat of Enfield Southgate. The rest, on election night, 
is history. He will fight Enfield at the next election and whatever happens 
after that he can be sure a dramatic political career awaits, perhaps in the 
very top rank of British politics.

Ask Aristotle about Stephen Twigg 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-5279,00.html>
 