
Steven Finn’s unhappy tour of Australia has come to a premature end. The 
Middlesex bowler, who has yet to appear in an international match after 11 
weeks in Australia, will return to England to rest and continue to work on the 
technical issues that have prevented him playing either in the Test or one-day 
series.

“We feel it’s the best thing for him,” said England’s limited-overs coach, 
Ashley Giles. “We feel he’s not been bowling that well and not bowling well 
enough to get selected. I feel the best place for him to be right now is out of 
a performance environment.”

Finn was expected to play a major part in the Ashes and one day tour when the 
party was originally selected, and was seen as the most likely of the 
triumvirate of 6ft 6in-plus England bowlers - alongside Boyd Rankin and Chris 
Tremlett - to play in the Test series. Instead Finn has been a spectator 
throughout, effectively spending the winter working inconclusively with 
England’s coaching staff on technical issues with his seam position and a 
noticeable kink in his bowling action. Last week in Melbourne he cut a 
frustrated figure during practice, spending his time alternatively bowling into 
an empty net and in deep conversation with his captain

“Steven is one of our most talented bowling assets who has played and will 
continue to play an important role for England,” Giles said. “He has been 
working hard over the last couple of months on technical aspects of his bowling 
and Steven and the coaches all feel continuing this work out of the performance 
environment will be beneficial for him.

“Sometimes through your career you go through those ups and downs and his 
timing is out. That then can affect your confidence and certainly it is not 
coming out as quickly as he would like either.”

Giles admitted Finn’s loss of capacity dates back since shortly after the 
start of the Ashes tour, albeit it has taken eleven weeks for England’s 
hierarchy to decide the best place for him is back with his county coaches. “I 
suppose he has been in this state for at least a couple of months and it hasn’t 
worked.We feel now that it is best to take him out of it. Sometimes you do have 
to do that, you take guys back. At the moment Steven needs a bit of space in 
the very short term he probably needs a couple of weeks away from cricket full 
stop. Steven is not selectable at the moment.”

All in all the events of the last two months represent a terrible blow for a 
bowler who just a year ago looked in fine fettle during the one-day series in 
New Zealand, and who two years ago appeared to be one of the best young fast 
bowlers in the world during England’s one-day series victory in the United Arab 
Emirates against Pakistan. Finn is the youngest England bowler to take 50 Test 
wickets and currently has 90 at an average lower than any of England’s other 
new ball bowlers. For all that his England career would appear to be on hold 
indefinitely pending a basic recalibration of his bowling action, and a due 
period of recovery from the strain of what has been a traumatic period.

“We’ve already had communication with Middlesex and we need to make a plan and 
get Steven back as quickly as we can,” Giles said. “The important thing to say 
is that whichever coach has been working with him, be it at Middlesex or 
England, we’ve only got the interests ofSteven Finn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steven-finn> at heart in getting him back 
bowling as well as he can.”

There will be a temptation to draw comparisons with James Anderson, who also 
briefly lost his way after being coached into changing his action with England 
in part in order to avoid suffering a back injury - and then later suffered a 
stress fracture of his back. Finn’s issues appear to be more specific, relating 
to the way he releases the ball and a general loss of rhythm and speed. It is 
not known if England will call a replacement into the one-day squad. Finn has 
also been included in England’s provisional 30-man squad for the World Twenty20 
in March. A final 15-man squad is set to be confirmed early next month.
 