
The latest enforced departure from England's tour of Australia could hardly 
have come as less of a surprise.For Steven Finn this was closer to a merciful 
release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/13/england-steven-finn-bowler-australia>
 after 11 weeks on tour without playing an international match and some clear 
evidence in practice last week in Melbourne that the world's No3 ranked one-day 
international bowler has regressed to a state where he is un-selectable.

Finn will now return to England where he will, it is to be hoped, take a break 
from the draining business of attempting to set right the misaligned mechanics 
of his bowling action.

Speaking in Brisbane before the second ODI on Friday , Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> confirmed Finn's departure, 
and also defended England's treatment of the fast bowler, who can in effect no 
longer bowl while under the intensive daily guidance of the ECB's elite 
coaching unit. Finn is the third member of England's party in Australia to make 
an unplanned departure, after Jonathan Trott and Graeme Swann.

It has been a horribly debilitating tour all round. Of the original Ashes 
squad Stuart Broad is injured, Jimmy Anderson visibly exhausted, Alastair Cook 
in the worst trough of his career, Matt Prior dropped andKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, who received little 
support from Giles on the day he was announced in a provisional squad for the 
World Twenty20, in a kind of unspoken international limbo.

"Such a big loss of form is sad, sad for him and for us," Giles said of Finn. 
"Someone like Steven Finn is a key asset. He could have made a massive 
difference in the Ashes and he certainly would in our one-day side. Everything 
we have done anyway is directed for one reason, to helpSteven Finn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steven-finn>. There is no squabbling over 
the sort of care he is getting, we just need to get him back to bowling the way 
he can."

"When we selected this tour we had to select it a little bit of a way out. At 
that time, the reports from him being in the Test team, he was turning a little 
bit of a corner, so we had to give a shot. Now I think it's unfair for him to 
be around any longer."

Pressed on the specific nature of Finn's problems, England's one-day coach 
offered a glimpse of the confusion surrounding a player who this time last year 
was a vital cutting edge in the one-day series victory in New Zealand. "There 
is some technical stuff going on," Giles said. "The way he is bowling there is 
something technical in the chain that's out of sync. What you're talking about 
is a catalyst. What it exactly is I don't know but we've got a problem."

There have been suggestions Finn might be suffering from the dreaded yips, 
although Giles – a former left-arm spinner, a breed who have been afflicted 
more than most – looked quietly horrified at the suggestion.

"I hate that word and I don't even want to say it. It's a very different thing 
compared to what I believe Steven has got. It's a mixture of the two. He's got 
technical issues. The more troublesome they become, the worse the battle with 
them becomes, of course it's going to affect you mentally. Then you start 
second guessing what it is, what's the start point, what is the end point, 
where am I going in my career?

"What Steven Finn didn't want anyone to think was that he was quitting. No one 
would ever dream of saying that. We made the decision in the end in conjunction 
with the guys back at home, all our management, Andy, Paul Downton, top bosses 
have all been involved in this. The important thing from our perspective and 
Middlesex's perspective is that we move forward together to get him right, so 
that we make sure the messages are very clear and the plans clear."

Giles also dead-batted the suggestion that Pietersen's inclusion in the World 
Twenty20 squad might signal a thawing in his relations with Andy Flower. Asked 
if he thought Pietersen would play for England again, Giles said: "I don't 
know. We have to take stock. We have picked a 30-man squad, nobody is 
guaranteed ever of playing.

"The important thing from my perspective and having spoken to Cookie is we 
don't make any knee-jerk calls now. We need time to sit back and take 
everything into account.

"In the short term me and Cookie are going through a one-day series that we're 
desperately trying to win. We've got those pressures. There's been a lot 
written and a lot said. At the moment we just need to sit back and see where we 
are. And Kev's in that 30."

Looking forward to Friday's match at the Gabba Giles confirmed that Joe Root 
remains a key part of his plans for the one-day and Twenty20 teams and also 
poured cold water on the notion England might experiment with the makeup of 
their top order at this early stage in the series.
 