
When the director Steve McQueen was an art student learning basic film-making 
skills at Goldsmiths College, London, he joked he was already aiming for the 
time when his name would eclipse that of his glamorous namesake, star ofThe 
Great Escape and Bullitt. "One day," he told his collaborator, Professor Will 
Brooker, "when people talk aboutSteve McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, I am going to be the first 
person they think of."

Now, with an Oscar for his film 12 Years a Slave, the transition from Turner 
prizewinning artist to celebrated director has been made in style. It is a path 
to cinematography also taken by the British artist Sam Taylor-Wood, nominated 
for a Turner prize in 1998 and now editingher high-profile film of the erotic 
bestsellerFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155218/fifty-shades-of-grey>.

Next month will see a further reminder of the link between the film industry 
and the rarefied contemporary art world, a link that has existed since the 
Lumière brothers first projected images on to a screen. Julian Schnabel, the 
American artist and film-maker, is to stage his first art exhibition in Britain 
for 15 years.

"The connection between visual artists and film might seem obvious, and 
Schnabel is successful in both, but it is amazing how many good artists there 
are who have not made good films," said Tim Marlow, who was appointed head of 
exhibitions at the Royal Academy of Arts last week.

Back in the 1920s Jean Cocteau, the toast of bohemian Paris, put away his 
paintbrush and typewriter in favour of the motion camera, creating surrealist 
classics of the cinema such asLa Belle et la Bête, while his compatriot Jean 
Renoir, son of the painter Auguste-Pierre, made ceramic pots long before he 
made his filmLa Grande Illusion in 1937. Since then many influential directors, 
including the late Japanese masterAkira Kurosawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/akirakurosawa>, have started out as painters 
or sculptors.

But does an artist really have to choose? Is it possible to keep a reputation 
going in both fields? Schnabel certainly thinks it is. Before his show, at the 
Dairy Art Centre in London, he says he still regards himself as "primarily an 
artist", despite the critical success of his filmsBasquiat, Before Night Falls 
andThe Diving Bell and the Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/12/top-10-biopics-movies>.

McQueen could find such a trick hard to pull off. Last month he quietly 
withdrew his name from consideration for the $100,000 2014 Hugo Boss prize, 
administered by New York's Solomon R Guggenheim Museum, due to the demands of 
promoting12 Years a Slave in Los Angeles. He had been unable, it was announced, 
to fulfil the requirements of making a large contribution to the prize show 
catalogue.

Now it looks as if McQueen, who lives in Amsterdam, will have little time for 
fine art. Although he has dropped his planned biopic of the musician Fela Kuti, 
he is developing major television series for both the BBC and the American 
network HBO. The HBO show is to tell the story of a young African-American man 
who enters New York high society, while the BBC has commissioneda new drama 
about the lives of black Britons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/10/12-years-a-slave-director-steve-mcqueen-bbc-drama>
.

Each of these TV projects will reach a larger audience than the video 
installations that first made McQueen's name. In his 1993 black and white 
silent film,Bear, two naked men exchange meaningful glances in the gloom, while 
inDeadpan, a work shown in his winning 1999 Turner prize show, he restaged a 
Buster Keaton stunt in which the film-set facade of houses collapses around an 
unscathed lone figure.

McQueen has said he sees no division between his work in cinema and his fine 
art. It is all part of what he wants to do creatively, he argues. And if anyone 
can straddle these two worlds then it is McQueen, according to Gregor Muir, 
executive director of the Institute of Contemporary Arts, in London. "He is an 
extraordinary man," said Muir. "He was not just an artist who became a film 
director, he was one of the best artists of his generation. He has surprised us 
throughout his career."

To underline McQueen's value, four days ago a leading Dutch museum acquired 
two of his artworks. The pieces – a lightbox containing a photograph of a boy 
on a beach and footage of a dead horse lying in a meadow – will go on display 
in December at the Stedelijk in Amsterdam, a museum that already owns7th Nov, 
his 2001 short film recounting the events of a fatal accident. Commenting on 
the purchase of these works, the BBC's arts editor Will Gompertz saw a false 
distinction between art and showbiz that assumes that the art world represents 
"a refined elite above the vulgarities of consumer society", while, in fact, 
"it is just as intoxicated by the razzledazzle of celebrity culture as the 
readers ofGrazia. Fame in the art world has the same effect as fame in the rest 
of society: it raises the value of an individual's stock."

Muir, who evangelised about the importance of video art when he worked at the 
Lux Gallery in east London and then at the Tate before he ran the ICA, thinks 
there is another false distinction at work. "We shouldn't assume that fine art 
is always going to be less popular or entertaining than a commercially made 
film," he said, citing the example ofChristian Marclay's acclaimed 24-hour 
montage,The Clock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/apr/07/christian-marclay-the-clock>
.

"In the early 1990s artists began to explore film because suddenly they had 
access to camcorders and digital film-making. They could deconstruct film as 
never before, whereas in the past artists had to form co-operatives to make 
videos together."

Muir points out the ICA's role at that moment. In 1999 the institute was the 
venue for McQueen's first big solo show, although some of his work had been 
shown by a London dealer. Tracey Emin was one of the first to jump into film 
with her short biographical pieces. "Tracey received a lot of support for her 
early films, both in the world of art and of film," recalls Muir. "Some of 
those early films were truly touching vignettes."

But it was McQueen and Taylor-Wood, now known as Sam Taylor-Johnson following 
her marriage to actor Aaron Johnson, and acclaimed for her debut feature 
Nowhere Boy, who were to head for the big screen. "Sam saw a path for herself 
and she has taken it. But Steve and Douglas Gordon, the artist whomade a film 
about the French footballer Zinédine Zidane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/may/18/cannes2006.cannesfilmfestival1>, 
were both influenced by the artists Bill Nauman and Bill Viola and wanted to 
expand on their ideas. It was clear they wanted to test the way in which 
narrative film could exist as an art form. They had quite a different route 
from Schnabel, who just suddenly surprised us with his rare talent in film."

First to spot McQueen's thirst for cinema may have been Will Brooker, who 
worked alongside the artist at Goldsmiths 
<http://www.kingston.ac.uk/news/article/1259/04-mar-2014-best-picture-triumph-for-oscarwinning-director-steve-mcqueen-no-surprise-to-kingston-university-film-studies/>
 and who is now a Kingston University professor of film and cultural studies. 
"McQueen uses a sustained long take as a motif in his work – he won't cut away 
and is committed to shooting difficult and sometimes unpleasant scenes, which 
ties in with my sense of him from 20 years ago," Brooker said. "He's brought a 
fine art sensibility to cinema and film is the tool for his art."

For Muir, the key consideration is the fearlessness the right artist can bring 
to cinema: "This is the route, we should remember, that gave us not only the 
first black director to win the best film Oscar, but also the first woman to 
win an Oscar. Kathryn Bigelow, who won in 2009 forThe Hurt Locker, was a 
painter and conceptual artist before she madeStrange Days and Point Break with 
Keanu Reeves. She was one of the first artists to cross over into narrative 
film. Both these artists have pushed things in film because that is what 
artists do."

Muir also has a claim to have predicted the influence of video artists on the 
film industry. In an article forArena in the 1990s he suggested some stars of 
the art world might go on to make the big films of the future. "At least I 
don't need to eat my hat on that one," he said.

• This article was amended on 10 March 2014. An earlier version said that 
Professor Will Brooker was Steve McQueen's tutor at Goldsmiths. They were 
fellow students and worked alongside each other.
 