
Steve Bruce has called for a conference on footballers' footwear and the state 
of modern pitches in the wake of horrific injuries suffered by players wearing 
fashionable blades rather than conventionally studded boots. Already this 
season Manchester United'sAntonio Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> and Sunderland's 
Fraizer Campbell have sustained appalling injuries after their feet became 
trapped in the turf as they contested possession.

"The pitches are so good, so firm, these days that they are really hard 
compared to the way they used to be and the grass is also much stronger which 
means the blades can stay stuck there," theSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> manager said. "I think we've 
really got to look at this because there is a problem. It would be interesting 
to see some research into modern pitches and also footwear, which, on a lot of 
occasions, leave a lot to be desired."

In recent seasons it has become increasingly fashionable for players to opt 
for blades instead of traditional conical studs with many feeling they offer 
better grip while maximising sprinting ability. Managers increasingly harbour 
reservations, though, particularly as the new boots are so lightweight that 
they might pass as slippers. Bruce believes a review is overdue.

"I think there should be a comprehensive study and medical report into the 
amount of injuries players wearing these blades are getting," he said. "I'd 
like to see stats comparing the number of players getting serious injuries 
wearing blades with those getting seriously injured wearing studs."

Matters are complicated by the lucrative commercial contracts most leading 
players have with boot manufacturers. Accordingly, once the proposed study was 
published, Bruce would advocate the staging of a conference involving the 
football authorities and boot companies to plot a safer way forward.

"Maybe it's time for everyone to sit down together and see if there's anything 
we can do to make things better," Bruce said. "When we next sit down at the 
League Managers Association I'll certainly have an opinion."

Sunderland have lost Campbell, their England Under-21 striker, for at least 
six months due to the serious knee injury sustained when his blades caught in 
the Stadium of Light's turf and his knee twisted under pressure as he 
challenged Manchester City's Micah Richards for possession. "When you see the 
replays, Fraizer drags his foot, his foot gets stuck and his knee just pops," 
said Bruce. "It's awful to see."

Similarly, Valencia suffered a fractured leg and dislocated ankle as well as 
significant ligament damage during United's Champions League game against 
Rangers at Old Trafford on Tuesday and may not play again this season.

The Ecuador winger underwent surgery today after his foot became lodged in the 
grass as he contested for the ball with Rangers' Kirk Broadfoot. "The operation 
went well," said a United spokesperson. "A plate has been inserted to stabilise 
the fracture but there is obvious significant ligament damage that follows a 
dislocation and he will be out for a good portion of the season."

Bruce, who managed Valencia during the pair's days at Wigan Athletic, was left 
depressed. "You never want to see that. It's scary shit. But I know Antonio 
very well and if anyone can get back from that it will be him. He's one of the 
most dedicated kids I've ever worked with. He's strong and as tough as they 
come but he'll need to be; it's an awful injury."
 