
Stilian Petrov has defended Alex McLeish's management of Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>. Increasing frustration at 
Villa's current struggles to translate good performances into wins saw the Scot 
face borderline insubordination from Charles N'Zogbia and Stephen Ireland 
during Villa's 2-1 defeat at Newcastle United on Sunday but the team's key 
midfielder remains firmly behind him.

"Our manager will get it right," said Petrov. "We believe in him and we will 
keep fighting." While Ireland exchanged words with his manager, apparently 
swearing at McLeish when he was censured for failing to cut out the cross which 
prompted Newcastle's opening goal, N'Zogbia tweeted his displeasure at being 
replaced by Emile Heskey.

"First time in my life I'm not happy playing football," said the French winger 
in a tweet which was subsequently removed and will not result in any 
disciplinary action from Villa. Ireland, too, was substituted but McLeish 
maintained his half-time withdrawal had nothing to do with their spat and was 
because the midfielder who, has begun returning to form in recent weeks, had 
sustained an ankle injury.

If Villa's supporters did not contest Ireland's removal, they subjected 
McLeish to chants of "you don't know what you're doing" when Heskey replaced 
N'Zogbia.

"Managers will always be under pressure when you don't get results even if you 
play well," said Petrov. "Ours is doing well and he's strong and positive but 
unfortunately we can't get a result.

"He's a strong character, though. He'll never give up. He'll keep fighting and 
driving us forward. We are behind him. It's just that we can't get results at 
the moment. We've been creating chances but we just can't keep a clean sheet. 
We've been working really hard but it has not been paying off."There is general 
disappointment that Villa are 13th in the table and it is felt that this rather 
than any wider disillusion was behind N'Zogbia's tweet. Having reflected on the 
events of Sunday the former Newcastle and Wigan Athletic player subsequently 
tweeted in rather more positive, possibly conciliatory, mode. "Football goes up 
and down," wrote N'Zogbia. "Massive challenge 4 me. What doesn't hurt u make u 
stronger. I have learned from it."

Petrov understands such introspection. "The margins between winning and losing 
are very small in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>," he said. "If you are not 
careful things can turn against you so I hope we can start getting some points 
and climbing the table. That's important for us now but we know we have enough 
quality to pull out of this. We know we will score goals and there will come a 
time when we will defend better. We will get it right."

McLeish has criticised certain players for not saluting travelling Villa fans 
after the final whistle at Newcastle. Only the manager himself, Barry Bannan, 
Darren Bent and Shay Given went over to acknowledge those visiting supporters.

"They shouldn't be doing that," said Villa's manager. "Even if they go over 
and get abused they should still do it. They need to show a touch of humility. 
I will have a word with them."
 