
QED does not cover the half of it. At the end of day one England were 234 for 
four: they managed 291 all out. At the end of day two Australia were 188 for 
four: they managed 393 all out. A lead of 102 and the game was all but over.

Extrapolate those figures and England's overnight 114 for five will have been 
turned into 160 all out and by now Australia will have successfully chased 59 
to win. So tail-end runs do not count? Without wishing to become Duncan 
Fletcher's defence counsel - ghostwriters can be a sycophantic bunch - this was 
an all too graphic illustration of a topic the England coach was rather 
concerned about earlier in the tour.

If you recall, it exerted considerable influence on selection and was 
subsequently ridiculed. Funny that we do not seem to be hearing too much about 
it now. These runs matter. They matter because Australia's last four batsmen 
have averaged 71 per innings in this series; England's just 24. They matter 
because Australia have Shane Warne at No8 averaging 49: in return England have 
Sajid Mahmood averaging 2.80.

That Mahmood will have, by now, batted at No9 in England's second innings only 
adds to the hopelessness of the situation. "Promotion or protection?" was not 
necessarily the most sarcastic of questions when Monty Panesar was sent in last 
evening at seven. Nightwatchman was the call, but just whom he was protecting 
was still unclear. Maybe it was James Anderson; at No11 his series average of 
seven is all over his opposite number Glenn McGrath's 3.3.

Of course, there are many other reasons why England's tour has been so 
painful. But nothing quite irks Fletcher like sloppy, woolly-headed cricket. So 
for the captain, Andrew Flintoff, to give a perfect example of just that - 
stumped off Warne pushing forward with his back foot only on the line - would 
have been difficult to stomach. For Geraint Jones similar slackness of mind 
sealed his dropping after Perth; this might confirm Flintoff's demotion from 
the captaincy.

There had been other examples yesterday, as at least four run-out 
opportunities were bungled. Mahmood's obliviousness to the possibility of 
running out Warne was a schoolboy error; Alastair Cook's throw to the bowler's 
end hardly surprising in its recognition of a slight difference in pace between 
Warne and his spring-heeled partner Adam Gilchrist.

Less obvious was Anderson's folly when chasing to the cover boundary, staying 
too close behind Ian Bell so that when the diving flick came back it hit his 
foot and rebounded for four. The very next ball Flintoff should have run out 
Warne from mid off.

Mind you, Warne jumped to avoid the throw before he had made his ground. But a 
legend's rare moment of doziness we can forgive.
 