
Druids had nothing to do with the building of Stonehenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stonehenge>, and there is no evidence for 
supposing that human sacrifice was ever practised there.

This is stated in a new illustrated guide Stonehenge and Avebury and 
Neighbouring Monuments 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1434231.Stonehenge_And_Neighbouring_Monuments>
 published to-day (H.M.S.O., 3ss), byProfessor R. J. C. Atkinson 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_J._C._Atkinson>, Professor of 
Archaeology at University College, Cardiff. He states that ever since it was 
first suggested 300 years ago that stone circles were Druidicial temples it has 
been popularly supposed that Stonehenge was built and used by the Druids.

“Unfortunately there is no foundation for this belief. The Druids were a 
Celtic priesthood which flourished in Britain only during the few centuries 
before the Roman Conquest, It is unlikely that there were any Druids in these 
islands before 250 B.C., and by that time Stonehenge had been built for more 
than a thousand years and may already have been partly in ruins.”

He adds that the Altar Stone and the Slaughter Stone are popularly connected 
with the idea of human sacrifice. These names were, however, invented by 
“over-imaginative antiquaries only during the last three centuries, and there 
is no evidence at all for supposing that human sacrifice was practised at 
Stonehenge at any time during its long history.”

As for the beliefs that on the longest day of the year – June 21 – an observer 
at the centre of Stonehenge would see the sun rise immediately over the Heel 
Stone and that it would cast a shadow of the top of the Heel Stone on the Altar 
Stone, he added that “neither of these widely held beliefs is correct. To-day, 
the midsummer sun rises appreciably to the left of the Heel Stone, and when 
Stonehenge was built it rose even farther to the left. It will not rise over 
the Heel Stone for more than 1.000 years, and by the time the sun has risen far 
enough to cast any shadow it is prevented from reaching the Altar Stone by 
Stone One of the Outer Circle, which stands in the way.”

Counting the days 
Professor Atkinson agrees that the axis of Stonehenge was arranged to point 
towards the sunrise on the longest day of the year but he does not agree this 
necessarily means that the builders were sun-worshippers and that the monument 
was a temple to the sun. He suggests that this arrangement may be no more than 
a practical device for determining by observation a fixed point in the year 
from which the annual calendar could be counted.

The Ministry of Works has recently been restoring Stonehenge and the booklet 
supports the theory of archaeologists that some of the great stones were 
dragged at one period from the Prescelly mountains in Pembrokeshire and at 
another period from the Marlborough Downs. Professor Atkinson divides the 
history of the monument into three main periods ranging from 1800 to 1400 B.C.
 