
The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-Moon, has called on countries whose soldiers 
are responsible for rape and sexual exploitation on peacekeeping missions to 
stop covering for their crimes and put them on trial.


Ban said sexual violence by peacekeepers was “a number one priority” after a 
series of severely embarrassing revelations of rape and exploitation, often 
involving children.

Are women better peacekeepers? These UN officers think so
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/women-better-peacekeepers-un-officers-think-so>
UN officials acknowledge that the organisation has failed sufficiently to 
address the issue, in part because of the threat by some countries to pull 
their peacekeepers out of UN operations if they are publicly named and shamed.

But Ban said the UN was limited in its response because governments refused to 
give it the authority to do more than order peacekeepers responsible for sexual 
abuse to return home. He called on member countries to show “greater 
institutional responsibility” by investigating and prosecuting their troops.

“I have been talking to the leaders of those countries concerned to make sure 
that they’ll be punished in accordance with national laws,” he told the 
Guardian in an interview. “We are very seriously discussing how to handle this 
matter. There is a growing awareness among the member states that they should 
be more practical and cooperate fully with the [UN] secretariat.”

In August, Ban demanded the resignation of the head of UN peacekeeping 
operations in theCentral African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic> (CAR), Babacar 
Gaye, over his failure to deal with “serious allegations” about the conduct of 
blue helmet troops. At the time, Ban said he was “anguished, angered and 
ashamed” by a series of incidents, including a report by Amnesty International 
on the rape of a 12-year-old girl and the killing of a 16-year-old boy by 
peacekeepers.

“Unfortunately we have been experiencing recurrent crimes happening here and 
there, most recently in Central African Republic,” said Ban. “That’s something 
we expect the member states to fully cooperate [with]. At this time, theUnited 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> secretariat does not 
have the mandate to take any punitive measures. We cannot put them in the 
justice and accountability process. It is member states.”

Ban did not name individual countries but UN officials say that while some, 
such as France, Morocco and SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, have prosecuted troops serving 
under the UN flag, others, such as Pakistan and the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, frequently take no action. UN officials privately accuse some 
governments of using the organisation to shield their armies from scrutiny and 
to take the brunt of the public criticism.

“If countries won’t prosecute their own troops, they have virtual impunity to 
commit all kinds of crimes,” said one senior UN source.

The UN has begun to suspend payments for peacekeeping troops to countries that 
refuse to act on credible allegations of abuse, but it has declined to name 
them. Some countries, notably Nigeria, Rwanda and India, have threatened to 
pull their troops out of peacekeeping if they are exposed publicly on abuses, 
sexual and otherwise.

The UN would not name the nationality of the peacekeepers who were accused of 
sexually abusing street children in the CAR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/23/un-peacekeepers-accused-sexually-abusing-street-children-central-african-republic>
 in June. Last month, it again refused to make public which contingent was 
being investigated forallegations of raping women in the CAR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/19/un-receives-new-allegations-of-by-minusca-peacekeepers-in-car>
, including a minor. However, it was revealed that the soldiers were from 
theDRC.

What's the point of peacekeepers when they don't keep the peace?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/un-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia>
A UN report into the killing of civilians by a UN police unit in Mali made no 
mention of the fact that Rwandan forces were responsible. A UN source said the 
Rwandan government had threatened to withdraw peacekeepers from Darfur if it 
were named, but it did quietly withdraw the police unit and promise to hold the 
officers responsible to account.

Sexual abuse by peacekeepers has been a consistent problem – from Sarajevo and 
Liberia to Haiti and the CAR. Critics such as Amnesty International say the UN 
has failed to address the problem sufficiently for more than two decades.

“It’s ubiquitous,” said Richard Gowan, until recently research director at the 
Centre on International Cooperation, a thinktank in New York that works closely 
with the UN on peacekeeping. “For a lot of the UN guys, they know it’s 
happened. They know that it’s doing real damage especially in places like Haiti 
and Liberia where these missions have been for many years.”

The UN’s record of confronting sexual abuse is not good. Yasushi Akashi, the 
Japanese diplomat who headed the UN’s disarmament mission in Cambodia, 
infamously responded to evidence that UN staff were frequenting Phnom Penh 
brothels, many of which had underage prostitutes, by saying: “Boys will be 
boys.”

Ostracised, sacked … and even arrested: the fate of whistleblowers at the UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/un-united-nations-ostracised-sacked-arrested-whistleblowers>
At times, the instinct was to cover up. Whistleblowers were sacked or 
sidelined. Reports were buried. Investigations were opened but dropped because 
of lack of resources.

In 2005, the then secretary general, Kofi Annan, called sexual exploitation 
“an ugly stain” on the UN’s reputation, after an investigation of the conduct 
of peacekeepers in the DRC identified some having sex with children in exchange 
for food.

Another UN report this year said “transactional sex is quite common but 
underreported in peacekeeping missions”. It noted hundreds of cases, about a 
third of which involved children. South African peacekeepers based in the DRC 
have been accused of soliciting sex from refugees as young as 12 in exchange 
for food and money.

More than 200 Haitian women told investigators of having had “transactional 
sex” for cash or goods. “For rural women, hunger, lack of shelter, babycare 
items, medication and household items were frequently cited as the ‘triggering 
need’,” the report said.

Peacekeepers in the DRC have also fathered children they have failed to take 
responsibility for after leaving the country. “It’s very damaging,” said Jack 
Christofides, a UN official on a break as head of UN peacekeeping in central 
Africa. “I can tell you that all the indicators, all the number of cases are 
going in the right direction, which is down. But you and I know that any case 
can destroy this effort in a flash.”

The 2005 report recommended that courts martial be held in the country where 
the crimes are committed but it was rejected by the member governments. 
Christofides would like to see member states give the UN the authority to 
prosecute soldiers responsible for crimes.

“I don’t know if the member states are going to change this any time soon, 
where they must give us the authority to discipline their troops. I think it 
would take something exceptional for us to be given that kind of authority. But 
many of us believe that unless you can control the entire chain, it’s going to 
be impossible to rule it out completely, on the part of civilians and on the 
part of military,” he said.

Some countries have responded to the public criticism. The highest number of 
allegations of rape and sexual exploitation in the DRC were against South 
African troops.

“I think South Africa feels the heat now,” said Christofides. “In Congo they 
did something that I think is going to become standard practice now for all 
contingencies if we can persuade them. They flew military prosecutors who could 
investigate on the ground so, if there was an allegation, they could respond 
quickly. That had a meaningful impact because once a contingent member is back 
in his home country, it’s very difficult to investigate. Witnesses disappear.”
 