
Typing "Hallelujah" into my iTunes yields 12 results, nine of which are 
versions of Leonard Cohen's classic song, one by the man himself. But it is not 
on behalf of Cohen that there is outrage over the decision torelease Hallelujah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/dec/15/thexfactor-digitalmedia> as the 
single for the X Factor winner, Alexandra Burke. Rather, it is protectiveness 
towards another cover of it,by Jeff Buckley 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AratTMGrHaQ>. Appearing on many "best songs of 
all time" lists, Buckley's version, which one friend described as "the song 
that plays you into heaven", is considered definitive.

The Facebook group Jeff Buckley for Xmas no 1 
<http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=66500765224&ref=mf> aims to convince as 
many people as possible to download the Buckley's version of Hallelujah in 
order to beat the X Factor single to No 1 in time for Christmas. Describing the 
X Factor version as "inevitably soulless" and a "pale imitation" before the 
winner was even decided, or any of the versions of the single had been heard 
(although I had high hopes for Diana Vickers' version based onthis early 
audition <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=5GC2jFym4eg>), the group objects to the 
context of the song's release, and the inevitably mainstream and "inauthentic" 
nature of X Factor.

With almost 60,000 members (and rising), the group has support from Radio 1 
DJs Edith Bowman and Colin Murray – the latter suggesting that record shop 
owners cover up Burke's single with Jeff Buckley records – and is, this week, 
being picked up by the major news stations.

The success of the group is reflected in the download figures. While it is 
fantasy to think that there is any chance of Buckley's version catching the X 
Factor machine, it currently sits at No 4 in the iTunes chart, with Burke's 
Hallelujah at No 1.

And as others have pointed out, the chart battle between the two covers of 
Hallelujah can only be good for Leonard Cohen'srecently depleted retirement fund
 
<http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&Params=M1ARTM0012813>
.

But what is it that makes Burke's version inauthentic and Buckley's authentic? 
And why be so depressed over the X Factor version, when the song has been 
exposed to mainstream audiences via its use on both The OC and Shrek 
soundtracks?

Buckley to many might be considered the antithesis of the X Factor phenomenon 
(his own lucrative deal with a major label – Columbia – aside), a real 
songwriter singing about emotional pain; that he tragically died aged just 30 
in 1997, after drowning while swimming in a Memphis river, makes fans' 
protectiveness over him even more understandable. From the audible breath at 
the beginning, to the note held for an impossibly long time at the end, there 
is no doubt that Buckley's Hallelujah is sublime; it is a seven-minute 
exposition of orgasmic misery. Amplified by Buckley's death, the song has 
become talismanic: an anthem for those who "get it" – the musical equivalent of 
Donnie Darko.

I have seen Hallelujah performed live in many contexts, by teenagers and 
adults alike, and while I haven't liked them all, they all had something in 
common – a genuine passion for the song. Perhaps this explains the ubiquity of 
Hallelujah as a cover song: it taps into a heartbreak we all understand, and 
yet few have managed to express in quite the way Cohen does.

This is what is seen to be missing from the X Factor version – that a song 
given to someone to sing cannot have the same resonance as one freely chosen, 
especially with regard to this track. But it would take a hard-hearted person, 
while watching Burke's performance of Hallelujah, to claim there was no passion 
in it.

And perhaps that's all the song asks – to be performed with passion. Its 
celebration of love, with all its attendant pleasures and pains, is too alive 
to be relegated to one historic recording of it.

Hallelujah has taken on a life of its own since Leonard Cohen's creation of 
it, and will not be pinned down. It doesn't belong to Jeff Buckley. And it 
doesn't belong to us, either. It's Christmas. Time to share our toys – even our 
favourite ones.
 