
"He who gives when he is asked has waited too long." That was the simple 
message posted by the Somali Relief & Development Forum (SRDF) on their 
Facebook fan page this April. Beside the message was a photograph of a nameless 
elderly Somali woman swathed in a red scarf, her lips pressed tightly together, 
wrinkly palm outstretched, eyes gazing imploringly out of the computer screen.

How do people respond to this kind of image? Among Facebook users, the 
reaction was decidedly mixed. Twenty-two people 'liked' the original post, but 
on another of SRDF's pages, supporters of the charity criticised the photo as 
"degrading" and "humiliating", and asked for it to be removed.

Despite the complaints, it stayed put, and SRDF's campaign to assist those 
currently starving in the Horn of Africa continues, both off and online.

SRDF is a coalition of seven Somali-led humanitarian NGOs, set up in 2011 to 
work with communities in Somalia and its neighbouring countries. For Robert 
Chetwood, one of just four permanent staff, networks like Facebook are a 
powerful marketing tool: "It's something we rely on quite heavily. It's free, 
and it's a really good way to spread the word with minimum costs."

The logic seems clear: the woman in the red scarf gives a human face to the 
story, and it's easier to feel inspired to donate to a real person than a list 
of statistics.

But does this approach work? "It's great for awareness, but from a fundraising 
point of view, it's difficult to see how many of those 'likes' transferred into 
people who actually donated," says Chetwood. And as some of the negative 
reactions showed, pictures of suffering can trigger not simply empathy and a 
desire to help, but also anger at the way that the people at the frontline of 
famine and conflict are represented.

It's an issue that multimedia producer and writer Dr David Campbell has been 
thinking about for some time. Following research into how the media reports 
famine, he concludes it's high time that we saw some alternative pictures in 
our newspapers and on our laptops.

"There has been little if any evolution in the way famine is represented," he 
says on his website. According to Campbell, the haunting images of starving 
people – especially children – that have long been the mainstay of famine 
reporting, may do more harm than good. "The problem is that these images 
individualise an economic and political issue, and focus our attention on 
passive victims awaiting external assistance."

It's not only the type of images that are the problem; it's the timing, too. A 
recent report from aid agencies Oxfam and Save the Children suggested that 
donors are reluctant to act until there is photographic evidence that a famine 
is occurring. The consequences of this delay can be fatal. Although an 
emergency in the Horn of Africa was forecast as early as August 2010, the 
international community did not respond until almost a year later, by which 
time the warning signs had spiralled into a humanitarian catastrophe.

The quick-fix approach of many international bodies exacerbates this problem. 
"If you're in a position of power, you're probably going to be judged on what 
you do now, rather than what happens in five years' time," says Chetwood. As a 
result, emergencies are tackled on a case-by-case basis, but the bigger picture 
receives little attention and the cycle of poverty and insecurity continues.

So what can be done? If the international aid system needs a dramatic 
overhaul, how can the media be part of this process? One answer is to start 
reporting hunger before it reaches emergency levels. A CARE International 
survey in 2007 showed that three-quarters of the British public wanted the 
media to highlight food crises earlier.

But a second and perhaps more sustainable answer is to address the images 
themselves. We need new ways of picturing places suffering the effects of 
famine, and fast.

Encouragingly, groups like SRDF are beginning to tackle this very issue. 
Shortly before posting the controversial Facebook photo, SRDF held an 
exhibition and charity auction at Foto8, a photojournalism gallery in East 
London. 'Stories from Somalia' featured photographs by Virginia Luling, Ed Ou, 
Sebastian Rich and Claudio Viezzoli, spanning a period from the 1960s to the 
present.

"Principally it was to do with trying to show Somalia in a more positive 
light, and show that there's no reason why a future can't be built, that's more 
sustainable," says Chetwood.

For a £4 donation on the door, visitors were treated to glimpses of a Somalia 
that has rarely made it into the news. From the carefree girl combing her hair, 
to the man proudly holding a crocodile destined for a new life as a handbag, to 
the child soldier, the photos showed a country that is complex and in many ways 
troubled, but culturally rich, and full of life.

The evening was also about recognising the importance of Somali voices. Dr 
Hany El Banna, co-founder of Islamic Relief, said: "The solution is Somali, not 
to be dictated by the economy of Somalia, by the wealth of Somalia, by the 
geo-strategy of Somalia, but by the Somali people."

The event raised more than £6000, which will be put towards long-term, 
sustainable projects, including sponsoring Somali students to attend university.

"I think the problem is, when people think of Somalia, they think of conflict 
and famine," says Chetwood. "They don't think of anything else. So it's really 
hard for Somalis to break out of that. It's very hard to lift yourself out of 
that situation if the Western world only looks at you in that light."

The enthusiastic response to the event showed that alternative images can play 
a key role in turning things around. As Sebastian Rich explained, it's vital to 
keep Somalia in the news: "I may be naïve, but every now and again I hope that 
some pictures will strike a chord with a politician, or someone down the line, 
and something will change." Images can capture people's imagination; for the 
woman in the red scarf, they could be the start of a new future.
 