
Hours before Malcolm Turnbull said he would call an early election unless the 
Senate passed his industrial relations laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/21/turnbull-double-dissolution-election-will-be-called-if-abcc-bill-is-not-passed>
, Andrew Bolt wasrevealed as Sky News Australia’s star recruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/21/the-bolt-report-to-be-resurrected-on-sky-news-five-nights-a-week>
 to “lead discussion” during the election. It is not hard to see that Bolt’s 
appointment will push the channel even further in the direction of Rupert 
Murdoch’s Fox News, which delivers an unremitting and sometimes fearsome diet 
of rightwing opinion into most homes in the US.

The timing of Bolt’s appointment was not lost on some with a cynical frame of 
mind who thought he might have arrived just in time to do his best to cruel 
Labor’s chances at the polling booth. But the truth is Sky has been keen to get 
Bolt on board ever since News Corp chose to stop funding his low-rating 
political opinion show, The Bolt Report, onChannel Ten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-ten>.

The Weekly Beast: don't say papers are forever at Fairfax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/24/the-weekly-beast-dont-say-papers-are-forever-at-fairfax>
The pay TV channel, under pressure from ABC’s News 24, which has significantly 
higher ratings and is free, is keen to offer a point of difference. And 
whatever you think of Bolt, he certainly attracts attention.

The Bolt Report, which the Herald Sun columnist presented on Sunday mornings 
on Ten for five years, will be transformed into a looser format that will air 
live every weeknight on Sky at 7pm from May. That’s five hours of Bolt on his 
soapbox each week – talking about everything from global warming and the Greens 
to the stolen generations and free speech.

 The Bolt Report timeslot puts him up against the ABC’s main news bulletin at 
7pm, which is Sky’s main competitor in the space. To compete against the highly 
resourced public news program Sky could only go one way, and that was to be 
provocative.

 According to OzTAM ratings figures Sky News averages 12,000 viewers 
nationally between 6pm and midnight, peaking between 8pm and 10pm at 18,000. 
For comparison, ABC News at 7pm averages 1m nationally.

 Although Bolt was beaten by the ABC’s Insiders in his old slot on Ten, he had 
significantly more viewers than he can expect in his new home.

 Of course Sky is no stranger to conservative commentary or to giving 
Murdoch’s favourite commentators a voice. Now one third-owned by Murdoch’s Sky 
Europe, with the rest owned by Nine and Seven, Sky has always had a close 
connection to News Corp and its journalists. They even have purpose-built 
studios in the newsrooms at the Australian and the Daily Telegraph.

 But over the past 20 years Sky has built its reputation on straight news 
reporting throughout the day, strong breaking news coverage and endless 
political analysis from talking heads in Canberra. The main presenters such as 
David Speers, Kieran Gilbert and David Lipson have all been thorough 
professionals and you would be hard-pressed to detect a political leaning among 
them. Similarly the newsreaders are all straight down the middle. Sky News in 
the UK manages to maintain a neutral line through all its coverage – indeed, is 
required to by broadcasting rules.

 But the evenings on Sky News Australia are a different prospect altogether, 
suggesting something of an identity crisis. After Speers comes off air, you can 
be fairly sure you’ll catch a rant about the inner-city elites, Fairfax, the 
ABC or the Labor party.

 Paul Murray’s right-leaning PM Live show runs at 9pm every weeknight and 
you’re likely to see News Corp journalists such as Miranda Devine, Sharri 
Markson, Tim Blair and Rita Panahi on his panel, or listen to him in furious 
agreement with Cory Bernardi.

 The Australian’s associate editor, Chris Kenny, also has his own show every 
Friday and Sunday on which he pontificates about his favourite topics – climate 
change, the Greens and the ABC – and he too usually has guests who agree with 
much of what he says.

Andrew Bolt corporation? Columnist to take part in ABC documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/08/andrew-bolt-corporation-columnist-to-take-part-in-abc-documentary>
 Sky management would say the channel is no Fox News and boasts a smorgasbord 
of talent from across the political spectrum, including the former Labor 
premiers Kristina Keneally and Peter Beattie and the former Labor numbers man 
Graham Richardson.

 Then there’s PVO – Peter van Onselen – a soft-right commentator who presents 
and analyses the news for much of the afternoon.

 “Great news, this has the potential to become The O’Reilly Factor of 
Australia,” wrote one of Bolt’s fans on his blog about the news.

 “Perfect fit Andrew,” said another. “Once a week was always insufficient at 
10 and Sky offers the best resources to present The Bolt Report. 
Congratulations and look forward to the relaunch in May.”

 But Bolt and Sky had better not start celebrating too soon if commenters are 
any indication. Many of them bemoaned the fact that they don’t have and can’t 
afford to get pay TV.

 A sample: “No Foxtel so is there [an] option to watch online instead?”

 “Please advise availability of reception as cannot afford Foxtel ...!”

 “PS, how do we pick up Sky News on the net?”
 