
The scene is set; it is the year 1816 and Mary Godwin, her soon-to-be husband 
Percy Shelley, her sister Claire and a servant boy, Felix, are gathered in the 
parlour of Lord Byron’s Villa Diodati on Lake Geneva. He has requested their 
company to see who can tell the most blood-chilling ghost story. As a storm 
brews outside and the evening begins there is the sound of desperate pounding 
at the front door!

This is how you are drawn into the chilling tale of emerging scientific 
discovery clashing with superstition and tradition in the nineteenth century. 
The main part of the story is told as a first-hand account by a village girl in 
the Somerset Hills, Lizzie Appleby, and once again Emma Carroll has brilliantly 
captured an authentic and believable voice for her heroine. She recounts a 
story of traditional village life disrupted by the mysterious events at Eden 
Court; weird deliveries, ghastly howling noises and the disappearance of 
animals from the local farms! These events eventually rip Lizzie from her 
familiar surroundings and send her on a journey to the Villa Diodati to search 
for something precious that she has lost.

I absolutely loved this book because it combines so many things that interest 
me; science, the story behind Frankenstein, Somerset (where I live) and epic 
story-telling. There is a rich contrast between the scientific experiments with 
electricity which were taking place at that time and the folklore and 
superstition in the village. Emma Carroll also makes you realise that women 
scientists were not appreciated and had to hide behind men to be taken 
seriously, without giving you the impression that she is lecturing you about 
it. I like the way she just wove interesting ideas and historical facts into an 
entertaining and gripping storyline.

I think that that this book deserves 5 stars out of 5 and I would recommend it 
to anyone over 9 years old. Also, if you are interested in the story of 
Frankenstein, this is a perfect way of finding out more but at the same time a 
completely original story. My advice is get reading but be prepared – it is a 
tale to freeze the blood!

At the end of the book, Lizzie, her sister Peg and Felix journey to Finsbury 
Square in the City of London to pick up a first edition of Frankenstein. I was 
lucky enough to almost recreate this journey as Emma Carroll invited me to the 
launch of Strange Star which was held at Daunt Bookshop on Cheapside, very 
close to Finsbury Square. It was really exciting to find myself in a bookshop, 
surrounded by writers and editors and agents and other people from the 
publishing world, pretty much BookieCookie heaven! It’s thanks to the Guardian 
Children’s Books site publishing all my earlier reviews that I got this 
opportunity, so I will always be grateful to all the wonderful BookElves for an 
experience that I will remember for a long time. Anyway, go and buy Strange 
Star - you will not be disappointed!

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413564/>  