
Magnus Pölcher, social media and web projects, Goethe-Institut London 
<https://www.goethe.de/ins/gb/en/index.html>

My first theatre memory was Schlachten! at the Deutsche Schauspielhaus Hamburg 
in 1999. It was a production by Tom Lanoye and Luk Perceval based on 
Shakespeare’s Wars of the Roses. It was a 12 hour theatre marathon: quite 
intense and of course very bloody. But the best part came after our gruesome 
night of intrigues and multiple murders; we rewarded ourselves with fresh fish 
sandwiches at the city’s harbour and watched the sun rise. Sometimes theatre 
must make you suffer to enjoy reality.

Caroline Miller, director, Dance UK <https://www.danceuk.org/>

My first memory of the theatre was seeing La Fille mal gardée by the Royal 
Ballet in the 1970s. I was six and awestruck: the huge height of the ceiling 
with its beautiful decoration; the luxurious red curtains; the orchestra way 
down in the pit; and most of all, the beautiful, exquisite dancers.

'The unsung hero of UK culture' – industry voices on why they love theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/nov/18/uk-culture-industry-voices-on-theatre-fin-kennedy-lovetheatreday>
I laughed at the giant chickens and fell in love with Lise’s beautiful costume 
– white and pale pink with roses and long silky ribbons. I was delighted when a 
live pony came on stage and awestruck when – the stage engulfed in a storm – 
thunder struck and dim-witted Alain flew up into the air, carried away by his 
umbrella. The whole evening was simply the most wonderful and exciting thing I 
had ever seen. A year later I couldn’t wait to go back. The ballet started. I 
began to cry. My mum whispered: “What’s wrong?” I said: “It’s started, so it’s 
going to finish!”

Chris Cooper, HMS President <http://www.hmspresident.com/>

One particular theatre memory happened in 1958. I was a 14-year-old football 
youth, but when Crystal Palace was not playing at home, I had to accompany my 
older sister to a matinee performance of her choice. The stage doorman at the 
Haymarket sold raffle tickets on the day for foldaway stools that gave you a 
place in the queue for upper circle tickets.

Having reluctantly bought one, she was cross (and I was relieved) when it 
appeared that the actual tickets for the show that afternoon had run out.
Seeing our mixed reactions, the stage door keeper gave us two free stalls 
tickets for a preview matinee “over the road” at Her Majesty’s. We’d never sat 
in the stalls before (Row G, 6 and 7) and the show was a first preview of West 
Side Story – and a new life for me began.

Paul Kleiman, higher education consultant and visiting professor

My memory comes from the mid-1960s, at an all-boys grammar school, in which 
the only drama was the annual all-male school play, usually Shakespeare. 
Somehow a local actor, Eunice Black – a large, formidable woman – was invited 
into the school to start a drama club and restart the “house play” competition 
between the school’s six houses. The previous competition died a deserved death 
around the time of the Siege of Mafeking.

Take your children to the theatre and give them something to treasure for life.
Jonathan Chiswell Jones 
Ms Black introduced us to the wonderful and disturbing worlds of Beckett, 
Ionesco, Pinter, Bond, Genet and more. I caught the theatre bug designing and 
managing a production of Ionesco’s The New Tenant for the competition, in which 
the new tenant of the title moves into an empty Parisian apartment, which is 
then slowly filled to overflowing with an increasingly bizarre range of 
objects. At the end of the play the tenant is marooned among the furniture as 
we hear the concierge complain that the whole of Paris is overflowing with the 
stuff.

My career as a professional theatre designer, director and teacher can be 
traced directly back to that play and Ms Black.

Holly Barradell, drama development manager, Trinity College London 
<http://www.trinitycollege.com/>

I was in the first ever Courtyard Theatre Hereford youth production in 1997 
and stayed there until 2004, when I left for Bristol Old VicTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> School and trained to be a stage 
manager. I then worked in the industry professionally before training to become 
a secondary drama teacher. I now work as drama education specialist. I’ve 
always worked in drama and performance ever since treading the boards aged 11.

Jonathan Chiswell Jones, potter, JCJ Pottery <http://www.jcjpottery.co.uk/>

I was taken to see Die Fledermaus, aged 10, at the Oxford Playhouse. That was 
more than 60 years ago, but the thrill is still sharp. Of course, I fell in 
love with the leading lady and was enthralled by the students’ drinking song. 
How sharply a child receives these impressions; we are never so receptive 
again. Take your children to the theatre and give them something to treasure 
for life.

What are your earliest memories of the theatre? Share them below the line

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 