
When Kevin Poulsen, a former hacker who now edits at Wired magazine, came up 
with the idea two years ago of creating an open-source drop box for leaked 
documents along the lines ofWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, he could not have imagined that 
its launch would coincide with one of the most aggressive US government 
assaults on press freedom in a generation.

Deaddrop <http://deaddrop.github.io/> unveiled itself to the world on 
Thursday, three days afterAssociated Press revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/13/america-government-associated-press-phone-records>
 that it had been subjected to a "massive and unprecedented intrusion" into its 
news gathering by the Justice Department. Leak investigators had obtained phone 
records of more than 20 telephone lines used by AP journalists, without the 
news agency being informed of the violation.

For Poulsen, this week's coincidental confluence of events underlines the 
potential value and importance of the DeadDrop project. "With the risks now so 
high – not just from the US government but also the Chinese government that is 
hacking newsrooms in the West – it's crucial that news outlets find a secure 
route for sources to come to them."

But this week's AP saga has also underscored the perils involved for anyone 
brave enough to try and leak information. As a further reminder of the dangers, 
Bradley Manning will go on trial next month facing possible life in military 
custody with no chance of parole for having been the source of the huge 
WikiLeaks trove of US state secrets.

The Manning trial has a further relevance to the launch of DeadDrop, Poulsen 
believes. In a pre-trial hearing in February,Manning disclosed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/28/manning-washington-post-new-york-times?INTCMP=SRCH>
 that before making contact with WikiLeaks he had attempted to hand his 
enormous mountain of digital documents to the Washington Post, New York Times 
and Politico but failed to find a way into any of those organisations.

"This is the important lesson here. There was no natural route for Manning to 
gain entry, and it was a simple idea from WikiLeaks of creating a web forum 
where documents could be securely uploaded that led to their huge scoops."

DeadDrop relies on code that was written by the open data campaigner Aaron 
Swartz <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz> and completed just 
a month before he committed suicide in January. It will be open for any person 
or institution to use and develop. Poulsen expects that some people will spin 
off their own versions – or "fork the code" as it's known in the business – 
while a canonical top copy will be maintained that can be constantly updated 
and improved.

The first major use of the code has been pioneered by the New Yorker, Wired's 
sister magazine within Condé Nast, which has posted its version on its website 
under the titleStrongbox <http://www.newyorker.com/strongbox/>. Nicholas 
Thompson, editor ofnewyorker.com <>, hopes that the new anonymous information 
sharing service will help redress the imbalance in what he calls the "data arms 
race".

"Technology for surveillance and data capture by companies monitoring our 
behaviour has developed at such a pace that data privacy has failed to keep up. 
It's an arms race between data capture and data privacy, and data capture is 
winning."

The drop box is already a leap ahead of the technology used by WikiLeaks in 
that it allows for a two-way communication between source and journalist, and 
not just a one-way handing over of information. Sources are able to upload 
documents anonymously through the Tor network onto servers that will be kept 
separate from the New Yorker's main computer system. Leakers are then given a 
unique code name that allows New Yorker reporters or editors to contact them 
through messages left on Strongbox.

Early reviews of the service have generally been favourable. Jonathan Stray of 
the Overview Project praises 
<http://source.mozillaopennews.org/en-US/articles/strongbox-reactions-part-ii/> 
the use of the Tor network as the "gold standard for anonymous online 
communication".

But Stray warns potential leakers against being lulled into a false sense of 
safety: "I think we need to understand it is far from a complete solution to 
the problem of source security."

Strongbox may be secure, but if journalist and source are tempted to step 
outside its boundaries and communicate in other ways – by phone or email, for 
instance – they will leave behind a trail that can be traced. "Whether or not 
this is a problem depends on who you are trying to keep secrets from – as the 
recent secret DOJ subpoena of AP phone records shows," Stray writes.

That danger was neatly illustrated by Bradley Manning. He was undone not 
through any breach in the secure channels through which he uploaded information 
to WikiLeaks, but because he engaged in a web-chat with the former hacker 
Adrian Lamo who then shopped him to the authorities.

Paradoxically, the transcript of those web chats were first published by 
Wired, having been brought to the magazine by Kevin Poulsen.

So far, experimentation with the creation of drop boxes to facilitate 
anonymous digital leaking has failed to reach the dizzy heights that WikiLeaks 
attained in 2010. Since 2011, WikiLeaks and its founder Julian Assange have 
been so beleaguered by legal and financial problems that they have closed their 
secure uploading channel altogether; the only way currently to pass information 
to the organisation is through direct contact with one of its small inner 
coterie.

An attempt by WikiLeaks defector Daniel Domscheit-Berg to create a spin-off 
called OpenLeaks has failed to make much impression. Similarly disappointing 
results have been experienced by mainstream news organisations attempting to 
take on the mantle of WikiLeaks.

The Wall Street Journal came under heavy criticism for the technical glitches 
contained in its anonymous drop box,SafeHouse <https://www.wsjsafehouse.com/>, 
launched in 2011 that analysts said could have put leakers at risk of 
detection. The service is still available on wsj.com, but the Journal declined 
to comment about it suggesting it has been less than an unqualified success.

The New York Times also considered setting up a leakers' drop box in 2011, but 
decided not to go ahead. A spokeswoman said: "As with any potential reporting 
tool, we'll likely revisit the idea in the future as our reporting needs 
evolve."

Jay Rosen, media critic at New York university, said the patchy record of such 
innovations told their own story. "It's obvious the difficulties are greater 
than we thought. Since WikiLeaks, the authorities have become much more 
aggressive in prosecuting, and we're still a long way from offering confidence 
in this system."
 