
Stuart Broad insists he has no regrets over his decision not to walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/15/england-andy-flower-stuart-broad>
 during the first Ashes Test in July.

Broad nicked Ashton Agar to slip with England in a perilous position and was 
given not out by the umpire Aleem Dar. Australia had already used their two 
reviews so Broad remained at the crease andwent on to craft a 138-run 
partnership with Ian Bell 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/566932.html>, which was crucial in 
giving England a 1-0 lead in the series.

"My first comment on that whole incident is I could name you 18 or 19 players 
who played in an Ashes series who nicked it and didn't walk," Broad said in an 
interview which will air on BBC Radio Five Live on Monday. "We could be here 
all day if I named players from the past. I am trying to think of someone in 
the modern game who is consistently a walker.

"It's a really interesting debate and something that got blown so out of 
proportion maybe because the Australians were frustrated they had wasted two 
referrals. It was an important moment in the game because, let's be honest, if 
Belly and I hadn't put on those runs, we wouldn't have won the Test match so we 
would only have won 3-1 or something."

Broad later admitted that he knew he had edged the ball, which led the 
Australia coach, Darren Lehmann, to describe the player's actions as "blatant 
cheating". Lehmann later insisted that he had meant the comments as a joke.

"Ryan Harris came over to me and apologised," Broad said. "First of all he 
said from the players we have given him [Lehmann] a hard time and his comments 
were unacceptable. "Then he [Lehmann] came across and said: I meant it in jest. 
I said that in black and white it doesn't look like jest to me. He said 
something along the lines of, listen to the interview, and I said, I have far 
better things to do with my time, and that was about it. We shared a nice beer 
and I said, 'See you in November'."

Australia will be given a chance to exact revenge on Broad and England next 
month: the return Ashes series starts in Brisbane on 21 November.
 