
My friend Stuart Gordon, who has died of cancer aged 63, was a much admired 
violinist. He learned while at school in his native Wallsend, near Newcastle, 
and joined the Northumberland Youth Orchestra, with whom he toured extensively. 
Although he was academically gifted, music claimed his full attention. He 
prided himself on never having had a "proper job", but as a musician he was 
always kept very busy.

Early success came with the Short Wave Band, whose first album, in 1975, was 
greeted with the headlines "Talented but Weird" and "Unknown Duo Head for the 
Top". However, Stuart and his bandmate, Phil Harrison, moved on to join the 
Korgis and it is Stuart's beautiful violin solo that you hear on their 1980 hit
Everybody's Got to Learn Sometime <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOqXy64-hTw>
. Before this he had briefly been in the Incredible String Band and later he 
also toured extensively with Peter Hammill, who said there was never any need 
to rehearse with Stuart, as he would instinctively always know what to play.

Session work followed, and playing with artists as diverse as Peter Gabriel, 
Massive Attack <https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack>, Alison Moyet 
and the Beach Boys showed Stuart's ability to switch easily between styles. He 
composed music for Aardman's TV series Rex the Runt, BBC natural history 
programmes and many HTV documentaries.

In the last three years, he and I toured and recorded with our great friend 
Steve Tilston, as the Steve Tilston Trio, and during our many miles on the road 
we discovered a shared interest in raptors and a love of strong espressos at 
motorway stops. I saw, too, that Stuart liked nothing better than to share his 
skills with young aspiring players, taking time out after the gig to talk and 
play with them. He was above all a funny, kind and generous man much loved by 
his many friends and his family.

He is survived by his wife, Dawn, whom he married in 1994, and their son, 
Ollie, his mum, Joyce, twin brother, Keith, and sister, Christine. Stuart's 
father, Jim, predeceased him.
 