
Behind the cloud-capped mountains of Gulu, in the northern district of Uganda, 
Jessica Olwa ploughs the corn fields of her 300 acre farm, lines of sweat 
pouring down her face. The towering maize plants that normally grow to 2.5m 
(8ft), now barely reach hip-level. Lack of resources has driven away much of 
her labor. "The last export didn't do well", she explains with a wry smile. "I 
wasn't paid on time so I couldn't pay my workers. Now I can barely produce the 
same levels as before".

This stunted growth is unusual for a country that has both the soil and 
climate for successful commercial agriculture. That farming leaves little to be 
desired is due to what Tony Addison, Associate Director of the Chronic Poverty 
Research Centre in Manchester, calls a negative impact from aid flows.

"Aid to Uganda is deterring export production via a "Dutch Disease" effect", 
he claims. The sudden influx of cash distorts the economy and exchange rates by 
driving up home prices, thus making their goods too expensive for export. In 
addition the flurry of subsidized US and EU goods outstrips African produce.

Wiping the perspiration from her face, Jessica, a 54 year-old widow, puts 
aside these macroeconomic considerations. With no buyer for her crops, all she 
is concerned about is finding the money to pay her children's school fees, or 
buy the medicine needed to sustain them all. Already she has had to sacrifice 
the education of her two youngest daughters who will "marry and leave anyway".

Despite international donor support accounting for over 30% of the country's 
resources, very little of that money trickles down to the most disadvantaged 
communities, being either misappropriated or used extravagantly by the elite in 
the leadership.

A road maintenance project, one of numerous promised by President Museveni, is 
still lying fallow in the outstretched unindustrialized fields of Gulu. The 
roads are in such a dire condition that agriculturalists like Jessica, who make 
up 90% of the population, are unable to bring their crops and trade to market.

Move out of Gulu, 332 km south to the capital Kampala and things are no 
better. Super-sized slums and improvised housing juxtapose shining government 
buildings. And the most enterprising of people struggle to find opportunities 
to trade and work in the private sector because of the unfavorable business 
climate.

Anthony Ogong, 28, a member of Uganda's burgeoning youth population, recounts 
his fruitless attempts to acquire a business license. "I wanted to set up a 
small telecommunications company to allow farmers to communicate with their 
agents and customers across the country. Instead of encouragement, all I got 
was red tape"; he sighs with barely suppressed frustration. Anthony spent weeks 
just filling out forms, being passed on from one civil servant to the next. In 
the end he gave up.


In an economy plagued by bureaucratic holdups – where would-be entrepreneurs 
can spend hundreds of days going through regulatory hurdles – Transparency 
International, the global watchdog against corruption, reveals that some 
businesses prefer to resort to bribery to get things done faster. And civil 
servants are often so badly paid that they are only too willing to partake in 
this petty corruption in order to survive.

Yet corruption deprives the state of tax revenues needed to provide productive 
public goods, such as adequate infrastructure. A lack of sea-worthy ships and 
bridges on the brink of collapse put off quality investors, who are unprepared 
to lose profits in lengthy merchandise transportation.

For Mary Lubega, 45, working as a Senior Personal Secretary at Makere 
University, "the government does not have the wellbeing of the country at 
heart". She speaks in a barely audible whisper, as if she were being recorded.

"State funds are used as personal money for government offcials and their 
families and they are spending lavishly while the rest of the country is 
lacking basic necessities, like medicine and education".

With few or no strings attached, it has been all too easy for funds to be used 
for anything, save the developmental purpose for which they were intended, 
denounces Zambian economist Dambisa Moyo. In her mind foreign aid is at the 
heart of Africa's failed economic growth.

"Stuck in an aid world of no incentives, there is no reason for governments to 
seek other, better, more transparent ways of raising development finance, such 
as accessing the bond market" she writes in her book, "Dead aid", which casts a 
damning picture of populations doomed to a perpetual cycle of discouraged 
self-enterprise.

Like the 50 000 m3 quota for sugar exportation that Uganda has never managed 
to meet, despite it being able to export goods duty free to the European market 
under the Cotonou agreement. "We prefer to import sugar from Brazil and Cuba", 
ironizes prominent Ugandan journalist, Andrew Mwenda, who believes his country 
missed out on the manufacturing boom, embraced by emerging countries like China 
and India.

Aiding free enterprise is Hives Saves Lives Africa, which insists upon 
instilling a sense of African responsibility without engendering further aid 
dependency. In providing beneficiaries with training and equipment, to be 
repaid against the income earned from beekeeping, the organization seeks to 
develop communities' business skills and cut off the cycle of giving something 
for nothing.

One country not immune to mutual gain is China, which, between 2000-06, 
invested $6.6 billion in Africa's information and communications technology, 
affirms China's Ministry of Commerce. Not least because of the free access 
granted to the continent's oil and raw materials. According to the World Bank, 
Chinese companies bring know-how, and machinery, as well as access to marketing 
and distribution networks for African populations.

"But the ability to utilize that opportunity and turn it into advantage 
depends on internal capacity", warns Andrew Mwenda.

Emigration

That internal capacity is weak, as more and more disillusioned young people 
like Anthony, emigrate seeking greener horizons that will give them actual 
opportunities.

Back in the hills of Gulu, Jessica spies the depletion of her corn cobs with 
mixed feelings. "At least it's not so much because of the rebels anymore" she 
says with forced optimism. For over twenty years, Joseph Kony's Lord Resistance 
Army has kept this region locked in fierce fighting, which has undermined 
provision of services to rural areas. According to recent theory by Dutch 
writer Linda Polman, this conflict might have been prolonged by humanitarian 
aid.

With a vacant expression on her face, Jessica just hopes that next season's 
harvest will bring more growth.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 