
Another year, another Australian tour de force. After winning the Boxing Day 
Test at Melbourne by 337 runs, Ricky Ponting's men finished the first day of 
the second Test at Sydney in a familiar position of strength against India - 
even if it needed a superb century fromAndrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> to rescue them following a 
dramatic post-lunch collapse.

Symonds has played plenty of match-winning innings in one-day cricket over the 
years, but - with Australia in search of a world-record-equalling 16th straight 
Test victory - none will have given him as much pleasure as this. When Adam 
Gilchrist poked RP Singh to Sachin Tendulkar at first slip with less than an 
hour gone in the afternoon session, Australia had slipped to 134 for six and 
India were dreaming of squaring the four-Test series.

But Symonds, harshly taunted only a year ago by Kevin Pietersen for being a 
specialist fielder, promptly embarked on an SCG Test-record seventh-wicket 
stand of 173 with Brad Hogg, somehow surviving a blatant edge off Ishant Sharma 
on 30, then added an unbroken 69 for the eighth with Brett Lee. By the close, 
he was still there on 137 from just 173 balls, including 17 fours and two sixes 
off Harbhajan Singh. It was his second Test century and proof, if any was 
needed, that the No6 slot in this powerful Australian line-up is now very much 
his.

How distant that all seemed when RP Singh was threatening to run through 
Australia's top order with the kind of intelligent left-arm swing and seam that 
baffled England last summer. First he removed the in-form Phil Jaques in the 
third over of the day, top-edging an attempted cut through to Mahendra Singh 
Dhoni to depart for a duck and end a run of five successive scores of 50 or 
more since returning to the Test side in November. Then he squared up Matthew 
Hayden (13) in the ninth to provide Tendulkar with the first of three catches 
at first slip.

That left Australia 27 for two after they had won the toss on a pitch with a 
bit of extra bounce in it, at which point Ponting and Mike Hussey calmly added 
92. Then the real drama began. Having listened irritably to pre-match 
suggestions that Harbhajan had his number, Ponting, on 55, was aghast to be 
given leg-before to his tormentor by Mark Benson after getting a big 
inside-edge on to his pads. It was the seventh time Harbhajan had removed 
Ponting in Tests - only Darren Gough, with eight, has done it more often - and 
possibly the most galling.

Two balls later, Hussey was undone by RP Singh's bounce to depart for 41, and 
in the next over Michael Clarke (1) disastrously offered no shot to Harbhajan. 
When Gilchrist (7) provided RP Singh with his fourth wicket, Australia had lost 
four for 15 in five overs and Ponting's hopes of equalling the record set by 
Steve Waugh's side between 1999 and 2001 were looking slim.

Symonds, though, found a redoubtable ally in the under-rated Hogg and 
gradually the day turned on its head. With Symonds, reprieved by Steve Bucknor 
off Sharma, punishing through midwicket and the left-handed Hogg scoring 
heavily in the cover region, Australia reached tea on 214 for six and the 
recovery was under way.

But it was merely the precursor for a riveting final session in which Symonds 
and buddies battered 162 runs in 37 overs, Indian heads dropped and the status 
quo was restored. Last time India played at Sydney, they scored over 700 in 
their first innings. Something similar might be needed here if they are to stay 
in the series.
 