
Poor old Tony Blair. He only has to announce his summer hols and, bang, the 
annual Premier Holiday Hunting Season really gets going with a vengeance.

This year there were a few stories in the papers last week that he and the 
family were off to the Caribbean and the avalanche started. Why doesn't he pay? 
Who's the host? What's wrong with Britain? And why doesn't he just follow the 
example of either our very own Clem Attlee in the 1940s and 1950s, or Dutch 
premier Wim Kok now, and spend a jolly couple of weeks driving around the West 
Country staying in some nice B&Bs?

Oh, give the guy a break. When you've got some miss ing weapons on your mind, 
you at least want to worry in comfort, without having to dodge the showers on 
nothing more than a full English breakfast and a few gallons of unleaded on the 
Dawlish bypass. So it seems this year the Blairs are off to Barbados to stay 
with either (depending on your choice of daily newspaper) top Christian and 
Wimbledon a cappella ace Sir Cliff Richard (a £3 million mansion) or leading 
Tory backer and JCB digger maestro Sir Anthony Bamford at his Heron Bay 
paddette (no price available, but recently refurbished for countless millions).

But now to cap it all, apart from the usual heavy arms onslaught for not 
staying at home or slumming it in the Med like the rest of us, the poor Blairs 
are coming in for some extra-unfriendly fire for even thinking of going to the 
Caribbean in the summer (honestly, my dear, so uncool ... and nothing for the 
kids).

Well, I beg to differ. Sure, people (and pretty rich people at that) normally 
traipse off to the Caribbean in winter, when the dry, hot days and brilliant 
beaches are maybe at their best. Summer? Isn't it all humidity and hurricanes? 
And no cricket? There's certainly no cricket - but everything else is pretty 
near perfect.

I took my 12-year-old daughter for a four-day break there last summer, and she 
raved about it (and teenaged girls can be very very picky). We stayed at the 
Blue Waters hotel on the northern coast of Antigua. It's been run for years by 
a charming but formidable English couple, Keith and Dorothy Martell, and 
they've wanted to make sure people come back. So they have worked hard to 
create a friendly and relaxed environment.

Set in lovely grounds, 14 acres of general lushness, Blue Waters is fine for 
families and couples, all of whom seemed to be chilling out splendidly when we 
were there. And the hotel lays on a child-minding service for younger kids. 
There's masses to do (should you feel the need) as well as space to idle the 
day away sipping on a fruit punch in the shade of a swaying palm.

The hotel buildings are plantation-style, open and breezy, with enticing views 
of the warm blue sea. It's not small (77 rooms and suites), but feels intimate 
as you amble to one of the two restaurants for a light lunch before deciding to 
spend a hard afternoon lying in the sun, watching the hummingbirds dart through 
the greenery and wondering whether or not you can be bothered to go for another 
dip in the pool. Or you can wander down to the bath-warm sea and wait for the 
cranes to drop like missiles as they spot their own light lunch just below the 
surface.

The hotel's rooms are cool and comfortable and have recently been upgraded 
with rattan and wood furnishings, while piles of shimmering bougainvillea and 
hibiscus crowd on to their terraces. When you leave the room the sheer pleasure 
of being hit by a wall of hot, dry air is worth the trip alone for us chilly 
northern Europeans.

Most of the staff at Blue Waters have been there for a long time and it tells. 
Not only do they appear to really like being there (frankly, who wouldn't?), 
but they are very friendly and endlessly helpful. It's a mark of what Keith has 
achieved that so many of the island's best hotel staff, with all Antigua's 
countless luxe hotels to choose from, stay at Blue Waters.

Kayaking, wind surfing, sailing, tennis, gymnasium - they're all there, and we 
were only 10 minutes from the capital, St John's, a really sweet little place 
with a lovely, colourful market. It feels very welcoming, as Does the rest of 
the island. Besides the joys of loafing about, you can also swim with dolphins, 
which was a real treat. We were only there for a few days but the weather was 
perfect; hot but not oppressive and no problems with humidity.

So I say leave the Blairs alone. Let them go to the Caribbean if they want to. 
They'll have a fantastic time, with or without some Bible readings from Sir 
Cliff. Then at least when Mr T rejoins the fray, he'll have a terrific tan.

Factfile

Roger Alton stayed at Blue Waters <http://www.bluewaters.net>, Antigua (01327 
831007). He travelled with luxury tailor-made travel specialistsCarrier 
Caribbean <http://www.carrier.co.uk> (01625 547 020). Carrier offers a 
low-season summer deal - 1 June to 31 October - of £1,175 per adult and £470 
per child on a bed and breakfast basis, including mid-week British Airways 
flights from Gatwick and private transfers.
 