
Nigeria's players are sitting in a bedroom on the 12th floor of their hotel 
singing and clapping. For a team with a reputation for self-destruction, unity 
seems strong.

Everyone was singing from the same song sheet in room 1207, but it was 
different later when the topic of the Far East came up.

Taribo West announced that the Super Eagles would win their group involving 
England, Argentina and Sweden and advance to lift the World Cup. "The time," 
the former Derby defender said, "has come." But Chelsea's Celestine Babayaro 
sounded a different note.

"Being honest, I don't see Nigeria winning the World Cup," he said. "There's 
something with us. One day Nigeria can come out and you watch them and think: 
'Wow, this is the team.' Other times it is: 'What are they playing at? This 
team is nothing.'"

Ask Babayaro how to solve such inconsistency and he shrugs. "There's so much 
talent," he said. "It's frustrating." In their opening game of the African 
Nations Cup, a 1-0 win over Algeria on Monday, they showed the usual mix of 
sumptuous skills and elementary errors. The defence looked vulnerable and what 
could have been a comfortable victory might have ended 1-1. Today they take on 
Mali and an exuberant home crowd.

Babayaro fears failure to construct a team structure around individual talent 
could undermine Nigeria against England in Osaka. "If you are talking about 
one-to-one skills, we have got the skills and guys who can match the English 
players," he said. "But it might be - how should I say this? - the group thing 
that might take us a step down.The English side have got great discipline and 
that's what we haven't got."

Nigeria's head coach Shuaibu Amodu feels the solution lies in continuity and 
getting into his players' minds. Many of the team have been together since 
1996, when Olympic gold was won, but the coach Jo Bonfrere has gone and come 
and gone again since then. Amodu knows only victory in this tournament can 
guarantee his position in Japan.

"It may be a different crew by the summer," he said from a sunbed beside the 
swimming pool of the hotel where Nigeria, Zambia, Tunisia, Egypt and Liberia 
are staying. "That's Nigeria for you. You can be sacked - bang - like that."

If Amodu goes, a European will replace him and one of the great Nigerian 
debates will resume. Some feel only a foreign coach could add pattern to the 
flair; others say the late appointment of Bora Milutinovic before France '98 
was disastrous for tactical and cultural understanding. Nigeria lost heavily to 
Denmark in the second round.

The players have been publicly supportive of Amodu here, citing his 
understanding of their mentality. "Boys like Taribo, Sunday [Oliseh] and others 
in Europe have been there too long," the coach explained. "They have everything 
you can think of so when they come home nothing is as it's supposed to be. They 
can become aggressive and their focus is bad. It needs somebody to talk to them.

"If a European is the manager he doesn't understand why things aren't in place 
and will agree with the player it's wrong. We can say calm down, we're sorry 
but we are trying; we have to be together in this."

Nigeria need only the slightest disharmony, squabble or complacency to hit 
reverse. When it comes to tactics, outlook or even a bedroom sing-song, unity 
is key. The next two weeks will be crucial.
 