
Comics god Alan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> has 
issued a comprehensive sign-off from public life after shooting down 
accusations that his stories feature racist characters and an excessive amount 
of sexual violence towards women.

The Watchmen author also used a lengthy recent interview 
<http://slovobooks.wordpress.com/2014/01/09/last-alan-moore-interview/> with 
Pádraig Ó Méalóid at Slovobooks entitled "Last Alan Moore interview?" – to 
expand upon his belief that today's adults' interest in superheroes is 
potentially "culturally catastrophic", a view originallyaired in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/22/alan-moore-comic-books-interview>
 last year.

"To my mind, this embracing of what were unambiguously children's characters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-comics-graphic-novels> at their 
mid-20th century inception seems to indicate a retreat from the admittedly 
overwhelming complexities of modern existence," he wrote to Ó Méalóid. "It 
looks to me very much like a significant section of the public, having given up 
on attempting to understand the reality they are actually living in, have 
instead reasoned that they might at least be able to comprehend the sprawling, 
meaningless, but at-least-still-finite 'universes' presented by DC or Marvel 
Comics. I would also observe that it is, potentially, culturally catastrophic 
to have the ephemera of a previous century squatting possessively on the 
cultural stage and refusing to allow this surely unprecedented era to develop a 
culture of its own, relevant and sufficient to its times."

The award-winning Moore used the interview to address criticism 
<http://andweshallmarch.typepad.com/and_we_shall_march/the_black_dossier/index.html>
 over his inclusion of the Galley-Wag character –  based onFlorence Upton's 
1895 Golliwogg creation <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golliwogg> – in his 
League of Extraordinary Gentlemen comics, saying that "it was our belief that 
the character could be handled in such a way as to return to him the sterling 
qualities of Upton's creation, while stripping him of the racial connotations 
that had been grafted onto the Golliwog figure by those who had misappropriated 
and wilfully misinterpreted her work".

And he rebutted the suggestion that it was "not the place of two white men to 
try to 'reclaim' a character like the golliwogg", telling Ó Méalóid that this 
idea "would appear to be predicated upon an assumption that no author or artist 
should presume to use characters who are of a different race to themselves".

"Since I can think of no obvious reason why this principle should only relate 
to the issue of race – and specifically to black people and white people – then 
I assume it must be extended to characters of different ethnicities, genders, 
sexualities, religions, political persuasions and, possibly most uncomfortably 
of all for many people considering these issues, social classes … If this 
restriction were universally adopted, we would have had no authors from 
middle-class backgrounds who were able to write about the situation of the 
lower classes, which would have effectively ruled out almost all authors since 
William Shakespeare."

Moore also defended himself against the claim that his work was characterised 
by "the prevalence of sexual violence towards women, with a number of instances 
of rape or attempted rape in [his] stories", saying that "there is a far 
greater prevalence of consensual and relatively joyous sexual relationships in 
my work than there are instances of sexual violence", and that "there is 
clearly a lot more non-sexual violence in my work that there is violence of the 
sexual variety".

His thinking, he said, was that "sexual violence, including rape and domestic 
abuse, should also feature in my work where necessary or appropriate to a given 
narrative, the alternative being to imply that these things did not exist, or 
weren't happening. This, given the scale upon which such events occur, would 
have seemed tantamount to the denial of a sexual holocaust, happening annually."

In the real world there are, Moore tells his interviewer, "relatively few 
murders in relation to the staggering number of rapes and other crimes of 
sexual or gender-related violence", but this is "almost a complete reversal of 
the way that the world is represented in its movies, television shows, 
literature or comic-book material".

"Why should murder be so over-represented in our popular fiction, and crimes 
of a sexual nature so under-represented?" he asks. "Surely it cannot be because 
rape is worse than murder, and is thus deserving of a special unmentionable 
status. Surely, the last people to suggest that rape was worse than murder were 
the sensitively reared classes of the Victorian era … And yet, while it is 
perfectly acceptable (not to say almost mandatory) to depict violent and lethal 
incidents in lurid and gloating high-definition detail, this is somehow 
regarded as healthy and perfectly normal, and it is the considered depiction of 
sexual crimes that will inevitably attract uproars of the current variety."

Moore ended by telling Ó Méalóid that his lengthy responses to questions, 
written over Christmas, should indicate to fans that he has no intention of 
"doing this or anything remotely like it ever again".

"While many of you have been justifiably relaxing with your families or loved 
ones, I have been answering allegations about my obsession with rape, and 
re-answering several-year-old questions with regard to my perceived racism," he 
said. "If my comments or opinions are going to provoke such storms of upset, 
then considering that I myself am looking to severely constrain the amount of 
time I spend with interviews and my already very occasional appearances, it 
would logically be better for everyone concerned, not least myself, if I were 
to stop issuing those comments and opinions. Better that I let my work speak 
for me, which is all I've truthfully ever wanted or expected, both as a writer 
and as a reader of other authors' work."

After completing his current commitments, Moore said he will "more or less 
curtail speaking engagements and non-performance appearances".

"I suppose what I'm saying here is that as I enter the seventh decade of my 
life, I no longer wish that life to be a public one to the same extent that it 
has been," he said. "I myself will be able to get on with my work without 
interruption, which I think is something that I'm entitled to do after all 
these years, and indeed part of the length of this response might be likened to 
someone taking their time about unwrapping a long-postponed and very special 
birthday present to themselves. The truth may or may not set us free, but I'm 
hoping that blanket excommunication and utter indifference will go some 
considerable way to doing the trick."
 