
The consensus for Gordon Strachan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gordon-strachan> to be named the next 
Scotland manager is building after Alex McLeish effectively ruled himself out 
of the running.

Strachan is the firm favourite to succeed Craig Levein, who was sacked on 
Monday evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/05/craig-levein-scotland-manager-departed>
. McLeish has also been mooted as a candidate but the 53-year-old, who managed 
Scotland in 2007, played down the notion of a return to the post.

"I left the national team to take up club football, I felt I was missing the 
day-to-day stuff," he said. McLeish resigned the post and became Birmingham 
City manager, despite some notable victories,including against France in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/sep/13/match.scotlandfootballteam>. 
"I'm still of that mind. I wouldn't like to be unfair to the Scotland fans in 
terms of coming back to the job. A lot of people would maybe think I was 
a hypocrite. I don't want to say I don't want the Scotland job but I feel I've 
still got some time left in club football."

On Strachan, his former team-mate at Aberdeen, McLeish added: "Gordon Strachan 
is a pretty good candidate to me. He's had success at club level with Celtic."

Gary Caldwell, the Wigan Athletic and Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> centre-back, also played under 
Strachan at Celtic. "I think so, he's a passionate manager and a very 
passionate Scot," said Caldwell of the likelihood of Strachan succeeding in 
international management.

"I had three good years with him at Celtic and he achieved great things there. 
He's been out of management for a while and I'm sure he will be hungry. I think 
the national team job needs a passionate guy. It is not an easy job. I'm sure 
he is a guy who will come with a real passion and do well for Scotland."

Strachan has yet to break his silence but it is understood he would be keen on 
it. His latest successor as Celtic manager, Neil Lennon, has also spoken on 
behalf of Strachan but claimed Scotland's players must take responsibility for 
recent woes. "I'm biased but I'd go for Gordon," Lennon said of the former 
Coventry City and Southampton manager. "I don't know if he'd thank me for that. 
I don't know what his thinking is and I know he's enjoying his media work. But 
for me he's an outstanding candidate for the job.

"The players need to have a look at themselves as well. They need to leave 
egos at the door and put the whole focus on Scotland for the two weeks or 
however long they are away from the clubs. I'm not sure all of them have done 
that looking at performances and attitude. The next manager has to be really, 
really disciplined and set down his rules and the players have to adhere to 
them."

The Scottish Football Association has said it will wait until after next 
week's friendly in Luxembourg before starting the process of replacing Levein. 
Billy Stark, previously the Scotland Under-21 coach, will name a squad for that 
encounter on Wednesday but some experienced names – including Scott Brown and 
Allan McGregor – are expected to sit the game out.
 