
A new system to protect trafficked children indicates that there has been an 
alarming rise in the number of Albanian child slaves forced to work in the UK.

If the trend – being highlighted on Anti-Slavery Day – were to continue, 
Albanians could soon outnumber Vietnamese children as Britain’s most exploited 
juvenile group.

Figures shared with the Observer by the children’s charity Barnardo’s – which 
is trialling a new Home Office-funded <https://www.barnardos.org.uk> advocacy 
service to provide better protection for child-trafficking victims – suggest 
that a growing number of children from the former communist state are arriving 
in the UK, often voluntarily, only to end up being exploited.

“Within the past year there has been an increase in the number of trafficked 
children fromAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> whom we 
support across our services,” said Javed Khan, Barnardo’s chief executive. He 
said some were used as forced labour, often on building sites, but most were 
exploited for criminal activities.

“We believe they have been trafficked internally after arriving here,” Khan 
said. “We know they have experienced trauma.”

The Home Office estimates that 13,000 people are believed to be victims of 
slavery in the UK. However, the true number of exploited children is probably 
significantly higher, Khan suggested. “We know the current estimate of the 
number of trafficked children in the UK is just the tip of the iceberg,” he 
said. “Due to the secretive nature of trafficking and inconsistency in 
collecting data across several agencies, it is difficult to definitively 
estimate the number of trafficked children in the UK. But we do know that many 
frontline professionals are not aware of the signs of trafficking.”

Barnardo’s is running a pilot service that sees trafficked children given a 
special advocate to look after their interests and to protect them from falling 
back into the hands of organised criminal gangs when they have been referred to 
social services.

Most of those helped were aged between 15 and 17, but the Barnardo’s schemes 
have encountered cases involving children as young as three. There was an 
almost even split between boys and girls. “It is common for young people to go 
missing in search of their traffickers,” Khan said. “This happens even after 
support has been put in place, due to threats by their traffickers. An 
independent advocate provides a single point of contact to the child, allowing 
them to build a relationship of trust and break the link with traffickers.”

An interim appraisal of the advocate scheme, being piloted in three regions in 
the UK, suggests that Albanian children comprise a quarter of all trafficked 
children being helped by the new service. They are second only to Vietnamese 
children – forced to work on cannabis farms and in nail bars – who make up more 
than 30% of the 160 cases overseen by Barnardo’s so far.

Five years ago Albanian children were not recognised as a particularly at-risk 
group in the UK. Most children forced to work as slaves in the UK came from 
Vietnam (31% of those recorded), Romania (16%), Morocco (16%) and Nigeria (13%).

Barnardo’s estimates that just over a third of the children it has helped are 
trafficked for sexual exploitation, while two-fifths were subject to forced 
labour. Almost one in 10 was made to go into domestic servitude, while 5% were 
forced into begging and petty crime.

In the last couple of years police have arrested large numbers of Albanians 
coming into the UK in lorries via the Channel ports. The new focus on the UK 
suggests that traffickers could be changing their tactics.

A report by the Protection Project in 2010 stated that: “In 2007,  
<http://www.protectionproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Albania.pdf>Greece 
was reported as the main destination for trafficked victims transited from or 
through Albania.”

Putting slavery firmly on development agenda is just the beginning | Kevin 
Hyland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/17/modern-slavery-act-human-trafficking-development-agenda-just-beginning>
The traffickers primarily use land routes and falsified documents to transfer 
their victims across borders. Kidnapping and deception of young women and girls 
for commercial sexual exploitation remains the main “recruiting” method used by 
traffickers. Once transported to the destination country, they are forced into 
prostitution and brutally abused.

Khan said it was a concern that the protection of trafficked children across 
the UK remained piecemeal. “We know that trafficked children are still going 
missing from care across the country as they are placed in inappropriate 
accommodation and denied the support to which they are entitled,” he said. “We 
urge the home secretary to establish legal powers for advocates so that they 
can compel public authorities to provide trafficked children with this support.”
 