
A man thought to be the first British suicide bomber in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> was a driver and student of the 
extremist preacher Omar Bakri Muhammad, the cleric claimed on Thursday.

Abdul Waheed Majeed, 41, is suspected of being responsible for driving a lorry 
into a jail in Aleppo and detonating a bomb last week.

Officials have not confirmed the identity of the bomber but there have been 
reports that a UK jihadi, who used the name Abu Suleiman al-Britani, carried 
out the bombing.

It is thought to be the first time a Briton has staged a suicide attack in 
Syria, where a number of UK-born extremists have gone to fight.

Counter-terrorism officers have been searching Majeed's home in Martyrs Avenue 
in Langley Green, Crawley, West Sussex – the former home of schoolgirl Sarah 
Payne's killer Roy Whiting, according to neighbours.

Majeed, known as Waheed, a married father of three, left Britain six months 
ago, telling his family he was going on a humanitarian mission to Syria.

Speaking 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/exclusive-suicide-bomber-brit-worked-as-driver-for-hate-cleric-omar-bakri-9125787.html>
 to London's Evening Standard from his flat in Tripoli, Lebanon Bakri described 
Majeed as "a very dear brother".

He claimed Majeed had been an active student and valued member of the banned 
extremist al-Muhajiroun organisation between 1996 and 2004 and was someone who 
wanted to further the "Muslim cause".

Bakri said Majeed would organise his sermons in Crawley and record the 
lectures and distribute them. He said: "He was a good brother. He was someone 
who was always at hand to help people.

"He wanted to study Islam and wanted to know what it was to be a good Muslim. 
He was also very interested in the issue of how we could establish an Islamic 
state."

Bakri also claimed that Majeed knew two men, Jawad Akhbar and Omar Khyam, also 
from Crawley, who were convicted in 2007 for a plot to blow up the Bluewater 
shopping centre in Kent and London's Ministry of Sound nightclub.

Sussex police said their investigations into Majeed are ongoing.

Chief Inspector Justina Beeken said: "The inquiries by the south-east 
counter-terrorism unit are ongoing and we are closely liaising with them and 
the community in the town. There has been no formal identification of the man 
and therefore we cannot confirm who he is or where he is from.

"There has been a lot of media and social media coverage around Syria and we 
are working with the local community to reassure and engage with them regarding 
this. We are a community which always pulls together and supports each other.

"We all collectively condemn any acts of terrorism and continue to offer our 
sympathies to all those affected by the crisis in Syria."

The police guard had been removed from outside Majeed's house on Thursday 
after counter-terrorism teams completed their searches and life was returning 
to normal on the street. But the sense of shock remained.

One Muslim resident, who did not wish to be named, said it was "senseless that 
he [Majeed] had left three children behind. Islam does not permit you to kill 
anyone."

Ahsan Ahmedi, president of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community based in Langley 
Green, close to Majeed's house, said there had been problems with al-Muhajiroun 
in Croydon a few years ago, referring to the fertiliser bomb plot. He said he 
could not be sure from Majeed's photograph whether he was part of the group 
affiliated to radical preacher Bakri but dismissed the idea there was a problem 
with extremism among young men in Croydon.

"Certainly, at this present time the mosques take a very positive role. 
They're doing a very good job. If people are involved in terrorism, they're 
doing it independently, underground." Members of the Ahmadiyya community, an 
Islamic sect, have faced persecution in other areas of Britain from some other 
Muslims who do not recognise them as fellow Muslims but Ahmedi said they had 
not had the same experience in Crawley – proof that it was a tolerant 
community. But he added: "We should always stay vigilant."

As the civil war has dragged on, UK security services have grown increasingly 
concerned about the trend of young Britons travelling to Syria to train to 
fight with jihadi groups and the potential that they could return and stage 
attacks on UK soil.

In November, the Guardian confirmed that a man in his early 20s from west 
London, Mohammed el-Araj, had become the second Briton named and confirmed as 
dead while fighting in the civil war. Araj spent 18 months in prison for 
violently protesting outside the Israeli embassy in London in 2009, and was 
killed in Syria in mid-August, his family said.

Last week the UK's most senior terrorism prosecutor, Sue Hemming, said Britons 
who travelled to fight in Syria against Bashar al-Assad could face life 
sentences under terrorism offences on their return to the UK.
 