
The actor who played Titty in a 1970s adaptation of Swallows and Amazons says 
she thinks the name is “sweet” and that she has been sent messages from around 
the world following thedecision to rename the character Tatty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/25/arthur-ransomes-titty-name-print-swallows-and-amazons>
 in a new film version of Arthur Ransome’s classic children’s story.


Actor Sophie Nevile said the news that Titty’s name will be changed to avoid 
titters and innuendo “has started an impassioned national debate. I had no 
warning! However a whole range of comments from fans has hit my social media 
pages.”

She went on: “I loved playing the part of Titty in the EMI film Swallows & 
Amazons, made on location in the Lake District back in 1973. It has been such 
an enduring success that children all over the world still call me Titty. It’s 
a sweet name. They’ll see me in the street and call out, ‘Hello, Titty! How are 
you?’ That can turn a few heads.

“I was in France last year when an adult started calling me Titty. He 
apologised, realising he was calling me by the character name, and then went 
right on calling me Titty, quite naturally. I don’t mind a bit.”

She says in a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/i-loved-playing-titty-in-swallows-and-amazons-its-what-fans-still-call-me>
 that she often spends time with Suzanna Hamilton, who played her sister Susan 
in the film, and that they still refer to each other by their characters’ names.

Nevile went on: “I am sure the producer of the new film adaptation of Swallows 
and Amazons has a reason for changing the name. I have a young friend called 
Tatty who is just like the character, so can easily take it on board.

“Arthur Ransome was inspired by a real girl. Her nickname came from the 
fairytale Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse. He insisted that Titty wasn’t short for 
anything. Roger Wardale, Ransome’s biographer, will confirm that she was just 
called Titty in the books.

“I received the sweetest email from Japan saying ‘We love your Titty!’ I was 
once staying at Bank Ground Farm in the Lake District to record an interview 
for the BBC with Ben Fogle, when two Japanese ladies arrived to stay there. 
They flung up their hands and screamed in delight. The name Titty echoed from 
the hills of Cumbria.”

The BBC is in the process of filming the latest adaptation of Ransome’s story, 
which follows the adventures of the Walker children – John, Susan, Titty and 
Roger – as they sail on a lake and camp on an island one summer.

However the character of Titty has been renamed Tatty. The original name will 
remain in print though.

Characters’ names have often been modified to avoid sniggers from modern 
audiences.

A 1963 film adaptation of Swallows and Amazons renamed her Kitty, while Fanny 
in Enid Blyton’s The Faraway Tree became Frannie.
 