
Sydney ended Adelaide’s season with a clinical 36-point win at the SCG, 
setting up a preliminary final showdown with Geelong.

Lance Franklin and Tom Papley booted a combined eight goals in the semi-final 
as the Swans bounced back from their brutal loss to Greater Western Sydney and 
avoided a straight-sets exit.

Sydney Swans vs Adelaide Crows: AFL semi-final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/17/sydney-swans-vs-adelaide-crows-afl-semi-final-live>
Swans speedster Gary Rohan, who has endured a stop-start career since breaking 
his leg in 2012, was taken from the field on a stretcher after suffering a leg 
injury in the second quarter.

Co-captain Jarrad McVeigh was also laid low by a suspected calf strain but 
otherwise there was plenty for Sydney coach John Longmire to like ahead of 
Friday night’s preliminary final.

Especially in the first quarter, when the hosts delighted a crowd of 38,136.

The minor premiers prevailed 18.10 (118) to 12.10 (82) after seizing control 
of the contest in bedazzling fashion.

Sydney boasted a 25-point lead at quarter-time, having piled on 7.3 (45).

It was the club’s highest score in the opening term of a final and as many 
goals as they managed in four quarters at ANZ Stadium last week.

The Crows lifted but had left themselves with too much to do, especially after 
defenders Jake Lever and Daniel Talia were hurt in the opening half.

Lever failed to return after halftime. Talia played on but was clearly 
restricted by a groin injury.

Isaac Heeney, one of many Swans youngsters to struggle against GWS, produced 
the greatest game of his short career.

Heeney tallied 32 disposals, while midfielders Luke Parker, Dan Hannebery and 
Josh Kennedy were also magnificent for the hosts.

Franklin, held goal-less by the Giants last week, kicked 2.2 in the first 
quarter including a trademark Buddy showstopper from beyond the 50m arc that 
split the middle.

Franklin finished with four goals and at the other end, Sydney’s defence did a 
fine job on the league’s most potent forward line.

Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> aces Eddie Betts, Taylor 
Walker, Tom Lynch and Josh Jenkins combined for seven goals.

The goals and rotations dried up for both teams after quarter-time but the 
contest remained gripping.

Every time the visitors threatened to make serious inroads on the scoreboard, 
the Swans steadied.

The Crows reduced the margin to 19 points late in the third term when Betts 
slotted his second goal.

Papley, playing the 18th game of his career, snapped a near-instant reply at 
the other end.

Papley delivered another two clutch goals in the final quarter, with one 
coming after teammate Ben McGlynn was floored by a high bump from Crows ruckman 
Sam Jacobs.
 