
It's difficult to embrace the quiet beauty of a place when you're shifting 
through it at mach 10, skidoo engine roaring in your ears, cheeks whipped to 
burning in the cold. But as the dying sun cast its light across the thousands 
of snow crystals thrown up by the wind, the ensuing rainbow which hovered above 
the Låktatjåkko Mountain Station compelled silent attention. Nestled 250km 
north of the Arctic Circle in Swedish Lapland, it's a place where you can let 
yourself believe in magic.

Låktatjåkko, or Låkta, is a tiny annex of the petite ski resort of Bjorkliden, 
just north of Abisko national park, accessible only by skidoo or touring skis. 
On the shores of Lake Tornetrask and dwarfed by the legendary Lapporten Gap, 
the U-shaped gateway to Lapland, Bjorkliden is a resort surrounded by epic 
scenery. Trains rattle past it from Kiruna to the better known ski destinations 
of Narvik and Riksgransen, meaning anyone who gets off will pretty much have 
all 24 pistes to themselves. Small and charming, it has one ski shop, one 
restaurant, one bar, one hotel and 80 beautiful self-catering cabins. Almost 
everyone is Norwegian or Swedish; Bjorkliden was a well-kept secret from 
British skiers until 2007, when Discover the World started offering packages to 
the destination. The main targets may be families and beginners, but the area 
also offers up a world of unexplored off-piste, heli-skiing and powder up to 
your thighs as late as May. Yet if it weren't for the local tipple being called 
Wolf Paw, you'd be forgiven for thinking life was pretty chilled in Bjorkliden.

Låkta lies 9km further inland from Lake Tornetrask, in a pass between two 
peaks. The highest mountain station in Sweden at 1,228m, it takes around 30 
minutes – depending on your driving skills – to skidoo from Bjorkliden. You can 
easily swap one of your nights in the resort for a night up at the mountain 
station, or you can arrive for dinner and leave the same evening. Operating 
like a small hotel, it has 18 beds in basic but comfortable rooms with dinner 
and breakfast provided. The remoteness of its location is not reflected in its 
interior, with a log fire, sauna and well stocked bar, making it feel like a 
cosy chalet rather than a refuge. It's a favourite among skidoo enthusiasts who 
stop off for lunch, and a base for ski tourers and backcountry skiers to access 
the kind of powder fields only usually seen in dreams.

If I dreamt that night, I couldn't remember the next morning. An evening of 
Swedish hospitality laid on by Låkta's managers Per and Marie with the help of 
Samuel Adams, a bottle of red, reindeer steaks, cloudberries and piles of the 
mountain station's famous waffles, left little time for that.

After days of high winds and heavy snowfall, the next day dawned bluebird. The 
snow was light, dry, sparkling. "I think," murmured Per as he laid out 
breakfast, "that with these conditions, you are about to ski the best run in 
the whole of Sweden."

The beauty of staying at Låkta is, while the icy air gets to work on the 
hangover, you can get a head start on the day's adventure, stomping off from 
the front door. You can hire a guide in Bjorkliden who, if they are like mine, 
will arrive fresh and raring to go in the morning. With shovel packed and 
avalanche transceiver switched on, I set off in the wake of mountain manager 
Niclas Stockel. Leaving the warmth of the station we began our ascent of Låkta 
– the peak from which the lodge takes its name. For a climber, this would be a 
piece of cake. For someone who only ever goes up a mountain in a chairlift, it 
took its toll. While I grappled with gravity, Niclas ploughed on, carving a 
route through deep snow and ice, crossing reindeer tracks and scrambling over 
rocks. After 45 minutes we stood on the summit, me feeling every inch like 
Reinhold Messner, despite my rasping breath. Mountains revealed themselves in 
every direction. Norway lay behind us, a mass of peaks and troughs. To our left 
Moon Valley, inaccessible by anything except touring skis, making it a haven 
for wildlife, most notably wolverines.

Clip in. Ski off. We cruised through the first powder field, the mellow 
gradient forcing a no-stopping rule until a couloir, where snow swept past my 
feet like velvet. Bursting out into a second powder field, the light a soft 
yellow, I looked back at tracks which seemed to lead down from another planet. 
I had never seen so much snow with absolutely no evidence of any other skier. 
Niclas upped the ante by choosing a steeper descent on an area which had been 
known to avalanche. I stared at the face until I swear I could see cracks 
appearing before plummeting down it with ill-advised speed, hands 
death-gripping the poles. "I could hear you gasping from where I was," said 
Niclas as he led the way into a tightly packed tree run.

This was more like it. Quick, sharp turns, the young, lissome trees forgiving 
any lapses of concentration. The ride ended at the first sign of life for a 
long time – a railway line. And a four-wheel drive on hand to ferry us back to 
the resort.
 Warm glow . . . evening at the Låktatjåkko Mountain Station 
I opted for a final ski before dinner and caught one of the resort's five 
button lifts to the top of its longest run – 3km. No people, just powder. The 
view wasn't dramatic by, say, Rocky Mountain standards but it was composed of a 
series of elements – the lake, the Lapporten Gap, Låkta – which were all 
variations on a white theme. The sharp light allows each element to stand out 
on its own merits, but the combined effect is to make you feel like you are 
moving through a painting. I moved through mine silently, snow pattering down 
with each turn until I arrived rosy and flushed at the bar inHotel Fjället 
<http://www.bjorkliden.com/?q=node/347> – where a band were playing Status Quo 
covers to the delight of the four revellers occupying the dance floor. But a 
blast of dad rock was a small price to pay for the first, and only, tracks of 
the day.

• Discover the World 
<http://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/en/types/Sweden/Skiing/> (01737 218 800) 
offers a three-night package to Bjorkliden, including return direct flights 
from Heathrow to Kiruna, transfers, full-board and ski pass from £623pp from 
December to May. To hire a one-on-one guide for a day is 2,500 kroner (£218) 
but you can split that between a group. A night at Låkta costs from 450 kroner 
(£40); two-course dinner is 350 kroner (£30).
 