
The booming Sydney and Melbourne property markets are masking much weaker 
conditions in other capital cities.

Sydney and Melbourne were the only cities to post home price rises of more 
than 1% in the June quarter, latest figures from theAustralian Bureau of 
Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
show.

Why Australia is the third most expensive place to buy a house
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2014/jun/12/why-australia-third-most-expensive-houses>
Home prices rose by almost 9% in Sydney, more than twice Melbourne’s 4.2% gain.

That helped nationwide capital city home prices rise 4.7% in the June quarter, 
well above market expectations of a 2.4% gain.

Over the year to June, the residential property price index was up 9.8%, the 
bureau said on Tuesday.

But an almost double-digit rise in nationwide prices hides some large 
disparities in Australia’s housing market, a Commonwealth Bank senior 
economist, John Peters, said.

Perth and Darwin had the weakest outcomes, with a fall in prices in the June 
quarter and the year to June.

“The combination of record low interest rates, robust investor activity, 
demand outstripping supply, and strong foreign investment supercharged a huge 
lift in Sydney house prices,” Peters said.

“Residential property growth price growth has been more restrained throughout 
Australia’s other major capital cities, with annual price growth running at 
very comatose levels.”

Conditions in Sydney and Melbourne may soon be affected by measures by 
regulators to improve lending standards and reduce the participation of 
investors in the housing market.

“Anecdotal evidence in recent weeks has hinted that the Sydney and Melbourne 
property markets have shown some signs of moderating with weekly auction 
clearance rates coming off the boil,” Peters said.

The figures were released as investment bank Morgan Stanley declared the 
housing boom was over and the challenge was to pull off a “soft landing”.

While official interest rates remain at a record low 2%, tightened lending 
standards are prompting a cooling-off period amid slower net migration, its 
analysts note in a research report.

“We are now calling the peak in the housing cycle, and expect further falls in 
auction clearance rates and house price momentum, with a negative impact on 
construction occurring over 2016,” the report said.

The analysts say the housing slowdown comes at an awkward time for the 
Australian economy as it transitions out of the mining boom.

“We believe recession risks are elevated as regulators attempt a difficult 
soft landing of the housing market amidst external and income challenges,” the 
report said.

“While we believe policymakers have meaningfully tightened credit conditions 
and are willing to sacrifice some growth to lessen the risk of a ‘crash’ down 
the track, the challenge is to pull off a ‘soft landing’, as seen in 2003-04.”
 