
 A 16-year-old Sydney boy has been charged with planning a terrorist act to 
coincide with Anzac Day commemorations.

Officers from the New South Wales joint counter-terrorism team arrested the 
teenager near his Auburn home on Sunday after an investigation by officers 
attached to Operation Vianden.

The arrest was announced shortly before the start of Sydney’s main dawn 
service at Martin Place.

The NSW police commissioner, Andrew Scipione, said officers had been forced to 
move quickly.

Malcolm Turnbull: multiculturalism and tolerance will combat terrorism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/malcolm-turnbull-multiculturalism-and-tolerance-will-combat-terrorism>
“Clearly we have taken swift action to ensure community safety on the eve of a 
sacred day on the Australian calendar,” Scipione said on Monday.

“Anzac Day should be observed by all in our community free from fear and I 
would encourage everyone to enjoy this special day.”

Speaking at a 6am media conference shortly after the dawn service, Scipione 
said police did not believe there was a wider threat. “At this stage we believe 
it was one person by himself,” he said. “The risk from this particular threat 
has been thwarted.”

Commander Chris Sheehan from the Australian federal police said young people 
who might be susceptible to carrying out criminal acts were being groomed 
online like victims of sexual abuse.

“In Australia and around the world, the age of people radicalised is getting 
younger, with online grooming tactics similar to those used by sexual 
predators,” he said.

The boy has been charged with one count of acts in preparation for, or 
planning, a terrorist act, which carries a maximum penalty of life 
imprisonment. He was refused bail and was due to appear in a children’s court 
later on Monday.

 Both Scipione and Sheahan said the boy’s age was troubling. “It is important 
for families to stay on top of what’s happening, particularly as they see 
changes in behaviour,” Scipione said.

The commissioner urged people not to let the arrest disrupt plans to attend 
Anzac Day services. “Do not let an event like this stop you from going out and 
taking part in what is a most important commemorative day for us,” he said. 
“So, please, don’t be perturbed.”

Scipione said details of the boy’s alleged plan would become clearer after the 
court appearance. “We knew of this particular young person but these are facts 
that will come before the courts when he is presented today,” he said.

The boy’s family home at Auburn had been searched, he said. “There was a 
search conducted and a number of items looked at. I’m not in a position to tell 
you if anything was seized.”

The federal justice minister, Michael Keenan, said he was concerned by the 
arrest of the teenager.

“It’s very disturbing when Australians are out there commemorating what is a 
very important national day for us, some people would think that’s an 
appropriate time to target those services – I’m very worried about that,” he 
told ABC radio on Monday.

But Australians should take comfort authorities had been effective in 
preventing possible attacks, he said.

The NSW premier, Mike Baird, said the events were disturbing. He praised 
police for the arrest. “The important point is not to look at the 
hypotheticals, but to look at the actions that have been taken – actions were 
taken by police to prevent actions, to keep us safe,” he told reporters after 
the dawn service.
 