
Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> man Muhammad 
Abdul-Karim Musleh has been granted bail after being charged with allegedly 
travelling to a Syrian conflict zone in 2013.


The 22-year-old was arrested by the New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> joint 
counter-terrorism team at his south-western Sydney home on Tuesday in relation 
to four July 2013 offences and appeared at Parramatta local court.

Musleh was charged with three counts of giving money or goods to promote 
foreign hostile acts and one count of preparing to engage in foreign hostile 
activities.

The offences were alleged to have occurred between 13 June and 11 July 2013.

Magistrate Karen Stafford said on Tuesday she was willing to grant Musleh bail 
under strict conditions including that he report daily to police, give up his 
passports, abide by a curfew, and that his parents commit to pay a surety of 
$250,000 if he fails to appear at his next court date.

Her ruling was influenced by the commonwealth director of public prosecutions’ 
decision not to oppose Musleh’s application for bail, she said.

“These are matters where the court certainly has a concern about, if bail is 
granted, whether Mr Musleh will appear in court to answer these charges,” 
Stafford said.

“The crown is in a better position in many cases than the bench ... to make an 
assessment as to bail concerns.”

Musleh’s parents will remortgage their Holsworthy home to make the surety 
money available, defence lawyer Greg Scragg said.

His mother works for the government as an interpreter and his father works for 
Transport NSW, he said.

Scragg also said Musleh understood that breaching his bail would mean putting 
his mother’s money and the family home at risk.

He is currently studying for a certificate in carpentry at Tafe, the court 
heard.

Some young supporters of Musleh became aggressive to the waiting media as his 
parents left the court on Tuesday afternoon.
 