
Cricket Australia fined Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> A$4,000 after his rambling 
radio interview in which he called New Zealand's Brendon McCullum "a piece of 
shit".

He was found guilty of "detrimental public comment" in a hearing chaired in 
Melbourne by the code of conduct commissioner Gordon Lewis, a retired judge. 
But more serious discussions went on in private asCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia sought to discover the 
extent, if any, of Symonds's drinking problem and whether this should cause him 
to be omitted from Australia's tour of South Africa next week.

A Cricket Australia board meeting next Tuesday is expected to be heated, with 
supporters and critics of Symonds expected to argue their case. Symonds himself 
returns to first-class cricket on Friday after minor knee surgery when he plays 
for Queensland against Western Australia at The Gabba.

If the Australia selectors ignore the plea of Symonds's captain, Ricky 
Ponting, and overlook him for the South Africa tour, he will be free to play a 
full season in the IPL for Deccan Chargers. The perception that Symonds would 
be rewarded for his unprofessionalism would rankle with his Australia 
team-mates, who will only be able to play the final two or three weeks of the 
2009 IPL season after the completion of their tour of South Africa.

Symonds issued a statement in which he said: "Whilst the comments were 
intended to be light-hearted, I acknowledge that they were careless and as such 
I accept the fine that I have received today. I am pleased that the 
commissioner determined the penalty based on the full 14-minute interview, and 
not just the one comment that received extensive coverage.

"I want to again apologise to Brendon McCullum for my comments and thank him 
for his understanding. I want to reinforce that I remain committed to Cricket 
Australia and Queensland Cricket, and I look forward to putting this matter 
behind me so that I can focus on my cricket."

Symonds's discontent over McCullum arose from New South Wales' decision to 
field him in a Twenty20 final against Victoria last week, so making him 
eligible for the money-spinning Champions League – the world club competition – 
in India later this year.

It was his insulting remarks about McCullum that caused an outcry when he told 
the commercial radio station Triple M: "He is a Kiwi yeah, we love to hate 
them. He is the lump of shit, sorry the lump of cow dirt that people are 
thinking of." But his full interview made it clear that McCullum was not his 
chief target – his anger was with NSW's expedience as he felt that an 
Australia-born player had been dropped unfairly.

"Personally I wouldn't be changing a winning team," he said. "It doesn't 
matter about McCullum mate, he could have been Irish, he still would have got 
it. It's not his job, he's doing his job and trying to earn a wage. But what 
happened here is an injustice."
 