
Andrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> kept 
Australia on course for a record-equalling 16th successive Test victory with a 
brilliant century - although he later admitted he should have been out on 30.

India had threatened to cause an upset at the Sydney Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground on the first day of the 
second Test as RP Singh swept through Australia's top order to leave them 
reeling on 134 for six but Symonds hit an unbeaten 137 to guide his team to 376 
for seven .

The all-rounder, however, then said he should have been back in the pavilion 
much earlier only to be rescued by a mistake by the umpire Steve Bucknor, who 
failed to detect an outside edge when the Australian wafted at a leg-cutter 
from Ishant Sharma. "I was really lucky. I was out when I was 30 and given not 
out; that's cricket, though. People make mistakes," he said.

Symonds received valuable support from Brad Hogg - the pair putting on 173 for 
the seventh wicket to stabilise the innings on an uncharacteristically 
responsive Sydney pitch. India had been given a positive start by Singh, who 
induced an outside edge from Phil Jaques in the third over, the ball flying 
through to the wicketkeeper Mahendra Singh Dhoni. Matthew Hayden followed soon 
after for 13.

Although Ricky Ponting and Mike Hussey restored a degree of normality with a 
third-wicket stand of 92, RP Singh then snared Hussey for 41 and Harbhajan 
Singh trapped Michael Clarke for one in front of the stumps. Adam Gilchrist 
fell to the impressive Singh for seven with Sachin Tendulkar making his third 
catch of the innings.

In Cape Town West Indies recovered from 77 for three on the first day of the 
second Test againstSouth Africa with Shivnarine Chanderpaul, partnered by 
Marlon Samuels, hitting his eighth Test half-century in his past nine innings. 
The left-hander was unbeaten on 64 after helping the tourists to 240 for eight. 
Samuels made 51 and the captain Chris Gayle 46.

However, Dale Steyn ensured South Africa ended on top with three wickets late 
in the final session, finishing with figures of four for 60. A superb delivery 
dismissed the opener Daren Ganga for three in the fifth over. And, with nine 
overs left, he swung the momentum back towards South Africa with two wickets in 
two deliveries, Denesh Ramdin and Rawl Lewis the victims. Jerome Taylor then 
added eight runs before he, too, fell to Steyn.
 