
So Andrew Symonds won't be coming to India after all. Since there is not much 
to be said for the fishing in Bangalore, Mohali, Delhi and Nagpur, I doubt he 
will be shedding too many tears. His absence is, however, a body blow for the 
ever-increasing number of neanderthals in the stands, those that happily pay 
thousands of rupees for the privilege of imitating Guy the Gorilla and Charlie 
the Chimp. It's also a setback for Indian officials capable ofconjuring up 
fairy tales 
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,22604344-5001505,00.html> 
that would have made Hans Christian Andersen sit up and take notice.

Most of all though, it's a massive setback to an Australian side bidding to 
repeat their 2004 triumph. Between Jimi Hendrix dying in his bathtub a year 
after that remarkable rendition of The Star Spangled Banner at Woodstock 
(around the same time that Bill Lawry's side won 3-1, and the gravest threat 
came from the team bus being pelted with stones in Kolkata after rumours that 
Doug Walters had served in Vietnam) and that tour four years ago, Australia had 
won only two Tests in India.

Michael Kasprowicz's cutters inspired a consolation victory in Bangalore in 
1998 after Mark Taylor's champions had been trampled underfoot by a rampaging 
batting line-up, and even Steve Waugh's new-age Invincibles had fallen short, 
in 2001. The emphatic nature of their success in Mumbai was quickly 
overshadowed by stirring Indian deeds at Kolkata and Chennai.

In 2004 though, the Indian sleight of hand was demystified, despite Anil 
Kumble, Harbhajan Singh and Murali Kartik taking 55 wickets between them. 
Michael Clarke showed the way with a twinkle-toed century of dazzling quality 
on debut and weighty contributions from Damien Martyn and Simon Katich ensured 
that the efforts of a splendid bowling attack would come to naught.

Jason Gillespie was the best pace bowler around, not the impostor who went to 
the Ashes months later, while Shane Warne enjoyed his best series on Indian 
soil. As for Glenn McGrath, he was chillingly purposeful, like Edward Fox in 
The Day of the Jackal, sowing seeds of doubt in Indian minds with a magnificent 
delivery to Rahul Dravid, the talisman of the side, in the opening Test.

The common factor in that Bangalore win and the romp in Mumbai in 2001 was 
Adam Gilchrist, whose audacious batsmanship at breakneck speed left the Indians 
utterly disoriented and susceptible to the knockout blow. In both games, India 
had worked themselves into positions of strength, only to be left clueless by 
the ferocity of the riposte.

And that's where Symonds comes in. With Gilchrist now part of Australian 
cricket folklore, it was Symonds who inherited the mantle of middle-order 
enforcer. It is a task he has warmed to, averaging a stunning 72.07 from 12 
Tests since coming back into the side during the last Ashes. India have been 
his favourite opponents. In the hullabaloo over what was said or not said at 
the SCG last season, it was forgotten that Symonds' 162, with a little help 
from snoozing umpires, changed the game and series. It was also forgotten that 
his 410 runs and nine wickets (at 27.44, far better than the mouthy Harbhajan) 
made him the standout performer over the four Tests. Only once did he fail to 
cross 30.

Symonds also has "previous" when it comes to playing in India. During the 
one-day series last year, the spotlight was on his tactless comments about 
India's Twenty20 celebrations and the monkey chants and gestures that followed. 
What was almost overlooked was that he had bludgeoned a century and three 50s 
on his way to an aggregate of 365 runs from only 330 balls. Not since Viv 
Richards dismantled India at the Kotla in 1987 had we seen someone hit the ball 
so cleanly and so far.

In his absence, Australia's dependence on old India tour hands such as Katich 
and Matthew Hayden (549 runs in 2001) will be even more acute. Michael Hussey 
has never played a Test in India, while Ricky Ponting's otherwise 
picture-perfect resumé has an ugly smudge that is his pitiful record against 
Indian spin – he averages 12.28 from eight Tests dating back to 1996. And will 
Phil Jaques be able to recreate the opening chemistry that made Hayden and 
Justin Langer perfect candidates for aVan Halen album cover 
<http://www.amazon.com/Balance-Van-Halen/dp/B000002MUQ>? 

Batting though is the least of the worries. Not one of the bowlers has played 
a Test in India. Brett Lee may have stormed to the top of the charts after 
singing a cheesy tune with Bollywood legend Asha Bhosle, but he could find 
leading such an inexperienced attack is a lot less fun. Stuart Clark is the 
McGrath clone, but how will he react when tested by the likes of Virender 
Sehwag? Will Mitchell Johnson get any joy from pitches unlikely to support his 
hit-the-deck methods? Are Doug Bollinger and Peter Siddle good enough for this 
level, or will they go the way of Scott Muller and Brad now-painting-houses 
Williams?

And what of Bryce McGain, the 36-year-old entrusted to carry on a tradition 
that links O'Reilly, Grimmett, Benaud and Warne, not to mention Stuart MacGill, 
the best understudy in history? McGain was no more than tidy on the one day he 
was able to bowl against India A, and with no carrom ball or doosra in the 
armoury, he might struggle to impose himself against Sehwag and VVS Laxman, who 
drove Warne to distraction with those gorgeous inside-out strokes through cover.

It's still an imposing Australian line-up, but the names do not trip off the 
tongue in quite the same way that they did in 2004. Years from now, it might be 
acknowledged that India 2004 was right up there with West Indies 1995 as the 
zenith of modern Australian cricket. If Ponting and the new faces are unable to 
scale similar heights, they might have good reason to direct a rueful glance or 
two at the bloke who went walkabout with his fishing rod for company.
 