
Matthew Hayden is a fellow of deep religious conviction, so he would probably 
be familiar with the Book of Job, chapter one, verse 21, the bit about the Lord 
giving and then taking away. He might even have taken it is as his text for the 
day yesterday, so utterly fluctuating were the fortunes of the two sides.

The morning belonged to England as they purloined three more wickets to go 
with the couple from the first evening to leave Australia floundering at 84 for 
five. Given more charitable umpires than this pair of curmudgeons, it could 
have been even better. Instead, until Sajid Mahmood removed Hayden and - 
merciful relief - Adam Gilchrist, for spit, with the second new ball late in 
the day, that was as good as it got. Job done, you might say.

As Hayden filled his boots and Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> completed a maiden century 
at times measured and at others manic, Australia had England on the ropes. 
There was a century for Hayden, his 27th in Tests, an innings of 153 spread 
over seven hours which had begun as an exercise in discipline but which 
gradually morphed into the Hayden we knew before he entered a mid-life crisis a 
couple of years ago, full of clumping stand-up clean hits and imposing, 
chisel-jawed arrogance.

Together the two of them removed any semblance of hope England may have 
nurtured about upsetting applecarts and overturning form, their sixth-wicket 
stand of 279 - ended when Mahmood had Hayden caught at the wicket - a record 
against England with the exception of the 346 famously added by Sir Donald 
Bradman and Jack Fingleton on this ground 70 years ago when Bradman batted at 
No7 to allow a sticky-dog pitch to dry out and made 270.

Whether the Don celebrated his milestone quite as extravagantly as Symonds is 
not recorded but it is believed he was more decorous. By any standards - and in 
the modern age of badge-kissing, leaping, air-punching and acknowledgement to 
friends, family and passing acquaintances they are slacker than once they were 
- Symonds' was an extraordinary display of exuberance, involving first a 
primeval yell to the skies as the straight hit from Paul Collingwood sailed 
into the members' pavilion, followed by some relatively low-key arm-raising as 
a precursor to the grand finale in which he leaped into Hayden's arms, wrapped 
his legs around his waist and thrust away. There was a danger a bucket of water 
might have been needed to separate them in order for the match to proceed. Even 
Bill Lawry averted his gaze.

It would be a hard person, though, who failed to appreciate the unfettered joy 
of someone who had gained a place in the side only through default and, while 
an integral part of the one-day team, had been looked upon as an underachiever 
at Test level.

The Australians may still find that the pace bowling of Shane Watson, their 
preferred all-rounder, will serve them better than Symonds' mix of spin, cut 
and medium swing but the latter is going to be hard to shift after this. He 
finished the day unbeaten with 154, with 14 fours and a six - worth more on 
this giant ground - and, if he made a cautious start with 21 deliveries to get 
off the mark and suffered a spell mid-innings where his play was more 
appropriate to the tail end of a one-day knock, then some of his strokeplay was 
satisfyingly robust.

Symonds hits the ball with the power of a steam hammer, particularly on the 
drive, but contrasts it with the most delicate of glances and touch singles. 
Only once did he appear to be troubled when, on 46, he attempted to sweep Monty 
Panesar. The ball pitched on the stumps, held up down the line of middle and 
would have hit had Symonds' back leg not intervened. Panesar almost disappeared 
inside his patka with an impassioned appeal - to no avail.

England have not been well served by the umpires in this innings, and a day 
named "Ladies Love Cricket" might better have been "Lads Love LBW". Caution and 
benefit of the doubt are one thing but Rudi Koertzen, in particular, and Aleem 
Dar appeared to have ruled that mode of dismissal from the equation. Hayden, on 
six and then on nine, had seemed stone dead on the first evening and to that 
can be added not just Symonds but Ricky Ponting, who shuffled across his stumps 
to Flintoff when three and was hit on the knee roll and Hayden again when 
padding up to Panesar while pretending not to. Where is Darrell Hair when he is 
needed?

For all that it had been an excellent morning for England, with some 
assistance still in the pitch - a touch more pace, perhaps, and the ball hard. 
Ponting's escape did not benefit him for long, as he tried to pull Flintoff 
from outside off- stump and top-edged a steepler to Alastair Cook at midwicket, 
whereupon Matthew Hoggard beat a tentative prod from Mike Hussey and pegged 
back his off-stump. When Steve Harmison found lift and movement to unseat 
Michael Clarke, caught by Chris Read, the impossible seemed possible.

England bowled well for the most part after that, and manfully in the most 
disconcerting times, but the pitch had definitely added pace and the ball 
consequently seemed to come on to the bat more comfortably, the better to play 
strokes. Perhaps it was just an illusion. By the time the innings was in its 
pomp, judicious shot-making and canny running had spread the field, Flintoff 
unable or unwilling to apply pressure round the bat. There are times, though, 
when the batsmen just win and this was one of them. Salute excellent batting.
 