
Andrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> told his 
Australian team-mates that he had sorted out Harbhajan Singh's alleged "monkey" 
jibe "man to man" and appealed to them not to press racist allegations against 
the Indian spinner, according to a report in The Australian newspaper this 
morning. But by then the team were adamant that Harbhajan must be reported to 
the match referee, their indignation reportedly fuelled by the belief that he 
had also called Symonds a monkey during a febrile one-day international in 
Mumbai last October.

Australia's determination to pursue the matter prevailed in spite of a 
personal appeal to their captain,Ricky Ponting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting>, from his opposite number, 
Anil Kumble, for the charges to be dropped.

Ponting refused, saying that the incident had already been reported. The 
controversy has since escalated into a stand-off between India and the 
InternationalCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council, with 
senior Indian officials still warning yesterday that their decision to continue 
the tour remained provisional and was subject to the outcome of their appeal 
against Harbhajan's three-Test ban. The date for that hearing has yet to be 
agreed.

The newspaper said that Symonds told Ponting immediately after the Sydney Test 
that Harbhajan had called him a monkey but recoiled when an Australia team 
meeting decided to report the Indian off-spinner. Symonds then went to the 
India dressing room to confront Harbhajan and returned to tell his team-mates 
that the matter had been settled. They chose to pursue the matter, the report 
continued, and Ponting told Mike Procter that it was Harbhajan's second 
offence, prompting the match referee's decision to ban him for three Tests. 
Harbhajan denies ever having called Symonds a monkey.

Kumble too identified Ponting as the driving force behind Australia's official 
complaint, revealing yesterday that he had phoned the Australia captain after 
the third day of the Sydney Test, when the bad blood had become evident, and 
had appealed to him to address the Harbhajan-Symonds matter privately.

"I asked if it could be sorted out between us but it went up to the match 
referee," Kumble said. "[Ponting's] response was that it had already been 
reported. Having played cricket for this long, I anticipated that this would 
spiral into a larger issue. I think it's important Ricky and I get together and 
speak about it, address it." Kumble also wants to talk to Ponting about India's 
belief that the Australians are not playing the game in the proper spirit.

Ponting said yesterday that there were elements of the second Test that "in 
hindsight you might do a little differently" but denied that Australia were 
arrogant. "Everyone likes to see a tough, uncompromising brand of cricket," he 
said. "But if there are areas in our game to improve on then obviously we need 
to address that. I don't think anyone wants the way Australia plays cricket to 
change."

The captain said that the furore had led to his parents receiving abusive 
phone calls and they had changed their phone number because of the anonymous 
calls criticising him and his team.

The ICC has appointed a New Zealand high court judge, John Hansen, to hear 
Harbhajan's appeal against his ban. An appeal is normally heard within seven 
days where possible but the third Test is due to start in Perth next Wednesday.

Lalit Modi, a billionaire businessman who as vice-president of the Indian 
board wields considerable influence, gave no guarantees yesterday that the BCCI 
would accept the judge's findings. "It was an interim decision of the ICC to 
ban Harbhajan, and because of that it is an interim decision by the BCCI to 
continue the tour," he said. "We will wait to see what the outcome of 
Harbhajan's appeal is and we will make a decision from there. The controversy 
continues until Harbhajan's name is cleared."
 