 Like many people who take an interest in self-defence, I once had a bad 
experience with a mugger. This was no common-or-garden yob, either, but a man 
who was absolutely dedicated to his profession. When it came to terrorising 
nice, middle-class boys like me, he left no stone unturned. How do I know this? 
Because he had a spiderweb tattooed to his face. That's right - a spiderweb.
I was an Oxford undergraduate at the time and, when he stopped me and a friend 
on Cornmarket Street and asked my friend to empty his pockets, I did what any 
self-respecting Englishman would do - I ran for it. Unfortunately, Spiderman 
gave chase. He caught up with me outside the Oxford Union and, very generously, 
tried to give me a matching tattoo, only without the benefit of sterilised 
instruments.

"You should see the other guy," I said, when I eventually hobbled into the 
union bar. "Not a scratch on him." As you can imagine, I find it impossible to 
recall this incident without a burning sense of shame. Why was my response so 
utterly feeble? Over the years it has rankled and rankled until I finally 
decided it was time I took myself in hand. If I was to avoid being humiliated 
by the likes of Spiderman again there was only one thing for it: I had to 
become better - much better - at running away. It was with this in mind that I 
decided to pay a visit to the Moberly Sports Centre on Kilburn Lane in London, 
one of the few places in the UK to offer instruction in parkour - or free 
running. For those who don't know, this is the discipline that evolved in the 
suburban ghettos of Paris, principally as a way for young criminals to escape 
from the gendarmerie. It is now a global youth cult, on a par with 
skateboarding a few years ago, and has become something of an action movie 
cliche. For instance, in the chase sequence at the beginning of Casino Royale, 
Daniel Craig pursues Sébastian Foucan, one of the founders of the sport, 
through a high-rise building site.

Typically, parkour involves leaping over rooftops and jumping off walls - a 
sort of high-wire circus act, except without the benefit of a net. Its most 
skilled practitioners look as though they're defying the laws of nature as they 
propel themselves forward, overcoming every obstacle in their path. Just the 
ticket, then, for escaping from potential muggers.

My instructor was John "Kerbie" Kerr, a young man who has achieved such cult 
status within the free running movement that Adidas are bringing out some 
"Kerbie" trainers next year. In spite of being only 21, he has worked on 
several feature films as a stunt adviser, including 28 Weeks Later

"When I was at school I always wanted to do gymnastics, but my dad didn't 
think it was macho enough," he said.

His father would be unlikely to make that criticism about parkour. Kerbie 
recently appeared on an episode of Top Gear in which he raced James May through 
the streets of Liverpool - May in a Peugeot 207, Kerbie on foot. Needless to 
say, he won.

If Kerbie was a little wrong-footed to be confronted by a bald, overweight, 
43-year-old man, he certainly didn't show it. After some perfunctory warm-up 
exercises, he taught me how to "roll" - a technique for breaking a fall that 
involves doing an off-kilter forward somersault - quickly followed by a 
"precision jump", a "vault" and a "tic tac".

This last was probably the most difficult. You run at full pelt towards a 
brick wall, launch yourself at it, then kick off it and continue running in the 
opposite direction. After trying it a couple of times, I suggested to Kerbie 
that the reason this move is known as a "tic tac" is because that's the noise 
your ankle makes when it snaps in two. Instead of laughing, he confessed that 
he'd broken his own ankle jumping into a gravel pit last year.

In fairness, parkour isn't nearly as dangerous as it looks - though, 
admittedly, the floor of the gym was covered with mats. The main disadvantage 
of taking it up at my age is that you're likely to aggravate long-standing 
injuries rather than create new ones. For instance, an old rotator-cuff problem 
of mine began to play up after I'd practised the "roll" half a dozen times - 
and 20 years of trying to ski moguls in the Alps has left me with a pair of 
knees that aren't best suited to performing "tic tacs". Still, there was 
undeniably something invigorating about it, and it's hard to imagine a form of 
self-defence that has more street cred. If I was a 12-year-old boy, I'd be 
pestering my parents to buy me a pair of "Kerbies" as soon as they hit the 
shelves.

Will my parkour training be of any use if I'm confronted by another mugger? 
Probably not. When I think about Spiderman, my only consolation is that my 
facial tattoo has long since healed, whereas his is almost certainly still 
there.

· The Sound of No Hands Clapping: A Memoir, by Toby Young, is published by 
Abacus.

Parkour
Thrill rating 7/10

Danger rating 7/10

Fitness rating 8/10

In a nutshell ...

Your body is a physical instrument, the urban landscape your jungle gym. The 
essence of parkour is to run, jump, somersault and roll your way from point A 
to point B as quickly and gracefully as possible, no matter what obstacles 
(railings, walls, roofs, steps) are in your way.

The idea is based on the méthode naturelle training style coined by Frenchman 
Georges Hébert in the 19th century. In the late 1980s, compatriot David Belle 
was inspired by Hébert, began to train au naturelle and became "the godfather 
of parkour" (Belle featured in the 2002 BBC "ident" Rush Hour, which depicted a 
man dashing to get home across London's skyline).

What's the buzz?

"I like the freedom it offers, not going to the gym, not bound to a monthly 
contract," says Dane Grant, a veteran traceur (as parkour practitioners are 
known). There's a mental buzz, too; you need to be focused as well as fit, 
plotting your next steps even as you perform each feat of acrobatics. "Even the 
smallest difference, between jumping one metre or a metre and a half, can be a 
test for the body - so take baby steps," Dane advises.

Thrill a minute?

You need to build up to each manoeuvre and assess the location before you 
begin. Sticky from the Urban Freeflow team (the world's largest parkour 
organisation) says his motto is "start low, start slow"; he encourages 
beginners to practise regularly in a gym before thinking about any outdoor 
leaps.

Adrenaline peak 

Two highlights are the "underbar" move - when the traceur slides through a 
box-shaped opening by bending his/her body in the same way that high jumpers 
do, and not touching any of the sides - and the "dismount" jump from heights of 
2 metres and more.

Where to do it 

After the BBC's plug for parkour, London's South Bank became a mecca for 
traceurs (famous monuments make great launching stations). But any 
self-respecting concrete jungle will do.

Who can do it? 

Everyone, young and old, male and female. To get started, join a group in your 
area: Urban Freeflow offers classes at the Parkour/Freerun Academy in Kensal 
Green on Friday nights - each week 50 or more people of all ages attend.

What to take 

Long sleeves, long trousers and cushioned trainers to soften the impact when 
you land.

Typical prices

The London gym sessions cost £5 a time. Otherwise, it's just the gear.

Impress your pals

Urban Freeflow's list of Hollywood movie and music video credits stretches 
ever longer, but surely a highlight for team member Blue was his appearance in 
the new Sugababes vid, About You Now - although he did get injured for the 
privilege.

Video clip urbanfreeflow.com/urban_freeflow_parkour_showreel.wmv 
<http://www.urbanfreeflow.com/urban_freeflow_parkour_showreel.wmv>

Good links

parkour.org.uk <http://www.parkour.org.uk>

urbanfreeflow.com <http://www.urbanfreeflow.com>

myspace.com/northernmunkeys <http://www.myspace.com/northernmunkeys>
 