
Tanzanians love their mobile phones. Every village, truck stop, street corner, 
seems to have a kiosk selling phone cards. On the highways surrounding the 
capital, Dar es Salaam, billboards and outdoor screens show happy shiny people 
with their phones; in one, a stunningly glamorous young woman smiles at her 
little screen. "Keep texting," it says.

But while the fortunate are on their mobiles, plenty of people are still 
unsure what they are going to eat that night.

In Kilolo primary school, a complex of single-storey buildings in a 
mountainous area about 10 hours' drive west of the capital, children are in 
danger of going hungry. And cold - with many wearing clothes long past their 
best.

Beatrice Mkusa is a teacher-mentor at the school. Her job involves offering 
counselling, pastoral care and support to vulnerable children, especially 
girls, and she sees at first hand the results of one of Africa's persistent 
problems: HIV/Aids. "We may not even know of all the orphans in our school. 
Often we only know [they are orphans] if they ask for help," she says.

So how can education, especially for girls, and the increased use of mobile 
phones, help achieve the millennium development goals (MDGs)?

The MDGs - drawn up at the United Nations in 2000, and adopted by 189 
countries - were created to tackle the world's development challenges. They 
cover problems ranging from extreme poverty to maternal health, climate change 
to global partnership for development (see box).

Tanzania has faced many of the issues addressed by the MDGs. Since 
independence in 1964, when Tanganyika and Zanzibar joined to become one 
country, Tanzania has struggled to keep afloat. In 1967, President Julius 
Nyerere issued the Arusha declaration, which involved the nationalisation of 
factories, banks and private countries, and focused on making the country, and 
individuals, self-reliant. Self-reliance meant that primary school education 
for all - with an emphasis on agriculture, so that everyone could make a living 
- was strongly promoted, with most children attending; Secondary school 
education was neglected. The policy of self-reliance and nationalisation did 
not, however, lead to prosperity. Instead - combined with the war on Idi Amin's 
Uganda, famine, the rising price of oil, debt servicing and widespread 
corruption - it led to Tanzania becoming one of the poorest countries in the 
world.

Debt relief

As part of the heavily indebted poor countries relief programme, Tanzania had 
much of its international debt cut in 2001, and in 2005 the British government 
relieved part of the debt the country owed to the World Bank. It currently has 
a debt of $7.9bn, which is 72% of its GDP.

Tanzania still has much catching up to do if it is to meet the MDGs, but all 
is by no means lost. According to a progress report, issued by the government's 
Ministry of Planning, Economy and Empowerment in 2006, "Tanzania has the 
potential to achieve its poverty reduction goal [MDG1], based on impressive GDP 
growth rates coupled with ongoing economic, governance and institutional 
reforms, and the transformation of the rural economy." The GDP is certainly 
going up - by 6.8% in 2005. But, according to the United Nations Development 
Programme, this did not lead to a fall in poverty throughout the country as so 
much of the growth was concentrated on Dar es Salaam. The countryside remains 
poor.

"Poverty is our biggest problem," says Winifrida Rutaindurwa, who together 
with Imelda Msasi Kihaka is one of the Gender Focal Persons at Tanzania's 
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training. Certainly, while all the MDGs 
are connected, reducing poverty and hunger has to come first: people who are 
hungry will find it hard to do anything other than try to get food. On the 
other hand, the long-term solution to poverty lies in achieving some of the 
other MDGs. And it is women who are most likely to be poor.

Many argue that educating girls is the key to a whole range of development 
challenges - not just to tackling the lack of primary education, or enabling 
gender empowerment, but to every one of the MDGs: tackling poverty, maternal 
mortality, infant mortality and child deaths; and combating HIV/Aids, malaria 
and other diseases ... the list goes on.

"If you educate women, you educate a whole society," says Emilio Lalika, one 
of the ward education coordinators for Kilolo district. "By educating them, you 
prepare a strong army to stop poverty, health problems, prevent infection and 
prepare food hygienically. If you educate girls, they will support other girls. 
It's a big big change."

In Tanzania in 2008, there is supposed to be universal primary education - 
which means education up to a basic level, rather than a specific age. Since 
2002, the government has abolished school fees, invested in teacher training, 
and provided grants for construction and renovation. But not all primary 
children, boys or girls, are in school. The main reason for this is poverty: 
not being able to afford the books or uniform; being needed to help tend the 
family's land; or the necessity of earning whatever small amount of money you 
can as a labourer or domestic servant.

Seconds out?

In 2001, 93% of the population had only primary education or less. Now things 
are improving fast. When the government launched the Secondary Education 
Development Plan in 2004, there were 828 government secondary schools; by 2007 
there were 2,806, with many more opened this year. That translates into 
hundreds of thousands more secondary school students. But although in the first 
year of primary equal numbers of boys and girls enrol, the proportion of girls 
attending has dropped sharply by secondary school. (For more on the reasons 
why, see page 4.)

This is holding girls back from changing Tanzania. "Once educated, a girl can 
reduce poverty and disease, to a great extent, and help the economy of the 
nation as a whole. Health issues, nutrition, hygiene, wellbeing of family ... 
when you educate women, you're educating in family matters. Girls are more 
responsible than boys," says Rutaindurwa. When girls are educated, she 
explains, they are more likely to support their parents too, so they will not 
experience poverty in old age.

The NGO Camfed supports girls' education in five African countries, supporting 
408,000 children in 2007. Cama, its network for rural school leavers, provides 
bursaries and grants for small-scale businesses, together with leadership and 
other forms of training. Kilolo district has had an active Cama association 
since 2007: their enthusiasm and success is indicative of how young women are 
able to take their lives into their own hands given a comparatively small 
amount of training and finance. The businesses started by the 50 or so members 
include tailoring, small shops, a restaurant, farming and hairdressing. 
Starting last month, these nascent businesswomen are each giving 100 Tanzanian 
shillings a month (about 40p) to help sponsor children in their district. Cama 
members in the other countries where Camfed operates supported 47,369 children 
in 2007 - excluding members of their own families - with earnings from their 
own businesses.

The Cama members in Kilolo were also keen to space out their children, saying 
that five years was a good gap between them. According to Imelda Msasi Kihaka, 
a woman's fertility rate goes down as education increases. "[Fertility] is 
increasing in rural areas where there is less access to secondary school. The 
average birthrate is still four children per woman, but for educated women it 
is much lower," she says.

Research from the Global Coalition on Women and Aids also shows that HIV/Aids 
prevalence goes down sharply among women when they are educated - they know how 
HIV is transmitted, that they have other options than to have exploitative sex 
with older men, and are able to keep away from paid sex work.

Technology

International aid, of course, remains key to achieving the MDGs. The British 
Department for International Development (DFID) gave Tanzania £120m in 
2007-2008, £105m direct to the government. Rich countries are committed to 
spending 0.7% of their income on aid, yet this is not anything like enough to 
meet the MDGs. Nor do all countries that should reach this figure: the UK has 
committed itself to reach this target before 2015, but has not yet done so.

Yet advances are being made in Tanzania anyway, as the panel below indicates. 
The often-neglected MDG8, which deals with trade, debt, the availability of 
drugs, development and governance, also looks at technology. Specifically, it 
aims to make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information 
and communications. While there is uneven distribution across Tanzania with 
regard to technology - not everyone can afford a mobile, not everywhere has a 
signal, and internet connections are extremely patchy - far more people are 
able to use a mobile than ever had a landline. Across Africa, 280 million 
people now have one.

According to Jeffrey Sachs, director of the Earth Institute at Columbia 
University and special adviser to the UN, "The cell phone is the single most 
transformative technology for development." Mobile phones may be of particular 
use to the young businesswomen from Cama: they can use them to help with their 
small businesses, even set up a small business involving phones; have access to 
banking, send small sums of money from one phone to another; receive medical 
advice and health tips; and get involved with grassroots activism, whether on 
political, social or health issues.

The mobile phone won't give the poorest people clean water, though, and they 
still have to pay for their phones out of a tiny income - one which might have 
gone further without their pre-pay cards. But while it won't, and should not 
have to, replace the money-rich countries that must keep on giving, the mobile 
plays a part in the virtuous circle of development.
 