
As the man in charge of TalkSport, Scott Taunton is, as you would expect, a 
passionate football fan. Aussie rules football, that is. Canberra-born Taunton 
is predictably enthusiastic about the national sport station, which last week 
signed a deal with thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> to take its football 
commentaries global. It is, says Taunton, the "biggest thing" that has happened 
to TalkSport since it launched as Talk Radio 17 years ago.

But it's when the discussion turns to Aussie rules that Taunton's eyes really 
light up. "It's a great game, a rough game," he says. "If you are anywhere near 
the ball I am allowed to take you out at any time so long as I don't do it in 
your back. And if you have the ball as long as I don't go above the neck or 
below the knee you are fair game. It's true sport."

Which is a rough approximation of what TalkSport, owned by ITV Northern 
Ireland licensee UTV, has been trying to do to its licence fee-funded rival, BBC
Radio 5 Live <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-5-live>, over the past 
few years, launching a sustained critique of its output and the way it buys 
sports rights.

TalkSport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport> has chipped away at 5 
Live's dominance of live Premier League football and broadcasts 64 games a 
season (compared with the BBC's 128, down from 192 a couple of years ago) with 
another 32 games on Absolute Radio, the Times of India-owned commercial station 
which UTV has twice tried to buy.

With big name signings such as Russell Brand and, controversially, disgraced 
Sky Sports pairRichard Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> 
and Andy Gray, to sit alongside fellow presenters such as Alan Brazil, Stan 
Collymore and Darren Gough, TalkSport has been rewarded with record audiences 
and was station of the year at the 2011 Sony Radio Academy Awards.

Its latest four-year deal with the Premier League, beginning with the new 
season less than four months away, will enable it to air live top-flight 
English football worldwide outside of Europe.

The station will broadcast all 380 Premier League matches each season in three 
languages – English, Spanish and Mandarin – and will build 30 studios in the 
basement of the TalkSport offices, which are a stone's throw from ITV's HQ on 
London's South Bank. It currently has just two, with a third for emergency 
back-up.

Targeting listeners in the US, India, Indonesia and, ultimately, China, is a 
prospect far removed from the station's former heartland audience of white van 
drivers ringing up to be harangued by James Whale.

"My favourite statistic is that 54% of adults [in the UK] consider themselves 
a fan of the Premier League," says Taunton, managing director of UTV Radio (GB) 
and chief executive of TalkSport. "The only country higher is Indonesia, where 
56% of people say they are fans.

"There are 230 million Indonesians and 60 million Brits. Suddenly we are into 
markets that are huge. In China 650 million people claim to be Manchester 
United fans."

The TalkSport brand will be retained for global commentaries which will be 
broadcast via the internet and (ultimately paid-for) mobile apps via a branded 
radio player.

Taunton is looking at global sponsorship deals with the likes of Coke, Pepsi 
or Nike and partnerships with local broadcasters. A UTV delegation will shortly 
travel to south-east Asia.

It was the overseas focus that led the station to drop all its remaining 
non-sports content – an overnight programme and a weekly show fronted by George 
Galloway – earlier this year.

"People in Hong Kong, Malaysia or China tune into the station at 1am UK time 
and they are listening to a debate about whether we are being taxed too much 
and speed cameras," explains Taunton. "It's part of the global positioning of 
the brand."

The station expects the new operation to be profitable in its third year after 
£1m losses in the first year and break-even in the second. Start-up costs will 
be around £800,000, with Taunton already looking at adding more languages and 
sports rights.

The star performer in UTV's radio division, which also includes 13 local 
stations, TalkSport's profits were up 16% last year to £7.4m with revenues of 
£31m. Taunton was paid £387,272.

The station will have live commentary from Euro 2012 in Poland and Ukraine – 
along with theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> – a far cry from the 
2000 tournament in Holland and Belgium when the station (under the previous 
ownership led by Kelvin MacKenzie), without any live rights, covered the 
matches by watching the games on TV in an Amsterdam hotel and adding background 
crowd noise.

TalkSport also had exclusive radio commentary rights to last year's rugby 
union World Cup, breaking the BBC's monopoly of live coverage of the event 
since 1987.

The BBC has the exclusive radio rights to the Olympics, but Taunton expects an 
uplift in audience and advertising from the excitement surrounding the London 
Games.

With an average weekly reach of 3.2 million listeners – a million up on five 
years ago – TalkSport still has only half the audience of 5 Live's 6.2 million. 
But with the BBC station grappling with the challenges of its Salford move, and 
under pressure from the BBC Trust – partly as a result of TalkSport's lobbying 
– to cover more minority sports and harden up its news coverage, Taunton sees 
further opportunity.

"You would have to believe that we could close the gap over time," says 
Taunton. "What we have done together is grow speech radio on a dying medium 
wave format that the government wants to turn off."

The long-mooted digital radio switchover has been a bugbear for TalkSport, 
which campaigned against a proposed 2015 switchover date and quit commercial 
radio's trade body, the Radio Centre, in protest at its pro-switchover policy 
three years ago.

Taunton also clashed with Global Radio founder Ashley Tabor over the issue and 
what he perceived to be the Capital and Classic FM owner's unfair influence 
over the Radio Centre. He branded Tabor a "rich man's son" three years ago, but 
has since shaken hands with him, although a return to the Radio Centre or 
switchover body Digital Radio UK is not on the cards.

"It was a heated time for the industry; it had been a long time coming," 
remembers Taunton. "We'd had disputes, not just [with] Ashley but the Radio 
Centre and other directors for a good 18 months at board level before in the 
end it just became untenable."

Once the black sheep of the radio industry in the MacKenzie era, TalkSport 
risked pariah status once again with last year's hiring of Keys and Gray, who 
were sacked by Sky Sports after their off-air comments about a female official 
prompted a sexism row.

Taunton describes it as a "great solution for both sides" and says listeners 
were "willing to put aside what happened and give them the benefit of the 
doubt".

"I am not saying you would under any circumstances take people on despite what 
they said," he adds. "They were genuinely remorseful for what had happened and 
saw the error of their ways."

Keys and Gray are nominated for a Sony at next month's 2012 awards and it will 
be an interesting reception should they win. Programme director Moz Dee, key to 
the station's transformation, is also nominated, for station programmer of the 
year.

The pair's arrival followed the messy exits of James Whale – fired from his 
late night phone-in in 2008 for breaching broadcasting regulations after urging 
listeners to vote for Boris Johnson in the London mayoral election – and Jon 
Gaunt, fired in the same year after calling a London councillor a "Nazi".

Taunton has more time for Whale ("an outstanding broadcaster") than Gaunt, who 
launched a protracted legal action in the wake of his sacking and published 
Taunton's email address, inviting listeners to tell him what they thought. 
Taunton describes it as "interesting feedback. Some of them needed a dictionary 
but nonetheless it was colourful."

Their sackings also prompted MacKenzie to criticise Taunton in his Sun column. 
UTV bought TalkSport from MacKenzie's Wireless Group in 2005. He was still in 
situ when Taunton was sent over from UTV's Belfast operation to take charge of 
the station soon afterwards.

"Kelvin asked if he could have a meeting room for a week. After three weeks he 
was still there trying to work out his severance package," recalls Taunton.

"I grinned and said is this the time for me to look like the new kid on the 
block, and you the passionate operator who leaves kicking and screaming? You 
call your journalist mates and I'll call the cops." MacKenzie's response was of 
the four-letter variety, he adds.

Taunton tells a good tale, and if he wasn't running the station you imagine he 
might be ringing it. Especially if it broadcast Aussie rules.
 