
The big four supermarkets in Britain have pledged to save women hundreds of 
pounds on sanitary products over the course of their lifetimes following the
government’s promise to scrap the so-called tampon tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/18/tampon-tax-scrapped-announces-osborne>
, the Guardian can reveal.


Tesco, Asda and Morrisons have written to Paula Sherriff, the Labour MP who 
led the parliamentary campaign to scrap the 5% VAT on sanitary products, 
confirming that the price tag will be reduced in line with the abolition of the 
levy. A spokeswoman for Sainsbury’s told the Guardian that this was 
“definitely” its plan.

Smaller rival Waitrose and the high street chemist Boots have confirmed they 
will do likewise.

David Cameron confirmed in March he would end the VAT charge after facing a 
backbench rebellion backing a Labour finance bill amendment to introduce a zero 
rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/mps-plan-budget-rebellion-against-tampon-tax>
.

The Eurosceptic Conservative rebels were angry that EU rules meant individual 
countries could not abolish VAT on selected products. The UK and other 
countries pushed for a relaxation of the rules.

Brussels has since announced options to permit a zero rate on sanitary 
products, which campaigners believe are a basic need that should not be subject 
to VAT.

The chancellor, George Osborne, had proposed to redistribute the estimated 
£15m a year in VAT to women’s charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/tampon-tax-15m-womens-charities-george-osborne-spending-review>
 but agreed to scrap the levy entirely when the European commission changed its 
stance.

However, there were concerns such savings would not be passed on to consumers: 
France recently reduced its VAT rate on sanitary products from 20% to 5.5% but 
French prices have remained broadly similar.

Sherriff said: “I’m delighted to have reached this agreement with Britain’s 
largest retailers that they will guarantee to pass on the tampon tax cut at the 
point of sale. It would be completely unacceptable if this measure just led to 
big businesses boosting their bottom line at the expense of women buying what 
are essential goods.

“I will be pressing some of the smaller chains to sign up to the same deal and 
for the manufacturers to recognise the cut in their recommended retail price.

“If for any reason we don’t get full agreement to this voluntary deal, I am 
prepared to push the case for the finance bill to include powers to impose a 
windfall tax in future.”

Osborne has yet to set a deadline for the abolition. Sherriff will table a 
further amendment to the bill setting a firm date if the government does not 
set out its own timetable soon. This is again expected to attract cross-party 
support.

In its letter to Sherriff, Morrisons’ head of policy and corporate affairs, 
David Scott, said: “This [reduction] is designed to directly benefit women and 
I am pleased to confirm that Morrisons will be passing the 5% reduction on to 
our customers when the relevant regulations come into force.”

Una Kent, communications director at Boots, told Sherriff that the chain would 
“absolutely” reflect the abolition in its pricing and added: “It’s encouraging 
to see these proactive steps being taken to help essential sanitary items 
become more accessible for all women.”

Writing on behalf of Asda’s chief executive, Andy Clarke, the senior director 
for corporate affairs, Chris Lowe, told Sherriff that abolishing the tax is a 
policy that the Walmart-owned supermarket “has long campaigned for and was the 
top action our Asda mums said they would like the government to take”.

Sherriff is also concerned that continued financial pressure on poorer 
families following the financial crisis has forced some women to visit food 
banks to get tampons, a situation likely to be the focus of a forthcoming 
campaign.


 