
The US drugstore chain Walgreens has abandoned plans to shift its headquarters 
to Europe as part of its £9bn takeover of the group that owns British 
high-street stalwart Boots the Chemist.

The US group, which has more than 8,000 US outlets, was under intense 
political pressure to keep its tax domicile in the US as it pushed ahead with 
the deal to buy the 55% share ofAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> it does not already own.

The decision is a blow to other US companies with similar tax-cutting plans, 
such as the US drugmaker Abbvie,which has embarked on a £31bn takeover of UK 
firm Shire, in pursuit of a UK domicile that will lower its tax bill. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/abbvie-shire-takeover-risk-us-halt-tax-inversion>

The deal spells a massive payday for Stefano Pessina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/06/italian-billionaire-stefano-pessina-richer-boots-walgreens-merger>
, the Italian billionaire who bought Boots in a heavily debt-funded deal with 
hedge fund Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in 2007. Pessina will get £1.5bn in cash and 
£2.95bn of shares, but the 73-year-old dealmaker has no plans to retire, and 
has been named as executive vice chairman of the combined company.

Walgreens' decision to keep its headquarters in Chicago, rather than take 
advantage of Alliance Boots' tax domicile in Berne, Switzerland, came after the 
US Treasury threatened to restrict tax benefits for American firms that go 
abroad for tax purposes and president Barack Obama accused tax-shifting 
companies of lacking patriotism.

Greg Wasson, chief executive of the combined company Walgreen Boots Alliance, 
said the risks of a "significant potential consumer backlash" from changing its 
tax domicile were too great.

The decision will be a bitter disappointment to Walgreens' shareholders, 
especiallyGoldman Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> and 
a group of hedge funds that had urged the pharmacy group to relocate to Europe 
to cut its tax bill.

Wasson told investors that Walgreens had done an "extensive study" of an 
inversion -the process of moving its corporate headquarters out of the US to 
reduce taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/14/corporate-inversion-moving-head-office-tax-purposes>
. But the company feared "a protracted controversy" with tax officials at the 
Internal Revenue Service that could see it bogged down in litigation for up to 
10 years, as well as the potential loss of government contracts.

"The parties could not arrive at a structure … to ensure that the transaction 
could withstand almost certain intense protracted IRS scrutiny," Wasson told 
investors. "While we fully understand the significant financial benefits of an 
inversion, when weighed against the risk, we determined that pursuing a 
structure that included an inversion was not the right structure for our future 
enterprise."
 Alliance Boots has more than 2,500 high street chemists across the UK. 
Photograph: Sergio Dionisio/AP 
On Tuesday the US Treasury secretary Jacob Lew said the Obama administration 
could act to reduce tax benefits for companies moving overseas for tax purposes 
without waiting for the approval of Congress. "If Congress doesn't act, we 
can't wait for months or years to go by and just watch companies make decisions 
as if nothing will change," Lewtold the New York Times. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/06/business/Action-in-washington-on-corporate-inversions.html>

According to the paper, 22 US companies have announced an inversion deal since 
2011, although the biggest potential deal so far, a hostile takeover of the UK 
pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca by its US rival Pfizer, fell through amid the 
political backlash in both countries.

Obama has argued that US companies pursuing inversions do not deserve to call 
themselves American companies. "I don't care if it's legal. It's wrong," he 
said in a speech last month.

Walgreens is paying £3.1bn in cash and £5.9bn in shares to take full control 
of Alliance Boots, having taken a 45% stake in 2012. The pharmacy group hopes 
to create "a new global leader in pharmacy-led health and wellbeing retail" 
that will have 11,000 stores in 10 countries.

Alliance Boots came under fire from tax campaigners, following the 2007 
takeover. On Wednesday the union Unite said the company had lowered its UK tax 
bill by more than £1bn since Pessina and KKR took charge, as it accused the 
company of "shirking its responsibilities".

Alliance Boots maintains that it has complied with the law and filed 
transparent financial reports. A spokeswoman said the company paid £90m in UK 
corporation tax in the most recent tax year, up from £64m in 2012/13.

Company sources said UK consumers would not see any immediate changes in Boots 
stores as a result of the deal. Boots will keep its headquarters in Nottingham 
and the company is not planning job losses or an overhaul of Boots stores. In 
the long run, the deal could see Boots expanding its vaccinations service and 
opening more pharmacies in health centres. Veteran retail analyst Nick Bubb 
said Pessina's involvement meant the deal seemed much more like a merger than a 
takeover. He added: "Although there was a risk that Walgreens drags Boots 
downmarket, in practice the UK business is likely to be left to its own devices 
and I don't think the consumer will notice any difference."
 