
When the villagers in Kilolo decided to build their secondary school on top of 
a hill they must have hoped to instil optimism and ambition into the sons and 
daughters they would send there. Thrust high into the vast blue Tanzanian sky, 
the view from the playground is a pure panorama across miles of acacia-clad 
hillsides. For now, though, the six pupils patiently waiting to tell me about 
their club are most concerned with keeping warm, shivering inside thick, green 
sweaters that don't quite keep out the chilly wind.

As I am about to discover, the Tuseme Club is no ordinary school society. Its 
achievements are unimaginably significant for the pupils and their community. 
"Tuseme" means "speak out!" in Kiswahili. It is a best-practice model for 
enabling female empowerment and gender awareness and is already having a 
radical, transformative impact throughout Africa.

World leaders aim to have equal numbers of boys and girls in secondary schools 
by 2015. In Tanzania, this balance has almost been achieved at Form One, yet by 
the time you get to A-levels only 41% of the class are girls. Somewhere in 
between, girls are being prevented from going to school. Much of this is down 
to poverty, with many families unable to pay school fees or supplementary costs 
such as stationery or uniforms.

But while poverty is important, it is prevailing gender prejudices which make 
such a family decide to educate their son rather than their daughter. The same 
prejudices make it harder for girls to excel once they are in the classroom.

Professor Penina Mlama is the executive director of Camfed (the Campaign for 
Female Education) in Tanzania, and creator of Tuseme. "Believe you me," she 
points her finger straight at me, "these girls, these Tuseme girls, are not 
going to allow anybody to trample on their lives. I have seen these girls and 
they are being transformed."

Tuseme is about helping children, teachers and parents to see gender 
discrimination, think about its effects and do something about it. It works 
like this. Two facilitators visit the school and work through a series of 
topics with 100 girls and boys. The pupils identify the things that make their 
education more difficult and drill down into these issues to find their root 
cause. Oliva, 17, was taken aback by the programme's capacity to encourage 
female participation. "It was amazing. Girls who normally just sit silently at 
the back were getting up and telling us exactly what their problems are," she 
says.

Each Tuseme group creates an action-plan to tackle the problems and devises 
songs, dances and sketches that explore the key issues. These are performed in 
front of an excited, inquisitive audience of teachers, parents, pupils and 
village authorities. Oliva told me why these simple performances are so 
effective. "You dramatise some of the ways adults are really treating children 
and then you ask the adults if what you have depicted is true."

Most striking about the action plan written up by Oliva's rural cohort is that 
their top four concerns are specific to girls: childhood pregnancy, gender 
discrimination within the classroom, the lack of a girls' counselling room and 
the overloading of girls with chores at home and at school. The very same 
issues are raised by both the Gender Unit of Tanzania's Education Ministry and 
the UK's Department for International Development, each with their millennium 
development goal thinking caps firmly on.

Top of the list is teenage pregnancy. This is symptomatic of a wider 
discrimination against women especially prevalent in rural areas. Many 
Tanzanian schoolgirls are very vulnerable to predatory men - and not just 
leering adolescents. Male teachers and even relatives can pose a threat, often 
promising school fees or uniform as bait for sexual acquiescence.

Mlama has been fighting gender discrimination all her life. "We have this huge 
problem of people thinking that women and girls are there basically as sexual 
objects, for the pleasure of men," she says. What makes this so much worse, 
according to Mlama, is that many girls are socially conditioned to accept this 
role, leaving them prone to sexual exploitation in a country where HIV/Aids is 
endemic; and fostering an acceptance among parents, teachers and pupils of both 
sexes that education is for boys rather than girls.

Tuseme is Mlama's ingenious strategy to equip girls with the confidence to 
resist this repression. In 2007, five girls left Oliva's secondary school due 
to pregnancy and several others are believed to have risked backstreet 
abortions. Since Tuseme began earlier this year, no such incidents have been 
reported.

Yet just as important as empowering the girls is informing the boys. Mlama 
recalls an extreme case of male guilt arising from Tuseme participation. "One 
teacher came to me after a workshop. He said, 'Where have you been? You should 
have done this thing many years ago. If I had gone through this 29 years ago it 
would have saved so many girls so much of the pain that I have inflicted upon 
them. Please go and do this to every school!'"

Amazed by its effectiveness, 14 African governments, including Tanzania's, now 
hope to include Tuseme in their education plans. Through the issues it 
addresses and the results it has produced, Tuseme shows that at its best, 
development can be about enabling some of the world's most vulnerable people to 
redefine and reassert themselves.

Supporting the Tuseme programme is an innovative part of Camfed's work 
promoting girls' education across the region. Empowering a Tanzanian secondary 
schoolgirl is one thing, but she needs to be at secondary school in the first 
place. Camfed provides bursaries to the girls who are most vulnerable to 
dropout through an air-tight structure of experienced volunteers from local 
education authorities. Staying at school means a girl is far less likely to be 
nudged into an early marriage or, worse, travel to Dar es Salaam to become one 
of many domestic servants or "house-girls". Such jobs are notorious for their 
miserable pay and conditions and for seeing young girls return to their village 
poorer, pregnant and HIV positive.

The millennium development goals can appear hopelessly optimistic. Too big, 
too soon, too difficult. Oliva might well agree, but she will still be taking 
action. "There are some problems we want to completely eliminate now, like 
pregnancy. Others we can only start on." Her Tuseme group has decided to make 
that start with gender awareness workshops in their villages. Impressed, I ask 
who will lead these - a parent, a teacher, someone from Camfed? "No," says 
Oliva. "We are going to do it."
 