
Teemu Selanne took one last tour of the Anaheim rink after the final horn, 
waving his stick at cheering fans while players from both teams banged their 
sticks on the ice. Despite the melancholy look on his face, the Finnish Flash 
said he has no regrets about returning to theAnaheim Ducks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anaheim-ducks> for one last season, even 
after they fell well short of another Stanley Cup title.

Selanne's 21-season NHL career probably ended on Friday night with a 6-2 loss 
to theLos Angeles Kings <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-kings> 
in Game 7 of their second-round series.

Los Angeles continued a remarkable run of crunch wins in this postseason, 
advancing to the Western Conference finals for a third-straight year. The Kings 
improved to a 6-0 record in games where a loss meant elimination from this 
season's playoffs.

Justin Williams, Jeff Carter and Mike Richards scored in a first period, 
laying the foundation for a comfortable win over their neighbours and chief 
rivals. Anze Kopitar, Marian Gaborik and Tanner Pearson also scored, and 
Jonathan Quick made 25 saves for LA.

Next up for the Kings is a West decider against reigning Stanley Cup champion 
Chicago, with the Blackhawks to host the opener on Sunday.

Corey Perry scored early in the third period for Anaheim, but also missed a 
penalty shot and was denied on a second-period breakaway. Kyle Palmieri scored 
late in the second period.


 Selanne, 43, has maintained he will retire this summer, keeping to his plan 
even after starring in a sixth Olympics and playing a significant role in the 
best regular season in franchise history in Anaheim, his home for parts of 15 
seasons.

"I've been flirting with this decision for a long time, but the passion and 
the fun always brought me back," said Selanne. "I still love this game, and I 
still know I can play, but it is better this way than having different 
situations, and that's why I think it is the right time."

The crowd chanted "Let's Go Teemu" in the final minutes, with even Kings fans 
joining in. After the final horn, Selanne accepted congratulations and 
eventually made it to the dressing room, where his famed composure slipped.

"I tried, but when I came in here, I couldn't hold myself anymore," Selanne 
said. "I didn't know what to do out there."

Selanne kept returning to the Ducks for seven straight years after he first 
contemplated retirement following their only Stanley Cup championship in 2007, 
each time hoping the Ducks would make another title run. He kept moving up the 
NHL's career scoring chart, currently sitting 15th with 1,457 points and 11th 
with 684 goals.

Selanne's ice time with the Ducks dwindled this year while coach Bruce 
Boudreau worked younger players into key roles. He still played a dependable 
role in Anaheim, bottling his frustration for one more run at a Cup.

"The 2007 Stanley Cup has to be the biggest crown for my career," Selanne 
said. "To be honest, the most proud I am is I have been able to play so many 
years and at this age. You all know when you get older, it's not going to get 
any easier. But to be able to compete against these young guys and still enjoy 
this and play well, that has been the greatest thing in my career. I'm really 
thankful for that."

Selanne has a full life in Southern California waiting for him after 
retirement. He opened a successful steak house in Laguna Beach last year, and 
his four children are comfortable in their year-round home in Coto De Caza, an 
Orange County community on Selanne's beloved golf course.

Yet in classic Selanne fashion, he didn't slam the door completely shut on the 
possibility he could play elsewhere next season. Speculation has been rampant 
in Finland and Russia about the possibility of luring Selanne to Jokerit, the 
Helsinki-based club that's joining the Kontinental Hockey League in the fall.

"I don't know, and I don't think so," Selanne said of a potential move to 
Jokerit. "I know there is a lot of interest for that, but I always said I was 
going to retire here. To be honest, I really don't have to play anywhere 
anymore. I could if I want, but right now I don't want to."

Selanne began his pro career with three years in Jokerit's junior development 
programme, and he played three seasons with the big-league club before joining 
the Winnipeg Jets for his record-settingNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> rookie year in 1992-93.

The game also might have been a finale for Saku Koivu, Selanne's fellow Finn 
and longtime friend. The 39-year-old was the Montreal Canadiens' captain before 
moving to Anaheim five years ago.

"I really don't have an answer for you," Koivu said. "Usually after the 
season, the last three or four years, I've been signing one-year contracts. And 
I'm going to go the same road, just to get away from the game for a couple of 
weeks and really take a good careful look at what happened, how the season 
went, and if there is enough left to come back and push for another year."

 