
Corey Perry took advantage of a defensive mistake to score a third-period 
winner in theAnaheim Ducks' 3-2 victory over the Winnipeg Jets on Sunday night, 
while Teemu Selanne got a standing ovation in what could be his last visit to 
Winnipeg.

Selanne, who is retiring after this season, began his NHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> career with the Jets in 1992-93 by 
setting rookie records of 76 goals and 132 points. The Ducks won't return to 
Winnipeg unless the teams meet in the playoffs.

"Some ways, you felt that I was on the home team," Selanne said with a laugh. 
After playing 231 games in a Jets uniform, Selanne was traded to Anaheim in 
February 1996 and didn't get to move with the Jets when they relocated to 
Atlanta. "I feel like even when I left, they have always been there after, too, 
so it's a good feeling," he said.

Viktor Fasth made 15 saves for Anaheim, who also got goals from Mathieu 
Perreault and Andrew Cogliano. Andrew Ladd had a pair of goals for Winnipeg, 
Blake Wheeler assisted on both in his 375th NHL game and Ondrej Pavelec stopped 
31 shots.

In other games on Sunday, the Vancouver Canucks had a 5-4 win over the Calgary 
Flames and the Carolina Hurricanes earned their first win of the season with a 
2-1 victory over thePhiladelphia Flyers.

At Calgary, Mike Santorelli scored his second goal at 3:17 in overtime to lead 
Vancouver to a comeback win. The Canucks scored three straight goals in the 
third period to lead 4-3, but with Flames goaltender Joey MacDonald on the 
bench for a sixth attacker David Jones sent the game into extra time with 19 
seconds remaining in regulation. Dale Weise, Jannik Hansen and Santorelli 
scored in the third after the Canucks fell behind 3-1 early in the period.

Canucks backup goaltender Eddie Lack made 32 saves in his first regular-season 
NHL game and David Booth scored for Vancouver in the first period. Mikael 
Backlund, Sean Monahan and Calgary captain Mark Giordano also scored for the 
Flames and Joey MacDonald stopped 23 shots.

At Raleigh, Radek Dvorak scored the winner in the second period. Jay Harrison 
also scored, Jeff Skinner added two assists and Anton Khudobin made 17 saves in 
his Hurricanes' debut. Luke Schenn scored for the Flyers, who have opened the 
season with three losses for the second year in a row. Before last year, 
Philadelphia had lost its first three games only one other time in club history.
 