
Venkatesh Routh lives with his wife and two-year-old son in Mancherial, a 
small city in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. Three nights a week he says 
goodbye to his wife, who is nine months pregnant, and goes to the railway 
station. But instead of getting on a train he walks to the end of the brightly 
lit platform, past the chai-wallah selling hot sweet tea, to the point where 
the floodlights go no further. Here he steps into a maze of dirt paths and 
thorny bushes. There are no women, and the men have all come for the same 
reason: to have sex with other men.

"I come here in secret," says Venkatesh, standing in the dark. A train 
clatters past, horn blaring. "I am a kothi [effeminate homosexual]. I didn't 
want to get married, but my family members pressured me. Every day for three 
years they kept asking, 'Why don't you marry?'"

"When I started coming here for sex I'd heard the word 'Aids', but I didn't 
know how you get it. I didn't know how to use a condom," he says. "Now I show 
other people how to use them properly."

As 29-year-old Venkatesh fills up the condom box bolted to a crumbling wall 
among the bushes, he is taking part in what looks to be one of the most 
promising HIV prevention efforts in the developing world in recent years. All 
over Andhra Pradesh, men who have sex with other men - who may or may not think 
of themselves as gay or bisexual and who are often married with families - are 
forming community groups and helping each other to solve their own problems. 
Venkatesh is one of them.

One in seven men who have sex with men in Andhra Pradesh is HIV positive 
according to the state government. They are almost 20 times more likely to be 
infected with HIV than the average Indian adult (the national adult prevalence 
rate is 0.36%). This is because unprotected anal sex with multiple partners 
carries a high risk of HIV, and because discrimination drives men who have sex 
with men underground.

Homosexuality is illegal in India under the notorious section 377 of the 
Indian penal code and is a social taboo. There is incredible pressure for men 
who are attracted to men to hide their sexuality. Sex between men is often 
limited to brief liaisons at so-called "hotspots" behind a train station or by 
the side of a highway. "We wear a mask, the masculine mask," says Krishna, 
founder of a network for men who have sex with men in Andhra Pradesh. "We drop 
our voices, change our walk. That is drama, you have to act."

Because men who have sex with men are so well hidden, it is almost impossible 
for government Aids agencies or HIV/Aids charities to reach them. "The 
Government people can't walk around looking for hotspots," Krishna says, 
laughing at the thought. "They can't find them!"

Men such as Krishna, however, do know where to look. In Andhra Pradesh, 
community-based organisations (CBOs) made up of men who have sex with men can 
now be found in every district. Outreach workers at the CBOs map all of the sex 
hotspots in their area and visit them daily, armed with an HIV education 
flipbook, a stash of condoms, lubricant, and a plastic model of a penis. Each 
CBO is supported by a local non-governmental organisation (NGO) which provides 
a drop-in centre and sexual health clinic, and a state level NGO, the Alliance 
for AIDS Action, a partner of the International HIV/Aids Alliance, which 
coordinates the programmes and provides training to the community groups.

CBO members also work with police, doctors and parents to tackle the wider 
discrimination that puts men like them at risk of HIV. "I tried to go to the 
government hospital because of an anal infection, but the doctor called me a 
kojja [derogatory word for transsexual] and refused to see me," says Venkatesh. 
"I felt so bad I wanted to commit suicide," he says, "but now we do workshops 
with the doctors to make them understand us better." This work is crucial as 
untreated sexually transmitted infections increase men's vulnerability to HIV. 
If the sessions fail then Venkatesh will try other means - one doctor who 
constantly refused to treat men who have sex with men was sacked recently after 
CBO members talked to the hospital authorities.

Most groups also try to improve relations with the police because, as one man 
says, they "harrass us like hell". I was told about police at hotspots 
demanding bribes ("they will pocket whatever we have"), and arresting, beating 
and raping men. In response to this and violence by local thugs, CBOs have 
formed Rapid Action Teams - if a man is in trouble he can ring for help and a 
group of his peers will quickly come to the scene and challenge the attacker. 
CBOs also do "sex and sexuality" training to build a rapport and understanding 
with the police.

The results for these projects are staggering. An evaluation in 2007 showed 
that 96% of men who have sex with men reported using a condom with their last 
male partner, up from 55% in 2003. The prevalence of syphilis, which is used as 
an indicator for HIV, more than halved in the same period. This is a cause for 
celebration not just for men who have sex with men, but also for their wives. 
Roughly eight out of 10 men who have sex with men in Andhra Pradesh are married 
and if they become HIV positive it is very likely that their wives will too. 
The state Aids prevention body estimates that 96% of men who have sex with men 
in Andhra Pradesh (that they know of) are now being reached by this type of 
programme.

The Alliance for Aids Action hopes that by empowering men who have sex with 
men to solve their own problems, these changes can be made to last. "How long 
can a third party run a programme?" asks Narendra Nath, a senior programme 
officer at the alliance. "When this project finishes [in about five years] we 
hope that the CBOs will be able to keep doing the HIV prevention work."

Back in the maze of bushes by Mancherial train station a group of three kothis 
who have come here in search of "someone beautiful" crowd around. The mood is 
jovial and they joke that one man in our group is "looking very smart!"

"I don't tell my wife I come here because she'll feel bad," one says. But I 
use a condom - I don't want to make her suffer."
 