
Dar Hajra, near Ronda, Andalucía

Rooms in Dar Hajra – which means "House of the Rocks" – are sculpted around a 
limestone outcrop just above Montecorto, a sleepy village near Ronda's busy 
streets and tempting bodegas. With a double bedroom, a big kitchen-diner, a 
handful of terraces with breathtaking panoramas, and a romantic infinity pool, 
any couple will struggle to leave this delectable retreat.
• From £134 a night, sleeps two (minimum seven nights)

Bolonia Beach Houses, near Tarifa, Andalucía

These three cool casitas (for two to six people) are all about outside space. 
With mesmerising views towards the Atlantic Ocean and a playful communal garden 
peppered with mysterious sandstone monoliths and tempting daybeds, Bolonia will 
make couples and curious kids feel equally at home. Each house has a 
well-equipped kitchen and a private terrace with a barbecue, plus you're just a 
short drive from the windsurfing/kitesurfing beaches of Tarifa and the hamlet 
of Bolonia, wherechiringuitos (beach bars) operate throughout the summer.
• From £98 a night for a two-to-three person house

Molino Rio Alajar, Sierra de Aracena, Andalucía

This tranquil escape, surrounded by forests of oak and chestnut, inspires 
families to run free through the rural grounds, swim in the outdoor pool, and 
embark on adventures along ancient footpaths that lead straight from their 
door. Six cottages (sleeping up to six) arch around views of the Alajar valley, 
each with a top-quality kitchen and a terrace for alfresco dining. Welcome 
baskets and shopping services are available, and there are plenty of vegetables 
to choose from in the on-site garden.
• From £85 a night for a two-person cottage (minimum two nights)

Finca Naranja, near Ronda, Andalucía

This enchanting, architect-designed cluster of cottages in the hills near 
Ronda fuses rustic Andaluz materials, south-east Asian artefacts and 
contemporary works of art. Well spaced for privacy, the four suites each sleep 
between two and five people and have their own terrace, a simple kitchenette, 
and a fridge pre-stocked with breakfast ingredients, plus bread and muffins are 
delivered each morning. Guests share a communal barbecue, a pool and a 
chill-out meadow with an honesty bar. Ronda is just a 15-minute drive away, and 
there are bicycles for roaming the bucolic countryside.
• From £113 a night for a two-person cottage (minimum three nights)

Casita la Terraza, near Tarifa, Andalucía

With a spectacular setting, high above the Tarifa coastline, this cosy cottage 
has astounding views. It's set in the rambling grounds of a country house and 
visitors have shared use of the owners' pool, plus limitless outdoor activities 
within easy reach. Birdwatchers, hikers, kitesurfers and windsurfers will all 
be in their element and, when the day is done, there's a peaceful, private 
terrace for supper and sundowners.
• From £64 a night, sleeps two (minimum four nights)

Apartment 43, Jerez de la Frontera, Andalucía

Despite its modern interior, this apartment was once the salon of a 
19th-century mansion, just yards from the historic centre of Jerez. Now a cool, 
calm loft for up to five guests, it comes with a mezzanine master bedroom, a 
second double or twin, a striking chrome staircase, and a fabulous kitchen with 
every conceivable gizmo. It's perfect for a long weekend in this underrated 
city, whose highlights include the Alcázar fortress, sherry bodegas and the 
Museo Arqueológico.
• From £138 a night, sleeps 2-5 (minimum three nights) 

Pedrera Boutique Apartment, Barcelona


In a tourist hub like Barcelona, Pedrera Apartment offers a rare 
home-from-home experience. Owned by an interior designer (who rents it out on 
demand), this classy two-bedroom bolthole in Eixample has loads of space and is 
within walking distance of all the major sights. Step off the streets and take 
the old-fashioned lift to your sunlit apartment, complete with original floor 
tiles and a working fireplace. There's plenty of cooking equipment for lazy 
brunches, and owner Alex's insider tips ensure dining out is a pleasure.
• From £143 a night, sleeps four (minimum three nights)

Alemanys 5, Girona, Catalonia

This 16th-century house turned stunning 21st-century Girona pad was 
transformed by architect-owner Anna Noguera, and is now available to 
in-the-know city visitors. Available as two apartments (sleeping six) or one 
large house (sleeping 10), the flexible living spaces beautifully merge ancient 
and modern, not least in the state-of-the-art kitchens. Explore Girona's 
atmospheric Jewish quarter, seek out hidden beaches by bicycle, or take a night 
off cooking to sample the delights ofEl Celler de Can Roca 
<http://www.cellercanroca.com/index.htm>, one of the world's best restaurants.
• From £139 a night, sleeps four (based on a seven-night stay) 

Ea Astei, Basque Country

Go modern or rustic at this unique Basque Country resort – there are 
traditional cabins, enormous apartments and sleek wood-and-glass lodges to 
choose from. Sleeping six, they all benefit from a gorgeous forest setting, 
plus amenities including a large outdoor pool, a sauna and a terrace with 
sweeping hillside views. Wherever you stay, you'll have your own kitchen which 
we recommend stocking with fresh produce from nearby Guernica market – the 
cheese, ham, honey and cider are all particularly good.
• From £114 a night for a four-person lodge (minimum two nights)

El Secreto de Ollo, near Pamplona, Navarra

Families will love the two-bedroom self-catering apartment at this peaceful 
guesthouse. Parents get a four-poster master bedroom, kids have their own 
bunkbed room, and there's an airy, open-plan kitchen-living room for 
home-cooked meals. You're in the tiny village of Ollo, near the region's 
ancient capital, Pamplona, but in a bonafide rural idyll, handy for valley 
walking, wild swimming and horse riding.
• From £142 a night, sleeps four

For further details and to book any of the featured accommodation, go to 
i-escape.com/spain <http://www.i-escape.com/spain/>
 