
The Aeneid by Virgil

Dido, Queen of Carthage, greets Aeneas and his son. But the latter is the 
disguised love god Cupid, instructed by his mother Venus to make the Queen fall 
for Aeneas. "Unhappy Dido little thought what guest, / How dire a god she drew 
so near her breast. / But he, not mindless of his mother's pray'r, / Works in 
the pliant bosom of the fair".

Troilus and Criseyde by Geoffrey Chaucer

Inside the impregnable walls of Troy handsome Troilus fancies himself 
impregnable to love. Then he strolls into the temple and sees the beautiful 
widow Criseyde. "And sodeynly he wax ther-with astoned, / And gan hire bet 
biholde in thrifty wyse: / 'O mercy, god!' thoughte he, 'wher hastow woned, / 
That art so fair and goodly to devyse?'"

Romeo and Juliet by William Shakespeare

The Capulets throw a swell party, and Romeo, a self-assured ladies' man, 
attends in disguise. Then he sees Juliet. "Did my heart love till now? forswear 
it, sight! / For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night". Moments later they 
speak together for the first time, in the alternately rhyming lines of a love 
sonnet.

Paradise Lost by John Milton

Adam tells the angel Raphael of the moment when he first saw Eve in a dream 
vision, "which from that time infused / Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before, 
/ And into all things from her air inspired / The spirit of love and amorous 
delight". He wakes to find she is real and he is hooked.

"The Lady of Shalott" by Alfred, Lord Tennyson

The mysterious, cursed lady sees Sir Lancelot in the mirror in her room, and 
rushes to the window. She has seen the man she cannot resist, but thereby is 
she doomed. She gets in a boat, and as she floats down the river "chanted 
lowly, / Till her blood was frozen slowly, / And her eyes were darken'd wholly".

Basil by Wilkie Collins

Travelling home on a London omnibus, posh Basil falls in love at first sight 
with a fellow passenger, a linen-draper's daughter called Margaret Sherwin. He 
follows her to her home, courts her and eventually marries her. However, she is 
not the right woman: she cheats on him, and he embarks on a violent struggle 
with her paramour.

Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy

At the railway station to meet his mother, Vronsky steps back to let a lady 
out of her compartment and glimpses her face. "In that brief look Vronsky had 
time to notice the suppressed eagerness which played over her face . . . It was 
as though her nature were so brimming over with something that against her will 
it showed itself now in the flash of her eyes, and now in her smile". Their 
fates are sealed.

A World of Love by Elizabeth Bowen

Jane Danby discovers a hoard of mysterious love letters in the rambling Irish 
manor house where her parents work. She puzzles over their possible recipient 
and discovers about her parents' past affairs of the heart. On the novel's last 
page, she herself meets a man: "They no sooner looked but they loved."

Catch-22 by Joseph Heller

It comes in the novel's very first sentence: "It was love at first sight. The 
first time Yossarian saw the chaplain he fell madly in love with him." As he 
lies in his hospital bed, Bombardier John Yossarian sees Chaplain Tappman and 
knows that he will be the only person in a mad world he can really trust.

The Amateur Marriage by Anne Tyler

Tyler's story of a long marriage that ends in divorce begins with love at 
first sight. In 1940s Baltimore, Pauline Barclay walks into the grocery store 
where Michael Anton is working. She has cut her head jumping off a streetcar. 
As Michael sticks a makeshift bandage on her head he knows he is "a goner".
 