
App: Tepilo <http://www.tepilo.com>

By: Tepilo/Ashley Bolser Agency <http://www.bolseragency.com/mobileapps/>

Price: Free

Available on: Nokia <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nokia>

What is it?

A property platform that lets you securely buy, sell or let homes for free.

Who is it by?

Tepilo was founded in July 2009 by property expert Sarah Beeny 
<http://www.sarahbeeny.com/> and named after a "fantastical palace called 
Tepilo" her father told her about in childhood stories. Beeny is well-known for 
her property TV show Property Ladder and themysinglefriend 
<http://www.mysinglefriend.com/> dating website. The app was developed by the 
Ashley Bolser Agency.

What does it promise?

Users can search for properties for sale or to rent listed on the Tepilo 
website, from which the app sources content. The difference between this and 
the likes of Rightmove and FindaProperty is that Tepilo only includes 
properties listed for sale or rent privately. According to the marketing blurb, 
it "allows you to take independent control of buying, selling or letting your 
property – with no charges or commission". The app also allows users to search 
for flatshares, which is powered bySpareroom.co.uk <http://www.spareroom.co.uk/>
.

How does it work?

Type in a postcode to search for properties in your chosen area, or search in 
your current location using your phone's GPS. Results are displayed reasonably 
coherently and interesting properties can be stored under a favourites list.

Is it easy to use?

Consumers who already have property apps should find it simple enough. It's a 
basic search engine with photo galleries, an integrated map and buttons to 
contact the seller or save a property. To use the latter facility you need to 
register or log-in to a Tepilo account.

Is it fun?

This might depend on how you view estate agents. Many might be tickled by an 
irritation-free property search, given that Tepilo cuts out potentially 
unnecessary middle-men from property deals.

Is it pretty?

Considering the homepage features a large and prominent photo of Sarah Beeny, 
the answer is undoubtedly yes. But Beeny aside, the homepage is clean and 
simple and navigation is intuitive. However, I'm not a fan of the way text is 
displayed (this could be a limitation of the Nokia N8 rather than the app 
itself), and it uses a nasty font that appears pixellated – given that I was 
unable to zoom in using the N8 there was nothing I could do about it. Another 
mild complaint is the map is slow to respond and similarly nasty, looking 
nothing like a streamlined, integrated GoogleMap.

Should you download it?

If you're looking for property and don't wish to deal with estate agents, this 
is the app for you. Naturally, it doesn't have the reach of the Rightmove or 
FindaProperty apps, which is apparent when just a handful of results appear 
after a postcode search – but this should improve in time, and serious property 
hunters might be missing a trick if they ignore private sales or rents.

Those looking to buy a home might have greater leverage to negotiate on the 
seller's asking price given that the app only lists private sales – sellers 
will not be incurring estate agent fees so should have room to manouevre – 
which is worth thinking about.

Some slight drawbacks are the photo galleries, which are quite small on the 
Nokia N8 I tested it on – with no ability to make them larger – meaning the 
thumbnails pics aren't enough to make a sensible decision about a property. 
Also, it's a great shame that the app is only available on Nokia's Ovi store at 
present. I can't help but think it might look prettier and work more smoothly 
if it was running on an Android device or, of course, the iPhone.
 