 When Teresa Gorman stands down at the 2001 election, her yellow jacket - aimed 
to catch the Speaker's eye - will be missed. So will her double function as the 
sand in the parliamentary oyster, as a radical feminist and hard right Tory 
Europhobe. I never thought I mourn her passing after our first confrontation, 
when I uncovered the fact that she had taken 10 years off her age in 1987 to 
inherit in the safe Tory seat of Billericay from Harvey Proctor, maligned as a 
whipper of rent boys.
When I flourished her birth and marriage certificates which showed she was 55, 
not 45 as she had claimed to her selection conference, Mrs Gorman said: "It's a 
fair cop!"

Her selectors' gullibility was understandable. She showed the effectiveness of 
hormone replacement therapy, of which she is a prime defender as "St Teresa of 
the Menopause". Even as she departs at 69, her skin, appearance and behaviour 
are those of a much younger woman.

The saddest thing about her departure is the manner of it. In 2000 she was 
suspended for a month for misleading the Commons' standards and privileges 
committee about properties owned, some overseas, by her husband and herself.

She hated this sort of fussy poking into her affairs because she has always 
been an extreme economic libertarian, opposed to any official nannying. She 
also claimed that she was the victim of a tit-for-tat political campaign.

As the feminist daughter of an Irish building worker, she also detests middle 
class idiots, particularly if they are also male chauvinist pigs. She declared 
herself the "enemy of the old, wet Tories who think they were born to rule." 
Her 1994-95 Europhobe rebellions provoked her chief whip to want to exile her 
to the Falklands. In 1997 she deserted John Redwood as "a bad-mannered, 
insensitive snob whose remarks on single mothers were a disaster", dismissed 
William Hague as a "Willie" and voted for Europhile Ken Clarke.

It was an example of a bright woman who "considers every subject on its 
merits", as Gerald Kaufman confirms. Typical of her independence is her 
rejection of accepted wisdom about global warming. As a biologist with a first 
class honours degree from London University, she prefers blaming sunspots.

Her militant feminism made her part of the bipartisan Commons feminist 
sisterhood into which she was welcomed by admiring Labour and LibDem women. But 
she only had contempt for the docile "New Labour" Blair-worshipping 1997 
generation of women MPs who refused to use their enhanced strength 
independently.

Mrs Gorman, though, had always acted independently. Her low horizon family 
expected her to become "a hairdresser or someone's secretary". Instead she 
became a biology teacher. When she found schools could not afford microscopes, 
she developed teaching aids which she sold all over the world through her firm 
Banta. Only middle class conformist Conservative chauvinists will not miss her.

Ask Aristotle about Teresa Gorman 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-2003,00.html>
 