
Entering the Competition

1. The Guardian Small Business Network – Business Advice competition (the 
"Competition") is open to UK residents aged 18 and over ("You") subject to 
paragraph 2, below.

2. The Competition is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited ("GNM", "Us" or "We") its group companies or their family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, persons who have previously registered 
with the Guardian Small Business Network or anyone else connected with the 
creation or administration of the Competition.
3. By entering the Competition you are accepting these terms and conditions.

4. To enter the Competition, you must:
a. be a new registrant to the Guardian Small Business Network;
b. provide all required information by completing and submitting the 
registration form to become a member of the small business network; and
c. submit 100 words or fewer on the topic of the best piece of advice for 
running a business.
If You have any questions about how to enter or in connection with the 
Competition, please e-mail us at professionalnetworks@theguardian.com with 
"Small Business Network Business Advice competition" in the subject line.
5. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry 
to us.

6. Only one entry is permitted per person. 

7. The closing date and time of the Competition is 11:59 on 3 July 2013. 
Entries received after that date and time will not be considered.

8. Entrants shall retain the copyright in their entry and can use it as they 
choose

9. By submitting an entry to the Competition, You give GNM:
a. a non-exclusive, royalty free worldwide, irrevocable, perpetual licence to 
GNM to publish the entry in any format including, without limitation, the right 
to publish the entry in electronic format and hard copy for purposes connected 
with the Competition ; and
b. the right to use your name and town or city of residence for the sole 
purpose of identifying You as the author of your entry and/or as the winner of 
the Competition.GNM will always try to identify entrants as the author of the 
entries but entrants acknowledge that it is not always possible for GNM to do 
so. Entrants irrevocably and unconditionally waive their moral rights to be 
identified as the author of the entries.

10. Your entry must be your own work, must not be copied, must not contain any 
third-party materials and/or content that You do not have permission to use and 
must not otherwise be obscene, defamatory or in breach of any applicable 
legislation or regulations. If We have reason to believe your entry is not your 
own work or otherwise breaches this paragraph 10, then We may not consider it.

Picking the winner

11. A panel of judges will choose one winning entry from all eligible 
Competition entries. Full details of the judging process and the judges are 
available on request to professionalnetworks@theguardian.com with "Small 
Business Network Business Advice competition" in the subject line.

12. The winning entry will be the entry, which, in the sole discretion of the 
judges, is the most original piece of business advice that is both helpful and 
inspirational to others running a small business. This can be in the form of 
advice for growing a business that you have found useful, an insight on 
starting up for success, what you have found inspirational when running a 
business or have learned to build into your business that has been a genuine 
part of your business success and is replicable by others in  the small 
business community.

13. The judges' decision of who the winner will be made on or before 2 August 
2013. The judges' decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.

The Prizes

14. The winner will win a package of advertising across Guardian print and 
online platforms with a value of £50,000.

15. The winner will be notified by GNM by email on or before 31 August 2013. 
If the winner does not respond to GNM within 7 days of being notified by GNM, 
then the winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner (and that winner will have to respond to the email from GNM 
within 7 days of being notified by GNM or else they will also forfeit their 
prize). Details of the winner and their winning entry will be published on 
theguardian.com/small-business-network by 30th September 2013 or (at GNM's sole 
discretion) at a later date.

16. The prize and dates of advertising package will be confirmed with the 
winner by GNM on or before 31 October 2013

17. The prize cannot be exchanged or transferred by You and cannot be redeemed 
by You for cash or any other prize. You must pay all other costs associated 
with the prize and not specifically included in the prize.

18. We retain the right to substitute the prize with another prize of similar 
value in the event that the original prize offered is not available.
Some other rules

19. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint 
submissions are not allowed.
20. We take no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt.

21. Details of the winner can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed 
envelope to the following address: Guardian Small Business Network – Business 
Advice Competition, GP Marketing First floor, Guardian News & Media Limited, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

22. No purchase is necessary. 

23. The winner may be required for promotional activity.

24. The Promoter of the Competition is Guardian News & Media Limited whose 
address is Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Any complaints regarding 
the Competition should be sent to this address.

25. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence.

26. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by You as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting any prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to You or any other person's computer relating to or resulting 
from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the 
Competition.

27. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding.

28. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure.

29. The Competition will be governed by English law.
 