
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has slumped out of the 
world’s brand premier league and been overtaken by the German discounter Aldi 
in the latest sign of the damage caused by a £263m accounting scandal and 
errors on pricing, quality and customer service.

The UK’s biggest retailer, ranked as the 17th most valuable global brand only 
five years ago, is no longer in the top 100, analysis by the research agency 
Millward Brown shows. Its brand value, according to the report – which balances 
brand power with financial performance – fell 37% in the past year.

By contrast, Aldi’s brand value rose 22% to $11.7bn (£7.6bn), putting it 90th.

Mike Dennis, an analyst at Cantor Fitzgerald, said: “Tesco has been tainted 
not just by accounting scandals but because it didn’t serve the customer – it 
served itself.”

Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> is the fastest growing 
grocery retailer in the UK, but is also grabbing market share from traditional 
retailers across Europe.

Dennis said Tesco’s new chief executive, the brand expert Dave Lewis, had a 
tough job on his hands to rebuild its reputation. He said: “Lewis has not only 
got to understand how to get the Tesco brand back at the family dining table 
but to understand what those people want to consume.”

Tesco timeline – the retail giant's rise and fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/09/tesco-timeline-the-retail-giants-rise-and-fall>
Tesco’s fate reflects a changing world market in which technology and 
communications brands such as Verizon and AT&T have overtaken traditional 
consumer brands, including Coca Cola and McDonald’s, to lead the rankings.

At the head of the pack is Apple, which increased its brand value by 67% to 
$246.99bn in the past year, overtaking Google to reclaim its position as the 
world’s most valuable brand. Millward Brown said the success of the iPhone 6 
and a “relentless focus on the consumer experience” had putApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> back on top. A decade ago, the 
company was not even in the top 10.

Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> nearly doubled its 
brand value, leaping nine places up the world rankings to 12th as it benefited 
from stepping into new services and finding a way to make money from its fans’ 
impulse to share their life stories.

The rise of the tech brands took the value of the top 100 to $3.3tn, an 
increase of 14% in the past year.

But it was not all good news for such companies. Yahoo! dropped out of the top 
100 as it struggled to keep up with the trend from desktop to mobile technology 
and moved out of China. Twitter was the biggest faller, sliding 21 places to 
92nd, closely followed by Samsung, a victim of Apple’s success, which dropped 
16 places to 45th. Ebay was down 12 places to 73rd.

While traditional retailers such as Walmart, Ikea, H&M and Zara all slipped 
down the rankings,Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> Group, 
the Chinese online retailer, jumped straight into 13th place – one spot ahead 
of its US rival Amazon – which fell four places.

Alibaba floated on the New York stock exchange last year with a valuation of 
$187bn, and leads a rising cohort of Chinese companies in the top 100.

New entrants include the telecoms firms Huawei and China Telecom, while the 
insurance companies China Life and Ping An joined Tencent, the business behind 
the mobile service WeChat and the search engine Baidu, among the biggest risers 
in terms of brand value.

Only two categories declined – global banks and luxury goods. 

The brand value of the top 10 banks slipped 2% as they suffered a “massive 
deficit in consumer trust,” according to Millward Brown’s report, amid 
continuing revelations about misdeeds from Libor and foreign exchange market 
rigging to payment protection mis-selling.

Michel Bergesen, a brand consultant at Landor Associates, said: “The banks 
shook every dimension of trust we might have had. They recovered to the point 
where we now have transactional trust. But I distinguish that from relational 
trust. I trust you to get the job done. You are part of the world’s financial 
plumbing. But do I really trust you in the sense that I would trust.”

Gucci, Hermes and Louis Vuitton all fell down the rankings and Prada dropped 
out of the top 100 as sales growth slowed in the important Chinese market in 
the wake of new anti-corruption legislation. Millward Brown said: “Some 
consumers, particularly [young people], viewed luxury products as expensive 
indulgences inconsistent with their desire to live in a modest and sustainable 
way.”


How does brand valuation work?

Millward Brown combines financial and consumer research to quantify the worth 
of brands in its survey.

The process starts with a calculation of earnings generated by a particular 
brand through analysing information from annual reports and other sources 
including Kantar Retail.

Millward Brown then assesses the potential for future earnings as a multiple 
of current earnings to give a financial value to a brand, similar to that 
adopted by City analysts when valuing a company.

The next step involves examining a brand’s ability to make people pay more for 
an item and buy more products - its “brand contribution”. This is calculated 
with the aid of research covering 3 million consumers and more than 100,000 
brands in more than 50 markets to build up a global picture of brands, category 
by category and market by market.

Finally, the financial value of the brand calculated by Millward Brown is 
multiplied by a percentage figure representing the brand contribution to 
calculate the value of the brand featured in the top 100 report.
 