
When Firmin Gémier, the actor playing Père Ubu, uttered the opening line of 
Alfred Jarry's play Ubu Roi at its Paris premiere in 1896, its author gained 
instant notoriety. Although consisting of just one made-up word, "merdre" - for 
which one English translation is "shittr" - it was enough to cause 15 minutes 
of uproar in the audience. When the play continued, its mix of absurd humour 
and obscenity provoked heckling, and scuffles broke out. in the auditorium. 
Nobody had seen anything like it. A perplexed WB Yeats, who attended the 
performance, famously said: "What more is possible? After us, the Savage God."

The Savage God sounds suspiciously like a rock band, and Jarry managed, in 
fact, to create one of music's odder distributaries, thanks to the concept of 
'pataphysics. Jarry's school physics teacher - nicknamed Père Hébé by his 
pupils - managed to influence his charge in ways he never intended. As well as 
providing the seed of Père Ubu's name, Hébé's bungling manner, disastrous 
experiments and inability to control a class led Jarry to the creation of the 
spoof science of 'pataphysics, in which contradictions are embraced, with all 
possible viewpoints having equal validity. (The apostrophe was apparently 
necessary to "avoid a simple pun", although what that pun was has never been 
explained.)

To the extent that people are familiar in any way with 'pataphysics, it would 
probably be through the Beatles. Paul McCartney heard a radio production of 
Jarry's play Ubu Coco (Ubu Cuckolded) and was inspired to mention 'pataphysics 
in song. Unfortunately, he dropped it into Maxwell's Silver Hammer, one of his 
very worst. But, that disaster notwithstanding, 'pataphysics has a curious 
place in music, a place that will be marked tonight at the Queen Elizabeth Hall 
in London, with a musical production, Bring Me the Head of Ubu Roi, featuring 
the veteran US avant-rock band Pere Ubu, which will be preceded by a free 
'Pataphysics in Sound concert in the venue's foyer.

Put into a brief idiot's guide - which, one assumes, would be as 
'pataphysically valid as any other guide - 'pataphysics is, in Jarry's words, 
"the science of imaginary solutions" and "the law governing exceptions". In it, 
science's apparently immutable laws are scoffed at. To Jarry, they are merely 
"the correlation of exceptions, albeit more frequent ones ... which reduced to 
the status of unexceptional exceptions, possess no longer even the virtue of 
originality". 'Pataphysics was, he said, "the greatest of all sciences".

Jarry claimed that "talking about things that are understandable only weighs 
down the mind and falsifies the memory, but the absurd exercises the mind and 
makes the memory work". He was a singular artist who aimed to live life as a 
total hallucination. To this end, he drank formidable quantities of wine and 
absinthe, which precipitated his demise at the age of 34 in 1907.

Jarry's legacy was formalised posthumously in 1948 by the founding of the 
Collège de 'Pataphysique in Paris. Its constitution asserts that all people are 
'pataphysicians whether they know it or not, but paid-up Collège members have 
included artists Asger Jorn, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst, Jean Dubuffet, Eugene 
Ionesco, Jean Baudrillard, Umberto Eco, and the Marx Brothers. And its precepts 
have produced music more interesting and challenging than Maxwell's Silver 
Hammer.

Duchamp created a number of musical compositions, many purely conceptual. But 
when Stephane Ginsburgh recorded Duchamp's 1913 opus Erratum Musical a few 
years back, he took into account Duchamp's observation that 'pataphysics 
involved "canned chance" and ensured all the piece's 88 piano notes were picked 
out in a random order with no emphasis on any one in particular. In 1960, Jean 
Dubuffet, who originated the term Art Brut, taped a series of improvisations 
with Asger Jorn, choosing from his collection of more than 50 instruments, few 
of which he could play to any recognised standard. These energetic, chaotic 
recordings were released as Expériences Musicales in 1961. And in 1975, the 
English composer Gavin Bryars - a member of the Collège de 'Pataphysique - 
wrote Ponukélian Melody, a slow piece for wheezing organ, parping tuba, cello 
and bells. It was his musical response to Raymond Roussel's novel Impressions 
d'Afrique, which was set in an imaginary African country.

But 'pataphysics first truly overlapped with rock music in 1967, when Soft 
Machine - a psychedelic pop group with a penchant for improvisation - performed 
a live soundtrack to Jarry's play Ubu Enchainé (Ubu Enchained) at the Traverse 
theatre in Edinburgh during that year's Fringe festival. Early in the band's 
career, drummer and vocalist Robert Wyatt's whimsical, absurdist lyrics were 
often described as Dadaist. But were they, more accurately, 'pataphysical?

"I wasn't drawn to Jarry and 'pataphysics from reading about it," Wyatt 
explains. "I think we were chosen to be 'pataphysicians before I knew what it 
was. Later, we were playing in Paris, and some representatives of the College 
of 'Pataphysics came to the concert. A venerable old member of their group 
heard it for about five minutes, thought we played the most incomprehensible 
and appalling music he had ever heard, gave us his blessing and gave us 
certificates. So we are officially Petits Fils Ubu - Ubu's grandchildren - and 
in our case it gives us the right to lead the marching band at the front of the 
victory parade of the 'pataphysical movement. But nobody who gave it to us 
thought to explain it any more than you would explain a football match to a 
teddy bear mascot."

For Soft Machine Volume Two, recorded in 1968, Wyatt wrote A 'Pataphysical 
Introduction and A Concise British Alphabet. The latter is in two parts: he 
sings the alphabet forwards in the first, backwards in the second. This 
followed in the footsteps of Luc Etienne's 1957 composition L'Apres-Midi d'Un 
Magnétophone: Palindromes Phonétiques, which has a similarly palindromic form - 
a recording of speech played normally, then with the tape running backwards . 
This emphasised that, 'pataphyscially speaking, it meant as much, or as little, 
either way around, and 'pataphysicians would describe the relationship of 
Etienne's composition to Wyatt's as an example of "plagiarism by anticipation".

Was Wyatt guided by any of these concepts? "I don't think I was guided by any 
thought at all," he admits. "But I just decided that singing the alphabet 
backwards was a 'pataphysical activity. Some people get upset by art that 
doesn't make sense to them - I never had that problem. I never saw what was the 
sense that modern art wasn't making. I was always at home with the science of 
imaginary solutions."

Tonight's performance of Bring Me the Head of Ubu Roi is just the latest in a 
long line of different treatments of Ubu Roi, from Jan Lenica's 1977 cartoon 
version to a 1991 opera by Polish composer Krzysztof Penderecki. Jarry had an 
interest in the notion of "horrible beauty" in which an aesthetic appreciation 
of the monstrous was allowable and discordant elements could be counterbalanced 
by humour. Pere Ubu's singer, David Thomas, agrees that this is a pretty good 
description of the band's music, which is surmounted by squalling, untempered 
synthesiser and his own squawking vocals. But apart from their name and the 
fact that the title track of their 1977 debut album, The Modern Dance, includes 
the refrain "Merdre, merdre", was Jarry an influence on Pere Ubu's music?

'The thing that impressed me over the time of immersing myself in Jarry in 
high school and the point at which I formed Pere Ubu, was Jarry's theatrical 
production ideas," Thomas explains. "It seemed to me that his method called for 
the engaging of the audience's imaginations in the creative process, with his 
use of placards, 'pataphysical notions, and anti-naturalism. As synthesised, 
concrète and abstract sound techniques and technology developed, and were 
integrated into rock music, then pure sound as a powerful narrative voice in 
its own right came into play.

"The object was the same as Jarry's seemed to be, to engage the imagination of 
the audience in the creative process. To confound, illuminate, generate chaos 
for its own sake, to overlay intentions with counter-intentions, self-doubt, 
fear and hope, to create an art that, as accurately as possible in a 
three-minute song, mimics the human condition."

Thomas has edited the play to concentrate on the two main characters. He has 
also added elements that he feels are in "the spirit of the original, 
particularly in the area that originally interested me in this project - the 
notion that the Politico-Media-Industrial Complex is filled with characters far 
more grotesque than Jarry's characters could have ever been."

Jarry wrote The Song of Disembraining for Ubu Roi, but Thomas has decided not 
to use it. "It's not really a very good song," he says. "The title is great but 
it meanders on and on forever." He has instead translated parts of the plot 
into original song structures "where elegant to do so", for which he is 
unabashed. "We are a rock band. We are Americans. We're not going to pretend to 
be something we're not," he says. "The justification is that we're the only 
band in the world which has for more than 30 years followed a Jarry-esque, or 
even 'pataphysical course in rock music. We got a right to do what we want. The 
play is about ideas. The clothes you put on ideas are fashions that come and 
go. The ideas are what count and what survive."

· Bring Me the Head of Ubu Roi is at the Queen Elizabeth Hall, London SE1, 
tonight. Box office: 0871 663 2500
 