
It is the middle of a summer morning deep in the KwaZulu-Natal countryside, 
and the heat is intense. Beside the road that leads to Durban, 60 kilometres 
away, stands a sprawling acacia tree. Beneath it, women and children are 
gathering.

'We walked since before five to get here.' says Sabahle, 34, who has come with 
her sister and her young niece. 'It is a long way. We don't have money to take 
a bus.'

Sabahle and her family are just a few of the hundreds of women who come every 
month to the Tree Clinic, which meets beneath the acacia and distributes 
medicine, contraceptives, advice and information to women from rural 
communities. On this particular Wednesday, there are perhaps seventy attendees. 
Some, like Sabahle, have brought young children. Others have come in large, 
chattering groups. Gathered beneath the sparse shade of the tree, they create a 
rootless but deeply connected community, all bound by the fact that here, their 
voices will be heard.

In KwaZulu-Natal, more than sixty percent of the population live in poverty, 
with inadequate access to food, clean water, education and healthcare. The 
provincial HIV infection rate, at 39%, is the highest in South Africa. The 
relationship between these statistics is no coincidence; in this community, 
poverty and HIV go hand in hand.

International HIV and AIDS charity AVERT reports that there is an 'evident 
link' between the socio-economic background of a person, and the likelihood 
that they will take an HIV test. The report states that 'those who have taken 
an HIV test and know their result are more likely to have a higher level of 
education, be in employment, and have accurate HIV knowledge than those who 
don't.'. People who live in poor and rural areas are half as likely to be 
tested for HIV as those who live in wealthier provinces.

In South Africa, real work is being done to combat the epidemic. The HIV 
Testing and Counselling (HTC) Campaign, launched by the State Health Department 
in April 2010, aims to improve awareness of HIV and encourage discussion of the 
disease and through the use of television and radio. They want to reach fifty 
percent of South Africa's population with the campaign, and research has shown 
a positive impact on those who have heard the message.

South Africa also has the world's largest anti-retroviral programme; according 
to the 2009 UNAIDS progress report, forty percent of adults and ten percent of 
children needing treatment for HIV are enrolled in anti-retroviral therapy. 
Ninety percent of public health facilities now offer voluntary counselling and 
testing services. President Jacob Zuma has committed himself to improving 
access to treatment, and education about HIV.

But this work, while positive and necessary, is failing to reach those most in 
need of help. According to Grace, who has been running the Tree Clinic for 
three years, the people she meets have different needs and different problems.

'It is good that there are stories on the television and the radio, but what 
about the people who don't have those things? The women I speak to live in 
villages where there is only electricity if they steal it. They don't have 
radios. They don't hear that they can get free testing.'

Lack of education is not the only concern Grace sees. The women who come to 
the Tree Clinic travel for hours on foot because, once there, they will receive 
food and medicine. Volunteer nurses will check their children for signs of 
illness. Medication, vitamins, soap and clothing – things they cannot otherwise 
afford – are given out. Sabahle is making peanut butter sandwiches that will be 
handed out at lunchtime. She shoos away her niece, who leaves to play with the 
other children who have come.

'In my village, when you have HIV it is hard to tell anybody.' She says. 
'People will call you "Living Dead" and not talk to you. Nobody has time to go 
to hospital and take medicine, or people in the village ask why you are not 
working. It is very hard. To get anywhere takes time and money. We don't have 
those things.'

HIV treatment is time-sensitive and ever-present. It requires multiple drugs 
to be taken at specific times. It requires a nutritious diet and a healthy 
lifestyle. If medication is interrupted or abandoned, the disease becomes 
resistant and new combinations of drugs must be found. Regression can happen 
quickly.

'Why do you think we make sandwiches?' asks Grace. 'Nobody has enough food. 
Nobody wears a watch. They don't know what time to take their medicine. They 
don't have time to go to hospital. They are scared that people will find out. 
There are good drugs and there is good help, but not for these people.'

Her message is clear; without addressing the fundamental problem of poverty, 
South Africa cannot hope to overcome the HIV epidemic. The work done by the 
Tree Clinic is, she says, a call to arms.

'Things have to change. If the government wants to stop AIDS, it will have to 
stop poverty first. It is the only way.'
 