
His Highness Sheikh Maktoum Hasher Maktoum Al Maktoum never had to make a name 
for himself. But the sheikh, the nephew of Dubai's crown prince, will soon be 
famous outside theUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates>. He is sport's newest 
and most interesting entrepreneur - and he might just go down as the man who 
makes motor racing interesting.

He has turned his back on oil wells and the horse racing that interests many 
members of his family to found A1 Grand Prix, an FIA-approved world 
championship spread over five continents and involving 25 countries; the first 
of the 12 races will be held at Brands Hatch on Sunday week. Like most 
billionaires he is coy about disclosing his personal involvement in the 
venture. "I'm a creator, an inventor, not a numbers man," he protests. But when 
the sum of £100m is arrived at he shrugs and nods with grudging agreement.

He leans back in the opulent surrounding of the iconic Burj Al Arab hotel 
which dominates the Dubai coastline. It is built in the shape of an Arabian 
dhow sail and Sheikh Maktoum speaks in the tones of a commander setting off on 
an epic voyage.Dubai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dubai> is fast emerging 
as an important sporting centre. The International Cricket Council moved there 
recently and will soon be opening an academy. An area called Sport City, 
including state of the art training facilities, is being constructed.

But right now A1 is all Sheikh Maktoum wants to talk about. "This is the right 
concept with the right car at the right time. And if I can pull it off . . . 
whoosh. This will be a £2bn business by the time we get into the second year. 
Only a madman like me can come up with an idea like this. But I've gone from 
being called a madman to dreamer to visionary in a very short time."

He is selling franchises to a maximum of 25 countries - 23 have been announced 
- who have paid between £5m and £100m for the three-year deal, depending on 
their ability to generate funds. The Great Britain, United States and Germany 
teams have paid almost the full £100m, considerably more than Pakistan or 
India. The British franchise, or "seat", has been purchased by two businessmen, 
Wade Cherwayko and Tony Clements, the head of corporate finances at ODL 
Securities.

They have set up Network GB for sponsors to buy into and have appointed John 
Surtees, the only man to have won world racing titles on two wheels and four, 
as the principal of the British A1 team. For their money they are loaned the 
cars and given tyres, fuel and technical back-up. They recoup their funds 
through sponsorship, merchandising and broadcasting rights. Sheikh Maktoum 
discovered, comparatively late, that he is dyslexic; no one considers him to be 
innumerate. He received his business degree in Boston.

The Real Madrid footballer Ronaldo and the former formula one world champion 
Emerson Fittipaldi are fronting the Brazilian team; Luis Figo is the name 
behind Portugal's. Surtees says: "Some of the tracks, such as in China and 
Malaysia, are also used in F1 but generally they are different. We are racing 
in the winter for a start. And we're also racing in places like the US, Dubai 
and Indonesia. In this multi-national society, that gives our sponsors the 
opportunity to promote themselves in new areas."

Surtees is offering integrated advertising, hospitality, public relations, 
product launches, sales incentives and branding space on the cars and the use 
of primary corporate colour in association with the team colours. Sheikh 
Maktoum is already claiming an "audience reach" of 290m in the first year and 
has sold TV rights to Sky Sports in Britain, Sky Italia, Fox TV in Australia 
and ESPN in Asia. "In year one the 25 competing nations represent 80% of the 
world's population - some 4,357,466,431 people."

From a racing perspective the idea is attractive. The 50 identical cars, using 
a Lola-designed chassis and a Zytek-built, 550 bhp engine capable of up to 
190mph, will race under the colours of the national teams and the winners 
should be the best drivers - unlike in formula one.

"This is motor sport on a level playing field," says the 28-year-old sheikh. 
"And the cars cost one-tenth of formula one cars. It's a cross between the high 
profile of F1, the overtaking and excitement of Le Mans and the audience 
interaction you get with Nascar. The difference is it will be bigger than the 
Olympic Games, bigger even than the football World Cup.

"The idea is not to compete with formula one, which is about technology and 
manufacturer versus manufacturer. This is about driver skill and national 
pride. And new venues. We're catering for the motorsport fan who can't afford 
£200 for a ticket. A1 tickets go for £40. It's affordable, accessible and 
identifiable."

He speaks quietly but Sheikh Maktoum is not apparently looking for a bushel to 
hide his light under. "I designed the car and test-drove it. I'm not an artist 
or an engineer but I took my inspiration from a shark and a stingray, who have 
to move through something much more dense than air. I told an artist to draw 
what I meant and then got the engineers to develop it more."

Other interests? "I played bass guitar and composed my first album when I was 
16. Nor for sale, just private. I also like rock and ice climbing." He added he 
would like to be compared with Albert Einstein but later jokingly conceded that 
that made him sound egotistical. But that ego, and his vast wealth, just might 
make A1 Grand Prix work.

 The driving force: Sheikh Maktoum Hasher Maktoum Al Maktoum

Personal

Lives Dubai  Age 28

 Qualification BSBA in Finance with Honours from Suffolk University, Boston, US

 Speaks seven languages, including Urdu and French

 Sporting

·Holds international Grade C FIA racing licence.

·Has driven in four formula 4 races in UK, twice finishing in the top three.

·President of UAE Hockey Committee.

·Represented UAE in International Syrian Triathlon.

A1 calendar

 2005

Sep 25 Brands Hatch, England

 Oct 9 Lausitz, Germany

 Oct 23 Estoril, Portugal

 Nov 6 Sydney, Australia

 Nov 20 Sepang, Malaysia

 Dec 11 Dubai, UAE

 2006

Jan 15 Sentul Circuit, Indonesia

 Jan 29  Cape Town, South Africa

 Feb 12 Curitiba, Brazil

 Feb 26 Monterrey, Mexico

 Mar 19 Laguna Seca, United States

 Apr 2 Shanghai, China
 