
Towards the beginning of our investigation of The Shipping News, we were told 
about the end. Pamish wrote:"Probably the best closing sentence ever written. 
Save it up." <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13443318>

SignificantOther agreed: "This book has one of the best and most 
beautifully-written last paragraphs of all the novels I know." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13447324>

At this point – spoiler alert! – if you haven't yet finished the book, you 
should probably look away now. As Pamish and SignificantOther suggest, this 
paragraph is so good it's worth quoting in full:
 For if Jack Buggit could escape from the pickle jar, if a bird with a broken 
neck could fly away, what else might be possible? Water may be older than 
light, diamonds crack in hot goat's blood, mountaintops give off cold fire, 
forests appear in mid-ocean, it may happen that a crab is caught with the 
shadow of a hand on its back, that the wind be imprisoned in a bit of knotted 
string. And it may be that love sometimes occurs without pain or misery. 
What do you make of that? Even as I typed the passage out I changed my mind 
again. I remembered, for instance, that the "bird with broken neck" earlier on 
in the story didn't really fly away. I also started feeling sure that water 
can't ever be older than light. This time around, the words struck me as 
pessimistic. Bleak, even. Which is strange, because the first time I read them, 
I thought that Proulx had copped for the happy ending. For a brief moment, I 
felt almost as let down as I did when staggering to the end of Cormac 
McCarthy's The Road. It seemed to me there was something untrue there, some 
unwarranted jauntiness. It was only after a few moments reflection that it 
began to dawn on me that she might be saying that Quoyle's chances for painless 
happiness are slim. That it would be, in fact, miraculous if he escaped further 
trials. And that, rather beautifully, Proulx seems to have left it down to her 
readers to decide whether or not they believe in such miracles.

Later, when I listened to Proulx give a rare interview about The Shipping News 
with the BBC's James Naughtie <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00fpwdg>, 
another possibility presented itself. Provocatively, the author claimed that 
this passage merely gives "the illusion of the happy ending. I wrote the book 
to deceive the reader. It's a happy ending that isn't really happy … "

So the whole thing is smoke and mirrors? Proulx knew all along that Quoyle was 
still bound to suffer? It's a possible reading. But at this stage, I'm afraid I 
have to bring inBarthes and the death of the author 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jan/13/death-of-the-author>. 
Proulx may have had these dark intentions (just as she may also have simply 
said she did on a whim, as interview-subjects sometimes do), but ultimately 
that might not matter. If we accept that we shouldn't impose a limit on the 
novel, and that what the author meant and what the book says are not 
necessarily the same thing, Quoyle can be set free. If most readers decide that 
he is happy, well, he probably is. In fact, it seems to me that the fate of our 
hero is in your hands. Do you see him sailing contentedly into the early winter 
sunset of Newfoundland? Or do you see rough seas ahead? How did those final – 
lovely – words strike you?
 