
The lead up to the introduction of the patriotically-named “allegiance to 
Australia” bill has been marked by debate around whether any such law would be 
constitutional, or would breach the separation of powers by giving the 
ministers judge-like powers.

Unfortunately, in its efforts to guard against this unconstitutional outcome, 
the Abbott government has forgotten that a third branch of government exists 
alongside the executive and judiciary – the legislature – and that it too is 
prohibited from exercising judicial powers.

There is a real risk the new law amounts to parliament imposing a sentence and 
punishment on an individual, an equally unconstitutional outcome. Whether the 
law is constitutional is only one question though. Arguably, more important 
ones should be the focus of attention.


Citizenship could be stripped for damaging commonwealth property
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/new-laws-dual-nationals-lose-citizenship-for-damaging-commonwealth-property>
In essence, the Australian citizenship amendment (allegiance to Australia) 
bill will, if passed, revoke the citizenship of dual citizens who:

 * Serve outside Australia in a foreign army at war with Australia or in a 
proscribed terrorist organisation;

 * Engage in certain terrorist conduct; or

 * Are convicted of certain terror related offences.

The first ground – let’s call it wartime renunciation – is very similar to 
existing law, but fighting for or in the service of a proscribed terrorist 
organisation will now be grounds for automatic loss of Australian citizenship. 
While lawyers will quibble over the meanings of terms both parties are likely 
to support these changes.

That the fighting or service also has to occur overseas means that it is less 
likely to be the focus of attention (although it should be closely scrutinised 
by parliament).


As a new reform, the minister can stop a person automatically losing their 
citizenship (some relief to dual Australian-Kurds fighting against the Islamic 
State (Isis) overseas) but the power is 100% discretionary. The minister is not 
obliged to act, nor follow the rules of natural justice, nor does he or she 
even need to wait for a final Asio security assessment before acting (or not).


Under the second ground, a dual citizen would lose Australian citizenship if 
they did certain things including: engaging in a terrorist act; providing or 
receiving training connected with preparation for, engagement in, or assistance 
in a terrorist act; or financing terrorism or financing a terrorist.


While these acts sound fairly clear, anti-terror laws passed since 2001 have 
been incredibly broad. While fortunately, the vaguest terror offence – 
“possession of a thing connected with a terrorist act” – is not grounds for 
citizenship revocation, there are significant issues with this conduct ground.


It’s not clear whether a person needs to intend to engage in any of these 
activities before their citizenship is revoked. Someone who puts on the uniform 
of another country in a time of war knows what they are doing, but will people 
lose their citizenship because part of their donation to a Gaza Relief fund 
ended up with a terrorist organisation?

Would a person who, unwisely perhaps, “liked” a radical Facebook group which 
posted instructional videos on how to use small arms, or web-links to old 
resources like the Anarchist’s Cookbook, lose their citizenship?


The next question: who is a “terrorist”? Is it a fluid concept (like in the 
Criminal Code) or is it confined to people the government has declared are 
terrorists?

If it’s the latter, then at least there is certainty – unless the government 
gets its wish to make the laws retrospective. In that case, a person could 
never be sure that someone they gave money to (including family members) is not 
going to be later declared a terrorist. Remember Thatcher’s designation of 
Mandela as a terrorist? Some individuals move between criteria.


As with the wartime ground, the minister will have discretion to prevent 
someone losing their citizenship, although the usual caveats about natural 
justice apply (ie, there is none).

The proposed law also doesn’t set out a way for someone to challenge a finding 
that they engaged in proscribed conduct (indeed, the law is silent on who finds 
out that a person is engaging in this conduct).

Will they have a full review before the courts? If not, then is this a case of 
parliament adjudicating on an individual’s guilt and imposing a sentence? The 
high court has ruled that such laws, so calledbills of pains and penalties 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pains_and_Penalties_Bill_1820>, are 
unconstitutional at a national level.


Until the questions around level of intent and avenues for appeal are 
addressed, the second conduct ground – engaging in terrorist conduct – remains 
dangerously vague and possibly unconstitutional. It should certainly not be 
made retrospective.


Finally, a dual citizen will lose Australian citizenship if convicted of 
certain crimes: the conviction ground. This power may superficially appear to 
balance judicial oversight and ministerial power, but there are some 
significant concerns and unanswered questions.

It is actually a form of mandatory sentencing, power akin to 
parliament-imposed jail terms. The conviction-ground also takes no account of 
age, involvement in the offence (for example if you were an unwilling accessory 
after the fact) or other mitigating circumstances.


As with all mandatory punishments, it privileges some offences over others. 
Why are these crimes more deserving of loss of citizenship than others? Why is 
terrorist conduct involving the compilation of training material worse than the 
conduct of a husband who murders his wife, or throws his child off a bridge to 
their death?

In both cases a person has failed to “uphold and obey” the laws of Australia, 
as they commit to in the Pledge of Allegiance, but in only one case is 
revocation of citizenship an available punishment.


Finally, the bill is silent on what happens if a person’s conviction is 
quashed or overturned on appeal. While it is clear that a person loses their 
citizenship immediately upon conviction, and that a person who loses their 
citizenship under the wartime, conduct or conviction ground can never become a 
citizen again, it fails to provide for a person’s citizenship to be reinstated 
should their conviction be overturned.


So what will the high court say when this law is challenged? It most certainly 
will be. Given the uncharted waters Australia is entering with these laws I am 
not brave enough to venture an answer.

However, by making the revocation of citizenship automatic, the law does not 
resolve the separation of powers issue that forced a change in the government’s 
plan. Rather than it being the minister exercising judicial power, under the 
draft bill it is now the parliament – something no less unacceptable under our 
system of government.

By determining rights and duties (citizenship) and imposing a penalty on the 
basis of certain facts being established without the involvement of a judicial 
hearing, the law is arguably unconstitutional.


More importantly, this law fails to answer a central question in this debate: 
why should some citizens be entitled to escape justice? By revoking citizenship 
we renounce our own ability to bring a person to justice for breaking our laws.

As citizens we agree to be bound by Australian laws, and to submit to the 
jurisdiction of Australian courts if we break them. If an Australian commits 
non-terror related murder (say domestic violence) we punish them in our courts 
because that is the compact between citizen and state: protection provided by 
the latter in return for allegiance. The “allegiance to Australia” bill 
ultimately weakens, rather than strengthens, that bond.
 