
• The gold postbox in Sheffield to celebrate Jess Ennis's gold medal has 
already been defaced. The graffiti in question? "Go Jess." A new line in 
patriotic vandalism.

• "The velodrome has been the hottest ticket at the games," said Hazel Irvine, 
as the track cycling came to an end. Not everywhere it hasn't. The Italians 
haven't been able to get enough of the fencing, the French are obsessed with 
the judo, the Danes have eyes only for the handball, the Spanish only care for 
the basketball and the Olympics didn't really begin for the Turks until the 
Greco-Roman wrestling got under way.

• Touchy-feely watch: Phil "Roving Hands" Jones has been doing his best to 
limit his physical contact with the athletes to the odd grab, but he lost it 
completely by putting his arm round high jump bronze medal winner Robbie 
Grabarz. Luckily he didn't take Robbie's name any more literally. Jake Humphrey 
has emerged as the BBC's latest contender in the groping medal table by kissing 
Mark Cavendish on the cheek.

• The Princes William and Harry may have been at almost every event so far, 
but so too has their aunt, the Princess Royal. And despite multiple TV 
sightings, she has yet to be caught smiling. Her Mum put herself into the frame 
for the role of M in the new Bond film during the opening ceremony; Princess 
Anne looks to be auditioning for the role of Rosa Klebb.

• Aussie baiting (part 1,638): A late surge of medals hasn't been enough to 
lift Australian morale and Rob de Castella, the former world champion in the 
marathon, has suggested the Aussie athletes have been spending too much time 
partying in the Olympic Village. The search for medals has become so desperate 
that the Melbourne Age suggested gymnast Lauren Mitchell deserved a "moral 
medal" after acknowledging the four gymnasts who finished ahead of her were 
actually better.

• Breaking news from Freeview: according to its own research, although 85% of 
Brits were initially sceptical about the Olympics, more than three-quarters now 
think London 2012 may be the best games ever. To which any sane person would 
ask, "How would they know? Was the whole of GB in Beijing, Athens, Sydney, 
Atlanta … ?"

• Shortly after commiserating with Vicky Pendleton over her debatable 
relegation in the first heat of her final, Gary Lineker signed off his report 
about Spanish officials' complaints of bias towards the Brits in the hockey 
with a smile and "Ah well! It's OUR Olympics and we'll cry when WE want to".

• Paul Dickenson wasn't in most gracious of form with his commentary on the 
women's hammer qualification. As Betty Heidler stepped into the circle, he 
said: "Here's the German record holder with his first throw." Brendan Foster 
wasn't being much more generous in the men's 5,000m heats: "They only have to 
run the final lap in 67 seconds; some will know that, but some are a bit thi …, 
er, some are a bit slower." And Lord Coe's command of English has deserted him. 
"The spectators have been spectacular," he said. Who would have thought?
 