
I was a callow man-child of 26 and in New York for only the second or third 
time. I was a literature grad, a wannabe publisher with a bottom drawer full of 
half-finished novels. A friend of mine from Oxford was living there, chasing 
his own dream. His father was a famous theatre producer; his stepmother, an 
Australian film director, had moved to New York and re-partnered. Lyndall Hobbs 
asked us out for dinner at Nell’s, ofRocky Horror Show fame. There was a crowd 
going. It was the late 80s and I was completely out of my depth.

Nell’s seemed impossibly glamorous. Women glittering like Christmas trees 
tottered around on heels, wearing sunglasses indoors; a hundred Gordon Geckos, 
festooned with gold medallions and bracelets, clanked their way to the bar. My 
suburban pallor offset their glowing tans and pearl-white teeth. I was woozy 
with displacement – tongue-tied, a little disdainful, a literary minnow in 
a tank full of celluloid sharks.

We were shown to a booth at the front of the club, near the stage. 
I was introduced to Lyndall and sat next to her partner, Al. He wore jewellery 
from the same expensive stores as all the Geckos at the bar and, if anything, 
his tan was even deeper. He looked like Shylock, had a fine head of black hair, 
a strong Roman nose and dark, bottomless eyes. I assumed he worked on Wall 
Street and feigned a lack of interest.

By contrast Al was polite, generous even. He wanted to know what I did, and I 
talked about the London publishing scene. He asked me about Oxford and my 
friendship with Lyndall’s stepson. At one point, for reasons I was too 
disassociated to follow, conversation turned to Shakespeare. Al, it seemed, had 
been present, or maybe backstage, at a performance ofJulius Caesar in Central 
Park.

“It was a fabulous production,” said an older man in our party, briefly 
animated. “Yes, yes,” everyone murmured back, including Al, if somewhat less 
emphatically.

“This was a Man,” said Lyndall, raising a glass to no one in particular. Al 
got up and went to the boy’s room.

Later, in the taxi on the way to my friend’s apartment in the Village, I asked 
him what Al did. “What do you mean, what does Al do?” he said. “I mean, what’s 
Al’s job, what does he do for a living?” My friend turned and looked at me, a 
mixture of scorn, pity and laughter dancing in his eyes. “Who?” he said. “Al 
Pacino?”

I never made it back to Nell’s. I don’t think they missed me.
 