
Today over 160,000 Australians will wake to another day in one of the nation’s 
2,800 residential aged care facilities. We used to call them nursing homes and 
we used to call their residents by name. Today we hardly see them.

More than 160,000 Australians. That’s a city the size of Geelong or 
Townsville. Men and women who have lived and loved, brought up families, run 
businesses, held positions of authority. Women who were beautiful and clever 
and men who were unique and quirky. People who lived among us.   

Today, in those nursing homes, many not confined to their beds will spend 
their hours in oversized armchairs perhaps watching birds from the lounge 
window or silently waiting for mealtimes.

Most have dementia, most are in their late 80s and most will die where they 
now live. During this election campaign, no politician will come their way 
seeking their views or their vote. They have become invisible to our political 
system.

A minority will have visitors who drop by occasionally, a former neighbour or 
distant relative, driven by the last bond of duty. A blessed few will have 
regular loving visitors. You see them sitting in the sun. Devoted octogenarian 
husbands who can still see the girl they fell in love with, faithful sons and 
daughters bringing their grandchildren and leaving the framed photo of four 
generations smiling out from the bedside table.

But most will have no visitors from one month to the next. No children, no 
partners, no former neighbours or work mates. No one from that world where they 
used to live. They are surely the loneliest people in Australia. They simply 
have no one who can speak to them in old and familiar ways, no one who will 
caress their cheek or hold their hand as they sleep.

For many, the only human connection left to them will be the uniformed, 
overworked, professional carers who staff the nursing homes. Undertrained, 
underpaid and unrepresented, this group of overwhelmingly middle aged, 
hardworking women – about a quarter of whom were born overseas – bear that last 
sacred duty of caring for the lonely until they ease out of this life.

Too many Australians in nursing homes will end their lives in the company of 
people who never knew them before they were residents, who have little 
knowledge of who they used to be, what their lives were like.

And so these residents will spend their days being cared for by shifts of 
staff following the routine, being readied for the day, hair combed, medication 
given, breakfast provided and then set ready for the morning.

Some will look out for the visitor that never comes; some will spend their day 
in a constant shuffle around the ward driven by what no one will now ever know. 
Many will simply sleep, too deeply immersed in their dementia to do much else.  
  

At day’s end all will be prepared for the night, tucked into a cot with side 
rails raised and farewelled by staff coming to the end of their shift, their 
only company, through the long hours, the winking of the movement detection 
monitor and the light under the door from the nurses’ station.

If you ever needed confirmation as to how invisible this group has become you 
only needed to look at the 2016 federal budget and its attack on residents of 
aged care facilities. 

These most vulnerable and needy Australians rely almost totally on the nursing 
home provider for their safety, comfort and quality of life and, as is 
appropriate in our nation, on the taxpayer that provides support from the 
department of health.

Why do some of us, like David Attenborough, live to 90? It’s not luck | Alan 
Walker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/90-queen-david-attenborough>
Appropriately, the extent of that financial support depends on the needs of 
the individuals, including their level of frailty, the pain they experience and 
the extent of their dementia. Those assessed as the neediest are able to draw 
the most funds.   This is determined by the aged care funding instrument, the 
tool that determines how much support will be provided.

This month’s budget delivered a brutal cut to this program ripping out $1.2bn 
over four years. That means an incredible $300m less each year to support 
services for the most frail and needy in aged care homes. Apparently it’s 
appropriate that they pay for the tax cuts for small business and those earning 
over $80,000 per year. It’s easy to ignore the invisible. 

The practical result of these cuts will include reductions in physiotherapy 
for residents in pain, lower staffing levels and longer waits for personal 
attention and less attention to residents who may demonstrate confronting 
behaviour. It’s hard to fathom a system that allows for tax cuts for the 
well-off to be paid for out of the misery of the aged living with dementia in 
the nation’s nursing homes.  

Perhaps the only justice in this sorry tale is that inevitably a few of the 
men and women responsible for this attack on the frail aged in residential care 
will themselves one day spend their final days in the aged care system that 
they so negligently undermine. Politicians get old, develop dementia and get 
lonely too.
 