
Richard Carrington and I launched the online Poetry Archive a little under 10 
years ago atpoetryarchive.org <http://www.poetryarchive.org/>. Our original 
intention was to combine three things: pleasure for the general 
reader/listener, by bringing together existing recordings of "historic" poets 
with new recordings of contemporaries that we would make or commission 
ourselves; help for students of all ages and their teachers, by combining these 
recordings with introductions, brief biographies, lesson plans, a glossary of 
terms, and all sorts of other educational bells and whistles; a safe haven for 
poet's voices, which would mean their voices were not lost to posterity (as for 
instance Hardy's voice, and Lawrence's voice, and Housman's voice have all been 
lost).

You can hear WB Yeats, Ezra Pound, William Empson, EE Cummings, Stevie Smith, 
Siegfried Sassoon <https://www.theguardian.com/books/siegfried-sassoon>, Sylvia 
Townsend Warner, Sylvia Plath … We wanted to do all this in as open-hearted a 
way as possible, for the benefit of poetry in general. We wanted to be 
international in spirit, too, and include English-language poetry from wherever 
it is being written in the world. And we wanted to demonstrate on every page of 
the site that the meaning of a poem has as much and perhaps more to do with its 
sound as it has to do with the patterns and definitions of words on a page. 
"The ear," as Robert Frost says, "is the best reader".

We thought we might be filling a gap in the audience for poetry. But even we 
were surprised by how many people came to listen. We now have well over 200,000 
unique visitors a month, and every month they listen to something like a 
million-and-a-half pages of poetry. And our audience, like our holdings, is 
continually expanding. So the next time you read an article complaining that"no 
one reads poetry any more", think again: they may not buy collections of poetry 
in large numbers, but the primitive appetite to hear it is alive and well.

In the last couple of years Richard and I, along with our small group of 
Archive colleagues, have been redesigning the site. We re-launched it a week 
ago. There are plenty of cosmetic changes – cleaner and clearer pages, and 
better connections between the various elements – but they're only the 
beginning. There's also a great deal of new content (including new poetry from 
the UK, America and the Caribbean), taking the number of poets included on the 
site close to 350. And there are two major new features.

One is an extensive collection of recordings of well-known contemporary poets 
reading poems by Mighty Dead forbears with whom they have a special affinity 
(Alice Oswald reading Thomas Wyatt, Mimi Khalvati reading William Blake, 
Anthony Thwaite reading Robert Browning, Paul Farley reading John Clare); in 
each pairing the sense of intimate connection is deepened by an introduction 
and commentary on the poems.

The other innovation is simple to describe but potentially very far-reaching 
in its effects. We've made almost all the site downloadable, so that visitors 
can use it as they use the iTunes store, and for a small cost adopt the poems 
they especially like onto their own devices. I have the feeling it could be the 
Big Bang for poetry, taking it where it belongs – out of its various niches and 
into the wide world.
 