
When I first heard of Mikhail Bulgakov’s The Master and Margarita it was 1993 
and I was living in St Petersburg during my university year abroad. I was 
teaching English (very badly), barely coping with temperatures of -15C and 
fighting a losing battle with the Russian language. This book made me realise I 
was not going to give up. And that I really wanted to be able to talk to the 
people for whom this book was everything and to try to understand something 
about their lives.

I now realise I was probably drawn to The Master and Margarita because its 
title is virtually the same in Russian as it is in English (“Master i 
Margarita”) and it gave me a boost that finally I could understand a book title 
without thinking about it. (To give you some idea of what a big deal this was, 
Crime and Punishment is Prestupleniye i Nakazaniye.) Soon afterwards I 
discovered the Russian word for picnic was “piknik” and felt as if I had 
cracked the Enigma code. These are the desperately pathetic but so important 
little moments in life that make you think: “Maybe I can do this very difficult 
thing after all.”

I read it in translation, a Harvill Secker paperback with a picture on the 
cover of the graffitied stairwell of the Moscow block where Bulgakov lived. At 
this point I was nowhere near able to start a book in Russian, let alone finish 
one. At the end of the year I could read the language but by then I had come to 
the conclusion that people who make out that “literature is so much better in 
the original” are just idiots who want you to know how clever they are to have 
mastered a language. No matter how fluently you know a language, you will never 
read a book in the way a native speaker will read it. So it’s pointless to make 
out that anyone is “missing something” by reading a book in translation.

All this is to say that I had to endure many stunted conversations (remember, 
I could not really speak Russian at this point) with Russians violently 
berating me for not reading Master i Margarita in the original. They were glad 
I was reading the book (it was then and is now the favourite book of most 
Russians) but highly suspicious of the idea that it could possibly be the same 
book in bourgeois English.

Just knowing the book at all felt like finding the key to a secret world. In 
1993, during the Yeltsin era, things were changing fast. But essentially St 
Petersburg was much as it had been for the previous 30 years. It was common for 
people to insist I must be Latvian, as they were so freaked out by the idea of 
meeting someone from England. I would frequently encounter people who had never 
met a foreigner before and genuinely did not believe they would meet one in 
their lifetime. It’s strange to think that many of the people I knew then – who 
never believed they would own a passport – now live abroad.

Reading Bulgakov’s satire of 1930s Stalinist Moscow helped me to see just how 
easy it is to mess up a nation psychologically. In the novel the devil and his 
retinue (which includes a wall-eyed loon and a talking cat) manipulate “the 
Master”, a writer, and Margarita, his muse. Simultaneously – because the 
narrative flits between two stories – Pontius Pilate condemns Christ to death 
in Jerusalem. I read it as a book about how to go on living when your spirit is 
broken. The controversial and much-analysed conclusion to the novel is about 
the Master and Margarita being granted “peace” but not “light”.

I also read it as representing the mental state necessary for surviving in the 
Soviet Union: you can have some kind of inner peace in your internal life but 
you’re never quite off the hook. More importantly, I was buoyed up by the 
book’s sense of humour, mixed with the outlandishly fantastical. I figured that 
if this was a country where this was everyone’s favourite book, then underneath 
all the suspicion and misunderstandings and the accusations of being a Latvian 
and the constant demands for information about the Beatles (“Or maybe you 
prefer King Crimson?”), there must be a properly beating heart. It took a while 
for me to acquire enough language to get to it, but eventually I did.

At the end of that year, just before I was due to go back home for my final 
year at university, I made a pilgrimage toBulgakov’s flat in Moscow 
<http://www.bulgakovmuseum.ru/en/>. This was seen as a slightly touristy and 
embarrassing thing to do, so my then (native) boyfriend left me to it and made 
a detour to the newly opened McDonald’s to buy multiple “cheeseburgery” 
(another word that cheered me greatly) to take on the 10-hour train journey 
back to St Petersburg, so that people at home could try this great delicacy.

Round the corner from the flat – where the graffiti from the book cover was 
still intact – isPatriarch’s Ponds 
<http://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/04mappen/patriarch.html>, a park where a 
key scene in the book takes place. As I sat alone on a bench overlooking the 
ponds, a stranger came up to me and gave me what we called “the foreigner 
test”. It was the quickest way for Russians to work out if you might be a 
source of Levi’s, using a simple question: “Excuse me, what’s the time?” If you 
can answer quickly, you’re Russian. Before he’d even finished asking, I shot 
back barely looking up: “Half eleven.” As he walked away, I grinned and thought 
to myself, finally, “Ya master” (“I am the Master”).

Viv Groskop is artistic director of the Independent Bath Literature Festival
 