
At times of uncertainty we often turn to animals for reassurance – think of 
Paul the Octopus and his remarkable run of World Cup predictions – so it's not 
surprising that the US are looking to a horse for clues about the choosing of 
the Repblican vice-presidential candidate.

Stay with me here. Today Mitt Romney ends his gaffe-strewn whistle-stop tour 
of Europe and the Middle East, flying home to fevered speculation about his 
choice of running mate. His wife Ann, however, remains in London – her horse 
Rafalca is competing in the Olympics dressage competition on Thursday.

If Rafalca advances he could well be competing next week, obliging Ann to stay 
longer, and it is unlikely that Mitt will make such an important announcement 
without his wife by his side.

The timing is all up to Rafalca, and past vice-presidential choices have shown 
there can't be any harm in letting a horse decide these things.

*******

I tuned into the swimming heats this morning hoping to see some freakishly 
improved times, but was immediately distracted, then mesmerised, by the 
microphone on Clare Balding's headset. As she talks the little spherical bud 
dances in front of her mouth like a just-out-of-reach Malteser. It's impossible 
to follow what she's saying. I had to go out and buy some Maltesers in the end 
– and I don't even like Maltesers.

*******

They're calling it the Curse of Cameron. The prime minister turned up to the 
Aquatic centre to watch the diving – and Tom Daley failed to claim a medal. 
Last week he went along to cheer Britain's cyclists – and Mark Cavendish missed 
out on a near-certain gold. Coincidence?

It's not just the Olympics, either: the PM, you will recall, attended Andy 
Murray's ill-fated Wimbledon final match. It's not even just sport: apparently 
Cameron can shrink quarterly growth figures just by staring at them, sometimes 
without opening the envelope first.

Royal spectators are a comparative lucky charm: Will and Harry were present 
when the men's gymnastic team took bronze, and a positive royal flush turned 
out to see Britain's equestrians win silver.

Britain's medal hopefuls, including Bradley Wiggins, will be relieved to hear 
that the prime minister is in Scotland today, and Northern Ireland tomorrow. 
Win while you can!

*******

On Monday, in reporting that the spectator-packed hill overlooking the sailing 
had been named "Ben's Nevis" after Ben Ainslie,I offered up the coinage "Tom's 
Tumulus" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jul/30/armchair-olympics-day-three> to 
denote the grassy slope outside the Aquatic Centre, where unticketed fans 
gathered to have their hopes crushed. I asked for better suggestions (finding a 
worse one was deemed too difficult).

This morning's entries included, and were in fact limited to, this from 
Anthony Tasgal: "name it after Tom Daley's partner: the Waterfield". Bravo. 
This represents such a marked improvement that Anthony's medal will be held 
back pending a drugs test. In the meantime, send in any thoughts on proximate 
viewing promontories named after British athletes. And remember: they needn't 
have won anything.

Picture of the day
 Horsing around: Brazil's Olympic football team stretch during a training 
session in Manchester. Photograph: Andrea Comas/Reuters 

Another horse falls in the cross country event and, tragically, must be 
destroyed. Oh, wait – my mistake: this is two Brazilian footballers at a 
training session. Both of whom, I'm assuming, will make full recoveries.

LingoWatch: Kesa-gatame

A judo mat hold in which one arm goes round the opponent's neck while pinning 
him with one's hip and chest. It's effective, secure and, to the untrained eye, 
a little bit romantic.
 