
The kindness of strangers is incredible. It seems that every week, just as 
we're realising we really need this or that, the very thing arrives, courtesy 
of someone we've never met. It restores your faith not just in people, but in – 
call it what you will – synchronicity or providence or good luck.

The other day we were desperately trying to work out how we could insulate a 
shelter. The conventional, and nonconventional, options such as Celotex and 
Non-Itch and Thermafleece were beyond our budget. As we were beginning to lose 
hope, an email arrived from Devon offering us as many sheep fleeces as we could 
take. So we now have two huge, dumpy bags of beautiful black fleeces to shove 
under ceilings and over groundsheets.

A few weeks before that we were all feeling a bit low: it was the bleak 
midwinter and it seemed forever dark and cold. For some bizarre reason, I had a 
craving for Bombay mix. No idea why, as I never normally eat it. And "the 
woodsman" had decided to give up coffee and wanted some loose-leaf Earl Grey. 
We all longed for chocolate and jam and the like. That week a huge hamper 
arrived, unsolicited, from a couple in Scotland, full of Bombay mix, Earl Grey 
and everything else. There were also huge slabs of traditionally smoked salmon 
that kept us going for many days.

We needed some advice about woodland management the other day and got hold of 
a great environmental consultant who lives near here. He came and spent quite a 
few hours sharing his wisdom with us, but refused to charge for his time. In 
fact he introduced us to a deer stalker who, again, is going to help us control 
the deer for nothing (well, for a share of the spoils, but nothing more).

With that venison and the imminent pork from the pigs, we realised that we 
needed a huge freezer. A friend had invited me down to the south coast, as his 
father had died some time back and he had wondered, before he sold the place, 
whether there was anything we might need. So one Sunday my daughter Benny and 
I went to his late father's bungalow and returned, of course, with a freezer. 
And a great .22 rifle with sights and a bootload of tools, such as vices and 
spanners and belt sanders and so on.

In the past few months we've been given armchairs and rugs and tents and 
saplings. But perhaps the most touching example is what happened after I wrote 
of the demise of our daughter's chicken, Fluffy Blue. Within a week a woman 
from Stirling had sent us a crisp £10 note, saying it was to buy a replacement. 
There was something very touching about the simple generosity of a stranger 
from the other side of the country, especially since it would make our children 
so cheerful and – being a chicken – it was a gift that would just go on giving.

I'm slightly wary of saying "And lo!" in biblical terms every time a need is 
met by these timely gifts. And there are plenty of rational explanations: 
people appear to like what we're up to and are very supportive. And those who 
come here know it's a dry house and so, instead of arriving with a bottle of 
plonk, often roll up with weird and wonderful gifts. But after a while the 
coincidences begin to pile up and you do begin to wonder. How on earth did they 
know we needed that? What possessed them to bring us, unprompted, a garden fork 
a few days after ours broke?

Beyond the sheer utility of what we receive, the great advantage of such 
kindnesses is that they underline the communal nature of this project. You 
avoid the pride of a do-gooder when you realise you couldn't do anything 
without other people. We've always said we're much more interested in 
interdependence than independence; that we're more enthusiastic about give and 
take than self-reliance and self-sufficiency. I think people sometimes make the 
mistake of thinking that we're great givers; maybe we are, but we're certainly 
– and I don't write this as an appeal, but to put the picture straight and 
acknowledge others' generosity – takers, too.
 