
There was a mixed reaction when The Shipping News was announced as this 
month's Reading Group choice. Plenty seemed pleased. But many were disappointed.

As expressed by Lobster1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13442943>: "Oh gosh … 
I really didn't like the book … eeek … I enjoyed the story but I had problems 
with her prose style … I found it annoying."

This prose style seems to be the sticking point. Even many of those that like 
the book seem to find it difficult.Shavedlegs wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13444340>: "I agree 
with the comments about her writing style. I found it really hard work and it 
took me ages to really get into it. It's worth sticking with it as the 
description of a bleak Newfoundland winter and the emergence of the key 
characters is beautifully done. Definitely a slow burner."

MajorWhipple too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13445976> had worries 
about the pace, saying: "It's a terrific work although the pace might not suit 
everyone." Although he went on to note: "For me it was the perfect marriage of 
style and setting. Excellent characterisation and plotting too."

Kendrew agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13443569>: "I fell 
out of love with fiction for many years and it was this book that persuaded me 
to fall again. Many people have told me that they find Proulx difficult and 
hard going but I found her quite the opposite. I have since read Postcards, and 
after Cormac McCarthy I find Proulx wonderful when describing landscape."

So what is it about the style in the Shipping News? Is it (as Partridge says 
of one of Quoyle's early pieces of journalism) "like reading cement"? Or, as 
that line might suggest, is it rather witty?

Personally, at just over halfway mark, I'm on the Kendrew-MajorWhipple side of 
the fence – although it took me a while to get there. At first I wondered what 
Proulx had against relative pronouns and conjunctions. I stumbled over 
sentences like the following:

"But Partridge, dribbling oil, said 'Ah, Fuck it.' Sliced purple tomato. 
Changed the talk to descriptions of places he had been, Strabane, South Amboy, 
Clark Fork."

I also wondered if I was going to find the imagery heavy going:

"As she spoke she changed in some provocative way, seemed suddenly drenched in 
eroticism as a diver rising out of a pool gleams like chrome with a sheet of 
unbroken water for a fractional moment."

Because that passage came early in the book, it got me worried. I spent a long 
time starting at it, sometimes thinking it sounded quite pleasant, other times 
thinking "but divers rising out of pools don't gleam like chrome" and "how long 
is a fractional moment"?

As it turns out, nothing since has tripped me up. Like many of the best books, 
The Shipping News has taught me how to read its rhythms, cadences and how to 
take in its imagery. Now, I'm racing through and enjoying every word. I can't 
verbalise why those sometimes clipped, sometimes languorous sentences fit the 
setting so well – it's more of a feeling. Is it too much to suggest that those 
waves and troughs, ebbs and flows, fogs, clouds and moments of piercing 
brightness in the prose are right for Newfoundland? Perhaps. But I'm sure that 
Proulx's prose is an admirable tool for conveying the tough poetic speech 
patterns of local characters like Billy:

"'Tis a strange time, strange weather. Remember we had a yellow day on Monday 
– the sky cast was an ugly yellow like a jar of piss. Then yesterday, blue mist 
and blasting fog. Cap it off, my sister's youngest boy called up from St 
John's, said there was a fall of frozen ducks on Water Street, eight or ten of 
them, feathers all on, eyes closed like they was dreaming, froze hard as polar 
cap ice. When that happens, look out boys."

I could read passages like that all day. Annie Proulx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx>, it's fair to say, knows her 
weather. Wind, snow, rain, lots of rain, storms, odd strange moments of 
sunshine and then, fog: "Fog against the window like milk..." "The sullen bay 
rubbed with thumbs of fog" … "green of grass stain, tilted in fog."

There are masterful descriptions of the elements – a pleasure in and of 
themselves – although, of course, there's more to them than mere decoration, as 
this early description of the strange hero Quoyle indicates:

"His thoughts churned like the amorphous thing that ancient sailors, drifting 
into arctic half-light, called the Sea Lung; a heaving sludge of ice under fog 
where air blurred into water, where liquid was solid, where solids dissolved, 
where the sky froze and light and dark muddled."

Fog again. A splendidly-worked pathetic fallacy. Or at least, that's how I've 
been reading it. I should state again here that other opinions are available. 
I've just spottedthis New York Times review 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/99/05/23/specials/proulx-shipping.html> stating: 
"Weather offshore or overland can often seem chokingly imbued with 
portentousness."

So there you go. As we already know, this isn't a book that pleases everyone. 
Although it's definitely keeping me happy. Whenever I come back to it, the 
strange rhythm and texture of the prose transports me straight to Newfoundland. 
It's one of those books that's enjoyable enough to make me resent the rest of 
my day. How mundane doing the dishes seems when I could be reading about 
Quoyle. I'm even feeling antsy writing this piece. In fact, I think I may slope 
off and read some more now …

Before I do, I'd just like to solicit opinions. How do you find the weather? 
Hard going? Bright and clear? And what is it that is so unusual and 
appealling/unappealling about the prose? Oh yes, and one lastthought from cutta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13443787>:

"Christ it's dull. Haven't read it but it's been Book at Bedtime on Radio 4 
for God knows how long and still nothing's happened. All that 'low, Biscay, 
deepening rapidly' or 'southeast Iceland, good, becoming poor, 7' etc etc. 
Occasionally there's an exciting bit about hurricane warnings but I still 
struggle to stay awake till the end each night."

There's no pleasing some people...
 