
The days of email scams have been replaced with a new wave of web fraud. One 
that's harder to spot but arguably easier to pull off and with far larger 
implications. Namely fake traffic.

Advertisers are battling with the reality that, according to digital analytics 
provider comScore, 36% of online traffic is suspicious or non-human. There's a 
reason why – it's remarkably easy for fraudsters to set up shop and generate 
fake traffic to websites that earn money from advertising. And linked to this 
so-called "non-human traffic" problem is the prolific credit card theft in 
recent weeks that's impacted millions of consumers and retailers.

If the scale of this non-human traffic seems hard to believe, let's look at 
how simple it is for a scammer to get started. Taking just a few weeks, a 
fraudster can be up and running in two easy steps: First, the scammer rents a 
server for £60 a month in some remote country. Using inexpensive software, the 
scammer creates a "bot" on that server that replicates the behaviour of a 
human. The bot visits legitimate and well-known websites across the globe, 
clicking on content as it goes. That activity legitimises the bot as a real 
person, with browsing behaviours similar to consumers that major brands would 
want to target with their digital ad campaigns. For example, if the bot had 
visited a major financial site and a menswear site, the bot would be assumed to 
be a high-net-worth male, which is someone a financial services company may 
want to target.

Second, the scammer sets up a legitimate company and website, with decent 
content and some ad slots. Let's call it bobsfinance.com. He then connects his 
ad slots to an ad exchange, which offers the ad space to advertisers every time 
a visitor visits bobsfinance.com. All Bob now needs to make money are some 
visitors.

The next day, the bot happens to visit bobsfinance.com. Before the ad exchange 
serves an ad, it studies the visitor's persona and sees a high-net-worth male, 
based on its previous web travels. The exchange then auctions this ad 
opportunity to advertisers and places the winner's advert on the site. 
Bobsfinance.com makes a few cents. Then repeat. And again. And again. And 
again. Thanks for playing! The advertiser pays the ad exchange and the ad 
exchange pays bobsfinance.com.

This process is so simple that a thief can have the bot coded and ready to go 
in about a week.

But the problem doesn't end there. Fraudsters can also establish complicated 
cost-per-click and cost-per-conversion scenarios that can involve stolen credit 
card numbers. For instance, bobsfinance.com could aim to drive traffic on a 
commission basis to a legitimate insurance provider. The bot will make a 
purchase on the insurance site using a stolen credit card. Given that the 
purchase is fraudulent, the credit card company would eventually refund the 
purchase, but bobsfinance.com would keep its commission because it's paid on a 
cost-per-conversion basis by the exchange.

While this problem is widespread and costing companies millions in wasted ad 
spend, there are several ways to mitigate exposure to this fake traffic. For 
starters, marketers should be cautious when using small unknown sites, 
particularly sites that have only recently been established and are generating 
suspiciously high volumes of traffic and click rates. Also, brands should only 
work with advertising providers who can demonstrate that they have systems in 
place to detect suspicious traffic. This includes systems that:

• Study visitor behaviours – such as the movement of the mouse – to make sure 
the traffic is generated by a person, not a bot moving the mouse in a robotic 
fashion;

• Examine visitor profiles for any anomalies that might signal fraud;

• Track repeated session behaviour;

• Compare traffic flows and patterns;

• Evaluate browser data;

• Analyse the viewability of ads on each page.

When marketers combine the above evidence with predictive insights, they're 
more likely to spot suspicious traffic.

The bottom line is this – if it's too good to be true, then it isn't. So don't 
email someone your bank details to win $1m, and don't buy blind inventory on 
unknown sites.

Cameron Hulett is executive director, EMEA at Undertone <http://undertone.com>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 