
Letter from America No 1002, April 7 1968 

I think we all felt guilty about his patience and enormous courage, as he 
walked into the valley of death so many times. He was in this sense the white 
man's stand-in, and braver than any of us. Because he acted out what we only 
thought and hoped, we feel very guilty about his murder. Guilt, as we all know, 
breeds anxiety, and there's no doubt that everywhere people look with bated 
breath toward the immediate retaliations of this early warm spring and to the 
possible inferno of the hot summer.

There is no sensible point in going into the details of Dr Martin Luther 
King's last journey to Memphis. Yet another American town, by the way, that 
echoed pleasantly through the American memory - until one ugly night.

Over and over, the television commentators kept saying that the dangerous core 
of the city [in the wake of the assassination of the civil rights leader] was 
around Beale Street. And I remembered my first visit there, long ago, a very 
young white man strolling on a hot August morning, safe as the wind, along a 
street that to me was as magical as the Acropolis to a classical scholar. Two 
negroes were bent over a tyre they were fixing. And one of them was tapping the 
rim and setting the beat for the blues they were singing together in low 
harmony. I thought the other night of the lyrics of the Beale Street Blues: 
"Well, if Beale Street could talk, If Beale Street could talk, Married men 
would have to take their beds and walk, Except one or two, who never sing those 
blues, And the blind man on the corner who sings his Beale Street Blues, Well 
I'd rather be there than any place I know, Because New York may be all right, 
But Beale Street's paved with gold."

Well, on Thursday night, it was paved with blood. And it will be from now on 
like the Dallas Blues, one song that no party will care to play or sing.
Bobby Kennedy stood on Thursday night before a crowd of negroes in 
Indianapolis. It was dark, and it was cold, and he stood hunched up against the 
glare of a harsh spotlight. "I have some very bad news for you all," he said, 
and he told them. "Those of you," he went on, "who are black
can be filled with bitterness, with hatred, and a desire for revenge. We can 
move in that direction as a country, or we can make an effort, asMartin Luther 
King <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> did, to 
understand and to replace that violence with compassion and with love. I can 
feel in my heart," he said, "what many of you must be feeling." He paused. He 
had never said in public what he said next. "I had a member of my family 
killed, and he was killed by a white man." I think he is the one white man in 
the United States on Thursday evening who could have walked safely anywhere 
through the negro slums.

 A mule cortège for the apostle of the poor 

The Guardian, April 9 1968 

Once before, the 9th of April was a memorial day throughout the south. One 
hundred and three years ago today, Robert E Lee tendered his sword to General 
Ulysses S Grant and was granted in return the release of his "men and their 
mules to assist in the spring ploughing". Today, on a flaming spring day, with 
the magnolias blooming and the white dogwood and the red sprinkling the land, 
they brought a farm wagon and its mules to stand outside the church on the 
street in Atlanta where Martin Luther King was born and, after the funeral 
service, to carry his body four miles to his college and lay it to rest. The 
"mule train" is the oldest and still most dependable form of transport of the 
rural poor in the southland. And somebody had the graceful idea that a mule 
train would be the aptest cortège for the man who was the apostle of the poor.

From the warm dawn into the blazing noon, the black bodies, wearing more suits 
and ties than they would put on for a coronation, moved through the negro 
sections of the town toward the street of comfortable, two-storey frame houses 
where the coloured business and professional men live and where the Rev Martin 
Luther King Jr lived and preached, in the Ebenezer Baptist church, a 
red-bricked nondescript tabernacle. The bell tolled out the tune of "We Shall 
Overcome" and big cars slid up to the entrance, and out of them climbed 
Attorney General Ramsey Clark, and Mrs John F Kennedy, and Richard Nixon, and 
Senator Eugene McCarthy, Governor and Mrs George Romney of Michigan, and 
Governor Nelson Rockefeller and Mayor John Lindsay of New York, the new Roman 
Catholic Archbishop Terence Cooke, Sidney Poitier, the Metropolitan Opera's 
Leontyne Price, Eartha Kitt, Sammy Davis, Jr, Bobby and Ethel Kennedy.

It is a small church, and shortly after 10:30 the last cars and the last 
mourners were slotted in their places. First, Mrs King and her four children 
and the dead man's brother, and Harry Belafonte. Then at last an alert squad of 
aides and secret service men surrounding Vice-President Hubert Humphrey. The 
conspicuous absentee was Lester Maddox, the governor of Georgia, a 
segregationist whose presence could upset a coloured funeral any place north or 
south.

It was a normal Baptist service, with southern overtones of gospel singing and 
solos by black girls in white surplices of Dr King's favourite hymns, sung with 
impassioned locking of the hands and closed eyes. Through it all, Mrs King sat 
back at a sideways angle with the carved, sad fixity of an African idol ... 
Both the casket and the family were ready to go, but there was a quick whisper 
in Rev Ralph Abernathy's ear: Mrs King had requested a playback of one of Dr 
King's last sermons.

"I think about my own death, and I think about my own funeral ... I don't want 
a long funeral, and if you get somebody to deliver the eulogy, tell him not to 
talk too long ... tell him not to mention that I have a Nobel peace prize - 
that isn't important ... I'd like somebody to mention, that day, that Martin 
Luther King tried to give his life serving others."

Then the doors were opened, and the family went out with all the parsons, and 
the mule team bore its flowered casket and moved toward the many, many 
thousands that had gone on before to Morehouse College.
 