
• With John "Fingers'' Inverdale tucked away out of reach as the Olympic 
stadium anchorman, Phil "Roving Hands'' – sorry, "Roving Mic'' – Jones is now 
way ahead in the race for the touchiest-feeliest member of the BBC's commentary 
team. After eyebrows were raised at Phil's hands-on approach, he seemed to have 
reined in his tactile approach on Monday night ... until the final event, when 
he blew it by grabbing Grenadian 400m gold-medallist, Kirani James. The period 
of enforced abstinence over, Phil had added 110m hurdler, Andy Pozzi, and 
javelin thrower, Goldie Sayers, to his tally by lunchtime on Tuesday .

• Visitors to the Olympic park have started to wonder if there is a dead body 
somewhere, such is the smell from the drains. Some locals have been wondering 
if this is because the architects forgot to connect the Olympic Village to the 
water mains, as water tankers have been spotted delivering supplies each 
morning before the games. A spokesperson for the Olympic Village told them that 
the water was for "landscaping''. In the wettest summer on record?

• On the lash (part 1): While Jess Ennis has been rocking with the Stone 
Roses, and Bradley Wiggins has been comparing Lambrettas with Paul Weller, the 
sailors haven't been missing out on a party in Weymouth. The great Brazilian 
sailor Robert Scheidt, who has won five medals in the last five games, has been 
hanging out in the Lazy Lizard bar on the seafront, where his countrymen have 
been providing their own samba beat. Meanwhile, in anticipation of another 
much-needed gold medal, the Australians have set up a marquee and fingerpost 
(Wangi Wangi 17,161km, apparently) outside the Cove House Inn on Portland, 
where barbecued kangaroo burgers will be on the menu for Wednesday night. Hop 
along.

• Aussie baiting (Part 376): Hugh Porter was on great jingoistic form on 
Tuesday morning in the velodrome, as Laura Trott competed for gold in the 
omnium. "If she wins she will equal the Australian gold tally on her own.'' 
"Steady on,'' said Hugh's straight man, Chris Boardman. "It's alright,'' Hugh 
continued. "I've got lots of Australian friends." Not for long.

• On the lash (Part 2): Most athletes are sensibly choosing to get trashed as 
far away as possible from prying eyes once their events have finished – bar the 
odd Twitpic or two. So whoever in the British squad suggested that cyclist 
Geraint Thomas might be up for a bit of commentary the day after he won gold in 
the team pursuit should have known better. The poor lad could barely remember 
his own name. Elsewhere in the commentary team, Michael Johnson – a bit grumpy 
of late – faces a strong challenge from cyclist Mark Cavendish for best pundit. 
Cav hasn't put a foot wrong all week and is rarely without a smile - especially 
when answering Jake Humphrey's more idiotic questions.

• LingoWatch: Par Terre If a Greco-Roman wrestling bout is tied after 90 
seconds, or one wrestler is called for passivity, the bout is restarted with 
one wrestler on his hands and knees in the centre circle, while his opponent 
starts with his hands on the back of the one on the ground. Definitely 
post-watershed.
 