Arnold Wesker did a number of jobs before achieving recognition as a writer in 
the late 1950s. Which of the following trades did he NOT pursue?  Plumber’s mate
 Seed-sorter  Tram driver  Kitchen porter Although the Wesker Trilogy – 
comprising Chicken Soup With Barley, Roots and I’m Talking About Jerusalem – is 
identified with the Royal Court, it was initially viewed with a certain 
suspicion by the management. So where were the plays first staged?  Mercury 
theatre, Colchester  Belgrade theatre, Coventry  Birmingham Rep  Stadtsteater, 
Stockholm Who first played Beatie Bryant in Roots?  Eileen Atkins  Judi Dench  
Vanessa Redgrave  Joan Plowright In which Wesker play do the following lines 
appear? 'We listen but we do not hear, we befriend but do not touch you, we 
applaud but do not act – to tolerate is to ignore.'  Chips With Everything  The 
Merchant  The Kitchen  Their Very Own and Golden City Which director once cried 
out, in the course of a rehearsal: ‘Arnold, if you don’t shut up, I’ll direct 
this play as you wrote it!’  Bill Gaskill  John Dexter  Peter Hall  Tony 
Richardson In which Wesker play is an apfelstrudel made and cooked on stage?  
The Old Ones  The Friends  The Kitchen  The Four Seasons In the early 1960s, 
Wesker created an organisation designed to popularise the arts through trade 
union support. What was it called?  Art Attack  Culture for All  Centre 42  
Power to the People In 1971 Wesker wrote The Journalists, which used the press 
as a symbol of a Lilliputian society’s desire to cut giants down to size. In 
order to research the play, Wesker was given privileged access to a newspaper. 
Was it:  The Observer  The Sunday Times  The News of the World  The Guardian 
Badenheim 1939 is a late Wesker play based on a novel about the breakdown of 
identity among the population of an Austrian town awaiting deportation to the 
death camps. Who wrote the original novel?  Aharon Appelfeld  Primo Levi  Ivan 
Klima  Isaac Bashevis Singer Which critic said of Wesker: ‘Like many Jewish 
writers, Mr Wesker thinks internationally but feels domestically’? Was it:  
Bernard Levin  Harold Hobson  Kenneth Tynan  Penelope Gilliatt  You got…  Wow, 
you've really got down to the Roots of Wesker's work!  You obviously know your 
onions as well as your Chips With Everything  Must try harder and get to know 
the remarkable range of Wesker's work, from The Kitchen onwards  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  