
Letter from America June 13 1968 

The Ambassador, a venerable hotel miles away on Wilshire Boulevard, was 
Senator Robert Kennedy's headquarters, and that was the place to be. We took 
off and, in the long driveway, lined up behind hundreds of cars containing all 
those sensible people who love a winner. At last, we got into the hotel lobbies 
and a tumult of singing, dancing, music, and cheering [in celebration of 
Kennedy's victory in the California Democrats' presidential primary]. Guards 
and cops blocked the entrance to the ballroom, and a passport and a birth 
certificate and, I believe, a personal recommendation from Senator Kennedy, 
could not have got you in. My own general press credentials were quite useless, 
and, screaming at each other through the din of all these happy people, my 
companion and I decided the whole safari had been a mistake and we would go 
home.

We turned and started down the corridor. On our left, about 40 or 50ft along, 
was another door and a pack of people trying and failing to get through it. 
There was a guard, and a young Kennedy staff man turning down everybody. The 
Kennedy man suddenly shouted over the bobbing heads: "Mr Cooke, come on, you 
can get in here." So we were sandwiched or folded in through the mob and 
emerged as from a chute into an open place: a cool, almost empty room, a small 
private dining-room of the hotel. It was fitted up as a small extra pressroom, 
and there were about half a dozen women telegraph-operators, two newsmen I 
knew, and half a dozen others. It was a perfect way through to the ballroom 
for, in between, was a serving pantry that led through a passage right into the 
ballroom. A friend of mine said. "It's murder in there, and when Bobby gets 
through his speech, Pierre Salinger has promised us, he'll come through into 
this room and talk with us." It was an unbelievable break, so we sat down and 
had a drink and heard the telegraph girls tapping out copy and tried to bear 
the television set in a corner that was tuned up to an unbearable decibel level.

A few minutes later the TV commentators gave way to the ballroom scene, and 
Bobby was up there with his ecstatic wife, and he was thanking everybody and 
saying things must change, and so, on to Chicago [for the Democratic 
convention]. It was about 18 minutes after midnight. A few of us strolled over 
to the swinging doors that gave on to the pantry; they had no glass peepholes, 
but we soon heard the pleasant bustle of him coming through. There was suddenly 
a banging repetition of a sound that I do not know how to describe: not at all 
like shots, like somebody dropping a rack of trays.

Half a dozen of us were startled enough to charge through the door, and it had 
just happened. It was a narrow lane he had to come through, for there were two 
long steam tables and somebody had stacked up against them those trellis fences 
with artificial leaves stuck on them that they use to fence the dance band off 
from the floor. The only light was the blue light of three fluorescent tubes 
slotted in the ceiling. But it was a howling jungle of cries and obscenities 
and flying limbs and two enormous men - Roosevelt Grier, the football player, 
and Rafer Johnson, the Olympic champion, piling on to a pair of blue jeans.

There was a head on the floor, streaming blood, and somebody put a Kennedy 
boater under it, and the blood trickled down like chocolate sauce on an iced 
cake. There were flashlights by now, and the button eyes of Ethel Kennedy 
turned to cinders. She was slapping a young man, and he was saying, "Listen, 
lady, I'm hurt, too." And down on the greasy floor was a huddle of clothes, and 
staring out of it the face of Bobby Kennedy, like the stone face of a child, 
lying on a cathedral tomb.

I heard somebody cry, "Kennedy - shot," and heard a girl moan, "No, no, not 
again," and my companion was fingering a cigarette package like a paralytic. A 
dark woman suddenly bounded to a table and beat it, and howled like a wolf, 
"Stinking country, no, no, no, no" and another woman attacked the placid 
television commentators who had not yet got the news.

Well, the next morning when I saw and heard the Pope in his gentle, faltering 
English, I still could not believe that he was talking about this squalid, 
appalling scene in a hotel pantry that I had been a part of and would always be 
a part of. I have no doubt that this experience is a trauma, and because of it, 
no doubt, several days later, I still cannot rise to the general lamentations 
about a sick society.

I for one do not feel like an accessory to a crime, and I reject almost as a 
frivolous obscenity the sophistry of collective guilt, the idea that I or the 
American people killed John Fitzgerald Kennedy and Martin Luther King and 
Robert Francis Kennedy.

I do not believe either that you conceived Hitler and that, in some deep 
unfathomable sense, all Europe was responsible for the extermination of six 
million Jews. With Edmund Burke, I do not know how you can indict a whole 
nation. To me, this now roaringly fashionable theme is a great folly. It is 
difficult to resist, because it deflects an attack at one's own conscience to 
some big corporate culprit.

It sounds wise and deep, but is really a way of opting out of the human 
situation.
 