
In 1990 Nigel Williams published The Wimbledon Poisoner 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/wimbledon-poisoner.html>, a comedy about a 
dull solicitor who tries to kill his wife, fails repeatedly, but tops a lot of 
neighbours in the process. It sold 150,000 copies – about the same as the new 
Nick Hornby or David Nicholls shifts in print these days.

One of these copies came into my possession when I was about 11. I reread it 
religiously. I even made incredibly dim pencil notes in my paperback. I’d have 
picked it up because we lived in Raynes Park, one stop along the railway line, 
several steps down the swank ladder, but still an easy enough puff up the hill 
into SW19, with its tree-lined streets of mock Tudor semis, its posh school and 
its fancy village, its pubs rich in local history, which the book’s hero, Henry 
Farr, has detailed in a Casaubon-ish book called The Complete History of 
Wimbledon, which nobody wants to publish.

Rage about this rejection, about being felt – by himself included – to be 
boring, and about being remorselessly exploited by his awful wife, Elinor, 
turns Henry’s thoughts to slaughter. The first attempt, involving 
thallium-laced chicken, goes wrong when his friend Donald comes by for supper 
unexpectedly. Henry’s next, involving Finish ’Em! bleach in the punch at 
Donald’s wake is more indiscriminate but, again, Elinor remains unscathed. Both 
incidents draw the couple closer together. Elinor softens as her husband 
becomes empowered. But Henry’s resolve not to kill her coincides with what must 
be his imminent arrest.

The Wimbledon Poisoner is a weird book. There is brilliant observational 
patter, plus a couple of stone-cold farce masterpieces (buying the poison, 
trying to stop Donald scoffing) that even the most resistant would struggle not 
to snigger at. There is, through most of it, a fluent mix of whimsy and 
something more astringent, more cross. Henry is, actually, a complex chap, a 
scatological Pooter, stricken with a chirpier type of malaise than that 
suffered by Reggie Perrin, his neighbour over Norbiton – but an existential 
crisis none the less.

Rage about being felt – by himself included – to be boring turns Henry’s 
thoughts to slaughter

Yet there are also gags and conceits evidently dashed off (Williams wrote it 
while at the BBC). Writing that blurs the line between the colloquial and the 
facile. Once the first few deeds are done, the plot wobbles, and the appearance 
of a mysterious policeman slows momentum and worries the genre.

But, at 11, I wouldn’t have noticed. Even cliches come fresh once in your 
life. I simply found it hysterically funny. Not just the set pieces but all the 
incidentals about south-westLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
life, the hopeless piano lessons and the obsession with car paintwork, the 
wrangles over hedges, the Waitrose runs and the twitching nets. Likewise, 
Williams’s digs at feminist therapy wouldn’t have struck me as blunt, but 
rather as heat-seeking missiles bravely lobbed into uncharted territory.

This was a book that encouraged me to laugh at people whose wealth had 
previously seemed to put them more off-limits, and at a place which posited 
itself as aspirational. It ticked off Wimbledon, called it lazy and 
reactionary, scoffed at its sense of style. I loved Wodehouse, but he wrote 
fairytales, poking loving fun at an absurd aristocracy. I liked Waugh, what I 
clocked of it, but again: this was a class not often encountered. Now, 
suddenly, here was satire that spoke to me.

And it wasn’t just piss-take. It was celebration, too. The Wimbledon Poisoner 
crackles with ambivalence about the value of the suburbs; whether the decency 
of the project compensates for the parochialism that can rear up once its neat 
borders are challenged. But it also shows these borders to be anthropologically 
exotic as anywhere else on the planet. The front doorstep can be a place of 
wonder. And if you did spend a lot of time in Wimbledon’s fallout zone, this 
was a helpful thing to keep in mind.

The later two instalments of Williams’s Wimbledon trilogy didn’t hit home so 
forcefully for me. Alien invasion-themed They Came from SW19 was too wacky; the 
David Nobbs meets Michel Houellebecq vibe of fundamentalist fantasy East of 
Wimbledon went way over my head. Five years later, a BBC adaptation of Poisoner 
pretty much turned me off it for good.

Still, I hope the book changed me. I hope it made me more compassionate to the 
parents ferrying around some of my friends, gave me some insight into why 
people might have liked a civilisation defined by Thatcher, even as she lost 
power nine miles up the Thames. Plus, of course, it taught me an awful lot 
about poisoning.
 