
Neil D'Costa, known for the years he has spent coaching Michael Clarke as well 
as for his work with Phil Hughes and Mitchell Starc, gavea barbed little 
interview to the Sydney Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/cricket/tech-support-clarkes-former-coach-shows-batsmen-where-to-improve-20130816-2s25j.html>
 recently, pointing out various "fundamental flaws" in the "non-negotiable 
basics" of Australia's top order.

Such is the depth of Australia's trauma, another filleting with the knives of 
the press barely registered, although D'Costa had a few hurtful zingers in his 
armoury. Yet this was a piece that could be read another way, too, because it 
was a story that said something about modern coaching.

We are about to enter the second age of the coach. The professional game is 
reaching an apex of analysis as science reveals more of the physical realities 
of batting and bowling. It's not quite golf – yet – but it will be one day. As 
players become highly priced freelance contractors, why wouldn't they employ a 
personal coach to micro-manage each aspect of their game? And why would those 
coaches not become high-earning mini-celebs in their own right? Golf after all 
has its swing gurus and its putting specialists, its mind-managers and its 
conditioning champions.

As in golf, a new language is developing to describe function and form, a mix 
between management-speak and pop-science. D'Costa's piece is studded with it: 
he talks about "kinetic flow" and the "entry and exit points" of various shots. 
Yet at heart, this new language is another way of analysing principals that are 
as old as the game.

D'Costa offers this jargon-heavy paragraph on David Warner: "Warner has what 
in swing mechanics is called a reverse swing. His weight is distributed as if 
he's a right-handed batsman facing the wicketkeeper. The shoulder facing the 
bowler is high when, in fact, it should be lower at the time the ball is 
released. That would enable Warner to enter his shots with the correct weight 
shift and put his nose over the little toe on his front foot. What I see is 
Warner's leaning back. That allows him to cut easily but, when he comes 
forward, his balance is off. Having too much weight leaning back also makes him 
susceptible to lbw when the ball is swinging."

Or as my taciturn former coach Jim Cameron would say: "lean into the ball" (or 
"lean into the fucking ball" – he was Australian) .

D'Costa on Shane Watson: "Watson has a similar shoulder angle and alignment 
problem to Warner. He shifts his weight back when he sets up. Watson is a big 
build, so it's worth comparing him to Kevin Pietersen or Jacques Kallis, who 
each get their front shoulders down and stand slightly open at release so they 
can lean into the ball, chin-forward."

Or, get your head over the the ball.

On Brad Haddin: "You cannot recalibrate your judgment if you move your head 
and Haddin moves his head around, both when he's batting and wicketkeeping. 
Like Khawaja, he drops head when batting and keeping, losing milliseconds of 
vision."

Keep your head still.

On Usman Khawaja: 'He breaks rule No1 – keep your head still. He's tracking 
the ball by dropping his head. After his dismissal in the second innings of the 
fourth Test, Nasser Hussain asked 'How did he miss that?' The answer is, he 
dropped his head before the ball arrived and was looking at the ground instead 
of the ball. Until he changes that habit and is able to track the ball in and 
out with his head still, the rest doesn't matter.'

Watch the ball.

We're at a juncture, as the late Bob Woolmer pointed out in the title of his 
magesterial book, of the Art and Science ofCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket>. The fundamental principals of the 
game have been known to every player since the age of Grace. Science is, at the 
moment, engaged in explaining why the art works. It has value, and as the 
demands of its formats drive further, richer evolution of its methods, it will 
have a widening area of study.

But the oldest lessons should always be learned first, and they don't need 
decorating. Watch the ball. Keep your head still. Hit it when it's under your 
nose. The song remains the same.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This article first appeared on The Old Batsman 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/>

• Follow The Old Batsman <https://twitter.com/theoldbatsman> on Twitter
 