
Appearance: Oh, it takes many different forms.

Age: It would be wrong to speculate at this stage, but clearly it is very old.

Name: Does it matter what you call it?

Well, would you agree that “slipperiness” is a good name for what I want to 
talk about? If that’s what you prefer. I’ve heard “equivocation” used by some 
researchers.

You mean there are people who actually research slipperiness? I’m surprised 
this is news to you.Dr Peter Bull <> at York University, and others, have been 
working on the subject for a number of years.

And what have they found? I don’t intend to give a running commentary on every 
aspect of Dr Bull’s research.

I didn’t ask for one. I only want to know what he has learned about how 
politicians avoid answering questions. It’s a very important subject, I agree. 
That’s why we’re the only party that has committed to protecting university 
funding over the course of the next …

Just tell me what he’s done! He has studied British political interviews going 
back to the 1980s and devised what he calls an “equivocation typology 
<http://theconversation.com/theresa-may-has-a-very-special-technique-for-avoiding-questions-67424>
”.

Can you tell me what that is? I can certainly tell you what a typology is.

Argh! That for instance was a “partial answer 
<https://ecpr.eu/Filestore/PaperProposal/89ebb493-ac8a-472f-a12a-3c88edc95021.pdf>
”, a subcategory of “intermediate response”. BeforeTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> took power, Dr Bull had 
compiled a list of 35 similar dodges, and measured politicians’ slipperiness 
overall, but May has raised the bar. In two interviews Bull studied, she gave 
explicit replies just 14% and 41% of the time. The average is 46%.

Does this surprise you? In politics, you are surprised every day.

I said, does this surprise you? If you’d let me finish, May also has her own 
technique – the “non-specific response to a specific question” – which Dr Bull 
has now added to his list.

What is it? I think it’s clear what it is.

NO IT ISN’T! Well, when asked whether she thinks Britain should have access to 
the single market, May told Andrew Marr: “What I want to see is the best 
possible deal for the United Kingdom in trade in goods and services.”

That’s so annoying. Let me tell you what people find annoying: it’s this 
childish Punch-and-Judy journalism. This interview is over.

Do say: “I will answer your question if you’ll just stop interrupting!”

Don’t say: “This is getting awkward. Could you interrupt me again?”
 