
I wake to my alarm at six, have an espresso, shave and am out of the door, 
checking emails on my tablet as I go. I may be off to visit a care home, 
heading for the office, or travelling to carry out clinical assessments or meet 
with a local authority: my remit is wide-ranging. Although my routine may vary, 
I always have time for a cinnamon pastry and yoghurt.

Why might someone behave in a challenging way?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/aug/01/behaviour-practitioner-people-learning-disability>
If I’m on the move, I’ll be checking voicemails and occasionally having a 
hands-free call with one of our service managers. I’m based in London, but my 
work can take me anywhere from a specialist residential home in Land’s End, to 
a farm-based therapeutic setting in Anglesey, or to inner-city Manchester to 
coach staff in communication techniques.

I work for the Regard Group, a large private care-provider specialising in 
supporting individuals with learning disabilities, autism, mental health issues 
and acquired brain injury. I focus on providing clinical support for 
individuals who display behaviour that may challenge others, such as 
self-injury, inappropriate sexualised behaviour and physical aggression. I am 
also responsible for providing specialist training to our frontline staff.

My involvement in psychology started with a post at a New York charity 
supporting children and adults with learning disabilities and autism. Returning 
to the UK, I volunteered with a local learning disabilities charity, then 
worked as a local advocacy officer for Mencap, and subsequently as a police 
liaison officer creating awareness around hate crime and learning disabilities. 
These roles qualified me for a scholarship to study advocacy and then 
psychology, after which I worked for Mencap nationally.

Having become a listed member of the British Psychological Society, a 
behavioural psychology-based Master’s in analysis and intervention at Kent 
University’s Tizard Centre led me to a position within a community-based NHS 
team. Finally, I came to Regard, where my work has included setting up its 
positive behaviour support service according to Department of Health 
recommendations after theWinterbourne View report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/213215/final-report.pdf>
.

The aim of the service is to support staff in enabling service users to lead 
as full and independent a life as possible. We seek to enhance our care 
workers’ understanding of the sensory and social difficulties posed by 
diagnosis, which allows them to better interpret the behaviour of those for 
whom communication and understanding is difficult.

My role also includes advising Regard’s senior management team on best 
practice and strategic development for supporting specific diagnoses. Two of 
today’s tasks are rewriting the company autism policy and sending easy-to-read 
satisfaction questionnaires to the people we support.

Lunch always includes a banana – for slow release of energy – plus a wrap. 
And, of course, another coffee.

Professional conferences play their part in keeping my knowledge fresh and 
current, and today’s schedule includes preparatory reading for an upcoming 
clinicians’ network meeting in London.

I maintain involvement with my old alma mater, the Tizard Centre, delivering 
guest lectures to postgraduate students, and collaborating on research 
involving Regard and service design.

Regard is always supportive of my involvement in professional projects, which 
have included training NHS workers in learning disabilities awareness, sitting 
on the board of directors for a London learning disability charity, and 
participating in a CQC pilot project where people with learning disabilities 
inspected care homes alongside an official inspector.

This afternoon I will be meeting the parents of a young service user at their 
home to interview them about their son’s behaviours. Now in his early twenties, 
Tom has recently been placed in Regard’s care under transition from a secure 
NHS unit. After this meeting, which will take around two hours, I will be 
visiting the care home where Tom has been placed for a workshop with his 
immediate staff team, using the information his parents have given me along 
with the staff’s own observations to create an updated plan on techniques to 
support Tom’s behaviour.

Designing personal services for people with learning disabilities and autism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/sep/05/personal-services-support-adviser-learning-disabilities>
Following the meeting I will be working alongside Tom’s team, observing how 
they support him and coaching them in communication techniques as Tom is 
non-verbal although able to communicate by using picture prompts.

I clock off at a reasonable time because work-life balance is important to me. 
Down-time outside work is an engrossing movie, and a jog or game of squash, 
plus quality time with my family. There are ground rules, though – my wife has 
told me never to analyse her behaviour …

I generally sleep soundly at night as I have planned what I need to do the 
next day. As I drift off, I often find myself reflecting on a look, expression, 
mannerism or positive behaviour seen for the first time, and think: “Job done!”

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, email socialcare@theguardian.com
 