
"You really should be here," said Trevor Nelson, one of the three BBC 
commentators at the opening ceremony. "It's so much better than on TV." I'm 
fairly sure Trevor was right, partly because a seat in the stadium was the only 
way to escape hisaperçus, but mainly because I was keen to see if Olympic 
chairman Seb Coe's arch-rival, Steve Ovett, had been invited to join the parade 
of great British Olympians. He certainly wasn't included in any of the 
broadcast footage. Then again, even if he was there, you wouldn't have trusted 
Trevor to recognise him.

The big advantage of not going to the opening ceremony was that I was match 
fit and raring to go when the competition proper started at 8.15 this morning. 
If I'd tried to grab a lie-in I'd have missed out on seeing both Sofia Padilla 
and Sneh Rana being eliminated from the women's 10m air rifle shooting before 
9am, their Olympics already over long before most people were even awake on day 
one. Still, the British swimmers had made a unilateral decision not to attend 
the opening ceremony to retain their edge, something Joe Roebuck might have 
regretted after coming last in his 400m individual medley heat. Under the 
circumstances, he may as well have enjoyed the party.

This is the first games in which every minute of every event is available to 
viewers on demand. Within a couple of hours, the red button felt like more 
trouble than it was worth as I flicked aimlessly between the shooting, archery, 
badminton and beach volleyball – all sports I wouldn't dream of watching at any 
time other than the Olympics. Sometimes, you really can have too much choice.

The first gold medal of the games goes to Siling Yi of China in the air rifle. 
My 16-year-old son is not that impressed. "I swear I could do better than 
that," he says. "The target is only 10m away and they can't even hit the 
middle." Mind you, he has also said that about the archery this morning. So if 
you're disappointed Team GB didn't win a medal on the first morning, you can 
blame the selectors for not picking the right team.

Better news from the rowing, where the GB women's double scullers made it 
straight through to the final for which they are favourites. "That's the ideal 
result," said Sir Steve Redgrave. Minutes later the GB men's eight only 
finished second in their heat and now have to take part in the repechage. 
"That's good," said Sir Steve. "They will benefit from another race." Am I 
missing something?

After four hours of non-stop viewing, I have entered a zen-like trance. I am 
now on to the gymnastics and have just caught myself nodding along to the 
commentator who is talking about a "1 in 3, a double Arabian and a triple 
Russian" as if I knew exactly what he was talking about.

The dream is over. For four or five hours Hazel Irvine and Jake Humphreys, 
along with cycling commentators Hugh Porter and Chris Boardman, had been 
assuring me that the British team had the road race perfectly under control and 
that everything was set up for Mark Cavendish, the Manx Express, to sprint home 
and take the gold medal… before it became clear that it was all going tits up.

"They really need to close the gap now," said the commentary team 35km from 
the finish. "They really, really need to close the gap now," they said at 20km. 
"It would really help if we knew exactly how big the gap is," they said at 
10km, a detail the Olympic outside broadcasters had deemed irrelevant. The 
British squad weren't even in sight as the Kazakh won the race. "It was the 
peloton's fault for leaving it all to the GB riders," everyone agreed. Bloody 
foreigners coming over here and stealing all our medals.

Quote of the day: "Is it the Spaniard or is it the Dane? No, it's the 
Netherlands. They've given it to the Norwegian." Hugh Porter calling the third 
place finish in the men's cycling road race.
 