
The Old Woman, Manchester

Russian avant garde author Daniil Kharms has inspired work by Simon McBurney 
and Complicite, and a young generation of theatre artists, too; Clout Theatre's 
How A Man Crumbled looked at the life and absurdist work of a man who was a 
victim of Stalinism and who died in the gulags aged 36. Now Robert Wilson, the 
much lauded director whose work includes Einstein On The Beach and The Life And 
Death Of Marina Abramovic, returns to the Manchester international festival to 
stage Kharms's political novella about a struggling writer. The show has been 
developed with the former ballet dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov and actor Willem 
Dafoe.

Palace Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, Thu to 7 Jul

LG

The Color Purple, London

It's been a book, an Oscar-winning film, and now it's a musical, too. The 
Color Purple, the uplifting and moving story of one girl's struggle to escape 
extreme poverty and abuse in rural Georgia in the 1930s, madeAlice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker> (pictured) the first black 
woman to receive a Pulitzer prize; the 1985 film made a star out of Whoopi 
Goldberg. Now the musical version gets its European premiere at the Menier 
Chocolate Factory with Cynthia Erivo, who's been in Sister Act and The 
Umbrellas Of Cherbourg, as Celie. The production is directed and designed by 
John Doyle; his credits include Sondheim's Passion in New York, Road Show at 
the MCF, and an award-winning Sweeney Todd in the West End and on Broadway.

The Menier Chocolate Factory, SE1, Fri to 14 Sep

MC

Memory Point(s), Winchester

The result of a four-year collaboration between theatre company Platform 4 and 
the Alzheimer Society's Connections Club, which supports people with early 
onset dementia, this show takes small audiences at a time on a site-specific 
sensory journey around the backstage areas of the theatre. Taking its title 
from those moments such as birthdays, family celebrations and anniversaries 
that we all experience, and which often act as a catalyst to remembering 
previous similar events, the show uses headphones to guide the audience around 
the space. There are installations or memory points along the way, using film, 
song and mementos to help lost and buried memories rise to the surface. The 
show tours to Poole, Brighton and London's South Bank this autumn.

Theatre Royal Winchester, to 6 Jul

LG

The Dyas Sisters, Manchester

Grace and Victoria Dyas are theatre-making sisters whose lives are put under 
the microscope in this latest show from Quarantine, the Manchester-based 
company which often works with ordinary people rather than performers. Grace 
and Victoria will be endeavouring to remember everything that has happened in 
their lifetimes and make a book out of it. They will be given a helping hand by 
five local performers, who will appear onstage beside the Dyas sisters as if 
auditioning to play them in a staging of the book. If it sounds a little 
complex, don't worry. All will be revealed in a show created by a company 
responsible for some of the UK's most moving and accessible theatre.

Contact Theatre, Wed to 6 Jul

LG

The American Plan, London

American writer Richard Greenberg has had two successful plays here: Take Me 
Out and Three Days Of Rain, both of which were staged at the Donmar, the latter 
again in the West End with James McAvoy. The American Plan is an early work, 
from 1990, which was revived in the US by Brit director David Grindley 
(Journey's End, Our Boys) four years ago and now finds its way to the St James 
Theatre via the Theatre Royal Bath. Set in the Catskills of New York state in 
the 1960s, on the cusp of great social change, a damaged young woman tries to 
assert her independence while being manipulated by an overbearing German Jewish 
mother (who made it out of Germany on the "last boat" and who sings "The Nazis 
haven't found us/But darling they're all around us"), played by Diana Quick. 
Expect Greenberg's customary deftness of dialogue and emotion.

St James Theatre, SW1, Tue to 3 Aug

MC

Candida, Bath

Plays get written in many different places, but probably very few come to life 
on the top deck of a London bus. But that's where Shaw claimed he wrote this 
1895 romantic comedy, which he called his "mother play". The title refers to 
the woman who is the wife of the Reverend James Morell, a vicar who is adored 
by his parishioners, curate and parish secretary, but whose success might have 
more to do with his wife Candida's talents than his own. But his charmed life 
is turned upside down when a young poet, Eugene Marchbanks, declares his love 
for her.

Theatre Royal, Wed to 20 Jul

LG
 