
Diablo Cody <https://www.theguardian.com/film/diablo-cody>, legs tucked 
daintily beneath her on the sofa in a hotel facing the Pacific Ocean, and 
clutching a cup of coffee, is talking about how celebrity makes some people 
crazy and mean.

"There are some people out there who think that I'm repulsive, that I'm not 
even human. This guy said, if he had a choice between having sex with me and 
cutting his dick off, then he'd cut his own dick off. And I was like, first of 
all I think you're lying. But second, if he is telling the truth, then that 
says something pretty profound … about him. I think he was exaggerating, but 
it's so odd you'd ever feel the need to write such a thing in a public forum. 
And if he were to meet me, even for a few moments," the one-time stripper 
turned screenwriter adds in a sweeter, more conciliatory tone, "perhaps he 
could be persuadednot to lop off his Johnson."

In a world where men now seem ready to lop off their own Johnsons rather than 
have sex, Cody's violent new high school sex comedy horror movie,Jennifer's Body
 <http://www.jennifersbody.com/>, should fit in nicely. My mind reels back to 
the first–wave feminism of the 70s, thinking, wasn't lopping off Johnsons 
considered mere women's work back then? Progress takes many strange forms, 
apparently.

'This guy said, if he had a choice between having sex with me and cutting his 
dick off, then he'd cut his own dick off'
 Diablo Cody and Megan Fox. 
As does the backlash, which has been building since before her last movie, the 
indie romcomJuno <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/feb/08/comedy.drama>, won 
Cody a Best Original Screenplay Academy Award, guaranteeing the enmity of the 
people she'd outpaced to the top.

"I had been experiencing a backlash on a grass–roots level for a long time," 
she says. "First I was a success in my home town, then there was a little 
backlash there. It happened in stages, with each new level of success. And then 
when you win an Oscar, it's like a global backlash. Obviously you can't expect 
everyone to like all your work, but it's always the people who don't like it 
that say it the most loudly. But on the other hand, nobody has ever said 
anything about me that comes anywhere near what I think about myself. None of 
them has ever approached my level of self–loathing, even my biggest hater!"

If we dwell on the backlash, it's because it has become bigger news than the 
new movie itself, which is being reviewed within its carping context, and often 
unfairly. Not that a mean–spirited, vengeful backlash against a successful, 
genuinely witty female writer with a high public profile couldn't have been 
predicted with numbing accuracy years ago.

Cody almost purrs when I tell her that Jennifer's Body reminds me in small 
ways of Terry Zwigoff'sGhost World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2001/aug/13/1>. Both are acid–tinged depictions 
of what happens when two female friends grow up and apart as high school ends 
and adult reality beckons. Except here one of the friends gets turned into a 
monstrous succubus and starts eating her way – on a monthly, and Cody affirms, 
not strictly LUNAR, schedule – through the full gamut of high school boy 
stereotypes: pierced goth kid, offensive linebacker, wannabe ladies man etc. As 
played by Megan Fox, several orders of magnitude of icy beauty above the mere 
mortals around her, Jennifer is the worst type of popular high school girl, 
fully aware of her newfound beauty and confident enough to brandish it like a 
weapon against one and all. Her best friend Anita (or "Needy" – one of Cody's 
slightly too clever–clever emblematic names) Lesnicki, played by Amanda 
Seyfried of Big Love, Veronica Mars and Mamma Mia!, has known her since they 
were three ("Sandbox love never dies," she notes in voiceover), and acts as her 
sounding board, agony aunt and punching bag without complaint.

Things change when Jennifer pressures Needy to attend a local show with indie 
band Low Shoulder, led by Adam Brody of The OC (always more fun to watch when 
he's being a dick and a villain). The venue burns down, killing scores of 
people but the pair escape, with Jennifer taking an ill–advised ride in the 
band's makeout mobile. Later that night she shows up at Needy's house covered 
in gallons of blood and vomiting horrible oil–black sludge in copious amounts.

Cue the metaphorical version of the female high school experience, some of it 
obvious, all of it fun: Jennifer the literal maneater – and her monthlies really
are murder; the voraciousness of a young women's newly-discovered 
sexual/bloodletting appetites and the utter inability of the men around her to 
quench them. And then there's the way Needy figures out what's happened to 
Jennifer – by feminine intuition! Best plot device ever, it saves a ton of 
exposition.

'There's a dark component to being a teenage girl, because overnight you have 
this power'
 Megan Fox in Jennifer's Body. Photograph: 20th Century Fox 
"My high school experience was a lot more like Juno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juno> than Jennifer, obviously," says Cody. 
"I hung out with a group of pretty inoffensive kids, playing musical 
instruments, having fun and moving furniture around the neighbourhood.

"But there's a dark component to being a teenage girl, because overnight you 
have this power. It was so strange to me. I'd always been … I don't wanna say 
this 'weird kid' … reading books and so on. Then as a teenager, suddenly guys 
are paying attention, construction workers are whistling at you. And your mom 
isn't letting you out of the house in those shorts. It's like you've mutated 
and suddenly you have a totally different skill set. That power can corrupt 
you. For me, I went wild. I couldn't believe my luck. 'Oooh, I'm in control 
now, I can have a boyfriend, I can smoke, I can wear a BRA!' It was all so 
exciting. I was born to be a teenager, I'm still ready to be one now, and I'm 
31 years old. I was obsessed with being a teenager and I'm still obsessed with 
teenagers. To me it's the most heightened bizarre time in a person's life. It's 
like you're a werewolf or a vampire and always changing. There is something 
horrible and fascinating about girls going through puberty and adolescence. I 
don't know if you've seen The Virgin Suicides … I really liked that movie and I 
remember when I was writing this that I wanted to catch that same strange, 
ominous feeling that it captures about being a teenager.

"At the time I wrote the movie, I was feeling kinda dark, feeling maybe that I 
was turning into somebody I didn't like. I had become really driven, and I 
realised that I had a chance at a career as a writer, so it brought out this 
desperation in me, gave me some teeth. Part of me was trying to suppress that 
instinct and be the kind of laidback down–to–earth midwesterner that I really 
am. And part of me was like 'NO! We're gonna make this happen!' I was being 
pulled in two different directions, and it felt like it made sense to write a 
horror movie."

You have to love a parallel universe where blonde starlet Amanda Seyfried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amanda-seyfried> plays the plain–Jane role, I 
offer.

"I know, and I really had to fight for Amanda Seyfried's glasses! I said to 
them, 'I don't think the glasses are going to dim her beauty.' I gotta say I 
felt very plain on that set."
 