
Mark Rylance

Plays Johnny "Rooster" Byron in Jerusalem by Jez Butterworth, which opened at 
the Royal Court in 2009 and travelled to Broadway. It has just returned to 
London, where it is showing at the Apollo theatre in the West End.

Jerusalem first came to me in 2003, when I was too busy running the Globe. 
Back then it was called St George's Day. The pages were written with an old 
typewriter and it was very raw, so different to anything else. Sometimes, 
instead of characters' names, there was just pages of dialogue. It reminded me 
of how much as a kid I had resonated with adults outside of society, how much I 
liked their language and stories.

I got busy with other projects and they saw other actors. When the Royal Court 
asked me again, I wasn't quite sure. Because I'd had this surprising success 
withBoeing Boeing <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/feb/16/theatre2>, 
people were amazed that I was committing to an unknown play at the Court. It 
was rough and unwieldy. Even Jez Butterworth didn't think it was finished. He 
felt it was a stillborn play, that it hadn't survived its birth. Even through 
rehearsals, Ian Rickson, the director, had to keep him confident.

I was delighted Ian saw me in the role. I wasn't widely seen for parts like 
this. To some degree, I was always more feminine and I think my latent side, 
which emerged in my 40s, was my masculinity. I turned 50 the year before I 
started playing Rooster, and got into being very fit and healthy – my family 
all died of heart disease – so I was excited about playing this physically 
strong character.

Rooster is a real king of the outcasts, and those kingly qualities have 
challenged my thinking about myself. He has also taught me appetite: feeding 
the part of you that remembers enjoyment between you and the audience. I can't 
get worried about how I'm going to fill a room for three hours. If you feed 
that wolf, it can get the better of you. The thought of the whole thing is 
completely unpleasant, but the present moment isn't insurmountable. I have 
never enjoyed acting more.

[The cast] play volleyball together in the stalls before every performance and 
that almost becomes the best part of the day: it immediately brings you into 
the present. Everyone is suddenly very alert; it's like diving into a cold 
pond. Half an hour before the curtain goes up, I will spend five, 10 minutes on 
a particular meditation, trying to be as awake as I can to all the elements 
around me. When I come off stage, shaking, I have to close down completely, 
pull all that projected energy back in and become quiet.

I'm as vain as any other actor, but I don't read reviews. It's not my job to 
interpret it for the audience, it's my job to be it. The reviews can lock you 
into playing a show that happened a couple of years ago when really, you have 
to keep killing your babies and remember it's a live medium: it's not resolved 
or determined. And I'm not always doing what's on the page – partly because 
I've forgotten, I've shed it and moved on to different things.

I always say that "if you have a problem when you're playing Hamlet, hate 
yourself more". Rooster doesn't hate himself. There's something very animal 
about him. I think when I'm done with it I'll see it clearly, but I can't see 
him from the outside yet. After a good break, I'd love to play him again when 
I'm older.

Alison Steadman

Played Beverly in Abigail's Party, by Mike Leigh, at the Hampstead theatre for 
five months in 1977. TheBBC film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-hXUehyRlE> 
was shot over four days the same year.

I was working at the Nottingham Playhouse when Mike Leigh asked if I fancied 
doing a play. He'd been asked to do a six-week run at Hampstead and said it was 
the usual format: no storyline, no plot, just actors working together and 
having a bit of fun. We had eight weeks to put it together.

We built up Beverly as a certain class, a certain type, who liked baubles and 
beads and makeup and men. I worked on her for two weeks, improvising and 
layering the detail. I went to Selfridges beauty hall and there was a woman 
doing a great demo. She had a tiny microphone at the corner of her mouth and 
was saying things like: "Take a look at this eyeshadow. Look!This is the 
eyeshadow they're wearing in Paris this week. And believe me, what they're 
wearing in Paris this week, we'll be wearing in London next week." She was an 
inspiration; she had a real way of presenting herself. You are not thinking of 
someone and copying them when you make a character. It's like a painter doing 
an abstract painting: you've got to choose a colour, dip your brush in, put a 
first brushstroke on – otherwise the painting won't happen.

I did more research with makeup companies and Beverly's talk, her walk, those 
shoulders, all came from realising this obsession with her looks. Mike 
introduced her to Tim Stern's character, Lawrence. We decided they should be 
married and living in Chigwell. Then Tim and I went to theIdeal Home Show 
<http://www.idealhomeshow.co.uk/> in character. Well, Beverly would have wanted 
to go, wouldn't she?

That first six weeks we had queues around the block. We got extended for 
another 12 weeks, and it would have gone to the West End but I was pregnant. 
The BBC wanted to record it and by the time we filmed it, I was four months. It 
was great fun, but I was terrified. Think of a duck gliding along the water, 
but underneath the little feet are flapping away; that was me playing Beverly.

I used to think: "Oh my God, my whole life, is this all anyone will talk 
about? Will I never do anything that tops this or equals it?" After 10 years I 
thought: "Hang on a minute. Why aren't you incredibly proud? Why don't you 
accept the fact that there are one or two things that you will be remembered 
for?"

You always love the character you're playing because she's yours, but 
Beverly's a monster, a total monster. She's selfish, she treats Lawrence 
appallingly, and flirts outrageously with the neighbour's husband. Men used to 
come up to me at the Hampstead bar and whisper: "I know that woman. I've been 
cornered by that woman." I can't say I like her, but she was brilliant to play.

Jane Horrocks

Played LV in The Rise and Fall of Little Voice at the National theatre in 
1992, then in the West End. The play wasadapted for film 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0147004/> in 1998.

I did Jim Cartwright's first play, The Road, at the Royal Court in 1986. Judy 
Garland's Carnegie Hall album <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Et36f-zjI60> 
would be playing as the audience were arriving and, while I was getting ready, 
I'd be singing my head off. I loved Garland's voice: she's one of the main 
impersonations in Little Voice.

Jim was sitting in my back garden some time later and the impersonations I 
could do came up. He said, "I could do a play about that", and two years later 
there it was. I was surprised when I first read it, thinking: "OK, he's written 
this for me but there's no part here! Where are all the lines?" The role wasn't 
one I had to research; Jim already knew there were certain torch singers I 
could just do. Psychologically, the rehearsal process worked brilliantly: I 
worked in isolation with a musical arranger and was slotted into the scenes, 
feeling very distant from everyone else – just like Little Voice.

We knew from the first preview that we had something special on our hands: you 
could hear a pin dropwhen I opened my mouth to sing 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FPcfWQQKork>. Jim and I had worked a lot on the 
final speech Little Voice makes to her mother and talked about the very quiet, 
retiring kids in school who would hold their emotions in so long that one day, 
when they exploded, everyone was shocked. To a certain extent, I was like that 
as a child; I was very quiet, but my impersonations were entertaining. I 
avoided all bullying because I could hide behind these characters.

Everyone was very excited about doing the film. When it was leaked that 
Gwyneth Paltrow and Brad Pitt were being lined up for the main parts, there was 
outrage in the press. It did me a massive favour, actually. I would have hated 
it if Gwyneth had got it. If something's written for you, it's your role. Your 
part. I saw a revival in Newburywith Diane Vickers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q0VXttGamvg>, and it was so odd. Jim asked me 
if I'd wanted to play Mari, the mother. No way: I didn't want to go there. I 
didn't really want to see anyone else playing Little Voice.

It was a massive turning point in my life, and people still come up to me 
about it. When Steven Berkoff came to see me inThe Good Soul of Szechuan at the 
Young Vic <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/may/16/theatre> a couple of 
years ago, he came backstage and just said: "I loved Little Voice!" Nothing 
about the play I'd just done. But that's fine, I don't see it as an albatross; 
I think I'm incredibly fortunate to have done something people are so fond of.

I was in my late 20s when it kicked off, and my fella jokes about 1992-93 
being my "annus miserablis". If he refers to music or whatever from that time, 
I draw a blank. I was so wrapped up in the project, having such a ball, I had 
no clue what was going on around me. It hugely affected my confidence and lots 
of things changed after the play – but not after the film. People often think I 
won an Oscar, or assume I was endlessly offered stuff, or courted by Hollywood, 
but I wasn't. You get boxed in. The scripts weren't piling through the door.

I don't listen to those singers at all now. I kind of feel I don't need to, 
because of the film. It's out of my system. I look back with massive affection. 
It is the highlight of my career, without a shadow of a doubt.

Antony Sher

Played Richard III at Stratford-upon-Avon for five months in 1984. The 
production transferred to the Barbican, London, and toured Australia.

The idea of the 1984 RSC season was to have new leading actors playing 
Shakespeare. SoKenneth Branagh was playing Henry V 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAvmLDkAgAM>, Roger Rees 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0715953/> was Hamlet and I was Richard III 
<http://theater.nytimes.com/mem/theater/treview.html?res=950DE1D71139F935A15755C0A963948260>
 – my first major lead. The really difficult thing with great Shakespeare 
roles, as if they're not difficult enough in themselves, is the list of very 
famous actors who will have done very famous interpretations. With Richard III, 
not only did a very famous actor do a very famous interpretation, butit's on 
film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWkietU8WzQ>. So people all over the world 
can impersonate Laurence Olivier doing Richard III. You have to come to it new. 
Part of the job is to imagine what it would be like for that script to be given 
to you for the very first time.

I had snapped my achilles tendon two years earlier, and some of the six months 
of recovery time had been spent on crutches. I tentatively suggested to the 
director, Bill Alexander, and the designer, Bill Dudley, that we might try 
playing the part like this. We approached it slowly because a good idea can be 
quite close to a very bad idea, and we weren't sure which this was.

We noticed that often in the play, when women curse Richard they use animal 
imagery. He's called a "hellhound" and "hunchbacked toad" and most 
intriguingly, Queen Margaret calls him a "bottled spider". It occurred to us, 
as I was doing experiments on crutches, that I become a four-legged figure. By 
adding long sleeves, Bill saw that it could almost became a six-legged thing. 
That image became very powerful in people's minds.

To prepare for the role, I visited homes for disabled people. I was also 
looking at psychopaths, theDennis Nilsen case 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennis_Nilsen>, looking at films of dictators, 
including Hitler. Of course, you study the text as most of the clues will come 
from there. The first night I remember thinking: "It's very unfair of 
Shakespeare to start withthis very famous speech, the winter of our discontent 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GumLGIKT-Ak>."

It was exhausting, really punishing. I was in a full body suit for three 
hours, on crutches, for over a year. Of course it was an incredibly exciting 
time, too. Michael Caine came to my dressing room and said: "What about these 
reviews, then?" I said: "I haven't read them." He said: "Haven't read them? You 
bloody wrote them, didn't you?" But it was a relief when it came to an end. 
Your body is strained and your mind becomes guarded. When it ended I went 
straight into the West End andplayed a drag queen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Torch_Song_Trilogy>.

Antony Sher stars in Arthur Miller's Broken Glass at the Vaudeville theatre, 
London, until 10 December.

Nathan Lane

Played Max Bialystock in The Producers in Chicago in April 2001, and then on 
Broadway, where it ran for over 2,500 performances. A production opened in 
London in November 2004, which Lane joined for two months. The play was adapted 
for film in 2005.

I had heard on the grapevine that Mel Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/dec/18/features.review1> was writing a 
musical based onThe Producers <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ni_RtKMpak>. 
Around 1999, I was in Paris, staying at the Ritz on vacation, when I went down 
to the pool and the only two people there were Mel Brooks and his wifeAnne 
Bancroft <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jun/08/obituaries.news>. We 
briefly chatted; Mel told me he was working on the musical and thought I was 
the perfect person to play Max Bialystock. That was a thrilling and exciting 
surprise. Two years later, I got a call to do a reading and a workshop.

Zero Mostel, who played the part in the original film 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCNjOBzg8tc>, was a huge inspiration. But the 
stage version was different enough, and we had enough new material, that people 
thought I'd made it my own. Everyone involved with the show grew up on Brooks 
and knew the movie by heart. It's inevitable there is an influence and, at a 
certain point, you just have to do the material to the best of your ability. 
But it was in my bones to play a role like that; I didn't have to think a lot. 
There is a small part of you that feels proprietary about it, though you 
have to remember it's the playwright's character.

I had never experienced success on that level. I remember the first preview in 
Chicago, we thought: "These are really diehard fans of the movie, it will never 
be like this again." But it was. Every night.Carol Burnett 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000993/> got very emotional and said it was like 
going to the greatest party ever; it reminded her what musical comedy used to 
be like.

Coming over to England [to replace Richard Dreyfuss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jan/21/theatre>] was an unexpected 
surprise. I had just finished another Broadway show and we were due to start 
shooting The Producers movie in a couple of months' time. I was physically 
exhausted, but I said yes. I had severe back problems caused by a torn meniscus 
in my left knee. I needed surgery but was waiting to get back to New York to 
get it done. Then, one night at the end of the show, I heard a crack. My body 
collapsed; it was the most excruciating pain I've ever been through, but I was 
mostly sad about having to leave two weeks early – I loved playing that part. 
Six weeks later, we did the film. I had a physical therapist working on me 
between takes. I wouldn't have traded it at all.

The downside is that once you've had that amount of success, you become 
associated with that role and that kind of performance. People want you to keep 
doing the same thing. I've done a lot of plays, I've been an actor for 36 
years, but there's always a prejudice about musicals. People think it's 
frivolous, or they don't think it's really acting. But the good far outweighs 
the bad. I had a blast – everywhere we did it, people loved it. It was 
thrilling and stuff like that doesn't come around often.
 