
RESTAURANTS

Le Nid d'Aigle, Gourdon

This is a fantastic restaurant in the ancient village of Gourdon 
<http://www.vaucluse-visites-virtuelles.com/glvirtualbluepopouts/gourdon.html> 
in the Alpes-Maritimes. The village is perched on the edge of a mountain ridge 
and the restaurant is perched on the edge of the village, giving it possibly 
the best restaurant view in Europe. The food is what you go for though - it is 
delicious. The chef is a genius - his marriage of flavours and colours are a 
delight for the tastebuds and the eyes. There were four of us and we went back 
three times in 10 days.
• Place Victoria, 06620 Gourdon, +33(0)493 775 202, 
nid-daigle.fr/fr/restaurant.php <http://www.nid-daigle.fr/fr/restaurant.php>
TallyU

La Zucca Magica, Nice

A vegetarian haven on the south coast. It's a quirky place, every corner is 
filled with pumpkins, fairy lights and newspaper clippings of the larger than 
life chef Marco. The restaurant is quite small and the tables are close 
together, so it's full of atmosphere and very sociable. The restaurant only 
offers a set meal of five courses - you don't see a menu, you just sit back and 
enjoy the ride! The selection changes daily as the chef creates inventive and 
tasty dishes from the fresh produce available.
• 4 bis, quai Papacino, 06300 Nice, +33(0)4 93 56 25 27, lazuccamagica.com 
<http://www.lazuccamagica.com>
jaynemoobs

La Fontaine, Cavaillon

A lovely restaurant in a Provencal market town 
<http://www.provenceweb.fr/e/vaucluse/cavaillo/cavaillo.htm>. In two weeks of 
cycle touring around France we ate a lot of set menus, but the dinner we had 
here was the best of the lot - four courses for €22 and every course was 
sensational. The place also does pizza, fish and pasta, but I think its 
speciality is local Provencal dishes. The Cavaillon melon and prosciutto was 
beautiful, and the local lamb shanks were cooked in a slightly spicy sauce 
until they were so tender I didn't even need a knife to eat them. Friendly 
service, simple but pretty decor, and tasty house wine meant the evening was 
pretty much perfect.
• 47 Place Castil-Blaze, 84300 Cavaillon, +33 (0)4 90 71 78 01, 
lafontaine-cavaillon.com <http://www.lafontaine-cavaillon.com>
ShonaM

Le Maracana, Aléria, Corsica

There is comparatively little written about the east of the island in the 
guide books, which is a shame as Aléria is a bit of a find for foodies. L'Etang 
de Diana is France's foremost spot for the farming of oysters and mussels (they 
say), and the region is carpeted with vineyards. Our favourite restaurant was 
Le Maracana on the town's main street. Don't be put off by the roadside setting 
and plastic chairs. A €13 menu featured hearty local vegetable soup, succulent 
pork fillet served with figs and brocciu cheese and mint-stuffed omelette plus 
a choice of fresh desserts and a carafe of house wine.
• Route de la Mer, 20270 Aleria, +33(0)4 95 56 24 84
JillGuest

Le Vache a Carreaux, Avignon

Nestled on a side street in the shadow of the Papal Palace 
<http://www.palais-des-papes.com/anglais/index.html>, La Vache a Carreaux could 
justly claim to be one of the finest restaurants in Provence, a region renowned 
for its cuisine. Simply yet quirkily decorated and with a homely feel added by 
the extremely friendly and attentive service, La Vache a Carreaux offers a 
wonderful range of local dishes and a fantastic wine list to accompany it. A 
truly memorable dining experience, the food is of the highest quality (the 
succulent salmon was cooked to perfection) and every effort is made to ensure 
your satisfaction. Its moderate pricing is truly fantastic value for what you 
get.
• 18 Rue Peyrollerie, 84000 Avignon, +33(0) 4 90 80 09 05, vache-carreaux.com 
<http://www.vache-carreaux.com>
johnsannaee

Bob's Juice Bar, Paris

Brunch/lunch café. Menu offers (among other items) fruit cocktails and 
smoothies, home-made muffins, salads, massive sandwiches, veggie maki and my 
favourite - delicious, taste-bud exploding gazpacho. Oh yum. Free coffee if you 
eat in-house. All is organic, all is vegetarian, all is fun as you banter with 
the waiters (they love it).
• 15 Rue Lucien Sampaix 75010, +33(0)950063618, bobsjuicebar.com 
<http://www.bobsjuicebar.com>
katysaysmeow

BARS AND CAFES

Tearoom Angelina, Paris
 Angelina tearoom, Paris 
I'd recommend a visit to Angelina's Tearooms on Rue de Rivoli - an ideal place 
to take your partner or daughter if you want to impress her with the knowledge 
that Angelina's is known to have been frequented by Coco Chanel. That reason 
aside, the cakes are fabulous (like little pieces of art and totally 
delicious). Their signature dessert, chesnut-based Mont Blonc, is a delight. 
The coffee is great (cafe creme my personal favourite although I read about 
their notoriously rich chocolat l'africain) and the beautiful decor makes for a 
lovely experience. Ladies, don't leave without visiting the bathroom which is 
as lovely as the rest of the place!
• 226 Rue de Rovili, 75001, Paris, +33(0)142808200, 
groupe-bertrand.com/angelina.php <http://www.groupe-bertrand.com/angelina.php>
urbanprincess

Oliviera cafe and olive oil shop, Nice

Fantastic little cafe and outlet for quality olive oils, run by a passionate 
olive oil enthusiast. Daily menu of seasonal dishes, each matched with one of 
the range of oils. Learn about each appellation, or just enjoy a nice lunch.
• 8 Bis rue de Collet, 06300, Vieux Nice, +33(0)493130645, oliviera.com 
<http://www.oliviera.com>
WendyB

La Mosquée de Paris
 La Mosquée cafe Paris 
A visit to La Mosquée is the most relaxing way to spend time in Paris. The 
mosque itself is very interesting - someone there will eagerly show you around 
- but the best part is the little cafe. You can sit outside in the garden and 
sip mint tea or eat sweet pastries in a calm, unhurried atmosphere. There is 
even a traditional hamman where you can have a Turkish-style bath for a 
fraction of the price that any of the more indulgent spa hotels would charge to 
leave you feeling refreshed and ready to tackle the rest of Paris. A serene and 
peaceful environment where everyone is welcome.
• 39, rue Saint-Hilaire 75005, Paris, +33(0) 1 43 31 38 20, la-mosquee.com 
<http://www.la-mosquee.com>
BenPicking

Bar du Marche, Biarritz

Cosy and friendly restaurant in the heart of Biarritz next to Les Halles 
market. Drinks are very reasonable (a nice bottle of red wine for €16) and the 
food is lovely. We had cote de boeuf with frites for two (€39) and were 
pleasantly surprised with the huge pile of meat presented to us. Thoroughly 
recommend it.
• 8 Rue Halles, 64200 Biarritz, +33(0) 5 59 23 48 96
xiphias

CULTURE

Jean Cocteau Museum, Menton
 Photograph: Sergio Pitamitz/Corbis 
Although small, this collection is wonderful to see. Be careful when you go up 
the steps not to miss the paintings on the walls. The upstairs gallery gives an 
interesting incite into M Cocteau. Left me feeling quite inspired.
• Vieux Port - Tel: +33 (0)4 93 57 72 30, 
tourisme-menton.fr/Jean-Cocteau-museum.html 
<http://www.tourisme-menton.fr/Jean-Cocteau-museum.html>. Open all year round 
from 10am to 12pm and from 2pm to 6pm. Closed on Tuesday and holidays. Entrance 
€3.
travelandhotels

Chateau Oiron Modern Art Gallery, Oiron, Deux-Sèvres

When you've had your fill of "historic" Loire Valley chateaux, head to Oiron 
(near Saumur) for a feast of modern art installations and cabinets of 
curiosities in a fantastic setting. Each of the rooms in this 16th/17th-century
chateau <http://oiron.monuments-nationaux.fr/en/> has been given over to an 
artist - some well known (Hamilton Finlay, Tinguely, Messager) and others less 
so. Every time I've been there I've had it to myself, and enjoyed the carefully 
placed squishy chairs, great atmosphere inside and out, as well as the art 
works.
• 10 Rue du Château, 79100 Oiron, +33(0) 5 49 96 57 42, oiron.fr 
<http://www.orion.fr>. Open 1 October to 31 May 10.30am-5pm, 1 June-30 
September 10.30am-6pm. Entry €7
helixhelix

Le Passe-Muraille sculpture, Paris
 Photograph: Tracey Whitefoot/Alamy 
This is a sculpture of a man emerging from a wall. It is an hommage to the 
short story Le Passe-Muraille (The Man Who Could Walk Through Walls), written 
in 1943 by Marcel Aymé. It tells the story of a perfectly ordinary man, 
Dutilleul, who, one day at the age of 42, suddenly discovers he "has the 
remarkable gift of being able to pass through walls with perfect ease." What 
begins as a novelty that gives him pleasure, ends up pushing Dutilleul toward 
more sinister pursuits. Aymé was not a native of Paris although many of his 
novellas are based in and around the Montmartre neighbourhood where this 
sculpture can be found.
• Place Marcel Aymé, 75018, Paris
Weedeane

St Chartier Festival, Le Chatre, Indre

It's 34 years old, in the middle of nowhere, it's a festival of bagpipe makers 
and it's blooming fantastic! Cheap as chips, where the euro-hippies hang out 
for some folky fun. Sleep all day in the shade of the chateau, hang out at the 
evening gig or catch all the wannabes busking. However, it's after dark that 
this festival comes alive - stay up all night to watch belly dancing, Balkan 
street bands and who knows what while drinking cheap wine and eating merguez 
sausage. I've yet to find a British festival which is as much fun for 
relatively little outlay, even including the journey.
• 7 Avenue George Sand, 36400, La Chatre, +33(0)254486060, 
rencontresdeluthiers.org/en/intro.htm <>. 14-17 July 2011,
JoMaher

Musée de Grenoble, Grenoble

One of several high quality museums in a city that isn't known particularly 
for art and culture (but probably should be). The Musée de Grenoble is one of 
the best collections of art outside Paris in the whole country, with paintings 
by Rubems and Cannaletto. The 20th century collections are especially 
impressive, and it attracts some of France's best touring exhibitions.
• 5 Place de Lavalette, 38000 Grenoble, +33(0)4 76 63 44 44, museedegrenoble.fr
 <http://www.museedegrenoble.fr>. Open al year round (except 25 December, 1 
January and 1 May) 10am-6.30pm (closed Tuesdays). Entrance €5
johnsannaee

ACCOMMODATION

Chateau de Reignac, Tours
 Chateau de Reignac, Tours 
Beautiful chateau hotel in a small village in the Loire Valley that we stayed 
in on our honeymoon. Not cheap, but the rooms are beautifully refurbished 
(contemporary take on traditional design and very well done) and the food is 
exceptional. Doesn't have a hotel feel and hosts very pleasant (felt like we 
were staying with wealthly friends). Something to consider if you're looking 
for something quiet and quality. Good value we thought.
• 19 rue Louis de Barberin, F - 37310 Reignac sue Indre, +33 (0)2 47 94 14 10, 
lechateaudereignac.com <http://www.lechateaudereignac.com>. Doubles from 
€172.20 a night.
user101

Pichouette et Olives, Marseille

Guesthouse run by a sweet and friendly lady called Catherine. Rooms are 
colourful, clean and spacious. A delightful breakfast is provided. Catherine 
will go out of her way to make her home your home.
• 11, bld Tellen,13007, Marseille, +33 (0)491543835, pitchounetteetolives.com 
<http://www.pitchounetteetolives.com>. From €60 for a double with breakfast
goshorty82

Basses Beaumettes, Saint Auban, Provence
 Basses Beaumettes self-catering cottage, Saint Auban, Provence 
Self-catering apartment (a converted hayloft) full of character in the 
mountains near some of the best paragliding sites in Europe. Run by wonderful 
hosts Ruth and Ulric Jessop, who do everything they possibly can to ensure you 
have a fantastic holiday - making sure you are well fed and watered (despite 
the "self-catering" tag"), providing loads of suggestions of good things to 
do/eat/see in the area, and keeping you entertained with stories of all their 
amazing adventures skiing, paragliding, rickshaw racing, and living in France 
generally.
• Impasse des Beaumettes, +33 493 60 42 82, pottyplace.com 
<http://www.pottyplace.com>. €50 a night
Grousel

Hotel Montmirail, Gigondas, Provence

A secluded tranquil haven - almost taking a step back in time, except that the 
food and furnishings are modern and stylish. The hospitality of the owners is 
awesome, and the wine cellar is fantastic - a walk-in refrigerated room! Eat 
from the set menu every night and you will not see the same food twice and you 
will not leave an empty plate. Yum!
• Château des eaux 84190 Gigondas, +33 (0) 4 90 65 84 01, hotelmontmirail.com 
<http://www.hotelmontmirail.com>. Doubles from €86 a night .
takeachance

ACTIVITIES

Sculpture Trail (Sentier Sculpturel), Mayronne
 Sentier Sculpturel, Mayronne, France 
Mayronne is a hamlet in the Corbieres hills, near Lagrasse. It hosts a 
stunning free sculpture trail 5km (two hours 30 minutes) long. There are 
permanent sculptures and an annual exhibition April - September. Sculptures are 
amusing, puzzling and breathtaking. The walk would be stunning even without the 
sculptures and it is a magical experience. Very few people know it's there.

• Ferme de Carrus, 11220 Mayronnes, +33 (0)4 68 43 12 37, sentiersculpturel.com
 <http://www.sentiersculpturel.com>. Open year round
acorns

Bain de Saint Thomas, Fontpédrouse, Pyrenees

The smell of sulphur assaults the senses long before you turn into the natural 
amphitheatre where the Bains de Saint Thomas nestle into the snowclad foothills 
of the Pyrenees. Celebrated as "Les Sources d'eaux chaudes naturelles", these 
baths provide everything you could wish for and more: a range of pools, water 
jets, showers and jacuzzis plus a pair of swimming trunks for my husband who 
had managed to forget his. Stretched out in the warm, softly bubbling water, 
gazing at the mountains and deep blue sky above, you do not want not want to be 
anywhere else in the whole world.
• 66360 Fontpédrouse, +33(0) 468970313, bains-saint-thomas.fr 
<http://www.bains-saint-thomas.fr>. Open daily 10am-8.40pm. Entry €5.50.
issybryce

Reserve Africaine de Sigean, Narbonne

Located between Narbonne and Perpignan, in the heart of French Catalonia, 
hides this outstanding African Safari Park. The promotional material is naff, 
and it is approached via an unpromising dusty side road, but once inside the 
African adventure begins immediately (directly above where we parked our car 
there were pelicans nesting). The park is split into two sections, the first to 
explore on foot, where the favourites were elephants, chimpanzees, giraffes, 
and alligators. Some seen up close, and others through use of telescopes dotted 
around the park, as the size of some enclosures are vast. The second, and 
potentially more exciting section is the series of enclosures accessed by car. 
Rhinos, zebra, bears, and the stars of the show, the lions, can be seen up 
close and (almost too) personal. Beware of the ostriches! The whole family 
agreed that this was the best day of the holiday last summer.
• Route nationale 9, 11130 Sigean, +33(0) 4 68 48 20 20, 
reserveafricainesigean.fr <http://www.reserveafricainesigean.fr>. Last 
admission 6pm (6.30pm from 3 April). Entry: adults €27, child up to 14 €21.
joelmf

Nausicaa - Centre National de la Mer, Boulogne

A vast aquarium on the northern edge of Boulogne. It offers a broad experience 
of the world of the oceans, as well as showing hundreds of species of fish and 
marine mammals in spectacular tanks, against which you can press your nose as 
sharks or barracuda swim by, alarmingly close. Children, young people and 
adults with energy and curiosity will enjoy Nausicaa enormously.
• Boulevard Sainte Beuve, BP 189, 62203 Boulogne-sur-Mer, +33 (0)3 21 30 98 98,
nausicaa.fr <http://www.nausicaa.fr>. Open 9:30am to 6:30pm. Entry: Adult 
€17.40, child up to 12 €11.20.
MaxReger

Wild swimming, Galeria, Corsica

The Fango River runs west out of Corsica's awesome granite mountains, and by 
late summer doesn't quite reach the sea. A series of "piscines naturelles" are 
formed as the river creeks in the dry months. Some are deep enough for diving 
off the sides of the little gorge carved in less tranquil seasons. By the 
medieval Ponte Vecchiu bridge, the pools are longest and deepest. Here the 
river is almost at sea level and the water is no colder than the sea, but 
without the heavy saltiness of the Med. The mountain setting, but with water 
that doesn't freeze your bones, makes this a classic swim.
RobNorman

Chateau d'If, Marseille

This is an old fortress/prison set on the island of If, a few kilometres from 
the main port of Marseille. While the fortress has been on the island since the 
16th century, its main claim to fame is as the place of imprisonment of the 
fictional inmate Edmond Dantès, the hero of Alexandre Dumas' The Count of 
Montecristo.
• Quai des Belges 13001 Marseille, +33 (0)4 91 59 02 30. Open daily: Jan–March 
& Oct–Dec 9.30am–5.30pm; April–Sept 9.30am–6.30pm. Entry €4
Fidge

• This article was amended on 22 March 2011. The original located Gourdon 
between Sarlat and Cahors in the Alpes-Maritimes and the Château d'Oiron in 
Provence. These have both been corrected.
 