
The Benny Hill music was playing – Boris Johnson was presumably in charge of 
the tunes – as the American women took a one set to love lead against the 
Aussies in the beach volleyball shortly before 11.30pm on Saturday night, but I 
had to admit defeat and go to bed.

The Olympics may be all very well for the competitors who can get plenty of 
rest between their events, but they place superhuman demands on the armchair 
athlete who takes his sport rather more seriously. After 15 hours of non-stop 
television I was already knackered on day one with 16 more to go.

Barely refreshed, I was back downstairs early on Sunday morning for the 
shootout between the Brits and the Russians to progress beyond the last 32 in 
the women's archery.

No loud music here for an event where slowing the heart rate is key. It 
certainly worked for me, if not for the Brits, as seconds after the woman 
commentator announced that "the British girls were looking calm and settled in 
their action", one of them fired an arrow a long way off target to ensure the 
British team went out.

"That's a marvellous entrance," said Ian Stark, the former three-day eventer, 
as Zara Phillips rode into the dressage arena on the appropriately named High 
Kingdom. "She's got an eight for that."

Not for the first time, I realised that some events will always remain a 
complete mystery to me despite having watched almost every televised hour of 
every Olympics since 1972.

As far as I could see, all that Zara had done was ridden through a gap in the 
small white fence to the background soft rock of Robbie Williams. Perhaps High 
Kingdom had swished his tail in time. Everyone was thrilled by her performance 
– "That's a 46.10" – apart from her mother, who looked as stony-faced as ever.

My red button seemed to suffer a malfunction after that. Having just watched a 
Brit get knocked out of the sabre event at the fencing, the commentator 
announced that he was taking a break and just switched off his microphone, 
leaving me to stare at an empty, soundless stage for a few minutes.

In desperation, I switched over to the weightlifting only to find that no one 
was bothering to report on that event either. There were pictures, though none 
that were very helpful as the camera kept switching from men to women lifters 
with no explanation of why. And yes, I could tell the difference.

Over at the rowing lake, Steve Redgrave was as gnomic as he had been the day 
before. After Mark Hunter and Zac Purchase had won their heat, Britain's 
Greatest Olympian observed: "These two came sixth in their last two races and 
you just can't turn that sort of form around. But these two have."

As Rebecca Adlington scraped into the final of the 400m freestyle, both Hazel 
Irvine and Clare Balding declared the result an "important reality check" which 
highlighted the need to "manage expectations", apparently unaware that it was 
they and other BBC cheerleaders who had done most to inflate expectations.

Ian Thorpe, the Aussie swimmer, then went to explain in all seriousness why 
being in the unfavoured outside lane in the final would work to Becky's 
advantage. Go figure.

There was more confusion in the sailing when, moments, after announcing that 
British medal hope Ben Ainslie had got off to a good start, the commentators 
noticed he was struggling in the middle of the pack.

"He's losing places on the upwind sections and that will be a worry to him," 
we were told. Ben fought back to take second place. "Downwind speed is what you 
need to win gold," was the commentators' revised verdict.

Hugh Porter and Chris Boardman have rapidly established themselves as the most 
entertaining double act in the commentary box over the first two days, as they 
rarely seem to agree on anything and can both be relied on to call most things 
wrong.

Still, it made both cycling road races gripping television, and it was fitting 
they should be rewarded with Team GB's first medal, a silver from Lizzie 
Armitstead.

"Lizzie dropped her gel bar and that may have cost her the gold," said Chris. 
No, it didn't; Marianne Vos of the Netherlands was just a faster sprinter. 
Lizzie was weeping tears of joy in her post-race interview. So was I. The first 
of many, I hope.

Quote of the day: "The closing stages of this race are encrusted with 
enthralling action." Hugh Porter – who else? – on the women's cycling road race.
 