
Britain's greatest living playwright is nodding gently in his sleep. Tom 
Stoppard is uncomfortably folded into a second-class Eurostar seat, his head 
lolling against his shoulder. I've been told that he'll give me an interview 
half an hour before we reach Brussels, so after a moment's hesitation, I tap 
him on the arm and, like a lizard, he slowly opens one bloodshot eye.

He's not just tired – he's jet-lagged. He's feeling a bit ill, or "odd" as he 
puts it. He's just returned from America, and has got up at the crack of dawn 
to catch the Eurostar in order to spend three days attending something called 
the Brussels Forum. "And I don't even know what the Brussels Forum is," he 
says. "Do you?"

I shake my head.

"I'm really not entirely sure why I'm here. I was in New York and Natalia rang 
me up and asked me to come. So I came." He considers this. "Why areyou here?"

Natalia asked me, I say, and we share a moment of mutual incomprehension at 
the fact that he is addressing a conference of Eurocrats and I'm attending one. 
But then "Natalia", or Natalia Kaliada, is an unstoppable force. Stoppard calls 
her "the little dynamo", but this is understating the matter. She's the 
artistic director of the Belarus FreeTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, previously based in Minsk, now in 
exile, an organisation that has come to be the central motor of a campaign to 
draw attention to the terrible political repression happening in a country 
that, as Natalia points out frequently, to any audience that'll have her, "is 
in the middle of Europe, only two hours from London".

Five years ago, Natalia wrote to Stoppard and asked him to sign a letter of 
support, and it's why he now finds himself in situations like this: spending 
the weekend in Brussels with a hotel full of high-level government ministers, 
having agreed during an inattentive moment to giving the conference's "opening 
remarks" before a keynote address by the president of Europe.

"And I really have no idea what to say. What on earth do you think I should 
talk to them about?" It's a shame that it's only in retrospect that I realise 
that the man who wroteRosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead, and Jumpers, and 
Arcadia, who was the great champion of the dissident writers of the eastern 
bloc, is probably not actually seeking my advice. Because, oh dear God, I give 
it anyway.

You're the only person here who doesn't represent a vested interest, I say. 
It's really up to you to go and stir things up.

"You think I should bang the Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> drum?" he says. "I was wondering if 
I should. Or if I should talk about what the purpose of these forums are?"

Bang the drum! I say. Bang the drum!

In my defence, Natalia Kaliada is a force field I defy anyone to resist. I've 
watched Jude Law stumble blindly into it. He turned up at theObserver's office 
on a sunny Saturday, two weeks ago, to introduce her at our TEDxObserver event; 
next thing you know, he's promised to be at the Houses of Parliament for a 
performance alongside Natalia's husband, and co-founder of the Belarus Free 
Theatre, the playwright Nikolai Khalezin.

I, too, find myself pulled along in her wake, following her from event to 
event and now on to this dawn Eurostar (she's sitting at the back), drawn in by 
her sheer energy and determination and the fierce commitment that she brings to 
her cause. Because what's so compelling about what Natalia is doing, and why 
everyone around her, can't help but be compelled, too, is that, as Jude Law 
puts it, "she's living it". She and Nikolai and their youngest daughter, 
12-year-old sweet-faced Daniella, who hasn't been to school since they fled 
Minsk, can't go home. Their other daughter, 17-year-old Marya, is still in 
Belarus, as are their parents and they don't know when they'll ever see them 
again. They've been named enemies of the state, but, as Natalia repeatedly 
points out, they're the lucky ones. Many of their friends are in jail; others 
are dead.

It's almost as if perpetual motion is the only thing that's keeping her going. 
In between her talk at TEDxObserver and now, she's been to Washington, 
addressed another conference, and flown back on the redeye. Later, on no sleep, 
she gave another emotional speech at the Index on Censorship awards, where Tom 
Stoppard presented her with a special award on behalf of Belarus's prisoners of 
conscience, as classified by Amnesty, halfway through which she broke down and 
cried, and now, here on the train, while Stoppard has fallen into a coma and 
I'm just about managing to stare blankly into space, Natalia is furiously 
typing letters and emails and texting her contacts in Belarus.

"She doesn't eat, she doesn't sleep," says Irina Bogdanova, a fellow 
Belarussian whom Natalia and her family are currently staying with in 
Hampshire. Irina's voice is cracking. She's sucking Strepsils and is rasping 
away, but then she's another unwilling activist. Another accidental campaigner. 
"I hate politics!" she says. "Hate it. And yet here I am! It's incredible to 
me." She's a doctor who's lived in Britain for the past 18 years, her partner 
is a British aeronautical engineer, but on 19 December last year, her brother, 
Andrei Sannikov, Belarus's most credible opposition leader, and a presidential 
candidate, was beaten up, arrested, and is being held in a KGB jail awaiting 
what in effect amounts to a show trial.

He's one of the prisoners of conscience. And his wife, Irina Khalip, a 
journalist, is under house arrest with their three-year-old son unable to 
contact the outside world, and so it's to Amnesty that Irina Bogdanova has 
found herself turning. "They have been fantastic. Because there is only my 
78-year-old mother in Belarus, who's all by herself, who is trying to do it 
all. We found a lawyer, but they de-barred him, because that's what they do. 
But I've been speaking to Amnesty's lawyer and they've been advising us. And 
they act straight away. When something happens, they act so much quicker than 
anybody else. They issue this urgent action, which means they send a letter and 
a press release, to all their offices and the government, so at least the 
government knows that Amnesty is on their case, even if they don't care much. 
But actually, they do, I think. I mean, I don't think the situation changes 
drastically, but maybe it doesn't become any worse.

"What Amnesty does is to show that the world is watching. That somebody is 
taking note. That there are consequences. Or maybe one day, there will be. 
Because at the moment, nothing is happening. Nobody else is reacting! Can you 
imagine if it was Britain? If Gordon Brown had been locked up by David Cameron 
before even the election results had been announced? That is what is happening 
in Belarus. And this is Europe. Europe!"

There are so many difficulties in writing about what is going on in Belarus. 
Why you might struggle to find the country on a map. Why you might be 
struggling to care. There have been so many revolutions this spring, so many 
populist uprisings, and yet, right here, in Europe, is a forgotten country in 
the grip of what – you'll discount this as hyperbole and will almost certainly 
resist believing (I did) – is a Stalinist-style reign of terror.

Or, at least, when I meet Natalia for the first two times – unprepared, in a 
rush, my mind on other things – I just can't really process what she tells me, 
can't quite compute it. She's so passionate, so determined to tell her story, 
to convince me of its rightness, and its urgency, that words such as "torture" 
and "killing" and "KGB" tumble from her mouth, and I find it hard to piece 
together a narrative, or understand the context. And while I spent my early 20s 
hanging around eastern Europe and the ex-Soviet Union, my strongest memory from 
my last trip to Moscow was the traffic jam to get into Ikea.

And yet talking to Natalia feels like stepping into a DeLorean and speeding 
back 30 years in time. "Longer," says Irina. "This isn't like Russia in the 
80s. It's Russia in 1937. These mass arrests. People being disappeared. It's 
the purges."

Poor Belarus. It's always been the country in the way of western armies 
heading east, and eastern armies heading west; a brutal history that has 
continued into this century, first by Hitler – the Nazis killed a quarter of 
its population – and then by Stalin. It had the briefest moment of freedom, 
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and then in 1994, Alexander Lukashenko, 
the director of a state farm, was elected president and systematically began 
stripping those freedoms away again.

And last December, in the worst timing in modern protest history, just months 
before the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt, roughly 50,000 Belarusians took to 
the streets on election night in a peaceful demonstration that was violently 
put down. Natalia, like many others, was arrested; she, unlike many others, was 
released (there was a mix-up over her name). According to Amnesty, 42 are still 
in jail, and every day brings news of fresh trials and increasingly punitive 
sentences.

Two out of eight presidential candidates are in KGB jails; another is under 
house arrest, although at one point seven out of the eight had been detained. 
("Even in Russia, they renamed the KGB the FSB," says Natalia. "In Belarus, 
they didn't even bother.") Another, Ales Mikhalevic, has now fled to the Czech 
Republic and at a press conference told how he was tortured by masked men. "In 
fact, we've known about torture happening in police cells for years," Heather 
McGill, Amnesty's country researcher for Belarus, tells me. "This isn't new. 
None of this is new. It's just got worse. What we're most concerned about, more 
than these high-profile cases which at least the EU knows about, is that there 
are an awful lot of young people, who nobody knows about, in jail.

"Yesterday, a 20-year-old law student who was simply peacefully demonstrating 
was sentenced to three and a half years in a labour camp."

And then there are the "disappeared". When we get to Brussels, I meet another 
Irina: Irina Krasovskaya, the founder of a movement and website called We 
Remember. Twelve years ago, her husband, businessman Anatoly Krasovsky, and his 
friend, Viktor Gonchar, the leader of the opposition, simply disappeared while 
driving home. Vanished. Today, having told the story hundreds, if not thousands 
of times, Irina can't keep the emotion out of her voice when she tells me how 
their bodies have never been found.

It's such an anomaly, Belarus. The last dictatorship in Europe. A regime that, 
at times, seems to exist as an echo chamber of the past (Irina Bogdanova's 
nephew, Sannikov and Khalip's son, was removed by the authorities who attempted 
to place him in a state orphanage, the same tactics employed in Stalin's time). 
It's even made Tom Stoppard think again about totalitarianism. "Because there 
were certain assumptions I always made about Czechoslovakia under communism, 
and I'm now wondering whether those assumptions were actually true. It seemed 
to me that, there, people were followed and harassed, and they might lose their 
job or a promotion, the usual menu of that totalitarian system but my 
impression was that the jails were not full of political dissidents as they are 
here. The penalties were harsh for the few who did it, but there wasn't this 
mass fury."

Stoppard was born in Czechoslovakia and became closely involved with the 
dissident movement there, as well as travelling to the Soviet Union in the 80s 
with Amnesty, whose value as an organisation he calls "inestimable". What it 
does, he says, "is connect awareness to protest globally… And, of course, the 
very phrase 'a prisoner of conscience' is a very potent idea. Someone who's 
been locked up because of his conscience." But he had no idea that three 
decades on, having seen the Wall fall, and much of the old eastern bloc become 
part of the EU, he'd still be fighting the same old battles.

Is what is going on in Belarus now worse than what was happening in the old 
eastern bloc?

"I don't think there were these extrajudicial killings. The Soviet system was 
too officious. It was very fond of legalistic paperwork… It was a matter of 
ideology and obeying it. But Lukashenko doesn't have an ideology, he has a 
business plan."

A couple of hours later, in the ultra-marble lobby of Brussels's five-star 
Conrad hotel, I come across a tense grouping of Natalia and the two Irinas. 
Natalia looks like she's going to cry. Irina Bogdanova has now lost her voice 
completely. "I am just so tired of all of this!" she says.

They've just found out from a friend in Belarus that 70 more people have been 
arrested. And when they corner Baroness Ashton, the EU's foreign affairs 
representative, she gives them the brush-off. "We have responded quickly to the 
situation in Belarus," she says in the opening session in response to a 
question that Natalia asked. "I have met with relatives… we have imposed strong 
sanctions."

Strong sanctions? I ask Natalia afterwards.

"That's bullshit! There are bullshit sanctions. There's a travel ban on some 
politicians, that's it. We need economic sanctions."

"It's just feels so pointless!" says Irina Bogdanova, while Irina Krasovskaya 
adds: "Look, Belarus is on the agenda. They mentioned Andrei Sannikov in the 
opening remarks. Belarus is here."

And it's here because of them. Because, perhaps, most remarkably of all, the 
fight for freedom is being led by women. "We haven't any choice," says Irina 
Bogdanova. "I don't want to fight. I don't want to be here doing this. But 
someone has to. And all the men are in jail." It's the wives, and mothers and 
sisters and daughters, who've been left to do the dirty work. There's Elena 
Edwards, sister-in-law of the former presidential candidate Ales Mikhalevic; 
and Natalia Radina, who's taken over as editor of the main opposition website, 
Charter 97, after its founder, Oleg Bebenin, was found hanged last September.

And it's why, perhaps, they're so persuasive, so moving. When they talk, it's 
fuelled by pain and loss and anger. It's not hard to see why Steven Spielberg 
has become a supporter of the cause, why George Clooney has, why Mick Jagger 
made a video appeal on their behalf. In fact, in many ways, the Free Belarus 
Theatre is the model of a modern human rights campaign, although it never set 
out to be one. Natalia comes from a theatrical family and always wanted to be 
an actress but after studying in Moscow, she ended up working for NGOs, and 
Nikolai was a newspaper editor. He edited the three most influential 
independent newspapers in Belarus, until, one by one, they were all closed down.

What's the main newspaper called now, I ask Natalia at one point. "Sovietskaya 
Belorussiya. Soviet Belarus! I mean, really, it's beyond a joke! Except it's 
not funny."

With no newspapers left to work for, Nikolai turned to writing plays, and "one 
was put on in Moscow and we received royalties and with this money we decided 
to set up a theatre company with our friend, the director Vladimir Shcherban". 
It's the company's sixth anniversary this week, and while the authorities take 
their inspiration from Stalin, they have explicitly borrowed from the samizdat 
writers of the 1970s and 80s, employing the same methods, putting on plays in 
private flats and houses.

The British playwright Laura Wade, who went to Minsk to hold workshops with 
them, and attended one of their underground performances, says that "the thing 
about them is that not only are they very brave on a personal level, as well as 
very powerful, but also the work they are doing is incredibly high quality as 
well".

Being an underground theatre group is one thing; being the figureheads for a 
campaign to free Belarus is another. But, according to Jude Law, "the theatre 
has become a symbol of what's happening to the country, and Natalia has become 
a symbol of the theatre. She's been thrust into the spotlight because she's 
eloquent and charming, but what they're so good at is getting attention for 
their work, and then turning that back on to the country."

It's really no surprise to me that after a week or so of intermittently 
following Natalia Kaliada around, I end up in a room at the House of Commons 
with her, Jude Law, Kevin Spacey, Tom Stoppard, Sam West, half a dozen MPs, the 
leading lights of the Young Vic, a brace of playwrights, and a director or two.

"If there's ever the smallest crack," says Stoppard, "then Natalia has her 
foot in that door." As we wait around, Kevin Spacey, director of the Old Vic, 
tells me how he saw them in New York when they put onBeing Harold Pinter, a 
play based on Pinter's work, adapted and directed by Vladimir Shcherban. "There 
was just four actors. And five chairs. It was so powerful, hearing Pinter's 
words about politics and repression, in their own language. My heart was on the 
floor."

"I took Harold to see it in Leeds," says Stoppard. "It turned out to be one of 
his last public outings, and it was tremendously moving."

"I said to them: 'How can I help?'" says Spacey. "And they said: 'We need 
performance space.' So I said: 'Come to the Vic.' So they're now rehearsing 
there."

It'd be easy to dismiss them, the luvvies, and the film stars, stepping out of 
their sparkling celebrity bubbles for just a second, to throw a crumb of human 
comfort at the exiled and dispossessed, but there's real respect for the work 
that the Belarus Free Theatre is doing. They've all shown up at a moment's 
notice. And, crucially, it's a lot more than anybody else is doing – than the 
British government and EU have done. Tom Stoppard is on his fifth straight day 
on the Belarus trail. Spacey's not even on the bill. And Jude Law is 
refreshingly un-A-list about the whole thing. It's hardly a glamour gig: we're 
in a committee room of the House of Commons, with a handful of MPs, some 
parliamentary researchers and assorted hangers-on. And yet watching this odd 
couple – Jude Law in his crisp, white, tailored shirt, Nikolai Khalezin, with 
his ponytail and earring – do a scratch performance of an extract from 
Nikolai's play,Generation Jeans, alternately in Russian and English, is 
genuinely moving, not least because it is, in part, a love letter to Natalia, 
or "Natasha" as he calls her. (They're inseparable now, but when I ask Natalia 
how they met, she shudders. "I really hated his ponytail, his leather trousers… 
ugh! But then, you know, I got to know him.") When he was arrested during the 
election before last, and was in prison, he dreamed of "green meadows that 
would not lead me to Natasha", and notes that "when we are at risk our women 
become samurais".

They do. Poor Irina Bogdanova is in tears again. "It's just too close to me, 
emotionally," she says. "It's like going through it all again." But Mike 
Harris, of Index on Censorship, is pleased. "We had a really good turnout of 
MPs. And Douglas Alexander [the shadow foreign secretary] showed up." Why did 
they come, do you think? "Because we have tea and celebrities," he says.

And this, in very large part, is down to Natalia. She looks shattered. There 
are dark circles around her eyes already and she'll be up again at dawn for an 
interview for BBC World, off next week to New York, answering emails, drumming 
up support, thinking up schemes. I say goodbye, although not for long. Ping! An 
email drops into my inbox. "Is there any chance you can help me get a letter to 
Moby?"

For more information on the campaign, please see freebelarusnow.org 
<http://www.freebelarusnow.org/>. Natalia's talk at TEDxObserver can be watched 
online attheguardian.com/tedx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tedx/natalia-kaliada-theatre-against-oppression>

This article was amended on 5 April 2011, to correct the attribution of Being 
Harold Pinter
 