
In the vaulting back room of a church off Islington's Upper Street in north 
London, five bad bogus men are plotting to bump off a little old lady. It is a 
hugely ambitious undertaking. Not only isThe Ladykillers one of Britain's 
best-loved films, but the cast of the 1955 production – Alec Guinness,Peter 
Sellers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/peter-sellers>, Cecil Parker, Herbert 
Lom and Danny Green – did include one or two actors that modern film programmes 
like to wrongly refer to as "legends", even if (pedantry aside) you know what 
they mean.

But this won't be a film; it's a stage version. And it's far from a knock-off 
of the film. The story's pretty much the same, of course – criminals posing as 
musicians in a little old lady's guesthouse, as they plot a bank job; little 
old lady finds the loot; duplicity and betrayals and deaths ensue, just not in 
the way you'd think. But the script, originally by William Rose for the 
Alexander Mackendrick film, has been entirely reworked, by Graham Linehan 
(comedy writer –Father Ted, The IT Crowd – and renowned tweeter with 135,000 
followers). The cast includes Peter Capaldi, Ben Miller, James Fleet; direction 
is by the rightly feted Sean Foley (one half of comedy duo the Right Size, best 
known forThe Play What I Wrote 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2001/nov/06/theatre.artsfeatures>, their 
acclaimed tribute to Morecambe and Wise). It says a lot for their belief in the 
project when I learn they're all now committed to it until April – it opens in 
Liverpool and moves to London in November – because these are not people 
lacking current job offers.

But it is not, repeat not, a simple rehashing of the film, love the original 
though they all do. That was the mistaken assumption made by theToday 
programme, which asked Linehan if he had "changed it much". Linehan, bridling 
at the suggestion he'd simply transcribed it, and realising he was being set up 
for one of those confected cultural "arguments" not unknown to our belovedToday
, refused to play along. (He is charming, but rather an imposing, and deeply 
principled, man.) He began to answer in dry and deliberately unhelpful 
monosyllables, denied the chance to talk about his own creation for the sake of 
a shanghaied un-debate on originality. Radio gold it was. So… not a knock-off, 
not a copy; rather, a homage with a quite new script, done live, with more 
depth given to the crims who are not the Alec Guinness/Peter Capaldi character. 
Actually, it sounds different enough already to stifle the purists, though 
doubtless there will be rumbles. Until they see it. And…

"Hi, I'm Ben," says a softly spoken, softly bearded man, offering his hand. It 
takes me a few seconds to realise that Ben Miller (best known for BBC1'sThe 
Armstrong & Miller Show) is just terribly self-effacing and hidden by a beard 
(I check later; he's losing it for the show proper). Miller plays Louis, the 
Romanian hit man (Herbert Lom in the film), and got into this (the production, 
rather than being a hit man) because Sean Foley directs the Armstrong/Miller 
tour, and asked him.

"We couldn't be unaware of the film, I love it, but really we were starting 
from fresh with Graham's new script. It's very different now; there's a lot of 
very, very physical stuff. And it's been a joy to do, if new territory for me, 
and hard work. Sean is quite a… stickler." (A little later, I watch director 
Foley ask a genially menacing professor Capaldi to lift, and lift, and lift, 
the needle from a record in, I think it was, 12 different ways, to get it just 
so; I think "stickler" is fair.) Miller, like all the others, can easily 
separate this work from the original, keeping a clear linked duality: they seem 
in love with Linehan's script, but can't help making reference to the film, 
which they also loved. "What I've always found particularly attractive about 
the film is that it feels so solid, so perfectly crafted, yet it follows no 
formula whatsoever; it's so different from any Hollywood template we're used to 
now. This is comedy without template, which you don't see these days. Maybe the 
Coen brothers. That's it. And now Graham, and this. "
 The Ladykillers’ cast (l to r): Clive Rowe, Ben Miller, Stephen Wight, Peter 
Capaldi and James Fleet. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer 
Clive Rowe, who plays One-Round, is one cast member who hasn't seen the film – 
deliberately so. " I don't think I will – the scripting and directing are so 
tight, and I've got my character, and I don't want to run the risk of starting 
to try to impersonate someone else. Apart from anything else, I don't look much 
like him [Danny Green]. There's isn't a person of my, um,hue in the film."

Stephen Wight, the youngest here, is Harry Robinson, whom Peter Sellers had so 
much fun playing. "He's your cockney spiv of that age; likes the ladies but 
also quite addicted to pills. He's a character of that era, the 50s, when there 
was quite a lot of… moral duplicity. It's a fascinating time, isn't it, but we 
do have rose-tinted specs about it, particularly in cockney world."

Wight is not the first to tell me that he "can't wait to get on to the real 
set". It is, apparently, extraordinary, one of the stars of the show: a warped, 
sliding, lame,crooked house in which all the action occurs. The real challenge 
for him, he says, was "getting to grips with some of the technical physical 
stuff, props and timing and the rest. There's a rhythm to this physical comedy, 
it's almost like a dance troupe, and you have to get it spot-on – everyone, 
say, putting their hats on atexactly the same time – and these are tricks and 
skills, which I at least have had to learn."

They really are a terribly nice bunch, this lot, but perhaps the nicest and 
most self-effacing is James Fleet, who in real life still seems to be 
channelling his character, nice Tom, fromFour Weddings. Fleet is Major 
Courtney, and I've just watched him rehearse, with breathy stammering, his 
introduction by the professor to Mrs Wilberforce. "There's a dark, edgy menace 
to it," says Fleet. "There's a certain cruelty in there. It's in the writing, 
of course, but also the set, props, music. We have that authenticity of the 
age, the way that their cuffs and trousers were always a little threadbare."

I am bizarrely glad that, when Peter Capaldi comes offstage for his chat with 
me, he's removed the long scarf in which he'd been bedecked in the manner of a 
criminal professor. On stage, it had added significantly to his air of menace 
and deceit; he was treating the beaming Mrs W with wheedling charm while 
another side of his face was twitching with twisted insincerity. He is, of 
course, all real Scots charm in person, and happy to admit that he's still 
learning.

"All the emotion has to be done without, of course, close-up shots," Capaldi 
says. "The contrasting emotions, the duplicity, it's all pure stagecraft, up to 
us to get it right and to Sean to make sure the audience gets the right view 
every second." And you have to do emotion and anger without even one 
swearie-word, let alone the exuberant filth of Malcolm Tucker, Capadi's 
character inThe Thick of It. "Yes, but that's a bit of a relief for once.

"So it's about trying to get the tiny reactions right, every moment, while not 
losing the sense of the ensemble rhythm; it's a bit like a dance. Learning 
about the super-clarity that is needed on stage to bring about thatslight 
sidetracking of reality. And balancing doing justice to Graham's script with a 
consciousness of what the original film seems to mean to the people of Britain."

It was, surely, a film that could only have been made back then? "They must 
have been odd times. There was a chaotic fallout from the war. A sense of a 
change of class barriers, of government, of expectations, of certainties, that 
was probably, at times, brutal. And I think there was a potential or even need 
for reinvention; of identities, status, personae. So you got quite a few bogus 
gentlemen around the land. Gloriously captured in the film. We all want to do 
it justice, but also remember that we're putting on a theatrical experience, a 
live show. With just a fabulous list of people; I knew from the off that I 
wanted to be part of this. It would have been daft not to get on board."

Graham Linehan <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/graham-linehan>, when we 
meet as the others grab sandwiches, is flustered from traffic but more so, I 
suspect, from, at the moment, being the ghost at the feast. "I haven't seen 
much of the rehearsing. I find it very, very hard to take myself away from 
things, to relinquish any amount of control. But this time I had to step away.

"Sean and I had early discussions and agreed that would be the way. I needed 
someone who understood the language of the theatre. I've seen almost everything 
he's done, and do trust him. But it's still hard not to interfere. I really 
wish I could get my hands on certain bits I'd written. Maybe later, once we're 
there."

The more we talk the more I realise he loves the original film with a passion. 
He has read Mackendrick's book on film craft and thinks it's "genius". "And I 
think, every time I re-see it, that it's such asubtle film. I just noticed the 
other day the doorbell ringing. It's such a horrible grinding chime. Says it 
all. It's a glorious film, but when the pitch was made to me by the producers, 
to rewrite – well, it was a really good pitch. So I thought, yes, I'll take 
that on. Yes, a little ambitious. But I could expand the other characters, give 
them more space and time, findreasons, and bring some things, later things, to 
it – oddly, I thought quite a bit ofReservoir Dogs, another great film where 
the robbery sits mainly in the back story, and it's all about the personalities
afterwards.

"I do think my script's funny," he continues. "I think I know when I've 
written funny. Your best writing partner is yourself, three weeks down the 
line. You put your work away for a while, take it out and see if it's any good. 
Then the bad shouldn't get through."

Lunchtime cups of tea are being brewed on a trestle table before resumption, 
and I finally grab the nicely frantic director, Sean Foley. He doesn't look 
like he's having fun, but he is. He's about the 18th person to tell me about 
the "phenomenal" real set, currently being built up in Liverpool. "And it, and 
the characters, are representative of that time. There's the bogus professor, 
the major trading on old glory, the hint of dangerous foreigners, and Mrs W is, 
of course, Britain: living in a crumbling, crooked, subsiding house stuffed 
with reminders of naval glories. Back then people didn't know quite what to 
make of the trailers for the film; it wasn't a thriller, or a comedy, or a 
drama; none of them, quite. It was, in the end, billed as a 'delightfully 
different entertainment'. And I've tried to keep that phrase in my head. At the 
end, our purpose is to give people an entertainingly good night. If we get this 
right, that'll be exactly it."

Personally, I think they'll get it so right they might even get away with the 
money this time…

Observer film critic Philip French on the original Ealing film

Ealing Studios' two great directors each peaked with a classic black comedy 
starringAlec Guinness <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-guinness>. Robert 
Hamer'sKind Hearts and Coronets (1949) was set in Edwardian England; Alexander 
Mackendrick'sThe Ladykillers (1955) takes place in shabby postwar London. Both 
are outrageous tales of multiple murder, allegories about a troubled Britain in 
transition. In Mackendrick's film, Guinness heads a gang disguised as a string 
quintet planning a heist from the home of an innocent old lady. She represents 
a fading tradition of gentility, the bizarre criminals are a cross-section of a 
nation in decline. Guinness's sinister Professor Marcus (modelled on cadaverous
Observer theatre critic Ken Tynan) is a cut-price Moriarty. Danny Green plays 
punchy ex-boxer "One-Round", Peter Sellers's Harry is the archetypal cockney 
spiv, Cecil Parker's seedy ex-officer Major Courtney a recurrent postwar 
figure. The one true professional is Herbert Lom as ruthless central European 
Louis. It was Ealing's final triumph. 

Guardian Extra <http://www.guardian.co.uk/extra/2011/oct/19/extra-ladykillers> 
members can buy tickets at a special price including a post-show Q&A on 20 
December hosted by Mark Lawson, with a panel including Graham Linehan, Peter 
Capaldi and Marcia Warren
 