
The public inquiry into the fatal shooting by Metropolitan police of Azelle 
Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/nov/13/errors-made-azelle-rodney-shooting-inevitable>
 in April 2005 is concluding. The inquiry was held instead of an inquest 
because of concerns about sensitive evidence that could not be disclosed to a 
coroner or the family and their legal team. It opened in September, amid huge 
scepticism about whether it would be able to both establish the truth and hold 
those responsible to account. The chairman of the inquiry, Sir Christopher 
Holland, delivers his final report next year; but what has emerged in the three 
months of evidence should alarm us all.

Rodney, aged 24, died when the car he was in was brought to a halt in a "hard 
stop", having been under police surveillance for several hours. What has 
emerged in the evidence about the incident was of a chaotic and unmanaged 
process with one arm of the state not knowing what the other was doing.

A Metropolitan police officer fired eight shots in rapid succession, with no 
warning, six of which hit Rodney. One of the two bullets that missed him has 
never been found. The officer who fired those fatal shots had, in his career, 
shot five different men – three of whom, including Rodney, were killed, with 
the others seriously injured.

Rodney was a young black man and, while he did have previous convictions, he 
was no hardened criminal – not a monster, not a terrorist, not an enemy of the 
state. He had no history of either resisting arrest or assaulting the police. 
He deserved the right to surrender. Had he been given the opportunity by the 
Metropolitan police to do so he would almost certainly be alive today.

Rodney was under aerial surveillance at the time but its viewpoint was not 
communicated to the officers conducting the hard stop. This meant that vital 
information about where it might have been safer to stop the car, in a quiet 
place where there was less likelihood of injury to pedestrians, was not 
conveyed to the officers in charge or on the operation.

During the inquiry, the extent of the efforts to keep embarrassing matters – 
as opposed to operationally sensitive matters – secret became apparent. No 
proper risk assessment had been done in relation to the tactics employed and 
the risks they potentially posed both to the suspects, the public and the 
officers involved.

The hard stop was actually called at what was apparently the very last moment, 
outside a pub which was bound to be busy as a major football match had just 
finished (the first Chelsea championship win for 50 years), on the approach to 
a busy high street, next to a pub beer garden. Children were walking along the 
pavement and no sirens and blue lights were used. Moreover, all the cars 
collided – the three police ones and the car in which the suspects were 
travelling.

There was complete confusion in the evidence about why one of the officers was 
in the line of fire of the other. Officers seen on the video of the hard stop 
were not wearing caps to identify themselves and none appear to have shouted 
"armed police" before the officer fired his shots.

The law is clear that Rodney had a right to life. The use of deliberate and 
lethal force to extinguish his life, including the firing of every shot, has to 
be justified. The armed officer has to honestly believe that the force he used 
was absolutely necessary to deal with the threat he was facing.

Expert evidence was heard that it was possible to conduct such stops without 
causing fatalities by organising officers differently and by using sirens and 
blue lights to let the occupants know they needed to surrender.

There are terrible echoes in what we have heard in this inquiry with what we 
know aboutthe death of Mark Duggan <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mark-duggan> 
– a hard stop in a public place and the claim that the suspect who died was 
armed. What we have learned from Rodney's case is that it's vital Duggan's 
death is scrutinised at an open, transparent and timely inquest, to establish 
the truth for both his family and the wider community but also to reassure the 
public that changes will be made to protect their own safety.

Susan Alexander, Rodney's mother, said at the opening of the inquiry that she 
understood that he was suspected, with good cause, of being involved in a 
serious crime and that two other men in the car subsequently pleaded guilty to 
firearms offences. But she added that they were at least able to walk away 
alive and have long since served their prison sentences; it seemed to her that 
Rodney was "executed that day and as a result never even got to see his baby 
daughter". She sincerely hoped the inquiry would leave no stone unturned, that 
any lessons would be finally learned and that similar deaths in the future 
would be far less likely.

It is now in the hands of the inquiry chairman to deliver a report and for the 
police to respond, in a way that truly demonstrates that this unnecessary death 
will not be in vain.
 