 The look is Audrey Hepburn on a day out, with a chic scarf wrapped under the 
chin and a pair of trendy shades. It's all the rage for young women in Iran and 
a headache for the conservative defenders of an Islamic dress code.
With more hair on display and a more modern attitude about their place in 
society, women are pushing the boundaries of what is permissible in Iran's 
theocracy.

Not only are colourful scarves perched at the back of the head, but the long 
coats or shirts that are supposed to hide the contours of a woman's body are 
getting shorter and tighter, giving more than a hint of what lies underneath.

The conservative clergy who dominate Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> have launched another attempt to 
enforce "appropriate" Islamic dress for women. But they seem to be fighting a 
losing battle to keep the headscarf, or hijab, and the long shirt, or manteau, 
sufficiently austere and drab.

The authorities issued an order last month calling for an end to the 
manufacture and sale of see-through headscarves and short, "tight-fitting" 
manteaus.

At the entrance to a shopping centre in north Tehran, a sign warns that women 
who fail to cover their heads or the shape of their bodies will not be served.

"It's nonsense," said Mitra, a young woman who works at the cosmetics counter. 
"Everyone should have the right to wear what they want."

The sign at the entrance does not seem to have discouraged the stylish women 
strolling by, wearing manteaus nipped in at the waist and gravity-defying 
headscarves. Given the choice, Mitra and most other women say they would still 
cover their heads because they are accustomed to it and because men would 
harass them if they went out on the street "uncovered".

But what they resent is being told how they can dress, often by men in or out 
of uniform telling them to "fix your hijab".

Female MPs castigated the latest campaign to restrict women's clothing. 
Reformist parliament member Elahe Kolaee said last week that if shops stopped 
selling the shorter manteaus, women would sew their own at home.

 Quiet revolution


It is not just women's clothes that are changing in Iran. At university 
campuses, courtrooms and offices, a quiet revolution is gaining speed. With 
young women leaving home to attend university in unprecedented numbers, old 
assumptions about female roles are coming under question.

University life gives women a taste of personal freedom and new ideas, said 
Zohre Arzani, a divorce lawyer. "It makes them more aware of what they should 
expect or demand," she said.

One in three marriages in the capital ends in divorce, and according to Arzani 
marriages are breaking up partly because women are beginning to secure their 
financial independence for the first time.

Some working women like Yasmin, a 28-year-old civil servant, say they have no 
interest in marriage. "Why should I? I make enough money and I am free," she 
said. "I don't have to rush home to make sure dinner is ready for a husband."

On the internet, young women express their frustrations in anonymous weblogs, 
complaining about discriminatory laws and patriarchal attitudes. In the 
workplace, female graduates are making inroads as lawyers, doctors and 
managers. But Iran's laws have failed to keep pace with social change, 
according to Shirin Ebadi, a human rights lawyer. Under Iranian law, for 
compensation purposes a woman's life is worth half that of a man, women need to 
get written permission from their father or spouse when they travel abroad, and 
women can only get a divorce if they can prove the husband is violent, a drug 
addict, impotent, absent for several years or unable to provide financial 
support.

Although the legislation is based on Islamic sharia law, Ebadi and other 
women's advocates say there is nothing in Islam that precludes a woman's right 
to equality. Numerous "secondary laws" have been handed down by Shia clergy and 
judges over the years to deal with modern situations not addressed in the Koran.

"My problem is not with Islam, it's with the culture of patriarchy," Ebadi 
said. "Practices such as stoning have no foundation in the Koran."

Iranian judges recently stopped sentencing women to stoning, partly due to 
lobbying from the European Union. Ebadi believes it is only a matter of time 
before other discriminatory laws are removed as women argue their case.

But even avowed feminists such as Ebadi credit the clergy's insistence on the 
hijab and the segregation of the sexes with helping to open doors for women.

After the 1979 revolution that toppled the US-backed monarchy, fathers could 
let their daughters attend university in the knowledge that there would no 
mixing of the sexes. "So the excuse for women to stay at home was removed. 
There was no reason any longer to bar women from university," Ebadi said.

"This was the beginning of a change in women's attitudes. There is a saying 
that modernity is born on the street.

"And when a woman steps out on the street, she cannot be a traditional woman 
any more."
 