
Rose lives on a remote island in Makira province, part of the archipelagic 
South Pacific island nation Solomon Islands. She is the fourth of five 
children, and her parents estimate that she is aged 11. Rose had an accident 
when she was a baby that left her sight severely impaired, and lack of access 
to health care means her sight worsened over the years. She is now completely 
blind. There is one primary school on the island, but there are no resources 
for blind pupils, and Rose has never attended school.

"Rose stays and helps us in the home," explains Rose's father, Peter. "We 
can't afford to pay for her to go to school because we have four other 
children, and you need to be able to see to learn anyway."

Like many Pacific Island nations, traditional Solomon Islands society operates 
in close knit, mostly patriarchal communities, where the 'unfortunate' are 
cared for by community members. This creates an environment of charity towards 
those with disabilities, and while this can be positive, it is a subtle form of 
discrimination. This kind of attitude promotes pity for disabled individuals, 
and strips them of fundamental human rights – like pride, dignity, and the 
opportunity to shape their own lives.

Pacific customs mixed with religions such as Christianity can often be 
exclusionary, despite preaching tolerance and respect as core values. Literal 
preaching from Deuteronomy in the Old Testament depicts disability as a curse 
from God. Combined with customary beliefs that disability is punishment for a 
family's wrongdoing, this results in many people being ashamed of and fearing 
people with disabilities.

"Rose plays with her brothers and sisters," Peter says of Rose's social life 
"It's a big burden for whoever takes her outside because she has to be watched 
all the time, so she just plays near the house. Sometimes the other children 
don't understand that it's not her fault, so they play tricks on her because 
they know she can't see. It's better to keep her away from that."

Solomon Islands is a Melanesian country, and in most Melanesian cultures men 
control the decision making and governance mechanisms in the villages – girls 
and women are excluded. The idea that disabled girls and women could 
participate in community or country scale decision making that is vital to 
improving their lives is unlikely to be fulfilled.

Disabled girls face discrimination in various forms. Not only because of their 
gender, but also because of their disability, and yet again because they are 
children. This is known as intersectional discrimination. However, when 
policies and frameworks are drawn up by governments and aid donors, this isn't 
usually considered and issues are addressed separately - Gender. Disability. 
Children. Those from more than one marginalised group, who arguably need the 
most attention, are forgotten. For example, the draft 2011-2014 corporate plan 
from one ministry in Solomon Islands neglected to mentioned disabled children 
as a minority group that need protecting in one of its core aims, yet did 
mention age, gender, religion, ethnicity and cultural background.

"Disability is still just a buzzword in our country," remarks Savina 
Nongebatu, President of the country's only disability nongovernmental 
organisation, People with Disabilities Solomon Islands (PWDSI). "It's just 
'disability' across the board ... most people aren't even really aware of what 
it means to be physically disabled. There is still a long way to go before 
'invisible' disabilities, like learning difficulties, can be addressed."

Lack of access to education is an issue for children in many developing 
countries. In rural communities like Rose's, children often walk for several 
hours to school. For girls with physical disabilities, this is not possible. 
Many schools require fees, so sending your child to school is an investment. 
Prejudice against women and disabled people in Solomon Islands prevent future 
employment opportunities, so sending your disabled girl to school simply 
doesn't make financial sense for most parents. As a result, according to a 2009 
UNDP study only 18% of disabled girls attend school in Solomon Islands, 
compared to 37% of non-disabled girls.

For girls living with disabilities in developing countries however, there are 
other dangers.

"How can I run away?" exclaims Savina, as she gestures to her wheelchair. "How 
can I run away if someone is hitting me?"

A 2009 survey conducted by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community reveals 
Solomon Islands has one of the highest gender based violence rates in the 
world, with 68% of girls and women experiencing physical or sexual abuse by 
partners or family members. In a society where females are already treated as 
second class citizens with little respect for their basic human rights, what 
chance do further marginalised and vulnerable groups have of claiming and 
enjoying the rights that they are born with?

So why doesn't the international aid community ensure that issues of 
intersectional discrimination and the various types of disabilities get equal 
inclusion in government policies?

"Donors work with governments" explains Savina. "Solomon Islands' Government 
doesn't have any clear policies in place to improve the lives of people with 
disabilities. It's just not a priority. PWDSI funding has to come directly from 
international donors; we get no funding from the government."
Therefore while donors can implement complex issues in their plans, in a 
country where the government fails to acknowledge nearly 3% of the population, 
just getting the word 'disability' into parliament would be an achievement.

However, if governments in developing countries are not prioritising 
disability issues, neither is the international community. The Millennium 
Development Goals cover issues like eradicating extreme poverty, fighting 
disease epidemics and promoting gender equality – but do not include goals for 
improving the lives of people with disabilities.

"We are always helping organisations like UNDP and UNICEF to write reports and 
give recommendations, but it never amounts to anything," says an exasperated 
Savina. "Policies need to specify that problems faced by disabled girls are 
different, and must actively include girls in mainstream systems, such as 
schools."

"Sometimes when we're doing advocacy work, people with disabilities will ask 
questions like 'but do I have the same right to vote?'" explains Savina. 
"Advocacy is our main priority. People need to be made aware of what disability 
is, how it happens, what it means, and that it's not something to be ashamed 
of. We need people with disabilities to be visible. We need girls with 
disabilities doing advocacy work, and showing other girls that they have the 
same rights and freedoms as everybody else."

Perhaps then girls like Rose, along with the thousands of other disabled 
people in the country, won't have to be invisible any more.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 