
Inside the Olympic Stadium <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-stadium>
, my colleague Barry Glendenning has bumped into a lovely family who just 
happened to get four front row seats at the 50m mark on the finishing straight 
for £75 each from the Locog website earlier in the week. I share their joy 
through gritted teeth … Just as a Games maker did earlier in the week after 
discovering a piece of gravel in his salad. And while we're on the catering, I 
hear there was pork and couscous on the menu for the first day of Ramadan at 
the Olympic Village.

"A £1.5bn stadium, a crowd of 80,000 and Jessica Ennis leading the heptathlon. 
I can't believe how lucky I am to be here," said one Radio 5 Live commentator, 
who shall remain nameless, on Friday morning. Nor can I, and I don't care to be 
reminded. I'm also losing track of the number of times different commentators 
have told me: "The scenes here really are indescribable." In which case, either 
keep quiet or let someone else have a go who can do the job.

As you might have gathered, a week into the Games, the Armchair athlete is 
getting a little tetchy at having failed to get any tickets to a live event and 
being reminded how much of a good time everyone else is having. Particularly 
John Inverdale and Steve Redgrave at the rowing, who have been getting browner 
by the day. Four golds, two silvers, three bronzes, a front row seat, a hefty 
salary … and a suntan on top.

Not that there aren't compensations. One of the reasons I have always loved 
the Olympics is that they are two weeks when I have to make next to no 
decisions. I get up, watch TV and go to bed, all with no feelings of guilt. 
There aren't even any family rows about what to watch as the Olympics are an 
automatic deal breaker. It's amazing how many "once in a lifetime" moments can 
come round in a single day. I have a nasty feeling that if I had been alive in 
Roman times, I would have had a season ticket at the Circus Maximus.

The experience all those with tickets to the live events miss out on is the 
medal table for the commentators. Clearly out in front is Michael Johnson, who 
brings intelligence even to those sports he knows nothing about, though he lost 
style marks for not bothering to get off the sofa and leaving canoe silver 
medallists David Florence and Richard Hounslow to stand at the back in the dark 
while they were being interviewed by Gary Lineker. I know Team GB is on a gold 
rush, but silver isn't that bad.

Clare Balding was desperately trying to claw back her title of the nation's 
sweetheart after appearing highly unimpressed with Becky Adlington's bronze 
medal in the 800m freestyle immediately after the event. "I really didn't mean 
to imply Becky had failed in any way," she later grovelled. "I was just trying 
to sum up Becky's disappointment." Still, Clare could say whatever she wants 
and still come out well ahead of Mogadon Denise Lewis who sucks the enjoyment 
out of every event at the athletics.

The only pair to be giving Johnson a run for his money are Hugh Porter and 
Chris Boardman at the cycling, who are turning into one of TV's best comic 
acts. They bicker with each other constantly, disagree on most things and have 
sublime moments of patriotic chauvinism that usually involve "crushing the 
Aussies".

And finally … A grovelling apology of his own from my colleague Simon 
Hattenstone, who misquoted Becky Adlington as saying, "I dance like a man". 
What she actually said was, "I dance like a mum". As Simon dances like a girl, 
he would be happy to offer Becky first dance to kiss and make up.
 