
• Many people may have doubted Usain Bolt, but the Americans never did. While 
2bn people around the world watched the event live on TV, the US broadcasterNBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> chose to show it later. Presumably to 
give Tyson Gay and Justin Gatlin enough time for a head start.

• He's the face of the Olympics. No, it's not Bradley Wiggins or Mo Farah, it's
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the man who has 
managed to get more screen time than any athlete over the past 10 days. On 
Monday morning he turned up on Radio 4 to lecture the nation on how the 
Olympics are restoring a sense of morality to the nation. "There was a culture 
of easy gratification and entitlement and all the rest of it," he told the 
Today programme, while talking about last year's riots. If anyone knows about 
easy gratification and entitlement, it's our Bozza.

• If you were in any doubt that there is a pecking order of events within the 
Olympics, just check out the whereabouts of John Inverdale. Having anchored the 
outside broadcasts of the rowing last week, Inverdale has skipped off to the 
Olympic Stadium, leaving Rishi Persad (who?) to replace him at Eton Dorney for 
the canoeing events in which no one in Britain is that interested. Unless we 
look like winning a medal. Meanwhile, on Sunday night Inverdale and Colin 
Jackson went head to head at the 100m final, to see who could wear the jacket 
with the most hideous piping. Presumably after having gone clothes shopping 
with Ian Thorpe.

• Security has noticeably slackened off at Weymouth. On Sunday at the sailing, 
everyone caught trying to enter the Nothe spectator area with an umbrella 
larger than 30cm was treated like a potential terrorist with an offensive 
weapon. After many complaints, the regulations have now been relaxed so that 
spectators can bring in any sized brolly as long it fits inside their bags. No 
mentions of just how large a bag you are allowed, though.

• All pretence at impartiality is now officially over. When the Belarus 
athlete Ekaterina Poplavskaya crashed out of her first heat in the 100m hurdles 
after 40m, you could almost hear the indifference as Colin Jackson said: "Four 
years of hard work, bless her." When the Jamaican hurdler Brigitte 
Foster-Hylton came to grief in her heat a few minutes later, Jackson and Denise 
Lewis reacted as if there had been a death in the family.

• The Aussie-baiting continues. Having concluded it was probably a bit de trop 
to mention yet again how many medals we have got compared to the pitiful Aussie 
haul, Hazel Irvine adopted the even more patronising approach of comparing the 
Aussies to the Kiwis. "Just look," she said. "The New Zealanders are in 14th 
place with three golds while Australia are 10 places lower with just one gold."

• Very little at the Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> goes unsold. Long gone are 
the unmarked buggies to go and collect the javelins from the centre of the 
stadium, and in comes a fleet of mini Mini Coopers thanks to the sponsorship of 
BMW. It makes you think of the commercial opportunities that have been missed. 
Watching the women's marathon on Sunday, I was surprised to discover the route 
did not include several run-through McDonald's, rather than a few trestle 
tables masquerading as the athletes' feeding station. Still, there's plenty of 
time to sort this out before the men's marathon on Sunday.

********

• The whole world wanted to chat to Usain Bolt on Sunday night after the 100m. 
But the only person Bolt wanted to speak to was Mel C of the Spice Girls, whom 
he asked to pose for a picture with him later that evening. Just think: not 
only the world's fastest man but the world's only man who can instantly 
recognise Sporty Spice.

• Excuse of the day: after being expelled from the Olympic Games for testing 
positive for marijuana, the US judoka Nicholas Delpopolo said he had 
inadvertently eaten food that he did not realise had been baked with the 
recreational drug.

• Lingowatch: Tkatchev – a move named after the Soviet gymnast Alexander 
Tkatchev in which the athlete releases him/herself from the high bar and flies 
back over it backwards. Otherwise known as the reverse hecht. Please do try 
this at home.
 