
Aeschylus's The Persians is the earliest Greek play – and therefore the 
earliest play in the western tradition – to survive complete. It is also quite 
atypical of Greek tragedy. The plots of other extant tragedies in the Athenian 
corpus traffic with the deep mythological past. Aeschylus's ownOresteia, for 
instance, chooses as its starting point thenostos, the return home, of the 
victorious general Agamemnon after the siege of Troy. Like most other Greek 
tragedies the first play of the trilogy,Agamemnon, selects a fragment of Homer 
– in this case the king's violent death, as narrated by Menelaus in the Odyssey 
– and builds a mighty edifice from it. Or take Euripides'sThe Trojan Women, a 
"what happened next" continuation that deals with the horrific fate of the 
female members of Ilium's royal family after the city's overthrow.

The Persians is quite different. First produced in 472BC, its subject is how 
the news of a crushing and thoroughly unlikely defeat by the Greeks – which 
took place a mere eight years before the play was premiered – reached the 
Persian imperial court. Its near-contemporary setting is unique in surviving 
Greek drama (though we know of other plays, now lost, that explored similar 
territory: Phrynichus'sPhoenician Women of 476BC was also about the Persian 
defeat, and written from the Persian point of view.) It is perhaps becauseThe 
Persians seems to stand outside the main stream of Greek tragedy that it is not 
often performed, though it did (for obvious reasons) attract some companies 
around the time of the first and second Iraq wars.

This month, the National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
of Wales is taking on the tragedy. The location for the production is 
especially evocative: a replica village in the Brecon Beacons, originally 
constructed in order to allow postwar British troops to practise tank warfare 
in anticipation of the Russians rolling into West Germany. Much of the play 
will take place against the backdrop of a house lacking a front wall – a 
location that immediately suggests a theatre set and perhaps even askene (the 
Greek stage's carved back wall, which doubled as a costume store). Burnt-out 
tanks are all around. The director, Mike Pearson, says he has resisted direct 
contemporary equivalences (unlike, say, Peter Sellars, whose 1993 production 
likened Xerxes to Saddam Hussein). He wants the landscape and the surroundings 
to "work on" the audience, but not in any baldly literal way. The production 
uses video and film – the central messenger's speech, describing the Persian 
defeat at the Battle of Salamis, is "broadcast" as if on a modern 24-hour news 
channel – but according to Pearson the action eventually slips away from the 
contemporary into a more ritualised, even mythical form.

The Persian wars – in which a tiny, fragmented and often argumentative 
coalition of between 30 and 40 Greek city-states, orpoleis, fought off invasion 
by a mighty empire stretching from Turkey to Iran and from Egypt to the Aral 
Sea – remains one of the most sensational events in world history. This is 
partly because it was so unlikely, but chiefly because it prepared the ground 
for the Athenian enlightenment and its great flowering of philosophy and 
history, of rhetoric and drama and poetry – ways of organising intellectual and 
public life that are at the core of so much later western thought.

It is difficult, from the perspective of a populous and fragmented 
21st-century society, to begin to imagine what it was like to be among the 
audience ofThe Persians when it was premiered at the City Dionysia, Athens's 
great summer festival. The most dramatic section of the play is its extended 
account of the crucial sea skirmish, which was to be one of the turning points 
of the war. The Battle of Salamis is named for the island off the coast of 
Attica to which Athenian noncombatants had been evacuated. Their city itself 
had been ravaged and burnt to the ground by the invaders, but at Salamis the 
Athenians, with their new fleet funded by the state silver mines, demonstrated 
beyond doubt their naval superiority over the easterners (and indeed over their 
allies). Manning that miraculous Athenian fleet was its citizen body: Athens 
had no professional army. The oarsmen were ordinary men – artisans, traders, 
farmers. Every able-bodied male citizen (together amounting to around 30,000) 
would likely have fought at some point, either on land or at sea, in this 
desperate attempt to stave off conquest.

Many, possibly most of the inaugural audience for The Persians, therefore, 
would have actually taken part in the Persian wars (especially if we accept the 
scholarly near-consensus that very few women would have been present at the 
play).Aeschylus <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aeschylus> himself almost 
certainly fought: his brother died in the war. Imagine a performance of Gregory 
Burke's Black Watch, told instead from the enemy's perspective, for which the 
entire audience is composed of Iraq veterans – eyewitnesses to the events 
described in the play. Even this analogy is inadequate, however:The Persians 
was performed in a serious civic event, utterly embedded in the ritual, 
political and military life of the city. (The festival involved religious 
observances and later, during the Peloponnesian War, the children of those 
killed in battle would form a parade.) Thechoregos – similar to an executive 
producer – was a young aristocrat named Pericles, soon to be the most famous 
statesman Athens ever produced. The show took place in a city still scarred by 
its destruction at the hands of the invaders. It is hard to imagine a more 
loaded context for a performance.

This information throws into relief what is perhaps the central "problem" of 
the play, one over which much scholarly ink continues to be spilled. IsThe 
Persians a triumphalist exercise, relishing (perhaps understandably) the sweet 
taste of victory? Or is it a miraculous essay in empathy, inviting the Athenian 
audience to pity the defeated in their humiliation?

The play proceeds broadly as follows. The setting is the court at Susa, where 
a chorus of old men and Atossa, the queen mother, wait for news of the battle. 
Atossa narrates a dream about two women, one in Persian, one in Greek dress. 
Her son, King Xerxes, attempts to yoke them to the same chariot but the woman 
in Greek dress resists and breaks free. Atossa is full of foreboding. A 
messenger arrives, giving a vivid account of events at Salamis. Atossa goes to 
the tomb of her dead husband, King Darius, and the chorus raise his ghost (the 
first such apparition in the history of theatre and a direct ancestor of 
Shakespeare's ghosts inMacbeth and Hamlet). Darius condemns the rash, violent, 
boastful arrogance of his son. The defeated Xerxes arrives at the court and the 
play concludes with an extendedkommos, or lament, from the king and chorus.

Kaite O'Reilly, the playwright who has adapted The Persians for the National 
Theatre of Wales, sums up one side of the argument when she says: "It is 
extraordinary, as an Athenian, to write from the point of view of the defeated 
– it could have been written from the point of view of the victorious. There is 
such power and pathos in the play: compassion, generosity, humility." 
O'Reilly's vision of the play is close to that of the American scholar AJ 
Podlecki, who has written that the drama would require of its original audience 
"a nearly total abstraction from the natural stirrings of pride at bringing 
about the defeat of this bitter enemy. They had almost to forget who they were 
and to concentrate on the common humanity which they shared with their former 
enemy." Thomas Harrison, by contrast, argues that the play is inescapably and 
unpalatably patriotic. "The Persians . . . is not a work with which we can, or 
should, identify," he writes. "It is not a play that could be performed – to a 
liberal audience at least – without blatant anachronism or chilling 
detachment." He places it alongside works such asMansfield Park and Heart of 
Darkness, which are unpalatable by way of their inherent colonialism but still 
capable of holding our interest as works of art.

Some of the most significant work to have been done on The Persians is by 
Edith Hall, professor of classics and drama at Royal Holloway, University of 
London. She calls the play "the first unmistakeable file in the archive of 
Orientalism, the discourse by which the European imagination has dominated Asia 
ever since by conceptualising its inhabitants as defeated, luxurious, 
emotional, cruel and always as dangerous." She points out that the play 
indicates how the enemy was held in the "collective imagination" of the 
Athenians – a picture quite different from that of Homer'sIliad, where Asians 
and Greeks are given a largely even-handed treatment. Aeschylus's Persians are 
not noble, admirable creatures but instead stand for everything the Greeks, 
according to their own self-image, are not. They drip with wealth where the 
Greeks are honourably rugged; they are feebly feminine where the Greeks are 
virile; they are given to extravagant outpourings where the Greeks are 
emotionally continent.

How, then, might one begin to approach this troubling play in performance 
today? A start might be to admit that realism is out of the question. The great 
classicist Gilbert Murray wrote thatThe Persians was "a direct historical 
record" and that it was "not only an eyewitness account but by a combatant, and 
one who, beside his Greek sense of poetry, had also the peculiar Greek power of 
describing what he saw". That holds true for the play's tour de force – its 
vivid, fast-moving account of one of history's great battles. But the world 
occupied byThe Persians is a curious one that combines myth and reality. Dense 
and muscular in its imagery, with an exotic queen, a portentous dream, a 
distant location and a sinister supernatural event, this is a world hovering 
somewhere between the poetry of Homer and the rational enquiry of Herodotus, 
historian of the Persian wars.

As this play trembles between historical and poetic-mythological worlds 
(worlds which the Greeks of Aeschylus's time may not have differentiated as 
sharply as we do) so it seems to flit irresolutely, frustratingly in the 
imagination. At one moment you can bring to mind a noisy, triumphalist Athenian 
crowd cheering in the theatre as their enemies' loss is so lovingly described. 
The next moment those Greeks of the imagination are stopped in their tracks by 
the pathos of Xerxes's grief. We can never recover the feelings provoked by its 
first staging (which in any case, if modern audiences are anything to go by, 
are likely to have been multifarious and contradictory). But thankfully, 
through the imaginative use of an unusual setting deep in Wales, this 
troubling, masterful play can also become a drama for our time.

• The Persians is at Cilieni Village, Brecon Beacons, until 21 August. Box 
office: 01874 611622.
 