
When Arlene Phillips, the 66-year old Strictly Come Dancing judge, was removed 
from the show to make way for 30-year old Alesha Dixon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/jul/09/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing-bbc>
, there was a wave of public outrage. But Phillips could not have claimed age 
discrimination – one of the other male judges who remained on the show was 65. 
And she could not have claimed sex discrimination – she was replaced by a 
woman. The BBC, which is frequently accused of ditching women when they become 
"too old for TV" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/feb/04/older-women-too-old-for-tv>
, may have thought harder about removing her if the law had had more to say.

From today, it does. Under the new Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> Act which comes into force, the 
law recognises that you can be - this is innovative I know - both a woman, and 
old. It sounds obvious, but it really is progress.

And If you've ever had to fill in a pre-employment medical questionnaire, you 
won't have to any more. In an attempt to prevent employers discriminating 
against people with disabilities, the new law makes medicals and questions at 
the application stage unlawful. And if you did answer questions about your 
health and did not get the job, the burden will be on the employer to show that 
disability discrimination played no part in the decision not to hire you.

Then there is the much maligned – in my view wrongly – positive 
discrimination. From today, it's legal for the first time. Faced with two 
candidates of equal merit, employers can take characteristics which are 
underrepresented in their organisations into account when deciding which one to 
hire. People always feel strongly about this concept, but I don't see why. 
Faced with two candidates of equal merit it was always within an employer's 
discretion what they chose to take into account – the only difference now is 
that disadvantage in the workforce based on factors like race, sexual 
orientation or disability, can be openly cited as a reason.

And a baby step has been taken towards equal pay. "Pay secrecy" clauses in 
employment contracts will now be unenforceable – no one can be disciplined any 
more for discussing salary and details of their pay with colleagues at work.

But the new law is also full of "buts". As far as equal pay is concerned, 
openly publishing who earns what – or "pay reporting" – is the only way 
employees will seriously be able to address the injustice of pay discrepancies. 
There are pay reporting requirements in the new rules tomorrow and the 
coalition government has no plans to change that any time soon.

There are exemptions to the rules about medicals and questionnaires – 
employers are still allowed to ask questions about health before hiring if the 
question is "intrinsic" to the role, and can still screen for health problems 
at the short-list stage.

And the so-called "socialism in one clause" provision 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/apr/28/toynbee-equality-bill-welfare>
 – a public sector equality duty which would require public bodies to consider 
race, gender, disability, age, sexual orientation, religion or belief, 
pregnancy and maternity, and gender reassignment when designing and delivering 
public services – is still the subject of government consultation.

The Act must be doing something useful for employees though, because employers 
are already complaining about it. Meanwhile lawyers report a "surge" of 
activity as employers update their policies to make sure they comply with the 
new anti-discrimination regime. Some are estimating a ten per cent rise in 
employment tribunal claims. Adopting the age-old principle that if change 
doesn't bother anyone then it's not working - that sounds just fine to me.
 