
App: The Good Shopping Guide 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/the-good-shopping-guide-ethical/id416083134?mt=8>

By: The Ethical Company Organisation 
<http://www.ethical-company-organisation.org/>

Price: £2.99 (10% of net revenue goes to Friends of the Earth)

Available on: iOS

What is it?

It's The Good Shopping Guide in app form instead of a book. More than 700 
brands are ranked in 72 product-specific categories according to how ethically 
they have been produced – the ratings are based on research into the corporate 
social responsibility (CSR) records of the UK's biggest brands.

Choose any of the seven areas, including fashion, food and drink, and travel, 
then choose a product and pull up a table comparing the ethical credentials of 
some of the most popular manufacturers.

What does it promise?

"Revealing the good, bad and ugly of the world's leading brands, this is the 
classic (and the world's best-selling) ethical shopping guide. Whenever you 
shop … this app version gives full product sector comparison tables on famous 
brands and corporations in relation to their environmental, animal welfare and 
human rights records."

Is it easy to use?

Generally, although the How to use this ethical shopping app section is really 
about how to read the ethical ranking tables as opposed to how to navigate the 
app. The opening screen has links to this section, plus the seven areas in 
which products are grouped. Within each one there is an introduction, an 
"editorial" about the ethical issues surrounding that area, and a link to 
product pages. On the product pages the summary section is meaningless unless 
you have read the How to … guide (where it is unhelpfully referred to as short 
tables).

Is it fun?

Maybe not fun as such, but it's an interesting read. You can learn a lot about 
the ethical and environmental issues surrounding many aspects of the goods and 
services you commonly buy. For example, I learned how Tiger Woods's Nike 
sponsorship deal compared with the wages of Thai workers, and that 140m bananas 
are eaten every week in the UK.

Is it pretty?

Very. It's all set on a nice, muted, green background, except for the tables 
which are on a white background, which makes them very easy to read.

Should you download it?
 Good Shooping Guide QR code 
If you want an app which lets you find out at the wave of your phone whether 
the item you are about to buy is ethically sound, then no. You can't swipe the 
barcode and pull up information, and you can't even drill down into individual 
products – say you want to buy batteries, you can pull up a table of each of 
the main manufacturers, but you can't find out if a certain type of battery 
they make is particularly good or bad.

But if you want a cheaper, more portable alternative to the book, then yes. It 
is a good read and the tables are useful. The categories are sensible and wide 
ranging, and cover a lot of the biggest brands – and you can check them when 
you are in a shop and about to make a purchase.

The tables are by no means exhaustive (nor do they claim to be), and when I 
checked in the beer, lager and cider category it didn't include any of my 
ciders of choice. But next time I'm in the pub I can check whether it is 
ethically sounder to have a pint of ESB or Old Speckled Hen.
 