
ANDREW SACHS Sent the Beeb into cautious compliance meltdown

If Manuel had bothered to pick up his phone, Ross and Brand wouldn't have been 
tempted to leave their naughty messages, the Daily Mail wouldn't have been able 
to work itself up into a hypocritical moralistic lather, thousands of people 
who'd never heard the original show wouldn't have rung in to complain,Russell 
Brand <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/russellbrand> would still have his 
Radio 2 show instead of Alan bleedin' Carr, and the BBC wouldn't get all jumpy 
every time Frankie Boyle made jokes about theQueen's fanny 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N_ESgHRI5HI>. 
SEE ALSO The Satanic Slut

STEVE JOBS Killed the album with his zero-attention-span 'apps'

It was supposed to be so easy. Get your CDs, rip them in to iTunes 
<http://www.apple.com/itunes/>, put them on your iPod. Then, whenever a latent 
desire to listen to REO Speedwagon arose you could sate it right away. 
Brilliantly convenient. But what iTunes actually means is that after eight 
years of the sodding thing, everyone's attention span is so completely fried by 
the amount of choice that it's hard enough to get through one song without SKIP 
SKIP SKIPPING, let alone a whole album. Add to this the world's TV shows, 
movies, film trailers being added to iTunes ... And the invention of the iPhone 
... And the billions of distractions at the App Store. And Apple TV... It's 
enough to make you forget what you were saying mid sen ...
SEE ALSO Facebook, Google's Brin and Page, Roberta from Spotify 
<http://www.wordmagazine.co.uk/content/spotify-infinite-playlist-day-two#comment-89463>

DON SIMPSON Failed to keep Michael's heavy artillery at bay


The producer of Top Gun, Flashdance, Beverly Hills Cop, Bad Boys etc died in 
1996 after ingesting half a pharmacy, which left his partner, Jerry 
Bruckheimer, looking for a new partner in crimes against cinema. EnterMichael 
Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/jul/03/michael-bay-best-quotes>
, whose inane new flavour of action movie has stomped across the 21st century 
like a monster truck in a model village – with Megan Fox at the wheel in a 
stars-and-stripes bikini. The THX crashes and IMAX bangs of Pearl Harbor, Bad 
Boys II and the Transformers movies have bludgeoned us into brain death. All of 
which makes Top Gun look like high art by comparison.
SEE ALSO McG (Terminator Salvation), Timur Bekmambetov (Wanted), Louis 
Leterrier (The Incredible Hulk, Transporter 2), Paul WS Anderson (Resident 
Evil, Death Race)

AL GORE The king of inconvenience

There's the obvious crime of not winning the 2000 US presidential election, 
but you can't blame Al for everything that followed. One thing we can blame 
Gore for, though, is inventing the downer-doc.An Inconvenient Truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/114266/inconvenient.truth> melted a 
glacier of sobering, sanctimonious documentaries that were waiting to flood the 
cinemas and hector us on how doomed the Earth is because of global 
warming/human greed/not watching enough sobering, sanctimonious documentaries.
SEE ALSO The 11th Hour, A Crude Awakening, The End Of The Line, The Age Of 
Stupid, Darwin's Nightmare, The Vanishing Of The Bees. Lost the will to live 
yet?

NIGEL LYTHGOE Tuned telly into one big no-talent show

Not only did the charmless TV exec give us Popstars 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UpWus7NUeyY> (which begat Pop Idol, which begat 
The X Factor, which begat Britain's Got Talent), he made it acceptable for 
rich, slobbering middle-aged men with bad hair to humiliate desperate young 
female wannabes about imperceptible fluctuations in their weight on TV. The 
fact that British culture has now been reduced to Jedward and SuBo is all his 
fault.
SEE ALSO Simon Cowell, Strictly's Craig Revel Horwood, Richard Park

RACHEL ZOE Made starlets look like six-year-old boys in drag


Oh, Skeletor! As the size zero stylist to the stars and skinny celebutants 
we've learned a lot from your work. You're our total thinspiration. Firstly, 
that Kate Moss's maxim, "nothing tastes as good as skinny feels" is so true. 
Now we can all look like pre-pubescent girls again and all that couture finally 
fits us. Secondly, you can never have too many accessories: big handbags, big 
sunglasses, genetically dwarfed dograts – it's all good. And thirdly … oh, hang 
on, we just have to go to the loo again ...
SEE ALSO Grazia magazine, Lindsay Lohan, Victoria Beckham, Kate Moss

GARY LIGHTBODY Light up, light up, as if zzzzzz – the bedwetters' bedwetter

Began the decade as the gormless, floppy-haired frontman of a no-mark, 
studenty indie band and ended it much the same. Yet somewhere in between, he 
managed to sell 10m albums and ruin the romantic denouement of every TV 
miniseries with his insistently bland and wheedling marshmallow rock. To be 
fair, the other members of Snow Patrol are probably equally deserving of a 
spell in the stocks, if only we had the faintest clue who they were or what 
they looked like.
SEE ALSO Chris Martin, Keane

HARRY POTTER ... And The Endless Franchise Of Little Import

It all seemed so innocent back in 2001, when wide-eyed little Daniel Radcliffe 
gasped in amazement at the sorcerer's public school education that lay before 
him. But the Potter franchise still drags on, and worse, we've been inundated 
with countless wearisome wannabes. Every expensive family movie is now a 
prospective Part One, which means no one important dies, nothing gets resolved, 
and another venerable Brit thespian is forced to dress up as a wizard or an elf.
SEE ALSO The Chronicles Of Narnia, Lemony Snicket, The Golden Compass, The 
Spiderwick Chronicles, etc, etc ...
 