
It provided a compelling picture of the life of an Afghan family living under 
the tyranny of the Taliban and became the bestselling nonfiction book in 
Norwegian history, before being denounced as inaccurate and invasive by its 
main characters.

But an appeal court in Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> 
overturned a previous ruling and cleared the author of The Bookseller of Kabul 
and her publisher, Cappelen Damm, of invading the privacy of the family she 
lived with and wrote about, and concluded that the facts of the book were 
accurate.

Åsne Seierstad, a Norwegian freelance journalist who wrote The Bookseller of 
Kabul <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/aug/31/travel.features> after 
spending months living with Afghan bookseller Shah Muhammad Rais and his two 
wives, told the Guardian on Tuesday she was relieved that the eight-year legal 
battle that followed the book's publication was over. "The judgment means a 
lot. As a journalist being accused of invading someone's privacy, there is 
always a risk that it will stick to your name," she said. "If my name had not 
been cleared, it would have been difficult, perhaps impossible, to continue as 
a journalist."

Suraia Rais, the second wife of the real-life bookseller, whom he married, 
according to the book, when she was a girl of 16, filed the complaint against 
Seierstad. In a previous hearing, the Oslo district court ruled that Seirstad 
had invaded Rais's privacy, but on Tuesday Norway's supreme court cleared the 
author of any wrongdoing. In a statement Seierstad's lawyer Anne Gaustad said 
the court had concluded "the family was well aware of the nature of the book 
project", adding that Seierstad was found "not to have acted negligently, and 
the content of the book was essentially deemed true".

Seirstad said the legal process that had required her to defend "every single 
part" of the book had been a time-consuming process. "It makes you reflect on 
how careful you have to be as a journalist. I can have one of these cases, but 
I cannot have two," she said. "The judge ruled that I was not uncareful. Now, 
if anything, I am overly careful."

Seierstad met Rais after entering Kabul with the Afghan soldiers of the 
Northern Alliance two weeks after the September 11 terrorist attacks. She got 
to know the bookseller, who sold books previously banned by the Taliban, at the 
Intercontinental Hotel. Changing his name to Sultan Khan in the book, she 
painted a picture of a local hero who risked his life to continue working in 
the face of huge adversity and danger, but also of a ruthless patriarch who 
virtually enslaved his wives and children.

Following publication of the book, Rais flew to Norway, hired a lawyer and 
began a media campaign to repudiate Seierstad's version of events. He accused 
her of treachery, of humiliating him, his family andAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> as a nation.

Seierstad said she was no longer in touch with Rais or his family, but had no 
regrets about writing the book. "I never expected anything like this," she 
said. "There is nothing I would change – to change it I would have had to write 
a totally different book."

The book had justified itself, she added. "It is now translated into 42 
languages, it is read across the world, it is on university reading lists – it 
has proved itself," she said. "The book came after the fall of the Taliban, it 
says something about Afghan family life. Those kind of stories – what happens 
behind the scenes on a TV screen – are important."

The fact that her subjects were not at peace with the manner in which they 
were portrayed was not "ideal", she added. But she was confident that she had 
presented the family in a "respectful" way. "I have admiration for [Rais] and 
the fact he continued to sell his books. He is an Afghan hero and I think I 
portrayed that, but he is also an Afghan patriarch," she said. "Journalism is 
about going out and making choices. It's my book, it's my decision."

Asked what impact the experience had made on her, Seierstad said: "I learned 
many lessons about how the world works. It is also important to think that what 
you write has to pass a second test – am I comfortable with the people I am 
writing about reading what I have written? Have I been fair? But on the other 
side, you have to stand by your choices and your angle because that is 
journalism."
 