
Some have said that this has been a poor tournament, with few truly 
exceptional players. They are wrong. Although there have been better Nations 
Cups, and ones showcasing greater stars, it is not hard to pick out a selection 
of players who would give many a Premiership side a real going over.

I have chosen to stick with the formation employed by most of the sides in 
Tunisia: a good old fashioned 4-4-2. If all the players come from the eight 
teams who made the quarterfinals, that is because in general there was a large 
gap between those who qualified for the second week, and the sides who went 
home after 10 days. Zimbabwe's Peter Ndlovu, Egypt's Tarek Said and Ali 
Ibrahim, Burkina Faso's Abdoulaye Soulama, and Rwanda's Olivier Karekezi all 
merited consideration, but - like their respective teams - didn't quite do 
enough. Likewise many will be surprised at the exclusion of all the 
Cameroonians; but Geremi flattered to deceive, Samuel Eto'o didn't score the 
goals his performances merited, and Patrick Mboma faded dramatically after four 
goals in his opening two games. Senegal's Pape Malick Diop and Salif Diao came 
close, too, the only bright lights in the Lions' disastrous campaign, but in 
the final analysis this side is made up of players whose sides made it to the 
semi-finals.

Goalkeeper Khaled Fouhami (Morocco). Going into the final Morocco had conceded 
only twice in five games, and Fouhami had a major part to play in that. For 
years he was kept out of the national team by the inconsistent Driss Benzerki, 
but it is difficult to see why: Fouhami is a good shot-stopper, as he proved 
right from the Atlas Lions' opening game win against Nigeria, and is solid 
coming off his line. A worthy successor to the great Badou Zaki, now Morocco 
coach.

Right back Karim Hagui (Tunisia). So good he has made everyone forget about 
Hatem Trabelsi's absence. When Ajax star Trabelsi has been fit to play, Hagui 
has shifted seamlessly into midfield, or, as in the semi-final extra time, over 
to left back. Solid defensively and a menace going forward, Hagui has leapt in 
the space of three weeks from a man scarcely known within his own country to a 
player scouts from all over Europe should be looking at.

Centre back Joseph Yobo (Nigeria). The Everton defender has also been the 
tournament's best. Strong but not dirty in the tackle, commanding in the air, a 
good reader of the game and composed enough to lay the foundations of Nigeria's 
play from the back, Yobo has been exceptional. His only moments of difficulty 
came against the lively Tunisia strikers Dos Santos and Jaziri in the 
semi-final. Even then, his great pace got him out of trouble.

Centre back Abdesalam Ouaddou (Morocco) This place could easily have been 
filled by fellow Atlas Lion Nourredine Naybet, or by Tunisia's colossal captain 
Khaled Badra. But Ouaddou, who is fresher than both those great veterans, has 
been sensational at the heart of the competition's best rearguard. Naybet may 
be the voice, but Ouaddou is undoubtedly the legs of the defence. "He's been a 
rock," says team mate Youssef Hadji, "and he would definitely be in my team of 
the tournament." Ours too.

Left back Anis Ayari (Tunisia) Like his counterpart on the right, Hagui, Ayari 
has been a revelation. Unafraid to get forward, Ayari has also been very solid 
defensively. He completely nullified Senegal's Henri Camara in the 
quarterfinal, one of the major reasons Tunisia were able to beat the Lions. It 
will surely not be long before the Stade Tunisien youngster crosses the 
Mediterranean to a big European club.

Right midfield John Utaka (Nigeria). Oualid Regragui of Morocco had a good 
claim for this spot, but Utaka's goals give him the edge. Quick and skilful, as 
his winner against Cameroon amply demonstrated, Utaka was able to rescue his 
tournament from a shaky start against Morocco. In that loss the Lens winger 
floated alarmingly, but having been put to rights he stuck on the right and 
tracked back with the best of them. Going forward he provided more of a goal 
threat than Nigeria's strikers.

Central Midfield Mehdi Nafti (Tunisia). The Racing Santander midfielder is not 
a headline grabber, not even in his own international midfield, where Slim Ben 
Achour's extravagant technique and Riadh Bouazizi's luxuriant mullet are more 
readily identifiable. But Nafti kept the host's play ticking over nicely, 
winning the ball and then spreading the play simply and efficiently.

Central midfielder Mahamadou Diarra (Mali). Diarra has confirmed the hopes 
placed in him after he was voted best young player in the 2002 Nations Cup 
finals. The Mali captain wore responsibility well, and his driving, competitive 
midfield play was instrumental in the Eagles getting to the semi-finals. A hot 
property in European football too - he shines for French champions Lyon both 
domestically and in the Champions League.

Left midfielder Jay Jay Okocha (Nigeria). He played through the middle for 
Nigeria, but Okocha would have little problems if shifted out to the left. 
Perhaps less spectacular than he frequently is for Bolton, but arguably even 
more effective. It is not just the goals - two penalties and a wickedly curling 
free kick - but the fact that it is difficult to remember him wasting a pass. 
With opposing defences drawn up to stop him, Okocha always managed to create 
space, and then found one of his team mates. A joy to watch.

Striker Frédéric Kanouté (Mali). He failed to score in Mali's most important 
game, the semi-final, but Kanouté hit the target in every other Eagles game he 
played. Without doubt the most efficient poacher in the tournament, Kanouté 
also made a goal for colleague Soumaila Coulibaly with a lovely flick, and 
created danger with every twist and turn. The striker Mali have been crying out 
for for so long, Kanouté fully justified his controversial but heartfelt 
decision to switch sporting nationalities and leave employers Tottenham in 
temporary lurch.

Striker Youssef Hadji (Morocco) Not usually a striker, and not even a 
guaranteed starter for Morocco, Hadji is in the team because almost every time 
he plays he scores. Three goals on the way to the final is a fine haul for a 
super-sub, and his semi-final effort showed all his talent. Bursting onto 
Marouane Chamakh's cross, Hadji had the skill to roll a delicate shot into the 
net in the fraction of a second before keeper Mahamadou Sidibé arrived. Big 
brother Mustapha would have been jealous of that.

Coach Badou Zaki (Morocco) Irrespective of the result of the final, Zaki gets 
the vote. He was almost sacked after the Atlas Lions lost a friendly at home to 
Mali in November, but the former goalkeeper took a largely young side to the 
final hurdle. His Morocco side was undoubtedly the tournament's most organised, 
quick to retreat into defensive positions when it lost the ball, and creative 
up front.
 