
Jesús García Pitarch looked startled, Enrique Cerezo looked smug and Abel 
Resino did his best to look hard. Miguel Ángel Gil Marín, meanwhile, didn't 
look anything: he was in Dubai and not answering his phone, slipping in the 
knife and disappearing into the night. It was 4 February. Four days earlier 
Atlético Madrid's president, Cerezo, had insisted he was "absolutely sure" that 
Javier Aguirre would continue as coach despite failing to secure a single win 
in 2009. Now, Aguirre had been sacked. Sitting alongside sporting director 
Pitarch and thousands of miles from director general Gil Marín, it was time to 
present the new coach: former goalkeeper and recently, if disputably, usurped 
record-breaker Resino. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/feb/10/van-der-saar-world-record>

"The spirit of Luis Aragonés has returned to the Vicente Calderón," cheered El 
País. Not a white sheet floating round the crumbling stadium going "whoo!", 
taking pliers to wires, and sending dentures flying across the turf, but a 
genuineatlético, a believer, and an uncompromising tough nut. "Aguirre was too 
nice," Cerezo said. The same could never be said of Resino. "He is a talker, a 
motivator and a misery guts when he needs to be," Arrigo Sacchi insisted – and 
that was exactly the way it should be. After all, when the going gets tough, 
the tough get going. Even Billy Ocean knows that. "Things are really going to 
change with me," Resino snarled, pulling his best Tommy Lee Jones face.

"The whip is back!" winced one delighted report. There would be no more 
reading newspapers at the dinner table. No laziness. No lateness. And no 
"abusing your mobile". The recipe was simple, said one eulogistic piece, "lots 
of physical work, discipline, intensity and communication". Shocked by the 
number of penalties Atlético were conceding, Resino would bring the defence up 
and play with the highest line in Spanish football – well, the second highest 
after Arjen Robben's hair – and work on set plays. He'd bring the ball back to 
training. He'd make them compact and aggressive. He'd promote the Spaniards. 
He'd break down the cliques. And he'd weed out the weaklings, smash in their 
windows and kick out their doors.

They were hanging out the bunting down Melancholics' Way. Atlético immediately 
hammered Recreativo 3–0. They beatBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 4–3 with a last-minute winner. 
They drew 1–1 at the Santiago Bernabéu and should have won. Another last-minute 
winner, this time against Villarreal, rounded off their best performance of the 
season. A Champions League place came within two points. "We feel as strong as 
anyone," declared the midfielder Nacho Camacho. "We're really feeling the 
difference with Abel," added Tomas Ujfalusi. Resino was right: "Things are 
really going to change round here."

Only, let's face it, they're not. Not really. Not yet at least. And quite 
possibly not ever. For all the fawning, for all that the players are singing 
the new man's praises, little has changed. Resino might be anatlético but so is 
Torrente – Spanish cinema's answer to Inspector Clouseau, only fatter, thicker, 
more perverted and far more corrupt.Rojiblanco sentiment alone is no guarantee. 
Atlético beat Villarreal 3–2 at home – a game that, under Aguirre, they lost 
4–3 last season. But Aguirre's Atlético drew 4–4 at Villarreal this season. 
Resino's Atlético dominated but drew at the Bernabéu –a game that, under 
Aguirre, they unluckily lost 2–1 last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/aug/27/europeanfootball.sport>. But 
Aguirre toohas drawn 1–1 at the Bernabéu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/oct/02/europeanfootball.atleticomadrid>
 in a game his side should have won. And most of what Resino has done, Aguirre 
did too. Better. Draw with Getafe away? Aguirre's Atlético beat them. Beat 
Barcelona 4–3 at home? Aguirre's Atlético beat them 4–2. Lose away to Sevilla? 
Aguirre's Atlético beat them.

Then last night – the night after Sevilla and Villarreal, Atlético's rivals 
for a Champions League place, won – came the confirmation. Last night, Atlético 
lost 2–0 to RealMallorca <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmallorca>. 
And it was not just that they lost, it was that they were pathetic: "Lazy and 
clumsy," said El País; "a complete shipwreck," said the Madrid version of El 
Mundo Deportivo; "a nightmarish spectacle," said AS. "Atlético can no more play 
football than I can play the trombone," sighed their match reporter.

"This is not Atlético," screamed the headline in Sport. Trouble is, it is. In 
six games, Resino's Atlético have won three. The same number they achieved 
against the same teams with Aguirre this season and in the very same games 
last. Hell, even Resino's suicidal decision to leave Diego Forlán out of the 
Champions League second leg against Porto was matched by Aguirre: he left 
Sergio Agüero out at Anfield. Sure, Atlético looked good against Barcelona,Real 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> and Villarreal. But 
football's Truman Burbank really should have known better. Some things never 
change.

Resino might have been allowed to ditch Maniche, the pie-munching midfielder 
Aguirre was obliged to play, but he still has a dressing room where the players 
do not get on. He still has a squad that's brilliant up front and awful at the 
back. He still has footballers so bad that, team-"mates" admit: "You can't even 
risk giving them the ball." He still has a right-back who dislikes football 
almost as much as the rest of the players dislike him. He still has a captain 
in a huff and a playmaker who hates his guts. Meanwhile, his best players – all 
four of them – still want to leave. Above all, Resino still has Cerezo and Gil 
Marín: a president and director general (and majority shareholder) who are 
destroying what should be a brilliant institution – boasting some of the 
noisiest and most faithful fans in Spain – but is instead among the worst in 
Spain.

Atlético are a complete shambles; in debt and embargoed, torn apart by petty 
battles between the two men who should be running the place but are forever 
seeking to get one over on each other and what they can out of the club. Theson 
of Jesús Gil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/may/17/europeanfootball.sport> and 
his former right-hand man. The same men who complete signings independently of 
each other, argue over whose turn it is to choose a coach and told players that 
they would rid them of Javier Aguirre at the end of the season and then 
wondered why, his authority on the floor, results collapsed. The same men who 
have already told their players that Resino won't be there next year. Some 
things never change. And, however hard Resino is, for as long as Atlético 
Madrid remain in the same hands maybe some things never will.

Week 28 results and talking points: 

Spurs bought back the wrong strikers. Fredi Kanouté scored a wonderful 
hat-trick as Sevilla defeatedValladolid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valladolid> 4–1. He's now got 16 for the 
season (and no penalties) and remains the most graceful player in Spain.

A brothel. A gun. The dead of night. And a football club president sporting a 
black eye. Sex, violence, intrigue and the game (football, you understand, not
the game): the perfect ingredients for a crime novel. Police have let him off 
without charge, but Joaquín Bilbao has resigned as president of Xerez after he 
was involved in a drive-by shooting. In the early hours of last Tuesday 
night/Wednesday morning, according to reports, Bilbao turned up at a local
puticlub and wanted to sleep with a Russian girl. When he took exception to 
being told that the club was closed, a fight ensued. Rather than go home and 
cool down, he drove off and returned an hour later. Shots were fired at the 
door of the club with Bilbao's gun. The chauffeur said it was him and a bruised 
Bilbao has walked – free from jail and away from the club. "It's better for the 
institution for me to go," he said but his nocturnal escapades have done little 
harm to his club: Xerez are top of the Second Division.

Pressure, what pressure? Another week, another chance for Real Madrid to pile 
the pressure on Barcelona, by playing first. A drab 3–0 win over Almería cut 
the lead at the top to just three points, but the excitement didn't last long. 
None of Madrid's players had even left the stadium when the news came through 
that Barcelona were already 3–0 up. By half-time it was four, by the final 
whistle it was six – all of them impressive. Lionel Messi has made the 
unbelievable routine. Pep Guardiola's side have now scored 84 goals. Samuel 
Eto'o has 25, Messi 19 and Thierry Henry 15.

Madrid's goalscorer was Klaas-Jan Huntelaar, who now has eight goals in six 
starts for the club. In the league, that is. He wasn't allowed to play in the 
Champions League because of that almighty balls-up. Speaking of not allowed to 
play, Juande Ramos became the latest coach to give up and leave Guti out of the 
squad this weekend. Can they really all be wrong?

The first club to secure a play-off place was confirmed this weekend after 
Real Oviedo reached the 80-point mark in Spain's 18-group division three.

Results: Villarreal 2–0 Athletic, Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> 4–1 Valladolid, Getafe 2–1 
Recreativo, Madrid 3–0 Almería, Osasuna 1–0 Espanyol (an injury-time winner 
leaves Espanyol in deep, deep trouble), Deportivo 1–1 Betis (and things aren't 
much better for Betis), Numancia 2–1 Sporting, Racing 0–1 Valencia (Valencia's 
first win since they stopped being paid, thanks to a penalty miss in the fourth 
minute of added time for Racing), Barcelona 6–0 Málaga, Mallorca 2–0 Atlético.
 