
While the changes brought about by technology are threatening to dismantle the 
television industry as we know it, a saviour may arise from a most unlikely 
place: Video On Demand, or VOD. Because in a world where all programming is 
available on demand, all the time, there may be hope for the existing models 
yet.

While the UK has had BBC's iPlayer for several years now, there is no 
equivalent in the US. VOD is still the red-headed stepchild, something that's 
reflected in the deals the networks have with the MVPDs (multichannel video 
programme distributors), most of which limit the current season VOD offering to 
the last five or six episodes, to the disappointment of latecomers and binge 
viewers alike. The rationale behind this odd arrangement is that when these 
deals were struck, binge viewing was just a gleam in Reed Hasting's eyes and 
the on-demand episodes were viewed as more of a marketing tool than a proper 
means of viewing: viewers watching VOD were viewers who weren't watching 
commercials, which meant the networks were losing ad revenue.

But all this is changing now that the networks and MVPDs have discovered the 
joys of non-skippable VOD. This isn't a new or revolutionary technology – 
Hulu's essentially been doing it for years – but the sudden popularity of the 
disabling of the fast-forward button during commercials is all about the 
ability to maintain ad revenue while adjusting for new viewership habits.

Dynamic ad insertion – the ability to use "big data" to insert an ad into a 
slot based on when and where the viewer is watching – and increasingly, who the 
viewer is – should allow networks to reap the same, if not greater, profits 
from advertising by providing more targeted audiences. At the same time, it 
will (hopefully) save the viewer from irrelevant ads while cutting down on 
their frequency.

The idea is that with all this VOD available, viewers will no longer want or 
need a PVR: everything they'd want to record is already available on demand. 
It's a decent gamble, since TiVO aside, there aren't many independent PVR 
manufacturers and the MVPDs can easily switch out set-top boxes with built-in 
PVRs for ones without them, leaving viewers with no option other than VOD.

The success of this endeavour depends on one key question: will the networks 
be able to control their desire for ad revenue enough to make non-skippable VOD 
palatable to the masses or will they continue to insist on lengthy commercial 
breaks? Should they choose the latter, TiVO will certainly see an uptick in 
popularity, along with new cloud-based DVR services. But should they choose a 
more Hulu-like formula, with shorter, 60- or 90-second ad breaks, "Is this ad 
relevant to you?"-type feedback, and countdown timers, then viewers may well 
accept the commercial breaks in non-skippable VOD as a necessary evil, one 
that's well worth it for the convenience of watching whatever they want, 
whenever they want.

A move to a VOD-intensive ecosystem also opens up opportunities for 
non-traditional broadcasters, performers with large followings (singers, 
comedians, YouTube stars) who'll be able to light up their own VOD channels and 
bring in viewers via their social media channels. With those viewers comes ad 
revenue they don't have to share with a middleman. Falling production costs 
make this scenario even more feasible as does the limited risk for the MVPDs 
who host them: storage costs are low and it will be up to the VOD channel owner 
to promote their own programming and create their own ad revenue.

The final piece of this VOD utopia will be the ability to create linear 
channels from a range of VOD offerings, a sort of Pandora for TV, where users 
can create playlists around a genre (crime shows) or a mix of their favourite 
shows or have the ability to access playlists created by someone else – a 
professional critic, an existing TV network or even a celebrity. These personal 
channels will supplement rather than supplant traditional TV networks and will 
provide viewers with yet one more personalisation option.

Switching to an all-VOD world will have many effects on the current ecosystem, 
particularly around the ways shows are produced and marketed. It will be both 
harder and easier for new voices to be heard: harder because there are so many 
competing voices, but easier because there will be more ways than ever to find 
and attract an audience.

Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/advertising> will still 
be the primary monetisation model, but a system with fewer and better targeted 
ads is a small price to pay for the ability to watch a greater range of 
programming, however and whenever we want.

Alan Wolk is global lead analyst at Piksel <http://www.piksel.com/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> content 
is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. 
Find out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 