
While parliament’s chief preoccupation is the letter of the law, it also has a 
duty to uphold the law’s spirit. That role is especially important in business 
and finance, where a tension exists between a raucous commerce that wants 
anything legal to be also acceptable and a broader social conception of 
economic activity that places certain behaviour beyond the pale, even when it 
is not explicitly prohibited.

It is into this tricky realm that Commons select committees are advancing with 
investigations intoexploitative labour conditions at Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 and the collapse of BHS. Upholding the law comes first. The minimum wage is 
not a voluntary guideline and Mike Ashley, Sports Direct’s billionaire owner, 
last week conceded that employees of his company received too little.

Mike Ashley's evidence: surprise answers to unsurprising questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/mike-ashleys-evidence-surprise-answers-to-unsurprising-questions>
But that was just one of the practices emerging from the hearing to convey a 
contempt for the dignity of workers that should be obviously appalling, 
regardless of what the law allows. In a similar vein, there are moral judgments 
that can be made about the odyssey of wheeling and dealing that hollowed out 
BHS before its terminal bankruptcy. That ethical dimension is distinct from any 
putative legal judgment of the same events.

Sir Philip Green, the company’s former proprietor, is due to meet the business 
committee this week, although he has been arrogantly trying to avoid this. He 
will need to bring explanations to parliament. It is important to understand 
how a handful of individuals walked away from the wreckage of BHS with their 
wealth enhanced and the public purse likely to be depleted. It is no less 
important to signal that this distribution of risk and reward is simply wrong.

Then there is Boots, whose head of UK operations, Simon Roberts, announced 
last week his intention to stand down. Boots was once a trusted institution as 
much as a retail brand. In the hands of private equity owners via a complex 
structure of loans it became a vehicle for the enrichment of offshore 
investors. Some pharmacists complained it gamed its status as a pharmaceutical 
dispensary using cash from the NHS budget in ways that many would judge 
mercenary and devious, regardless of what the law allowed.

It is pointless to deny now that there is an ethical crisis in British 
capitalism. The issue is not just the primacy of cash extraction over 
investment. There is a deeper malaise that has blurred the distinction between 
enterprise and racketeering.

When Ed Miliband drew that line in a speech in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/sep/27/ed-miliband-speech-labour-conference>
 he found himself in the press pillory reserved for politicians of the left 
whose rhetoric is insufficiently deferential to business. But Mr Miliband was 
on to something and, slowly, ever greater numbers of Conservatives are drawing 
the same conclusions. Tory MPs are prominent in the charge to see Sir Philip 
stripped of his knighthood. There is a recognition on the right that rising 
anti-corporate sentiment cannot be written off as an envious leftwing 
ideological tantrum. It expresses justified outrage at a system that allows 
rich and powerful individuals to wreak social and economic havoc with impunity.

With breathtaking cynicism, hardline Eurosceptics even try to steer this 
sentiment against Britain’s EU membership, denouncing Brussels as a corporate 
conspiracy. In truth, workers and consumers need protections agreed at a 
European level to prevent cross-border competitive junking of rights leading to 
more rampant exploitation – Brexit’s real destination.

The new Tory critique of rapacious capitalism points towards the potential for 
a new consensus. It might encourage business leaders to discover that their 
self-interest lies in a more enlightened approach to workers’ rights and 
acceptance of wider social responsibilities. Most businesses would welcome such 
a shift and most politicians would gladly facilitate one. The idea that all 
capitalism is cruel and that private profit is all theft from the public is 
confined to the left-most fringe. Likewise, only a handful of ultras on the 
right now believe that all regulation is a suffocation of economic freedom.

A workable solution to the challenge posed by cases such as BHS, and Sports 
Direct can come about only through a partnership of business and politics. The 
full force of existing laws must be applied, and the bully pulpit of the 
Commons should be used to greater effect. But that is just a prelude to a 
cultural change, whereby the spirit of enterprise might more plausibly be 
invoked as a force for progress. Too often now it is a cover for something much 
darker.
 