The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record column, 
Sunday May 20 2007 

 In the article below, the Bluewater shopping centre was said to be in Kent. 
It is in Essex. This has been corrected.



Rewind to London, Sunday, 8 September, 1996. Al-Muhajiroun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun>, an obscure Islamist 
organisation, has booked the London Arena in Docklands for a conference 
dedicated to 'the struggle for Khilafah', the creation of an Islamic state. 
Speakers are to include Sheikh Omar Bakri Mohammed, al-Muhajiroun's leader, who 
10 years later will flee Britain to Lebanon after praising the 7 July London 
bombers.

Video addresses will be beamed in and letters of support are to be read. There 
will be one from Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the Hamas leader held in an Israeli 
prison for authorising the execution of two Israeli soldiers. There is another 
from Sheikh Omar Abdul Rahman, jailed in the US for plotting to set off bombs 
in New Jersey and New York.

There will also be an address on behalf of a man called Sheikh al-Jihad, 
better known as Osama Bin Laden, who a month earlier had publicly declared war 
on America.

Bin Laden's address, according to the conference organisers, will refer to the 
heroes of the Taliban. It will talk about Muslim suffering, about injustice, 
about the need to take action. For al-Muhajiroun this is a coming of age 
moment, the day the group emerged from its hinterland and on to the world stage.

At the time the conference, which the organisers cancelled at the last moment, 
raised hardly a blip on the radar of British intelligence. Now The Observer can 
reveal how al-Muhajiroun became the incubator of a global terror network that 
played a decisive role in radicalising the five 'fertiliser bomb' plotters 
jailed for life last week for planning a multiple bombing campaign at targets 
that included the Bluewater shopping centre in Kent, the Ministry of Sound 
nightclub in London and Britain's domestic gas network.

The fertiliser bomb plotters were typical of those al-Muhajiroun found and 
indoctrinated. The parents of many of those the group attracted pleaded 
desperately with their sons to break away. But al-Muhajiroun's appeal was 
irresistible. Hundreds embraced Bakri's call to jihad and, with al-Muhajiroun's 
help were dispatched to terror training camps in Pakistan.

The bomb trial heard how the five - Omar Khyam, Waheed Mahmood, Anthony 
Garcia, Jawad Akbar and Saladhuddin Amin, all Home Counties twentysomethings 
interested in sport and studying - were transformed from moderate Muslims into 
angry radicals keen to fight abroad. And at the heart of their conversion lay 
Bakri and his network of lieutenants whom he despatched to campuses, mosques 
and prayer centres to spread his message. 'While extremists are not always 
terrorists, terrorists are always extremists,' said Professor Anthony Glees, 
director of the Brunel Centre for Intelligence and Security Studies. 'The 
fertiliser bomb trial has given us the smoking-gun evidence that groups like 
al-Muhajiroun have had an important part in radicalising young British Muslims, 
and that this can create terrorists.'

With hindsight the Islamic International Conference should have set off alarm 
bells. But the reaction from on high to the group's emergence was muted. Few 
politicians wanted to be seen to criticise ethnic and religious minorities when 
what passed for multiculturalism was an all-encompassing ideology. Instead the 
rantings of Bakri, his acolyte, Abu Hamza, the hook-handed cleric now serving 
seven years for inciting murder, and their growing number of followers, were 
dismissed simply as the headline-grabbing posturings of a lunatic fringe. The 
security service's assessment was that those brainwashed by al-Muhajiroun would 
simply end up dying in some corner of a foreign battlefield that was of no 
concern to Britain.

As Peter Clarke, head of Scotland Yard's Counter-Terrorism Command, said last 
month: 'In the Nineties many people believed extremists from overseas regimes 
who were active in the UK were, if anything, pursuing agendas against foreign 
governments, and posed little or no threat to the UK.'

This failure allowed a dangerous global network to flourish. A network that 
has come back to haunt Britain and shows no sign of being dismantled.

Forward: New York 2002. Everyone who knew Syed Hashmi says he was a good kid. 
Born in Pakistan but brought up in New York's gritty borough of Queens, friends 
recall Hashmi as a caring, bright young man, whose devotion to Islam was 
passionate but not of the sort that marked him out from any other Muslims. But 
things changed when Hashmi switched colleges, leaving Stony Brook University in 
Long Island for the more mixed Brooklyn College, from where he graduated with a 
degree in political science in 2003.

It was at Brooklyn that Hashmi, 23, discovered al-Muhajiroun, inviting a 
member to speak at his campus. At the time the memory of the 11 September 
attacks on the World Trade Centre was hardwired into New York's consciousness. 
People were edgy and security services more vigilant. One prominent Muslim 
radical who lived in Queens had been a particular concern.

In November 2001 Mohammed Babar, a naturalised US citizen who had been born in 
Pakistan, attracted the interest of US intelligence when he openly declared in 
a TV interview that he was willing to kill American soldiers in Afghanistan. 
'My loyalty will forever be with the Muslims,' he said, despite his mother 
having narrowly escaped from the World Trade Centre when the planes struck.

Shortly after 9/11, Babar, who had been recruited by al-Muhajiroun in 2000, 
disappeared off the US intelligence service's radar. He had fled to Pakistan 
where he stayed at al-Muhajiroun's office in Lahore before buying an apartment 
in the city's Eden Heights suburb in 2002.

Over the next two years, the flat became a temporary home to a conveyor belt 
of radicalised British Muslims, many of whom, like Babar, had been born in 
Pakistan and wanted to fight. Angered by what they saw as the West's failure to 
protect Bosnian Muslims in the Nineties war in the former Yugoslavia, their 
sense of grievance was heightened by the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq and 
the turmoil in Chechnya and Kashmir.

Many of those who stayed there ended up at the Malakand training camp hidden 
in Pakistan's North West Frontier Province. It was there that Mohammed Siddique 
Khan, an al-Muhajiroun convert and the ringleader of the 7/7 plot that killed 
52 people in London, learnt his murderous skills. Other Britons at the camp in 
the summer of 2003 included Omar Khyam, ringleader of the fertiliser bombers. 
He attended the camp with Saladhuddin Amin, later to play a key role in the 
plot. Along with scores of other militants the pair practised making 
explosives, detonating devices in the camp.

Until now the details of how Babar met the fertiliser bomb plotters have been 
hazy. But documents filed by the US authorities who are extraditing him from 
the UK, say it was Hashmi, described as one of al-Muhajiroun's top recruiters, 
who brought the American, Babar, into the organisation where he later met the 
British fertiliser bomb plotters.

Hashmi, who moved to Britain from Queens in 2003, allegedly allowed his London 
flat to be used to store supplies and money that Babar was shipping out to 
Abdul al-Hadi al-Iraqi, then head of al-Qaeda's operations in Afghanistan. The 
supplies included ponchos, torches and boots, useful for recruits fighting US 
troops in remote parts of Afghanistan.

Hashmi was arrested on 8 June last year as he tried to board a plane from 
Heathrow to Pakistan carrying thousands of pounds in cash. If convicted in the 
US he faces up to 54 years in prison. His lawyers say he will deny all the 
charges and that much of the evidence against him is conflicting.

A Canadian, Momin Khawaja, said to be a close associate of Babar and 
al-Muhajiroun, will soon stand trial in his own country for his alleged role in 
the fertiliser bomb plot. Both trials threaten to shine new light on the links 
between al-Muhajiroun's operations in North America and Britain - links the US 
authorities are playing down. Michael Chertoff, the Homeland Security 
Secretary, quickly blamed British Islamists, but it is increasingly clear 
al-Muhajiroun's influence in the US spawned a small army of jihadists who 
exported the movement's ideology around the world.

As Babar, who turned supergrass against the fertiliser bombers, admitted at 
the trial, the US arm of al-Muhajiroun was a key component in its success. 
'Most influence started in the early Nineties - Sheikh Omar Bakri Mohammed here 
in the UK,' Babar said. 'They [al-Muhajiroun] had representatives in New York. 
I was able to meet them on the internet. We spoke numerous times over the phone 
and there was a lot of literature available on the internet.'

The influence of al-Muhajiroun is apparent in the number of terrorists it 
allegedly influenced. The shoe bomber, Richard Reid, was seen at several 
al-Muhajiroun meetings in Ilford, east London, in the months before his failed 
attempt to blow up American Airlines Flight 63 flying between Paris and Miami. 
One regular visitor to the group's north London office was Asif Hanif, 21, from 
Hounslow, west London. On 29 April, 2003, he walked into Mike's Bar, a crowded 
cafe in Tel Aviv, Israel, and detonated his explosive belt, killing three 
people and injuring 60 others.

Haroon Rasheed Aswad, another prominent member of al-Muhajiroun, was arrested 
in 2005 accused of attempting to set up a terror training camp for British and 
American jihadists in Oregon. In 2005 Mobeen Muneef, 25, a Londoner, was picked 
up by US Marines on patrol in Ramadi, southern Iraq, after being caught 
allegedly passing weapons to insurgents. Muneef is believed to have attended 
al-Muhajiroun lectures in London.

But then, if the US needed reminding of the threat al-Muhajiroun posed to its 
own, it needed only to read a leaked memo by an FBI agent named Kenneth 
Williams. Written on 10 July, 2001, the memo warns bin Laden was attempting to 
send recruits to civil aviation colleges in the US. The document notes that the 
head of al-Muhajiroun, Omar Bakri Mohammed, had been receiving faxes from bin 
Laden in which the al-Qaeda leader urges Muslims to take action against the 
West: 'Bring down their airliners. Prevent the safe passage of their ships. 
Occupy their embassies. Force the closure of their banks.'

Pause: east London, the Nineties. Few people can fathom how young British men 
are capable of turning on their country and killing innocent people, even if it 
sometimes involves killing themselves in the process. The five fertilizer bomb 
plotters were not loners, hiding away to nurture a discernible grudge against 
society. Three were married and two had children.

Ed Husain, a former member of Hizb-ut Tahrir, the radical group from which 
Omar Bakri Mohammed split to set up al-Muhajiroun, is one of the few who knows 
how the conversion process from moderate to radical works.

Like most of the fertiliser bombers, Husain grew up in a moderate Muslim 
family, but was radicalised in his teens. 'I grew up with a sense of being both 
Muslim and British,' Husain said. 'I went to a multicultural primary school and 
I really enjoyed it. But when I went to Stepney Green secondary school the 
atmosphere changed. It was a single-sex school, with boys predominantly from 
Bangladesh. There was nothing British about that school. It could have been in 
Karachi. My only choice at school was to become a gang member or become an 
Islamist.'

Husain, who last week published a book about his experiences, The Islamist, 
says his first exposure to radical Islam came in religious education lessons at 
the school. 'We read a basic textbook that linked Islam and politics as the 
same and spoke about the Muslim Brotherhood as a perfectly legitimate 
organisation.'

It appears a culture of Islamism was entrenched at the school. 'Prayers were 
being led by people linked to the East London Mosque. When my father heard they 
were holding these sessions he asked me to stop praying at school. I refused.' 
By then Husain was hooked.

'Eventually I was invited to the mosque. The atmosphere was radically 
different to my parent's mosque. There were young, dynamic Muslims. They were 
people I could identify with.'

By then Husain's parents were deeply unhappy with the company he was keeping, 
and tried to persuade him to leave the mosque, known for its extreme brand of 
Islam. 'My parents knew I was betraying what they had raised me on. After 
trying to convince me, they gave me an ultimatum - either leave Islamism or 
leave the house. People at the mosque told me it was a test from God.

'So one night I wrote a note to my parents and left for the mosque. My mother 
phoned at nine the next morning. The caretaker answered and said I wasn't 
there. I was sitting right beside him. I could hear my mother crying. That was 
my first moment of doubt about these people. But by then I couldn't leave. My 
family had lost and I had won. It was a process of indoctrination.'

Husain joined Hizb-ut Tahrir after meeting Bakri. 'People at the mosque could 
identify problems but couldn't offer solutions,' he says. 'Bakri offered a 
direct solution: the establishment of Muslim state with a foreign policy of 
jihad. There was a powerful message: this was the only way to be a Muslim.'

The government continues to resist demands to proscribe Hizb-ut Tahrir, 
despite continued concerns about its influence expressed by both the Pakistan 
and US authorities.

Press play: Present-day Britain. Somewhere in the UK hides a deeply disturbed 
27-year-old would-be suicide bomber, a close friend of Asif Hanif, who killed 
himself and three others in Mike's Bar in Tel Aviv and an associate of several 
fertiliser bomb plotters, including Babar.

The man, referred to as at the trial as 'Imran', has been on the run since 
last year.He had returned to the UK after a spell in a Pakistani jail, where he 
had been interrogated by MI6 over his links to suspected terrorists.

When he was arrested in 2005, Pakistani intelligence found 'Imran' had the 
telephone numbers of several defendants in the fertilizer bomb plot trial, as 
well as high-ranking al-Qaeda figures. The jury heard the plotters had 
approached 'Imran' to become a suicide bomber but he had bailed out at the 
eleventh hour, believing they would not go through with their side of the plan.

'Imran', who had been radicalised by al-Muhajiroun in Britain before linking 
up with its office in Lahore, also admitted to the Pakistani authorities that 
he had met two of the 7/7 bombers, Mohammed Sidique Khan and Shezhad Tanweer, 
at a jihadist training camp in late 2004.

His story should act as a warning: al-Muhajiroun's legacy lingers and its 
followers are still out there. Bakri may be in exile but he still spreads his 
message from his luxury flat overlooking the Mediterranean in Beirut where his 
neighbours include the Egyptian ambassador. 'Al-Muhajiroun are still a threat 
because Bakri's followers continue to operate under different names giving 
leaflets out at mosques and universities,' said Dr Irfan al-Alawi, director of 
the Centre for Islamic Pluralism.

'Bakri continues to preach his sermons via an internet chatroom from his 
exile, which means his evil ideology is still being practised by his followers 
who are part of a new group called Ahlus Sunnah Wal Jamaah.'

These followers, notably Abu Izzadeen, charged last month with inciting 
terrorism overseas, have continued to preach incendiary sermons around the 
country. Splinter successor groups have emerged and, despite being proscribed 
by the government, continue to act as conduits for young radicals.

Even Bakri acknowledges his former organisation's continuing influence. 
'Al-Muhajiroun was a political party,' he told The Observer. 'We were not a 
militant group. During my 20 years as an Islamic preacher in the UK, three or 
four thousand people heard me speak. I cannot be responsible for everything 
these people do. Yes, I spoke of jihad, but people have taken it out of 
context.'

The security service's greatest fear is that the hundreds, possibly thousands, 
of young men al-Muhajiroun helped dispatch to become 'holy warriors' overseas 
are now returning to Britain, ready to turn their sights on domestic targets. 
The trend was predicted as far back as 2002 by Hassan Butt, a former 
al-Muhajiroun member who attended terror training camps in Pakistan. 'These 
were people I was meeting and these were people who decided to return to 
Britain to become sleeper cells,' Butt said.

The question is how many of those who returned will become active. It is an 
ugly conundrum for counter-terrorism services as they attempt to prioritise the 
most dangerous radicals. 'Intelligence suggests there are between 1,600 and 
2,000 young Muslim men linked to terrorism in Britain,' said one 
counter-terrorism source. 'At any one time 20 will be talking about jihad 
overseas. Do you pick them up or wait and see? What nobody can answer is what 
happened to Mohammed Sidique Khan to turn him from a radicalised young man to 
someone who wanted to kill himself. We just don't know.'

Answering the question may prevent further atrocities, but those charged with 
protecting Britain admit another successful attack is inevitable. And just as 
inevitably its perpetrator will have been influenced by an obscure Islamist 
group that appeared to have all of the answers: al-Muhajiroun.

The origins of al-Muhajiroun

Formed in 1996, al-Muhajiroun established a network that stretched around the 
world usingpublic meetings and lectures in radical mosques. From an office in 
north London, the organisation maintained a presence in theUS and Pakistan, 
gaining a reputation for extremist rhetoric. Under the leadership ofSheikh Omar 
Bakri Mohammed, the group recruited young men from mosques, gyms and 
universities. Many members travelled to Pakistan to train in 'jihad'camps 
before being dispatched to fight inKashmir or Afghanistan or, as in the case of 
the 7/7 bombers and the fertiliser plotters, returning to the UK to plan
domestic attacks. Al-Muhajiroun officially disbanded in 2004. A month after 
7/7, fearing investigation byanti-terror police, Omar Bakri left the UK for 
Lebanon. Experts believe the organisation splintered into successor groups, 
which continue to operate in the UK.
 