
Five men have been detained in the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates> charged with insulting 
officials, after calling for democracy and criticising the government.

Blogger and political commentator Ahmed Mansoor, 42, lecturer Nasser bin 
Ghaith, 41, and online activists Fahad Salim Dalk, 39, Ahmed Abdul Khaleq, 34, 
and Hassan Ali al-Khamis, 39, have been detained in the UAE's capital Abu Dhabi 
since April this year.

In June they were charged under article 176 of the penal code, which makes it 
a crime to publicly insult the country's top officials, punishable by up to 
five years imprisonment. None of the men are known to have advocated any 
violence or change of government.

Since their arrests, the activists – Mansoor in particular – have been the 
subject of an intimidating online and satellite television campaign accusing 
them of being religious extremists and foreign agents who want to cause harm to 
the UAE.

Ahmed Mansoor faces additional charges for inciting others to break the law, 
calling for an election boycott and encouraging demonstrations. In March, 
shortly before his arrest, he vocally supported a petition signed by more than 
130 people that called on the UAE president, Skeikh Khalifa bin Zayed, to 
introduce universal, direct elections for the Federal National Council, and to 
give it legislative powers.

Amnesty highlighted the plight of the UAE Five at this year's Edinburgh 
festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/07/amnesty-uae-activists-edinburgh-festival?INTCMP=SRCH>
, encouraging audience members, writers and performers to take action to help 
them. High profile figures such as Mark Watson, Anne Fine and Hari Kunzru lent 
their support to the campaign.

To sign a petition calling for the immediate and unconditional release of the 
UAE Five, text the word FREEDOM followed by your name to 81222. Alternatively 
you can do it online byclicking here <http://amn.st/pBxqPb>.

The petition will be presented to the United Arab Emirates' embassy in London 
ahead of their trial, now set for the end of September.
 