
It was in the long, hot summer of 1975, after finishing university and before 
the shades of the prison-house – finding a job – closed in that somehow, for 
reasons I cannot now recall, I found myself reading The Pickwick Papers in my 
parents’ sun-dappled garden. My Penguin copy is punctiliously dated 8 July that 
year (I used to do that sort of thing). The spine is completely broken at page 
476 and there are stains (suntan lotion? Coca-Cola?) on the pages, so I must 
have been enthralled. It was my firstDickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> and, as my school and 
university careers had been taken up by set books, it was a liberation. Even
Christmas at Dingley Dell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2012/dec/25/simon-callow-charles-dickens-christmas>
 is infused with sunshine in my memory.

I still remember the surprise that Dickens could make me laugh out loud, and 
that is what made me love it. I had read humorous authors – Wodehouse, Thurber 
– but I had not expected it from a Sunday afternoon telly serial classic. There 
was Mr Jingle’s cricket match – “Played it! Think I have – thousands of times … 
exciting thing – hot work – very”; and Sam Weller and his dad composing the 
fatal Valentine’s card: “Wot I like in that ’ere style of writin’ … is there 
ain’t no callin’ names in it – no Wenuses, nor nothing o’ that kind … You might 
jist as well call her a griffin, or a unicorn or a king’s arms … which is werry 
well known to be a collection o’ fabulous animals.”

Best of all is the trial scene: “‘Yes, I have a pair of eyes,’ replied Sam, 
‘And that’s just it. If they wos a pair o’ patent double million magnifyin’ gas 
microscopes of hextra power, p’raps I might be able to see through a flight 
o’stairs and a deal door; but bein’ only eyes, you see, my wision’s limited.’”

It is a young man’s book, of course, lifting themes and ideas and characters – 
Jingle is apparently based on therecently deceased comic actor Charles Mathews 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Mathews> – but written with tremendous 
verve and style by a 24-year-old on the make. How Dickens must have aggravated 
jealous older colleagues. The book started off as the brainchild of a 
relatively well-known illustrator called Robert Seymour, hoping to cash in on 
the craze for humorous cockney sportsmen such as those inPierce Egan’s Tom and 
Jerry <http://spitalfieldslife.com/2012/03/28/tom-jerrys-life-in-london/>. But 
Dickens had other, better ideas. Within three days of meeting the neophyte 
author and finding his drawings criticised, the depressed Seymour walked out 
into his Islington back garden and shot himself. Seymour’s successor, Robert 
Buss, was no better – his drawing of a cricket match shows he knew even less 
about sport than Dickens did – but then the author found his perfect 
illustrator: Hablot K Browne – known as Phiz – created Sam Weller and the book 
took off. Dickens never looked back.

My other reason for loving it has always been its romantic, prelapsarian, 
brilliantly vivid portrait of late Georgian England, just before the railways 
changed everything – easy to forget that the book was two-thirds complete 
before the teenage Victoria came to the throne. The exuberance of the writing 
shows the fun Dickens was having. The Eatanswill election chapter is derived 
from his coverage of an election in Ipswich. It is a satire on reform-era 
politics. But as Norman Gash, the great historian of the period, says, it is 
actually a pale and euphemistic version of contemporary politics. The book’s 
darkest episode, Pickwick’s imprisonment, was clearly coloured by Dickens’s 
father’s time in theMarshalsea <http://knowledgeoflondon.com/marshalsea.html> 
for debt a few years earlier. You can read it for the history – as I probably 
started off doing – and you can read it for the fun. It started me reading 
Dickens – always a good thing – and, despite his later, greater, books, it 
remains my favourite.

It would be wrong to say The Pickwick Papers made me want to be a journalist, 
as the chances of that happening seemed vanishingly small at the time I read 
the book, but the idea of conveying what events were like was certainly 
encouraged by it. When I eventually became a journalist, watching local 
worthies, politicians and judges, it sometimes seemed they were not so very 
different from their Dickensian predecessors, though perhaps the acoustics were 
better: “Nathaniel Daniel or Daniel Nathaniel?” “No my lord, only Nathaniel.” 
“What did you tell me it was Daniel for then, sir?”

My interest in the period was coloured in by Dickens. Perhaps that is why my 
recent books are set in those decades: a book about British politics and 
society in 1846, and one about the Victorianpoisoner William Palmer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/stoke/content/articles/2006/04/11/local_heroes_doctor_william_palmer_feature.shtml>
, who was executed in front of a crowd of 30,000 people in 1856.

Dickens was fascinated by the case too, especially by Palmer’s seeming 
ordinariness. “Everywhere I see the late Mr Palmer … Mr Palmer sits next to me 
at the theatre; Mr Palmer goes before me down the street … I vow to God I can 
see nothing but cruelty, covetousness, calculation and low wickedness,” he 
wrote, describing him as the worst criminal ever to stand trial in the Old 
Bailey dock. Palmer’s defence barrister, Serjeant Shee, gave a good imitation 
of Serjeant Buzfuz, and the judge, lord chief justice Campbell, was not much 
better than Mr Justice Stareleigh in Pickwick’s case, so perhaps it is no 
wonder I was drawn to the case too: as a great, rich slice of rascally early 
Victorian England.

Some years ago, my wife gave me a 1930s facsimile copy of Pickwick in its 
monthly instalments, complete with resonant between-the-wars advertisements (“I 
have used your whisky consistently for the last 25 years and do not know what I 
should have done without it”), but in a way it’s too precious to read. I’d take 
the battered Penguin to my desert island.
 