
US liberty under threat: Alistair Cooke on the origins of McCarthyism

What many Americans believe to be the gravest infringement of personal liberty 
in many a long year is the proposal in a bill approved by the House of 
Representatives and shortly to be studied by a committee of both houses, which 
would for the first time yield to the Federal Bureau of Investigation the final 
determination of a citizen's loyalty to his country.

The bill established a National Science Foundation as a central clearing house 
for all research scientists working for all government. The amendments at issue 
are two that were introduced by two Democrats: Howard Smith of Virginia and 
Daniel Flood of Pennsylvania. The Smith amendment guarantees that no one can be 
employed by the foundation or work in a scholarship awarded by it unless the 
FBI has investigated him "and reported" that he is a loyal citizen who has 
never belonged to any of the huge list of subversive organisations so defined 
by the Attorney General. The Flood amendment promises that no foreigner can 
work or correspond with the foundation in any capacity until the FBI has judged 
him to be immaculate as a loyalty risk.

The big game the baying manhunters are really after is the person of the 
secretary of state. These dispatches have explained why Mr Acheson [secretary 
of state under President Truman] is now being subjected to a hypnotic treatment 
designed on the model of Russian purge trials to make him confess crimes he has 
not committed.

Mr Acheson's tense air of indifference to this treatment, as he goes on around 
lecturing the American people on the technique of "total diplomacy", has made 
his scent more pungent to the big game hunters. This frustration has erupted in 
the past fortnight in the foaming accusations before a special sub-committee of 
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, of one Senator Joseph McCarthy, 
Republican of Wisconsin. Mr McCarthy got his sub-committee called in the first 
place by his alarming promise to "name" 81 security risks in the State 
Department, including 57 "card-carrying" communists.

So far McCarthy has not identified one communist. He has launched into 
wholesale charges of homosexuality in the State Department, he has spewed out a 
great deal of unsubstantiated rumour about a lady formerly a New York municipal 
court judge and a United Nations delegate, who called him an unmitigated liar 
and challenged him, without success, to repeat his charges outside the umbrella 
of his congressional privilege.

Manchester Guardian, 20 March 1950
 