
• Move over, China, South Korea and Indonesia: let Britain show you the proper 
way to come second in a badminton match. All of Britain's badminton players 
were out and heading home by day four, without a disqualification among them. 
It's called losing, losers, and there's an art to it. Watch and learn.

• There is also a British way to win: go for gold, then miss out on a silver 
to take bronze, and be glad of it. The men's gymnasts did it, and so did the 
rowing eights. Yes, there has been some gold as well, but that's not the point.

The point is, in the bronze medal table 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/olympics-2012/results-medals-schedule?widget=medals,results,schedule&tabbed=true>
, Britain is doing rather well: joint 4th place, thanks to Chris Froome's 
magnificent third place finish in the cycling time trials.

It's unlikely that we'll catch Japan (11 bronzes already! Are they cheating?) 
or the US (nine), but we could go ahead of China (only four so far; they must 
be disappointed) to take the bronze in bronze medal-getting.
 Boris Johnson stuck on a zipwire in Victoria Park, east London. Photograph: 
Rebecca Denton 
• With so many sports commentators gathered together for one enormous sporting 
extravaganza, it's not surprising that cliche sweeps through their ranks like a 
virus. The BBC presenting team are currently afflicted with a propensity to 
refer to the epic struggles of top-form athletes as "a day at the office".

In Wednesday's tennis Tracy Austin characterised Vera Zvonareva's third-round 
loss to Serena Williams as "a tough day at the office". Minutes earlier a 
commentator had reported that the women's coxless fours were having "a 
difficult day at the office". Elsewhere one hears a swimmer's easy win in an 
early heat described "just another day at the office".

It's not just lazy, it's an insult to anyone who's struggling to complete a 
monthly sales figures report in time for this afternoon's marketing strategy 
meeting.

LingoWatch: repechage

After a week of hearing it, I was finally moved to look it up. From the French 
for "fishing out" or "rescuing", it refers to a second-chance round for 
competitors who failed to qualify by a narrow margin in a previous round.

I'm not sure how I got to the age I am without knowing this, but consider me 
enlightened.

• The Curse of Cameron, whereby the PM jinxes Britain's medal hopes though his 
attendance, is held at bay for another day while David Cameron visits Northern 
Ireland. Two gold medals won in his absence, and I swear the weather's improved 
as well.

But the good luck charm of an appearance from William and Harry has been 
called into question. Yes, they were there for Glover and Stanning's rowing 
victory, and for the eventing when the team took silver. But their cheerleading 
at the gymnastics – when the men were relegated from 2nd to 3rd (BRRRONNNZZZE!) 
– was hardly the stuff of miracles.

Could the real lucky charm be John Major, who sat near them at rowing and 
eventing? Could it be Norma?

Question of the day

Why is every point in the beach volleyball punctuated with naff pop music? The 
Macarena, More Than a Feeling, We Will Rock You. Is it in the rules?
 