
Letter from America No 1000, March 24 1968

I wish that this 1,000th Letter from America could be about the spring or 
American children, or any one of the many amiable things we've talked about 
down the years. But it must be about the thing that bewilders the American 
people like nothing else in all these 1,000 weeks.

For last week, the administration was brought to the bar of a standing 
committee of Congress and nothing, either in a parliamentary or a federal 
system, can offer such an inquisition as a congressional inquiry.

The Senate foreign relations committee was anxious to recall the president to 
his constitutional duty to seek the advice and consent of the Senate on a war 
that had got away from both of them. The undeclared war inVietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam>. Here was the secretary of state 
called as the president's understudy and subjected to the third degree by the 
representatives of the people. And if that sounds a little lurid or sentimental 
let me remind you of the cast of characters that sat like a court of judges and 
challenged Secretary Dean Rusk.

There was a farmer from Vermont, a mining engineer from Montana, a Rhodes 
scholar from Arkansas, the schoolteacher son of a hardware merchant from South 
Dakota, an electric products manufacturer from Missouri, a stockman from 
Kansas, a professor of Far Eastern history, a former Secretary of the Air 
Force, six lawyers - not too many to reflect the preponderance of lawyers who 
sit in Congress and who do, after all, make the laws. None of these men had 
been in the Senate for less than 12 years, and the farmer had been there 28 
years and two others for 24 years.

Secretary Rusk had resisted this call for two years, but then there was a well 
substantiated rumour that General William Westmoreland wanted another 200,000 
troops, and suddenly the world expressed its distrust of American policy by 
losing its confidence in the dollar. For two days Secretary Rusk was questioned 
and quizzed and lectured to and pleaded with by a committee whose old ratio of 
hawks to doves was significantly shrinking.

A hundred books and 1,000 editorial writers have recited and disputed the 
political origins of the war and enlarged on the human tragedy of its conduct. 
What matters or will come to matter to most people, I think, is not any new 
balance we can strike in the old argument but the realisation that America, 
which has never lost a war, is not invincible; and the very late discovery that 
an elephant can trumpet and shake the earth but not the self-possession of the 
ants who hold it.

Today, it seems to me, the United States is the world's greatest power, but 
only through its nuclear power. And what is never acknowledged - the universal 
taboo against the use of this power - disarms America at a blow and leaves it a 
large and rich but far from omnipotent power capable of fighting one or two 
unconventional wars with conventional weapons.

This, it seems to me, is the real American position in the world today and the 
reason why its best aims are frustrated. The United States has 132 military 
bases abroad and solemn treaty commitments to come to the aid of 43 nations if 
they're attacked or, what is more likely these days, disrupted from within. The 
earnest and gentle Senator Church put his finger on this Achilles heel by 
asking the secretary if the great conflict was not between commitment and 
capacity. In other words, America may be right but is she able?

How did it come about that this country, led successively by a soldier, then 
an alert foreign affairs student, and then by the shrewdest of politicians, 
committed itself to play St George to 43 dragons? We must go back to what I 
called the early glow of American world power in the early 1950s. That is when 
the pledges were given and when the cost of them was never counted.

The Communists, not to mention the nationalists, and the millions of Asians 
who simply want to see the white man leave their continent for good, had not 
attempted a test of American power. As late as the day of Kennedy's 
inauguration, the United States was still flexing and rippling its muscles for 
lack of exercise. And on that day the president delivered himself of a sentence 
magnificent as rhetoric, appalling as policy.

Secretary Rusk, very much moved, recited it the other day to the committee as 
the touchstone of America's resolve: "Let every nation know, whether it wishes 
us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any 
hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the 
success of liberty."

This, I suggest, is fine to read but fatal to act on. It may be the wish of a 
strong nation to do this, but in reality it will not support any friend or 
fight any foe or bear any hardship or support the burden, say, of a civil war 
in its own land, in order to rush to the aid of 43 friends and fight 43 foes. 
Vietnam, I fear, is the price of the Kennedy inaugural.
 