
When he was a child, Adnan Siddiqui would take the longer route from his home 
to watch Crystal Palace play football. The short route would pass The Victory 
pub, from which racists would jeer at him. He smiles at the thought that this 
same pub is now a mosque, the Thornton Heath Islamic Centre. Not that the 
racism has vanished from the pubs of his part of south London. Last Christmas a 
young Muslim was out in the pubs collecting for an African clean water charity 
– “trying to show people that not all Muslim people are bloody Isis” – but that 
made no difference to the man who punched him to the ground, racially insulting 
him as he fell. It was one small incident among a great many. The monitoring 
groupTell Mama <http://tellmamauk.org> found a whopping 326% rise in hate crime 
directed at Muslims in 2015. And it’s getting worse.

Dr Siddiqui is now the local GP in the area he grew up. But what he’s better 
known for is setting up Cage Prisoners. One of the most widely disparaged of 
advocacy organisations, now simply calledCage 
<http://cage.ngo/dr-adnan-2/?mode=grid>, their aim is to support those impacted 
by the war on terror, documenting abuses and insisting that all should have 
equal access to the rule of law.

They began with a particular concern for those kidnapped by the US and taken 
to Guantánamo Bay; too innocent to be put before a court of law, allegedly too 
dangerous to release. And, given the nature of this work, Cage inevitably stand 
alongside a whole range of people, from those who are innocent and have been 
wrongly targeted to those who are much more dangerous. Of course, it is the job 
of the law to distinguish between the two. Which is why the rule of law must 
pertain – exactly what Cage argue for.

But in making this case they have been derided, including by David Cameron no 
less, as dangerous terrorist sympathisers. And yes, Cage advocates have said 
some silly things in the past, for instance that“Jihadi John” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/02/who-is-mohammed-emwazi-from-lovely-boy-to-islamic-state-executioner>
 was “extremely gentle” before his radicalisation. They might even be right – 
evil can work into even the gentlest soul – but it was unwise. And yes, of 
course Cage condemn people like him too. But so nervous are some of the work 
they do that no UK bank is willing to provide them with an account. You can 
imagine how much HMRC loves the idea that Cage can only offer to pay their 
taxes in cash or gifted jewellery.

Margaret Thatcher once accused Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> of being “IRA 
apologists” for challenging the extrajudicial killing by the SAS of three IRA 
members in Gibraltar in 1988. Cage are doing much the same thing as Amnesty, 
except in the even more febrile environment of the war on terror. And they are 
described in much the same way.

I meet Dr Siddiqui for a biryani next to the East London mosque. Because I’m 
carrying too many assumptions, his accent – a cross between public schoolboy 
and south Londoner – catches me by surprise. I inquire further. He went to 
Dulwich College, he explains – withNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>. “He was in the sixth form 
when I first arrived,” Siddiqui says. He tells me he recalls Farage using words 
he found racially offensive, adding, “and I remember the way he did it, 
gloating on each word”. I am shocked but not surprised by this. “Yes, and he’s 
a Palace fan too,” Siddiqui then quips, lightening the mood.

As Siddiqui leaves to say his prayers and I wander home, I recall A Man for 
All Seasons, Robert Bolt’s play about Thomas More’s trial for treason. There’s 
a character who argues that it would be OK to disregard any law if chasing down 
the devil. It’s the 16th-century equivalent to the view that it is OK to 
suspend the rule of law when chasing down terrorists. More replies: “Oh? And 
when the last law was down, and the devil turned round on you, where would you 
hide, the laws all being flat? … Yes, I’d give the Devil benefit of law, for my 
own safety’s sake!”

This is exactly why Cage are right to insist that the law must apply even to 
those that the press and public opinion regularly demonise. Indeed, even to the 
devil himself.
 