
They correctly talk about "television phones" and electric toothbrushes, but 
mostly the 12 writers who gathered in 1963 to predict and debate the future 
were way off target. We're not yet immortal, the routine nature of space travel 
is yet to come, and the coffee we drink is not generally laced with amphetamine 
to improve our mood.

The dozen science fiction writers, including Ray Bradbury, Isaac Asimov and 
Arthur C Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarke>, were part of 
a Playboy magazine panel predicting what life would be like after 1984. At Tate 
Britain, visitors will be able to watch a filmed reconstruction of the 
predictions using actors.

Gerard Byrne's work, 1984 and Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/jun/19/gerard-byrne-video-installation-art>
, is part of an exhibition opening to the public on Tuesday calledRuin Lust 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/ruin-lust>, which 
explores artists' and society's fascination with ruins from the 17th century to 
the present day.

The presence of Byrne's work reflects the wide scope of the show. "It is not 
very obviously ruinous," said the show's co-curator, Brian Dillon. "But the 
thing that it captures is that sense of a future that might have been and I 
think ruins are partly about that – they point to a future that is unfinished."

Byrne's work is one of more than 100 on show for what is the widest-ranging 
art exhibition to explore the subject of ruins. Most of the works on show are 
from the Tate's own collections, and follows previous thematic shows that have 
included ones called "Migrations" and "Looking at the View". The exhibition 
includes works from particular periods when there was heightened interest in 
ruins, not least the 18th century, when there was something of a ruin craze.

There are works by John Martin, John Constable and JMW Turner, as well as 
contemporary artists fascinated by ruins such as Tacita Dean, Jane and Louise 
Wilson (seen left is Azeville 2006, part of a series of photographs of Nazi 
defences in northern France) and Rachel Whiteread,who is represented by 
photographs of Hackney tower blocks being demolished in 1996 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/whiteread-a-clapton-park-estate-mandeville-street-london-e5-ambergate-court-norbury-court-p77870>
.

Dillon has long been fascinated by ruins, admitting that a fun day out for him 
was "to wander about the Isle of Grain looking at lumps of old concrete from 
second world war airfields".

The title of the show is taken from a 1953 study written by the novelist and 
scholar Rose Macauley called Pleasure of Ruins. Dillon said there had been 
debate about what to call the exhibition.

"People have started to use the phrase ruin porn a lot and that seems to me 
very limiting – lust seems more capacious, it takes in desire for the past and 
future, nostalgia, regret, excitement, a kind of sublime."

There are lots of old ruins to look at – from ruins that may prompt a 
sentimental nostalgia, such as Turner's Tintern Abbey, to more horrifying ones, 
such as scenes of second world war devastation in works by artists such as Paul 
Nash and Graham Sutherland.

The show very much has a message that "ruins are also about the future", said 
Dillon. One of the most recent works is a bright pink post-riots painting by 
Laura Oldfield Ford called TQ3382: Tweed House, Teviot Street, which has two 
women in a dilapidated, brutalist flat who may be on the verge of discovering 
that something is about to happen.

Similarly, Byrne's work is very obviously looking forward. He filmed Dutch 
actors to take the roles of the sci-fi writers and they cheerfully predict 
away, but badly. There will be no boring jobs, they say, we'll get to Hawaii in 
an hour, and some of our children will live for 200 years, our grandchildren 
for 1,000 years and our great-grandchildren for ever.

Ruin Lust is at Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> from 4 March until 18 
May.
 