
The Amalfi Coast, south of the Bay of Naples, can claim to be Europe's most 
magnificent stretch of coast. It's not just its breathtaking scenery but also 
the glamorous resorts hidden away on the spectacular corniche that winds its 
way past lemon trees, olive groves, vineyards and tiny villages clinging on to 
jagged cliffs that plunge straight into the sea. Every turn along the Amalfi 
Coast brings you to another legendary destination, be it Positano, Sorrento, 
Ravello or Amalfi itself. Virtually cut off from the rest of the world until 
the mid-19th century, when a road was built linking all the villages along the 
coast, this unique region was first discovered by the aristocratic Grand 
Tourists of Europe, who made the Costiera Amalfitana an obligatory stop-off.

Then came artists seeking inspiration, such as composers Wagner and Grieg, 
painters JMW Turner and Joan Miro, writers and poets including DH Lawrence, 
Tennessee Williams and Andre Gide. It wasn't long before the films stars 
arrived too - Greta Garbo, Sophia Loren, Clark Gable, Humphrey Bogart - all 
seeking a perfect hideaway.

Today it remains the ultimate romantic getaway. As a holiday resort of the 
rich and famous, the Amalfi Coast has a reputation as being ultra-expensive, 
and there is certainly no shortage of luxury hotels, Michelin-starred 
restaurants and exclusive bars where an aperitif will set you back a small 
fortune. But behind the ritzy facade you'll discover that a holiday here 
doesn't have to break the bank. Base yourself in a simple hotel or B&B, seek 
out the excellent and reasonably priced old-fashioned trattorie, and use the 
brilliant local boats and buses to save a fortune in car parking costs.

Ravello

Ravello sits like an ornate decoration atop a fancy wedding cake in the hills 
above Amalfi. Every villa has picturesque gardens, and two that are open to the 
public, Villa Rufolo and Villa Cimbrone, are among the finest in Italy, with 
perfectly laid-out flower beds, palm trees, sculptures and fountains. Rufolo 
has a vast terrazza that seems to hang right over the sea far below and is the 
venue for the renowned concerts of the Music Festival. To secure tickets, book 
as long as possible in advance. For all its genteel airs, Ravello has a lively 
street market every Tuesday morning, where you will find wine, fresh mozzarella 
and olive oil, but also discount designer clothes from Milan.

Where to eat

Ristorante Salvtore
Via della Repubblica 2, Ravello, 0039 089 857227
www.salvatoreravello.com <http://www.salvatoreravello.com>

A far better choice than the touristy places in the centre of Ravello, this 
excellent restaurant combines a romantic view, smart service and dishes that 
surprise with both creativity and quality. Try the tender totani squid on a bed 
of pureed chick peas with a hint of spicy peperoncino. In the evening, part of 
the Salvatore is transformed into a casual pizzeria and, frankly, you won't 
taste a better wood-fired pizza anywhere on this coast.

Where to stay

B&B Ilimoni
Via Gradoni 14, San Cosma, 0039 089 858056
www.bb-ilimoni.com <http://www.bb-ilimoni.com>
Doubles from €70

Up in the hills above Ravello, this B&B is part of an organic farm producing 
lemons, olive oil and honey. Its lovely terrace overlooking the sea is the 
ideal place to try the lethal local after-dinner liqueur, limoncello. Room 
rates include a hearty breakfast, and the location is ideal for country walks.

Amalfi

The first view of Amalfi is unforgettable, with its tightly packed villas and 
palaces seeming to tumble down the cliffside into the fishing port and shingle 
beach below. Amalfi was once a maritime power to rival Venice, and its golden 
age is symbolised by its stunning cathedral: its Arab-Norman facade dominates 
the Piazza Duomo, the unofficial town centre that is always pulsating with 
people. When visiting the cathedral, don't stay too long in the main building, 
as the highlight is walking around the back into the Chiostro del Paradiso, a 
magical Moorish-style cloister, with a lush tropical garden, and then down into 
the opulent Cappella del Crocefisso in a subterranean crypt.

Amalfi is always filled with day-trippers, but quietens down in the evening. 
Choose a table out on the terrace of a bar, order an Americano or a fine local 
wine such as Greco di Tufo, and sit back and watch the dolce vita pass by as 
the sun sets over the Mediterranean.

Where to eat

Ristorante Eolo
Via Comite 3, Amalfi, 0039 089 871241
www.marinariviera.it <http://www.marinariviera.it>

Less well known than Amalfi's Michelin-starred Caravella or the horrendously 
expensive Trattoria Gemma, the Eolo is the perfect choice for adventurous 
gourmets. This is one of the few coastal restaurants which attempts a 
fusion-orientated menu. Think baby ravioli stuffed with potato and black 
truffle. An exquisite three-course meal will cost €50, but you're also paying 
for the ultimate view over Amalfi - so be sure to book a window table!

Where to stay

Locanda Costa Diva
Via Roma 12, Praiano, 0039 089 813076
www.locandacostadiva.it <http://www.locandacostadiva.it>
Doubles from €110

The tiny bay of Praiano is along the coast road from Amalfi, and this pretty 
B&B is a good alternative to staying in town. You don't need your own 
transport, as the local bus passes through, and boats can take you to Capri. 
The beach is free, unlike in the more fashionable resorts. The menu changes 
daily depending on what the fishermen bring in that morning.

Positano

Positano has a unique atmosphere - exclusive, chic, full of fashionistas, 
celebrities and wealthy jet-setters. But at the same time, this is an authentic 
Italian family holiday resort, with sunbathers eating pizza on the beach, kids 
pestering parents for gelati and Milanese women deciding which is the most 
fashionable boutique this year.

Where to eat

Trattoria Grottino Azzurro
Chiesa Nuova, Positano, 0039 089 875466

Rather than eating overpriced pasta at one of the tacky seafront restaurants, 
jump on a bus in the centre and ask for the Chiesa Nuova, high above town. This 
no-frills trattoria - there is not even a written menu - features cucina 
casalinga, simple home cooking, at its best. Try regional favourites such as a 
tortino d'alici, baked anchovies with herbs, or rigatoni with a seafood sauce.

Where to stay

Casa Cuccaro
Village of Nocelle, 0039 089 875458
www.casacuccaro.it <http://www.casacuccaro.it>
Double €80 

Above Positano, the picturesque hamlet of Nocelle is a great place to base 
yourself and has some wonderful rustic restaurants. Peppe Cuccaro has lots of 
experience in pampering guests: he worked for 25 years at the legendary San 
Pietro Hotel in the town. With his son, he has turned an old farmhouse into a 
charming B&B. For those interested in hiking, this is the beginning of the 
Sentiero degli Dei, a breathtaking 11 km mountain trek.

Sorrento

Sorrento may no longer be the exclusive resort it once was - it is now more 
popular with tour buses and cruise lines than Hollywood royalty - but remains 
an obligatory stop on the Costiera. Take its pulse with an aperitivo on the 
terrace of the Fauno Bar on the bustling Piazza Tasso, then wander down Corso 
Italia, with its tempting boutiques. In the narrow Via Casareo is the beautiful 
Sedile Dominova, a frescoed terrace where nobility met in the 15th-century - 
today it is a working men's club, where pensioners sit around playing cards.

Where to eat

Circolo Dei Forestieri
Via Luigi de Maio 35, 0039 081 8074033

Although Sorrento's famous 'Foreigners' Club' may not serve the best food in 
town, it is the best value for money and an unmissable experience. In a 
sprawling villa that also houses the tourism office, the Circolo resembles a 
scene from a Graham Greene novel, with British tourists ordering gin and 
tonics. There is live music at night and delicious pizza and pasta, but don't 
expect to see many Italians. Brilliant views over the Bay of Naples.

Where to stay

Casa Astarita
Corso Italia 67, Sorrento, 0039 081 8774906
www.casastarita.com <http://www.casastarita.com>
Doubles from €85

The grand hotels of Sorrento can be horrendously expensive, so the Casa 
Astarita, in the heart of the old town, is a splendid surprise. Housed in an 
elegant 18th-century palace, home of the Astarita sisters, it has only six 
rooms, so book well in advance. The B&B has a comfy lounge, with free internet 
access, where homemade limoncello is served at night as guests come home after 
a long day's sightseeing.

Minori

This quiet bay lies on the unfashionable side of Ravello, seemingly a world 
away from elegant Amalfi. In summer, there is a high-quality jazz festival, 
while in September a week is spent celebrating local food and wines in the 
Saporèarte ('taste is art') festival. Minori is also the location of the 
coast's only archeological site, the Villa Romana, hidden in a back street.

Where to eat

Ristorante L'Arsenale
Via San Giovanni a Mare 20, 0039 089 851418
www.ristorantelarsenale.it <http://www.ristorantelarsenale.it>

The Arsenale is one of the great gastronomic finds on the Amalfi coast. 
Although the surroundings resemble a run-of-the-mill trattoria, the cuisine is 
of Michelin standard and the wine list is stunning. Run by the four Proto 
brothers - two in the kitchen, two running the restaurant and wine cellar - the 
restaurant uses the locally caught seafood and adds a light, modern touch to 
traditional recipes, such as smooth ricotta and seafood mousse, and seared tuna 
with an intense red wine sauce. Their delicious pasta dishes cost less than €15 
a head.

Where to stay

B&B Palazzo Vingius
Via San Giovanni a Mare 19, 0039 089 8541646
www.palazzovingius.it <http://www.palazzovingius.it>
Double room from €95

This family-run B&B, surrounded by lemon gardens, is in a modern block of 
flats, all recently renovated, but considering the price and location - five 
minutes' drive from Amalfi and Ravello - this is a very good deal. There is a 
small pool and Turkish bath and sunny terrace with great views. Be prepared for 
a long walk back from the beach up steep steps.

Nerano

A picturesque, sleepy fishing village, Nerano is far from the glamour resorts, 
but is the ideal place to stay to explore the Massa Lubrense national park. 
This is a paradise for nature lovers, who can choose from more than 100 
kilometres of marked pathways. One unforgettable walk is from the village of 
Torca, down to the coastline of the Marina di Crapolla and the ancient San 
Pietro church, looking out over Li Galli islands, once the hideaway home of 
Rudolf Nureyev.

Where to eat

Ristorante Baia Nerano
Via Marina del Cantone 49, 0039 081 8081113

Most discerning diners visiting Nerano end up reserving a table at the chic 
Taverna del Capitano, where waiters wear dinner jackets and tables are set with 
crystal. But if you just come for a swim and sunbathe, a better idea is to eat 
a simple al fresco lunch of seafood, spaghetti and salad on the bamboo terrace 
of the informal Baia Nerano.

Where to stay

B&B L'Isca
Via Cantone 3, 0039 081 8081779
www.casalevillarena.com <http://www.casalevillarena.com>
Double from €90

Housed in a 19th-century palace once owned by the Marchese di Villarena, the 
Isca has B&B rooms and spacious flats. Although it is in the heart of Nerano, 
the property resembles a hidden oasis, with a lemon grove, pool and play area 
for smaller children.

Further information

Amalfi tourism office: 0039 089 871107; www.amalfitouristoffice.it 
<http://www.amalfitouristoffice.it>

Ravello tourism office: 0039 089 857096; www.ravellotime.it 
<http://www.ravellotime.it>. Programme of Ravello Music Festival: 0039 089 
858360;www.ravellofestival.com <http://www.ravellofestival.com>

Positano tourism office: 0039 089 875067

Sorrento tourism office: 0039 081 8074033; www.sorrentotourism.com 
<http://www.sorrentotourism.com>

Getting there

Easyjet (0905 821 0905; www.easyjet.co.uk <http://www.easyjet.co.uk>) flies to 
Naples from Stansted, and Thomsonfly (0870 1900 737;www.thomsonfly.com 
<http://www.thomsonfly.com>) from Manchester. Ryanair (www.ryanair.com 
<http://www.ryanair.com>) flies to Pescara, about 100 miles further away. 
Carrentals.co.uk (0845 225 0845;www.carrentals.co.uk 
<http://www.carrentals.co.uk>) has good deals for car hire in most locations, 
including Naples airport, where a week's rental costs from £125. A car makes it 
easy to get to the Costiera Amalfitana and gives you the freedom to stop off 
and visit Pompeii, but during the day, you're better off leaving the car and 
exploring the coast by bus or boat. Sita Blue Line buses are cheap (£1.50 each 
way) and run regularly between Salerno, Amalfi, Sorrento and Ravello. Buy 
tickets from any bar, travel agency or newsagent displaying a Sita sticker.
 