 Jonathan Gardam: ‘At Adass the variation in work is a big draw.’ 
 As the policy officer for the Association of Directors of Adult Social 
Services (Adass <http://www.adass.org.uk/home/>) my normal day is normally 
un-normal. Adult social care is a highly emotive and topical issue with almost 
one fifth of the adult population of England having experience of social care – 
either as part of the paid workforce (which is bigger than that of the NHS), as 
unpaid informal carers, or as a recipient of services.


So it’s understandable why we are always busy on a number of fronts. We have 
to reflect the views of our directors and take a proactive approach in seeking 
improved outcomes and efficient use of scarce resources – there’s never a dull 
day.


My day starts early – I have cunningly programmed my alarm to replicate the 
sound of a whistling kettle – at around 6am. I stumble around and usually go 
for a run to fully wake-up, which always does the trick. Then the family move 
into a very organised breakfast routine of school bag and homework checks, 
packed lunches, a healthy round of smoothies and a breakfast-meeting style 
summary of the day ahead. I then cycle off the station for my commute into 
London.


 I am officially an uber-commuter, travelling about 4.5 hours a day. This may 
sound extreme and when there is no seat or there are leaves on the line, it is. 
However most times the journey is uneventful and I pass the time occasionally 
breaking commuting etiquette by chatting with fellow passengers, reading the 
free paper or doing some work on my mobile. More often than not, I use the 
solitude to crack the email enigma – no matter how quickly they get answered, 
another one pops up.

Once in London, it is a short walk to the offices in Smith Square in the very 
heart of the Westminster village. The Houses of Parliament are almost on top of 
us and a very good reminder of the importance of our work, and I always feel 
very privileged to be doing what I am doing. After flashing my pass I avoid the 
lift making the steady climb up five flights of stairs and I arrive at the 
Adass Office.


 Adass is an extremely small team and the first 30 minutes or so is often an 
opportunity for us to catch up on the previous day’s events, reflect upon any 
press activityand to set or confirm priorities for the days ahead. The fluid 
nature of my work often means that I get involved in a range of different 
issues.

Why I left social work to set up my own care agency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jan/30/left-social-work-care-agency>
The rest of the working day is then spent getting on with the priorities in 
hand. This can include phone calls or emails with our Adass policy leads and 
presidential team, preparing detailed briefings and presentations, running 
surveys, or collating consultation responses. This routine is interspersed with 
meetings, which often create further work as well as offering helpful insights 
of what is happening elsewhere. This is a good discipline for the seasoned 
policy officer, as an ear to the ground can help in making sure our efforts are 
efficient and targeted.


I usually eat a packed lunch and try to spend a few minutes or so out and 
about. There is plenty to see and explore, but I do not wander too far as there 
is always work to do.

Good communication is essential to successful integration of health and social 
care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/feb/17/good-communication-integration-health-social-care>
 The variation in work is a big draw to working with Adass and it is always 
pleasing to see our contributions making a difference. However this difference 
is not always immediately apparent and it is important to be able to take a 
long-term view and to be prepared to see policy direction changing tack as 
external events exert their influence. Such shifts, while potentially 
frustrating, can offer new opportunities to try something new, so there is 
always a silver lining somewhere.

 My day in the office generally finishes around 5pm and I then join the 
commuter crush home. This is much less pleasant than my morning journey and I 
am pleased to get home at about 7.30pm. The evening is spent helping with 
homework – I am very proficient now in most subjects – and the evening supper. 
We do not have a TV, so we spend a lot of time talking. We all retire quite 
early and my last thought of the day is of the whistling kettle.

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers.Sign up for free 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.

 * This article was amended on 20 February. The article was incorrectly 
attributed to Drew Clode. The byline should have read Jonathan Gardam. This has 
been corrected. 


 