
Don't confuse Hosni Mubarak, 82, with David Dimbleby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-dimbleby>, 72. Everyone's glad Hosni's 
gone, but the BBC seems pretty anxious to keep David in contractual charge of 
Question Time and – who knows? – of the next election too. Unhappy about not 
presiding over the royal wedding? Anxious about too many trips to Glasgow? 
Never mind, Mr D. You're authoritative, experienced, still near the top of your 
game… But (irate noises off) you're also a man!

So, in a trice, we're back to the parallel ruckus where Angela Rippon, 66, 
Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips?INTCMP=SRCH>, 67, and 
Miriam O'Reilly <https://www.theguardian.com/media/miriam-o-reilly?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 53, bulk large – the row about how women TV presenters get retired early 
while men go on and on. Why on earth should David Dimbleby be indefinitely 
preserved when Moira Stuart, 61, is toast? Why should John Humphrys, 67, keep 
his place in the sun when Anna Ford, 67, sits out in the cold? That sad-seeming 
figure in wellies on a lonely hillside is Selina Scott, 59. Cue sundry assorted 
-isms and -ersms. But also prepare to notice an even more dotty dislocation.

David Dimbleby <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-dimbleby?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
quizzing ministers on Question Time, is older than anyone in the cabinet. Only 
Ken Clarke, 70, comes close. Kirsty Wark, 56, is older than Theresa May, 54. 
Jeremy Paxman, at 60, can play positively avuncular to Iain Duncan Smith, 56. 
Nick Robinson, 47, might have mentored Jeremy Hunt, 44, if he'd stayed on in 
Conservative politics. Jim Naughtie, 59, tops Eric Pickles at 58. Jon Snow, 63, 
and Andrew Neil, 61, are the kind of veterans only Vince Cable and George Young 
can compete with.

Even the younger female ranks of the TV have a few years on their Whitehall 
brothers and sisters. Fiona Bruce, 46, easily outscores David Cameron, 44, and 
Nick Clegg, 44. The queen of the breakfast sofa, Sian Williams, 46, can pull 
rank on Michael Gove, 43, and all education, too. Sophie Raworth, 42, is still 
up and coming on television, but Baroness Warsi, 39, may not have much further 
to go. Julia Bradbury, remember, was the younger Countryfile model who replaced
Miriam O'Reilly <https://www.theguardian.com/media/miriam-o-reilly>. At 40 she 
is a year older than our chancellor of the exchequer and two years older than 
his chief secretary. She walks round Windermere for a living; they do their 
sweaty best to run the economy.

There's a serious point here among the birthday bashes – a point which 
resonates as this coalition trundles anxiously along. Television, pursued by 
furious columnists, is berated for sidelining its women stars too early. If 
they look too old, then they are too old! It's a grisly male conclusion. But 
Westminster gets through its own government stars at a far faster rate. Unless 
you're remarkably lucky, then (like Brown and Blair) you're finished long 
before you're 60. The job just seems to eat you up.

That is not quite how the rest of the democratic world runs things. Sarkozy 
and Merkel are both 56 (older than Tony Blair when he departed, three elections 
won). As a matter of jolting fact, Carla Bruni, 43, is two years older than Ed 
Miliband. Barack Obama at 49 boasts more hair but not fewer years than William 
Hague. Timothy Geithner, the US treasury secretary, is a full decade more 
seasoned thanGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>
 (in a cabinet whose average age is 55). Hillary Clinton is 63, just like Mitt 
Romney. India and China would scoff at such youthful contenders for power.

Now, of course – as Silvio Berlusconi, 74, shows – mere age doesn't bring 
wisdom, and too much experience of the wrong kind spells constant trouble. But 
there are jobs for the boys and jobs for someone more savvy, more seasoned, 
more shrewd. Osborne and Alexander are too damned young for the gravity of the 
crisis they invoke. Cameron and Clegg talk big societies from small experience. 
Not been there, not done that. The difficulty is that Snow, Paxo and the 
interrogation squad matured through other crunches. The problem is that David 
Dimbleby sometimes sounds more like a prime minister than the one we've got.
 