
Climate change has been the number one environmental priority for the 
Co-operative <http://www.co-operative.coop/> for the last five years.

Since then, its operational greenhouse gas emissions have fallen in absolute 
terms by 21.5%, despite a substantial increase in turnover.

But concerns about carbon go back further still. As an industrial and 
provident society owned and democratically-controlled by its 5.5 million 
members, the seeds of its strategy began in 1998.

It was then that the Co-operative Bank turned down some substantial investment 
opportunities and imposed a ban on the financing of fossil fuel extraction.

It also began reporting emissions and financing renewable energy projects – 
well ahead of rivals.

The approach has been sustainability-led and very much focused on step-by-step 
innovation.

Since 2005, over 98% of electricity supplied to the business has been 
exclusively from wind and hydropower.

In 2006, the Co-op opened its first wind farm and commissioned the UK's 
largest photovoltaic solar system.

Another wind farm is now being planning and wind, biomass and solar projects 
are in development, along with a new commitment to invest £1bn in renewable 
energy in the UK.

In 2007, Co-operative Food became the first major food retailer to commit to 
only stocking white goods with an energy rating of at least an 'A' rating or 
recommended by the Energy Savings Trust. It successfully phased out tungsten 
light bulbs in 2009.

Having pioneered carbon offset, the Co-op now offsets one tonne of CO2 for 
every mortgage it has held since 2000 and aims to be carbon neutral by 2012.

In keeping with its values as a member-owned business, the Co-op also takes 
climate change strategy out into the community.

Through a £4m green schools programme, it has installed solar panels, small 
wind turbines, biomass boilers and ground source heat pumps in 185 schools.

It also helps schools reduce their carbon footprint by supporting more than 
2,000 children to walk to school, saving around 180,000 car journeys every year.

Having established an enterprise hub to help the growth and development of new 
co-operatives, the Co-op is now investing £1m to support community renewables 
and energy efficiency.

As it grows, it's commitment to sustainability remains as strong as ever. The 
acquisition of Somerfield and its merger with Britannia in 2009 did not, for 
instance, lead to lower carbon reduction targets.

If anything, it has led to the largest extension of sustainability policies 
undertaken on UK high streets. For example, each of its 3,000 food stores now 
has a dedicated energy champion.

A "warts and all" approach to sustainability reporting is regarded as key to 
progress, and this has included carbon disclosure for the last decade.

The future will be challenging, if only because the Co-op's 2011 ethical 
operating plan sets tougher targets. Since 2006 the aim has been for 25% of 
electricity used to be generated from inside the business.

Meanwhile, the Co-op is determined to influence public policy and continues to 
work with NGOs such as the World Wildlife Fund and Friends of the Earth.

A new head office, opening in 2012, will be given a Breeam "outstanding" 
rating.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 