
Like the Italians, the British cannot help ploughing their cash into 
activities that earn diminishing returns. It's a cultural thing. The Italians 
are earning paltry returns from knocking out white goods in competition with 
the Chinese and Koreans. Every year, the trade deficit with China gets bigger, 
but the metal bashers of the Po Valley just keep doing what they have always 
done.

In London, the major banks are struggling to wean themselves off casino 
trading, even though the returns are tiny compared to the vast amount of 
capital needed just to sit at the gambling tables of the derivatives markets.

Barclays is a case in point. Last month, chief executive Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins> was caught throwing 
millions of pounds at his traders to keep them from defecting. He argued that 
he needs them. More than half of Barclay's profits come from the casino 
investment bank arm. But shareholders are selling out in droves because Jenkins 
needs more of their money every year to earn what are very volatile returns. 
Productivity at Barclays, or the amount of profityielded per turn of the 
roulette wheel, is therefore low when averaged out over a number of years.

Then there is North Sea oil. For the past 30 years, much of our foreign 
exchange has come from Aberdeen's rigs. Every year, it takes more people and 
more effort to extract each barrel. It is cash and it pays some wages, but it 
represents a fall in productivity.

Low productivity has bedevilled the economy since the crash. The ratio of 
inputs to every unit of production is supposed to recover quickly following a 
recession, as firms shed employees and either produce the same thing with fewer 
resources, or switch into producing something with higher returns.

It seems that for the past four years British businesses have struggled on, 
producing largely the same things with the same labour force. Where they have 
gained is by shelving plans to buy new equipment and paying people less – 
either by reducing their wages in real terms or by reducing their hours. This 
policy might have worked in the short term, but it bodes badly for the future. 
Last week, George Osborne was confronted by a forecast that the public finances 
will be £20bn shy of his last estimate, largely because low productivity will 
slow the recovery and rob him of tax receipts.

Research by the Financial Times, using a model like that adopted by the Office 
for Budget Responsibility (OBR), finds that the UK's capacity for growth in 
future has deteriorated and a cyclically adjusted deficit target of £85bn for 
2013-14 will need to be ditched in favour of the actual £111bn deficit.

The OBR's boss, Robert Chote, has lamented that much of the UK's lost 
productivity cannot be considered cyclical, but lost forever. His estimate of 
lost productivity is going to rise.

Addressing an investment conference last year, David Cameron was urged to 
sweep away the minimum wage and allow employers to set the market rate for 
wages. The prime minister said he was against increasing profitability by 
driving down wages: that route leads to low skills, low investment and even 
lower productivity, he said. Better to increase the number of apprenticeships 
as a prelude to creating a high-skilled, high-wage, highly productive economy.

The trouble is, the minimum wage rate for an apprentice is £2.68 per hour. 
Acquiring a skill is a great incentive to work, but when the wages are less 
than £100 a week before travel costs and bills, the attraction diminishes.

Apprenticeship programmes are coming on stream in the services industry. Yet 
recent figures show that the country's biggest sector, accounting for 
three-quarters of activity, increasingly relies on young unskilled workers on 
short term, part-time and zero-hour contracts, keeping productivity low. It's 
not exactly the Cameroonian dream.

Complex rules of the bonus game means bankers can never lose

Two examples of the complexity of executive pay arose this week. First, 
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> could quite 
legitimately report that its chief executive, Antony Jenkins, had been paid 
£1.6m in 2013 under new rules that came into force in October. This is despite 
the fact that he cashed in another £5.2m of shares awarded to him from previous 
years and was handed another £4m-worth, which could pay out in the years ahead.

Second, Ross McEwan, boss of Royal Bank of Scotland, could quite legitimately 
assert that he was waiving his annual bonus for 2013 even as he was handed £3m 
in shares. This is because the 81%-taxpayer owned bank has – like most banks – 
a three-pronged pay scheme made up of salary, annual bonus and long-term bonus 
based on performance over three or five years.

This complexity exists even before the intervention of the EU cap on bonuses. 
The rule that limits bonuses to 100% of salary, or 200% if shareholders 
specifically grant approval, is adding another layer to the intricacy. Annual 
"allowances" are being handed out to bankers – £1.7m to HSBC boss Stuart 
Gulliver, for example – to ensure they do not lose out as a result of the 
restriction. It is yet another headache for anyone trying to work out what top 
bankers are being paid each year.

But the remarks by Jenkins about having to shell out big bonuses to stop 
investment bankers going to rivals raises questions about whether these are 
really "bonuses" at all.

His description of the "death spiral" he feared Barclays would descend into if 
the payouts were not made illustrate the main problem anyone trying to justify 
pay deals comes up against. Once individuals become accustomed to large 
paycheques, they expect them, as was the case at Barclays when profits slumped 
32% but bonuses rose 10%.

In bad years, bankers threaten to leave if they are not given their bonuses, 
and in good years they say they deserve the money for work well done. Their pay 
is not variable. Bonuses are not bonuses at all.

Philips has a trolleyload of problems at Morrisons

The key to keeping shareholders onside, it is reckoned, is to underpromise and 
overdeliver. So there are some hard yards ahead forMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> chief executive Dalton Philips 
this week, who has unfortunately done quite the reverse: overpromised and 
underdelivered. Just before Christmas Philips said things were looking up at 
the struggling grocer and that an increase in like-for-like sales was expected. 
In fact Christmas sales fell 5.6%. Add in 2.5% inflation and that was a more 
than 8% downturn – and a nasty profits warning ensued. Gruesome stuff.

Morrisons has all kinds of problems: it has too many big-box stores when we 
all want to shop local now; it is about a decade behind on internet shopping; 
it has no clear pricing position any more; it is losing shoppers to Aldi and 
Lidl; it has no loyalty scheme; its IT systems are out-of-date ... We could go 
on.

Philips needs a plan, and some rapid results – or he'll be heading for the 
executive checkout.
 