
The Kent coast is littered with old gibbet sites. During the Napoleonic wars, 
the cages that were used to display the decomposing corpses of executed 
criminals were common around popular smuggling haunts, gruesome reminders of 
the fate that would befall those who engaged in what they called “the free 
trade”.

Norfolk coast watch puts people smuggling on radar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/03/norfolk-coast-watch-people-smuggling-dymchurch-chichester-coastguard>
Today a rather more modern form of smuggling is operating along the coast of 
south-east England and it is casting a shadow over Britain’s security, its 
economy and perhaps even its continued membership of the EU. This time, 
however, the bounty fetching up on Britain’s shoreline is not French brandy but 
migrants and, in particular, Albanian nationals.

That Albanians now comprise one of the largest groups of illegal immigrants to 
the UK appears to have caught politicians and police forces by surprise. The 
former communist bloc country, home to just six million people, was once viewed 
as an insular, east European backwater. But figures shared with theObserver by 
Barnardo’s reveal that the number of Albanian children being helped by its 
specialist trafficking support teams is now second only to those from Vietnam.

Each month exposes a new smuggling operation involving men, women and children 
from Albania. Last weekend,18 Albanians were saved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/30/rescue-of-suspected-migrants-raises-fears-of-tragedy-in-channel>
 off the coast of Dymchurch in Kent when their inflatable boat started to sink. 
A fortnight before,17 Albanian migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/25/man-wanted-spain-arrested-chichester-marina-illegal-immigration>
 were picked up in Chichester marina in West Sussex, having crossed the Channel 
in a catamaran.

According to Europol, the pan-European police agency, the UK’s smaller ports, 
marinas and beaches are becoming attractive to gangs bringing in illegal 
migrants. Last week, the agency identified a dozen of these smuggling 
“hotspots” around the English coast, including Orford Ness in Suffolk, Tilbury 
in Essex, Newhaven in East Sussex and Whitstable in Kent.

The National Crime Agency believes hundreds of criminals in Britain are now 
involved in the trade. It estimates that migrants can pay as little as £100 for 
a “single attempt through unsophisticated means” from France to the UK. A 
“high-quality” journey can cost more than £6,000. But locals who live near the 
hotspots report that what is happening is not new. Simon Moores, an IT expert, 
was out in a kayak near Margate on the north-east Kent coast in about 2005 when 
he saw a lone man swimming ashore, fully dressed.

“I paddled quickly alongside and asked if I could help. ‘No, no,’ he replied, 
‘It’s a nice day and I am swimming.’ He was an Arab and, from years in the 
Middle East, I’m guessing an Iraqi. I stayed with him, all the way to the steps 
on to the promenade. He climbed them in a squelching pair of white Nikes and 
promptly disappeared.” Later, police told Moores that there had been a spate of 
boats dropping migrants off Margate.

The difference between then and now is that today’s smuggling operations are 
more technologically savvy, Moores believes. He points out that GPS phone 
technology allows people smugglers on the shore to co-ordinate with those on 
the boats. “Migrant trafficking’s Uber moment has arrived, thanks to smartphone 
technology,” Moores said.

A Dymchurch businessman told the Daily Mirror: “This is happening here. It’s 
real. Just a few weeks ago, I handed the Border Agency CCTV footage of six 
migrants walking along the slipway after getting off a boat. They jumped in a 
waiting van and then they were off.”

While Dymchurch, on the Romney Marsh, has hit the headlines, the longer 
beaches of Walmer and Deal, north of Dover, are thought to be more popular with 
the smugglers. Border Agency officials suspect that a large fishing boat is 
being used to transport illegal migrants out of Belgian ports, where security 
is more lax than in France. Once at sea, the boat transfers its passengers to 
smaller inflatables which can, under cover of darkness, speed into shore 
undetected by a coastguard struggling against funding cuts.

“We’re reaching crisis point and now is not the time to start cutting, but 
that’s what the home secretary has been doing,” said Martyn Underhill, police 
and crime commissioner for Dorset.

Moores used to be a Conservative councillor in North Thanet, which has a 
sizable immigrant population. “Local people believe that these people have 
taken their jobs,” he says. “It’s a perception more than anything else, but 
it’s the perception that counts from a political point of view.”

Neighbouring Thanet South is the constituency Ukip leader Nigel Farage 
narrowly failed to win at the last election. “No one here is voting to stay 
in,” Moores said. “The referendum is a catalyst. People seeEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as culpable in their problems. 
This is their chance to express how they feel.”

Regular stories about the arrival of illegal Albanian immigrants – which are 
heavily promoted by pro-Brexit politicians and newspapers – will not woo the 
undecided to the Remain cause. Rather, they highlight the tensions that come 
with integration: the apparent increase in the number of Albanians entering the 
UK can be traced back to December 2010, when the EU relaxed laws allowing them 
to travel throughout the Schengen area without a visa.

The hope at the time, as expressed by Baroness Ludford 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/justice-home-affairs/news/sword-of-damocles-hangs-over-visa-liberalisation/>
, a Liberal Democrat peer, was that “fostering the links between the western 
Balkans and the European Union will reduce the potential for our south-eastern 
neighbours to revert to nationalism, conflict and ethnic hatred, making them 
and us safer as a result”.

The latest report from European border agency Frontex 
<http://frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/Risk_Analysis/Annula_Risk_Analysis_2016.pdf>
 highlights the unintended consequence: record numbers of Albanians being 
stopped at EU airports as they seek to reach non-Schengen countries. “This 
predominance of Albanians in the data on refusals of entry coincides with the 
visa liberalisation regime that entered into force in 2011 for Albanians,” says 
the report. It adds: “The number of persons aiming to get to the UK with 
fraudulent documents significantly increased (+70%) compared with 2014. This 
trend is mostly attributable to the increasing number of Albanian nationals 
misusing Italian and Greek ID cards.”

Officially, the UK is home to around 20,000 Albanians. But more are known to 
have entered, having pretended to be Kosovans fleeing the war in Yugoslavia. 
The UK is the ultimate destination for younger Albanians, who come from a 
country where 70% of the population is Muslim and the medieval code ofkanun 
holds sway in rural areas. This decrees that spilled blood must be paid for 
with spilled blood, a stipulation that, down the years, has resulted in 
hundreds of tit-for-tat murders.

The blood feuds are recognised by the European Commission, as one of the most 
common “push factors” driving asylum flows fromAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>, along with “deprivation, 
unemployment, discrimination and poor access to healthcare, social benefits and 
education”.

Albanians claiming asylum in the UK regularly cite the feuds as their reason 
for being unable to return home. In 2008, there were 173 applications for 
asylum in the UK from Albanian nationals. By last year the figure had risen to 
1,809. Nearly all requests are rejected. This is to the advantage of the 
Albanian mafia which, according to areport 
<http://www.rieas.gr/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=332&catid=22&Itemid=69>
 by the Research Institute for European and American Studies, has used its 
dominant position in the European heroin trade to diversify. “This highly 
sophisticated criminal network has been able to control much of the drugs trade 
in Europe and also the trafficking of women and children from the Balkans to 
western Europe. Both of these activities are complementary to each other and 
frequently criminal groups switch from one activity to the other.”

Agon, an 18-year-old Albanian, being cared for by Barnardo’s, was trafficked 
from Spain to the UK: “My father had a problem with the mafia in Albania. The 
mafia wanted my father to pay some money but he didn’t have the money so they 
tried to shoot him. I was scared for my life, so this is why I left Albania. I 
left my family behind and went to Spain to start a new life. I met someone in 
Spain who knew about a group of Albanians that help people get to the UK.

“You have to pay them a lot of money, around £6,000. If you don’t have the 
money, you can pay them back by working for them once you’re in the UK. The 
traffickers told me I can have a better life in the UK. I believed them.”

So, it is becoming apparent, do many others.
 