
The Dream Team III enforcer Charles Barkley was clear from the outset. “We’re 
here to prove we are the best country in the world. We’re the best at 
basketball. We have got to kill them all.”

Heading into Australia’s 1996 exhibition match against the reigning Olympic 
champions, peroxide-blond guard Shane ‘The Hammer’ Heal and his Boomers 
team-mates were excited but not daunted by the prospect of taking on the NBA’s 
best.

“I think it was a defining sort of a moment,” Heal tells Guardian Australia 17 
years after a fiery confrontation that remains the first thing basketball fans 
want to discuss when they meet the veteran of four Olympic campaigns.

The Australians, a blue-collar line-up by international standards, approached 
the game with respect for their opponents but didn’t fear them. Heal recalls 
“we’d seen other teams getting photos taken with them and autographs before and 
after games and things like that. We said that wasn’t the Australian way and we 
certainly weren’t handling the game like that.”

Heal would finish the Olympic tune-up with 28 points and shoot a remarkable 
8-from-13 from three-point range, many of them a remarkable distance out from 
the line, but it was his confrontation with the notorious Barkley that captured 
the attention of the media and fans alike.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3OCJBVgGHM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3OCJBVgGHM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3OCJBVgGHM&media=>
Late in the first half and growing in confidence, Heal found himself open on 
the wing and released a shot for his fourth three-pointer of the game. Barkley 
arrived late, aggressively undercutting Heal and sending him sprawling to the 
floor in front of the Australian bench.

“The thing with Barkley and I, it was just a dirty play. You just wouldn’t 
expect someone to make such a dirty play against someone that’s in the air, 
anywhere in the world,” says Heal. “He just took my legs out and I landed on my 
back. It was just a really dirty play … he just ran straight through my legs. 
You definitely don’t expect that and you don’t expect it from anNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> superstar.”

Undaunted by the height and weight differential – his opponent stood six 
inches taller – Heal chased the American star back down the court, letting fly 
with a volley of verbal barbs, and bumped chests with Barkley. “When I got up 
and gave him a few choice words I remember him looking down and he said ‘What 
did you say?’ I didn’t know whether he couldn’t understand the accent or he 
couldn’t believe what I’d just called him.”

The tough-talking Barkley would later conclude: “He’s a talkative little 
fellow. I told him that if I don’t take that off Americans I’m definitely not 
going to take it off foreigners.”

Heal and his team-mates acknowledged they were playing against the world’s 
best but refused to back down from confrontation when necessary. “I guess the 
Australian way is that we weren’t going to kiss their arse – we were going 
there to test ourselves against the best. We weren’t going to treat them any 
differently than we did anybody else. We had respect for them but we certainly 
weren’t going to bow to them.”

As stunned as the Aussies were by the physical nature of the clash, not even 
Heal expected the sight of Barkley mimicking a gunshot at him as the teams went 
to their huddle.“I was going from one end of the court to our bench and he was 
going from the other end to his bench and we ran into each other again and we 
grabbed each other by the singlets and he was a big man, mate, he was a very 
big man. I’m very lucky he didn’t hit me because I’d still be asleep today I 
reckon.” Not for the last time, the match officials had to intervene.

Boomers captain Andrew Gaze recently remembered the clash 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/olympic-games/andrew-gaze-recalls-moment-shane-heal-took-on-legendary-charles-barkley-cadel-evans-good-to-go/story-fn5k3iok-1226433840934>
. “Shane, I think in the emotion of the situation and also just trying to make 
a statement to the rest of the group to say, ‘Hey, we don’t back down to 
anyone. I don’t care who you are or what your reputation is, we play it on its 
merits.’ You could almost see Charles [think] like, ‘What is this little 
peroxide-haired bloke doing?’”

In turn, Heal recalls Gaze’s attempts to halt the bubbling animosity, “I 
remember Andrew trying to calm [the Dream Team] down and try and calm us down, 
he was like the international peacekeeper. I remember him being hurt by the 
fact that they were so angry, but we really didn’t take a backward step.” Asked 
if his treatment of Heal was a sign of respect, Barkley replied: “I try to 
treat people equal. I try to hit everybody, and in that way I’m very 
consistent.”

“He was definitely consistent,” laughs Heal.

All the while, Heal had been on the receiving end of a trash-talking 
masterclass from the Dream Team guard and future NBA hall-of-famer Gary Payton.
 “The amount of rubbish that I listened to from Gary Payton about what he was 
going to do to me after the game and all the rest of it, it was just laughable. 
No-one spoke as much as what he did, that’s for sure.”

On a promotional tour of Australia later in the year, Payton would admit 
<http://community.seattletimes.nwsource.com/archive/?date=19960908&slug=2348050>
 that he was looking forward to squaring off against the NBA-bound guard and 
that he’d eat Heal for lunch, mockingly concluding: “It is wonderful for 
Australia that a short guy can make it to the NBA.”

“We certainly didn’t expect that it was going to be as physical and that we 
were going to have to stand up for ourselves like we did either,” says Heal. 
“The fact that they could be frustrated by an Australian team coming over with 
no NBA players like that, it was a little bit embarrassing I would have thought 
if you’re an American.”

The US media were decidedly unimpressed by the antics on display. Sports 
Illustratedsingled Barkley out 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/events/1996/olympics/daily/july23/barkley.html>
: “It’s hard to imagine an Olympic athlete who adheres less to the Olympic 
ideal than Barkley”. He was unflinching inhis response 
<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/501349/SIR-CHARLES-IS-SIR-KNUCKLEHEAD.html?pg=all>
. “We’re going to defend ourselves. If the American press wants to make us the 
bad guys, so be it.”

Though Heal wishes fans would remember the game for his three-point spree and 
not the fight, his analysis of his own performance is matter of fact. “That was 
my role on the Australian team. Andrew [Gaze] didn’t have a great one in that 
game so I needed to try and be able to put some more points on the board for 
us.”

“A lot of the time when you look back on games you didn’t realise you were 
[shooting from] that far out, especially when you’ve got momentum and adrenalin 
and everything. You just shoot.” Despite Heal’s game-best scoring performance, 
the Australians went down 118-77.

At the conclusion, Barkley stopped and embraced Heal in a sign of respect for 
the Australian’s performance and chutzpah.“From that point on he was great,” 
recalls Heal. “During the battle he was a knucklehead but then you forget about 
it and you move on.”

Still, Heal’s stoush with Barkley was a microcosm of a basketball nation 
standing up for itself. The sensation that surrounded the “Barkley game” 
possibly even obscures the underdog story of the Boomers’ incredible
fourth-place finish 
<http://www.basketball-reference.com/olympics/teams/AUS/1996%29.> in Atlanta. 
Heal still views that Olympic tournament as the sport’s peak in his homeland. 
“Australian basketball was probably, if you look back and pinpoint where the 
high was in Australian basketball, it was probably right then.”

Having defeated the Toni Kukoc-led Croatian side in a thrilling quarter-final 
knockout game <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dbcrLRHmcAg>, the Boomers 
progressed to an unlikely semi-final clash with the Americans. “We were so 
excited to get back in that locker room and we sang with so much gusto that it 
was like, it was just great to be an Aussie.“

In the semi-final clash, Payton was straight back in Heal’s face. “He was 
still talking to me right from the start and we were playing off to go into the 
gold medal game and obviously it was a big thing then because there was so much 
build-up because of [what had happened] the last time we played. During that 
[time Payton signed] an $89m contract and I remember when he was talking trash 
I said to him, “mate, the first thing you need to do when you get your $89m is 
buy yourself a jump shot.” His eyes spun – I reckon he was then the angriest 
man that I’d ever played against. He wasn’t happy.”

Sticking with the US for the early stages of the semi, the Australians went 
down 101-73 in a spirited display. Barkley noted his grudging respect for Heal 
in particular. “That little kid’s tough. I hope he comes to the NBA. He doesn’t 
have good common sense so he’ll fit right in with the [NBA guard] JR Riders.”

“I think that from that Dream Team game we built belief and then we won big 
games and played our roles and just kept finding a way to be able to get 
through,” says Heal. “We knew they were going to throw everything at us and we 
were on the world stage and playing in front of 40,000 people or something.”

Barkley concluded, “I don’t stroke people, but I think the Australians should 
be very proud. I really think they thought they could win. “

Australia had made the voyage weakened by the absence of then-Chicago Bulls 
centre Luc Longley but succeeded largely due to strong tournaments from Gaze 
and Heal and a healthy dose of enthusiasm and team spirit. “I have the utmost 
respect for guys like Bradtke and Ronaldson and Vlahov that were playing 
against much bigger opponents,” recalls Heal.

In the bronze medal play-off the Australians went close to upsetting a strong 
Lithuanian team containing NBA stars Arvydas Sabonis and Sarunas Marciulionis. 
Heal recalls those opponents in similar esteem to the Americans. “Sabonis in 
that game for the bronze medal, I can’t remember his exact stats but it was 
just unbelievable.“ The Lithuanians triumphed 80-74, sending the Boomers home 
without a medal but an enhanced standing in the international arena.

Heal’s performance at Atlanta landed him a three-year NBA contract with the 
Minnesota Timberwolves. “I didn’t ever envisage playing in the NBA. Leading 
right up to that first game [in Atlanta] I didn’t have goals of playing in the 
NBA. No-one from Australia had gone to the NBA except Luc Longley and he was 
7ft 2in.”

Heal says he only has himself to blame for not playing in the NBA for longer. 
“I don’t have too many regrets but that’s one of them.” Injuries and the 
challenges of raising a family in the land of 10,000 lakes got the better of 
the Australian, who packed his bags for home after a single season.

Along the way Heal found a mentor and friend in wily Wolves veteran Terry 
Porter, but the warmth of their relationship took some time to develop. “We 
didn’t get off on a good foot. I remember in the [NBA] pre-season he got off 
the bus and he said, ‘Rookie, you carry my bag.’ I said, ‘I’m not a rookie, 
mate, I’ve played for 10 years and I’m not fucking carrying your bag.’ Anyway, 
I left it in the car park and I just kept walking. I know he was fuming after 
that but we ended up becoming pretty close.”

The Timberwolves stint also reunited Heal with his Olympic sparring partner 
Payton. “He was still speaking when I went to the NBA and it was amazing. I 
remember standing at the free throw line and he looked over at a team-mate and 
he’s like, ‘I’ve got him, he’s mine’. I was like, ‘mate, you’ve gotta let it go 
– I’m a scrub at the end of the bench and you’re a superstar.’

“He didn’t stop talking trash to me until I hit the five threes in a quarter 
for Minnesota against Seattle. At the end of that game when I hit five threes 
he came up and sort of gave me a hug of respect and that was the only time he 
ever did that. “

Barkley was even more effusive in his praise of Heal’s journey to the 
big-time, stopping the Australian on the way to the lift when they were due to 
square off in the NBA play-offs that season. “I was like ‘wow, that’s Charles 
Barkley.’ I was sitting down and having a chat and he was great.”

After a long career that included a further NBA stint and seasons in Europe, 
it’s the memories of his four Olympic campaigns that Heal holds dearest. “I 
told my Dad when I was 12 that I was going to play for Australia. Going to an 
Olympics was all I ever dreamed of. I was in the backyard for hours and hours 
and I was counting down, making game-winners against America. That’s what I 
did.”

Atlanta still looms large in the careers of Heal and team-mates such as Gaze, 
Andrew Vlahov and Mark Bradtke, who had risen through the Institute of Sport 
together and benefitted from a warm camaraderie. He calls Atlanta a "pivotal 
moment”, adding: “for us to finish fourth and come within a basket of winning 
the only ever medal against Lithuania is something that I look back on and just 
think it was one of the biggest overachievements for a team in our history.

“When I went to Europe, the Greeks used to be blown away and say: ‘How the 
hell can Australia be in the top four in the world?’ We only had local players, 
no-one played in Europe back in those days and only [Atlanta absentee] Luc 
Longley played in the NBA so we were certainly fighting out of our weight class.

“I think the main reason was because of the camaraderie we had and passion we 
had for playing for Australia and what it meant. It gave us that opportunity to 
overachieve. To lose by a bucket against Lithuania with those unbelievable 
superstars on there, people are looking at the line-ups and going: ‘Wow, how 
did this happen? Who are these guys?’

“I think we earned a lot of respect in that period in world basketball. “
 