
"Oh, that's what I want to do," I remember thinking when I watched Spartacus 
for the first time. I must have been about 11 or 12 at the time, so I suspect I 
didn't see it during its original 1960 run.

I went to the cinema with a group of friends –we may or may not have been 
taken by an adult, one of my parents. I can't recall now. All I can remember, 
and vividly, was my complete immersion in the Roman world.

Much to my parents' consternation, it was the first film to make me utter 
those fateful words: "I want to be an actor." They must have groaned, and 
thought: there's five bob wasted.

Later, when I got a bit older and was training and working as an actor, a lot 
of the early Robert De Niro films –Taxi Driver, Raging Bull – had a profound 
effect on me; I think that applied to a lot of actors my age. We saw those 
movies and suddenly saw actors reallydoing something. But back when I first saw 
Spartacus, I didn't really understand what the acting in it involved at all. I 
just recall instinctively knowing that this was the life for me.

It wasn't so much to do with Kirk Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kirkdouglas> running about and scaling 
fences. There was something ordinary about the film and real. This was probably 
to do with the story: an average boy suddenly catapulted into extraordinary 
circumstances. The heroism of it all appealed to me, but it wasn't just about 
the action. I didn't want to have gigantic muscles like Douglas, nor did I want 
to fight in the ring and be a gladiator. Something about the storytelling and 
its humanity lit that spark within me. I became pretty obsessed with it.

Although Ridley Scott came quite close with Gladiator, it's been 50 years 
since the originalSpartacus and I'm surprised it hasn't been remade. If I had 
my choice of roles, I'd opt for Peter Ustinov's part: Lentulus Batiatus, the 
slave dealer and slightly effete villain.

Since first seeing it, I've watched the film many times and I own it on DVD. I 
also met Kirk Douglas very briefly a few years ago. I told him how he'd had a 
huge effect on me. He just nodded, squeezed my hand and said: "I'm glad." He 
must have heard that a million times.

Alfred Molina's latest film is The Sorcerer's Apprentice
 