
Egypt were drawing 1-1 with Senegal in the semi-finals of the 2006 African 
Nations Cup when, in the 77th minute, coach Hassan Shehata decided to replace 
an ineffectual Mido with striker Amr Zaki. 'Why are you taking me off?' he 
shouted. 'Because I am the coach,' replied Shehata. 'You are nothing but a 
donkey!' responded Mido. But as they squared up, Zaki scored with his first 
touch. The crowd were ecstatic, the team celebrated with Shehata rather than 
Mido, and Egypt went through to the final where they beat Ivory Coast. Mido was 
banned from international duty for six months by the Egyptian FA.

Russell Osman, Eurosport commentator: It looked like the game was heading for 
extra time, so Shehata decided to make a substitution. I bet he knew at the 
time that there could be a reaction from Mido, but not one of that magnitude.

Mido: I was angry when Shehata decided to replace me. I was not that bad and 
if I had stayed on I would have scored a goal.

Osman:  It was a valid substitution, a striker for a striker. Mido's workrate 
was poor and his team-mates had laid chances on a plate for him. His reaction 
was on a par with his performance - immature.

Mido: I was just asking the manager, 'Why? Why? Why me first?'

Martin Jol, Mido's then manager at Spurs:  Frustration was the thing with 
Mido. I know him well, he was thinking he could score, so of course he wants to 
stay on.

Mido: In Egypt they are amateurs. The manager is an amateur, the team are 
amateurs, the association are amateurs.

Osman:  It was the first time I had seen such a reaction at this level of 
football. Fair play to Shehata - he stood his ground when Mido confronted him 
face-to-face. Luckily Hossam Hassan, Egypt's most capped player, was on the 
bench and had the experience to get hold of Mido and force him away from the 
coach.

Hassan Shehata: I do not want to talk too much about this subject, because 
Mido is like my son. He came to the pitch and shook hands with me and the other 
players, so things are OK now.

Mido:  I have not spoken to Shehata since the incident. I don't care about 
him. He is a local guy. Before he was in charge of the national team he managed 
a second division side.

Osman: Zaki's goal fully justified Shehata's decision to replace Mido - great 
for the coach. It also really diffused the situation as far as the crowd were 
concerned.

Jol: There are always two rights. The right of the player and the right of the 
coach. And the coach was right because Egypt scored. A winning coach is always 
right.
 