
Name: Prune juice.

Age: Fresh, ideally.

Appearance: Brown. Heavy with promise and dread. Redolent of … so much: 
unhappy hours; sweet relief; false alarms; prunes.

Oh God, why are you talking to me about prune juice? I’m not pregnant again, 
am I?Not as far as I know.

Thank heavens for that. None of my passages could take it again. And it’s not 
me talking about it. It’s Lord Sugar.

A name that by itself could get the bowels moving again. I couldn’t possibly 
comment.

So why is El Sucre talking about nature’s gentle laxative liquid? He drew 
parallels between it and the£5.1bn Sky and BT Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/10/premier-league-tv-rights-grow-sky-sports>
 have paid between them to screen premiership games for the next three seasons 
– a 70% increase on the last deal.

Uh … About how all the money would go straight through the system and end up 
in the pockets of players and their agents without being invested in young 
players and their training facilities or used to cap ticket prices so that 
attendance at the beautiful game might remain, just, affordable for 
non-oligarchs.

But that’s capitalism for you. Surely Sugar’s not turning socialist in his old 
age?He congratulated the premier league’s negotiators on squeezing so much 
money out of the broadcasters. But certainly something seems to be suggesting 
to him that raw market power may not be the solution to everything.

It’s as if he no longer has faith in human nature. You must remember that this 
is a man – perhaps the only man – who has sat through every single episode of 
The Apprentice. Who has looked every one of the contestants in their blank, 
soulless, reptilio-shark eyes, repeatedly.

“If you want a picture of the future, imagine an overpolished shoe stamping on 
a human face still squawking into a horizontal mobile phone about giving it 
110% – for ever.”Was it a pity Orwell died before he realised he had actually 
been a lifelong optimist? Or not? Discuss through gin tears.

Do say: “Got it in one, Lord Sugar, as always, like the savvy, 
straight-shooting ultra-businessman you are.”

Don’t say: “Doesn’t prune juice actually, literally, clear out all the turds? 
Isn’t that actually what we want the money to do? Somebody call Cantona and his 
seagulls. This metaphor needs work.”
 