
Picture caption of the day

David Cameron and Boris Johnson enjoy the atmosphere at the Olympic Stadium on 
Saturday.

Johnson: I'm having a party

Cameron: You're not having mine

...................

• Congratulations to Laura Trott, the gold medal winning British cyclist, on 
being awarded a second gold postbox. The Royal Mail had promised to put up a 
gold postbox in the hometown of every British gold medallist and, after 
checking Trott's details on theTeam GB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> website, duly installed one in 
Harlow, Essex. Unfortunately, Trott actually comes from Cheshunt, Hertfordshire.

• There seems to be a competition among the TV commentators to see who can get 
the most touchy-feely with the athletes. John Inverdale could barely keep his 
hands off the rowers and almost everyone has tried to paw Jessica Ennis, as she 
attempted to hold back the tears. But the medal for most touchy-feely 
interviewing has to go to Rob Walker at the sailing who virtually hadBen Ainslie
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie> in a neck-lock after his final 
gold medal winning race.

• "You should have heard the noise when Jessica Ennis came out on to the 
track," said Paul Dickenson, as the British heptathlete lined up for her final 
event, the 800m. We'd have loved to, Paul, only for some reason theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> had decided to fill the time by showing 
us the same moody pre-cooked film footage of Jess's preparations that it had 
shown countless times already over the previous week.

• A new world record for rip-off pricing was reached with the £2 Cadbury's 
Twirl inside the Olympic Park – at least the armchair Olympics spectator 
doesn't have to worry about that.

• The spot-the-celebrity-in-the-audience game is wearing rather thin for those 
watching at home. And for those at the events, if Stella McCartney's obvious 
embarrassment at her dad cheerleading a singalong version of Hey Jude is a 
barometer.

There again, I'm not feeling particularly well disposed to slebs who have so 
obviously not had to suffer to get their tickets. Another gruelling two-hour 
session on the Locog website last night to try to get tickets that were said to 
be available ended in disappointment yet again. When I started out trying to 
get my hands on the tickets that had become available because so many members 
of the Category A Olympic Family couldn't be bothered to use them, I set myself 
a price limit of £150 per ticket. Three days later I upped that to £295. Last 
night, I found myself trying to buy tickets priced at £420. As I said, the 
whole process is driving me mad.

• With little else to do on Sunday morning, I watched the hockey match between 
Pakistan and South Africa and was amazed to find two Aussies commentating. 
Presumably the British team of commentators were sleeping off a hangover. This 
hasn't been the best of Olympics for the Aussies, so it was good to hear the 
two commentators finding something to cheer themselves up with. As the rain 
teemed down, one said: "The pitch is holding up extremely well. It was designed 
by an Australian."

• There are going to be a lot of people in line for an MBE after Team GB's 
performances so far, and perhaps those who dish these things out might care to 
include Dave Brailsford, Shane Sutton and Dr Steve Peters, the engine room of 
the British cycling team. Peters, a psychologist, almost made it as an Olympian 
himself. At the age of 50 he took up sprinting and found he could run the 100m 
in just over 11 seconds. I'd guess no one had checked his age when he 
unexpectedly received an invitation to train with Team GB's elite squad.

• "He has blood running through his veins," said one commentator as Ben 
Ainslie sailed to gold. I'm sure that will come as less of a surprise to our 
four-time sailing hold medallist than the news that he has also, according to 
Rob Walker, the BBC's roving mike on a boat, "transcended sailing". The 
miracles keep on coming...

• LingoWatch : The eggbeater A way of treading water that keeps the body high 
out of the water and lets the synchronised swimmer perform with her arms. 
Prolonged eggbeating is known as the aqubob. Obviously.
 