
Among the many dubious highlights of England's Ashes cricket wipe-out in 
Australia were those pictures of captain Andrew Flintoff taking it easy. Now, 
Freds looks as good as anybody in a suit or cricket whites, but here he was in 
baggy shorts and vest, revealing that his upper arms are covered with what now 
apparently has to be called body art. It reminded me that in parts of the West 
Indies, there is a fair proportion of overseas visitors who would make the 
newly well-inked Flints - bless his youthful lion heart - look like Little Lord 
Fauntleroy.

Which is sort of one of the reasons why Antigua's Carlisle Bay, my favourite 
spot on my favourite island, is so perfect. Frankly you can get a lot of 
big-bellied boozed-up blokes at home, so it's nice to be in one of the most 
beautful places on earth and, without wishing to sound like a screaming snob, 
know you're unlikely to find too many of them beering it up by the pool.

Not that this fabulously chic, stylish and friendly place is not inclusive; 
far from it - one of its proudest boasts is that nearly all the (charming, 
funny and friendly) staff are local, the beach is open, and you can walk off 
the sands and into the nearby village in a minute. Then, as the beach is bathed 
in evening light, you can see horsemen from the village canter up and down. 
Fantastic.

It manages to pull off the difficult trick of being fabulously cool and 
completely unintimidating. Though you won't find much in the way of folkloric 
evenings, pirate hats, steel bands or umbrellas in the cocktails, you will find 
gorgeous split-level rooms in cool greys - all designed to give a jaw-dropping 
view over the ocean from your bed - giant bathrooms and walk-in showers, nine 
tennis courts, a good gym and spa, and of course great food, tending towards a 
sort of Pacific fusion thingy.

It's a place of wonder: hyper-chic but Caribbean cool, unintrusive, soothing, 
modern and very beautiful. Oh, and there's a little footbath outside every 
room, so you don't cover your floor in sand when you come back from the beach. 
Now why don't more hotels do that?

· Roger Alton travelled with Carrier <http://www.carrier.co.uk> (0161 491 
7620). Prices from £1,615pp for seven nights in an ocean suite, including BA 
flights and transfers. Price is valid from 1-25 May, 1-30 June and 1 
September-15 October 2007. Book by 28 February.
 