
One-year-old Collin Atugume is unconscious when I see his parents carry his 
tiny form into the paediatric ward at Kiboga district hospital. He has been 
suffering from fever and diarrhoea for the past few days - classic signs of 
malaria - but his parents did not recognise them. The nurse inserts a drip into 
his arm to rehydrate him before she can begin the quinine treatment. He might 
not make it through the night.

Collin's story is not unusual here. Babies and young children have no immunity 
to malaria and are particularly vulnerable. The swampy region of Kiboga is the 
perfect breeding ground for mosquitoes which transmit the parasites that cause 
malaria and multiply in the blood, attacking the liver, kidney and brain and 
causing fever, coma and death. The people here are poor and most cannot afford 
mosquito nets. Some of the families I visited live 20km from the nearest health 
centre. It can take six hours to walk through the forest carrying a sick child 
and there is no guarantee that the life-saving drugs needed will be available. 
One centre I went to was out of stock and it was a further 10km to the region's 
only hospital, which serves a quarter of a million people.

But there is hope for families like Collin's as a new way of bringing 
treatment to the sick is being piloted in this malarial hotspot. Under the Home 
Based Management of Fever scheme, an initiative by theMalaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/malaria> Consortium and endorsed by 
Uganda's Ministry of Health, local people select a volunteer to receive 
training to identify the signs of malaria and to administer the treatment. 
Worried parents can bring their child to the Community Medicine Distributor's 
(CMD) home and they will check, diagnose and treat. With severe malaria capable 
of killing a child within 24 hours, every minute can count.

The use of volunteers is well established, but what is new in Kiboga is the 
use of Coartem, an artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT). It replaces 
other drugs that have become ineffective due to resistance and is distributed 
in special packs with simple instructions and diagrams for those who cannot 
read. The scheme is recommended by the World Health Organisation (WHO).

So is it really a good idea to allow volunteers with minimal training to 
visually diagnose and treat children without testing? Traditional malaria tests 
are unreliable because of poor laboratory standards, a lack of specialists and 
the time taken for results, by which time a child's condition could have 
deteriorated. Rapid diagnostic fingertip-prick kits are now available but they 
are expensive and the prevalence of HIV/Aids means that careful training of 
volunteers would be essential if they are to be used.

With the WHO advising that any fever in a malaria endemic country should be 
treated as malaria even if test results are negative, there seems little point 
in testing anyway. But treating all fevers as malaria has drawbacks; other, 
potentially fatal illnesses such as meningitis, diarrhoeal diseases and 
respiratory tract infections have similar symptoms. Dr James Tibenderana, from 
Malaria Consortium recognises that, "Not all fevers are due to malaria and I 
think the challenge for malaria control is how to deal with those fevers that 
are not malaria because the approach shouldn't be 'OK I'll treat for malaria 
and I don't need to worry about the others', because it's a child who's sick 
... If we don't have ways of addressing that as a health system then to an 
extent some of the gains that we're making in malaria control could actually 
end up being losses because children die of other things."

He wants to see the scheme scaled up so volunteers are trained to detect and 
treat other illnesses and then rewarded; perhaps with a bicycle to help them 
collect the medication, or some chickens which they can look after at home so 
they can spend less time working the land and more time on providing a 
healthcare service without being torn between this essential work and providing 
for their families.

The programme is not running in isolation. It is part of the country's 
strategic plan, which promotes prevention through insecticide treated nets, 
house spraying, eliminating mosquito breeding grounds and treating pregnant 
women.

Uganda's senior medical officer, Dr Myers Lugemwa, says that as well as the 
personal tragedy that malaria causes, it is the biggest stumbling block for the 
country's economic development. "This country loses $658m [a year] to malaria. 
That means if we sell all our coffee and all our exports, the monies accruing 
from the sale do not amount to the monies spent on malaria in the country." The 
illness means up to 40% of the workforce is out of action at any one time. What 
he can't tell me is why such a paltry percentage of Uganda's annual budget is 
spent on malaria prevention and treatment; just 10% of the health budget is 
earmarked for malaria and the disease didn't even classify as one of the 
country's priority areas in the last budget.

There is no doubt that the Home Based Management of Fever is having a positive 
impact in Kiboga. While the number of cases of severe malaria diagnosed at the 
district hospital has risen in all other age groups, in the under-fives where 
the ACTs are being used, the number has dropped significantly. As well as 
providing effective medication quickly, treating children at home also relieves 
pressure on the hospital. The paediatric ward at Kiboga district Hospital used 
to accommodate over 100 youngsters at a time, with up to three sick babies 
sharing a cot due to a lack of facilities. Nowadays, it is still busy but 
manageable with around 30 inpatients a day in the children's ward.

So what does the future hold? Glaxosmithkline claim to have a vaccine that 
could be available on the African market in as few as four years but even if 
tests are successful, affordability and the practicalities of distributing the 
vaccine to the most rural regions remain hurdles.

When I go back to visit Collin before leaving Kiboga he is responding well to 
the treatment, eating and playing, blissfully unaware of how lucky he was. 
Thanks to the distribution of ACT therapies and the dedication and goodwill of 
the volunteers that administer them, thousands more children will be able to 
avoid severe malaria and will make a full recovery, perhaps going someway to 
reaching the UN goal to halt and reverse malaria by 2015.

This can only happen if there are funds to ensure there are enough drugs to go 
round, proper incentives to make sure the number of volunteers can be increased 
and maintained, and investment in infrastructure to enable them to be 
distributed to the neediest areas until a real and lasting solution is found.
 