
‘A tempest in a teapot’ was how Gary Sick described the recent reports by BBC 
Persian’s Kambiz Fattahi on declassified United States documents on contacts 
with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini during the Iranian Revolution. As the official 
dealing withIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> in Jimmy Carter’s 
White House, Sick pointed out that these dealings with Khomeini have been 
public knowledge for decades and that the BBC’s ‘revelations’ added little to 
what we already knew.


Yet, the BBC’s claims have provoked outrage from Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, the supreme leader 
of the Islamic Republic, who has called the documents a forgery and a British 
conspiracy to defame Khomeini’s memory. Conversely, for many Iranians who fled 
Iran after the fall of the Shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the BBC reports 
confirmed the Shah’s claims in his memoirs that the Carter administration had 
abandoned him and paved the way for the victory of the revolution.

Many historians of modern Iran have commented on the ‘paranoid style’ in 
Iranian politics 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2009/08/the-paranoid-style-in-iranian-politics.html>
, a term coined by Richard Hofstadter in an essay on American politics. 
Iranians are not alone in subscribing to conspiracy theories, but their allure 
is deeply rooted in Iran’s experience of European exploitation and cold war 
superpower intervention. Britain and the BBC Persian Service have a special 
place in such thinking, best captured in Iraj Pezeshkzad’s much-loved 1973 
satirical novel,My Uncle Napoleon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/may/13/featuresreviews.guardianreview26>
.

So, has the BBC really uncovered new evidence that President Jimmy Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jimmy-carter> abandoned the Shah and 
helped usher in the Iranian Revolution? Or is this all just Iranian paranoia, 
fuelled by the BBC’s desire for a ‘scoop’?

In the first week of January 1979, there was an American plan to establish 
contact with Khomeini and gain his support for a managed transition to a 
post-Shah Iran. But the problem for the conspiracy theorists is that President 
Carter vetoed it.

At the time, the Carter administration was deeply split on what to do about 
the crisis in Iran, with many senior officials in denial about the Shah’s 
deteriorating position. The US ambassador, William Sullivan, had accepted the 
Shah’s demise and was planning a political transition and building bridges to 
the opposition. Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security advisor, had lost 
faith in the state department’s reporting on Iran and was open to the idea of a 
military takeover. Cyrus Vance, the secretary of state, was preoccupied by the 
SALT II and Egypt-Israel peace process, and recoiled at the idea of a coup: he 
advised that the Shah should either offer sweeping reforms or make way for a 
government of national unity.

Declassified: Washington’s hesitant plans for a military coup in 
pre-revolution Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/feb/11/us-general-huysers-secret-iran-mission-declassified>
But Sullivan had persuaded Vance to send an emissary to meet Khomeini in 
Paris. Theodore Eliot, a senior American diplomat who had served in Iran, was 
selected but at the last moment Brzezinski managed to persuade Carter to veto 
the meeting for fear that it might weaken the resolve of the fledgling 
government of Prime MinisterShapour Bakhtiar 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/08/a-darker-horizon-the-assassination-of-shapour-bakhtiar.html>
.

An incandescent Sullivan sent an excoriating memo to Washington on 10 January, 
calling this intervention a “gross and perhaps irretrievable mistake”. Vance 
had to persuade Carter not to fire Sullivan for insubordination.

Carter had not yet given up on the Shah or Bakhtiar. Brzezinski was deeply 
suspicious of the reporting coming out of the US Embassy in Tehran, believing 
it overly sympathetic to the Shah’s opposition. The relationship between 
Brzezinski’s staff in the White House and the state department’s Iran desk had 
broken down. Sullivan, meanwhile, pursued his contacts with the opposition and 
kept the full extent of his plans to himself. Few of his colleagues shared 
Sullivan’s optimism that Khomeini could be persuaded to cooperate with the 
military. In short, there was no coherent US policy for how to response to the 
Shah’s imminent departure.

When Carter’s foreign policy advisors gathered on 11 January, the majority 
accepted that the Shah was probably finished and Khomeini would almost 
certainly return and dominate the process of establishing an Islamic Republic. 
The United States would have to do what it could to rebuild its position in 
Iran.

Carter authorised a meeting between an American diplomat in Paris, Warren 
Zimmerman, and one of Khomeini’s chief aides, Ibrahim Yazdi. Was this the 
moment when Carter gave Khomeini the green light? It appears not.

When Zimmerman met Yazdi in Paris, rather than acquiesce to Khomeini’s 
triumphant return, he tried to persuade Yazdi that Khomeini should delay his 
departure. The Americans hoped to buy time for Bakhtiar’s government to succeed.

There was an element of blackmail in Zimmerman’s message. The US wanted to 
give the impression it was trying its best to prevent a military coup and that 
the ayatollah’s caution was vital. Zimmerman told Yazdi that “the left would be 
the only force to gain from a religious-military clash”. The records of these 
meetings suggest Khomeini’s camp feared a military coup and believed that the 
revolution would not succeed unless the US persuaded the Iranian military to 
allow him to safely return.

The Carter administration did not encourage the army to seize power and quash 
the opposition, but this hardly amounts to a conspiracy to topple the Shah and 
pave the way for Khomeini. The idea of a bloody military takeover was anathema 
to Carter, who had placed human rights at the centre of his foreign policy.

Moreover, not even the Shah supported a military crackdown, which he feared 
would lead to the disintegration of the armed forces and the end to any 
legitimacy for even a constitutional monarchy. Instead, Carter sent a military 
envoy to Tehran, General Robert Huyser, to encourage the Iranian generals to 
remain in Iran, keep the military united and support Bakhtiar’s civilian 
government.

After Khomeini’s return on 1 February and the collapse of Bakhtiar’s 
government on 11 February 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2010/02/fajr-10-days-that-changed-iran.html>
, the Americans were out of ideas and unable to understand a revolution led by 
a 76-year old cleric who wanted to establish an Islamic state. Like much of the 
secular opposition to the Shah, they did not expect religious seminarians to be 
able to run a modern country. They assumed that sooner or later more liberal 
secular elements of the revolutionary movement would come to power and pursue a 
foreign policy cognisant of Iran’s vulnerability to communist subversion and 
Soviet invasion.

For a brief moment, American officials were encouraged when the newly 
appointed prime minister, Mehdi Bazargan, voiced alarm at the communist threat 
and requested secret intelligence briefings from US intelligence officials. 
These hopes were finally dashed, however, with the seizure of the US Embassy in 
Tehran in November 1979 and the resignation of Bazargan’s government.

Many criticisms can be levelled at the United States for the incoherence of 
its policy during the Iranian Revolution, but the idea insinuated byBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Persian that there was a coherent US 
policy of abandoning the Shah and paving the way for Khomeini’s return is not 
supported by the documentary record. The Carter administration was slow to come 
to terms with the crisis in Iran, unable to agree on how to respond to it, and 
desperately hoped that some peaceful outcome that preserved US interests would 
somehow materialise.

But the United States is neither omniscient nor omnipotent. Panic, confusion, 
infighting, and wishful thinking should not be confused with conspiracy.

Roham Alvandi is associate professor of international history at the London 
School of Economics and author of Nixon, Kissinger, and the Shah: The United 
States and Iran in the Cold War (Oxford University Press, 2014)

Christian Emery is lecturer in international relations at the University of 
Plymouth and author of US Policy in Iran: The Cold War Dynamics of Engagement 
and Strategic Alliance, 1978-81 (Palgrave Macmillan, 2013)
 