
I have been especially glad to read Michael Scammell's Koestler (Faber, £30). 
Full disclosure: I commissioned the book as long ago as 1985. Sometimes, 
Scammell's publisher must have despaired of the project. Actually, the 
frustrating passage of 25 years has done this enthralling biography two favours.

First, it has contextualised Koestler. The 1930s and 40s now seem as remote as 
the Middle Ages and the great literary names of those years, such as Sartre, 
Connolly and Malraux, almost on a par with Erasmus or Mallory. Second, it has 
healed the wounds associated with Koestler's sexual habits. Twelve years ago, 
rival biographer David Cesarani's account of the "rape" of Jill Craigie (Mrs 
Michael Foot) caused headlines. Now, it is just a contentious part of 
Koestler's opinion that, as he wrote to his second wife, "without an element of 
initial rape there is no delight".

According to George Orwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>, 
his friend andObserver colleague, Koestler was an "outstanding figure" of his 
times. To us, he has become the author ofDarkness at Noon and an inveterate 
ladies' man with an unsavoury penchant for sexual humiliation. Still, 
Koestler's was an extraordinary career and this is probably the definitive 
account of a major-minor literary phenomenon. Whether Koestler is the 
"indispensable intellectual" of Scammell's over-earnest subtitle is a moot 
point, but he was certainly a great European journalist who deserves a good 
biography.

Koestler was one of those personalities who occasionally scorches through 
European literature, a human whirlwind of gargantuan appetites who banked so 
much experience before he was 40 that the rest of his life was a terrible 
anticlimax, a difficulty Scammell cannot entirely overcome.

Born a Hungarian Jew in 1905, Koestler was a child of his century: an emigre 
intellectual, a celebrity journalist and a dedicated anti-fascist. Everything 
he wrote was responsive to some extraordinary moment, dramatically inflated by 
the wind of history. Koestler always had the knack of being in the right place 
at the right time.

The turning point, after a series of youthful ricochets between Palestine, 
Paris, Berlin and London, was the Spanish Civil War. Koestler was arrested as a 
spy and endured three months in solitary. In 1940, after his release, he 
combined his prison experience with his revulsion at the Moscow shows trials of 
Bukharin and the old Bolsheviks inDarkness at Noon, the tale of Nicholas 
Rubashov, an abstract novel about crime, guilt and man's fate.

The Soviet Union is never mentioned but, as with Orwell's Animal Farm, 
contemporary readers, especially on the left, took it as a polemical 
repudiation of Stalinism. Orwell judged the book "brilliant as a novel and a 
piece of prison literature", perhaps hinting at the limitations of Koestler's 
fiction.

The international success of Darkness at Noon propelled Koestler into a 
literary and intellectual milieu for whom his writing became a touchstone of 
postwar culture. Then, more than now, he was "indispensable", appearing on 
progressive platforms to champion anything and everything, from "cultural 
freedom" to the abolition of capital punishment. Later travels to America and 
France became a rolling bacchanal of binge drinking, fashionable restaurants 
and sex with a dizzying array of star-struck young women.

Scammell is particularly entertaining on this hectic aftermath. He has a good 
eye for detail and a fine sense of comedy. His account of Koestler's visit to 
France in 1946 is a tour de force.Darkness at Noon, a succès fou with sales of 
more than half a million, had made Koestler a celebrity in Paris, a rival to 
the film star glamour of Albert Camus.

The reality was bitter, drunken and lachrymose. Koestler certainly clicked 
with Camus, threw a wine glass at Sartre and ended up in bed with de Beauvoir. 
At least one dawn broke over liberated Paris with the authors ofThe Second Sex 
andDarkness at Noon sobbing into the Seine at "the tragedy of the human 
condition".

Koestler was an odd mixture of spartan and softie. Possibly to purge his 
hangover, he habitually began the day with a cold bath. In bed, to the amused 
fascination of his friends, he always wore a hairnet.

After the climacteric of the Second World War, Koestler's life became a long, 
tortured, public self-explication until, as he put it, "Cassandra had gone 
hoarse". He was a writer whose future lay behind him, and none of his postwar 
books or enthusiasms, which brought him into the orbit of cranks such as 
Timothy Leary, could rebrand his image as a dangerous, slightly mad wunderkind. 
His end, a suicide pact with his third wife, was every bit as melodramatic and 
coldly egotistical as the rest of his career: scarcely more than a headline.

Too many translators spoil the book

Apropos Simone de Beauvoir <https://www.theguardian.com/books/simonedebeauvoir>
, there's a fine old literary row brewing in theLRB. Toril Moi's brilliant 
review of a new translation ofThe Second Sex explores the imperfections of HM 
Parshley's 1949 version, notably its decision to cut 145 out of 972 pages, but 
concludes that "the best you can say about the new translation is that it is 
unabridged". Moi takes publisher Random House to task for commissioning two 
translators whose bibliography includesCookies et cakes and a textbook, My 
English Is French. After Moi's forensic dissection of this new edition, most 
readers will conclude that de Beauvoir's French is gobbledygook. We await 
Random House's response with interest.
 