
The Arts Institute at Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bournemouth> 
is a specialist institution offering undergraduate, foundation degree, 
postgraduate and further education courses in contemporary arts, design and 
media.

Established in 1885, the institute offers courses ranging from film 
production, illustration and graphic design, architecture and events management 
through to fashion, photography and acting.

The campus is situated two miles from the centre of Bournemouth, on the border 
between Bournemouth and Poole, in Dorset, and consists of a series of 
purpose-built studios accommodating approximately 2,000 students on full-time 
courses. As you'd imagine, there's plenty of lovely scenery and seaside fun in 
the vicinity.

Fees
£3,145 for full-time undergraduate programmes in 2008.

Bursaries
All students who receive the full grant of £2835 will receive £310. These 
students will also receive a bonus of £150 on successful completion of their 
first year, £225 after their second year and a further £425 upon completion of 
their final year. All students who receive a grant of £1,050-£2,834 will 
receive £160.

Accommodation
Halls of residence on campus or in town cost £85-125 per week, including all 
bills. Places are allocated according to need and are not guaranteed. The 
majority of students live in privately rented accommodation during their first 
year. Average cost of that is around £70-£85 a week.

Facilities
A purpose built library provides material to support the courses taught. The 
institute also boasts a contemporary arts gallery.

Transport
London is less than two hours away, with regular train and coach services and 
good road networks. A sponsored bus service runs in term time, which links 
students to the places they are likely to want to go.

Contact:
Tel: 01202 533 011
Email: general@aib.ac.uk <mailto:general@aib.ac.uk>
Accommodation: studentadvice@aib.ac.uk <mailto:studentadvice@aib.ac.uk>
Web: www.aib.ac.uk <http://www.aib.ac.uk/>
 