
We're due to plant 300 or 400 trees next month and have been spending a lot of 
time walking around the wood, looking at different areas to see what might go 
where. When planning the planting it's helpful to have a very clear idea of 
what the purpose is. For us, the primary aim is simply fuel: we're going to 
need a lot of firewood to heat the house and its water in the years to come, 
and the perfect tree for that is ash,Fraxinus excelsior. As the saying goes: 
"Ash wet or ash dry, a king shall warm his slippers by."

Fortunately, ash is also the right tree for our secondary purpose – to have 
plenty of timber for furniture-making. Ash is strong but elastic, it cleaves 
beautifully and has a clean white colour. If, in years to come, we tire of 
making chairs, it's also perfect for making snooker cues, tennis rackets, 
rounders bats, hockey sticks, tent pegs, oars and so on. Historically it was 
always the wood used to make spears and arrows, hence its nickname of 
"widowmaker". The rampaging Vikings, after all, were calledaescling – men of 
ash.

We know that ash thrives here because it already makes up about a third of the 
trees in the wood. In many areas there are tiny forests of saplings. They look, 
at calf height, like vertical green knitting needles. The natural regeneration 
is so prolific that all we'll need to do in some areas is fence off the deer.

The other advantage of ash is that it doesn't overly darken the wood. Its 
leaves are pinnate, allowing light to filter to the understorey; they're the 
last trees to leaf, and the first to shed their leaves. Their honey-coloured 
bark is attractive. It grows fast and coppices vigorously. So it's not 
surprising that the tree has always been considered the most important one in 
the forest. In both Greek and Norse mythology humans were made from ash. Odin 
was speared to an ash – the mythical Yggdrasil. Nemesis carried an ash branch, 
and ash was used both for the symbolically important maypole and for the Yule 
log.

There's also plenty of folklore surrounding the tree: if you put an ash leaf 
under your pillow you'll receive a prophetic dream. It was used to cure 
rheumatism and remove warts. A particularly ill child was even passed through 
an opening in the tree, prior to sunrise, before the opening in the trunk was 
bound up again, thereby allowing both child and tree to heal together. Their 
destinies were then thought to be intertwined, and the adult would often 
protect "their" tree to prevent future ill fortune.

As for the other trees we'll be planting, the motives are very mixed. In part 
we want to have a blend of native deciduous trees, such as the Pedunculate oak, 
birch and beech. A major consideration is simply aesthetics: creating 
a woodland that is both eye-catching and calming. That means, for my tastes, 
planting rowan and field maple and copper beech. Another consideration is 
planting whips that will, in time, give us the materials for drinks and jams – 
crabapple, elder and blackthorn (the orchard proper we'll be planting next 
year). Grey alder we'll plant where it's wet, not least because it will improve 
the poor soil by fixing nitrogen. And even though we've been trying to 
eradicate the ugly conifers around the place, we'll have to plant – purely on 
economic grounds – two dozen Norway Spruce so that we can sell a few Christmas 
trees every year.

We're not introducing anything to the woodland that isn't already here, but it 
will look very different once we're done. Not least because, before we even 
reach for the spades and stakes, we're going to have to do a major thinning: 
getting rid of the dastardly goat willow, clearing large areas that have been 
lost to brambles and hawthorn thickets.

What I relish about the whole planting project is that it is the opposite of 
instant gratification. It's an investment whose rewards you reap only in 15 or 
20 years' time… Just about long enough, I hope, to perfect the art of 
chairmaking.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 