
The Australian Olympic Committee has released strict new guidelines for 
appropriate behaviour at the Olympic Village 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/sport/australian-olympic-committee-guidelines-ban-athletes-from-swaying-and-rambling-conversations/story-fni2u98u-1226763305412>
. These guidelines are aimed at stamping out drunken and inappropriate conduct 
by Australian athletes and will apply at both Summer and Winter Olympics. Under 
these new guidelines, team members will not be allowed in the Olympic Village 
if, among other things, they are intoxicated, disorderly, argumentative, 
swaying, staggering, falling down, loud and rambling, annoying or displaying 
any other conduct deemed by the Chef de Mission to be 'inconsistent with team 
standards'.

To be clear, these new, tough rules cover athletes only. They do not apply to 
any of the media covering the Olympics. In particular,Karl Stefanovic remains 
very much welcome at the Village 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/karl-says-sorry-on-air/story-e6freq7x-1225710346101>
.

While these new guidelines may seem comprehensive, the Guardian has come up 
with a further set of rules covering grounds for dismissal from the Olympic 
Village.

SUPPLEMENTARY GUIDELINES FOR DISMISSAL FROM THE OLYMPIC VILLAGE (To be 
provided to all athletes upon arrival)

1) Failing to use appropriate cliches in interviews

You should now have all received your Olympic Handbook of Officially Approved 
Sporting Cliches to be used depending on how you fare in your chosen sporting 
arena. You may 'thank mum and dad for all their support' in victory and/or 
attribute it to your 'Aussie spirit'. In defeat, you may reveal that you 'gave 
it your best shot, but just weren't good enough on the day'. While we will also 
tolerate and, in some cases encourage, malapropism-based variations on approved 
cliches, any fallback to actual human dialogue expressing genuine, considered 
thought on your emotional state remains strictly forbidden.

2) Not being drunk (rugby sevens players only) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/nov/18/australia-sportsmen-drinking-wallabies-dublin>

Look, officially, we've made it pretty clear we're against anti-social 
behaviour brought upon by excessive alcohol. But you guys are playing a sport 
involving behaviour that would ordinarily have an AVO slapped upon you. We'll 
look the other way if you lot need to have a few drinks. In fact, those of you 
who choosenot to drink and yet indulge in your chosen thuggery will be required 
to undergo psychiatric evaluation.

3) Losing to New Zealand

It's New Zealand. You know the drill. Don't lose to New Zealand. Losing to 
Great Britain is also strongly discouraged and will result in an official 
warning and a possible position in a future Australian Ashes squad.

4) Competing in the wrong sport

Come on, guys. We know none of you really want to play badminton, but you 
can't just wander off to play another sport. Let's keep some form of structure 
here and compete in one event only. (Ellyse Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/18/ellyse-perry-lisa-de-vanna-w-league>
 may apply for special dispensation.)

5) Wearing the Australian flag as a toga

Not just togas either. The following makeshift clothing items made from 
Australian flags will also result in removal from the village: neckerchiefs, 
sombreros and any form of safari suit. As always, exceptions will be made based 
on cultural and religious grounds, although let's try to keep the inventing of 
religions to a reasonable level, okay? This isn't 2000 BC.

6) Inappropriate use of HeroFaxes 
<http://anneknock.com/2012/07/28/the-olympics-as-a-marker-for-technological-progress-from-hero-faxes-in-1992-to-tweets-wifi-and-apps-in-2012/>

Yes, we know you'd rather just have messages of support tweeted, Facebooked, 
Instagrammed or Snapchatted to you. But some of the older fans of Australian 
sport aren't on social media and still prefer to send their messages via a fax 
machine. Accept their choice and treat the HeroFaxes with the respect they 
deserve. Remember, you can justask for more toilet paper.

7) Fighting Olympic mascots

Of course they're annoying as hell. We all know that. But, honestly, let's try 
not to start street brawls with the Olympic mascots. Leave that kind of 
nonsense for Disneyland where it belongs.

8) Making sniggering jokes about the title 'Chef de Mission'

It's French, people. Look it up. Anybody caught prank-calling the chef de 
mission and asking if he could 'whip up a croquembouche' will be instantly 
terminated from the team. Furthermore, you should be aware that implementing 
the prank call via a Matt Preston impression may result in criminal prosecution.

9) Being Nick D'Arcy

Self-explanatory.

End note

As always, all bans will be immediately reversed should you happen to win a 
gold medal.
 