
We're a week in, the Olympic Stadium is finally open, the Central Line is 
temporarily shut, and I'm not leaving my chair in any case. Actually I did make 
a brief personal appearance at the boxing on Thursday (row 27, that was me) to 
watch Anthony Ogogo win, without really understanding why.

The boxers were tied after three rounds – 18 points each – and when they went 
to countback, where all the judges' scores are added up, it was still tied. 
Then everyone started cheering, I joined in lamely and went home scratching my 
head. What happened?

It turns out that after the second tie the judges resorted to pushing their 
emergency red or blue buttons to decide the bout. Ogogo's opponent later 
appealed, but the decision was upheld. I didn't find any of this out until I 
bought a paper on Friday morning. It was an interesting experiment in frontline 
spectatorship, but frankly it's good to be back in front of the telly.

********

With a dozen Olympics events at my fingertips, I'm better placed to cheer the 
sporting success of my people: Plastic Brits. Like them, I came to this country 
for mercenary reasons – I can't imagine qualifying to write an Olympic diary in 
the land of my birth – and I celebrate anyone whose sense of national identity 
is flexible enough to do the same.

I'm not even a true Plastic Brit because I don't have UK citizenship – it 
costs £750! – but I have nothing but admiration for anyone who would part with 
that sort of money just to be able to play handball on an unremarkable team. 
Imagine the TV you could buy with 750 quid.

*******

The Olympian ethics of losing on purpose are almost as difficult to parse as 
the government's stance on which kinds of tax evasion are best: crashing bike 
intentionally OK; deliberately serving into the badminton net, not OK.

At least the British cyclist who allegedly crashed on purpose, Philip Hindes, 
has an excuse for his rash admission: he's German-born, and his English isn't 
perfect. One might assume the fault lies with the rules under which losing 
confers some kind of advantage. If losing on purpose is a strategy for winning, 
then it's not really losing, is it? It's just taking healthy competition to the 
next level. I said as much to the Inland Revenue, but they still made me pay 
the fine.

*******

Question of the day: how many times over the course of his career will a 
top-level trampolinist have to hear Jump by Van Halen?

*****

On the subject of spectatorial slopes being named after sporting heroes in the 
manner of Murray Mount (formerly Henman Hill) – or, more recently, Ben's Nevis, 
down in Weymouth – John Cavell emails a suggestion: "While a venue rather than 
a viewing promontory, shouldn't the velodrome be known as the Caven Dish?"

This is wrong for two reasons, John. Firstly, it doesn't conform to the 
traditional first name/word-beginning-same-letter format. And second, Mark 
Cavendish isn't even competing in the track cycling, although he is 
commentating. But the contributions aren't exactly flooding in, so on this 
occasion, I'll allow it.
 