
Roland Barthes once remarked that the face of Greta Garbo was an idea, that of 
Audrey Hepburn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn> an event. 
The idea, in Garbo's case, was Platonic, a severely abstract dream of 
perfection. The event or events were the thoughts and emotions that flickered 
like a magic lantern show across Hepburn's quizzical features. It's never clear 
whether she is laughing or about to cry, a vulnerable child or an alluring 
woman. She had, as the musical directed by Stanley Donen proclaims, a uniquely 
funny face.

Barthes was contrasting essence and existence, and Funny Face is about Hepburn 
as the embodiment of existentialism, the philosophical doctrine that emphasised 
our dangerous freedom to make ourselves up as we go along. She plays a sniffy 
intellectual, discovered by a fashion magazine during a photoshoot in a 
Greenwich Village bookshop. Fred Astaire is the photographer who persuades her 
to travel to Paris to model, which she does so that she can sit at the feet of 
a guru – actually as modish as the designers and stylists she despises – who 
preaches a nonsensical theory of "basal metabolism" in a Left Bank cabaret, 
surrounded by jazz-dancing beatniks. It's the same story recently retold inThe 
Devil Wears Prada, though Anne Hathaway is a modern woman who priggishly 
rejects the temptations offered by Meryl Streep, whereas Hepburn, romanced by 
Astaire with the help of some Cole Porter songs, happily consents to be 
beautiful rather than brainy.

Here Hepburn is caught on the street outside her guru's smoky den, joking with 
the extras between takes. Under her raincoat she is dressed in black, the 
costume of the self-dramatising existentialists, with her sleeves industriously 
rolled up. The motor scooter is a streamlined 50s icon: existentialism was 
about living fast, and its praise of our radical liberty was fuelled, as the 
cafe table reveals, by cigarettes and drink.

Bert Hardy, a gritty realist who worked for the magazine Picture Post, 
photographed Hepburn in black and white, without the candy-coloured luminosity 
Donen turned on for the scenes inside the nightclub. If he thought he was going 
to demystify her, he was wrong. The elfin funny face is up to its tricks, 
beaming with mischief. And what precisely is the event? She might be planting 
her hands on her hips to deliver a stern lecture, or be about to pull a cheeky 
surprise from her pocket. She needs no gauzes over the lens, and can even 
dispense with spotlights: she radiates brightness and warmth, making Garbo seem 
as frigid as the midnight sun. Whatever charisma is – and it means a gift of 
grace, a supernatural blessing – it has been captured here.
 