
Granada


The timber ceilings and rough-cut stone floor at the Hotel Ladrón de Agua give 
the rooms a rustic air, which might be surprising, given that it's in the heart 
of one of Andalucía's best-loved cities. Surprising until, that is, you look 
out from the balcony and across the narrow street. With the Darro river in 
front, burbling its way through high banks lined with trees and tangled bushes, 
this is a part of town which has welcomed the country right inside. In fact, 
Granada as a whole is a city that seems determined to have it all, country life 
and urban living: it is home to the "world's most beautiful building", the 
Alhambra, but within 30 minutes' drive of both world-class skiing and the 
beach. On top of all this, the Ladrón de Agua makes a claim for the place as a 
centre of literature, too, with a serene library off the central patio and 
rooms named after local poets, such as Federico García Lorca.
• +34 958 215 040, ladrondeagua.com <http://www.ladrondeagua.com>. Doubles 
from €76 a night

Where to eat With the first glass of wine (€2) at traditional tapas bar 
Chantarela, a large chunk of tuna arrives. With the second,brochetas de cerdo 
(fat medallions of pork). We didn't need a third.
• 18 Calle Aguila, +34 958 252 068

What to see With its smooth arches, slender pillars and exquisitely carved 
sky-lights El Bañuelo, Granada's ancient Arabic bath complex, still makes 
bathing look like the ultimate symbol of civilisation.
• +34 958 229 738, alhambra.info/en/banuelo.asp  
<http://alhambra.info/en/banuelo.asp>

Seville

 Las Casas de la Judería, Seville. Photograph: Harry Macias 
Arriving at the Las Casas de la Judería hotel you'd be forgiven for giving up 
and flinging your smartphone and map at the wall. It's hard enough to find your 
way here through Santa Cruz, Seville's gleaming, well-preserved and gloriously 
confusing old Jewish district – that the interior of the hotel replicates Santa 
Cruz in miniature, with its own labyrinth of romantic courtyards, fountains and 
corridors linking 18 medieval houses, may seem too much to take. However, the 
staff are used to helping confused visitors find their bearings and the rooms, 
while slightly worn, still have the grandeur of Seville's golden age. A few 
days of being lost here, as in Seville itself, are no hardship at all.
• +34 954 415 150, lascasasdelajuderiaseville.spainhotels.it 
<http://lascasasdelajuderiaseville.spainhotels.it/>, doubles from €111 a night

Where to eat Bar Ambigu in the Macarena barrio (where the girl in the song was 
from) doesn't look much but for €7.50 the set lunch menu is paradise for the 
stingy gourmet.
• 47 Calle Feria, +34 954 381 015

What to see Seville's Alcázar palace, all leafy patios, tumbling fountains and 
graceful arches, looks typically Arabic but it was actually built by the 
unfortunately named Christian ruler Pedro the Cruel.
• +34 954 502 324, alcazarsevilla.org <http://www.alcazarsevilla.org/>

Jerez
 Enjoy sherry and art at Bodegas Tradición 
It's highly impressive that, on a Tuesday afternoon, with about five minutes' 
notice, Juan Carlos, the co-manager at old-town Jerez guesthouseLa Fonda 
Barranco, has managed to find us an improvised flamenco performance. Even more 
impressive is that, after we race across town to the bar, he soon starts 
joining in with an emotional but melodic vocal himself. The owners of this 
19th-century merchant's house can't guarantee a taste of authentic flamenco 
singing every Tuesday but they do their best to make sure that guests see the 
real Jerez. It's a town which, with the white-wash flaking off the ancient 
walls, is less well-cared for than Seville or Córdoba but which, arguably, has 
a more authentic charm. That charm is equally on display at the guesthouse 
itself, with its eight simple rooms, terrace with views over the cathedral and 
breakfast served in a central, marble-floored patio.
• +34 956 332 141, lafondabarranco.es 
<http://www.lafondabarranco.es/EN/Welcome.html>. Doubles from €65 a night B&B

Where to eat As well as being the site of improvised flamenco performances, 
the Tabanco El Guitarrón de San Pedro also does fine tapas such as meaty tuna 
topped with sticky, caramelised onion.
• 16 Calle Bizcocheros, +34 649 656 918

What to see Local wine-maker Bodegas Tradición not only offers a great sherry 
tasting, its tour takes in a private art collection of a quality you'd expect 
to see in the Prado, including splendidly gloomy and morbid El Grecos.
• +34 956 168 628, bodegastradicion.es <http://www.bodegastradicion.es/>

Córdoba

 Balcón de Córdoba. Photograph: Trevor Baker 
Walk into the courtyard of the Balcón de Córdoba in spring and the first thing 
that hits you is the smell of orange blossom from the 150-year-old tree in the 
centre. There are birds singing and the sounds of the busy, touristy centre are 
muffled by the high walls. Five hundred years ago, this 10-room hotel was a 
convent, one of many built around the ancientmezquita (mosque) while it was 
converted into a cathedral. It retains a peaceful, secluded air, as well as 
many original touches such as the small, seed-shaped cobbles in the patio and 
blue-and-whiteazulejo tiles in the lobby. The rooms, though, are modern, 
elegant and luxurious. One has wooden stairs leading to its own private, 
rooftop terrace, complete with bed and views over the cathedral.
• +34 957 498 478, balcondecordoba.com <http://www.balcondecordoba.com/>. 
Doubles from €216 a night B&B

Where to eat Umami reworks local salmorejo, a kind of thicker version of 
gazpacho, in dozens of ways, including an unexpectedly great version with 
beetroot and mango.
• +34 957 482 347, salmorejeriaumami.com <http://salmorejeriaumami.com/>

What to see Palacio de Viana's five leafy patios are all very different but 
they each express the yearning of people from a hot, dry city for greenery, 
flowers and water.
• +34 957 496 741, palaciodeviana.com <http://www.palaciodeviana.com/>

Ronda

 Ronda, in Andalucía, would be worth visiting even if it wasn't stuck on the 
edge of a dramatic hole in the ground. Photograph: Alamy 
There's nothing like a 100-metre deep canyon to put even the most impressive 
town in the shade. Ronda, probably the best-known of Andalucía's white-washed
pueblos blancos, would be worth visiting even if it wasn't stuck on the edge of 
an enormous hole in the ground, but it's the vertiginous views across the gorge 
that have attracted visitors from Hemingway to Michelle Obama. They also 
attracted Basque native Marivi Ramirez, who's clearly spent a fortune on her 
four-bedroom guesthouse,Aire de Ronda. With details like sparkling Murano glass 
floors in the bathrooms and original fittings, such as the heavy, 17th-century 
door, it has the elegance of a boutique hotel and the comfort and friendliness 
of a family home. Just what you need after Ronda's vertigo-defying views.
• +34 952 161 274, airederonda.com <http://www.airederonda.com/>. Doubles from 
€82 a night B&B

Where to eat Try the sweet, firm jamón at Casa de Locos but make sure you book 
– there are only four tables.
• +34 605 768 408, de-locos-tapas.com <http://de-locos-tapas.com>)

What to see The view from Puente Nuevo (the new bridge) over the canyon is 
among the most dramatic in Spain.

Baza caves, Granada

 Cave roofs at Al Jatib Photograph: Trevor Baker 
After a few days at Cuevas Al Jatib, you might start to wonder why we don't 
still live in caves. From at least the 18th century, until they were largely 
abandoned in the 1960s, these holes in the south Granada countryside were 
family homes. Now they're among the best of the many cave hotels in this part 
of the province. Gleaming white inside (they're repainted once a year) and with 
a "chimney" in the centre for fresh air, they feel surprisingly light and airy 
but the rough-hewn walls ensure that anyone with Fred or Wilma Flintstone 
fantasies will be in their element. What's more, the view from the terrace at 
breakfast or, even better, at dusk, when the distant blue mountains turn a 
delicate pink, is magnificent.
• +34 958 342 248, aljatib.com <http://www.aljatib.com/>. From €364 a week for 
a five-person cave

Where to eat Drive into the pretty, nearby town of Baza and stop off at 
Restaurante Los Moriscos, for meltingly softcazón en adobo (marinated, 
deep-fried dogfish).
• 2 Calle de la Cava Alta, Baza, +34 958 703 632

What to do Al Jatib has its own Arab baths with hot and warm pools, as well as 
a bracingly cold shower.

Cabo de Gata, Almería

 La Joya de Cabo de Gata, Almería 
Approaching the Cabo de Gata national park by road, it's not hard to see why 
Sergio Leone chose to film For a Few Dollars More here. The dry, cracked hills 
of Spain's only real desert make convincing badlands. However, staying atLa 
Joya de Cabo de Gata, a complex of four farmhouses a couple of kilometres from 
the coast and the nearest village, gives you a different view. It has numerous 
delightful touches, including an outdoor bed next to the swimming pool, an 
Arabian-style tent for glamping and a jaccuzi where you can watch the 
technicolour desert sunsets. The real charm of the area, however, is the walk 
across country to beaches that are impossible to access any other way. At Cala 
Enmedio you're two kilometres from the nearest road and a million miles from 
the popular image of Spain's costas.
• +34 619 159 587, lajoyadecabodegata.com <http://www.lajoyadecabodegata.com/>
. Doubles from €110 a night

Where to eat Fish restaurant El Pescador, 20 minutes' drive away in 
Carboneras, is a family affair: the father catches the fish, the mother cooks 
it and their daughter serves it.
• Calle Sorbas, +34 950 454 257

What to do 100 metres from La Joya, there's the Hípica Aguamarga riding 
school, where they offer pony rides for kids and horse-riding for those who 
still want to be Clint Eastwood.
• +34 628 075 041

Conil de la Frontera, Cadiz

 Cadiz 's old quarter from Torre Tavira. Photograph: Alamy 
The fact that the typical sign you'll see outside restaurants in Conil de la 
Frontera, 30 minutes east of Cadiz, iscaracoles para llevar (snails to take 
away) is a hint that the main concern around here is not the foreign tourist 
market. They seem to have left all that to the Costa del Sol, an hour or so 
east. The main reason for staying at theHostal La Posada, though, is that it's 
one of the best value places for those who want to enjoy the wind and water 
sports on the Costa de la Luz's spectacularly unspoilt beaches. Although it 
only has eight rooms, some with their own terrace (useful for leaving that 
awkward surf board), it has two sun-terraces and a swimming pool.
• +34 956 444 171, laposadadeconil.com <http://laposadadeconil.com/>. Doubles 
from €38 a night B&B

Where to eat If you get bored of snails, La Plaza, on the outskirts of town, 
does a salad with a semi-carpaccio of local tuna that's very different to 
anything you've had from a tin.
• Calle Hijuela de Lojo, +34 856 905 045

What to do Based in Conil, Trafalgar Surf provides bargain surf lessons, as 
well as yoga classes for those who want to be a bit more zen.
• +34 657 885 665. Five days' surfing, including a two-hour lesson each day 
and an afternoon supervised practice session, costs €150; three yoga classes €27

Cazorla national park, Jaen

 Mesón Leandro restaurant, Cazorla, near Jaen 
Jaén is Andalucía's forgotten province, perhaps because its capital city can't 
quite match Granada, Seville or Córdoba for charm. However, its 2,000 
square-kilometre Cazorla national park, the biggest in Spain and second biggest 
in Europe, has long been a destination for visitors looking to get back to 
nature. This is the main selling point of theCamping Cortijo San Isício. With a 
campsite spread out over a terraced hill it's very easy to find a shaded spot 
beneath one of the almond or walnut trees, where you won't have to share the 
gorgeous views with anybody else. In the woods nearby, you'll also find boar 
and red deer, among other wildlife. Sadly, or not, the wolves and bears who 
used to roam these woods have long been extinct.
• 34 953 721 280, campingcortijo.com <http://www.campingcortijo.com/>. Adult 
€4.50, child €3.50, €3.50-€5 per tent

Where to eat At Mesón Leandro restaurant in nearby the village of Cazorla you 
can get even closer to nature, with fried partridge meatballs.
• +34 953 720 632, mesonleandro.com <http://www.mesonleandro.com/>

What to see Nearby village Cazorla is the unlikely host of one of Spain's 
biggest blues festivals, celebrating its 20th anniversary this year (24-26 July)
• +34 953 720 464, cazorla.es <http://www.cazorla.es/bluescazorla06/>

Sierra de Aracena, Huelva

 Molino Río Alájar, Huelva 
At night, outside one of Molino Río Alájar's six stone cottages, many city 
dwellers will realise two things. One, that there are far more stars in the sky 
than you ever imagined; here in rural northern Huelva there's very little light 
pollution. And two, just how noisy "peace and quiet" can be. That rustling 
sound could be the farm's donkeys moving in the paddock, the wind in the 
chestnut trees or Dutch owners' Peter and Monica Mulder's dogs out for a 
pre-bedtime stroll. But the cottages, although pleasingly rustic with open 
fires, terracotta floors and solid-looking stone walls, are not entirely cut 
off from civilisation. They surround a swimming pool and a tennis court, as 
well as a social area with table tennis and table football. For early risers 
freaked out by too much "peace and quiet", there's also a bus every morning at 
7am from the nearest village – pretty Alájar, with its impossibly narrow, 
cobbled streets, to Seville.
• +34 959 501 282, molinorioalajar.com 
<http://www.molinorioalajar.com/english/home.htm>. Cottages from €105 a night

Where to eat  El Padrino in Alájar is the place to experience the area's 
almost religious devotion to pig meat, not just the local acorn-fedjamón but 
the softpresa iberica, shoulder cuts.
• 2 Plaza de Miguel Moya, +34 959 125 601

What to see The Sierra de Aracena is one of Spain's most popular areas for 
bird-watchers, with the chance to see (and hear) nightingales, golden eagles, 
ravens and rare black vultures.

Train trips were provided by Renfe, renfe.com 
<http://www.renfe.com/EN/viajeros/>
 