
This December, in the rural village of Mlongoti, northern Malawi, Ethel Zgambo 
will finish her vocational studies. On completion, she will be presented with a 
sewing machine that will enable her to earn a regular income and possibly start 
her own business. Ethel is just one of 16.6 million orphans of HIV/Aids living 
across the globe, according to the latest UNAids global report. 90% of these 
live in sub-Saharan Africa.

But, Ethel's outcome was nearly very different. Orphaned six years ago, Ethel 
was a 10 year old girl looking after her three younger siblings and her ailing 
grandfather. She was forced to leave school to earn money to feed her family. 
The income she generated from selling maize was never enough to feed a family 
of five and they often went for days without food. This hunger and poverty led 
Ethel to become exploited by men. By the time she was 15 she was a single 
mother of two.

"She was contemplating suicide, because she had no hope. A lot of children go 
to bed with no hope." Rev Mercy Wood, the founder of Wood World Missions (WWM) 
reflects. Her grassroots charity is inspired by her own painful experiences as 
an orphan in Akwamu, Eastern Ghana and as she left Africa over 20 years ago, 
she promised to return."I went through hell. I had a vow to make."

She had first found Ethel clutching her swollen belly, severely malnourished. 
She needed hospital treatment, but could not afford the taxi fare to the 
hospital.

For many children in Africa, losing one's parents is the start of a sequence 
of events that escalate into lifelong issues. But before they are orphaned, 
families' incomes degenerate as the wage earner falls sick. From a young age, 
orphans will almost certainly be affected by stigma. The mere association with 
Aids can cause children to be ostracised by their peers, as communities refer 
to the virus as a curse, and those with it, or associated with it, cursed. 
Because of its connection to sexual behaviours such as prostitution and 
homosexuality; children, who may be high risk for testing HIV positive, view 
Aids as a dirty word, and will not seek treatment.

Phil Wood, the founder of Hope HIV, explains how well-meaning NGOs create 
stigma by just serving children who are known to be orphans of HIV/Aids. "More 
knowledgable NGOs focus on orphans and vulnerable children (OVC), so that 
minimises stigma within communities. It helps to have a more inclusive 
development philosophy. You can't discriminate, when there's extreme poverty."

Orphans are usually placed in the care of the extended family. But as the 
number of orphans has inexorably risen, extended families become overburdened 
with children, and child-headed households are becoming increasingly common. To 
care for their siblings, children are often forced to abandon their education 
to find work, further inhibiting their employability as an adult. Church-based 
organisations have proved instrumental in keeping this family unit together, 
visiting homes and providing social care and support to orphans.

Rev Wood's values lie in vocational and technical education: alleviating 
children's poverty by equipping them with skills to become self-sufficient. Her 
methods are cost-effective: £10 a month puts each orphan through vocational 
school. Her approach echoes the sentiments of many other small NGOs, yet small 
NGOs so often struggle with financing.

Though these solutions are relatively inexpensive, people are reluctant to 
give money to African aid projects. Whilst the mounting skepticism surrounding 
corruption prevents large amounts of financial aid from getting through, 
concerns are also growing that larger NGOs are flitting away money on 
unnecessary luxuries such as SUVs and plush hotels. Rev Wood is frustrated. 
"They use millions to build just one thing. Give me £50,000 and I can build a 
whole community!"

Battling cynisism against unwilling donors is difficult when faced with 
constant reaffirmations concerning government corruption, such as the recent 
story on former Malian minister, Oumar Ibrahim Toure, who resigned in January 
following allegations that $563,000 aid money for vaccines had been misused.

In Zambia, half of all children orphaned by Aids do not live with their 
siblings. Zambia remains one of the worst affected countries in terms of 
providing care for orphans. According to the latest UNAids global report, there 
has been a steady decline in five areas of support, and OVC are more than 30% 
more likely not to attend school than they were five years ago. This delay in 
moving forward seems due to the government's slow response in publicly 
recognising the emergency. In the early 90s, although the approximation was 
that one in five adults had contracted the virus, neither the press nor the 
government mentioned Aids. It was swept under the carpet, and it was this 
silence that the Zambian, and other sub-Saharan governments kept, that 
aggravated the Aids epidemic and in turn the number of children orphaned.

The exact number of orphans living on the streets is not known, but in 
Nairobi, where there are estimated to be 30,000 Aids orphans sleeping rough, 
gangs of children congregate. There are benefits to being in a gang, such as 
companionship and protection. But the benefits end there. Street-children are 
exceptionally vulnerable. With no adult guidance; it is not uncommon for 
children to be involved in prostitution, drug use, begging and thieving.

Ungudu, a Kenyan organisation partnered with Hope HIV, target street gangs. By 
providing such things as micro-finance loans, they encourage the start up of 
small businesses. Their focus is economical empowerment through technical and 
vocational education, ultimately reintegrating children back into the community.

Children like Ethel may have come to rely on small NGOs, but it remains in the 
national and international government's interest to take note from these 
grassroots organisations. They could do so much more.

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 