
Media represents our collective means of storytelling, and as media 
professionals we are society’s guardians of those stories.


Going back to the roots of storytelling when we sat around fires in close-knit 
tribes, our stories served the needs of those tribes. We told them to protect 
one another, to share ideas and knowledge, to express emotion.

As our tribes have grown and diversified over millennia, the purpose and the 
hue of our stories have shifted, reflecting both the benevolent and the 
destructive nature of humanity. At the same time, we have been brought closer 
together as the interconnected nature of social, economic, and environmental 
life on this planet has been made clear.

Once again it seems that we are back to living in one tribe, where our 
behaviour impacts and affects everyone else. Global supply chains, 
environmental pollution, economic shifts, and trends in fashion, music and 
sport send ripples around the world.

Thanks to the advent of the online age, our media landscape is now truly 
global. Our stories reverberate around the world. With this new paradigm comes 
responsibility. Once again our stories can serve the whole tribe’s needs, but 
this time the tribe is much bigger.

This awareness of the impact of our stories has led to the emergence of an 
ever-growing group of media professionals, entrepreneurs and content creators 
who are examining the purpose and consequence of their work. In doing so, they 
are looking to create more engaging, meaningful and impactful stories, 
breathing clarity into their work and creating greater engagement, trust and 
loyalty amongst their audiences.

This process began in London in 2012 at the inaugural staging of the 
Transformational Media Summit, where organisers and attendees began a 
conversation focused on the meaning of media and storytelling. The aim was to 
create a blueprint to enable the world to better realise our individual and 
collective potential through storytelling.

This year the Transformational Media Summit <http://www.tmsummit.org/> will 
take place in Washington, DC from October 26 - November 2 and will be sponsored 
by the United Nations Foundation. Change-makers, storytellers and media 
professionals from around the globe - including MTV Staying Alive Foundation 
CEO Georgia Arnold, Aric Noboa, president of Discovery Learning Alliance and 
Sean Dagan Wood from Positive News - will take to the stage to explore how we 
can use our creativity and passion for storytelling and different forms of 
media to create lasting and positive social impact on a global scale.

I hope you can join us there. 

Jeremy Wickremer is co-founder of the Transformational Media Initiative 
<http://www.transformationalmediainitiative.org/>, a global network of 
change-makers, storytellers and media professionals committed to using their 
talents and creativity to collaborate for good.Find him on Twitter 
@transformingmed <https://twitter.com/TransformingMed>


For more information on the Transformational Media Summit and to register 
followthis link <http://www.tmsummit.org>. 
 