
Landing, through thick cloud and splattering rain, at a small desert airstrip 
on a grey afternoon in the Sahara, is an unsettling experience. The desert, 
after all, is supposed to be sunny. But as the wind rattled the airport steps 
at Djanet, in the far south-east of Algeria, and big, hot raindrops turned the 
Saharan sand blood-red, I thought for a moment of retreating for home.

The thought didn't last. Sandstorms and rainstorms are as much part of desert 
life as blue skies and sun; winter is winter wherever you are and snow is not 
unknown on the vast, high rock mountains stranded amid the dunes that roll 
across the desert for hundreds of miles.

Algeria is unfamiliar to the British, though it is the world's 11th-largest 
country, second in Africa only to Sudan. Its ties with Europe lie firmly with 
the old colonial master France, though the relationship between the two 
countries is uneasy. Any curiosity British travellers may show is rebuffed by 
the difficulty of getting there - few direct flights from London and none to 
the south - and of getting in, with invitations needed for visas.

A gruesome decade-long civil war that left 100,000 dead has deterred travel 
too, though violence has subsided and the Foreign Office does not advise 
against visiting. Certainly the French are arriving there in growing numbers, 
to walk through desert landscapes of astonishing beauty and austerity.

For the desert is not dull, nor uniform, despite cliches derived from Beau 
Geste-like images: sand and mirages and nothing else. It takes time to adjust 
eyes accustomed to water and green fields, to the grandeur and extremes of the 
Sahara, but over time the power and variety of the landscape becomes clear.

I cheated by flying straight in on a charter plane from Paris, a sudden 
transformation from northern Europe to Africa, on a flight full of fit French 
men and women in tan trousers and white flowing headscarves. In truth you can 
walk in the desert in trainers, but the French like to do these things 
elegantly equipped.

I was met by Mohammed, a Toureg guide, and his deputy, a silent man swathed in 
a great golden cloak, both waiting with two battered white Land Cruisers, jerry 
cans full of fuel and water strapped to the roof. The cars were packed with 
fresh food at the start of a five-day walk.

We drove deep into the desert, first on tarmac, on the road north to Algiers 
(the distance-markers ticking off the kilometres to the capital, more than 2000 
of them) then through sand and scrub to our start. By now, the sun was working 
its way through the clouds, and that night the stars came out in their 
thousands in a coal-black sky miles from the nearest electric light.

We ate as the sun set, simply but well, around a campfire that was burning on 
the sand. Our food was cooked by Abdullah, a tall, jokey enthusiast for desert 
life who went on to produce days' of fine salads and soups from a small gas 
stove and crates of vegetables carried with us on camel back.

The plan for the next few days was simple. Our small group, six of us from 
Britain and two from France, would work our way through the canyons and crags 
of the Tassili N'Ajjers, a high, black rock plateau that lies on the border 
with Libya.

We walked with - and once rode on - a small team of camels, who carried our 
food and water as they gorged on desert flowers sprouting after the rains.

While they munched, we started what became a routine: breakfast of strong 
campfire coffee and bread, which became more stale by the day, then a morning's 
walk across sand and rock, sometimes hidden in gullies and sometimes at the top 
of great rock ridges.

We spent the middle of each day asleep, or reading, under the shade of the 
remarkable, slow-growing thorn trees that survive everywhere, in a desert where 
logic says nothing should grow. After a lunch of salad, we walked again through 
the afternoon as the sun set and the rock took on vivid colours.

Each night we slept on the sand, wrapped in sleeping bags and blankets, the 
stars above us and the camels plodding around us in the dark. The cry of birds, 
and jackals hunting, broke through the silence. So, one night, did the roar of 
wind up the valley as a sandstorm hit our small camp, blowing dust into 
everything while we wrapped our sleeping bags around our heads and waited for 
the storm to die back before excavating our belongings at daybreak.

The storm did pass, though the sky took on a strange, thick, grey appearance, 
like silty fog, as the sand settled.

The walking was not hard - though some might find it beyond them - and it was 
not hot. Winter temperatures do not rise much above 30C, the air bright and 
clear at altitude. Nights are cold; once it dropped to below freezing, which 
without a tent, makes a good down sleeping bag something more than a luxury.

But the simple pleasures of a campfire, a mugful of whisky and a book read by 
torch-light made the long, dark nights something to look forward to.

We met our Land Cruisers again after a week, a long drive from where we had 
started, and roared back up the road to the oasis of Djanet. Mobile phones 
beeped as civilisation returned, though Djanet itself was still small and 
remote.

A stereotypical desert village, all date palms and white buildings, we slept 
badly in the old officers' quarters of the French army barracks. The water ran 
out, putting paid to dreams of showers before Paris, and there was no beer in a 
place that was dry in every sense.

But that was in keeping with the spirit of the desert. So was the butcher's 
shop at the end of an alley nearby, the nature of the fresh meat for sale made 
indisputably clear by the camel's head sat on a wooden block outside.

Next door a small cafe sold sweet glasses of mint tea and pancakes, and not 
far beyond the desert began, the sand and the rocks climbing upwards towards 
the sky. Nothing in any direction for hundreds of miles but emptiness, a 
landscape calling out to be walked through.

Way to go

Julian Glover travelled with Point Afrique Voyages, www.point-afrique.com 
<http://www.point-afrique.com>
 