
 Karim Hagui - Tunisia Age 20  Club: Stade Tunisien 


 Without doubt the tournament's best young player, Karim Hagui was simply a 
revelation. The 20-year-old's form at right-back was so good that Tunisia's 
best player, Ajax's half-fit Hatem Trabelsi, was not really missed and even 
when he did come on as a substitute Hagui showed he is just as comfortable in 
midfield or at left-back.

In the final he replaced the suspended Khaled Badra in central defence and 
scarcely put a foot wrong, and there can be no complaints about his temperament 
either. It was he who scored the winning penalty in the semi-final shoot-out 
against Nigeria.

Hagui, solid defensively and quick to get forward, seems to have everything it 
takes to become a world-class player. He is a new face even for Tunisians, 
having made his international debut only in October, but in the space of the 
past three weeks he has become a national icon.

Hagui plays for Stade Tunisien, one of the better teams in the Tunisian 
league, but a move to a European club surely beckons.

 Youssef Hadji - Morocco, Age 23  Club:  Bastia 


 He looks exactly like his older brother Moustapha - once of Coventry and 
Aston Villa but now on a short-term deal with Espanyol in Spain - but arguably 
has the talent to be a better player than the 1998 African footballer of the 
year.

Despite coming into the competition as a reserve, Youssef Hadji, right, was a 
major reason why Morocco made it to the final. He came off the bench in the 
Atlas Lions' opening game against Nigeria to score the only goal, and then 
notched important goals in the quarter- and semi-finals.

The 23-year-old usually plays as an attacking midfielder but has shown he is 
more than capable of playing up front, too. He has fantastic technique, quick 
feet and seems to fear nothing.

Hadji disappointed somewhat in the final, however, and never really looked 
like scoring, but he did show another side to his game, producing a deft cross 
for Morocco's goal. He plays in the French league for Bastia and has scored 
half a dozen goals for the Corsican club this season.

 Vincent Enyeama - Nigeria Age 21  Club:  Enyimba 


 In recent years goalkeeper has been a problem position for the Super Eagles 
but in Vincent Enyeama they have found a man to banish the nightmare memories 
of Peter Rufai and Ike Shorunmu.

Enyeama is not a novice to big competition, having played against England at 
the 2002 World Cup finals, but this was the first tournament in which he 
started as Nigeria's No1. He did not disappoint, either, and a series of solid 
displays saw him voted into the official team of the tournament.

A save in that World Cup match against England best demonstrates his talent. A 
rocket shot from Paul Scholes seemed destined to hit the net but Enyeama's 
reflexes and agility enabled him to tip the shot on to the woodwork. The game 
finished goalless.

On top of all that, Enyeama was also a key member of the Enyimba side that won 
the 2003 African Champions League.

His only shortcoming is size - he could do with being a couple of inches 
taller - but there is no doubting his talent.

 Dennis Oliech - Kenya, Age 19  Club:  Al Arabia 


 Dennis Oliech came into the finals charged with providing Kenya's attacking 
thrust. It proved to be quite a responsibility for a 19-year-old who had mainly 
been used as a substitute in his international career.

Group games against Mali and Senegal provided glimpses of his evident talent, 
but the experienced defences of both those big-name teams rendered him 
scoreless.

Oliech was into the swing of things in the Harambee Stars' final game, 
however, scoring a goal and making two others, the second with a cute backheel.

He has pace and dribbling ability in abundance, but will need to work on his 
left foot: the Senegalese and Malians simply funnelled him away from his 
dangerous right side.

Oliech plays for Al Arabi in the Qatari league but his dream is to play for 
Arsenal. Although such a move is surely out of the immediate question, he 
certainly has the talent to shine elsewhere in Europe.

 Pascal Feindouno - Guinea Age  22  Club:  Bordeaux 


 Pascal Feindouno should be no surprise to British scouts - after all he 
scored for Bordeaux against Hearts in the Uefa Cup this season - but in Tunisia 
he gave further proof of his undoubted quality.

Capable of playing as an out-and-out striker, Feindouno is at his best on the 
right wing, where his speed, quick feet and crossing ability make him a 
fearsome prospect. He has an eye for goal, too, scoring against the Democratic 
Republic of Congo and Mali.

But his most impressive contributions were a sublime chip in that Congo match 
which landed on top of the bar and a 50-yard pass to set up Titi Camara against 
Rwanda was even better.

Feindouno is halfway through his sixth season in the French league, although 
he looks older than his 22 years, and has already expressed a desire to move to 
one of Europe's biggest leagues. He certainly has the game to shine wherever he 
goes.
 