
When I was at primary school, the day would end with 30 children sitting 
cross-legged on a piece of thin polyester matting and listening, for half an 
hour until home time at 3.30pm, to a few chapters of a book read to us by the 
teacher. When I was nine, Miss Dobbs read usThe Phantom Tollbooth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2011/nov/11/review-phantom-tollbooth>
, Norton Juster’s story of Milo and his adventures with friends Tock the 
watchdog and the Humbug. They journey through Dictionopolis (with a grand 
marketplace where letters are bought by the handful) and Digitopolis (where the 
land is mined for numbers, while rubies, emeralds and diamonds are thrown away 
with the earth). The two capital cities of the Kingdom of Wisdom are ruled by 
two warring brothers – King Azaz the Unabridged and the Mathemagician – who 
have exiled their two sisters, Rhyme and Reason, for refusing to say whether 
words or numbers were the most important. Since then, the kingdom has descended 
into chaos.

I used to love the stillness that settled over us at storytime as the usually 
solitary pleasure of reading was transmuted into a modest kind of communal 
rapture while we followed Milo through the Doldrums, up and down the Foothills 
of Confusion and Mountains of Ignorance, and jumped with him and his companions 
to the Island of Conclusions. On the way, they – and we – met, among many manic 
others, Faintly Macabre (the Not-So-Wicked Which), the tallest dwarf in the 
world (who looked remarkably like the shortest giant in the world), the Awful 
Dynne (who collects sounds for Dr Kakofonous A Dischord) and the .58 boy, who 
is the fifth member of the average American family (at least in 1961, the year 
of the book’s publication) with its two parents and 2.58 children.

The pace, the wit, the invention were dizzying – even if we did only fully 
understand about .58 of it at the time. There was action aplenty, and if you 
didn’t get one joke or pun or piece of wordplay, another would be along in 
a minute. They fell from the pages like sweets tumbling from a bottomless bag. 
But it was a book that, aside from the obvious pleasures of the story, also 
introduced me – via its Lewis Carroll-like love of wordplay, literalism and 
logic to the point of madness – to the notion that words themselves could be 
tools, treasures and toys all in one. They weren’t just markings on a page to 
be passively absorbed and enjoyed.

In a 2011 essay to mark the book’s half-century 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/10/17/broken-kingdom>, Adam Gopnik 
described it as celebrating a love of learning generally, and of an education 
in the liberal arts especially. Milo becomes immersed in a world that does not 
love facts or narrow specialisation, but has a broad appreciation for all the 
marvels waiting to be unveiled. When he returns, he realises that although the 
tollbooth that first took him there has vanished, his books will function as 
portals just as well. This was a message I loved to hear.

The Phantom Tollbooth was the first book I read that wasn’t grounded in 
reality.Narnia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/29/buildingachildrenslibrary.booksforchildrenandteenagers>
 was as far as I had travelled into fantasyland at that point (I wouldn’t meet 
Alice having her adventures in Wonderland for some years yet), but it was still 
recognisably Earthlike, despite a sprinkling of talking animals and ambulant 
vegetation. The purple tollbooth heralded uncharted imaginative territory. Just 
as Milo watched each of the instruments in the kingdom’s orchestra fill the 
land with light and colour (the piccolo produced lemon-yellow shafts of 
sunlight), so I felt my brain light up with possibilities I hadn’t known 
existed.

Juster was a synaesthete and felt intimate connections between words, colours 
and numbers, and it is perhaps because of this that his associations resonate 
so well with readers, even though we are more loosely wired. He was a young 
architect living in a Brooklyn basement flat who received a Ford foundation 
grant of $5,000 to write a book for children about cities. Instead, he began 
scribbling down sections of what would become a book that would endure for 
decades. Above his apartment lived an equally young artist calledJules Feiffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jun/24/uselections2000.usa1>. He became 
interested in Juster’s writing and started to illustrate it with the drawings 
that are now as inseparable from The Phantom Tollbooth as John Tenniel’s are 
from Alice.

Juster took Feiffer’s illustrations with him when he went to show the first 50 
pages of his book to an editor. Flying in the face of the received wisdom of 
the time, which said that children’s books should not contain anything that 
children did not already know, Random House wanted to publish it. By 2011 it 
was estimated to have sold about 40m copies.

In 1983, however, none of these were being sold in the UK. As soon as Miss 
Dobbs had closed the covers on the final instalment, I begged my father to buy 
me my own copy (I had long ago discovered there were none in the school or 
local library). We went to the Greenwich Book Boat – nothing there. We went to 
Dillons in Bromley – which had a COMPUTER that told us it was out of print. It 
is easy to forget how many gatekeepers there are between us and the books we 
want – or do not yet know we want – and this is even more so for children than 
for adults. If Miss Dobbs hadn’t lifted the barrier, when would I have come 
across this lovely book? Almost certainly after the perfect age to meet it, and 
maybe never.

For some reason we didn’t then start scouring secondhand bookshops – maybe Dad 
didn’t think they dealt in children’s books. But I have acquired several copies 
since as a hedge against further deprivation. It remains a masterfully wrought, 
glorious, hilarious, life-affirming read – a celebration of words, ideas, 
sense, nonsense, cleverness and silliness. The piccolo plays and lemon-yellow 
shafts of light dance everywhere.
 