
Hanalee Denny is a daring and fearless heroine, striding around her home town 
of Oregon with a pistol strapped to her leg as she quietly grieves the loss of 
her father, who died in an accident when hit by a drunk driver. As the curtains 
open, we see her on the hunt for Joe, the man who killed her father and who has 
recently been released from prison. He has something to tell her about the 
circumstances of her father’s death, and she leaves the meeting with her head 
spinning with thoughts of murder. Now everyone is under suspicion, and the only 
way to find the true culprit is to speak with her father – or his ghost at 
least. Her troubles don’t end there, for as a biracial girl in 1920s Oregon, 
she already has many enemies, and the Ku Klux Klan is corrupting even her 
strongest friendships. With few legal rights and a family whom she distrusts, 
Hanalee can only rely on herself.

Even though as a ghost story it isn’t exactly historical realism, I felt 
really connected to this ordinary young girl who dreams of being a lawyer yet 
is prevented from achieving her desires, and even laughed at, simply as a 
result of the colour of her skin. Winters certainly doesn’t paint over the 
racism that Hanalee experiences throughout the novel; suggestions of 
skin-bleaching or hair-straightening make the modern reader wince. Social 
injustice is a key theme, as the book also involves a secret gay relationship 
allowing the discussion of the process of eugenics, which helped to realise the 
reality of how anyone part of any minority would have been picked on and hated. 
This is obviously a frightening and scary world, made even more so because it 
was real. The fear in so many books is created by monsters, supernatural 
creatures or sci-fi robots, with protagonists leaping out of aeroplanes or 
spying on foreign governments, but here the fear is just the ordinary people in 
an ordinary town – and it works so much better. Authors don’t need to create 
horrible worlds of their own, when our own was/is just as bad.

It was interesting to read the Author’s Note, something which I admit I’m 
sometimes guilty of skipping over, as here Winters makes an interesting point 
about her uneasiness writing about a mixed-race character as a white woman. I 
can’t comment on whether she got every detail right, but it was interesting to 
read as I had been wondering how she had felt about this decision. She had 
certainly done a lot of research to make the story as accurate as possible, and 
I think this showed in the detail of her writing.

The inclusion of photographs of relevant scenes and objects also helped to 
make the novel more vivid, as it fed my imagination of the events and people 
described. To me the inclusion of both words and pictures added an almost 
theatrical element, in keeping with the inspiration of Hamlet. Inspiration 
seems more like the right word than retelling, as it was certainly rather 
loosely based on Shakespeare’s tale, mostly in the sense that the protagonist’s 
father’s ghost appears and tells her about the circumstances of his death. 
Hanalee is of course Hamlet, Robbie and Gil represent Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern in their treacherous behaviour, Laurie is perhaps Laertes and 
Fleur maybe is mean to be Ophelia. However in my opinion, apart from the 
similarities in the character’s names (and to a certain extent in personality 
traits), there’s not a massive similarity to Hamlet. I was expecting it to 
stick rigidly to the plot, and was therefore surprised by the number of twists 
and turns in Winters’ novel. It’s not necessarily a bad thing though, as I was 
kept guessing until the very end – and was relieved by the lower number of 
deaths!

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376546/>
 