
The Color Purple, book, movie, musical, has been successful beyond anything I 
could have imagined when I was writing it. My ambition was to spend as much 
time as I could with the grandparents and parents whose lives inspired it, and 
to do it as well as they might wish it to be done. I had no idea how much I 
would enjoy the company of these relatives, and especially the thought of the 
lives they lived half a century before I was born.

Art comes, like everything else, out of nothing, out of silence, out of, 
I suppose, longing.

Imagine: I was eight years old, blinded in one eye by a brother who 
was frightening even without a pellet gun, ridiculed constantly at school by 
children who knew no better and to whom my appearance was now odd, in a 
building that had once been the state penitentiary, and on whose floor, at the 
very centre of the school, was the circular imprint of the recently removed 
electric chair. (This is what "segregation" and "separate but equal schools" 
looked like.) The eye doctor my family took me to, and to whom they delivered 
250 borrowed dollars, took the money and gave us, in return, a single bottle of 
eye drops called Argyroyle (at least that is what it sounded like). I would not 
receive medical treatment for six years.

To add to this, we had recently moved to a community in a different county 
from where we were from. Nobody knew us. My best friends were the enormous 
pecan trees that lived near the barn, and the flourishing plantings of jonquils 
my mother instantly installed. (She took her bulbs and "cuttings" of plants 
everywhere we moved.) This was the darkest period of my childhood.

But this experience, as a child, of seemingly bottomless descent, is one of 
the reasons we have grandparents. So off we went to my grandparents' home, a 
three-room dwelling with golden kerosene lamps that my grandmother lit each 
evening before making the fire, and where my grandfather, in summer, carefully 
stashed deep green watermelons underneath the bed. This was the country way of 
keeping melons cool, but to me it seemed magical and something thought of just 
for me. Miss Yarborough, a schoolteacher who gave me piano lessons (five of 
them before our money ran out) rented one of the rooms, and so I slept with my 
grandparents. Slept between them, in fact, and the first few nights I was aware 
of how much effort they put in to not squashing me. They were old and seemed 
just fine about it. Soon sleeping between them felt cosy and safe, and ever 
since that time I've liked the smell of liniment.

They did not baby me or pity me: they simply accepted me. I went along when my 
grandmother, Rachel, fed the chickens and collected their eggs. And I went 
along with my grandfather, Henry, when he plowed the long rows in the garden in 
spring so we would have ample summer crops. I went with my grandmother 
to church, but only occasionally, since I preferred staying home with "Papa", 
whose quiet Sundays might include a walk, puffing on his pipe. A walk through 
woods so silent and dense that our narrow path shone beneath the dappled 
foliage like a silver snake.

What could I possibly do to repay this love? Especially since at the time 
it didn't seem nearly as extraordinary as it became, the older I grew and the 
more I pondered it. On top of which was the legend of my grandfather's youth of 
repeated misadventures – and, because of his alcoholism, my grandmother's 
history of abuse.

I felt, even before I knew how to write, that they deserved the biggest hug I 
could deliver via the printed word – though they died long before I did deliver 
it, in the shape ofThe Color Purple. And now this story of passion, of growth, 
of turmoil and confusion, of triumph over so many calamities – of my 
grandparents' undemonstrative but trustworthy caring – is a musical. I send a 
hug to those involved in the production: director, the producers, all the 
actors and musicians, costume designers, and set creators: you are carrying 
something precious that will give to you even more than you give to it. 
That has been the experience of everyone who has held this story, which seems 
to offer everyone something.
 