
Alaa al Aswany, the Arab world's bestselling novelist, swallows the last of 
his morning coffee, and throws back his boulder-like head in a gesture that 
comes close to, but is not quite, contentment. He is longing for a cigarette, 
too, only today he is not at home in Cairo, where he can happily smoke himself 
to death if he so chooses (the Egyptians puff their way through 19 million 
cigarettes every day) but in the quiet confines of the Gore hotel, Kensington; 
it will be a while longer before he can scoot out to the pavement and light up.

Still, he is not complaining. As cities go, London is not bad. "I have 
feelings about cities," he says in his wonderful, solemn English. "The kind of 
feelings a man has towards ladies. Some I love, and some ... not." London is 
one of those Aswany loves, though it cannot, in his view, touch Cairo or even 
Alexandria. "Ah! I cannot be objective about Egypt. It is only inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> that I feel myself. When I'm abroad, 
I'm someone who has much in common with myself, but it's not really me. I am 
always homesick!"

As a dentistry student in Chicago three decades ago, he hugely admired 
America's efficiency. But it was not, in the long run, for him. "Everything is 
systemised, practical. Egypt is the opposite, but there is beauty in that. To 
me, it's the most wonderful place on earth."

Aswany is in London to promote his new book, Friendly Fire, a collection of 
stories, and a controversial novella, The Isam Abd el-Ati Papers, which was 
banned in Egypt for a decade but now finds itself enjoying a new lease of life 
thanks to publishers who look at his back catalogue as a handy means of sating 
readers' appetites until the next novel. Aswany endured years of rejection at 
the hands of the General Egyptian Book Organisation (Gebo), the powerful 
state-run publisher, and The Isam Abd el-Ati Papers, which tells the story of 
an educated young man who is infatuated by the west but crushed by the tyranny 
and corruption of the Egyptian state, was one such rejection. He was told in no 
uncertain terms that the novella insulted Egypt and would never be published 
unless he removed its first two chapters. At which point he snatched up his 
manuscript and left the building. He has not been back since.

In 2002, his novel The Yacoubian Building, about the disparate inhabitants of 
a faded art deco apartment block in downtown Cairo, was quietly accepted by a 
small, independent publisher in Cairo. Its first edition sold out in four weeks 
and it was the Arab world's bestseller for five successive years, selling 
250,000 copies in a region where print runs rarely exceed 3,000. Word spread. 
It was made into a hit film by Marwan Hamed, and a TV serial, and has since 
been translated into 27 languages; 75,000 copies of the British edition have 
been sold. His next novel, Chicago, did even better, and ... presto! As he 
writes in the introduction to Friendly Fire: "[Suddenly] publishers started 
pressuring me to give them anything I'd written."

Those who loved The Yacoubian Building and Chicago, with their extravagant 
cast lists and their sweeping, soapy plots, should not come to Friendly Fire 
expecting more of the same. These stories are very different, for all that 
they, too, hum with the anger and frustration that Aswany has made his own (he 
will never just let his beloved characters get what they want). It's like 
turning from David Lodge to Chekhov (though if this sounds like I think this 
book is the best of the three, that would be very wrong: I adore Lodge; I adore 
Aswany, especially when he is in full-on campus mode; I cannot wait for his 
next big novel).

He grins, delighted at the mention of Chekhov. "The short story is a moment of 
enlightenment," he says. "A moment of vision. The story is going to fall on my 
head like an apple. But the novel ... there is a school of thought, and I agree 
with it, that we do not invent novels; we discover them. The novel exists in my 
heart and in my mind and I must concentrate to get it out. This is not the case 
with the story. I could get an idea for a story now, while I am looking at your 
face."

So is he working on one of these longer acts of excavation right now? "Of 
course! I cannot stop! Always a novel. I love people and literature is a 
wonderful way to express that love. Their suffering motivates me."

Aswany takes his success in his stride and with a hefty pinch of salt. On the 
one hand, he cannot resist showing me a photograph of his face on huge posters 
in the Paris metro, and it is, of course, a great feat to be able to make any 
money at all as a writer in a country where copyright laws are flimsier than 
tissue and where publishers rarely give their authors their due (Arab royalties 
for The Yacoubian Building have, he estimates, just about covered his bill for 
coffee and cigarettes). But, on the other, he is not about to give up the day 
job - dentistry - quite yet.

"Society is a living organism and you must keep up. That's why I still 
practise, though for only two days a week. I will never close the clinic. The 
clinic is my window. I open it to see what is happening in the street. You 
can't get disconnected from the street, as a writer; that's a common mistake. 
You can be too easily welcomed every night by the richest people and the most 
influential. It is very dangerous because it is that relationship with the 
street that made you successful in the first place."

Is he now a celebrity in Egypt? "I am very ... appreciated. But the word 
'famous' means that people recognise you, but you don't recognise them. I don't 
think this is a big deal. Many people are famous and they did nothing. 
Appreciation is the reward, not fame. If I could have 10,000 readers who really 
appreciate me, or one million who recognise my face, I'm going to pick the 
10,000."

In Egypt, however, fame must have its uses. Aswany has long been a well-known 
opponent of President Mubarak. He writes newspaper columns criticising the 
regime and is a member of the Kifaya (Enough) movement. So what is the 
establishment's attitude to him now he is celebrated the world over? "I don't 
expect them to love me. I am a member of some groups that call for the end of 
this regime. I know many officials in the government who like my work on a 
personal level, but... when it comes to award ceremonies, sometimes they 
attend, sometimes not. Sometimes they call, tell me that they appreciate my 
work personally but that they cannot attend officially."

Has fame made him safer? "I cannot compare what has happened to me with what 
has happened to some of my friends and comrades who have been tortured and 
beaten. What has happened to me - banning me from attending the premiere of The 
Yacoubian Building - is negligible in comparison. But, in any case, writing and 
fear are absolutely contradictory. Writing is an expression against fear."

He remains convinced that democracy is coming to Egypt and that the rest of 
the Arab world will then use it as a model. "I am telling you, it is not far 
away. I can't tell you a particular date but we are prepared. Our lawyers and 
doctors are as great in number as the populations of some Arab countries. In 
the west, there are 180,000 Egyptians with PhDs."

But how can he be so sure? To an outsider, Mubarak looks more nervous of 
democracy than ever; Egypt's notorious prisons grow ever more crowded with his 
opponents. "I've read the history of Egypt very carefully. Don't be taken in by 
the way Egyptians look. It is not always significant. Before the 1919 
revolution, we were occupied by the British. Our leader was sent into exile. I 
have read the [contemporaneous] reports of the British embassy and they say 
that they do not expect the Egyptian people to react to this at all. Yet the 
next day, the most important revolution in Middle East history took place!

"Now there are more and more protests in the street. Everyone is on strike. 
There is real pressure, you can feel it. You cannot deny it, even if you're 
from the government."

But democracy could be a double-edged sword. Won't many people vote for 
Islamist parties? He smiles. "I can predict this question!" But does he fear 
this? "Not at all. I have a real commitment to democracy. I'm not using it for 
political reasons and if I believe in it, I must respect the people's choice. 
If they choose Islamists, I am not going to be the happiest man on earth but 
I'm going to respect it." He believes that, ultimately, the bigger, more 
important, struggle may not be between autocracy and democracy, but between 
Egypt's traditionally more tolerant interpretation of Islam and the more 
extreme Wahhabi view which was imported to the country in the 1980s from Saudi 
Arabia.

For all his attachment to dentistry, Aswany was always destined to be a 
writer. Born in Cairo in 1957, his father, Abbas, was also a novelist, the 
recipient of the state award for literature in 1972, "when it was still 
respected", according to his son. "I was lucky. He was very liberal. He was my 
first professor of literature. He told me what to read and what not to read." 
Aswany had a traditional French education and then went to Chicago to study for 
his degree. The idea of staying on was tempting, but "I had to come back for my 
people, for literature".

So in the early hours of the morning, he would write and then he would walk to 
his practice and remove his patients' wisdom teeth. Did he, in the years when 
Gebo kept rejecting his work, come close to giving up? "I got very upset. I 
said to my wife [they have two daughters; he also has a son by his first 
marriage], 'That's enough. We must leave. I was planning to move to New 
Zealand. That was in 1998. But a dear friend of mine said, 'This will be the 
end for you.' So I tried one last novel."

His father was from Aswan, in the south, where people are supposed to be more 
uncompromising, courageous and proud, so perhaps his Aswan genes saw him 
through. Also his wife, who reads his first drafts. "I give her all credit. She 
is wonderful."

At least part of Aswany's international success is down to the fact that his 
novels, which embrace every stratum of Egyptian society from newspaper editor 
to manservant, and which reveal these characters' most shameful and most secret 
desires, have given us, as the New York Times put it, "an amazing glimpse" into 
a society which many knew little about. (At the peak of its success, The 
Yacoubian Building, in which a doorman's son, rejected by the police academy, 
falls in with extremists and dies pursuing jihad, was said to be on the bedside 
table of President Bush's adviser Karen Hughes).

But Aswany hates to be thought of as an Arab writer. "I'm against presenting 
literature on an ethnic basis. I am pushed, little by little, to be an Arab 
writer, but

I prefer to think of myself as part of the republic of literature. The 'now' 
topics are not so important. The human topics are the important ones; that's 
why we read Dostoevsky. I am very interested in the Taliban, in knowing how 
stupid they are. But I'm not going to learn much from a terrible 700-page novel 
about them.

I might as well go to the internet and type in 'Taliban'. To paraphrase 
[Gabriel] García Márquez, a good subject does not make a good novel, but a good 
novel makes any subject seem interesting."

And as in literature, so out in the world. Aswany cannot see the "war on 
terror" in terms of east and west or even ideology.

"I see this conflict as being between the majority of human beings and the 
interests of some groups who are not human at all. Most people are on the human 
side. They want to work, they want life to be better for their children. Some 
are artists and thinkers. On the non-human side, you find the big corporations, 
George Bush and fanatics like Osama bin Laden. I think human values will 
overcome in the end. That's why we are here, after all these centuries. Bush, 
bin Laden: they have no vision; they see the world through a pinhole. The rest 
of us, we have a better view. So I'm optimistic."

Perhaps I look sceptical because he adds, with a pacifying smile: "Look! My 
books deal with topics that would make any fanatic unhappy and I've been a 
bestselling author for years!" He slaps his thighs delightedly, though whether 
this is a sign that he considers he has won the argument, or merely that he has 
earned himself a well-deserved cigarette break, I would not like to say.

• To order Ten Tales of Today's Cairo go to observer.co.uk/bookshop <> or call 
0330 333 6847

Man from Cairo: A life in brief

Born 26 May 1957 in Cairo, Egypt, the only child of well-known novelist and 
lawyer Abbas El Aswany. Attends the Lycée Francais in Cairo. From a young age 
he is keen to be a novelist but, believing writing won't make him any money, 
studies dentistry at Cairo University. In 1985 moves to America to do a 
dentistry degree at the University of Illinois in Chicago. Now runs a dental 
practice in Cairo, where he lives with his second wife and three children.

Literary career

2002 Publishes The Yacoubian Building. For five successive years it is the 
Arab world's bestselling novel.

2007 The Yacoubian Building is made into a hit film and TV serial and the 
novel is released in Britain. Chicago, Aswany's second novel, topples his debut 
off the bestseller list.

2009 Short story collection, Friendly Fire, and a controversial novella 
published inthe UK.

Don't give up ... Writers with day jobs

Anthony Trollope (1815-1882) was a post office inspector while he wrote 
several of his best-known novels, including Barchester Towers (1857).

Kenneth Grahame (1859-1932) rose to be company secretary at the Bank of 
England while publishing several works of fiction, before retiring the year 
Wind in the Willows was published, 1908.

Franz Kafka (1883-1924) worked in insurance while writing fiction, including 
Metamorphosis (1912).

John Mortimer (1923-2009), barrister, wrote about his work in the Rumpole 
books as well as other novels.

TS Eliot (1888-1965) worked as a banker while he published his first four 
collections of poetry, leaving the job in 1925.

Bernard Schlink (b 1944), a law professor and judge, is author of nine novels, 
including The Reader (1995).

Vikas Swarup (b 1963) is India's deputy high commissioner in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and author of two novels including 
Q&A, which was filmed as Slumdog Millionaire.
 