
Asha is scared of shadows. For years, the 'shadows' in her eyes have been a 
sinister companion and slowly they have grown darker, robbing her of her sight, 
her dignity and her independence. "Soon it became so bad that I could no longer 
tend to my farm of maize and sunflowers," she said.

The shadows are cataracts, a cloudiness of the lens which stops light from 
entering the eye and eventually leads to blindness. Asha relies on her 
granddaughter to guide her wherever she goes, even the toilet. Unable to work 
the fields, she feels a burden to her family and the community in her rural 
village in Morogoro Region, Tanzania.

Asha is one of the estimated 9 million blind people in sub-Saharan Africa, a 
figure the World Health Organisation (WHO) projects to double by 2020 unless 
urgent action is taken to address the problem.

Cataract accounts for half of "avoidable" blindness in the region, meaning 
blindness which could be either treated or prevented by cost-effective means, 
and the International Council of Ophthalmology estimates that "for every person 
blind from cataract, there are probably three more cases who are severely 
visually disabled due to cataract."

But in a region devastated by AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, blindness 
remains a lower priority for governments and individuals.

"Most countries in Africa have very limited resources and most resources tend 
to go in terms of priority to those killing diseases," said Dr Daniel Etya'ale, 
executive director for Africa for the International Agency for the Prevention 
of Blindness (IAPB). "You present some of the statistics and sometimes the 
ministers themselves will be the first to say 'Where do you get these numbers?' 
so there's a huge need for more advocacy."

While the burden of blindness is an obvious public health issue, it is also an 
important economic one. Blindness leads to a loss of income for many people in 
the developing world, as well as the family and community who must care for 
them. Younger children are often taken out of school to become caregivers, 
depriving them of education and perpetuating the cycle of poverty.

"What people don't realise is that it may be first and foremost an individual 
tragedy but it's actually a family and community tragedy," said Dr Etya'ale. 
"For that kid, there's no future. There's no school opportunity, there's no 
prospect of any independent life until the blind person dies."

The economic impact to the region is just as pronounced. According to WHO, "a 
conservative estimate of the annual direct economic productivity loss due to 
blindness and low vision in sub-Saharan Africa is US$1830 million in 2000. 
Without concerted international action, it is expected to rise to $4374 million 
per year by 2020, the equivalent of 0.50 per cent of GDP for the region."

The World Bank further strengthens the case for economic intervention, 
describing corrective surgery for cataract, a simple 20-minute operation that 
restores sight by removing the clouded lenses and replacing them with clear 
plastic ones, as "one of the most cost-effective surgical interventions".

Heath economist and IAPB's director of advocacy, Julian Metcalfe, agrees. 
"Addressing this problem is both economically compelling and extremely 
cost-effective," he said. "If you can restore somebody's eyesight, the 
cost-effectiveness of that intervention is much higher than it is for many 
other diseases which are now attracting more international attention."

If the economic benefits are clear and treatment so cost-effective, why are 
governments not doing more to ease the economic plight of blind people in 
low-income countries?

WHO and the IAPB have attempted to galvanise the international community by 
highlighting the economic benefits of their global initiative, VISION 2020: The 
Right to Sight. Launched in 1999, the initiative aims to eliminate avoidable 
blindness by the year 2020 through the establishment of sustainable eye care 
systems in all 193 member states.

Their research estimated the cost of global blindness and low vision at US$42 
billion in 2000 and projected that the total annual costs would rise to US$110 
billion by 2020. However, if VISION 2020 goals are achieved, this will be 
reduced to US$57 billion.

An important measure of progress is the Cataract Surgery Rate (CSR) which 
indicates the number of cataract operations performed in a country per million 
of population each year. VISION 2020 recommends that a CSR of at least 2000 
needs to be achieved each year in Africa to eliminate unnecessary blindness due 
to cataract, but skilled human resources are scarce and sub-Saharan Africa has 
the lowest ratio of ophthalmic surgeons in the world.

In 2005, only nine of 46 sub-Saharan countries had a CSR greater than 500 but 
by 2006 this had doubled and Dr Etya'ale said that progress is encouraging. 
"This trend is continuing and I think this is an encouraging sign, despite all 
the constraints and limited resources that we have. It's probably around 35 
countries now that have shown some significant progress," he said.

In order to give further impetus to VISION 2020, the IAPB wants to persuade 
the World Bank, the international agency which provides grant finance to the 
world's poorest nations, to give more support to eye care strategies.

"We would expect them to ensure that the needs of the blind are given 
sufficient weight. For example, in their own efforts to train health care 
workers, an integral part of that training should be eye care strategies," said 
Mr Metcalfe.

Asha is one of the lucky ones to have her sight restored through surgery. 
Today, as the nurse removes the bandages from her eyes, Asha blinks slowly, 
disbelievingly, before a huge grin spreads across her weathered face.

Returning to her village, Asha sees her granddaughter for the first time. "I 
am so happy to see all my friends and family," she says, holding her 
granddaughter close. "At last I can see properly and will be able to go back to 
farming which is my livelihood."

For one woman in Africa, the cycle has been broken.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 