
When Barack Obama made his powerful case for comprehensive healthcare and 
effective regulation of medical costs in the US it was possible to imagine 
Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Nick Clegg, for all their many differences, 
sitting in the Congressional audience and nodding in near unison.

So too would French, Australian or Swedish politicians or healthcare 
professionals. All share the belief that advanced industrial states can and 
should organise the provision of healthcare to protect all: not really free, 
but available on the basis of need. As with its passion for baseball, America, 
with its crude "death panel" slanders, is the odd one out.

If we take Cameron at his word (electoral calculation and his experience with 
his son Ivan suggest we should) this is a British consensus to be cherished. It 
did not exist 20 years ago when Margaret Thatcher itched to marketise theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, but was thwarted, and Labour's basic 
analysis was – as usual – that the problem was simply money.

All of which is worth bearing in mind when they trot out rival plans to make 
the NHS even better in the coming election campaign. "Bureaucracy to be 
slashed" here and "doctors empowered" there; NHS constitutions all round and 
matron restored to the mythical autocracy of the Hattie Jacques era.

Carry On films were low budget, just like the NHS of the same period. Since 
the Blair-Brown doubling of the health budget to near European levels that is 
no longer the case. Whatever the future brings for financial retrenchment to 
pay off the bank binge overdraft, protecting frontline NHS services as much as 
possible is the agreed holy grail of public spending priorities.

In this context the issue is efficiency and value for money. Despite the war 
of words, the outlines of rough consensus are visible here too: locally 
devolved decision-taking; stronger primary care; better co-ordination between 
health and social services; greater flexibility over Nice's approval of costly 
new drugs and technologies, albeit without surrendering to big pharma's more 
dubious cures or the cuts agenda of the tabloids.

So the fundamentals are there, a comprehensive service free at the point of 
use. So is the pathway to better performance, though differences remain over 
the route, the balance between public and private provision, the thorny 
question of co-payments, which dogs all systems seeking long-term viability.

Harder to address, but impossible to ignore, is the burden on 21st-century 
services by so-called "lifestyle choices" – excessive consumption of fatty and 
salty food, cut-price drink, tobacco and other drugs, all combined with a lack 
of exercise, except (it seems) for unprotected sex. The tabloids simultaneously 
deplore and actively promote this. On one page they denounce the nannying 
state, on the next they demand guarantees from risk for their readers.

Nothing else reinforces the health inequality gap so much, the class basis of 
the longevity gap too. Yet we do it to ourselves, egged on by popular 
supermarket chains, big corporations and the Daily Beast, all of which 
governments tremble to resist.

Only modest progress has been under cautious New Labour, those smoking bans 
attacked, those NHS personal trainers mocked, every inch of the way. Yet the 
cost of failure grows by the hour and will, Derek Wanless's reports reminded 
us, become unbearable. If we are to live longer we must work longer and remain 
fitter longer. It is as simple – and as complex – as that.

But how to achieve this? To make our "National Illness Service" a preventive 
health service, to nurture social solidarity and protect Cinderella services 
like mental health while retaining the essentials of our cherished free society?

That is the challenge of the new century and recession economics only makes it 
more so.

Michael White is an assistant editor of the Guardian
 