
Before Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> went to 
bed in the early hours of Friday – he had just arrived in Poland for a Nato 
summit – he delivered a statement about two fatal shootings this week by the 
police that were caught on video, heightening racial tensions. When the 
president woke, he had to deliver another statement, about five policemen shot 
dead in Dallas, Texas. Such is the alarming and dangerous speed of events in 
America as it confronts some of the most racially charged incidents for decades.

In the years after the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 60s, race in the 
US dropped down the news agenda, at home and abroad. But the changes won in 
legislation and court rulings were not matched by conditions on the ground. 
There were improvements for some in education and employment, but life was not 
visibly different for the bulk of the African-American and Latino populations. 
In too many major cities, segregation remained a reality. Even the capital, 
Washington DC, where politicians spoke grandly of freedom, equality and 
tolerance, remained deeply divided. It is America’s dirty little secret.

Race went back on to the news agenda in 2013 with George Zimmerman’s acquittal 
over the fatal shooting of the African-American teenager Trayvon Martin, and it 
has stayed there ever since. The police shooting of Michael Brown was followed 
by the deaths of other unarmed black Americans in encounters with the police. 
There was the appalling shooting of nine black parishioners in a church in 
Charleston, South Carolina. And this week the police shootings of 
Alton Sterling and Philando Castile; and on Friday five policemen shot dead by 
sniper fire, with a suspectreportedly saying he was upset about recent shootings
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-police-shooting-gunman-kill-white-officers>
and wanted to kill white officers.

Such cases risk inflaming racial tensions, with no end in sight until America 
tackles the underlying causes. It is a terrifyingly huge challenge, dodged for 
too long. First, there is the segregation in the cities. Second, vast 
inequality: in Detroit, 10% of white people live in poverty but 33% of black 
people. And third, the country’s stubborn attachment to guns.

President Obama, in his statement about deaths at the hands of the police, 
cited statistics showing minorities are more likely to be pulled over, searched 
or shot by officers. It was incumbent on the country to root out deep-seated 
racial biases, he said. Last month’s Pew Centre survey on attitudes towards 
race in the US highlights the gulf in views. It found 88% of blacks said the 
country needed to continue making changes for blacks to have equal rights with 
whites, with 43% sceptical that such changes would ever occur. Only 53% of 
whites said the US still had work to do and only 11% expressed such scepticism.

A White House led by Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> offers a better chance of 
at least attempting change than one led by Donald Trump. The question is 
whether, against a backdrop of austerity, she has the courage to devote the 
billions that would be needed to make a start in addressing inequality. On 
guns, she has been surprisingly outspoken in saying that as president she would 
seek reforms. There is scope for some restrictions short of the kind of 
sweeping changes that happened in the UK after the Dunblane school massacre. 
There could be tighter checks on gun ownership, a campaign to replace the 
unbending leadership of the National Rifle Association and a ban on powerful 
automatic weapons. Why did anyone need such guns, President Obama asked on 
Friday.

In his late-night statement, he referred to the Black Lives Matter campaign in 
words that seemed prescient next day: “When people say ‘black lives matter’, it 
doesn’t mean that blue lives don’t matter. But right now, the data shows that 
black folks are more vulnerable to these kinds of incidents.”

The imperative for America is to transform that “data”, tackle problems 
shamefully ignored after the civil rights movement and try finally to end a 
centuries-old racial divide.
 