
I was given this novel 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1987/09/26/books/mcewan-child.html> as a gift, and read 
it one hot summer, in an airless and very purple upstairs room in a shared 
house in downtown Toronto. It opens with a father who wakes on a wintry south 
London Saturday and takes his three-year-old daughter to the supermarket across 
the road. She is with him one moment and not the next – all he has done is turn 
to pick something up, then turn back to keep speaking to his daughter. But she 
is gone.

I was in my early 20s, still a student, well over a decade away from having a 
child of my own, but that scene – the panic, the floor dropping out of a world, 
the sheer randomness – got its claws in and never left. I could no longer look 
at children in public spaces without some corner of my brain searching out the 
responsible adult and measuring the distance between them, the invisible link 
that could be snapped at any moment. For years I didn’t remember much else 
about the book, apart from a general miasma of grief and creeping madness, as 
well as a scene in a tree – though what the tree signified I would not have 
been able to say.

There are other writers – Hardy and TS Eliot, and especially Coleridge and the 
heart-stopping beauty of his notebooks – that mean more and deeper things to 
me, did in fact at various points change the entire course of my life, but The 
Child in Time got in somewhere else, made imaginable something I had not 
imagined before, and could not now un-think: that in a moment, and without 
reason, everything can change, and change utterly.

The Child in Time made imaginable something I had not imagined before, and 
could not now un-think

I have always remembered the title as A Child in Time – ie the specific child 
who disappeared. Actually, it’s The Child in Time, and a study – at as many 
levels asIan McEwan <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/12/ian.mcewan> 
can pack in of that theme – of how prescriptions about child-rearing have 
changed over the centuries; how they turn back on themselves depending on 
prevailing politics (the protagonist, a famous children’s author, spends hours 
daydreaming in a committee convened by the government to produce a manual on 
reading and writing, and child development in general); how a child’s 
experience of time seems to be as an eternal discovering present; how adults 
yearn to regain access to that state; how having a child concertinas time, 
dragging a parent’s own childhood back into play while at the same time forcing 
a reassessment of ageing parents – “there was a harsh undoing in progress” 
being one of many vivid and accurate lines about this. It is no surprise, given 
the seriousness and earnestness with which he unpacks (and doesn’t always quite 
digest) all these various issues, that this book was published when McEwan’s 
eldest was about three. At some level he is working things out for himself, 
through his fiction.

Being McEwan, however, all this is interleaved, in sometimes quite schematic 
ways, with theoretical physics, its attempts to explain the universe and 
especially time’s role in the universe; how it can accelerate, decelerate and 
bend, how disparate moments in history might somehow also be happening 
simultaneously. And being McEwan, he has really done his homework, but the A in 
physics is sometimes too earnestly pursued.

Hence a road accident that is not there, as far as I can see, for any other 
reason but to show – like a worked example in a maths book – how time seems to 
slow or to speed up depending on what is happening. Panic expands time, he 
argues; boredom contracts it. (There is also a scene in which a famous novelist 
picks the brains of an eminent physicist – a self-reflexive description of what 
was obviously some of his method in writing the book, and the method that 
underpins many of his later novels.)

There is wisdom aplenty but also a lot of signposting: invited to lunch with 
the prime minister, the famous novelist indulges a “childish defiance” and 
chooses dirty, unkempt clothes; “the child in him was disturbed by an older 
woman in tears”; he stands next to a train driver on a platform and is 
overwhelmed by a desire for the driver to see that child in him and invite him 
into the cab.

McEwan is particularly fascinated by moments when these understandable 
instincts curdle into something more crippling and disturbing: the way, for 
instance, in which an adult can latch on to other adults who seem to provide 
the safety and freedom from responsibility that his parents once did, then feel 
betrayed when they turn out to be fallible – and themselves children lost in 
time. It turns out that the tree I remembered is in this context a crucial 
test. (I won’t spoil the novel for those who haven’t read it by explaining how.)

This is a novel about childhood, but also about growing up and accepting 
responsibility. It’s a study of family, of the unexpected ways of love and how 
it curls through time; how time itself curls. Much of this, frankly, passed me 
by when I first read it. But that moment when the child was taken – the shock; 
the absolute before/after. That did not.
 