
There is a view that discussions about modern Africa should be 
forward-looking. They should be about trade,entrepreneurship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/26/next-generation-african-businesses-entrepreneurs>
, expanding markets,Chinese investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/interactive/2013/apr/29/china-commits-billions-aid-africa-interactive>
 and the commercial and cultural dynamism that undoubtedly characterises many 
of the continent’s 55 nations. This future-facing philosophy is an admirable 
attempt to free the spirit and imagination of the continent from the weight of 
its own history and the legacies of colonialism.

The history of British slave ownership has been buried: now its scale can be 
revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/12/british-history-slavery-buried-scale-revealed>
While there is much to commend this apparent pragmatism it is, perhaps, more 
viable in Lagos and Kinshasa than in London or Paris. Europe’s image of Africa, 
although changing fast, is too firmly tethered to history to be easily or 
quickly recalibrated. To historians, who inevitably take the long view, the 
modern relationship between Europe andAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> is merely the current chapter in an 
enormous book.

For much of the period from the 15th century till now, during which Europeans 
and Africans have been connected through trade, empire and migration, both 
forced and voluntary, Europe has viewed the people of Africa through the 
distorting veil of racism and racial theory. In the British case much of the 
jumble of stereotypes, pseudo-science and wild conjecture that coalesced to 
form racism arose from the political battles fought over the slave trade and 
slavery, during the last decades of the 18th century and the first decades of 
the 19th. The men who set out to defend slavery assembled a vast arsenal of new 
claims and old theories about black people, which they then codified, refined 
and disseminated through books, pamphlets, cartoons and speeches.

Racial ideas were aimed at Africans in their home continent, as well as at 
those in bondage in the New World

That propaganda campaign, along with the institution of British slavery 
itself, was ultimately defeated by the moral energy of the abolitionist 
campaign, and by the determination of the slaves of the Caribbean to resist 
their enslavement, yet the ideas about the nature of African peoples and the 
cultures of Africa that had been marshalled by the pro-slavery lobby lived on. 
Some, in more subtle forms, are still with us today.

Recent debates about slavery in Britain and the United States have 
understandably focused on the toxic legacies those systems bequeathed to the 
black peoples of the Caribbean and the US, the descendants of the slaves. What 
is sometimes overlooked is that the racial ideas of the pro-slavery lobby were 
also aimed at Africans in their home continent. The impact of Atlantic slavery 
on Africa can be measured not just in terms of underdevelopment and 
depopulation, but also in the way in which the continent came to be imagined in 
Europe in the post-slavery era, during which all but two of Africa’s nations 
were colonised by the competing European powers.

The book that, arguably, did the most to disseminate racial ideas about 
Africans was written by a man who never set foot on African soil. Edward Long 
was a slave owner and the son of a slave owner, his family having been in 
Jamaica since the middle of the 17th century. His ideas about black people and 
Africa were widely accepted as being rigorous and scientific, although Long had 
no scientific training. The book that made him famous, hisHistory of Jamaica 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/commentisfree/2015/aug/28/cairo-reading-group-regime-book-2011>
 (1774), was not a history book but rather a strange hybrid; part travel guide, 
part discussion of British colonial rule and economics in the Caribbean, and 
part political score-settling. But it is also the classic text of 18th-century 
European pseudo-scientific racism.

Its key sections are Long’s vitriolic denouncements of Africans as 
irredeemably inferior and perhaps not even human. Despite his obvious 
self-interest, the fact that he had spent 12 years in the Caribbean gave Long’s 
views a supposed authority that goes some way to explaining why his ideas had 
such longevity.

Though lacking any first-hand experience, he dismissed the continent as 
backwards, concluding that it was the source of “every thing that is monstrous 
in nature”. Long’s racism was flexible enough to make the transition from being 
a defence of slavery to a justification for colonialism: he was a vital strand 
in the connective tissue that links the history of slavery to that of 
colonialism. Echoes of Long’s most venomous passages can be heard in books 
written by men of later generations who did venture to Africa; their views of 
the African societies they encountered were contaminated by Long and other 
racial theorists before their ships had even landed.

Of the many ideas and theories that seeped out of the debates around slavery, 
the one that still casts a shadow over the image of Africa is the notion that 
tyranny, war and chaos are the natural condition of the continent. Long 
asserted that Africa was so barbaric and chaotic that Africans were better off 
as slaves, since slavery saved them from the worse fates that, he claimed, 
would otherwise have consumed them in their homelands.

That idea was generated by men who were attempting to justify their trade in 
human beings, yet today there are still well-meaning, progressive-minded 
people, in Europe and in Africa, who speculate as to whether democracy, the 
rule of law and human rights can ever properly take root in Africa. Such views 
are testimony to the power of history and the potency of the race idea.
 