
In looks and thought, Michael Crichton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michaelcrichton>, who died this week, was 
unlike most people: closer to 7ft tall than six, he also possessed a mind of 
unusual scientific brilliance, but had a remarkable knack for coming up with 
stories most people would like. He boasted the improbable double for a novelist 
of having created both one of the most successful movie franchises in history 
(Jurassic Park) and one of the longest-running TV series, the hospital drama ER

Those stories were typical of Crichton's ability to turn learning into 
earning. A qualified doctor, he borrowed from his stock of medical knowledge to 
float the idea for the series that made George Clooney famous. There had long 
been white-coat shows on TV, but it's characteristic of Crichton's work that 
the unique selling point of ER was the way in which it trusted the audience to 
follow complex medical detail and jargon. For him, a manuscript or script was 
ideally a lesson that also entertained.

His clinical experience - allied to much broader reading and research in 
science and anthropology - also informed his breakthrough novel, The Andromeda 
Strain (1969), the first and best of the many thrillers written about germ 
warfare, and, later, Jurassic Park (1990), which cannily combined childish 
fascination with dinosaurs and adult panic over the potential of cloning.

The timing of these stories was another part of the writer's populist genius. 
At his peak - from the mid-80s to the turn of the millennium - it would have 
been wise to get Crichton to pick your lottery numbers. His prescience meant 
that Jurassic Park anticipated and then shaped the global debate over 
manipulation of DNA by scientists, while Disclosure (1994) dramatised (in a way 
some readers and movie-goers found misogynist) the debate over sexual 
harassment, and Airframe (1996), about aviation safety, was reviewed by 
newspapers that on their front pages were running pictures of planes that had 
fallen out of the sky.

With recent titles, Mystic Mike's crystal ball seemed to have clouded. 
Timeline (1999) was a wacky adventure in which the science (time travel) was of 
the most fantastic kind, while State of Fear (2004) was atypical in tackling a 
topic that was already heavily covered: global warming. Perhaps it was his 
unfamiliarity in coming late to the game that led Crichton to take what seemed 
to many to be a wilfully contrary line: using his novel to argue that global 
warming is also fictional.

Although he had one of the largest readerships among contemporary novelists 
(150 million copies sold), and a novel-to-movie strike rate bettered only by 
Stephen King, John Grisham and JK Rowling, Crichton disliked personal 
publicity. It's striking that the official announcement of his death noted that 
he had fought his cancer "privately", as if pride were being taken in the fact 
that the news would prove, as it did, genuinely surprising to the literary 
world.

This fits the pattern by which, even when the release of a new novel by him 
had become a major publishing event, Crichton liked, as far as possible, to 
take his readers by surprise. Routinely, a press release, often too late for 
publishers' catalogues, would announce the impending appearance of what was 
called only a "new Michael Crichton novel", no title or plot details given.

This was partly because his concern for topicality meant that he was allowed a 
scarily short gap between typing and printing, but also it reflected his 
desire, increasingly complicated by his level of success, to work in secret, 
like the scientist he always, at heart, remained. Another "new Michael Crichton 
novel" was listed in the HarperCollins catalogue for this month. When it was 
recently announced that it had been delayed, I wondered if his latest narrative 
might have been overtaken by events; now it's sadly clear that events had 
overtaken him.

Broadly, there are three basic elements that a novel can contain: narrative, 
ideas and prose. Novelists can still flourish within different markets if their 
essential talent is storytelling (Jeffrey Archer), thinking (John Berger) or 
crafting sentences (John Updike), but it is exceptionally rare for an author to 
have the gift of all three: John le Carré is the primary example. Crichton was 
unusual in a genre obsessed with narrative in also being fascinated by ideas, 
but his prose, a bare and sometimes ugly scaffolding for the facts and twists, 
held him back from higher literary standing: one reason that The Andromeda 
Strain is the most accomplished of his books is that it is deliberately written 
in the neutral tone of science reporting.

Crichton will be remembered as a very tall man who told stories that often 
seemed to be tall but which, at their best, got closer to the truth than much 
factual writing does. His books were a sort of science fiction, but set in the 
present and with the emphasis on the science.
Mark Lawson

• As noted here earlier this year, Barack Obama says the novels of Philip Roth 
"helped shape my sensibility". And we now know considerably more about his 
reading, thanks to his Facebook page and a recent essay in the New York Times (
nytimes.com <http://www.nytimes.com>): Emerson, Nietzsche, Niebuhr and Tillich 
for philosophy and theology; Jefferson, Lincoln, Gandhi, Adam Smith, WEB Du 
Bois, Martin Luther King and James Baldwin for politics and economics; and 
other non-fiction books by David Halberstam and Studs Terkel.

In fiction, Obama has picked out Shakespeare's tragedies, Melville's 
Moby-Dick, Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls, Solzhenitsyn's Cancer Ward, 
Toni Morrison's Song of Solomon, Marilynne Robinson's Gilead, Doris Lessing's 
The Golden Notebook, John Steinbeck's In Dubious Battle and Robert Penn 
Warren's All the King's Men

There's little obvious overlap here with Gordon Brown, who has mentioned 
Orwell, Milton, Tennyson, Tolstoy, Wordsworth, Camus, Sartre, HG Wells, Lewis 
Grassic Gibbon and Ian Rankin as among his favourites. If books come up when 
they meet, the pair may be obliged to discuss Adam Smith, who, like the PM, 
came from Kirkcaldy. With David Cameron, on the other hand, literary rapport 
should be easier. Graham Greene, the Tory leader's favourite novelist, is also 
the only author with two novels cited by the president-elect: The Power and the 
Glory and (intriguingly) The Quiet American
John Dugdale

• The second half of the year has seen a strange pattern in major UK book 
prizes. Kate Summerscale was the only woman on the shortlist when she won the 
Samuel Johnson prize; Linda Grant, who didn't win, was similarly isolated among 
the Booker prize finalists. More recently, the Guardian first book award 
shortlistees are all male, as are those for the John Llewellyn Rhys prize, for 
fiction or non-fiction by under-35s. The TS Eliot prize shortlist consists of 
three women poets and seven men. Only the Forward prizes for poetry bucked the 
trend with a 10:8 ratio in favour of women across the three shortlists (though 
two of the awards were won by men). Whatever's going on, it doesn't seem to 
have much to do with judges' gender: of these prizes, three - Samuel Johnson, 
Guardian first book and Forward - were chaired by women and three by men.
John Dugdale

• A new website from Alice Walker was launched this week, with a 
characteristic greeting on the welcome page from the author of The Color 
Purple: "It is with infinite hope," Walker writes, "that I offer these thoughts 
from the internal road." Calledalicewalkersgarden.com 
<http://www.alicewalkersgarden.com>, the site takes its inspiration from the 
horticultural passion of the California-based novelist, poet and essayist, who 
"is often found outside in her garden picking greens for dinner, flowers for 
the table, and gathering ideas for new writing from the clusters of zinnias". 
How much time the visionary spends at home tending zinnias in boring old 
Berkeley, however, is not entirely clear, as the site's "wanderings" section 
reveals the following enviable schedule: Nov-Jan Mexico; Jan-Feb Burma; 
Feb-April Hawaii; May-June Mexico. Only in July-Oct is she scheduled to wander 
back to northern California. "Often found in her garden" when she's actually at 
home, perhaps.
John Dugdale
 