
All options to deal with the "crazy interpretation of our human rights laws", 
including withdrawal from the European convention of human rights, need to 
remain on the table to prevent any repeat of the Abu Qatada affair, the home 
secretary,Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has 
told MPs.

She blamed the European court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> in Strasbourg, 
saying the radical Islamist cleric would have been sent back to Jordan long ago 
had it not "moved the goalposts" by establishing new, unprecedented legal 
grounds for blocking his deportation.

But a spokesman for the Council of Europe, which oversees the Strasbourg 
court, said: "We welcome the fact thatAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> will now face charges in Jordan 
under the condition that evidence obtained under torture cannot be used. This 
is victory for due process and for human rights."

In the House of Commons, May, who was warmly congratulated by MPs from all 
parties for finally securing the departure of the terror suspect in the early 
hours of Sunday, said that she took quiet satisfaction that a dangerous man had 
been deported to face justice in his own country.

The home secretary also confirmed that her new immigration bill to be 
published in the autumn will contain measures to make it harder for foreign 
national criminals to avoid deportation through "spurious appeals". It will 
also ensure that foreign nationals who commit serious crimes will be deported, 
save for those in yet-to-be-defined "exceptional circumstances".

The justice secretary, Chris Grayling, is also now looking ways of speeding up 
the pace at which the courts hear national security cases. Ministers are also 
looking at ways of barring access to legal aid and claiming welfare benefits 
for terror suspects and extremists whose behaviour is not conducive to the 
public good.

May also tried to reassure backbench Conservative MPs that Abu Qatada would 
not be able to use his family, who are currently still in London, as a reason 
to return to Britain once he has served any sentence he might receive inJordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>. The home secretary tried to 
reassure them that the Home Office was working on closing any such doors that 
might seem open to him, but she also said that his immediate family had to make 
a decision "about where they see their future lying".

The home secretary, who was greeted with cheers from the Tory benches, was 
told by the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, that his deportation was "a 
good result for the country".

May said his removal had taken 12 years and cost over £1.7m in legal fees: 
"That is not acceptable to the public, and it is not acceptable to me. We must 
make sure it never happens again."

She said she had repeatedly made clear her view that the Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> should be scrapped.

"We must also consider our relationship with the European court very 
carefully, and I believe that all options – including withdrawal from the 
convention altogether – should remain on the table. But those are issues that 
will have to wait for the general election," the home secretary said, clearly 
signalling that she expects the next Conservative election manifesto to contain 
a clear commitment on the issue.

Shami Chakrabarti, director of human rights campaigners Liberty, said the 
response of ministers was as curious as it was depressing. "They say they got 
Jordan to change its laws to ban torture evidence so that he and others can be 
safely tried in that country.

"Why then aren't they celebrating their successful promotion of human rights 
abroad instead of threatening to tear them up here at home?" she asked.

Abu Qatada is being held in the Muwaqqar high security prison, east of the 
Jordanian capital, Amman, for 15 days after being charged on Sunday with 
plotting terrorist acts on Jordanian soil.

His lawyer, Tayseer Thiab, was due to submit a bail application on his behalf 
on Monday. His father and three brothers were allowed to meet him shortly 
before he was transferred to prison.

His father told the Jordan Times he was in good condition: "He told us he 
trusts the Jordanian judiciary and that he is confident he will be freed as 
soon as the charges against him are [proved to be] groundless."
 