
Not since Andy Murray won Wimbledon has anyone sat under such a hailstorm of 
congratulation asTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
on Monday. You'd imagine the deportation of Abu Qatada was the greatest triumph 
of statesmanship since the end of the second world war. The home secretary 
might have been relieved that Alex Salmond wasn't sitting behind her, grinning 
and waving a Scottish flag.

In fact, the prime minister himself, who must be seriously worried about Mrs 
May's increasing, and seemingly unstoppable, popularity, sat in on some of her 
statement before deciding he had better things to do (like greeting Murray at 
No 10) than listen to the whole house telling her how utterly marvellous she 
was.

Of course, they wanted to smear themselves all over with Murray's factor 30 
success. "I congratulate the home secretary," fluted Hazel Blears, "but I was 
thinking that it took 12 years to deportAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, and only seven years for Andy 
Murray to win Wimbledon!" ("And five minutes for you to work that in," growled 
a grumpy Tory.)

Even Labour MPs were anxious to spray Mrs May with water cannon of praise. 
Perhaps they hope the love for Theresa will lead to a leadership contest. 
Perhaps they meant it, though of course with politicians that is always the 
least likely possibility.

Keith Vaz, the Great Vaz of Vaz, and chairman of the home affairs committee, 
said the cleric's removal was "a personal triumph for her. She must have felt 
there were three people in that marriage!"

Perhaps reflecting that the third party Princess Diana was referring to is now 
Duchess of Cornwall, Mrs May did grimace. After all, the differences between 
the two are multitudinous. Abu Qatada: long beard. Camilla: no beard. Abu 
Qatada: preaches that it is OK for true believers to kill infidels, especially 
Jews. Camilla: asks "have you come far?"

Buoyed by her success, Mrs May repeated that she wants to abolish the Human 
Rights Act, and maybe withdraw from the European court of human rights (ECHR).

Even some Tories thought that was going a bit far. Edward Garnier pointed out 
that even a British act would include a prohibition on torture, so it would 
have made no difference at all to the Qatada case! But Mrs May was in "first 
thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers" (Shakespeare, Henry VI, pt 2) mode. 
The ECHR had "moved the goalposts". The judges didn't "get it".

In the end, Mrs May felt obliged to join in the congratulations for herself, 
praising her own "grim determination".

Moments later, Michael Gove, the education secretary, was talking about the 
new schools curriculum, which will include Boolean logic. In my day we hoped 
for rain so sport would be cancelled. Now pupils will say: "I've got a sore 
throat, so I can't do double Boolean logic today!"

Of course many teachers feel they need a crash course in Govean logic.
 