
Sperm wail

Mark Lester 

It may prove to be the detail that causes an event horizon in Michael Jackson 
World. Can even the redoubtable friends, fans or family, let alone us mere 
mortals, possibly cope with Mark Lester's claim that he is the father of 
Jackson's daughter Paris? Yes, Lester the star of the 1968 film musical Oliver! 
Apparently he was a close friend of Jackson – because, presumably, neither of 
them saw anything odd in an adult with a string of paedophile allegations 
around his neck cosying up to former child star – donated some sperm (perhaps 
even singing "Who will buy this wonderful feeling?" as he did so) and was later 
made godfather to all the children.

Lester says Paris bears a marked resemblance to his daughters from his first 
marriage (who must be thrilled by the news) and is willing to take a paternity 
test to prove it. Now – who will buy?

Last of the summer house whine

Alan Duncan

The multimillionaire shadow leader of the Commons (right) was caught on secret 
camera describing life for MPs under the post-expenses-scandal regime as akin 
to being nationalised. "You have to live on rations and are treated like shit." 
The next day, doubtless after a few heated calls from a Tory HQ less than eager 
for the party to be seen as whingeing about having its troughing activities 
curtailed, the MP said his remarks were intended humorously and that he had 
apologised.

The footage was filmed by Heydon Prowse, whom Duncan had invited for drinks 
after the activist dug a pound sign into the MP's lawn in protest at his claim 
for gardening expenses. Note to self, Dunx: keeping your enemies close but not 
your mouth very rarely pays off.

Hotstepping over obesity

Arlene Phillips 

Cut down in her prime by the sword of ageism so readily wielded in television 
(aka sacked as aStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> judge and 
replaced with Alesha Dixon – nice enough, but with the dance experience of a 
30-year-old singer), the ex-Hot Gossip hoofer has been appointed "dance 
champion" by the government.

Phillips will spearhead another idiot initiative … we mean, national campaign, 
to get lardarses who find team sports too repellent to dance instead. As she 
has mentioned approvingly China's commitment to community open air dancing, 
this may be less an idiot initiative than the first foray into a striking 
rearrangement of our social and democratic structure.

What they said
 "Dear Twitter, My water broke. It wasn't like Charlotte in Sex and the City. 
Now, timing contractions on an iPhone app" 
First of many tweets by Sara Morishige Williams, wife of Twitter co-founder 
Evan Williams, as she began her labour and the final collapse of civilisation.
 "I am over it, so, so over it – 100%. I didn't think I'd move on this 
quickly. I thought it would take years. But I've finally accepted our marriage 
is over. I've shed my last tear" 
Peter Andre embraces the healing process and life without Jordan. If only the 
reader could do the same.

What we've learned

Elvis Presley earned £31m last year, despite still being dead

Salmon are back in the Seine

There are just 33 native sperm donors in Canada

You can now buy DIY DNA testing kits from the chemists

Berkshire astronomers charting the Perseid meteor shower have displaced teen 
star Miley Cyrus from the top Twitter slot

… and what we haven't

Who will play the Teletubbies, who have announced a reunion tour this autumn
 