
The dust jacket, if there ever was one, is long gone. And the grubby cloth 
boards, scribbled on in red crayon, hang by a thread from the spine. On the 
endpapers, my mother has written my name and the address of the house we lived 
in when I was six, but then my little sister has crossed it all out and written 
her own name in wobbly blue felt-tip. Did she steal it? Or did I hand it over, 
buying her silence in some naughtiness or other? All I know is, in our 
playroom, Robert Louis Stevenson’s A Child’s Garden of Verses had leverage.

It’s a collection of poems, but to me back then who’d never heard of poetry, 
it was a storybook, hectic and cacophonous and bulging with ideas and 
observations that could set a six-year-old’s head on fire. “In winter I get up 
at night and dress by yellow candlelight”; “A birdie with a yellow bill hopped 
upon the window sill”. I loved the energetic optimism of the rhymes, with their 
warm curiosity and occasional flashes of priggish certainty: “the friendly cow 
all red and white” who “gives me cream with all her might” – and am amazed at 
how many of them have continued to echo through my adult life.

Nursery rhymes from all over the world – a gallery to share with children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2014/oct/13/culturally-diverse-nursery-rhymes-gallery>
But it was also the pictures, with their glowing embers and summer skies, cosy 
nurseries, bedrooms and landings, pinks and blues and glassy river greens. A 
whole world was here. The Whole World, in fact. Not just Mapperley Park, 
Nottingham (where I lived), but a glorious global mish-mash of autumn bonfires, 
cricket balls, haylofts, suns rising and setting in far-off lands, ticking 
grandfather clocks and candles sputtering, summers fading into winters, 
children asleep while troops of soldiers and fairies and elephant caravans 
moved over their safe and homely counterpanes.

Here was all the magic and possibility of imagination. “I have just to shut my 
eyes,” says the mousy-haired little girl who, in her mauve dress, white 
knickers and black Start-Rites, looked quite a lot like me, “to go sailing 
through the skies”. Might a child have it in them to break free of the shackles 
of parental discipline and nursery routine and escape any time they wanted into 
daydream? The idea was a dizzying one.

Some of the dreams were more alluring than others. The bed that becomes a boat 
steering “across the dark”. The swing that goes higher and higher until you can 
see right across the countryside. I remember being half-impressed and 
half-horrified by theThe Land of Story-Books 
<http://www.scottishpoetrylibrary.org.uk/poetry/poems/land-story-books>, with 
its picture of the extremely daring boy creeping along behind the sofa with a 
gun on his way to shoot lions and tigers in a starlit jungle, while his parents 
sat by the hearth consigned to grown-up obliviousness.

But one or two upset or even terrified me. In Good and Bad Children 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/good-and-bad-children/> the “unkind and the 
unruly” grow up to be “geese and gabies”, and I could not bear the picture of 
the grey-faced man (presumably a gaby?) alone in his slippers in his chair, 
“hated” as his age “increases” by his nephews and nieces. I always quickly 
turned that page.

I didn’t so much read this book as live within its pages

And what about The Unseen Playmate 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-unseen-playmate/> who “comes out of the 
wood” when “children are happy and lonely and good” and who, though he plays 
with you, will also play with your toys once you go to bed. And perhaps worst 
of all, the poorDumb Soldier <http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/dumb-soldier>, 
buried in a hole in the garden and left there, rigid and helpless, while the 
grass grows up over him only to be recovered at the end of winter after he “has 
seen the starry hours and the springing of the flowers”. I knew I should be 
glad for the soldier, exhilarated even, but the idea of all those hours staring 
into the lonely darkness felt far too much like death for comfort.

It’s no coincidence that it’s my mother’s handwriting at the front of this 
book. Both she and my father had grown up in bookless homes; both left school, 
largely uneducated, at 15. And yet, barely in her mid-20s and already with 
three small children, she took herself off to the local library and proceeded 
to read her way through it. Thanks to that epiphany, my sisters and I grew up 
with story firmly planted in our lives:Ladybirds 
<http://www.vintageladybird.com/> at pottytime, Mary Poppins and The Treasure 
Seekers at bedtime, Enid Blyton and Noel Streatfeild as soon as I could read 
myself.

This book seems to offer a line straight back to those days. The stories that 
its poems contain are uniquely circular, ongoing, continuous. I didn’t so much 
read this book as live within its pages. And yes, the childish viewpoints feel 
bright, unforced, happily spontaneous, but the overwhelming sense is that of a 
cool artistic impulse, chipping and honing and squeezing, trawling for ideas 
and then gobbling them up and shaping them into something that amounts to far 
more than the sum of its parts.
 