
Lisson gallery shows Ai Weiwei at Art HK


Hong Kong's high-profile international art fair, ArtHK 
<http://www.hongkongartfair.com/>, opens on Thursday. And among the exhibitors? 
Lisson, Ai Weiwei's London gallery, which has been a vocal force in the 
campaign to free the artist from detention in China. The gallery's appearance 
at the fair has been pre-emptively defended by a press statement that declares: 
"By continuing to show his work, we build new audiences for it and draw 
attention to his plight. To withdraw from ArtHK and not show work by the artist 
would make us complicit in the authorities' attempt to silence him and his 
supporters." This is arguable at best. To my mind, what the gallery is really 
drawing attention to is the fact that, for the commercial art world, it's 
business as usual, no matter what the principles at stake.

New study highlights bullying in the arts

We might think of the arts as one big love-in, with hand-holdy warm-up 
exercises, folk calling each other "darling" and group hugs. Anyone who has 
worked in the creative industries, however, knows the reality can be rather 
different. Now, for the first time, a detailed academic study has been produced 
by Anne-Marie Quigg, an independent consultant and cultural policy expert. The 
case studies in herBullying in the Arts 
<http://www.gowerpublishing.com/isbn/9781409404828> make for chilling but 
all-too-familar reading: the chair of the board who bullies the chief executive 
into long-term sick leave; the fundraising director who victimises a senior 
colleague (but is then praised and given a shiny new job); and the "artistic 
temperament" being used as an excuse for unacceptable behaviour that goes well 
beyond the diva-ish.

Personally, I've known conductors bully musicians, and musicians in turn bully 
their conductor; many dancers seem to accept regular bullying as an accepted 
means of achieving exceptionally high standards. One of Quigg's case histories 
involves a writer bullying the director of her play, and its cast, into tearful 
confusion – and then the icing on the cake, bullying her landlady. According to 
Quigg: "It's a bit like when bullying happens in the church: we pay lip service 
to certain principles, but what happens in practice is very different."

Community service for Christoph Büchel

Swiss artist Christoph Büchel, once created a life-like, fully functioning sex 
club in Vienna <http://www.flickr.com/photos/eselat/sets/72157623380813177/>; 
last year, he createda nightmareish combination of prison and plane-crash scene 
in Glasgow's Tramway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/apr/19/glasgow-international-visual-art-festival>
. It is something of a relief that his latest venture is tamer (and worthier): 
he has transformed Hauser and Wirth, an impeccably chic gallery on Piccadilly 
in London, intoa working community centre 
<http://www.piccadillycommunitycentre.org/>.

The visitor is greeted with the lino floors and strip lighting of a municipal 
service building, all of it in use by local voluntary organisations. A canteen 
on the ground floor hosts coffee mornings; upstairs, you can attend yoga 
classes or a tea dance. There's also a drop-in counselling service, a charity 
shop and, downstairs in the basement, a rather airless bar and the truly seedy 
janitor's room complete with rumpled blankets and, if you venture far enough 
(which I don't recommend), his porn stash.
 