
London's taught me to be myself. I used to talk to people on the street. They 
thought I was mad. I remember once on the bus, I said hello to a man and he 
went: "Can you just be quiet?" I was only trying to cheer people up.

Growing up, all I knew was the Caledonian Road in north London. But after I won
X Factor living there was difficult because of the kids. I remember once as I 
was driving in the gate they were trying to open the boot of my car, and then 
they started throwing stones. A week later I was gone.

My mum said: "You really should move somewhere greener", so I moved to 
Hertfordshire and I live in an area with a lot of old people so no one knows 
who I am. You just talk about your dogs.

I've always been independent. I was earning from the age of 12. If I earned 
pocket money from singing in bars and someone gave me a tenner, I'd split it 
with my mum. I left home at 16, so I know how to look after myself. My sister 
calls me the girl that never needs a man. She says: "You may as well just marry 
yourself..."

I hate being alone. That's a different ball game. The other week I went away 
on holiday for five days to Morocco, and it's the first time I've been away by 
myself. I cried on the plane. But I went to the souk, I ate every night alone, 
and I thought: "I can do this." I was writing in my diary, I was reflecting on 
life, I was giving thanks, I was reading for once... It's cool – I'm growing.

My main objective for life is to look after my family. I could waste money on 
clothes and clubs, or I can invest and set up a foundation. I prefer that route.

I'm very spiritual. I make sure I get up every morning and give thanks and 
before I go to bed I say a prayer. I won't get on stage and perform unless 
we've prayed. It makes such a difference.

Music is my drug. I'm itching when I'm not working. I hate it. You should have 
seen me last year, when they told me I had a weekend off from recording my 
album. To do what, exactly? My manager says I'm going to work myself into my 
grave. It took me a long time to learn some balance.

I'm obsessed with life. I love birthdays. It's giving thanks that you've lived 
another year! This year I celebrated my birthday for a month. You can't say: 
"It's just another year." There are babies that only live a week. We should be 
grateful.

The two things we take for granted in the UK are healthcare and education. I 
want my charity to focus on the two things I got for free. I'm opening a school 
in Haiti and I'm trying to set up a foundation for kids. That's my biggest goal.

I want to win awards one day. I'm nominated for an MTV European Music Award, 
which is incredible. As a British person, to win a Brit would be an honour.

I'm taking acting lessons next year. And I'm going to teach myself to play the 
guitar. Who knows if I'll manage it. YouTube has good teach-yourself videos…

No one ever makes a decision for me. I have Simon [Cowell] and my label 
overseeing everything, but we make decisions together, and it's great. I don't 
really have a mentor any more: Cheryl Cole's more of a friend now.


Alexandra Burke is the star of Nintendo's new ad campaign. She also performs 
as part of T4 Stars of 2010 at Earl's Court on 21 November. For details, visit
alexandraburkeofficial.com <http://alexandraburkeofficial.com>


To read all the interviews in this series, go to 
theguardian.com/lifeandhealth/series/thismuchiknow 
<http://theguardian.com/lifeandhealth/series/thismuchiknow>
 