
The Camden Comedy Crawl/Liverpool Comedy Festival

Two very different festivals get underway this week, with very different 
agendas. Liverpool'sComedy Festival <http://liverpoolcomedyfestival.com> (to 8 
May) is a classic example of the modern city shindig. Spread out over 11 days, 
it's garnished with big crowd-pullers (including Dylan Moran, Russell Kane, 
Greg Davies and Tim Minchin) but also offers the chance to check out some less 
heralded talents – including gothic sketch comic Colin Hoult and offbeat 
cerebral stand-up John-Luke Roberts. These last two will also be plying their 
trade on Camden'sComedy Crawl <http://thecomedycrawl.com> – a less lavish, more 
frenzied affair that seeks to pack an entire festival programme of over 100 
comics into two nights of entertainment (Sat, Sun). Grab a wristband, and 
there's a good chance to see something fresh and interesting – like Tom 
Rosenthal, hotly tipped on the back of his turn in Channel 4's Friday Night 
Dinner.

Adam Riches: Manthology, London
 Adam Riches. 
The possibilities of Yakult as a fount of comedic inspiration have been 
hitherto largely unexplored. But character comicAdam Riches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/adam-riches> is more than equal to the task 
of redressing the balance, courtesy of his alter ego Victor Legit. Victor's an 
everyday, common-or-garden macho hardman with two rather unusual quirks – he's 
obsessed with his job of enforcing the laws against DVD piracy, and he has an 
equally compulsive relationship with a certain probiotic milk drink. This kind 
of thing is typical of the Riches comedy method – he takes male personality 
types with which we're all familiar, and adds a streak of full-bodied surreal 
madness to the mix. Following a series of successful Edinburgh Fringe shows, 
this London run sees him cherry-picking the best bits for his Manthology. On 
one level, it's a thorough examination of the nature of masculinity in the 21st 
century. More importantly, it all adds up to a hugely entertaining collection 
of rude gags and inspired comedy characters.

Leicester Square Theatre, WC2, Wed to 15 May

Sod Cancer! London
 David Mitchell and Robert Webb. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt/Rex 
Now that David Mitchell is the default booking for most TV panel shows, you 
might think double-act partner Robert Webb has become overshadowed. However, 
seasoned comedy watchers will probably look to the example of Fry & Laurie – 
whose bone-dry cerebral whimsy is clearly a big influence – as proving that the 
careers of comedy duos can end up like the story of the tortoise and the hare. 
In 20 years time, Webb could be appearing on US network television with an 
unnaturally grafted American accent, while Mitchell could be flogging teabags, 
obsessing about technology and, well, appearing on panel shows. In the 
meantime, they're making a rare live appearance at this charity gig, organised 
by friends of deceased TV pro Jerome O'Donohoe to raise money for the Institute 
of Cancer Research.

Bloomsbury Theatre, WC1, Sat
 