
Lobbying is an issue this government is keen to bury. From the Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> scandal earlier this year, 
to Greg Barker and his lobbyist adviser only a few days ago, stories of senior 
Tory politicians and lobbyists tangled in a mysterious web of power and 
privilege are commonplace. It is no surprise the government has delayed and 
prevaricated over lobbying reform.

Serious questions remain to be answered about the relationship between the 
most senior members of the government – includingGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, the chancellor and 
William Hague, the foreign secretary – and shadowy business and lobbying 
organisations.

Nowhere else is it clearer than with the case of Atlantic Bridge 
<http://atlanticbridge.org/>, the organisation that was at the centre of the 
Adam Werrity and Liam Fox affair. Atlantic Bridge operated under the guise of a 
charity but used its income to pursue a neocon political agenda. As a result it 
was swiftly closed down by its trustees.

But the truth about its operations remains shrouded in mystery and we still do 
not know the truth. This is why I raised the matter in the House of Commons 
last week and why I have written freedom of information requests to the Charity 
Commission and HMRC.

There is added urgency about these matters following events this week. The 
cabinet reshuffle saw the entry into the cabinet of every single MP who had 
served on the advisory board of the disgraced Atlantic Bridge organisation, 
which included George Osborne,William Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague>, Michael Gove and Chris 
Grayling. These kind of examples leave the government open to the accusation 
that it is dragging its feet on regulation of the lobbying industry because of 
inappropriately close relationships with organisations such as Atlantic Bridge.

The board – which included some of the most powerful people in the country – 
presided over Atlantic Bridge during the time that we now know that it was 
operating inappropriately and outside the provisions of the Charities Act. It 
was also being run from Liam Fox's parliamentary office until 2009. The Charity 
Commission investigated the circumstances and determined that the Atlantic 
Bridge was advancing a particular political interest even though it was 
registered as a charity.

Atlantic Bridge was set up as a partnership programme with the American 
Legislative Exchange Council, an organisation comprised of businesspeople, 
lobbyists and politicians, promoting free market and conservative ideas.

Atlantic Bridge was closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/05/charity-liam-fox-axed-watchdog>
 in 2011 following a highly critical report by the Charity Commission. The then 
cabinet secretary, Gus O'Donnell, carried out his own investigation into the 
Fox/Werrity affair but aspects of Atlantic Bridge's operations still lie behind 
a cloak of secrecy.

Thus far the commission has failed to publish all the details of its 
investigation and has rejected requests for information on spurious grounds.

Although Tory party donors and big American companies have been cited, the 
source of Atlantic Bridge's funding is still unclear. Publicly available 
information shows that there were a number of large donations of more than 
£50,000 so that Atlantic Bridge could cover its tax liabilities. The source of 
these donations remains uncertain.

The Atlantic Bridge organisation failed to submit any claims for gift aid or 
answer questions about charitable tax relief. The Charity Commission now 
believes is a matter for HMRC rather than the commission. If the Atlantic 
Bridge benefited from tax relief, and then used its income to shuttle powerful 
rightwing politicians around the world, then the amounts of tax relief must be 
revealed and then recovered.

There is also the question of what happened to the money which was in the 
account when the organisation was wound up. The Charity Commission confirmed 
that from 2010 to until the wind-up of Atlantic Bridge last year, the 
organisation had an income of nearly £80,000. It was said by Atlantic Bridge 
that its remaining assets had been used to settle tax and other liabilities, 
with the rest, just over £400, being donated to Winston Churchill's Britain at 
War Experience. The details of the other liabilities have not been disclosed.

In the interests of transparency and fairness, all of Atlantic Bridge's 
accounts need to be published in full. In order to get to the bottom of the 
Atlantic Bridge scandal, I have submitted freedom of information requests to 
the Charity Commission, appealing to it to release the Atlantic Bridge 
documents it has so far refused to publish. Also, I have written to HMRC to ask 
it to investigate the accounts of Atlantic Bridge to provide further detail 
about what the organisation's residual funds were spent on.

Let's be clear, the Tory-led government is no stranger to the shady and 
sinister world of inappropriate conduct and lobbying. From Peter Cruddas, the 
Tory co-treasurer,offering access to the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/25/peter-cruddas-resigns-cash-access>
 for donations, to Jeremy Hunt's close relationships with lobbyists and BSkyB, 
there have been numerous scandals involving senior Tories.

Following the departure of Mark Harper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jul/06/mark-harper-faces-tricky-week?>
, the minister in charge of cleaning up the lobbying industry, it seems the 
government has put any plans to introduce meaningful regulation on the back 
burner. Only today, after over a week of uncertainty, it was announced that
Chloe Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chloe-smith>, who is known 
for her "poor performance" on the BBC's Newsnight programme, will now be 
heading the government's lobbying reform programme. It is clear that lobbying 
reform will be nothing but light touch.

Delay after delay, failed promise after failed promise, we have seen the 
government play a political game of obfuscation. The truth is the government 
does not want to clean up lobbying. It simply has too much to hide.
 