
Akira Kurosawa And His Influence, London

If you've never seen a Kurosawa film, then a) you've doubtless seen a film 
made by someone who's seen a Kurosawa film, and b) shame on you. The Japanese 
master devoured western film and literature (John Ford and Ed McBain were 
favourites), and translated them into samurai epics and domestic films noirs, 
which westerners devoured right back. Here you get both sides of the coin. 
Compare Clint Eastwood's Man With No Name in A Fistful Of Dollars with Toshirô 
Mifune's wily samurai in Yojimbo, catch the Hamlet influences in Kurosawa's 
1960s corporate thriller The Bad Sleep Well, spot the original C3PO and R2D2 in 
The Hidden Fortress, or see how the multi-angle flashback structure of Rashômon 
(on extended release) has lent itself to medieval Sweden (Bergman's Virgin 
Spring), the Wild West (Outrage) and ancient China (Zhang Yimou's Hero).

BFI Southbank, SE1, to 8 Jul; Akira Kurosawa: The Samurai Collection is out on 
DVD on Mon

Intense Intimacy: The Cinema Of Claire Denis, Bristol
 Isabelle Huppert in the Claire Denis film White Material. 
Claire Denis's 35 Shots Of Rum was agreed to be one of the best films of last 
year, a soulful but up-to-date take on multicultural Paris, but she rarely 
gives audiences such an easy ride. More often than not, the French film-maker 
has turned out elliptical, challenging sensual movies mining uncomfortable 
areas. One recurring interest is her country's and her own past in colonial 
Africa. After her debut Chocolat, she returns there for her latest, White 
Material, in which Isabelle Huppert plays a coffee plantation owner surrounded 
by civil war. There are other strings to her bow, though, as like gory horror 
Trouble Every Day, intimate drama Nénette Et Boni, or her documentary on 
Cameroonian group Les Tête Brulées, testify.

Watershed, Sun to 30 Jun

Now That's What I Call The 1980s, Derby
 Buckaroo Banzai Across The 8th Dimension. 
The 1980s remake bandwagon is rolling through the multiplexes this year, but 
here's a few films that have thankfully passed it by. Then again, who could 
ever emulate cult favourite The Adventures Of Buckaroo Banzai Across The 8th 
Dimension? Those spiky synth-pop stylings, that baffling sci-fi zaniness, Jeff 
Goldblum looking young – as the great sage MC Hammer once said, U can't touch 
this! Beyond that, this is a collection of epoch-defining, easily revisited and 
hopefully eternally inimitable benchmarks: Blue Velvet, The Breakfast Club, The 
Lost Boys (the Twilight of its day) and Brian de Palma's Scarface, which was, 
admittedly, a remake.

Quad, Sun to 26 Jun

Rendez-Vous With French Cinema, London
 Gainsbourg: Vie Heroique. Photograph: Rex 
When it comes to a healthy national cinema, you can't beat the French, so why 
not join them? Six recent releases make up this cultural exchange, with a few 
British faces among them. Kristin Scott Thomas plays a modern-day Lady 
Chatterley to Sergi López in Leaving (Partir), while Oxford's Lucy Gordon, who 
tragically committed suicide last year, gives what would have been a 
star-making performance as Jane Birkin in Joann Sfar's fanciful biopic 
Gainsbourg: Vie Héroïque. Not to mention US defector Jean Seberg, in a restored 
version of Godard's À Bout De Souffle. Plenty of familiar French names too: 
Alain Resnais (Wild Grass), François Ozon, Mathieu Amalric and Mélanie Laurent. 

Various venues, Tue to Fri, institut-francais.org.uk 
<http://institut-francais.org.uk> 
 