
So initially, I thought the funniest thing about what I suppose I am obliged 
to refer to as Fergiegate was the moment in the News of the World film when she 
says "I'll get a lick of the spoon . . . and save my bacon": the metaphors are 
mixed but remain firmly kitchen-based. Fergie, I have missed you.

In fact, the most whiplash-inducingly hilarious element to this non-drama is – 
as is so often the case – the reaction of the press. Aside from the ridiculous 
moralising about the gall of Fergie attempting to make money out of the royals 
when the papers have been doing that for years, particularly the ones whose 
sensibilities were most offended, there is the intimation thatPrince Andrew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-andrew> is – I'm sorry, I might need a 
moment – in some way important and that national security has somehow been 
threatened. Or something.

In pretty much every article, Andrew was described as "Prince Andrew, the UK's 
special representative for international trade and investment."

I'm sorry, the what? Is that what we've been telling him all these years to 
make him feel as if there is some point to his existence, other than being the 
un-needed spare to the superfluous heir? Was "the UK's special representative 
for golf-playing and Kazakh-befriending" already taken? And is this the job for 
which, it came out last year, Andrew was claiming £4,000 a week in expenses 
from the taxpayer?

I apologise for the series of questions but there is so much that needs to be 
resolved, not least whether Fergie got to keep the $40,000 she was seen walking 
away with in the NOTW's video. I truly hope she did because I would much rather 
she got that money from someone – Murdoch, a phoney businessman, I'm not fussed 
– other than Andrew, whose financial situation we have already discussed.

Taking it as a given that Andrew truly did not know that his ex-wife was 
whoring him out, then I would humbly suggest he takes note. Fergie has, with 
her hands eagerly cupped, inadvertently hit upon the right way for royals to be 
funded. I've long thought that the royal family should be shipped around the 
world to stand in glass boxes on display, like Diana's dresses, so that people 
who actually want to see them can pay to see them – the royals themselves 
thereby becoming self-funded. I mean, my gosh, if there really is some 
businessman out there who would be willing to pay £500,000 to hang out with 
Prince Andrew, by all means, don't be shy. I'm sure I could throw in Edward for 
£20 and a recently topped-up Oyster card.

As an American, I feel uniquely qualified to talk about this, seeing as it is 
often claimed that it is for the benefit of my countrymen (and the occasional 
Japanese tour group) that the royal family continues to exist. But it's really 
the British press that doffs its cap to the living Windsors, as opposed to 
forking out for more Diana postcards, which is the American approach to royal 
studies. Just this weekend there was much hue and cry in the headlines over the 
suggestion that details of the Queen's speech had been leaked, days before she 
spoke it. A nation shrugs.

Similarly, in an election ripe with insane moments, quite possibly the most 
ridiculous was when Nick Clegg allegedly asked Gordon Brown to wait a little 
longer before resigning, only for Brown to reply that he couldn't because "the 
Queen expects me to go". It would have been more understandable to my 
disrespectful mind if he'd said, "I'm sorry, Nick, I can't – Deal Or No Deal is 
about to start and I just love Noel Edmonds."

So don't apologise, Fergie. You haven't screwed up in the slightest. You've 
merely hit upon the patently obvious truth: that the royal family should be 
granted the same respect and job as the commemorative mugs that are sold in 
shops with names like Fancy That of London, and sold accordingly.

An update to the celebrity register Now that Andrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield> ex-MD has at last been 
struck off the medical register, shouldn't the celebrities who did so much to 
spread his gospel be struck off as celebrities? I'm speaking in particular of 
Jenny McCarthy and her ex-boyfriend Jim Carrey, the former having claimed 
proudly that her medical qualifications come from "the university of Google" 
and the latter having appeared in Dumb and Dumber (which, incidentally, was not 
a docu-drama about his relationship with McCarthy).

With the exception of being asked to discuss their "craft", there is nothing 
celebrities like to talk about more than how they are "using their fame for a 
good cause". Thus, if they have used their fame for a bad cause, it follows 
that they should lose their celebrity rights, and McCarthy in particular has 
done at least as much as Wakefield to spread the idea that theMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> jab causes autism, thanks to her 
scaremongering appearances on Oprah, Larry King and general noise-making.

So I wondered how McCarthy was taking the news about Wakefield. Was she 
contrite? Her faith dented? Of course not. Instead, displaying the same 
blinkered delusion as her chum Wakefield, she was bigging up on Twitter his 
recently published book, the ironically titled Callous Disregard, for which 
McCarthy (once Playboy's Playmate of the Year) has supplied a doubtless 
medically sound introduction. Who could doubt it, considering that just a few 
tweets below this, she felt compelled to share with the world the following: 
"At my gyno. Sometimes I think he should pay ME for this opportunity." Medical 
register, schmegister: who could resist putting the health of their children 
into the hands of Wakefield and his coterie?
 