
I'm interested in people. I'm an actor, so I have to be – otherwise how can I 
play them? At drama school we were taught to listen, listen, listen – and if 
you do, you hear brilliant things. I was on tour with Rula Lenska in the play
Losing Louis a few years ago. I was in a café and I heard this girl say to her 
friend: "Guess what I dreamt last night? I dreamt my boyfriend went off with 
Rula Lenska. Well, I dunno, it was someone with big hair anyway." I wanted to 
die laughing.

I love theatre. When it works properly and you're over the nerves and you've 
got a good play with nice audiences, that's my favourite thing to do.

The first time I saw a fox as a child I was beside myself with joy. I still 
have the same sense of delight now. The news stories about urban foxes upset 
me. Let them dig up your bulbs.

Abigail's Party never goes away. Nor does Mrs Bennet from Pride and Prejudice. 
And now taxi drivers shout "Pamelaaaaa!" [fromGavin & Stacey] across the street.

You can't knock things being popular, particularly with young kids. I walked 
past this gang of boys on bikes and someone said: "Hey, it's Pamela!" They all 
raced up saying: "Please, miss!" They were so enthusiastic – it was really nice.

My dad made me train as a secretary when I was 16. He thought I'd be all right 
if I had typing and shorthand. I never did work as a secretary, but I'm glad he 
made me learn to type – I use it when I'm writing emails.

I don't mind the way I look. The most beautiful person in the world ages. But 
I do object to being creaky boned.

I take a photo of my mum wherever I go and put it in my dressing room. She was 
a great one for encouraging me if I was nervous about going on stage. One time 
I was playing Desdemona and I had the collywobbles about it. I broke down and 
cried and said I couldn't do it. She just said: "Stop it – you can do it, and 
you will."

I'm just about to buy a table-tennis table. I'm going to keep myself fit 
playing because I love it.

One of my favourite places is Birling Gap in Sussex. You drive down there, get 
out the car and within a minute you're standing on the edge of the cliffs. It 
never fails to bring a lump to my throat.

I don't like heights. I can't go on the London Eye.

One of my earliest memories is death masks on the walls in my grandmother's 
house. I guess they must have been her parents'. I remember being very alarmed 
as a three-year-old.

I love making shoebox rooms. I have whole boxes of milk-bottle tops, cardboard 
tubes, bits of wallpaper. If there's kids around and I get the chance, I really 
enjoy doing that.

I'll never forget seeing Ingrid Bergman on stage when I was a student in the 
60s. She was so beautiful. When she walked on stage the whole theatre gasped.

People say: "Sorry to trouble you" when they come up to me in the street. If 
they didn't trouble me and they weren't there, I wouldn't have a job.


The ITV drama Come Rain Come Shine is out now on DVD 


To read all the interviews in this series, go to 
theguardian.com/lifeandhealth/series/thismuchiknow <http:// 
theguardian.com/lifeandhealth/series/thismuchiknow>
 