
Acting is a commentary on life and a way of entertaining people. One without 
the other doesn't work.

Nice table manners are important. I am not very fussy about which fork people 
use, but I do like civilised behaviour. When I was little, my mother told me 
off for giving the thumbs-up sign, and she told me not to put my hands in my 
pockets.

Hundreds of amateur and professional productions of Abigail's Party have been 
put on all over the country and I have seen a lot of them. But I wasn't going 
to go along to the Hampstead Theatre's 25th anniversary production. I know 
Elizabeth Berrington and I thought it wasn't going to be very nice for her 
playing Beverly with me sitting there. So I sent her a note saying I would pop 
in later during the run. She sent a note back asking me to come along. So what 
can you do? I went along and it was a great night.

The most frightening thing is having to stand up as myself. I hate it if I 
have to make speeches. It is really horrible. You haven't got the security of 
the play to hide behind.

Film writers and stage writers often write parts for women which are really 
just cyphers to tell some amazing story. They just put a glamorous woman in it 
and they mix in a love affair. Frankly, I am not interested in that.

Acting has been a sort of release. I can experience things and do things that 
I don't do in life.

You have got to be friends with your children. You should give them the 
feeling you will always be there and be as loving as you can be.

I don't get recognised. You could die on the Tube and people wouldn't notice. 
If you are just travelling on the Tube because you want to get from A to B, and 
reading your paper, people don't even notice you, whoever you are.

I always endeavour never to be late. At drama school we had to sign a book 
when we arrived. It was put away after 10 minutes, and you were fined if you 
were late. My drama teacher used to say, 'If you are 15 minutes late each day, 
you'll lose one or two days by the end of rehearsals.' It isn't polite to be 
late, although it happens to us all sometimes with public transport. If 
anything, I like to be 15 minutes early and have a cup of coffee.

Money has never been something I thought about, even as a girl. 

I am always waiting for failure, for the bad reviews. Because it happens. 

The work is a lot of pressure. I want to be quiet sometimes. I have a glass of 
wine, take the dog out or go for a long walk.

I am at my happiest when a show is on and I am in the West End, and I have got 
over all the nerves, and learnt all the lines, and the show is working and the 
audience is loving it. Every time I come home at night, I feel great. I am 
flying for about two or three hours.

Music, and piano music in particular, became more important to me after I 
played Brenda Ogden, the wife of the pianist John Ogden. I had to play a duet 
in the film, or mock it up anyway. We had to play in the Royal Festival Hall. 
Hanging around backstage made me appreciate what a rarefied world it is.

It is not good to play a role when someone else has already done a definitive 
version. I wouldn't play Jean Brodie because Maggie Smith has already done that 
and from then on, if anyone plays it, it is always, 'Oh, she didn't do it like 
that.'

The British class system hasn't changed very much during my lifetime. Some of 
the upper classes may have opened up their homes a bit, but behind closed doors 
it is the same club that it ever was.

I dress very casually usually, but I love clothes. I don't care where they 
come from. When it is a special event, I love to dress up a bit in my 
twinklies. I have certain bits of jewellery I love, but I would never spend 
£2,000 on one dress.

I wouldn't want to die on stage. I would like to die in my bed with my family 
around me and with my sons holding my hands. It is about dignity, really. I 
would like to retire at some point, but I don't know if I could do it. Probably 
not. The thing is to go on having a youthful mind. The worst thing is to start 
whingeing.

· Alison Steadman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman> stars 
in The Woman Who Cooked Her Husband at the New Ambassadors Theatre, London from 
5 September.
 