
Holiday group Thomas Cook has moved higher in another falling market, on hopes 
its majority shareholder Arcandor was edging closer to German state aid and - 
separately - following a presentation in the City.

Retail and tourism group Arcandor, which owns 52% of Thomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup>, has warned it could go 
bust if it does not receive €1bn of aid, and it now seems a decision will be 
made on Monday. Thomas Cook's shares have been volatile recently on worries 
about what might happen to the Arcandor stake, given its current financial 
problems.

Meanwhile Panmure Gordon issued a buy note on Thomas Cook after the broker 
attended a dinner with the management of the company's Northern European 
business. Analyst James Ainley said:

"The business has been the best performing division in the group in the last 
few years reflecting to some extent the geographical positioning of the Nordic 
region which has meant little low cost carrier development. Management 
confirmed that the recent uptick in bookings was continuing and it remains 
confident of meeting 2009 full year expectations.

"Overall the presentation served to emphasise the unique aspects of the 
Northern European region. Management has certainly performed well in this 
region and the recent booking trends indicate that 2009 will deliver another 
good performance. Given the weaker early booking trends we currently assume 
Northern European margins fall from 8.9% to 8.0% in 2009. We remain comfortable 
with this forecast for the time being but continuation of the strong recent 
trends may cause us to revise this upwards."

All this means Thomas Cook shares have climbed 4.75p to 234.75p, making the 
company the biggest riser in theFTSE 100. Overall the market is off to a fairly 
quiet start, with little corporate news. The leading index has suffered from 
another spate of profit taking, falling 52.27 points to 4424.75 ahead of US 
employment and factory orders reports due out later. The major US figures this 
week, however, come on Friday with the monthly non-farm payroll numbers.

Meanwhile sterling continued to move higher, as investors bet on an economic 
recovery, pushing the euro to its lowest level against the pound since December.

Owen Ireland, sales broker at spread betters ODL Securities, said:

"Investors are now watching with avid interest as the FTSE loiters around the 
4500 level. It wasn't unreasonable to expect the Index to continue its progress 
north yesterday, but the banks certainly saw to that, with International 
Petroleum Investment Company selling its 11% stake inBarclays. If we're going 
to see an extension of this rally, investors will have to believe that the 
light at the end of the tunnel isn't just an illusion, and that the stocks they 
are buying saw their worst long ago."

Banks were again under pressure, with Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> down another 13p to 260.5p and 
Lloyds Banking Group off 2.2p at 67.3p ahead of what could be a feisty annual 
meeting on Friday, also the closing date for the bank's placing and open offer.

Elsewhere Lloyds of London insurer Amlin fell 20.25p to 318.75p as it 
announced a placing of 23.5m shares to help fund the €350m purchase of Fortis 
Corporate Insurance from the Dutch government. In a hold note analyst Tom 
Dorner at Oriel Securities commented:

"Amlin has for some time expressed a desire to make an acquisition and 
acquired AFU in France during 2008. The acquisition will provide Amlin with a 
strong European presence and diversification away from catastrophe reinsurance. 
A clear positive is that the acquisition is expected to be earnings and return 
on equity enhancing in 2009. FCI was loss making in 2008 so a key question will 
be whether Amlin are able to turn around FCI's operations.Amlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amlin> has a strong track record for 
delivering sector leading underwriting results, so on first impressions one has 
to be hopeful that they will be able to achieve this."

But JP Morgan was less positive, saying the deal looked expensive and adding:

"Amlin say that sharing Amlin's underwriting skills and risk management will 
improve FCI's ability, however this could also prove to be a management 
distraction and could reduce the quality of existing business which attracts a 
premium rating to the sector."

BAE Systems climbed 6.75p to 339.25p after Cazenove repeated its outperform 
rating on the company. The broker said it was surprised BAE had missed out on 
the recent market rally, and believed the shares were materially undervalued.
 