
If you weren't much of a cricket fan, some of the writing about the Ashes 
decider at The Oval would have made you wonder whether Bill Gordon was a pastry 
chef rather than someone entrusted with preparing a cricket pitch. Adjectives 
like "overcooked" and "overbaked" were used liberally to describe the 22 yards 
of turf, and the debates raged on long after Graeme Swann had bowled the final 
ball.

I'm no expert on pitches – and I have yet to come across one – but I honestly 
don't understand the fuss. It might help to work with facts, rather than 
Ashes-inspired emotion. England finished the opening day on 307 for eight from 
85.3 overs. Both sides scored more than 347 in their second innings. The 
innings of the match was played on the third day by a man making his Test 
debut. The best spell of the game came from a young pace bowler, but there were 
wickets too for the spinners, one of them a part-timer. And, most importantly, 
there was a result, not five days of mind-numbing tediumas seen in the 
Caribbean earlier this year 
<http://www.cricinfo.com/wiveng2009/engine/match/352663.html>, with every man 
jack seemingly capable of scoring a century.

To be fair, though he described the pitch as "poor", Ricky Ponting didn't use 
it as an excuse for a crushing defeat. That would have ignored Australia's 
utterly limp first-innings display, and even Fox News wouldn't swallow such 
tripe. We hope. The scent of putrid grapes came instead from the media. Fair 
enough. Defeat to the Poms can be a bitter pill to flush down the throat.

But why bring the subcontinent into it? One of the articles mentioned 
"designer" subcontinent pitches. It wasn't a Calvin Klein reference, but an 
allusion to the Asian tendency to prepare raging turners to stymie touring 
teams. Now, a decade ago no one would have batted an eyelid at such an 
assertion. For much of the 1990s, cricket in India did mean underprepared and 
slow surfaces where the ball turned square from the first afternoon. The home 
side duly won most of the matches too.

To make such a statement in 2009 merely highlights ignorance. Times have 
changed, but some attitudes don't appear to have done the same. It reminded me 
a little of a Test match I covered atAhmedabad in December 2005 
<http://www.cricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/226363.html>. India made 398 
and 316, and Sri Lanka, needing 509 to win, folded on the final morning for 
249. After the game, Clive Lloyd, the match referee, informed the ICC that it 
was a "substandard" surface unfit for Test cricket. To say that a few eyebrows 
were raised would be an understatement.

In India's second innings, Harbhajan Singh and Anil Kumble had added an 
unbroken 69 for the final wicket. And though the spinners on both sides took 
wickets, they didn't come cheap. With VVS Laxman scoring a beautiful 
first-innings hundred and several others excelling with the bat, it certainly 
wasn't a case of tossing the ball into the "right areas" – to use every 
bowler's favourite cliche – and harvesting the wickets.

Somewhere along the way, we've allowed a particular mind-set to take root. A 
sporting pitch seems to have become a synonym for one that aids the pace 
bowlers. Why should that be so? I can recall Kumble taking seven for 48 on the 
opening day of a Test against Australia in Chennai in 2004.It turned out to be 
a magnificent game <http://www.cricinfo.com/statsguru/engine/match/64100.html> 
with many twists and turns, and we were denied a grandstand final-day finish 
only because of rain.

Later in that series, with the outcome already decided, Australia lost by 13 
runs in Mumbai <http://www.cricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/64102.html>. The match 
lasted just three days, and the late Polly Umrigar, batting great turned 
curator, was excoriated by the media. Preparation of pitches is hardly an exact 
science and poor Umrigar, a traditionalist to the core, never lived it down. 
But would there have been such uproar if Australia had won?

Again, a look at the facts is instructive. India were bowled out on the 
opening afternoon for 104, with Glenn McGrath, Jason Gillespie and Michael 
Kasprowicz taking seven of the wickets. Damien Martyn then gave Australia a 
99-run lead, before some sensational batsmanship from Laxman and Sachin 
Tendulkar allowed India to sneak a small lead. But Michael Clarke picked up six 
wickets for nine runs to end the innings, leaving Australia to make just 107. 
As at the The Oval, some of the batting wasn't very clever at all, and it was 
only the cussedness of the tail that spared them even greater embarrassment. 
Dicey pitch? Sure. But surely not so unplayable that only Matthew Hayden of the 
top order could surpass Nathan Hauritz's score of 15.

Let's look at some more models of these Armani pitches. Take Nagpur 
<http://www.cricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/64101.html>, the game before 
the Mumbai Test against Australia. With the series on the line, the local 
association decided to prepare a surface so tinged with green that the 
Australian pace attack were grinning long before they got hold of the new ball. 
The result, with McGrath and Gillespie in the line-up, was predictable, a 
342-run thumping that gave Australia a first series win in India since the 1969 
moon landing.

Consider another well-tailored specimen, Ahmedabad in April 2008 
<http://www.cricinfo.com/indvrsa/engine/match/332912.html>, with South Africa 
the visitors. Again, a fair smattering of grass on the surface. India bowled 
out for 76, in 20 overs. South Africa won by an innings. If you're doctoring 
pitches, surely you wouldn't do it to suit the away side? A week later,on a 
Kanpur dustbowl <http://www.cricinfo.com/indvrsa/engine/match/332913.html> that 
made The Oval look like the Autobahn, India did square the series.

But it wasn't the surface that defeated South Africa as much as their attitude 
to it. Allied with some extremely sloppy bowling at India's tail – they were 
248 for six in response to South Africa's first innings 265 – they had no 
chance. The whingeing would have been fine if it wasn't so selective. Back in 
2000, Jacques Kallis and Mark Bouchereked out a tense four-wicket win in a 
Mumbai Test <http://www.cricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/63870.html> where the 
highest total was 225. The Wisden Almanack described that pitch as appearing to 
be "not just shorn by the mower but also scraped with a wire brush", but I 
certainly don't recall any gnashing of teeth or wailing after that game.

India have won just 19 of 44 home Tests this decade compared to 17 from 30 in 
the 1990s. Of course, they aren't a patch on the masters of pitch design in the 
region, Pakistan. Post-1997, they contrived to lose home series against 
Australia, England, India, Sri Lanka, South Africa, and even Zimbabwe. Sharp 
designing, that. Maybe Mr Gordon needs some lessons on how to make visitors 
look their best. And some of those crying hoarse about perfectly fine pitches 
could do with a little fact-checking.
 