
Disturbing readings from the Cotswolds, where the indications are becoming too 
insistent to ignore. I’m afraid we need to face the terrifying possibility that 
the so-called Chipping Norton set did not die. It simply ... mutated.

Chances are, you were one of those people who imagined that this once 
prevalent social virus – which included your David and Samantha Camerons, your 
Rebekah and Charlie Brookses, your Clarksons and your Murdoch-Freuds – had been 
eradicated after The Unpleasantness. There was a general perception that it 
simply could not have survived legal attempts to get to the bottom of who said 
what to whom at some frightful “country supper”, or what happened to theformer 
police horse Raisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/02/david-cameron-rebekah-brooks-police-horse>
, between the prime ministerial arse being on her back, and her being returned 
to the Met in what the force described as a “poor condition” – to say nothing 
of such internecine struggles asthe Murdoch-Freuds ending their marital union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/06/matthew-freud-elisabeth-murdoch-divorce>
.

Thus you probably assumed that the Chipping Norton set had been permanently 
broken up – or at the very least scattered. A bit like the Fellowship at the 
end of The Fellowship of the Ring, only with more black Range Rovers.Always the 
black Range Rovers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/02/rich-kids-of-instagram>

But perhaps the Chipping Norton set was not dead. Perhaps it was merely 
dormant. Or rather, perhaps it was retooling, and in its newest strain presents 
a threat for which we may be profoundly unprepared. I must draw your eye to a 
report in the Sun, which reveals that David and Samantha Cameron spent New 
Year’s Eve at an “old school disco-style” party at the Cotswold home of … [cue 
Vader music] …Alex James <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james>.

Oh God, you may be screaming, not James … Once he was the bassist in Blur, now 
he’s Britain’s premier cheese bore, but there was a sense that he should have 
been placed beyond use after the publication ofhis 2012 opus All Cheeses Great 
and Small 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2012/feb/16/alex-james-memoir-cheese>
.

That, you may recall, was the second volume of an autobiography from a man who 
had done absolutely nothing whatsoever of note since the end of the last one 
from which it picked up, unless you count buying a farm in the Cotswolds. And I 
don’t. This glaring absence of plot unfortunately required Alex to pad out the 
pages with his observations on life, rural and otherwise, and he never failed 
to sink to the challenge. “Trees belong to the class of things that cost as 
much as you’re prepared to spend, like pianos,” we learned. His domestic 
staffing arrangements were detailed with immense charm. “On the whole,” muses 
Alex, “I was surprised how much I liked most of the people who lived nearby. 
Not just the nobs and the billionaires. We took on two Gypsies from the trailer 
park as cleaners and they fascinated me. The younger one was very pretty …” The 
reader never got to learn their names, the elder cleaner only ever being 
described as “the not-so-pretty Gypsy girl”. In Alex’s prose, the Cotswolds 
took on the character of some Hieronymus Bosch twatscape, as he gadded between 
endtimes socials – “apparently, I’d only just missed the man who used to run 
Bradford & Bingley. He was now a cheesemaker of some repute” – and the world’s 
wankiest organic shop, which, according to Alex, “radiates prestige”.

The idea that this character should now entrance a prime minister who may be 
on the brink of a second term is perhaps less than encouraging. In fact, were 
anything capable of making Tony Blair’s Chequers invitation to Tess Daly and 
Vernon Kaye look like asking Mary and Percy Shelley down for the weekend, then 
this is surely it.

Of course, for the doomchasers, the clues have long been there. It was all the 
way back in 2011 thatAlex hosted a festival on his estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/sep/15/day-the-festival-dream-died>
, an event that yielded the image used to accompany this column, featuring 
attendee Jeremy Clarkson engaged in conversation with a 
BabyBjörn-harness-wearing Cameron. It is, in many ways, the eternal caption 
competition, and though a Daily Mail reader appended the comment “the prime 
minister, and the ideal prime minister”, this column preferred a one-worder: 
Worstival. Whichever way you slice it, something about the festival dream was 
brutally snuffed out in that Cotswolds field that afternoon, and, if you look 
right into Alex’s eyes, I think even he knows it. Man, he looks beaten.

But is he? Because reports from New Year’s Eve suggest otherwise. The most 
detailed account comes from the Sun, the paper for whom Alex has functioned as 
an occasional columnist over the past few years.

“The prime minister was seen ‘dad-dancing’ throughout the night,” we learn. 
“At one point, the 48-year-old premier ended up in a battle with Alex over 
whether or not he should sing karaoke. Wife Samantha, 43, was also spotted 
enjoying the festivities with her husband,” the paper goes on. “Onlookers 
described how ‘it looked like she was playing a leg as a guitar at one point’.”

Whose leg? It may just seem like an adorable vignette of leg-guitar now, but 
in three years and a couple of major news investigations’ time, it could be the 
missing piece in a conspiracy involving the prime minister, some telecoms 
industry and security services interface, and whichever local moguls were 
pogoing to Town Called Malice round at Alex’s that night.

Yet the answer, I’m afraid, is tantalisingly unclear. There is no readily 
available passenger manifest for this ship of fools, with the only other named 
attendee at the bash being Spandau Ballet’s Gary Kemp. Mr Kemp is a Labour 
supporter, so I should make it clear that there is no suggestion that the limb 
in question was his. Mrs Cameron may well have been playing her own leg as a 
guitar: my feeling is that the prime minister’s official spokesperson should 
come clean about the incident immediately, and in its entirety, before it 
becomes A Thing.

As for the notable absentees, I expect it is very possible that the Brookses 
and the Clarksons New-Years-Eved together, raising the possibility that the 
Chipping Norton set now has splinter groups, whom you may wish to think of as 
the Provisional Chipping Norton set and the Real Chipping Norton set, 
in order to keep track.

Either way, my ducks: new year, new danger. The idea that this thing has 
simply gone away is beginning to look like complacency of the most foolish kind.
 