
The trial of senior executives at the bank that almost bankrupted Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> begins this week with tight 
security around the Dublin courthouse where the men blamed for the Irish 
banking crisis are to be tried.

It will be one of the most complex and controversial trials in the history of 
European financial crime, with hundreds of witnesses, millions of documents and 
a trio regarded as national hate figures in Ireland. The case also marks a rare 
criminal intervention against senior figures involved in the credit crunch, 
with Iceland making the only notable attempt to prosecute bank executives for 
their role in institutional failures.

Three leading figures in the defunct and disgraced Anglo Irish Bank – Sean 
FitzPatrick, Pat Whelan and William McAteer – will each face 16 charges of 
unlawfully providing financial assistance to individuals for the purpose of 
buying shares inAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> in 2008.

All of the charges relate to transactions with 16 individuals who allegedly 
received financial assistance from the accused trio between 10 July and 17 July 
2008. The three former bankers deny all the charges against them.

Among the star witnesses expected to give evidence will be Ireland's one-time 
richest man, Sean Quinn, who borrowed billions from the bank to fund a global 
property portfolio during the Celtic Tiger boom years. When property prices 
collapsed across the world, Quinn owed billions and had to file for bankruptcy.

A jury of eight men and seven women have been sworn in at the Dublin circuit 
criminal court, where the trial begins on Wednesday morning. It will be the 
first time in Irish criminal history that an extended jury of 15 has been 
selected to hear a major case.

About 350 people volunteered to serve on the jury, giving an indication of the 
interest in the upcoming trial, which is expected to last for three to six 
months.

Judge Martin Nolan told the assembled panel that any past or present Anglo 
Irish Bank employees should not serve on the jury and said anyone who has 
expressed "strong public views" on Anglo Irish – including on Facebook and 
other social media networks, or who owns shares in any bank, was prohibited 
from serving.

Among the persons alleged to have been given financial assistance from the 
three Anglo Irish Bank bosses are Sean Quinn Junior and his mother Patricia.

The 16 people named in the charges are: Patricia Quinn; Sean Quinn Junior; 
Collete Marie Quinn; Aoife Quinn; Brenda Quinn; Ciara Quinn; Paddy McKillen; 
Séamus Ross; Brian O'Farrell; John McCabe; Gerard Maguire; Patrick Kearney; 
Gerard Conlon; Gerard Gannon; Seán Reilly and Joseph O'Reilly. The charges 
relating to Patricia Quinn are alleged to have occurred between 10 July and 18 
July 2008.

Forty two officers in the Garda Siochana are expected to give evidence along 
with former employees at the Anglo Irish Bank and staff from Ireland's central 
bank. Overall, up to 24m documents and 800 witness statements will have to be 
examined during the complex financial trial. The Irish court service has opened 
an extra courtroom for the public to watch the unfolding trial on video link 
next door such is the public interest in the trial.

There is expected to be heavy security present around the courthouse in case 
of demonstrations against the bankers on trial.

There have been previous protests outside the home of Sean FitzPatrick in Co 
Wicklow and in addition back in 2010 a general threat from dissident 
republicans in a communiqué to the Guardian that they weremonitoring the 
actions of "banks and bankers" in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/sep/14/real-ira-targets-banks-bankers>.

Nearly €30bn (£25bn) of taxpayers money had to be pumped into the bank in 2008 
to rescue it and the entire Irish banking sector from total collapse. The bank 
has since been nationalised and renamed as the IrishBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Resolution Corporation.

The multibillion-euro rescue of the debt ridden bank came back into public 
focus last year when tape recordings emerged of Anglo Irish executives 
discussing the bailout they had sought from the Irish government.

One of the tapes – first revealed by the Irish Independent – contains audio 
recording of one Anglo Irish Bank executive, John Bowe, who is heard laughing 
and joking about the rescue with one of his colleagues, Peter Fitzgerald.

The two men are heard discussing how the government and the taxpayer agreed to 
pump billions into the bank. Bowe is asked by Fitzgerald how they can came up 
with an original figure of €7bn to rescue the bank from complete collapse.

On the tape Bowe is heard replying: "Just as Drummer (the then Anglo Irish CEO 
David Drumm) would say, 'picked it out of my arse'."

In fact the Anglo Irish Bank bailout was to cost the Irish taxpayer more than 
quadruple Bowe's original estimate.

The Anglo Irish executives are also heard on tape making jokes about the money 
the German and other European taxpayers are handing over to the Irish 
government in a bid to shore up the Republic's banking system. The tapes, which 
were played across Irish airwaves and online, caused national outrage,inciting 
comment from Angela Merkel, who said the scandal "damages democracy" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/28/angela-merkel-anglo-irish-bank-scandal>
. However, none of the three defendants in the trial that begins on Wednesday 
were recorded on tape.
 