
Spanish clubs continued their impressive run in European competition this 
season whenAthletic Bilbao, Atlético Madrid and Valencia reached the Europa 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> semi-finals 
alongsideSporting Lisbon.

Bilbao came back twice to end Schalke's hopes with a 2-2 draw that put them 
through 6-4 on aggregate,Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> routed AZ Alkmaar 4-0 to go 
through 5-2, and Atlético won 2-1 atHannover to secure a 4-2 aggregate after 
two legs. Sporting completed the Iberian peninsula's tremendous night when they 
drew 1-1 atMetalist Kharkiv to go through 3-2.

Sporting play Bilbao and Atlético face Valencia as Spanish clubs repeated 
their feat of 2007, when three also reached the semi-finals. Barcelona and Real 
Madrid reached the Champions League semi-finals this week.

Bilbao, who eliminated Manchester United, completed their passage to their 
first European semi-final since they lost in the 1977 Uefa Cup to Juventus.
Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> looked keen to pull off 
an upset at San Mamés Stadium as Klaas-Jan Huntelaar drove a shot beyond the 
goalkeeper Gorka Iraizoz to give the visitors a 28th-minute lead with his 
tournament-leading 10th goal.

Marcelo Bielsa's decision to replace Ander Herrera with Ibai Gómez right after 
the goal soon paid off. Gómez cut inside from the left to curl in a shot from 
outside the area for a 41st-minute equaliser.

With the rain pouring down, Raul put the German side ahead in the 52nd minute, 
but three minutes later Bilbao levelled again as Iker Muniain played in Susaeta 
to score with a low shot.

Athletic Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> will not 
have their defender Javi Martínez available for the 19 April first leg at 
Sporting after the Spain international was booked in the second half.

Ricky van Wolfswinkel headed Sporting in front in the 44th minute but the 
Ukrainian side equalised in the 57th when Jonathan Cristaldo cut inside to beat 
Rui Patrício with a powerful shot.

Adrián López put the 2010 champions Atlético on course for the last four with 
one of the goals of the season againstHannover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover>. López held off Emanuel 
Pogatetz's challenge to gather Diego's pass inside the area, before skirting 
around five challenges and firing past Pogatetz. He was covering for the 
goalkeeper Ron-Robert Zieler who was flat on the floor after twice being unable 
to stop López.

Mame Biram Diouf rolled home an 81st-minute equaliser for the German side, but 
the Atlético striker Radamel Falcao controlled the ball on his chest to volley 
home in the 87th minute.

Valencia scored four goals at its Mestalla Stadium for the second Europa 
League match in a row. The home side were leading 2-0 by the 17th minute after 
the defender Adil Rami scored twice inside three minutes, and Jordi Alba and 
Pablo Hernández added second-half goals.
 