
Ashley Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole> knew what to 
expect when his mobile trilled. The sense of shock may not have been quite as 
profound as on that infamous occasion when Arsenal's contract offer was relayed 
to him by his agent as he drove, prompting him almost "to swerve off the road", 
but this was a player wounded. England's most capped left-back, one of eight 
centurions and a defender who has started all of his country's games at major 
finals since 2002, would not be in Brazil. Roy Hodgson's request to retain him 
on the stand-by list was always likely to be declined.

Yet, by the time he took to Twitter to confirm the end of an international 
career the like of which an England left-back has never previously known, that 
initial deflation had given way to realism. Cole was gracious in praise of the 
manager, wished his team-mates "only success", and lauded those who will 
replace him, Leighton Baines for now and Luke Shaw in the longer term, as "the 
future of this country". His hurt at having to call it a day reflected raw 
emotion. His recent run back in theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> first-team, with impressive 
displays against elite opposition, had appeared to cement his place in 
Hodgson's plans. In the end, however, the management pinned their hopes on 
youth.

These are tumultuous times for Cole. His whole season had been an eye-opener 
given that he was never a player used to enduring life on the fringes but, ever 
since he damaged his ribs in an otherwise comfortable victory at Norwich City 
in October, he has been scrambling to retain his lofty perch with club and 
country.

His future at Chelsea hangs in the balance, with the manager, José Mourinho, 
due to submit a written review of the season, in which he makes the case for 
the 33-year-old to be offered a new one-year deal with his current contract 
into its final two months, on Monday.

It is unclear whether the hierarchy at Stamford Bridge will be persuaded to 
retain the player, with interest expressed in Atlético Madrid's Filipe Luís and 
César Azpilicueta so assured at left-back since breaking into the team last 
November. The Spanish right-back usurped him on the left and excelled.

Chances have been so limited for the Englishman since then that his 350th 
league appearance at Cardiff City on Sunday was only a 15th start of the 
campaign in the competition. He wore the captain's armband in the 2-1 win in 
the absence of John Terry and Frank Lampard. "He was not captain to say goodbye 
in a nice way," said Mourinho after the match. "He arrived [at the club] before 
Branislav Ivanovic, so he was the one with more time. So I gave him the armband 
as a consequence of that. I don't know [if that was his last appearance], but I 
don't think so."

Time inevitably catches up with every player, but that prolonged period out of 
the Chelsea first team eroded his untouchable status within theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> set-up. Baines may not have 
enjoyed quite the barnstorming season as last year with Everton, but he has 
featured when fit. Cole has been kicking his heels on the sidelines instead, 
that impressive beard almost symbolic as he waited impatiently for his chance.

When it came, against Atlético in the semi-final first leg in Madrid, he 
appeared to grasp it: his ability to slip so seamlessly into the rhythm of a 
game of that magnitude, and then maintain form five days later in the Premier 
League win at Liverpool, was a reminder of his qualities. He was a player who 
could be relied on, a defender of pedigree. There was very little rustiness to 
his game, and the beard was duly clipped. It all seemed to suggest that dream 
to become the first Englishman to feature at four World Cup finals would be 
realised.

And yet Hodgson is moving on. Baines will be first-choice in Brazil, and Shaw 
can learn from the experience and, as the manager witnessed yet again 
first-hand at St Mary's on Sunday, is ready to step up if required during the 
tournament. Cole would have travelled as a back-up, and where was the value in 
that? Better, surely, to blood Shaw in a travelling party and whet the 
youngster's appetite with France 2016 or Russia 2018 in mind.

The experienced man's reluctance to join the list of seven back-ups was surely 
anticipated. Liverpool's Jon Flanagan was selected in his stead, with the 
phone-call from Hodgson on Sunday evening bringing to a close an international 
career that has stretched for over 13 years since a debut against Albania in 
Tirana. David Seaman, Steve McManaman and Andy Cole played that night at the 
Qemal Stafa stadium, names from a bygone era. Only the debutant at left-back 
and Rio Ferdinand of those who started the visitors' 3-1 victory are still 
playing.

Cole's reputation at the top level soared in the seasons since. In terms of 
consistency, he has been one of the best left-backs in the world. He has 
performed brilliantly at times, most notably against Cristiano Ronaldo in 
brushes with Portugal that were ultimately surrendered on penalties. There have 
been low points, too, most of them born of club loyalties and the public 
caricature thrust on Cole – or generated himself by that infamous, ill-fated 
autobiography – and he was booed at Wembley after a skewed pass presented 
Kazakhstan with a goal in October 2008.

Yet history will surely remember him as the best England ever had at left-back 
and, should Chelsea not offer new terms, the calibre of club who will seek to 
secure his signature this summer – there is tentative interest from Paris 
Saint-Germain to Monaco to Real Madrid – will reflect his standing and enduring 
qualities.

The last of Cole's 107 caps was the only one he failed to start, the veteran 
replacing Shaw, the young pretender, at half-time against Denmark at Wembley in 
March. Those roles have now been reversed for good. This is the end of an era.
 