
To paraphrase a great philosopher, with training for a marathon comes great 
responsibility. Admittedly, most of this experiment has thrown that lofty ideal 
to the wind but, all the while, that responsibility has been subtly taking its 
revenge.

The recent injury in my left knee (inflaming ligaments where they attached to 
the top of the shin bone) has left me in a quandary. Do I persevere, despite 
missing so many weeks of training? Or do I do the sensible thing — rest 
properly and miss the marathon?

Making this decision was always going to be tough. Perhaps as hard as the 
early starts on cold winter mornings and the aches and blisters with which 
running has furnished me. Perhaps even as difficult to deal with as the 
frustration in the months after my right leg was injured. As it turned out, I 
grossly underestimated the problem: deciding whether to quit has been by far 
the hardest part of the training. Fortunately, I had help.

Fellow runners have been writing in from all over the country with advice. The 
consensus has been that running a marathon in my condition is a foolhardy 
enterprise. Many described their own regretful experiences of running after 
injury. Others insisted it would be irresponsible of me to risk potential 
long-term damage to my knees. And there were also suggestions that I should 
just postpone my plans and do a different marathon this year: Edinburgh in June 
or New York in November, perhaps.

There were also letters that encouraged me to go ahead and run the damn thing 
anyway (with lots of walking or in a wheelchair if needed), just to prove a 
point. Think about the tens of thousands of people who didn't get a chance to 
race this year, they rightly reminded me.

But just proving a point was never the intention of my experiment. The idea 
was to enable a non-runner to run a whole marathon — no stopping, no walking, 
no cheating.

So, with a heavy heart, I have decided that my experiment needs some more 
time. No London marathon for me this year, but I'm planning to continue the 
training and register for a 10k or a half-marathon as soon as humanly possible. 
And then, tantalisingly, there is always next year...

You can still sponsor three other members of the Life team who are running the 
London marathon this year:

Sarah Hewitt is running for the Dreams Come True Charity. The specific dream 
you can make come true is for a little 4 year old boy from London who urgently 
requires a lung and heart transplant. His dream is to go to Disney Land, Paris.
www.justgiving.com/sarahhewitt <http://www.justgiving.com/sarahhewitt> 

Ian Sample is raising money for Medicins Sans Frontieres <http://www.msf.org>, 
the independent humanitarian medical aid agency committed to providing medical 
aid wherever needed, regardless of race, religion, politics or sex.
www.justgiving.com/iansbigrun <http://www.justgiving.com/iansbigrun>

David Adam is raising money for the Multiple Sclerosis Society, dedicated to 
supporting the 85,000 people affected by MS in Britain and their families.
www.justgiving.com/davidadam <http://www.justgiving.com/davidadam> 
 