
lmost two years ago my wife and I bought a 10-acre woodland with the aim of 
making it into a refuge for those going through tough or troubled times. It was 
a pretty unusual idea and many friends made it quite clear they thought it was 
daft. We didn't even know how to describe what we were doing. None of the 
labels – commune, kibbutz, community, care farm – seemed to fit what we wanted 
to do, so we just called it an unorthodox family home and got on with it.

Two years later the purpose of this place is still the same: it exists in 
order to offer shelter to those in crisis. But while that vision for the place 
has always remained the same, many other things have subtly altered as we've 
discovered how complicated it is to realise that simple-sounding vision. We've 
made many mistakes, taken quite a few hits and learnt many lessons.

One of the main difficulties has been – for want of a better term – the 
admissions policy. Since we were inspired by the Pilsdon communities in Dorset 
and Kent, we had always imagined that we, too, would be offering rest to those 
facing a period of personal crisis, be it bereavement, separation, addiction, 
homelessness, penury, depression and so on. And while those are, indeed, the 
people we're here to serve, we've slowly realised that by far the largest niche 
of people who contact us are facing something less defined: they're simply fed 
up with modern life; they're disillusioned with superficiality and fads and 
lifeless living. They're lonely, stressed or sad, but they don't necessarily 
see themselves as "in crisis".

I used to worry that we were watering down our vision by catering for those 
with just a vague existential angst. But all visitors are valid and we've 
realised how difficult it is to quantify need, how hard it is to arrive at a 
waiting list according to the depth of someone's need. Some who seem strong and 
confident are just the opposite and some who appear truly in trouble are 
actually in quite good shape. We used to tiptoe around issues, not really 
wanting to ask too many questions, but now we're fairly upfront, wanting to 
know why people have come and what they hope to get out of their stay. If we 
had a motto here it would probably be "Sharp tools, blunt tongues".

We've had, sadly, to realise our limits. We felt unable to help one young man 
with acute psychosis and duly received hate mail and late-night phone calls for 
a while. One memorable evening, as my wife Fra and I were trying to cook for a 
dozen people and put three kids to bed, some crazy pastor from Hull called to 
say: "I've got a prostitute here who has been beaten up by her pimp. She has a 
serious heroin addiction so we're sending her to you tomorrow." No you're not, 
we said. We cottoned on quite quickly that some people saw us as a place to 
drop off their problems and we became rather hard-headed about who we could 
accept. But, at the same time, we've tried not to invite only the easy cases. 
We want to welcome tough, difficult guests, those who are overbearing or 
underwhelming, but not if it's only to make someone else's life easier.

It's also proved very difficult to plan visits and stays. Because we're not a 
hotel and don't take bookings, it's fairly random who turns up when. Many say 
they're going to come and don't; many don't say they're going to but do. We're 
a tiny operation and very short on space, so it takes quite a feat to fit 
people in. And it can be frustrating. Quite often you listen to someone's woes 
on the phone for hours and make arrangements for them to come down, but you 
never hear from them again. I don't mind listening, but I'm sorry to have to 
say no to someone because I'm holding a bed for a person who never rolls up.

We've also discovered the importance of boundaries – and not just for our 
ever-escaping pigs. We have a public footpath that runs all the way around the 
outside of our woods and we had made a small gate with a sign saying that we 
welcome visitors. We also wrote, in large letters, that people should call 
before coming in because we're often felling or shooting and because there are 
children and livestock running around. I left our number. It was as if we had 
left the gate wide open. People blithely wandered in asking, in as many words, 
"Where's the party?" Dogs ran riot during courses. I even found one dodgy 
couple taking a felling axe to one of our trees. I'm sad to say we now have a 
sign saying "Private property, no trespassing". The nice welcoming stuff is in 
smaller letters underneath.

And our internal boundaries are pretty clear, too. Just about the only golden 
rule we have here – other than no drink, drugs or bullying – is that we close 
up our part of the house at 9pm. Even during the day no one comes upstairs 
unless invited. We never go in a guest's room without asking first. Everyone 
needs privacy and a door they can shut. It's not a free-for-all.

On which note, probably our biggest failing so far has been the inability to 
find a sustainable financial model. We run a lot of courses but, perhaps 
because we only started them in the autumn or maybe because we're in a 
recession, we're not exactly overrun with punters. We've found selling stools 
and chairs very difficult as they take days and days to make and even if we 
charge the minimum wage for our time, people still baulk at paying £100 for 
a chair when they can get one at Ikea for £10. We haven't charged guests rent 
as we don't want to exclude those with no income. All of which means the entire 
financial burden has been on my shoulders and, being a freelance writer, those 
shoulders are very narrow.

The result is I've often felt like an absent leader. Instead of working 
alongside people in the woods, I've been at the computer desperately trying to 
earn the money to pay all the bills. Either that or I get up in the middle of 
the night to write so I can get outside and alongside during the day. Trying to 
look after three children and various guests as well as writing two books and 
reviewing dozens more has been no small burden and I'm feeling shattered. Every 
day seems to have the intensity and mild chaos of Christmas, with loads of 
people around, loads to do and loads of laughs, but also tensions and things 
that don't go according to plan.

That's why we are, finally, about to decide on a more formal legal structure. 
Having run this place simply as an unorthodox "extended household", we've 
realised we need to put things on a more sustainable footing. I had resisted it 
because of an innate fear of bureaucratisation and institutionalisation, but we 
need the support and oversight of trustees or committed consiglieri. We need to 
have a charitable organisation that can raise funds. Most of all, we need a few 
lines drawn in the grey area between what is ours and what is the charity's, if 
only so people can be sure they're contributing to the greater good, not just 
to the Joneses.

Although it has been predictably tough so far, it's also been rewarding and 
immensely enjoyable. We have never doubted our vision. We're more convinced 
than ever that this is what we are called to do, that this is the way we want 
to live. And we've been exceptionally lucky with the guests who have come. 
We've probably only had two dozen so far, staying for anything between one 
night and six months, but they have enriched our lives hugely.

We've never felt like we're nobly helping out the needy, because those guests 
help us as much as we help them. We'll find someone else has done the cooking 
or the shopping or the washing up. Someone else has lit the fire or laid the 
table. The house and the woods have been full of music and chat. For all the 
difficulties of communal living, we would really struggle to go back to the 
ghetto of the nuclear family.

It helps, paradoxically, that the people we share our lives with aren't chosen 
in the expectation they will become friends. We don't start out – as many 
communitarians do – thinking we're all going to be best mates, happily hugging 
every day. We get close, certainly, and a couple of guests who have been here 
many months really do feel like they're family, but that intimacy evolves. It's 
an unexpected bonus. Our starting point tends to be merely that we're going to 
get by rather than get on. We know all about the "crooked timber of humanity". 
Expectations are low and, that way, the surprises are invariably pleasant.

It's been uplifting to see that the wider we've opened our door, the more 
amazing things have come through it. Instead of feeling cut off from the world 
(and living in the sticks at the end of a cul-de-sac it wouldn't be hard), 
we've felt deeply connected to it. Whatever it is – karma or chance or 
serendipity – it's been extraordinary to see needs met with a precision and 
timing that verges on the incredible.

I'm not even talking about sophisticated stuff, just the raw basics that allow 
a place like this to keep going: a cockerel or some chisels, a bed, some 
chairs, a dozen pallets and so on. Often when we invite some random visitor to 
stay for a meal we get chatting and, usually unprompted, they'll offer us 
something that we've been desperately needing for weeks. It affirms not just 
your faith in human nature, but also in something more mystical, something to 
do with casting your bread upon the waters. And it's taught us that the way to 
solve the financial difficulties here isn't to earn more money, but to spend 
less. We've learnt how cheap life can be when your door is open.

And although I've felt the financial burden very acutely, many of the other 
burdens have evaporated. There are various areas round here where I am, 
thankfully, the deputy, not the sheriff: someone else is in charge of the 
workshop, someone else is head swineherd. I don't feel weighed down by 
responsibility because other people have taken over. If I could just delegate 
all the shopping and washing up, things would be perfect.

Most importantly, the only aspect of this "extended household" that really 
concerned us has been a source of great joy. We never really worried about the 
possibility of things getting broken or stolen, but we've always been very 
aware of the dangers to young children presented by a constant stream of 
strangers. We're fairly hawkish about looking out for those dangers, but 
actually, so far, the children have probably been the main beneficiaries of 
this place. Someone teaches them elementary knife skills or how to play the 
mouth organ. Someone makes them laugh by eating bizarre food combinations. They 
learn strange songs and new words in new languages. A woman from a kibbutz 
makes them think by listing all the things she can't do on a sabbath.

They invent funny nicknames for everyone who comes: Bagel Dave, Curry Pete, 
Neil Somebody, Miss Banksy and so on. They go to bed asking excitedly, "Who's 
coming tomorrow?" and the main sorrow for them is when someone leaves. They ask 
questions about bereavement or booze or melancholia and we tell them what we 
can. Their lives are an adventure even though they're at home. They are, in a 
small way, getting a glimpse of the joys and tragedies of life.

It feels as if there's still a colossal amount to do. We've still got to build 
a tiny chapel, convert the explosives chamber, plant an orchard, dig a pond, 
build a sauna, make the compost bog, sculpt a cob oven, create an outdoor 
shower and, most importantly, find a snooker table. We want to put a massive 
tarp over a natural curve in a clearing and have an amphitheatre for concerts 
and classes and workshops. One day we'll have an alternative festival here 
called Windsor Hill Woodstock. But the most important thing will always be 
offering fellowship and sharing shelter. That's the reason we're here.

If you'd like to support or read more about Tobias's project, go to 
windsorhillwood.co.uk <http://windsorhillwood.co.uk/>
 