 For more than half a century the leftwing aristocrat Tony Benn has been as 
much a part of parliament as the Queen is of Buckingham Palace. As a Labour MP 
he has spearheaded revolts, driven debate and occasionally just ranted, since 
his election in 1950 at the age of 25.
And yet this pillar of parliament will leave the Commons in 2001 to, he says, 
"devote more time to politics". He cannot really have meant it but it was 
typical of this scion of the establishment to leave with the claim that his 
radical days are not yet over. He called it a family trait: "like my father, I 
grow more left as I grow older".

As parliament's most articulate member, Mr Benn has won attention and honour 
for his speeches, even when their provocative contents do not stand close 
scrutiny. This is not a new charge: his late mentor, the socialist MP Tony 
Crosland, called him "just a bit cracked".

More than most people, Tony Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tony-benn> has been shaped by his 
upbringing: he was the second son of a peer and the product of a privileged 
family, co-owners of the Benn Brothers publishing firm. These privileged roots 
led to his great parliamentary monument: the successful crusade 40 years ago to 
reverse the law which forced him to accept his late father's title.

His background also led an education at Westminster school and New College, 
Oxford, where he became president of the union, and met his wife, Caroline 
Middleton de Camp. Caroline, the daughter of wealthy Cincinnati lawyers, became 
his closest friend and confidant up until her death in November 1999.

Having established his right to remain in the Commons, he became an upwardly 
mobile 1960s technocrat: postmaster general and then technology minister in 
Harold Wilson's first government, and secretary of state for industry and later 
for energy in the 1970s.

He tried to scrub himself clean of his establishment background and idealised 
the working class, wrapping himself in miners' banners to the embarrassment of 
his genuinely proletarian junior minister, Eric Heffer. His approach led to the 
paring down of his name, from Anthony Wedgwood-Benn to plain Tony. Yet he has 
been incredibly open in his diaries, offering a frank account of Labour's 
postwar turmoil and his own political life.

Once Labour was out of office in 1979, Mr Benn made himself the de facto 
leader of the hard leftists. He came so close to defeating his immediate 
target, Denis Healey, for the post of deputy leader in 1981 that he risked 
"destroying the Labour party as a force in 20th century British politics," 
according to Healey.

His activities certainly stimulated the 1981 defection of 12 MPs to create the 
SDP, an event which helped keep Labour out of power for the next three 
elections, and also prompted the loss of his own Bristol South East seat in 
1983. He was returned to parliament as MP for Chesterfield less than a year 
later.

As old Labour gave way to new, Tony Benn shed the his agitator's cloak for 
that of an eloquent elder statesman - opposed to the use of British military 
force abroad, and even more strongly critical of his party's new direction. 
This led to frequent clashes with Tony Blair in the Commons, but also turned 
him into something of a totem of parliamentary independence, respected on all 
sides. For most of the 1990s, no other MP could match him for passion or 
grandeur.

As a result there were happy faces across in the chamber when Hilary Benn, one 
of his four children, became the Labour MP for Leeds Central in a 1999 
byelection, the fourth generation of Benn parliamentarians.

Ask Aristotle about Tony Benn 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-361,00.html>
 