
The Abbott government is now in serious lipstick-on-a-pig mode. The big 
changes from last year’s budget have hit the fence. The savings once declared 
essential have gone with them. The task now seems to be to dress up this 
failure of the first term agenda as something close to success.

Budget savings worth more than $15bn over the next four years have either been 
defeated, or are stalled, in the Senate. As recently as last month, the 
treasurer,Joe Hockey <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, 
was saying that unless those measures passed, the budget would “never get back 
to surplus”.

Given the impact of the continued deterioration of commodity prices on the 
budget, that seems like a fair assumption unless the government finds 
alternative savings of similar size. (Remember last December’s mid-year 
economic forecast was still showing a deficit of $11.5bn in 2017-18).

But Hockey’s statement was made when at least some members of the government 
thought the intergenerational report might help them make a convincing case for 
their savings. Despite the taxpayer-funded advertising campaign to help make a 
case for change, that hope now seems to be shelved.

Problem. How does the government explain why this policy retreat does not 
amount to a debt and deficit disaster? How to climb out from under the “bad 
news” – from the government’s perspective – of recent events, including the 
defeat of the savings from the higher education changes and the shelving of 
Medicare changes. How to explain the reversals of position, at some cost to the 
budget, on car industry assistance and defence pay.


The prime minister, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, has turned to the 
intergenerational report for inspiration. It shows that currently legislated 
policy might bring the budget back to something close to balanced by 2020, 
before plunging back into deep deficits which reach 6% of GDP by 2055.

He leaves out the second part of that sentence and concentrates on the next 
five years to say that the IGR “showed that on the measures that this 
parliament has already passed … we get back to broad budget balance in about 
five years.”

In other words – no disaster to see here. No problem. And no need for the 
further deep savings that the prime minister now lacks the political authority 
to prosecute. The budget will be “dull”, the prime minister insists.


This lipstick analysis takes into account savings that have been passed, but 
neglects to explain some other significant things like:
• How the projected $11.5bn deficit in 2017-18 in the actual budget’s 
calculations – which took into account many of the policies now defeated and 
was based on higher commodity prices, can possibly turn into a “broad budget 
balance” just two years later unless the government implements savings policies 
that would be anything but dull.

• Who is going to pay for hospitals. By far the biggest long-term savings 
measure included in the IGR was the decision taken in the last budget that from 
2017, the federal government’s share of hospital spending will grow each year 
in line with inflation and not by the previously promised 6% or more (which was 
calculated to help meet the actual cost of running hospitals). This saving 
starts to take effect before the budget returns to “broad balance” in 2020. But 
of course it wasn’t a saving at all, it just just hand-balled the cost on to 
the states.

• What will happen to pensions. The IGR assumes a big saving from the policy 
that pensions will grow in line with inflation for 12 years from 2017, but the 
government is already moving away from this policy.

The new looking-on-the-bright-side approach goes further. It includes daily 
offerings of things to talk about other than the unfortunate failure of key 
elements of the budget and much of the Coalition’s first term program.


Abbott told his party room on Tuesday the government was changing focus from 
the policies it had been unable to get through the “feral Senate” to smaller 
things that were “meaningful” to the person on the street and didn’t need 
Senate approval. Things like enforcing rules on foreign investment in real 
estate, new country of origin labelling on food, a voluntary code of conduct 
for supermarkets, waiting a while before taking unclaimed money from dormant 
bank accounts.


They had to be optimistic, he told his MPs, and present a “glass half full” 
message to the electorate.


Of course, it’s possible the electorate may still see the pig. 

 