
Seven years ago Allira watched the Live 8 concert on a battered old LG TV in 
her uncle's backyard. When the pictures of malnourished and starving children 
came up she turned to her mum and asked "when are they going to show our 
picture?" That day Allira had just eaten a rotten banana, the day before it had 
been a packet of 2 minute noodles, uncooked. She was starving, but she wasn't 
in Africa. Allira was in outback Australia. Today she is a happy teenager, 
nervous about her exams at school and looking forward to hanging out with 
friends at the weekend. She isn't hungry, not that much anyway, but she is 
still asking questions. Why doesn't anyone seem to care about us? Why are we 
always ignored? Does anyone care about Australia's Aboriginals?

It's not hard to forget those sights from the Live 8 concert, they appear 
daily on Australian TV in adverts for aid organisations and charities. African 
children so thin they hardly look human breathing heavily in their mothers' 
arms, moments from death. It's a truly terrible sight. But so is a group of 
Aborigines sleeping rough in a city park, or an aboriginal girl in the outback, 
her eyes sticky from the Trachoma infection. These people are not a million 
miles away in another country, they live just down the road from teachers, 
doctors, lawyers and journalists. Yet no one seems to be doing anything about 
their problems. Does it somehow make it more real to see these images on 
television than have them greet us as we leave the train station in the morning?

Allira wants to be an actress when she leaves school, just like celebrated 
Aboriginal actress Deborah Mailman. But she has a long way to go. Three and a 
half thousand miles to be exact. That's how far it is from her home in 
Katherine, Northern Territory to Sydney. She's worried about leaving her mum 
and what will happen to her brothers when she goes. Her mum drinks too much and 
her eldest brother's started to sniff paint cans with his mates. It means they 
sometimes forget to feed her younger brother. It's not unusual to hear stories 
like this up here. It may sound clichéd but Allira has a lot of friends whose 
parents spend their time getting drunk or high. It doesn't mean they love them 
any less, it just makes them a bit forgetful sometimes.

A walk round Allira's township, where 16% of people are unemployed, shows run 
down weatherboard houses, battered and rusted cars and piles of rubbish in 
gardens. Stray dogs scavenge in amongst the streets and drunk men sit slumped 
together under an old tree. A few hours away, people live in slick, high rise 
buildings or large open plan homes surrounded by manicured lawns. They take 
holidays on the coast at world famous beaches and have barbeques with their 
friends drinking a "coldie". This is the image of Australia everyone knows. And 
this is the image they want to know.

Locals and tourists alike don't seem to take much notice of Aboriginals. In 
his anecdotal tome, Down Under, Bill Bryson observes how the Aboriginals exist 
invisibly alongside everyone else.

"The people on the street were overwhelmingly white Australians but there were 
Aborigines about too – not great numbers of them, but always there, on the edge 
of frame, unobtrusive, nearly always silent, peripheral. The white people never 
looked at the Aborigines and the Aborigines never looked at the white people. 
The two races seemed to inhabit separate but parallel universes. "

An incident a few years ago in Brisbane, Queensland highlighted this as a real 
issue when a respected Aboriginal elder collapsed at a bus station. Dozens of 
people passed her by but assumed she was drunk or on drugs, it was only a group 
of young international students who stopped to check if she was ok.

Allira doesn't understand it. How can people get so upset about those living a 
million miles away when people living in their own country are suffering just 
as much? What does it take for them to get noticed? Will they have to become 
skeletal and close to death before someone takes an interest? Even then, 
they'll soon be forgotten about. After all, Allira often forgets about the 
people in Africa and their problems. Then again, she does have an excuse.
 