
Peter Bradshaw on crime

Controversially, the cinema has always made criminals look cool. The big 
screen loves bad guys and, to modify Blake's description of Milton, has often 
been of the devil's party, while knowing it perfectly well. Yet crime and 
transgression are the stuff of drama and real life, too. Howard Hawks's 
Scarface in 1932 gave us Paul Muni's criminal sociopath Tony Camonte, 
brilliantly reinvented by Brian De Palma in 1983 with Al Pacino in the lead 
role.

The gangster genre showed how criminal networks operated inside their own 
fiercely moral codes and stood in direct opposition to courtroom dramas such as 
Twelve Angry Men, with its formal endorsement of the letter of the law. The 
noir genre of the 40s and 50s conversely found criminality to reside not in 
dynastic cultures or parodic societal norms but in individual acts of cynicism, 
obsession and desperation.

Crime <https://www.theguardian.com/film/crime> becomes lighter with the caper 
genre, such as The Italian Job, whereas the Ealing comedies found the bitterest 
black comedy in murder and a queasy celebration of the entrepreneurial daring 
in crime.

10. Goodfellas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/37702/goodfellas>
 Henry Hill was portrayed in Goodfellas by Ray Liotta, centre, with Frank 
Adonis and John Manca. Photograph: Rex 
Has Martin Scorsese <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese> made a 
better film in the last two decades than this visceral insider's view of New 
York mob existence, drawn from the real-life story of Henry Hill? Whatever you 
make of its morals, and the charge that it glamorises the mafia, it's hard to 
deny the sheer explosive power of Goodfellas, still undiminished 20 years after 
its release. Mafia allure is precisely what the film is about. Ray Liotta's 
Henry Hill says it loud and clear at the very start: "As far back as I can 
remember, I always wanted to be a gangster. To me, being a gangster was better 
than being president of the United States."

To this young, half-Sicilian half-Irish kid growing up in an impoverished 
Brooklyn, joining the local mob opens up a world where everything exists for 
the taking. It means sharp suits, flash cars, gold watches, beautiful women. It 
means being able to ignore the line at the Copacabana and swagger through the 
kitchens with your girlfriend while a table is being laid for you up front – a 
scene that Scorsese unfolds in a masterful 184-second tracking shot, one of the 
most celebrated in cinema. The photography, by Michael Ballhaus, is one of many 
pleasures here. Thelma Schoonmaker's editing, notable for its use of jump cuts 
and freeze-frames, gives this two-and-a-half-hour movie its blistering speed.

The ensemble cast is magnificent, particularly Robert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> as Henry's mentor Jimmy Conway 
and, in a gleefully nasty turn, Joe Pesci as his partner-in-crime, Tommy 
DeVito. DeVito shows how instantly the good life can give way to horrific 
violence. And Henry's trajectory through the film, as he spirals into drug use 
and paranoia in the late 70s, reveals an altogether more bleak vision of 
criminality. But the overriding impression we are left with is of the 
irresistible appeal of being a gangster. It's driven home in the final scene 
with Henry, in witness protection, bemoaning the awfulness of living as an 
"average nobody". This, depending on your point of view, is the film's fatal 
flaw, or its masterstroke.Killian Fox

9. Hidden <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/108597/hidden>

Hidden opens with a long, static shot of a house on a quiet Paris street. 
Credits roll. Very little happens. A closer shot shows a couple leaving the 
house, and the camera pans after the man. We hear a terse interchange. On 
screen, the film fast-forwards and suddenly – unnervingly – we realise we have 
been watching a piece of surveillance on video. The tape has turned up, without 
explanation, at the house of the couple we saw on screen, and they are watching 
it with us. They are Georges (Daniel Auteuil), a well-known TV intellectual, 
and his wife Anne (Juliette Binoche), a book publisher. The video is 
immediately interpreted as a threat. More tapes arrive, along with crayon 
drawings depicting scenes of bloody violence. The effect of these intrusions is 
singularly disturbing, and Hidden unfolds with the fearful air of a thriller, 
but it avoids most of the conventions of the genre. Dramatic music is absent. 
The one truly shocking moment of violence arrives without a suspenseful 
build-up, and the victim is who we least expect it to be.

One tape leads Georges to the run-down apartment of an Algerian man named 
Majid, who Georges knew as a child. It transpires that Georges bears 
responsibility for how this man's life has turned out, and his guilt points to 
the more widespread malaise in French society concerning the Algerian war. The 
film interrogates western attitudes towards the Muslim world, exposing how fear 
is also based on guilt and repressed memories. The political subtext never 
detracts from the film's chilling dramatic effect and the air of intrigue, 
which intensifies in the very final scene.KF

8. Pulp Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/56612/pulp.fiction>
 Uma Thurman and John Travolta in Pulp Fiction (1994) Photograph: 
c.Miramax/Everett/Rex Features 
1994 was Quentin Tarantino's year. With audiences reeling from the shock of 
Reservoir Dogs two years earlier, the mantle of world's coolest film director 
was his for the taking. His second feature, the ambitious but oddly leisurely 
thriller Pulp Fiction, premiered at Cannes, where Clint Eastwood's jury awarded 
it the Palme d'Or. A year later, it had grossed $213m, faced off against 
Forrest Gump at the Academy awards and planted an entire library of offbeat 
references and quotable lines in the heads of susceptible cinemagoers. It would 
not be overstating the case to call it a phenomenon.

The idea of a portmanteau crime film had been cooked up by Tarantino and his 
old video store colleague, Roger Avary (who got a "story by" credit). But the 
picture's magic touch is the anti-chronological structure which enables its 
three stories to intersect in unusual ways – so the final story predates the 
first one, and a character who dies in the middle story reappears at the end, 
striding off toward a demise we have witnessed, but about which he can have no 
possible inkling. In the first chapter, two hitmen, Vincent (John Travolta) and 
Jules (Samuel L Jackson), take possession of a mysterious briefcase before 
Vincent goes on to chaperone his boss's girlfriend (Uma Thurman) on an evening 
that spins wildly out of control. The second story follows a boxer, Butch 
(Bruce Willis), whose failure to throw a fight as instructed leads him into 
territory which might reasonably be described as hellish. The closing episode 
has an unexpected air of sitcom about it as Vincent and Jules turn to a 
clean-up specialist named the Wolf (Harvey Keitel) when a misfired gun leaves a 
nasty mess in the back of their car. All this is bookended by scenes in a diner 
that is being held up by two excitable young crooks (Tim Roth and Amanda 
Plummer).

For better or worse, the movie made possible the long reign of Miramax, 
revived Travolta's career and ratified Tarantino's reputation. Familiarity with 
the director's box of tricks has bred a touch of contempt, but it's becoming 
easier, now that the hype has cleared, to see the movie for what it really is: 
an audacious attempt to fuse visual chutzpah and expansive storytelling, movies 
and music, art and trash. It's a true one-off.Ryan Gilbey

7. Get Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36294/get.carter>
 GET CARTER (1971) Pers: CAINE, MICHAEL / MOSLEY, BRYAN Year: 1971 Dir: 
HODGES, MIKE Ref: GET001CJ Credit: [ MGM / THE KOBAL COLLECTION ] Photograph: 
The Kobal Collection/www.picture-desk.com 
At a distance of nearly 40 years, Get Carter has as much value as a piece of 
social history as it does as a thriller. The Tyneside it portrays isn't one of 
hen parties in Bigg Market, but of poverty that grinds Newcastle and its 
inhabitants into an inescapable and unendurable greyness. At times, too, it 
seems as if Mike Hodges has thrown his actors into real life – the faces of the 
old men in the pubs and betting shops, and the revellers at the dancehall take 
the movie into something akin to cinéma verité, even as mayhem erupts in the 
foreground.

As a thriller, though, it's colder and more brutal than anything British 
cinema has produced before or since; its mood so unyielding that the viewer 
does not even question whetherMichael Caine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine> really could be a Geordie hood 
returning home for his brother's funeral. There's humour, but it's so bleak it 
causes grimaces more than laughs: when the husband of Carter's lover (played by 
Britt Ekland) walks in on her having phone sex with Carter, he asks, puzzled: 
"What's the matter? You got gut trouble or something?" That's entirely fitting 
with regard to the subject matter, for when Carter investigates his brother's 
death, he discovers the dead man's daughter has been coerced into porn films by 
the local crime syndicate, setting Carter off on a trail of vengeance.

At the centre of it all is Caine, playing with such chilly authority that even 
his most geezerish moments – "You're a big man, but you're in bad shape. With 
me it's a full time job. Now behave yourself" – retain their threat, when a few 
years later they might have teetered over into self-parody. He's aided by a 
top-notch supporting cast, with the playwrightJohn Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne> an unlikely but wholly 
convincing ganglord, and future Coronation Street mainstay Bryan Mosley as the 
hapless hanger-on Cliff Brumby, who makes one of British cinema's most notable 
exits, from the upper stories of the Trinity Square car park in Gateshead.

Watching Get Carter now is like reading accounts of the first westerners to 
cross the Gobi desert: did this world ever exist, and in such recent times? It 
seems wholly remote from 21st-century Britain, even as its themes of coerced 
sex and utter amorality chime with contemporary fears.Michael Hann

6. Double Indemnity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36162/double.indemnity>
 Double Indemnity. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Cameron Crowe called Double Indemnity "flawless film-making". Woody Allen 
declared it "the greatest movie ever made". Even if you can't go along with 
that, there can be no disputing that it is the finest film noir of all time, 
though it was made in 1944, before the term film noir was even coined. Adapting 
James M Cain's 1935 novella about a straight-arrow insurance salesman tempted 
into murder by a duplicitous housewife, genre-hopping director Billy Wilder 
recruitedRaymond Chandler <https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymondchandler> 
as co-writer. Chandler, said Wilder, "was a mess, but he could write a 
beautiful sentence". Noir's visual style, which had its roots in German 
Expressionism, was forged here, though Wilder insisted that he was going for a 
"newsreel" effect. "We had to be realistic," he said. "You had to believe the 
situation and the characters, or all was lost."

And we do. Fred MacMurray, who had specialised largely in comedy until that 
point, was an inspired choice to play the big dope Walter Neff, who narrates 
the sorry mess in flashback, and wonders: "How could I have known that murder 
can sometimes smell like honeysuckle?" Edward G Robinson is coiled and 
charismatic as Neff's colleague, a claims adjuster who unpicks the couple's 
scheme. But the ace in the hole is Barbara Stanwyck as Phyliss Dietrichson, a 
vision of amorality in a "honey of an anklet" and a platinum wig. She can lower 
her sunglasses and make it look like the last word in predatory desire. And 
she's not just a vamp: she's a psychopath. There are few shots in cinema as 
bone-chilling as the close-up on Stanwyck's face as Neff dispatches Phyliss's 
husband in the back seat of a car. Miklós Rózsa's fretful strings tell us 
throughout the picture: beware. Stanwyck had been reluctant to take the role, 
confessing: "I was a little frightened of it." Wilder asked whether she was an 
actress or a mouse. When she plumped for the former, he shot back: "Then take 
the part."RG

5. Rashomon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83179/rashomon>
 Toshiro Mifune and Daisuke Kato in Rashomon. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
A woman is raped in a forest by a bandit, and her samurai husband murdered. In 
court, the victim and her attacker give contradictory accounts of what 
happened, while the dead man, communicating through a medium, offers another 
differing interpretation. Finally, a fourth account is given by a woodcutter 
who claims to have witnessed the attack. But whose version can be believed? 
Rashomon, which won the Grand Prix at Venice as well as the Oscar for best 
foreign language film, is an example not only of the great Kurosawa at the 
height of his powers – working with his regular collaborator, the imposing 
Toshiro Mifune – but of cinematic storytelling at its most daring. With its 
multiple contradictory flashbacks conspiring to present truth as an amorphous 
entity, Rashomon has been hugely influential on film structure and vocabulary 
in the 60 years since it was made.

But this formalist significance should not overshadow the picture's visual 
eloquence, and the extraordinary cinematography by Kazuo Miyagawa, which uses 
the intricate woodland setting as a metaphor for the story's tangled emotions. 
"[The] strange impulses of the human heart would be expressed through the use 
of an elaborately fashioned play of light and shadow," wrote Kurosawa of his 
preparations for the film, which he adapted in part from the short story, Yabu 
no Naka (In a Grove), by Ryunosuke Akutagawa. "In the film, people going astray 
in the thicket of their hearts would wander into a wider wilderness …"

The bristling beauty of the film emerged from Kurosawa's quest to reconnect 
with the roots of the art form, which he worried were in danger of being 
eclipsed. "Since the advent of the talkies in the 30s," he said, "I felt we had 
misplaced and forgotten what was so wonderful about the old silent movies. I 
was aware of the aesthetic loss as a constant irritation. I sensed a need to go 
back to the origins of the motion picture to find this peculiar beauty again 
..." There may be something a shade too reassuring about the final deference to 
truth and idealism. But this is easily offset by the rigorous psychological 
work-out to which Rashomon – arguably Kurosawa's greatest work – subjects its 
audience.RG

4. Badlands <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76181/badlands>
 Martin Sheen in Badlands, 1973. Photograph: Everett Collection / Rex Features 
Terrence Malick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/terrence-malick> based his 
peerlessly poetic debut on the real-life story of Charles Starkweather, a 
teenage James Dean wannabe who fled across the midwest on a killing spree, his 
14-year-old girlfriend in tow. But the film couldn't be further from a pulpy 
true-crime tale, or a hip New Wave homage like Bonnie and Clyde. It's a true 
original: eloquent about the intersection of crime, romanticism and myth-making 
in America, and highly innovative in its use of colour, editing and voice-over. 
Martin Sheen, who was cast as the Starkweather surrogate, Kit, believed 
Badlands was the best script he had ever read. "Still is," he says. "It was 
mesmerising. It disarmed you. It was a period piece, and yet of all time. It 
was extremely American, it caught the spirit of the people, of the culture, in 
a way that was immediately identifiable." Sissy Spacek played Holly, the 
baton-twirling schoolgirl who elopes with Kit after he kills her father (Warren 
Oates).

The film's dislocated emotional effect arises almost entirely from Holly, 
whose banal narration goes starkly against the grain. Traditionally, a 
voice-over fills in the blanks, but Badlands is defined by the contradiction 
between what we see and what we hear. Holly's blank reaction when Kit guns down 
her father makes the slaying more shocking than any amount of hysterical 
identification. "She isn't indifferent about her father's death," Malick 
pointed out. "She might have cried buckets of tears, but she wouldn't think of 
telling you about it. It would not be proper. You should always feel there are 
large parts of her experience she's not including because she has a strong, if 
misplaced, sense of propriety." This suggestion that we may not be getting the 
full story is crucial to appreciating Malick, who is more likely, at a moment 
of drama, to turn his camera on a quivering blade of grass.RG

3. Vertigo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/34909/vertigo>
 Kim Novak and James Stewart in Vertigo … 'Do men fall for the down-to-earth 
dame with the sense of humour? Do they heck.' Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/PARAMOUNT 
The rehabilitation of Hitchcock's Vertigo is now fully complete – its 
reputation is as assured as that of Citizen Kane, and can only have been helped 
by a long period in which it was out of circulation – but what an oddity it is. 
Viewed as a conventional thriller, this adaption of Pierre Boileau and Thomas 
Narcejac's 1954 novel, D'Entre les Morts (aka The Living and the Dead), is 
hardly the tightest of constructions. And there is also the notorious 
left-field touch of giving away the twist some distance before the end. But 
then, plot matters far less in Vertigo than the machinations of desire and 
obsession – and about those there is no finer film.

James Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesstewart> plays Scottie, 
an acrophobic private eye who receives an unusual assignment: to follow 
Madeleine (Kim Novak), the wife of an old friend, who is drifting around San 
Francisco in a dazed funk. She seems to be under the spell of a long-dead 
ancestor named Carlotta, who committed suicide, but soon Scottie is lost in his 
own reverie.

At this point, the plot takes a sharply disorienting turn, and Vertigo moves 
into darker and even more unsettling territory. Stewart's performance as a 
prototype stalker is especially troubling as we watch his soft features harden 
and his wholesome persona become mangled and corrupted; along with Henry Fonda 
in Once Upon a Time in the West, it is one of cinema's most effective instances 
of casting against type. Meanwhile, Novak is a model of fraught beauty in her 
tombstone-grey suit. She was always a reluctant star, and her natural anxiety 
contributes to her character's vulnerability, which peaks in the heartbreaking 
line to Scottie: "If I let you change me, will you love me?" No wonder the 
writer David A Cook said of the film that it "suggests not only the fraudulence 
of romantic love, but of the whole Hollywood narrative tradition that 
underwrites it."

Stylistically, Vertigo features some of Hitchcock's most expressionistic work; 
the film includes the famous zoom-in/track-out shot, also known as the 
"trombone shot" (and later appropriated by Steven Spielberg for Jaws), which 
gives the impression of both moving toward and away from the subject 
simultaneously. Even the misstep of the nightmare sequence created by John 
Ferren, which sees Scottie's disembodied face floating in a psychedelic void, 
cannot undermine the stifling atmosphere of romantic intensity epitomised in 
the ripe colours and Bernard Herrmann's grand, encircling score.RG

2. Touch of Evil <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36217/touch.of.evil>
 Touch Of Evil, Film Still Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/UI 
In the novel Badge of Evil by Whit Masterson – the source material for this 
movie – the hero is an American with a Mexican wife (in a marriage that is nine 
years old). It was Orson Welles who flipped the racial mix, and made the 
marriage brand new. Welles intended a story of three frontiers: the rancid 
Mexican-American border; the way a good detective becomes a bad cop; and a 
provocation on interracial sexuality. To be sure, it's a recognisableCharlton 
Heston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charltonheston> in makeup as Mike 
Vargas, with Janet Leigh as his Susie – but in 1958, that bond disturbed a lot 
of viewers. Moreover, the overtone of honeymoon is a wicked set-up for threats 
of rape. Will the horrendous border scum get to Susie before Mike? If you doubt 
that suggestiveness, just notice how the car bomb explodes as the honeymooners 
are ready to enjoy their first kiss on American soil. This is a crime picture 
in which coitus interruptus has to be listed with all the other charges.

Metaphorically and cinematically, it's a picture about crossing over – in one 
sumptuous camera set-up we track the characters over the border. That shot is 
famous, but it's no richer than the single set-up in a cramped motel suite that 
proves how Hank Quinlan (Welles himself) plants dynamite on the man he intends 
to frame. These scenes were a way for Welles to say, "I'm as good as ever", but 
they are also crucial to the uneasiness that runs through the picture and the 
gloating panorama of an unwholesome society. The aura of crime has seeped into 
every cell of ordinary behaviour: the city officials are corrupt; the night man 
(Dennis Weaver) needs a rest home; and the gang that come to the motel to get 
Susie are one of the first warnings of drugs in American movies. Not least, of 
course, Quinlan – a sheriff gone to hell on candy-bars.

So evil is not just a "touch". It is criminality in the blood. Marlene 
Dietrich's Tanya watches over this doom like a witch or prophet, and a bleak 
reminder that there is no hope. Fifty years later, that border is still an open 
wound.David Thomson

1. Chinatown <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36302/chinatown>

The near perfection of Roman Polanski's Chinatown starts with 
Diener/Hauser/Bates's haunting art nouveau poster for the film: an emblematic 
Hokusai wave breaks against Jack Nicholson's silhouette as the smoke from his 
cigarette floats up to merge with Faye Dunaway's medusa-like hair. The movie 
ends equally unforgettably with the line "Forget it Jake, it's Chinatown!", as 
lapidary a pay-off as Scarlett O'Hara's "After all, tomorrow is another day."

Behind the angst-ridden film noirs of the 40s and 50s lie the social and 
political tensions of the second world war and the postwar decade. Similarly, 
Chinatown was conceived, written, produced and released in the troubled period 
that included the last years of the Vietnam war, Watergate and Nixon's fraught 
second term in the White House. But it retained its freshness, vitality and 
timelessness by being set so immaculately in an earlier period – Los Angeles in 
the long, hot summer of 1937 – and it deals with the scandals of that era, 
those touching on the complex politics of water in the arid west.

While gathering divorce evidence on behalf of a suspicious wife, Gittes 
(Nicholson) is sucked into a world beyond his comprehension involving municipal 
corruption, sexual transgression and the power of old money. He encounters the 
rich, ruthless capitalist Noah Cross (John Huston) and his estranged daughter, 
the beautiful Evelyn Mulwray (Faye Dunaway), whose husband, head of the Los 
Angeles Water and Power Board, dies under mysterious circumstances.

In his screenplay, Robert Towne develops two dominant metaphors; the first 
centres on water. During a period of drought someone is dumping water from 
local reservoirs, and it becomes clear that this most precious of human 
resources is being manipulated by land speculators in their own interests. The 
name of Evelyn's husband, Hollis Mulwray, evokes William Mullholland, the Los 
Angeles engineer responsible in the 20s for the deals that, in the old Western 
phrase, "made water flow uphill in search of the money". The name Noah Cross 
suggests the loveable Old Testament patriarch, played in the 1966 blockbuster 
The Bible byJohn Huston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-huston>, but 
here reprised in a less benevolent mode as a self-righteous plutocrat who has 
harnessed the flood in his own interests.

The other metaphor is that of Chinatown, an inscrutable place which outsiders 
either stand back from or misread in a way that demonstrates the futility of 
good intentions. Jake worked in Chinatown during his days in the LAPD and, at 
the end of the picture, returns there in a bid for redemption that turns out to 
be an act of tragic pointlessness. He's in every scene, frequently with the 
camera just behind him. We see and experience everything from his point of 
view, with Polanski composing every frame, dictating each camera movement.

The movie captures the city in a summer heatwave: the blinding exteriors 
dazzle the eye and blur the judgment; shafts of light create a sinister 
atmosphere as they penetrate the dark interiors through venetian blinds. Jerry 
Goldsmith's superb score uses strings and percussion during moments of suspense 
and a distant, bluesy trumpet for elegiac, contemplative scenes. Above all 
there is Nicholson's Gittes, a cocky, confident man losing his social moorings 
and ending up as the proverbial drowning man reaching out for straws.Philip 
French

More Guardian and Observer critics' top 10s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/top-10-films>

• Top 10 romantic movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/07/top-10-romantic-movies>
• Top 10 action movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/10/top-10-action-movies>
• Top 10 comedy movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/11/top-10-comedy-movies>
• Top 10 horror movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/14/top-10-horror-movies>
• Top 10 sci-fi movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/16/top-10-sci-fi-movies>
 