
Shipwreck Beach Bar & Grill, Friars Bay

There are few better places to watch the sun go down than this spot on Friars 
Bay, just over the hill from Frigate Bay on the south east peninsula. Shipwreck 
Bar & Grill is known for a casual vibe - its laidback mood is evoked by the 
gentle waves of the Caribbean Sea. Yet should you feel active, the bar rents 
out snorkel gear and paddleboards. The rum-heavy 'Pirate's Punch' and 
'Kittitian Snafu' are the hot ticket items. There's live music on Sunday 
afternoons.
• Open daily 10am to 6.30pm 

Green Valley Pub, Cayon

Located on Island Main Road in the scenic village of Cayon, Green Valley Pub 
is a good bet for nature lovers. Lush greenery and splashy paintings surround 
the outdoor bar, which holds a two-level seating area that perfectly positions 
you to watch the antics on a stage below. You can enjoy the island breeze while 
sampling the straightforward drinks menu of mostly rums and beers. The pub 
hosts regular gigs and dances featuring local bands.
• Open Mon-Sat 10am-midnight

Rum Barrel, Basseterre

From rum to cruise ships, you'll take in key elements of St Kitts here. Stroll 
through Port Zante, St Kitts' port and shopping area, and you can't miss this 
open-air venue - complete with brightly coloured awning and wraparound bar. Hop 
on to a wooden stool, order a (rum) drink and observe the dozens of tourists 
from the big cruise ships nearby typically milling around. Well known for its 
regular bartending competitions, Rum Barrel features a diverse selection of 
rums, including Brinley Gold Rum which is made on the island.
• Open every day except Sunday 8am to 11pm

Reggae Beach Bar & Grill, Cockleshell Beach

If you want a little more action alongside your bar-hopping, check out Reggae 
Beach Bar & Grill on postcard-pretty Cockleshell Beach on the south east 
peninsula. The bar offers watersports such as kayaking and jet skiing – in 
addition to plenty of sun loungers. You'll get some of the best mixed drinks on 
the island here, especially the 'Reggae Colada' (made with passion fruit) and 
'Reggae Punch' (Appleton rum and lime juice). There is also a lively lobster 
cookout every Friday evening.
• Open daily from 10am-6pm, reggaebeachbar.com <http://www.reggaebeachbar.com>

Twist Bar, Basseterre

Head here to join local sports fans. Twist Bar not only boasts several 
flat-screen TVs (always tuned to sporting events), but also pool and football 
tables for those who fancy a game. This second-floor bar is one of the most 
happening places in the Port Zante complex, and has a diverse menu that 
includes a selection of Mexican, Chinese, Thai, Italian and Indian dishes. 
Twist Bar is also renowned for its variety of flavoured rums, and has a large 
stock of Caribbean-made products (including Cruzan from St Croix and Dorado 
from Jamaica). Its signature drinks are the Twist Rum Punch and the 'Twist 
Shot', which contains Sambuca and absinthe.
• Open daily 10.30am to 9pm

Patsy's Beach Bar, The Strip

Since its opening about a year ago, this bar has gained a reputation for 
producing the best food on The Strip. Its menu offers a range of meat and 
seafood dishes, all grilled to perfection by Patsy herself. With a live band on 
Sundays and karaoke on Wednesdays, Patsy's attracts a more mature and relaxed 
crowd. This is a place for those happy to sit back, sip their wine and listen 
to old-school tunes.
• Open daily from 11am

Karma Beach Bar, Frigate Bay

Facilities at this large bar adjacent to the Marriott Resort are impressive. 
There's a roomy lounge with a bank of wide-screen TVs and a great music vibe. 
Or, if you're looking for a tad more seclusion, take a seat on the outdoor deck 
opposite the turquoise beauty of the Atlantic Ocean. Beer connoisseurs will 
appreciate this spot, which boasts a selection of brews from more than 40 
different countries. The global outlook continues with music and food: Karma 
Beach Bar features an international DJ once a month, while its menu includes 
Indian, Chinese and Thai dishes.
• Open daily from 5pm to 1am

Illusions Bar, Frigate Bay

Upscale and elegant, Illusions Bar is in the Sugars Complex in Frigate Bay. 
Open since May, this spot has quickly become a standout. It's particularly 
lively and crowded on theme nights - such as Latino Wednesdays and open mic 
Tuesdays. The namesake drink, "It's an illusion", is a hot menu item made with 
spiced rum.
• Open daily except Sundays, noon to 11pm 

Vibes Beach Bar, South Frigate Bay

The beach at South Frigate Bay is more than just a band of sand – it 
encapsulates the party spirit of St Kitts. Known as The Strip, it's lined with 
little restaurants and laid-back beach bars. Nowhere on The Strip embodies the 
festive feel more than Vibes Beach Bar. Don't be fooled by its simple wooden 
exterior, this place is where ardent partiers go for a memorable 'lime'. Its 
signature drinks are the Vibes Passion Fruit Margarita (made with golden 
tequila) and the Cranberry Punch (made with rum and ginger). Try the 'Vibes 
Platter', a treat of local seafood.
• Open daily, 4pm-2am

Chinchillas Mexican Restaurant & Bar, The Strip

This hangout in a prime position on The Strip is great not only for lovers of 
Mexican culture, but also for romantics in general, thanks to its beautifully 
lit trellis and soft lighting. Chinchillas is renowned for its margaritas, 
especially its signature 'Coronita' – an upside-down Corona Beer inside a giant 
frozen margarita. The food offerings range from traditional Mexican dishes to 
American Tex-Mex food.
• Open Monday to Saturday 11am to 4 pm and 5 to 10 pm

Melissa Bryant is a native of St. Kitts. She worked for several years as a 
journalist for the local news and features sitesknvibes.com 
<http://www.sknvibes.com> before starting a university career
 