
Mobile advertising is coming of age. PwC's latest Global Entertainment & Media 
Outlook 2014-2018 predicts that the UK mobile advertising market is expected to 
increase by 17% annually to reach a total of £2.2bn in revenue in 2018. Some 
15.5bn apps are expected to be downloaded in the UK in 2018; 50% of the UK 
population will own a tablet by 2018 and 73% will own a smartphone. Advertisers 
need to have a strong mobile strategy in place if they want to reach consumers 
on their mobile devices. So, what are the key considerations for running a 
successful campaign?

Targeting

When first thinking about running a mobile advertising campaign, audience 
targeting should be top of your list of priorities, and establishing the 
appropriate metrics will ensure that your ads are being targeted as claimed. 
There are certain levels of information available on mobile users such as 
demographics (age and gender), device type and behaviour as well as location 
data. You should try and get some location metric into most mobile campaigns 
because it's one of the key differentiators of the medium. The caveat here is 
to avoid over-targeting, particularly around location, which requires 
significant volume; otherwise your campaign could be in danger of only reaching 
four people on a street corner.

Audience

Once you've decided on your target audience, you will then need to think about 
the sort of publishers that you want your ads to appear on. Different sites 
offer different user behaviours – for example, gaming apps tend to offer higher 
click-through rates but less conversion than traditional content. This could be 
because there are more accidental clicks in games than with traditional content 
because users are given points, tokens or virtual currency to use when they 
click on ads.

Make sure you get a full site list from your agency or network, and if they 
won't guarantee where your campaign will appear then you have to worry about 
where it's running. The old adage of you getting what you pay for holds true 
and that low rate you negotiated may not look so smart when your ads are 
appearing on the most ubiquitous gaming sites.

Formats

Next, you need to think about how to make sure your campaign is effective 
without being intrusive. This is a fine line, particularly in mobile. Formats 
that come out of the banner without taking over the home screen are better than 
pop ups that appear all over the screen. Formats that appear for a shorter 
period of time that are easy to close or skip are also less likely to annoy 
your target audience. If you are thinking about using video, make sure there is 
a clear value exchange between the brand and the user and always include a skip 
function so you can accurately measure completed views.

Measurement

Finally, you need to ensure that your campaigns are being adequately and 
accurately measured by analysing post-click behaviour and that you're being 
delivered the inventory and volumes that you were promised.

A final note on two of the latest buzz words: programmatic and data. If you 
are running a performance-based campaign then taking a programmatic approach 
will definitely give you scale (I would not suggest programmatic for branding) 
and might give you efficiencies but the promised land of targeting and 
frequency capping is not there at the moment. When it comes to leveraging the 
vast data available on mobile, you really need access to a DMP (data management 
platform) either via your media partner or agency, or your own. Some brands are 
investing in their own DMP to get a better understanding of their audience and 
how they behave so they can evolve their campaigns.

Asking some of the key questions outlined in this piece will help you to 
deliver a campaign to the right audience in a way that is engaging without 
being intrusive. Our own research shows that the UK is outperforming 
significantly when it comes to mobile ads, which is something that brands and 
agencies should take into account when they come to planning campaigns.

Mark Slade is EMEA MD at Opera Mediaworks <http://operamediaworks.com/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 