
Sprat Net, Old Road

Fish and lobster don't come any fresher than at this local-to-the-bone 
establishment in Old Road, the first British settlement in the Caribbean. 
That's because the proprietors are among the island's best-known fishermen, who 
decided in the mid-1990s that, rather than just sell their daily catch, they 
might as well cook it first. The result is a sprawling wooden structure right 
on the Caribbean waterfront, where you can watch your fish or lobster be cooked 
on large grills in an open kitchen. You eat at unpretentious wooden picnic 
tables; the crowd is predominantly local and decidedly lively, and there's 
often live music on the menu, too. Prices are moderate.
• + 1869 466 7535 or +1869 661 1901

Sweet Cane, Basseterre

This unpretentious establishment is proof that good food, efficient service 
and consistency are the most important ingredients in a successful restaurant. 
With its eclectic and fairly ambitious menu, it would be easy for this Port 
Zante eatery to get a few things wrong – but not only have I never had a meal 
here that wasn't excellent, I've never spoken to anyone who has. Which is a 
remarkable recommendation, given that Kittitians are appreciative of good food 
and don't hesitate to say when a meal is not up to their high standards. Sweet 
Cane's menu includes specials such as Cajun grouper, roast beef in red-wine 
sauce, shrimp penne pasta, excellent burgers, jerk chicken, lasagne, seafood 
gratinée and oxtail with garlic mashed potatoes. The decor is bright and 
cheerful, and the location – in the Basseterre cruise-ship complex – is 
convenient, if not particularly entrancing. Prices are moderate and value is 
outstanding.
• +1869 866 4305 or +1869 665 7628

Shiggidy Shack, The Strip
 Shiggidy Shack bar, St Kitts 
Located at the opposite end of The Strip to Buddies, Shiggidy Shack is right 
on the beach – you can sit with your feet in the sand at some tables – and is 
one of the longest-established of the popular bars jostling for business. A 
traditional gathering place for the St Kitts expat crowd, and also popular with 
tourists staying at nearby hotels, Shiggidy Shack has a menu heavy on seafood 
straight off the grill, with lobster and excellent fish burgers its star 
attractions. Among the others are live entertainment and karaoke nights – and, 
yes, reasonable prices.
• +1869-465-0673 or +1869-762-3983, mrxshiggidyshack.com 
<http://www.mrxshiggidyshack.com>

Buddies Beach Hut, The Strip

The biggest establishment on The Strip – a line of beachfront watering holes 
that stretch the length of Frigate Bay South – Buddies offers an ambitious and 
well-executed menu that includes ribs, chicken, lobster, fish and burgers. 
These are all cooked with Caribbean flair and served with excellent rice or 
fries, and (a bonus here) beautifully crisp vegetables. Again, the crowd is 
largely local and lively, particularly on Friday evenings, when the downstairs 
bar is sure to be hopping – and the upstairs dancefloor even more so. Prices 
are moderate ... and if this is starting to sound repetitive, that's 
deliberate: St Kitts has an assortment of upmarket restaurants with tabs to 
match, but the 10 recommended here are all reasonably priced and offer good 
value for money.
• +1869 465 2839

Jam Rock Restaurant and Beach Bar, South Friars
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
We're still on the beach, but this time at South Friars, just after the first 
major hill on the south-east peninsula highway, heading south from Frigate Bay. 
Jam Rock is a comparatively recent addition to the growing array of bars and 
restaurants on the island's most popular beach. It is a Jamaican-owned 
establishment and the menu offers a variety of JA specialities, among them jerk 
pork and chicken. But the hands-down winner is their succulent fillet of 
grouper smothered in a delectably creamy sauce – it might not be authentically 
Caribbean, but contented regulars choose it time after time.
• +1869 469 1608

Sunset Beach Bar, South Friars

We're heading back to South Friars and one of the longest-established beach 
operations on the island. The current incarnation of the Sunset is down the 
beach from the original location, now occupied by the swish Carambola 
restaurant, but owner-chef Olivia is still at the helm, and still delivering 
authentic local food and Caribbean hospitality. Sunset veers away from the 
usual beach-bar grilled staples with a limited menu of home-cooked stewed 
chicken or steamed fish served with peas and rice. Prices? On the low side of 
moderate.

Rituals Sushi, Frigate Bay North
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
A sushi restaurant in St Kitts? Not so long ago, you'd have been laughed off 
the island if you suggested it, but the recently opened Rituals Sushi – 
opposite the Frigate Bay golf course, in the middle of a string of touristy 
restaurants – is the real deal. The chefs know what they're about, whether it's 
the excellent sushi they're preparing or an interesting selection of mainly 
Japanese dishes. The kimono-clad waitresses are friendly and efficient, and you 
have the choice of eating on a pleasant patio or in the elegant, Asian-themed 
interior. Prices are on the high side of moderate, but it is excellent value 
given the quality and consistency Rituals Sushi delivers.
• +1869 466 0161

PJ's Bar and Restaurant, Frigate Bay North

A Kittitian institution, PJ's was in business long before most of the 
restaurant owners on Frigate Bay North had even heard of St Kitts, much less 
opened their doors. Owners Pat and Jude shut up shop for a couple of years, but 
decided to reopen earlier this year. Their return was warmly welcomed by a 
legion of local regulars, who had missed propping up the bar at the front of 
the restaurant, and they are often joined by tourists from the nearby Marriott 
hotel. Pizzas are front and centre of PJ's menu, along with a selection of 
mainly Italian-themed dishes. Prices are a shade on the high side of moderate.
• +1869 465 8373

Bombay Blues, Frigate Bay North 

Consistently excellent, authentic Indian food – in pleasant surroundings 
overlooking the golf course on Frigate Bay North – makes Bombay Blues a 
favourite with food-savvy locals. I've never heard an uncomplimentary word 
about the food or the service. The menu is standard Indian fare, with a wide 
selection of curries, tandoori offerings, breads and vegetarian dishes, but 
these are impeccably executed, with discerning use of seasonings and spices. A 
la carte prices are excellent value on the high side of moderate, while the 
all-you-can-eat Sunday brunch buffet is a terrific deal at a shade under £10.
• +1869 466 0166 or +1869 662 7599

El Fredo's Restaurant and Bar, Basseterre

A lunchtime favourite with the Basseterre business crowd, El Fredo's is a cosy 
hideaway oozing Caribbean charm and chic. The menu is strictly local, with 
offerings such as stewed conch, goat water stew (a much-loved St Kitts and 
Nevis Saturday treat), fried or steamed snapper, stewed oxtail, pigtail soup 
and jerk chicken. And, as they say in St Kitts, the food bang good. The 
background reggae is a welcome bonus and it's virtually impossible not to be 
drawn into conversation with Kittitians lingering over a post-lunch rum or 
Carib. Hang a left at the foot of Fort Street, Basseterre's main drag, and El 
Fredo's is a short stroll along the Bay Road waterfront. Prices? You guessed 
right – moderate.
• +1869 466 8871 or +1869 764 9228

Note, opening and closing hours of many St Kitts' restaurants can vary widely 
and change often, depending on the season. Not to worry ... if one door is 
closed, another's sure to be open

Juan Gonzalez is a freelance writer who has travelled throughout the Caribbean 
over the past three decades, reporting on the region for a number of magazines 
and newspapers
 