
Cwtch, St Davids

Attentive foodies may already know St Davids' best restaurant. Its door is 
plastered with Michelin stickers. Good Food Guide readers voted it their 2012 
Welsh restaurant of the year. Less well known is that this unusually sharp (for 
Pembrokeshire), modish bistro is also open during the day for (so-so) coffee, 
serviceable cake and, at lunch, simple dishes which are a testament to chef 
Andy Holcroft's rigorous, locally-sourced cooking. With its excellent 
piccalilli, coleslaw and interesting extras, supporting a great, mildly 
seasoned hand-raised pork pie and some fine cheeses (including regional doozy, 
Perl Las), Cwtch's filling ploughman's platter illustrates how truly 
professional kitchens take real pride in even the most menial tasks. The lunch 
menu might also include the Welsh stew, cawl, sausage and mash and a regular 
selection of "gourmet" pizza. These include an intriguing smoked salmon 
creation which uses that opinion-splitting Welsh seaweed delicacy, laverbread.
• Lunch dishes £5.50-8.50. 22 High Street, 01437 720491, cwtchrestaurant.co.uk 
<http://cwtchrestaurant.co.uk/>

The Sound Cafe, St Davids
 The Sound Cafe, St Davids 
That the first chalkboard you see lists not that day's specials, but the local 
surfing conditions gives you an idea of the crowd that this friendly cafe 
attracts. Not that the Sound is prey to bouts of sun-bleached, surf-dude 
laxness. Far from it. A greaseless fried breakfast – Britain's most abused meal 
– revealed a kitchen cooking with unusual attentiveness and vigour, using good 
quality ingredients, including superb thick-cut smoked bacon from St Davids' 
butcher, Gwyn Davies. The prices are fair, too. Later, the menu expands to 
sandwiches, salads, burgers and specials, such as goulash, linguine with a 
roasted vegetable sauce, and Thai-style fish cakes.
• Breakfast dishes £1.50-£7, sandwiches and meals £5 - £9.95. 18 High Street, 
01437 721717,the-sound-cafe.co.uk <http://www.the-sound-cafe.co.uk/>

St Davids Food & Wine, St Davids
 St Davids Food & Wine, St Davids 
This specialist Welsh deli and food store is a useful address, whether you 
want to stock up on presents (Penderyn whisky; St Davids-specific ales from the 
Conwy and Gwaun Valley breweries), or simply grab a superior sandwich. My 
purchase was ham and coleslaw, the boiled ham generously layered on a fresh 
granary baguette and lubricated with a thick layer of oniony coleslaw. A 
sandwich is a simple thing. And such basic attention to detail shouldn't be 
that unusual, but it is. Of course, the deli also carries the usual olives, 
cheeses, meats, Patchwork pates and such that you would expect, alongside 
savoury bakes and (rather tired-looking) sausage rolls. The service is warm and 
engaging and the staff know their products inside-out.

If, after that, you are looking for dessert, the neighbouring Bench (11 High 
Street, 01437 721778,bench-bar.co.uk <http://www.bench-bar.co.uk/>) is just the 
ticket. There, Gianni di Lorenzo uses organic milk from St Davids' Caerfai Farm 
and traditional Italian methods to produce a variety of ice-creams, daily 
(£2.10-£5). Some of those (lambrusco, cherry brandy, strawberries and cream) 
might raise an eyebrow in Rome or Naples, and Bench's ices don't quite have the 
lustrous creaminess or the refined clarity of flavour of the very best gelato, 
but they are thick, gorgeously fresh and a distinct cut-above the usual scoop.
• Sandwiches £2.35-£3.95. High Street, 01437 721948, stdavidsfoodandwine.co.uk 
<http://www.stdavidsfoodandwine.co.uk/>

The Shed, Porthgain
 The Shed, Porthgain 
This tiny seaside village looks sleepy, but in the Shed – a restaurant, fish 
and chip takeaway, and ice-cream shop – the activity is frenetic. Grab your 
supper and plop yourself down on the quayside where, on a clear night, you can 
enjoy spectacular sunsets. The Shed's fish and chips may not linger quite so 
long in your memory. They are good rather than exceptional – decent chips, ace 
caper-rich tartare sauce, fresh, juicy haddock but skin-on and the 
gossamer-thin batter too refined for my tastes. At £6 a portion, they are not 
exactly cheap either. However, sat there, gazing at the small fishing boats 
atmospherically beached in the harbour, the smell of seaweed in your nostrils, 
the only sounds the lapping of waves and the yapping of scrapping seagulls, the 
setting is priceless.

Unsurprisingly, the Shed isn't the only place you can get creditable fish and 
chips around here. If you're exploring, you may also want to make note of 
Something's Cooking (fish and chips £5.95, the Square, Letterston, 01348 840621,
 somethingscooking.net <http://www.somethingscooking.net/>) which, despite 
being inland, has achieved a five-star Seafish Fish Fryers Quality Award – a 
good indicator of quality, in my experience – for its treatment of Porthgain 
crab, Milford Haven hake and Abergwaun scallops wrapped in Gwaun Valley bacon. 
Owned by the chi-chi St Bride's Hotel, Marina Fish 'n' Chips in Saundersfoot 
(from £6.30; The Harbour, 01834 813598,marinafishandchips.com 
<http://marinafishandchips.com/>) is a similarly modern, sure-footed take on 
the fish and chip experience, with its oak tables, beer batter and mackerel 
salads. Just down the road, in Tenby, D Fecci & Sons (£4.25£5.10; Oxford House, 
Lower Frog Street, 01834 842484) have been frying to much acclaim for decades.
• Takeaway dishes £6-£11.50. 01348 831518, theshedporthgain.co.uk 
<http://www.theshedporthgain.co.uk/>

The Cambrian Inn, Solva
 The Cambrian Inn, Solva 
With its colourfully painted houses and pretty estuary location, Solva has 
long attracted tourists. The new-look Cambrian Inn can only add to its appeal. 
With Matt Cox (ex-Cwtch, St Davids) installed as chef, the pub is establishing 
a reputation for serving well-executed food at keen prices. At night, many of 
the main dishes are priced just below £10. The pub itself has been given a 
fairly generic, but not unpleasant, gussied-up gastropub facelift. Likewise the 
food is crowd-pleasing stuff (burgers, ham and eggs, roast chicken and chips), 
but given a subtle refinement. Local ingredients are prominent. You are given a 
choice of hake, cod, lemon sole or haddock when you order fish and chips. If 
anything, the kitchen could dial down its tendency to gild these simple pub 
dishes. My sample steak and Guinness pie, laced with local cheese, was in many 
ways a great plate of food – the pie rich, silky and deeply meaty, the chips 
exemplary. The addition of rosemary to the suet crust, however, was a bit too 
much. Incidentally, at a time when many restaurateurs are seeking to exploit 
picky real ale drinkers, well done the Cambrian for charging a relatively 
reasonable £3.30 for a bottle of Welsh Tomos Watkin's ale.
• Lunch, sandwiches from £4.95, otherwise mains from £7.95. 6 Main Street, 
01437 721210,thecambrianinn.co.uk <http://www.thecambrianinn.co.uk/>

Bristol Trader, Haverfordwest
 Photograph: Winston Bynorth 
How to describe the Bristol Trader? Without damning it with faint praise? 
Well, let's say this. It is a pub. It serves pub grub. Does the whole menu 
deliver? I can't say, I haven't eaten my way through it. But, intuitively, I'd 
guess that, as with any venue that offers everything from gammon steaks to Thai 
curry, quality will vary. In short, don't expect gastronomic fireworks. Yet, 
with that caveat digested, this place is still a worthy addition to this list. 
The Trader makes efforts with its sourcing and takes a pride in cooking dishes 
fresh, on-site, that few pubs of its ilk do. Choose wisely and you can eat your 
fill of tasty food, here, while still pocketing significant change from a 
tenner.

My sample plate of faggots (a big favourite in Pembrokeshire) is a case in 
point. The faggots themselves come from quality Narberth butcher, Andrew Rees, 
and boast a proper livery tang. The gravy is blandly forgettable, the mash of a 
competent home-cooking standard. But for £7.25, who's complaining? And you can 
eat much cheaper than that, too. The Trader's "no frills" menu includes a plate 
of award-winning Preseli Gold sausages and chips, for £3.95. All this is served 
until 8.30pm. While the pub building itself is unremarkable, its riverside 
location must make it a big draw on hot summer days. Real ale fans, though, may 
be disappointed if they drop in and – as on this visit – the boring choice is 
still Worthington's, Abbot Ale and Speckled Hen (from £2.80 a pint).
• Main menu, salads and main meals £7.25-£9.50. Quay Street, 01437 762122, 
bristoltrader.net <http://www.bristoltrader.net/>

Plum Vanilla, Narberth
 PlumVanilla cafe 
Vegetarians should make a beeline for this bright and breezy, quietly boho 
cafe. It is not entirely meat-free, but most of its jazzy salads (for instance, 
goat's cheese, pear and chilli) and daily specials (spicy vegetable fajitas; 
spinach and feta pie) are. A salad of halloumi and shaved beetroot dressed with 
lime and chilli was laid-out rather regimentally – and I've had better, wilder 
salads for £8.95 – but it delivered an interesting knot of flavours to unpick. 
The salty cheese was a good counterpoint to that not overly aggressive 
dressing, which, oddly, really drew out the sweet fruitiness of the beetroot. 
Quiches, frittata, filled baguettes and such are also available.
• Takeaway baguettes, salad boxes and meals £2.50-£7; eat-in £5-£9.50. 2A St. 
James' Street, 01834 862762,plumvanilla.com <http://www.plumvanilla.com/>

Ultracomida, Narberth
 Ultracomida, Narberth 
This place is one of those anomalies, a serious homage to the tapas bars of 
Spain, in the last place you would expect it – rural south Wales. There is a 
smart, uncluttered deli at the front of the unit (where you can take away 
exotic Iberian sandwiches and other items, £2.80-£3.95), and behind that a 
small busy and buzzy tapas space that, with its large communal tables and 
stools at the bar, feels reasonably authentic. Alongside the excellent 
complimentary bread, oils and spikily-preserved olives, a couple of 
Ultracomida's generously portioned tapas will make a substantive lunch. The 
menu is littered with items which will prick the interest of even the most 
seasoned foodies –cecina (oak-smoked beef), sobrasada (soft, spreadable 
chorizo) andPicos de Europa (blue cheese) – while also offering plenty of 
familiar choices. A thick slice of tortilla was exemplary: rugged, creamy, 
cooked accurately so that the potato and onion retain their integrity, and 
served with a terrific roasted garlic aioli. An empanada, in this case a kind 
of plate pie of tuna, onions and tomatoes, in a piquillo pepper pastry, was a 
little burned on top, but full of good flavour. There is also a menu of 
starters and larger lunchtimeraciones – two courses for £11.

If you are in Haverfordwest, incidentally, and fancy something similar, hunt 
out Casa Maria (2 Castle Square, 01437 779194,casamariadeli.co.uk 
<http://www.casamariadeli.co.uk/>), a bright spot on a drab square. It serves 
great rich, winey espressos, in dinky, coloured earthenware cups, and a 
splendid almond cake, tarta de Santiago. Over the two floors, the menu (dishes 
£2.50-£9.95) ranges from sandwiches,pan con tomate and artisan deli platters, 
to tapas dishes such as local lamb meatballs with cinnamon and lemon, and
morcilla (blood sausage) with sherry-cooked onions. It is an attractive space, 
certainly downstairs, and the staff are winningly friendly.
• Tapas £4.20-£5.95, raciones £6.95-£9.95. 7 High Street, 01834 861491, 
ultracomida.co.uk <http://www.ultracomida.co.uk/>

The Georges, Haverfordwest
 The George's Haverfordwest 
Unfortunately, I was in Haverfordwest the week this much-loved cafe (open late 
Fri/ Sat) was closed for refurbishment (it has since reopened). But even though 
I can't personally vouch for it, it would be remiss not to mention it, given 
its popularity among local foodies. Located within what sounds like a new-age 
lifestyle store – think aromatherapy, clogs and crystals, it delivers a global 
menu with an emphasis on ethical and local ingredients (including organic fruit 
and vegetables from its own gardens on the nearby Penty Parc Estate). Its 
dishes, which range from snacks such as homemade country pate or hot filled 
ciabatta rolls to mains such as cottage pie or a Greek take on macaroni cheese, 
rarely break £10.
• Light bites £2.50-£6.50, main meals £7.50-£13.50. 24 Market Street, 01437 
766683,thegeorges.uk.com <http://www.thegeorges.uk.com/>. Open late Fri/Sat

In a double-whammy, I was also in town too early to road test Carbone Grill & 
Bar <https://twitter.com/carbonegrill> (5 Riverside Quay, Riverside Shopping 
Centre), which opens this month. Owned by the people who had the Good Food 
Guide-listed Black Sheep, it comes with a good pedigree and, utilising a 
whiz-bang INKA charcoal oven, aims to turn south Wales onto proper pulled pork, 
A1 burgers and such meaty morsels made newly trendy by London's street food 
scene. These will be served alongside steaks, pizza and pastas, with many items 
under £10 and takeaway available, too. One to watch.

Sampler Tea Room, St Davids
 The Sampler Tea Room & Museum 
The name refers to this quaint tearoom's collection of needlepoint samplers, 
but it is also renowned for its home-baked cakes, jams and teas. Local produce, 
such as Solva crab, is key. Organic cheeses from the Caerfai Farm dairy can be 
sampled (pardon the pun) on a ploughman's-style platter. The Sampler's scones 
are served with clotted cream from Drim Farm in Narberth. The menu also 
includes a wide variety of sandwiches and filled jacket potatoes, with many 
items also available to takeaway.
• Cakes 90p-£2, sandwiches and meals £4.95-£7.65. 17 Nun Street, 01437 720757, 
sampler-tearoom.co.uk <http://www.sampler-tearoom.co.uk/>

Rail from Manchester to Haverfordwest was provided by Arriva Trains Wales 
(0870 900 0773,arrivatrainswales.co.uk 
<http://www.arrivatrainswales.co.uk/Home.aspx>). Accommodation was provided by 
Crug Glass Country House hotel in Abereiddy (01348 831302,crug-glas.co.uk 
<http://www.crug-glas.co.uk/>), which has splendid rooms from £100-£180 per 
night B&B
 