
Peter Bradshaw on comedy

Notionally, one of the most loved of genres, comedy persistently finds that it 
is somehow ineligible for greatness. Comedies rarely get Oscars. Charlie 
Chaplin, the great comic, was one of cinema's first international superstars. 
Keaton, the Marx Brothers and Laurel and Hardy produced sublime gems of 
film-making, arguably cherished more now than at the time. Billy Wilder's Some 
Like It Hot is one of the most loved films of all time, with a miraculously 
light touch and a glorious romantic chemistry between Curtis, Lemmon and 
Monroe. In Hollywood, the screwball tradition came to be supplanted in public 
taste byWoody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>, whose DNA 
can be traced through the cerebral creations of Charlie Kaufman.

Recently, Hollywood comedy has been characterised by the fratboy style of Will 
Ferrell and directors such as Judd Apatow, and by the spoof adventures of Sacha 
Baron Cohen. Comedy connects cinema to its deepest roots in pure entertainment 
– though perhaps a newBilly Wilder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/billywilder> is needed to orchestrate 
something more ambitious from these current stars.

10. Airplane! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83228>
 Airplane! Photograph: Rex 
By rights you should hate Airplane!, simply because its influence stretches to 
every single woeful parody film made in the last three decades. Without 
Airplane! there'd be no Epic Movie or Date Movie or Meet the Spartans or Robin 
Hood: Men in Tights. But, despite all the pain and misery that it's indirectly 
inflicted on the world, do you hate it? Of course not. That's becauseAirplane! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane> is untouchably brilliant.

The plot is an irrelevance – if you must know, there's a virus that takes hold 
of a plane full of passengers – because it's merely a peg to hang hundreds and 
hundreds of jokes on. The density of gags that writers Jim Abrahams and David 
and Jerry Zucker manage to squeeze into its 88 minutes is nothing short of 
breathtaking. They come so thick and fast, and they're delivered with such 
irresistible deadpan sincerity, that repeated views are a must. And what makes 
Airplane! all the more incredible is that it refuses to be dulled by 
familiarity. No matter how many times it gets quoted, or how many of its 
catchphrases have entered the modern lexicon, Airplane! is still as fresh now 
as it was on its release. Glorious. Stuart Heritage

9. Monty Python's Life of Brian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78168/monty-python-s-life-of-brian>
 From left, John Cleese, Michael Palin and Graham Chapman in a scene from 
Monty Python's Life of Brian. Photograph: Everett Collection / Rex Feature 
Although the Pythons were originally inspired by a title (Jesus Christ: Lust 
for Glory) to make an irreverent biblical comedy, Life of Brian is not about 
the son of God. It's about the guy in the next-door manger, born on the same 
night: Brian Cohen. It was an easy mistake to make; even the three wise men 
were momentarily fooled. Predictably, the film caused wide­spread outrage; 
accusations of blasphemy prevented it from being screened in many countries, 
while the marketing campaign cheerfully capitalised on the protest, proclaiming 
the film "so funny it was banned in Norway".

In spite of his obvious lack of divinity, and the fact that he's more 
interested in women and anti-imperialist politics than religion, Brian (Graham 
Chapman) is plagued by followers convinced that he's the saviour. The real 
Jesus is glimpsed at one point delivering his Sermon on the Mount, but Brian is 
so far back in the crowd that the people around him are wondering what Jesus 
meant by "blessed are the cheesemakers". Brian fixates on a rebellious young 
woman called Judith and gets tangled up with the People's Front of Judea (not 
to be confused with the Judean People's Front). A series of misadventures and 
misunderstandings lead him to Calvary, where the whole Messiah mix-up reaches 
its painful, and tuneful, climax.

The film was shot in Monastir, Tunisia, for $4m, with financing from George 
Harrison's HandMade Films, and each of the Pythons plays at least three roles.
Michael Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-palin> played 12, 
including a Boring Prophet and an ungrateful ex-leper who complains that, by 
curing him, Jesus has taken away his source of income.

These days, Life of Brian exists less as a film than as a series of endlessly 
quoted gags floating around in the popular imagination. People who have never 
even seen it can still chuckle heartily at "What have the Romans ever done for 
us?", or whistle Always Look on the Bright Side of Life. It's not like the 
Pythons took the narrative terribly seriously either: at one point, Brian is 
plucked out of a tight situation by a visiting alien spaceship. This is not 
necessarily a shortcoming, more a classic Python method of sending up something 
rather silly that has been taken far too seriously for its own good.Killian Fox

8. Rushmore <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79577/rushmore>
 RUSHMORE, film still 
Shortly after finishing this, his second feature film, Wes Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wes-anderson> arranged a private screening 
for the New Yorker's esteemed former film critic, Pauline Kael. After the 
lights came up, the 79-year-old turned toward this fresh-faced auteur, 50 years 
her junior, and said: "I don't know what you've got here, Wes … I genuinely 
don't know what to make of this movie."

Who can blame her? Even now that we understand exactly what is meant by a Wes 
Anderson film, Rushmore looks and sounds as rich and strange as ever with its 
story of unlikely romantic jousting playing out against a privileged East Coast 
backdrop to the jangling guitars of a "British Invasion" soundtrack (the Kinks, 
the Who, the Rolling Stones).

In his dazzling screen debut, Jason Schwartzman plays 15-year-old Max Fischer, 
a pupil at the elite Rushmore academy. The earnest, emphatic Max is president 
of everything from the debate team to the beekeeping society. When he becomes 
smitten with a teacher, Miss Cross (Olivia Williams), he resolves to build her 
an aquarium. But he has a rival in love – the melancholy billionaire Mr Blume, 
played byBill Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bill-murray>.

Max and Blume, essentially the same character at different stages of decay, 
begin their psychological duel over Miss Cross; and Anderson nudges the humour 
to the brink of despair, in the style of 70s black comedies like The Heartbreak 
Kid or Harold and Maude. Max's home is adjacent to a cemetery, and the film is 
on similarly intimate terms with bleakness. There's Max, in one of the 
academy's upper windows, aiming his air rifle at a schoolmate in a pitiful echo 
of Malcolm McDowell in If … And behold his hateful snarl when rebuffed by Miss 
Cross: "Rushmore was my life," he spits. "Now you are!" Suddenly he sounds like 
a stalker in the making.

Astonishingly, Anderson keeps us laughing as we wince. Savour the extravagant 
stage productions by the Max Fischer Players (an amateur Serpico, or a Vietnam 
epic complete with dynamite), which are not so much am-dram as wham-bam. And 
relish the gently batty performance which established Bill Murray's reign as an 
offbeat indie god. Anderson would go on to make more ambitious and extravagant 
movies, but it is Rushmore, co-written with Owen Wilson, that is truly touched 
by comic genius.Ryan Gilbey

7. Duck Soup <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36133/duck.soup>
 Groucho Marx in Duck Soup 
About 10 months after Adolf Hitler was appointed chancellor of Germany, Duck 
Soup opened. Is there any way of reconciling (or separating) these two events? 
Which moustache was the more dangerous or absurd? In the movie, Groucho played 
Rufus T Firefly, president of Freedonia, ready to defend the honour of Mrs 
Teasdale (Margaret Dumont) – if he could find it – by going to war with 
Sylvania. It is respectable to claim that anti-war films of the early 30s are 
really important and frightening. But I'm not sure the blithe pro-war stance of
Duck Soup <https://www.theguardian.com/film/duck-soup> hasn't lasted better as 
a clue to how crazy the 30s were.

McCarey didn't actually want to make Duck Soup. He only renewed his contract 
at Paramount when told the Marx brothers had quit. But then they sneaked back 
and he was trapped. "The most surprising thing," he said later, "was that I 
succeeded in not going crazy, for I really did not want to work with them: they 
were completely mad."

Groucho is in charge of the movie and he talks all over it, like a dog peeing 
to mark out territory. I am told that otherwise solemn children can be reduced 
to writhing masses of delirium by this stuff. It also has the mirror sequence. 
Of course, in hindsight, a good historian would have known – any country that 
could throw off this anarchy was going to knock out a country that preferred 
Triumph of the Will.David Thomson

6. Dr Strangelove <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76390/dr-strangelove>
 Stella's sunglasses for SS14 remind us of Peter Sellers in Dr Strangelove. 
Photograph: Rex Features 
We may think of 1964 as the year the Beatles appeared on the Ed Sullivan Show 
or as the last year of peace before America set itself to annihilating in 
earnest the small Republic of North Vietnam, but it was also the year 
Khrushchev was overthrown and China detonated its own atomic bomb (weirdly, 
those two things happened on the same day). In the aftermath of the Kennedy 
assassination, these were things that seemed worth being terrified of.

Thankfully, Stanley Kubrick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>, 
Terry Southern and Peter Sellers were on hand to make us feel better about the 
end of the world as we knew it, and about the psychopathic childishness of our 
military betters. There had been nothing in comedy like Dr Strangelove ever 
before. All the gods before whom the America of the stolid, paranoid 50s had 
genuflected – the Bomb, the Pentagon, the National Security State, the 
president himself, Texan masculinity and the alleged Commie menace of 
water-fluoridation – went into the wood-chipper and never got the same respect 
ever again.

Southern, in particular, was wise to the nonsensical macho posturing of the US 
military-industrial complex, and had no time whatsoever for the uniformed 
ignoramuses pontificating about mutually assured destruction, fail-safe 
trajectories and world targets in megadeaths (as one top-secret file is named). 
Thus he makes General Jack Ripper (Sterling Hayden) a barmy, paranoid 
repository for every last idiocy the military was spitting out at each new 
press conference on Vietnam or nuclear-attack policies.

And if you think General Ripper is an over-the-top slur on the good name of 
America's military might, then you've never come across the real-life head of 
strategic air command, US Air Force General Curtis "Bombs Away" LeMay – as 
floridly insane as any character in Strangelove.

No wonder the audiences' initial reaction was one of horror that these 
verities should be questioned, or such figures ridiculed. Once they got over 
that, they never stopped laughing, and one small, important cornerstone of the 
nation's respect for the military was smartly tugged out, leaving the 
destruction of the edifice itself to the war planners. They would tear it down 
without the aid of satire before the decade was out. A comic masterpiece that's 
also deeply serious and perceptive about the mad military mindset of those 
times, Dr Strangelove's genius endures even as we bury the weapons we once 
feared so much.John Patterson

5. The Ladykillers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36206/ladykillers>
 The Ladykillers 
The Ladykillers was the last of the great Ealing comedies and, almost by 
default, the dying gasp of a vanishing London; still rationed and 
rubble-strewn, with steam trains on the tracks and carthorses on the streets.

Shot in 1955 by Alexander Mackendrick, from a script that purportedly came to 
writer William Rose in a dream, this film charts the misadventures of a gang of 
thieves who hole up in the home of a guileless widow. Mrs Wilberforce (Katie 
Johnson) lives in a lopsided house up a King's Cross cul-de-sac, a place that 
rings to the din of steam whistles and parrot squawks. It becomes the base for 
a bullion robbery hatched by the oily Professor Marcus (Alec Guinness), who 
convinces the owner that he and his associates (Peter Sellers and Herbert Lom 
among them) are actually members of a string quartet. The musicians need a 
rehearsal space and Mrs Wilberforce is only to happy to oblige, standing on the 
landing and thrilling to the strains of Boccherini's Minuet (Third Movement) as 
played on an antique turntable. "You liked that, huh?" mumbles the brutish One 
Round (Danny Green), who wouldn't know a cello from a hole in the ground.

How does one improve on a film as brisk, pungent and bracing as this? The Coen 
brothers notoriously tried and failed with theirfumbled 2004 remake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101145/ladykillers> – a film that 
seemed to miss (or at least misread) all the elements that made the original so 
special. "It's an Ealing comedy so there's something very British and genteel 
about it," Joel Coen sniffed at the time. "That isn't particularly our thing." 
Genteel? What film was he watching, exactly? The Ladykillers is as black as 
pitch and as corrosive as battery acid. The crims are picked off one by one; 
victims of their greed and wickedness while their supposed target bobs – 
vaguely, innocently – just out of reach.

God, it seems, protects drunks, little children and meddlesome old women with 
too much time on their hands. So hang on to your handbag and keep the parrot in 
its cage. Once darkness falls and the goods trains start rolling, this dream of 
a film can feel suspiciously like a nightmare.Xan Brooks

4. Team America: World Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/103000/team.america>

Released a year into the Iraq war, this was the first and perhaps the funniest 
of Hollywood's early reactions to the messy conflict. Based on a brilliantly 
simple and idiotic conceit – an action movie with puppets, in the style of 
Gerry "Thunderbirds" Anderson's "supermarionation" – it turns the same 
scatological splatter-gun on America's jumped-up sense of itself as policeman 
to the planet that writer-directors Trey Parker and Matt Stone had used on TV in
South Park <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/south-park>.

Thus our heroes are idiots to their core who spout mindless security-state 
boilerplate or burst into such patriotic songs as America, Fuck Yeah! In the 
majestically over-the-top opening sequence, they manage to defeat the 
terrorists, but at the expense of knocking over the Eiffel Tower (on to the Arc 
de Triomphe and the Louvre), thus earning the enmity of the French for all time 
(like they didn't already have that).

Soon Team America is at war with a leftie coalition called the Film Actors' 
Guild (oh yes, FAG), comprised of celebrities all voiced by Stone and Parker, 
with Michael Moore, Alec Baldwin, Matt Damon and Sean Penn taking an epic 
amount of crap for their troubles. Kim Jong-il also makes a major appearance, 
singing I'm So Ronery in typical South Park "is-it-racist?" style.

Predictably there were censorship problems, given the almost nauseating 
amounts of scatology and violence. The film-makers described their tribulations 
with the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) at length in Kirby Dick's 
anti-censorship documentary,This Film Is Not Yet Rated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/114020/this.film.is.not.yet.rated>, and 
many of the excised scenes made it on to the DVD release. Three cheers for 
bonus features!JP

3. Some Like It Ho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36223/some.like.it.hot>t
 Some Like It Hot. Photograph: Allstar Picture Library 
Though it takes place in the Roaring Twenties, Some Like it Hot can be thought 
of as the first great American comedy of the swinging 60s. It was so advanced 
for its time in its sexual mores that it won the double-standard for offensive 
Hollywood cultural product: it was released without the Motion Picture 
Association of America's seal of approval, and very much with a C (condemned) 
rating from the Catholic Church's Legion of Decency.

Luckily for director Billy Wilder, who'd made a career of cocking snooks at 
the censors and the bluenoses, audiences were beginning now to care less and 
less for the restrictions peddled by the MPAA and the Legion. Wilder was one of 
the directors (along with Otto Preminger) who helped Hollywood cinema finally 
grow up. For this we thank him.

And he did it with transvestites. Dressing up Tony Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tony-curtis> and Jack Lemmon as showband 
strumpets on the run from the Chicago mob, on their way to Miami with Sweet 
Sue's Society Syncopators (lead singer and signature bombshell: one Marilyn 
Monroe), allowed Wilder and his co-writer IAL Diamond to run every variation on 
sexual partnerships, homoerotic confusion and misalliance, and the war between 
the sexes. There are moments in it that still look fresh and ahead of its (and 
even our) times, the final line "Nobody's perfect!" being one such moment.

So it's a wonder that this sprightly, evergreen comedy was made under such 
arduous circumstances, largely thanks to Monroe as her off-street life rapidly 
fell apart around her. Curtis claims he never said working with Marilyn was 
"like kissing Hitler", but we print the legend anyway – because it's more fun. 
Despite the back story, Monroe was never more mind-bendingly pneumatic or 
winningly beautiful than she was here. A perfect American comedy.JP

2. Borat <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/114557/borat>
 Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of 
Kazakhstan. Photograph: Twentieth Century Fox 
Could anyone have foreseen just how great a comedy Borat – or to give it its 
full title, Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious 
Nation of Kazakhstan – was going to be? Its star, Sacha Baron Cohen, had honed 
the satirical stunt documentary to perfection in his Ali G TV series, but had 
crashed and burned when trying to put the character on the big screen, in the 
awful Ali G Indahouse. It's still a bit of a mystery why Baron Cohen ever got 
the chance to make a follow-up, but he wisely went back to the format that had 
proved itself time and again on TV: set up an apparently clueless fictional 
character, and send him in to encounter real-life types and get them to make 
idiots of themselves. Borat, the cheerfully antisemitic TV presenter from 
Kazakhstan, who had populated Baron Cohen's TV spots since the late 90s, may 
not have appeared promising material for a feature, but boy, was everyone wrong.

The film is based on a simple idea: Borat is making a documentary about the 
US. But the opening section, in which he introduces his home village and its 
inhabitants, establishes a tone of breathtaking offensiveness. The "Kazakh" 
actors clearly have no idea about the outrageous things Borat is saying about 
them, and Baron Cohen crowns proceedings by staging a "running of the Jew", 
supposedly a regular local pastime. Thus the stage is set: the film is an 
incredibly cruel satire, aimed at both post-Soviet bigotry and American social 
dysfunction.

By the time he gets to the US, Baron Cohen is in full flow, the superficial 
ingenuousness of his creation opening all sorts of doors. Arguably the most 
spectacular, and certainly unplanned, result is the consternation he causes by 
bravely singing a spoof national anthem at a rodeo in Texas; the electric 
hostility he triggers in the spectators unnerves one of the horses so much it 
stumbles and falls to the ground.

Baron Cohen, as has been pointed out, can be faulted perhaps for bamboozling 
the uncomprehending and the weak. But that misses the point of much of what 
makes Borat great: the joke is almost always on him as well. The sort of comedy 
that Baron Cohen is trying for is high-risk for sure, and hardly guaranteed to 
provide results – but Borat is all gold. We may never see its like again.Andrew 
Pulver

1. Annie Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36314/annie.hall>
 Diane Keaton & Woody Allen in Annie Hall. Photograph: Allstar 
Woody Allen's nakedly auto­biographical film is the Oscar-winning sensation 
which put him on the map – and it's probably his best film, too. This 
fictionalised account of the rise and fall of a "nervous romance" between 
Jewish New York comic Alvy Singer (Allen) and the willowy, Waspy Annie Hall 
(Diane Keaton) was the high-water mark of Allen's gift for sublimely touching 
and funny screen comedy. It is a gloriously convincing romance, packed with 
superb gags. Annie Hall also virtually invented the relationship comedy in both 
movies and literature; it made possible the now degraded romcom genre, and on 
TV it spawned Seinfeld, Curb Your Enthusiasm, Sex and the City, and Entourage – 
though none of these have anything like Annie Hall's passionate romantic pain.

It is an ancestor of the work of Charlie Kaufman, which comes closer to 
Allen's own darkness. Throwaway jokes about Alvy's paranoid encounters with his 
TV-watching public look very contemporary in our celeb-happy age. The 
sensationally funny and daring cameo for Marshall McLuhan, who magically 
appears in a cinema queue to tell some loudmouth academic that he is wrong and 
Alvy is right, is an inspired and sophisticated flourish. It depended on a 
literate audience, who would also be tickled by the idea of a Henry James novel 
called My Sexual Problem. The film's concluding device – the ecstatic montage 
of his lost relationship's most poignantly magical memories – incidentally 
lives on in the Big-Brother-reality-TV convention of showing the departed 
competitor his or her best moments in the house.

The fact that the movie was originally to be entitled Anhedonia, that is, the 
clinical inability to experience happiness, has become part of its legend, 
especially because the film has given everyone so much happiness. It was, in 
fact, the movie which introduced us most fully to Allen's very serious 
obsession with death: how fleeting life is, how dependent on chance, and how 
overshadowed it is by the thought of its approaching end. Life is negligible 
and horrible, like the food in a restaurant in the Catskills-type joke Alvy 
tells at the very beginning: terrible, and such small portions. But in Annie 
Hall the mortality that weighs most heavily is the mortality of his love 
affair. There are no wedding bells or happy endings, and that is what gives the 
movie its sting. Allen also captured something in Keaton which can't be 
described except in cliches: kookiness, wackiness, ditsiness. They have a 
sexual relationship, and yet Keaton is not portrayed in a very sexualised way: 
she looks beautiful, but shambolically real.

The question at the heart of the film is: what went wrong? How did the romance 
die? Alvy introduces his story as an autopsy, a re-examination of his life and 
behaviour, and a doomed attempt to find out why his relationship with Annie 
failed. There is no answer: just a deeply touching, funny, brilliantly told 
story.

When I first saw the film, I remember being stunned with Allen's sheer 
audacity in the scene where he remembers his old schoolroom, sitting alongside 
kids who harangue him in adult language about his sexual precocity: "For God's 
sake, Alvy, even Freud speaks of a latency period!" One extraordinary girl in 
glasses addresses the camera and says: "I'm into leather." I've never been able 
to watch Annie Hall without pondering the fact that this child is now an adult. 
Where is she now?

Alvy Singer, like Woody Allen, tries writing scenes based on his own life: to 
make sense of them, to lessen the pain, to understand what happened, and still 
the truth eludes him. This wonderfully funny, unbearably sad film is a miracle 
of comic writing and inspired film-making.Peter Bradshaw

More Guardian and Observer critics' top 10s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/top-10-films>

• Top 10 romantic movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/07/top-10-romantic-movies>
• Top 10 action movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/10/top-10-action-movies>
 