
Sunday evening: Emmanuel Adebayor's Togo exit the Africa Cup of Nations to 
Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/03/burkina-faso-togo-africa-cup-nations>
. His acute disappointment contrasts with the sense of relief at his club, 
Tottenham Hotspur, who need him for the Saturday lunchtime Premier League 
fixture at home to Newcastle United. With Jermain Defoe injured, Adebayor is 
their only fit senior centre-forward.

Thursday morning: Adebayor is still to leave Africa. André Villas-Boas tried 
his best to sound relaxed about the situation but it did not take a behavioural 
expert to detect notes of frustration and exasperation in the Tottenham manager.

"I spoke to him on Monday morning ... I know where he is, I'm not sure if I 
want to make it public," Villas-Boas said, before admitting that the player 
remained somewhere in Africa. "We're trying to establish the best flight 
connections for him. He had issues to take care of after the tournament 
finished forTogo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/togo>."

What were those issues? Villas-Boas refused to say. He suggested that, at some 
point in the week, there was the hope that Adebayor would make it back in time 
for the training session at 3pm on Thursday but the schedule came to be 
revised. Now, Adebayor's appearance at Friday's 3pm session is eagerly awaited. 
"We've allowed Ade to come back for the Friday training session if he can't 
make it for today's," Villas-Boas said.

He added that he would certainly name Adebayor in his squad for the visit of 
Newcastle but here is the rub. Adebayor said that he was exhausted after the 
Burkina Faso defeat – he had shouldered tremendous responsibility as his 
nation's figurehead – and he must now rack up the air miles, going from 
Africa's heat to the chill of England, to refocus swiftly on club business. 
"It's always difficult," Villas-Boas said. "He will not be 100%, for sure, but 
he is still a player that can make a difference for us."

Adebayor was granted three days off after Togo's defeat and Villas-Boas said 
that it was up to the player how and where he spent the time. "I don't mess 
with that," Villas-Boas said. Adebayor is feted as a demi-God in Togo and he 
has been under pressure to show his face in Africa. But as Tottenham fans pay 
Adebayor's salary and might wonder why he could not have travelled back a 
little sooner, it was difficult to escape the feeling that it was all rather 
needlessly chaotic.

Villas-Boas talked about how the in-form Gareth Bale could continue to play 
through the middle, as a No10, while the attacking midfielder, Lewis Holtby, 
has impressed his new team-mates hugely in training. Clint Dempsey, who himself 
is not due back until Friday's session, after playing for the United States in 
Honduras on Wednesday, has come to be pressed into service up front but in 
Defoe's absence, the onus is on Adebayor.

Villas-Boas said that Defoe's ankle ligament damage, which he suffered at West 
Bromwich Albion last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/03/west-brom-tottenham-match-report>
, would rule him out for "two to three weeks." That is the optimistic reading. 
It is understood that Defoe is more likely to be out for six weeks, possibly 
even longer.

It has been a trying season so far for Adebayor, who scored 18 goals last time 
out for Tottenham, when on loan from Manchester City, but has contributed only 
three since his £5.5m permanent transfer in August. Adebayor came as an ex-Togo 
international and so the decision to return to his country for the showpiece 
tournament in mid-season did not exactly sit well with Daniel Levy, the 
Tottenham chairman.

It has not just been the Africa Cup of Nations that has fractured Adebayor's 
rhythm in club colours. He suffered injuries in the first half of the season 
and a three-game ban for his dismissal in the 5-2 loss at Arsenal on 17 
November. The derby stands as a microcosm of his season. He enjoyed encouraging 
moments, including the opening goal, only to err with his red-card challenge 
and, ultimately, disappoint.

Adebayor is hurting after the defeat to Burkina Faso, even if Togo's progress 
to the quarter-final represented an historic achievement. He muttered darkly 
about the hard and sandy pitch at Nelspruit's Mbombela Stadium, while he gave a 
glimpse of his ego in the verbal tirade that he launched at Didier Six, the 
Togo coach, whose decisions and management style he did not like.

"The coach was not a help," Adebayor said. "Me, I was on the pitch, so I 
couldn't do his job and mine. I couldn't coach and play. I tried to do my best 
but he didn't help us."

Villas-Boas described Adebayor as "very extravagant" and he said that his 
character "often" came across in the dressing room. The challenge now is to 
harness the anger and the desire, and channel it to Tottenham's ends over the 
final 13 games of the Premier League season.

"Sometimes you need players with leadership, charisma and personality," 
Villas-Boas said. "The manager's impact in the preparation of games is a 
certain amount but in the running of the game, it can be minimal and in those 
situations, you need players to inspire the others. This is the type of impact 
that Ade can have on Togo and the teams he has played for before.

"Compared to last season at Tottenham, things haven't gone so well for him, 
although the team is still doing well so his impact is there. Individually, in 
terms of goals, it hasn't happened so much. Strikers, especially, live off 
scoring goals and Ade wants to add to his tally. But I'm sure that in the next 
three months, he can still have that impact."
 