
Once she recorded the names of the 102 people she had shared a bed with; now 
Tracey Emin is among those given the royal seal of approval, with the award of 
a CBE in theNew Year honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/new-year-honours-list>.

The 49-year-old artist has been best known for eye-opening works including 
Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963-1995, the tent embroidered with names that 
was destroyed in a warehouse fire in 2004, and My Bed, an installation of her 
unmade dirty bed including objects such as used condoms, discarded tampon 
applicators and blood-spotted underwear.

But in receiving her CBE, the former Young British Artist confirmed her move 
towards a less sexually charged mainstream. In a recent Guardian interview, she 
said that hitting the menopause meant that it was time to start "using your 
mind more" – swapping sex for stargazing.

Nevertheless, Emin said the honour might have been a surprise to some: "I 
think they pushed me in at the deep end. But I'm absolutely thrilled. It's been 
insane trying to keep it a secret but I'm really looking forward to seeing the 
look on my mum's face."

Emin is one of three long-established women in the arts and showbusiness to be 
recognised with a CBE in this year's list. The reclusive singer Kate Bush, who 
first broke into the charts in the 1970s while still in her teens, andArlene 
Phillips <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips>, a former 
judge on BBC1's Strictly Come Dancing, were also honoured.

Bush, who made her first public appearance in seven years in May to receive a 
South Bank arts award for her most recent album, 50 Words for Snow, was 
rewarded for services to music. She said she was "deeply honoured" and it was a 
"great surprise" to be nominated.

The 54-year-old turned down an approach to sing at the Olympics closing 
ceremony, which would have been her first live solo performance in 33 years; 
instead she recorded a new version of her 1985 hit Running Up That Hill for the 
finale.

Phillips, 69, picked up her CBE for her choreography and charity work, 
although many will know her best from Strictly Come Dancing and an ageism row 
at the BBC when she was ousted as a judge in favour of Alesha Dixon after the 
end of the 2008 series. Phillips, who was born in Lancashire, said: "I am very 
pleasantly surprised but mostly absolutely thrilled and delighted to receive 
such a wonderful honour."

The actor Ewan McGregor received an OBE for services to drama and charity. The 
41-year-old's charity work includes working with Unicef and the Children's 
Hospice Association of Scotland. Martha Lane Fox, the co-founder of 
Lastminute.com and the government's digital evangelist, received a CBE for 
voluntary services to the UK digital economy and charity. Ian Livingstone, life 
president of video games firm Eidos, received a CBE for services to the 
computer gaming industry.

Jeremy Lloyd, who penned such classic sitcoms as Are You Being Served? and 
'Allo 'Allo!, received an OBE for services to British comedy. Darren Henley, 
the managing director of Classic FM, received an OBE for services to music, 
while Nicola Benedetti, the 25-year-old Scottish classical violinist, was 
awarded an MBE for services to music and charity.

Magnus Linklater, the former Scotland editor of the Times, received a CBE for 
services to Scottish arts and media. Christina Lamb, foreign correspondent for 
the Sunday Times, received an OBE for services to journalism.

• This article was amended on 29 December 2012. A CBE was awarded to Ian 
Livingstone, who is the life president of Eidos. The original article 
mistakenly conflated him with the chief executive of BT, Ian Livingston. This 
has been corrected.
 