
The federal court has upheld a control order against a Melbourne teenager 
linked to last year’s foiledAnzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> terrorist plot but ordered that 
his GPS tracking device be removed.

Australian federal police officers removed the ankle tracker from Harun 
Causevic at the commonwealth law courts building inMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> on Friday, after Judge 
Norah Hartnett ruled the impact it had on the 19-year-old’s ability to get a 
job and general rehabilitation outweighed the benefit to the AFP’s monitoring 
of the former terrorism suspect.

Causevic had been wearing the tracker for nine months, since a few days after 
the AFP was granted an interim control order on 10 September 2015.

In a lengthy judgment handed down on Friday, Hartnett confirmed that the 
control order, with some changes, would remain in place until 11 September.

The assistant commissioner of the AFP, Neil Gaughan, had argued that the 
tracking device was “by far the single most important control in reducing the 
risk that the respondent will carry out a terrorist act”.

The 170g device was fitted to Causevic’s left ankle and allowed the AFP to 
plot his movements in real time using Google maps.

Police ask court to ensure Harun Causevic remains under control order
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/01/police-ask-court-to-ensure-harun-causevic-remains-under-control-order>
But Gaughan conceded under cross-examination from Causevic’s lawyer, David 
Neal, that the tracking device was an impediment to Causevic gaining 
employment, and that him being unemployed and idle was a negative thing for his 
development and the broader community.

Speaking to the media outside court on Friday, Neal said the removal of the 
tracking device was a win.

“We’re very pleased with the outcome, justice has been done,” he said.

Other than removing the tracking device, Hartnett varied the orders to remove 
the prohibition on going within 100m of the Shrine of Remembrance war memorial 
in Melbourne and the Returned Servicemen’s League club at Dandenong.

She also removed a reference to the Al-Furquan Islamic information centre, a 
pro-Isis community centre that Causevic attended, because it closed in April 
last year.

Causevic was arrested on 18 April 2015 on the allegation that he was involved 
in a plan to behead a police officer at either the Shrine of Remembrance or 
Dandenong RSL on Anzac Day last year.

Federal police drop Anzac Day terrorism charges against Harun Causevic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/25/federal-police-drop-anzac-day-terrorism-charges-against-harun-causevic>
He was held in jail until the charges were dropped in August. Charges were 
also dropped against all but one of his five co-accused, 19-year-old Sevdet 
Besim.

Besim last month pleaded guilty to planning the terrorist attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/30/melbourne-teenager-accused-of-anzac-day-terrorist-plot-pleads-guilty>
 and remains in jail awaiting sentencing.

In their application to maintain the control order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/01/police-ask-court-to-ensure-harun-causevic-remains-under-control-order>
, the AFP argued that Causevic had conducted surveillance at the Shrine and 
Dandenong RSL on 15 April 2015, and alleged that a conversation he had with 
Besim about “arm-wrestling” was a coded discussion about his preparedness to 
engage in an act of violence.

Hartnett found there was “no basis on the evidence” for inferring that 
Causevic was conducting reconnaissance, and said the discussion about 
“arm-wrestling” could have been referring to a literal arm wrestle – Causevic 
and Besim were both regular weightlifters and gym attendees – and should be 
given “little or no weight”.

But she said the control order should be maintained, even though there was no 
evidence that Causevic was involved in or had knowledge of the Anzac Day plot.

“The court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that confirming the 
Interim Control Order would substantially assist in preventing a terrorist 
act,” she said. Most of the events that prompted the issuing of the control 
order were in the past, she said, but not “comprehensively so”.

Under the conditions of the order, Causevic must remain at his family home in 
Hampton Park, Melbourne’s south-eastern suburbs, between midnight and 5am, and 
must not go within 500m of an airport or port that offers international travel.

He is prohibited from going within 100m of a military establishment and cannot 
visit a jail, or a mosque or place of worship other than his local mosque in 
Dandenong, without written permission from the AFP’s Joint Coordination 
Terrorism Taskforce.

The control order also prohibits him from contacting certain people, including 
Besim; from possessing a weapon; from accessing information about weapons, any 
form of terrorist attack, or anything to do with Isis; and from using a mobile 
phone or computer other than those approved by the AFP.

He is also ordered to attend counselling once a week.
 