
Thraves thrives

After a decade out of British cinemas, director Jamie Thraves's Treacle Jr 
(see Philip French's review this week) sees the return of a film-maker much 
admired for his debut,The Low Down, in 2000. I'm pleased to see that the Irish 
actor Aidan Gillen has stuck by Thraves, even now that his star has risen after 
roles inThe Wire and Game of Thrones. The pair are now working on another 
collaboration, a music film, which will combine Gillen's rock-star fantasies 
with Thraves's skills honed making videos for Radiohead, Coldplay and Dizzee 
Rascal. Thraves remortgaged his house to makeTreacle Jr and shot it for 
£30,000, composing and playing much of the soundtrack himself. The film is part 
of the New British Cinema Quarterly programme funded bySoda Pictures 
<http://www.sodapictures.com/>, an innovation of which Trash heartily approves, 
taking four British films a year on nationwide cinema tours with the director 
popping in to the special screenings to do Q&A sessions, sometimes accompanied 
by the film's actors – all a bit like a rock band on the road.

A very naughty boy


Treacle Jr actor Tom Fisher is to play Monty Python star Graham Chapman in a 
BBC drama reconstructing the controversy surrounding the release ofLife of Brian
 in 1979.Holy Flying Circus, for BBC4, will focus on the Pythons' defence of 
their comedy – now acknowledged as one of the funniest films ever made – when 
members of the church accused them of heresy and sacrilege, particularly during 
a famous debate on television hosted by Malcolm Muggeridge and including the 
bishop of Southwark.

Fame at last


I've been backing Soda's NBCQ programme in this column since its inception, 
but I must now also declare an interest. I've just found out that a film in 
which I have a small but eye-catching role has been selected as one of this 
year's movies. It's calledJunkhearts and I star in it – OK, I make a fleeting 
cameo in it as a barman – alongside Eddie Marsan, Tom Sturridge and Romola 
Garai. A dark urban thriller, with Marsan on top form, it should be in a cinema 
somewhere near you in the late autumn, maybe with me in tow. Just don't ask me 
to make cocktails.

Bad hair days


Talking of Eddie Marsan, I wrote here a few months ago that he was directing 
and starring in a film version ofRichard III which I was reliably informed 
would be set in the 1980s. Eddie has since told me it will be very much set in 
the 1960s, but that my story almost made him consider the 80s. "But," he says, 
"I would never get my hair to do that Flock of Seagulls thing."

Marty's movies


Festivalgoers at the oh-so-genteel event at Port Eliot in Cornwall this week 
will be enjoying a selection of films by Martin Scorsese. The director was 
persuaded to curate the programme by his long-standing costume designer Sandy 
Powell, who is a Port Eliot regular. Marty's picks for theParadiso Outdoor 
cinema 
<http://www.porteliotfestival.com/performers-2011/martin-scorseses-paradiso-outdoor-cinema/>
 feature a nightly double bill to match the festival's setting: on a river 
estuary, in the shadow of Isambard Kingdom Brunel's railway viaduct. So, among 
others, he's picked the late Sidney Lumet'sMurder on the Orient Express and 
Jean Renoir'sThe River. His restored print of Powell and Pressburger's The Red 
Shoes will also be playing, while Emeric Pressburger's film‑making 
grandchildren, Andrew and Kevin Macdonald, will show their documentaryThe 
Making of An Englishman, which reconstructs Emeric's journey from exile in 
Hungary to settling in London in 1935.
 