
Tom Bennie is probably the most important media figure you've never heard of. 
The chief executive ofArqiva <http://www.arqiva.com/> admits the privately 
owned transmission company has been content with a pretty low profile until 
now. Despite being responsible for much of the UK's broadcast infrastructure 
with sales of around £800m a year, the Hampshire-based company is rarely 
mentioned inside the London media bubble.

But Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> is going to have to 
accept rather more attention now that it has taken over the stalled 
video-on-demand service Kangaroo. It is also gearing up to launch a potentially 
revolutionary consumer service that aims to transform the way people watch 
television.

Bennie agrees that the move marks a shift and is clear that despite the 
relatively trivial financial outlay, building a successor to Kangaroo – which 
is widely predicted to be called SeeSaw – matters to him. "I think it'll be a 
really missed opportunity for Arqiva if this doesn't work," he says. "But it 
won't break the company."

Demanding decisions

The company emerged two months ago as the buyer of Kangaroo's technology after 
the project was blocked by theCompetition Commission 
<http://www.competition-commission.org.uk/>. The watchdog ruled that the 
attempt by BBC Worldwide, ITV and also Channel 4 to pool their resources and 
form a "one-stop shop" for on-demand programming online was anti-competitive.

"Maybe I'm a little naive but I was quite surprised by the amount of 
interest," Bennie says, pointing out that taking over the Kangaroo assets was 
hardly a major financial deal – Arqiva is thought to have paid a fraction of 
the £30m-plus that the project cost its partners.

The move was partly opportunistic, but also fitted with its existing strategy 
for the growth of non-linear television, and suggests that at least 20% of 
viewing could be on-demand by 2020, especially as people watch the iPlayer and 
other catch-up services through their televisions rather than computer screens.

Within a few months, British viewers will be able to download content from a 
yet-to-be-named website. Arqiva is negotiating with content owners about a 
range of programming that could be both advertising-supported or pay-per-view. 
Developing a consumer-facing project is a far cry from Arqiva's traditional 
role. It owns the UK's 1,100 TV and radio masts, making the company responsible 
for the nuts and bolts of the digital switchover, as well as for two of the six 
Freeview multiplexes and the only national digital radio multiplex.

And then there are the satellite dishes that decorate the tranquil grounds of 
Crawley Court, Arqiva's headquarters on the site of a long-demolished country 
house just outside Winchester, and which can reach the whole of the Americas or 
as far as western Australia.

It is this equipment that CNN, for example, uses to transmit news coverage 
across the Atlantic. Inside the master control room, operators scan the 350 
channels that are sent from here up to the satellites that beam them back into 
people's homes.

Bennie has spent much of his career in this hi-tech world. A trained engineer, 
he worked for the old Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA), which moved to 
Crawley Court in the 1970s, and then for NTL after it took over the IBA's 
privatised engineering assets.

NTL then became a cable company – later to merge with Telewest and 
subsequently rebrand as Virgin Media – and sold off the transmission business 
to the Arqiva consortium in 2005.

Two years later, the group paid £2.5bn for National Grid Wireless – which was 
once the engineering arm of the BBC – bringing it the rest of the country's 
masts and the Freeview multiplexes.

Arqiva's low-risk profile – some of its contracts run until 2032 – has mainly 
attracted financial investors looking for a long-term home for pension funds. 
It is now 48%-owned by the Canada Pension Plan.

Arqiva is not the only company interested in expanding into on-demand 
television. The US portalHulu <http://www.hulu.com/> – co-owned by the Fox, ABC 
and NBC networks along with the private equity partners Providence – has been 
making overtures to British broadcasters and content owners in recent months.

The spectre of Hulu was often invoked at the Royal Television Society 
<http://www.rts.org.uk/> convention in Cambridge this month, where Channel 4's 
chairman, Luke Johnson, among others, railed against the folly of the 
Competition Commission's decision on Kangaroo, while failing to mention 
Arqiva's successor project. "Kangaroo was an opportunity for UK industry to 
build something, to create equity for UK plc," said John Cresswell, ITV's chief 
operating officer. "That will now disappear to the west coast."

Bennie is well aware of the Hulu threat and pitches the Arqiva proposition as 
"UK-centric". "The Competition Commission understandably rejectedProject 
Kangaroo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/kangaroo> but in a sense it left 
the UK broadcasters in a bit of a bind, because it said nothing about the other 
US-based players like Hulu [who could] sweep in and establish their presence in 
the market.

"We certainly think that having a UK-centric proposition is an important piece 
in the market, and actually enhances competition rather than reduces it because 
we want to be inclusive not exclusive. We clearly want to get US and other 
content on to the platform as well as UK content."

Arqiva knows that not everyone can succeed in this embryonic market. "We 
certainly don't think we'll be the only proposition launching," says Bennie. "I 
don't think half a dozen will survive in the long term but I think there's room 
for two or three."

Arqiva has hired the former Eurosport executive Pierre-Jean Sebert to be chief 
executive and the former UKTV controller John Keeling to be platform controller 
of "SeeSaw", and they are building a team of 40-50 people from offices off 
Regent Street.

When it comes to getting the public to engage with the site, Bennie is quick 
to acknowledge that Arqiva will be outside its "traditional skillset" in making 
a direct appeal to consumers.

A switch in time

But for all the attention it has drawn, Arqiva's video-on-demand venture is 
hardly the only thing on Bennie's plate. Perhaps the biggest challenge is 
digital switchover, which is now well advanced since it began in Whitehaven in 
October 2007.

Arqiva is in charge of physically upgrading the masts that transmit 
terrestrial television to digital, while keeping the old analogue service 
going. It has now switched over 11 of the country's 50 main stations, as well 
as 200 relay stations, and has finished the entire West Country. The crucial 
Granada region follows this autumn.

The logistical challenge involved is immense: the highest masts can only be 
worked on in summer and rely on good weather conditions. But Bennie is 
optimistic all is going well, and positive about the long-term fate of digital 
radio, in which Arqiva has an important stake as the sole owner of the national 
digital multiplex, having bought out its joint venture partner Global Radio 
earlier this year.

He is, however, prepared to admit that there is a long way to go before 
analogue radio can be switched off, despite a target of the end of 2015 set by 
the government'sDigital Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/digital-britain> report.

"I'm not sure I want to be drawn on the timetable," he says. "I certainly 
agree it's going to take a bit of time to get to the point where it would be 
both commercially and politically acceptable to start to withdraw analogue 
services." He points to the rocky start digital TV had with ITV Digital, while 
conceding the switch from FM to digital audio broadcasting (DAB) radio is "not 
transformational".

"There's a whole raft of things that need to happen," he says. "There needs to 
be a stronger consumer proposition, no question … A way needs to be found to 
encourage car manufacturers to install DAB hopefully as standard but at least 
as a pretty low-cost option."

Despite the doubts, he has faith in DAB. "I think it's important for radio 
that it has its own home, its own network. The radio companies don't actually 
have to own that, but there does need to be a medium there that's the home of 
radio and we think that ultimately that will be DAB."

As with many of the areas in which Arqiva operates, it may take decades before 
we know the answer.

CV

Age 51

Education Engineering apprenticeship, Ministry of Defence

Career 1991 Business development director, National Transcommunications (NTL) 
1998 Business development director, NTL Broadcast 1999 Managing director, NTL 
Australia2002 Managing director, NTL business division 2005 Chief executive, 
Arqiva
 