
Mohammad Mostafaei's words – spoken by actor Paul Bettany

Growing up, my childhood was not easy. We were very poor, so my father forced 
me to work long, hard hours. He suffered from terrible mood swings. He was 
always shouting at me. Some days it just became too much. But there is one day 
that I will always remember. I was 14, cleaning the windows. I saw a notice for 
a public execution. I couldn't stop thinking about it. I imagined how the 
criminal might look – big and strong and dangerous. The execution date arrived. 
I squeezed my way through the crowd. I was so shocked. There was no strong, 
dangerous man, only a very young man trembling as he awaited his fate. He was 
so young that he hardly had any stubble. I couldn't watch. As I looked back, 
the boy's body was hanging, limp and lifeless. He had fair hair just like me. 
That experience motivated me to pursue law.

Day and night I studied hard. What I'd read about in the law books was 
actually very different in reality. Most lawyers were too scared to take on 
cases involving stoning or hanging. But I wasn't scared. When defending a case, 
you think of them as your family. It's like your own child is burning in the 
fire created by the authorities and everyone is just standing by. It became my 
life's purpose to save these young people. Over the next 14 years, I defended 
many of these juvenile offenders, nearly 20 of whom were saved.

One day I received a call about a young man who was only 17 when he'd 
committed his crime. I asked, "What's his name?" He answered, "Behnoud 
Shojaee." A fight had broken out; Behnoud intervened. One of the boys insulted 
Behnoud's dead mother. Behnoud grabbed a piece of glass, stabbed the boy and 
fled the scene. The boy had subsequently bled to death. Upon learning this, 
Behnoud immediately handed himself in and confessed to the police. He was 
sentenced on the 2nd of October, 2006. He was just 17 years old when he 
committed his crime.

Over the next three years, Behnoud's execution date had been set and postponed 
six times. On the seventh occasion, I was summoned to Evin prison at 3.30am. It 
was still dark when the victim's family arrived. The crowd rushed toward them, 
begging them to forgive Behnoud. I remember the victim's father calmed the 
crowd, telling them he didn't want to actually see Behnoud executed, but he 
wanted to see the noose around his neck. They brought Behnoud in, handcuffed 
and shackled. He looked so pale and thin. His nose was running. He fell to his 
knees, begging for mercy. He was shaking and saying, "Please forgive me. My own 
mother is dead. You can be like my mother now. Please forgive me." She said, 
"Fine, let's see what happens." We all went to the execution room. A soldier 
helped Behnoud up and placed the noose around his neck. Finally, the official 
turned to the victim's parents, saying, "Here is Behnoud. What do you want to 
do now?" The victim's sister threw herself at her mother's feet, pleading her 
to forgive him. We were all shocked by what happened next. I recall they 
charged toward him. We all shouted, "NO! NO!" After that, everything went black.

Outside, the crowd were praying for Behnoud. I broke the news to them. They 
were crying so much; I cried so much. Yes. The stories of these cases are 
really very painful.
 