
So this is how liberalisation of the European €200bn (£173bn) transport market 
will work. The field will be reduced to half a dozen players; the process will 
take 10 years; the state-owned giants will lead the mopping-up operation. This 
vision was outlined yesterday by Rüdiger Grube, chief executive of Deutsche 
Bahn, as he unveiled an agreed £1.6bn takeover ofArriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness>. It is depressing.

Almost alone among the UK transport groups, Arriva made the wise decision in 
the mid-1990s to concentrate its overseas expansion solely on smallish deals in 
continental Europe. The process was "painstaking," says chief executive David 
Martin, but few doubt its success. Arriva operates in 12 countries, has been 
winning contracts by the bucketload and rewarded its shareholders with unbroken 
dividend growth.

In a rational world, liberalisation would encourage the likes of Arriva to 
continue to exert competitive pressure on state-owned titans. Arriva recently 
won a high-profile route into Berlin. Did this embarrassing loss prompt 
Deutsche Bahn to pounce?

The German anti-cartel regulators recognise the threat to local competition 
and will force Deutsche Bahn to divest Arriva's German trains business. This 
ruling is not a deal-breaker, explained Grube. You bet it's not: he is buying a 
company that was becoming a serious irritant in other parts of Europe.

Both sides made play of the fact that Deutsche Bahn is a "normal" company in 
the sense that is structured as a joint stock company. Come on, all the stock 
is the hands of the German state, which is not open to offers even if it 
mutters occasionally about a flotation. The principle of reciprocity is being 
ignored.

Will the lot of the poor old passenger be improved? Arriva, under the wing of 
a big brother, may be able buy trains more cheaply and pass on the benefits. 
But, once Grube's vision is realised, we may also regret the loss of 
competition and variety.

Naturally, few are complaining today. German trains are meant to be 
impressive. Arriva's shareholders can celebrate a 50% takeover premium. The UK 
government can trust Deutsche Bahn's commitment to Arriva's base in Sunderland 
– this is not a Kraft/Cadbury. In a decade's time, however, we may wonder why 
anybody thought the cause of liberalisation was advanced by encouraging 
successful private companies to sell themselves to state-owned corporations.
 