
Q: There has been a lot of talk about the cost of getting to South Africa for 
the upcoming World Cup. However, I am finding it even more expensive to travel 
to Angola in January for theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 2010. It is only £400 
to get to South Africa at that time of year, yet nearby Angola seems to cost 
£1,000, whichever route you take.

Do you have any advice? I don't mind following an unusual itinerary.
Barney Cullum, Oxford

A: Luanda is reasonably well served by flights from Europe but the majority of 
passengers are returning Angolans or businesspeople working in oil, so 
discounted flights are rare; £1,000 is a good fare for a flight, try
holidaygenie.com <http://www.holidaygenie.com>. With neighbours like Congo and 
the Democratic Republic of Congo interesting overland routes are limited. It is 
possible to fly to Windhoek in Namibia and then on to Luanda with Air Namibia (
airnamibia.com <http://www.airnamibia.com>) but you're unlikely to make any 
real savings. Angola has made considerable advances in terms of safety since 
the end of the civil war in 2002, but it is a destination for adventurous and 
hardy visitors (angola.embassyhomepage.com 
<http://www.angola.embassyhomepage.com>).

Q: I am visiting New York with my family at the end of October. We also plan 
to travel further afield and enjoy the fabled autumn colours. We have booked a 
hire car but only have two days to explore. Can you suggest an itinerary that 
would allow us to enjoy the scenery and stay in an interesting town or two?
Bob Perry, Chiswick

A: The Hudson Valley, to the north of New York City, is the obvious place for 
this. Route 9, the main scenic drive, hugs the east side of the valley. 
Consider driving north as far as Rhinebeck, which has several lovely B&Bs. The 
historic town of Hyde Park includes the former home of Franklin D Roosevelt as 
well as the magnificent Vanderbilt Mansion National Historic Site. You can then 
loop back via the Taconic State Parkway.

If you don't mind a little extra driving, you could add on a loop out of New 
York State by heading west to the Delaware Water Gap, on the border of New 
Jersey and Pennsylvania. The road through the National Recreation Area is 
beautiful during the autumn, and would allow you to see more before arriving at 
the Hudson Valley via its western flank. Try I Love NY (iloveny.com 
<http://www.iloveny.com>) for information on foliage in New York State, and 
visitpa.com <http://www.visitpa.com> for a leaf-peeper's guide to Pennsylvania.

 Q: My generous parents have helped me get on to the property ladder and I 
would love to treat them to a week-long cruise next spring/summer. Norway and 
eastern Europe have the greatest appeal but I know nothing about the world of 
cruises. There would be four adults (including my brother), it should depart 
from Liverpool and it must be fairly comfortable. Can you point me in the right 
direction?
Hannah Loughlin, Formby

A: Fred Olsen and Princess Cruises sail from Liverpool, while several other 
lines call in on their way to or from other places including on cruises around 
the British Isles. Iglucruise (020 8544 6620;iglucruise.com 
<http://www.iglucruise.com>) is a good place to have a look at departures for 
spring and summer 2010.

Fred Olsen (01473 746175; fredolsencruises.com 
<http://www.fredolsencruises.com>) offers an eight-night itinerary leaving 
Liverpool on 13 May and calling at five Norwegian coastal ports plus Kirkwall, 
capital of the Orkney Islands. Prices with Iglucruise start at £759 for an 
inside cabin, rising to £1,281 for a balcony cabin, based on two sharing. 
Suites are also available.

The same ship, the Boudicca, also offers a Baltic itinerary visiting, among 
others, Skagen in Denmark, St Petersburg and Tallinn, capital of Estonia. 
Cruise Critic (cruisecritic.co.uk <http://www.cruisecritic.co.uk>) is a good 
place to read reviews from other travellers of any voyage you may be 
considering.

 Q: My husband and I are retired and our income is limited. However, when we 
were working, we loved to have a city break over New Year. We've been to 
Madrid, Prague and Paris. We like to visit museums and galleries, listen to 
music and eat out, especially on New Year's Eve. We don't do it so often now 
but are considering going away this New Year. I'd like to broaden our horizons 
and wonder if there are places we haven't considered yet but can visit on a 
budget. Can you advise?
P Smithson, by email

A: When planning a city break at New Year there are a few extra things to bear 
in mind. First, it will generally be expensive to go anywhere at this busy 
time. Second, most attractions will operate limited hours over the holiday 
period. There are no firm rules from city to city, so if there's something you 
simply must see, check that it will be open. Third, you'll usually need to make 
dinner reservations for New Year's Eve, and may find restaurants closed on 1 
January.

Belgrade is an unusual New Year destination, but an excellent place for a 
knees-up. Major squares host concerts which attract huge crowds of revellers, 
and the midnight fireworks are some of the best in Europe. The next day parts 
of the centre are closed to traffic for an all-day festival, and the party is 
reprised that evening. Away from the partying, Belgrade's Citadel, Old Town and 
museums are good to explore. Hotel Royal (hotelroyal.rs 
<http://www.hotelroyal.rs>) is clean, central and comfortable.

Skyscanner(skyscanner.net <http://www.skyscanner.net>) or Cheapflights (
cheapflights.com <http://www.cheapflights.com>) can give you an overview of 
flight prices. For example, Serbian JAT Airways flies from Heathrow to Belgrade 
for about £260 return at the end of December.

For more ideas try VFB Holidays (01452 716 833; vfbholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.vfbholidays.co.uk>) for a collection of short breaks to classic 
destinations, or Regent Holidays (0845 277 3317;regent-holidays.co.uk 
<http://www.regent-holidays.co.uk>) for more unusual destinations in eastern 
Europe and beyond.
 