
App: Travelzoo <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/travelzoo/id451314284?mt=8>

By: Travelzoo Inc.

Price: Free

Available on: iOS

What is it?

It's a discount app for the travel, entertainment and leisure sector.

What does it promise?

"Get the scoop on the latest and greatest travel, entertainment and local 
deals and purchase them directly from your phone."

Is it easy to use?

The pretty home screen gives way to a simple list of categories that let you 
select the day's top 20 deals, local deals, deals in other cities, travel deals 
and a final section entitled Inspire Me. I experienced some initial confusion 
as deals in the first few categories are not displayed in any order, with 
theatre deals butting up against holiday offers and restaurant bargains. Only 
in the travel deals section are there categories that filter deals into 
specific areas (cruises, hotels, flights, rail and road, etc).

The Inspire Me section contains a photo mosaic (which displays a collage of 
photographs showing among other things scenic travel spots, women being 
pampered and theatres), a map that uses geo-location to find nearby deals, and 
a scrolling "deal roller".

Users are sent to external websites if they wish to go ahead and purchase an 
offer.

Is it fun?

It's pleasant enough looking at where you could jet to on a whim. I spotted a 
13-night cruise to the Canaries from Southampton that looks like a lot of fun 
indeed – especially at £400 off the original price of £999.

Is it pretty?

The home screen offers a beautiful illustration of hotels, planes and concert 
venues rendered in a computer-generated 3D style, while the icons used across 
the app are crisp and intuitive. Then there's the photo mosaic and the deal 
roller, gimmicks perhaps, but ones that offer an aesthetically pleasing way of 
looking for bargains.

Should you download it?
 Travelzoo QR code 
About 2.5 million people use the Travelzoo website each week and a lot of work 
goes into selecting the deals – the company says 250 "deal experts" research, 
evaluate and test thousands of deals to find eligible offers to put in the top 
20 section. For that reason alone, this app seems better than your average 
voucher code offering.

When we tested what it had in the way of local deals in London, it came up 
with a range of entertainment deals and experiences including a sunset kayak 
tour on the Thames. Maybe not for everyone, but a refreshing change from the 
teeth-whitening promos that clog up some other apps.

Some users may find it frustrating that deals are displayed with little sense 
of order, but that's really a minor quibble. The app is free and as such is 
well worth a look. But, as with anything travel-related, once you are 
redirected to a third party check they areAbta <http://www.abta.com/home> and 
Atol <http://www.caa.co.uk/default.aspx?catid=27>-registered in case the worst 
happens.
 