
I am dangling higher than a double-decker bus from an ancient oak tree, and my 
fear of heights has kicked in with full force. "Lean back in your harness and 
hook your left leg up here, over this branch," says Neil, our instructor. "Come 
on, Mum! It's brilliant up here." Lucas, my six-year-old, is lounging on a 
bough above as if it's a sofa.

Along with my husband and two sons, I'm taking part in recreational climbing – 
exploring some of the country's biggest and oldest trees, using methods devised 
by tree surgeons. Having grown up in the Forest of Dean, I jumped at the chance 
to see woodland from a different angle – quite literally.

The climbing session starts with a briefing from Mark Hawes, founder of the 
Great Big Tree Climbing Company <http://www.bigtreeclimbing.co.uk/>. Working 
closely with theInstitute for Outdoor Learning 
<http://www.outdoor-learning.org/> and the National Trust 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/> in locations from Romsey to Windermere, Mark 
and his team combine physical challenge with basic wildlife education – we're 
cheerfully grilled on the Latin name for the oak tree (quercus) before scaling 
it. There are 1,000-year-old trees here in Surrey; the colossus we're tackling 
today is a mere few hundred years old.

It's also a mind-boggling 30 metres tall, its lowest branches by no means low 
– about three times my height. We're taught how to get up there using ropes 
that Mark's team have hung from the uppermost branches like an outdoor belfry. 
The technique is straightforward and everyone cottons on pretty quickly. We use 
a "handlock" and a "footlock" on the rope to propel us on a pulley system; and 
as we become airborne, we all start babbling excitedly. The harness takes our 
weight; the kids swing between climbs.

Once the boys are all clambering around the tree, five storeys up, it's my 
turn. And just like that, my nerve goes. I'm unceremoniously heaved on to a 
branch and cling to it with koala-like fervour and clammy hands. Eventually I 
open my eyes wide enough to appreciate my surroundings. Through a lattice of 
interlocking limbs, twigs splay into lobed, many-fingered leaves; grey-green 
lichen covers the rough bark. It's an oak tree as I've never encountered one 
before, and it's absolutely worth the effort.

Climbing a tree – especially an arboreal Everest such as this – sparks pure, 
exhilarating adrenaline, an utter sense of achievement; just as I remembered 
from childhood. As a family activity it's a total leveller: children relate 
both to the dare and the dread. "Were you really, really scared, Mummy?" the 
boys ask for days afterwards. Lots of groups take part: the same weekend as us, 
a mother, daughter and granddaughter had all gone up together.

Getting down is what my 8-year-old calls the best bit: a giant zipslide. I 
grit my teeth, screw up my eyes again and push out from the steadfast oak into 
the open space between me and the hard, hard earth. I scream all the way down; 
part relief, part terror. Within 10 minutes I'm desperate to get back up there 
and do it all over again. So are the kids. "Mum, can we do this at home?" NO.

Sarah and her family climbed with The Great Big Tree Climbing Company 
<http://www.bigtreeclimbing.co.uk/>.
 