
Thrill rating 5/10

Danger rating 4/10

Fitness rating 5/10

In a nutshell ...

What's so special about climbing a tree? Everyone's done it, right? Well, now 
that age-old childhood thrill has been transformed into one of the fastest 
growing adventure sports in the UK. We're talking ropes, harnesses and tree 
climbs of up to 20 metres! Getting off the ground is the most challenging part; 
from there it's all about using the strength in your legs (much stronger than 
your arms) to drive yourself up to the top branches.

There's an eco-friendly message here, too: Paul McCathie, ex-tree cutter and 
founder of Goodleaf Tree Climbing Adventures, was fed up with "doing unethical 
things to trees" and sought a career change. "I want to encourage people to 
fall in love with them again." Tree-hugging has never been so popular.

What's the buzz?

This is a brilliant "back to nature" adventure. In a world long before 
hyper-cool indoor climbing walls, tree-climbing was the original test of 
strength, stamina and agility. The buzz is cerebral, too: you have to 
"empathise" with the tree and judge the best branches to balance your weight 
against on your route to the top. Rather less cerebrally, once up high you can 
dangle upside down 8 metres above the ground (Tarzan noises optional).

Thrill a minute?

After the initial training, climbing to the top of a tree (looking like a 
monkey or a baboon, depending on your speed and grace) and then abseiling down 
may be enough excitement. But for more of an adrenaline rush, have a go at 
branch walking. Or if you want to take it seriously, visit the School of 
Treeclimbing in Hereford, which offers a five-day course in tree climbing and 
aerial rescue.

Adrenaline peak

How about tree-top camping in Cornwall? Lying 15 metres up from the ground, 
resting on "tree boats" (hammocks safely suspended in the tree), you can spend 
the night in the branches and enjoy breakfast with the birds (you don't have to 
share their worms), courtesy of the Mighty Oak Tree Climbing Co.

Where to do it

Goodleaf Adventures is based on the Isle of Wight in an area of outstanding 
natural beauty (to add to the excitement, the exact venue is kept secret until 
you book). The Mighty Oak Climbing Co is based in the Gardens at Nanswhyden, 
Cornwall, and the School of Treeclimbing at Weobley in Hereford. All guides at 
these centres have taken certified classes at Tree Climbers International (TCI) 
in America, or are ex-tree surgeons.

Who can do it

Mighty Oak takes everyone from children as young as four or five years old up 
to sprightly adults aged around 60. As Goodleaf's Paul McCathie says, "It's 
your state of mind not your age that limits you."

What to take 

Trainers with a good grip, a long- sleeved top and long trousers to avoid any 
scratches.

Typical prices

Group introductory courses start at about £35 per person (£25 for children) or 
£60 for private individual tuition. Mighty Oak will take you tree-top camping 
for £140 each (for 2-5 people). The School of Treeclimbing runs its five-day 
course for £300 per climber.

Impress your pals 

Did you know that children are more likely to suffer an injury playing a 
computer game than climbing a tree? (Depressingly, there's a Tree Climbing 
"mini-game" made for PlayStation 2.) Also, actor Evangeline Lily from TV's Lost 
series is so good at climbing trees, she's nicknamed "monkey" by her co-stars.

YouTube searchwords 'tree climbing freeride'

Good links

treeclimbing.co.uk <http://www.treeclimbing.co.uk>

mighty-oak.co.uk <http://www.mighty-oak.co.uk>

goodleaf.co.uk <http://www.goodleaf.co.uk>

treeclimbing.com <http://www.treeclimbing.com>
 