
England’s director of cricket Andrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> had to use the strength of 
the pound to secure a new head coach after Trevor Bayliss reportedly said no to 
the job during the early stages of negotiations.

The 52-year-old Bayliss was announced as the permanent replacement for the 
sacked Peter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/09/andrew-strauss-confirmed-director-england-cricket-ecb>
 on Tuesday after beating Yorkshire’s Jason Gillespie to the job and will take 
charge in time for the first Ashes Test in Cardiff on 8 July.

According to the former Australia fast bowler Geoff Lawson, who has been 
working alongside Bayliss at New South Wales, Strauss had his original 
overtures rebuffed last week only to come back, undeterred, with a fresh offer.

Those close to Bayliss claim England’s new director of cricket then matched 
the coach’s salary at New South Wales and the Indian Premier League side 
Kolkata Knight Riders in sterling – which is at a six‑year-high exchange rate 
of A$1.95 – thus almost doubling the former batsman’s earnings. That figure is 
understood to be close to £400,000 a year.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Lawson added that along with the 
money, Bayliss was also drawn by the opportunity to be reunited with the 
England assistant coach, Paul Farbrace, whom he worked alongside with Sri Lanka 
six years ago. “A major factor is Farbrace. They’ve got a very good working 
relationship and Trevor likes to have people around him he knows he can trust 
and knows what they can produce,” Lawson said. “And they made him a very good 
offer.”

Farbrace will continue to operate as England’s interim coach until the arrival 
of Bayliss late next month and took charge of training at Headingley on 
Wednesday, when England looked to loosen up after their thrilling 124-run win 
at Lord’s in time for Friday’s second Test against New Zealand.

Joe Root was delighted to be back at what the vice-captain and Yorkshire 
batsman calls “the real home of cricket” and revealed there is excitement among 
the squad about the arrival of the Australian after being given the lowdown 
from Farbrace.

“I have never met Trevor but I have heard a lot of good stuff about him,” Root 
said. “Farby knows him very well and speaks very highly of him so we’re looking 
forward to getting him over and meeting him. He has obviously got a fantastic 
record with the sides he has worked with.”

Speaking about the prospect of having an Australian in charge for the Ashes, 
Root added: “I think [nine] of the Australia squad he’s worked with before in 
New South Wales so that obviously will be a slight advantage.”

More pressing for England is the second Test, when a draw would secure victory 
in the two-match series and mean Alastair Cook’s side jump two places to third 
in the ICC rankings, behind Australia and the top side, South Africa.

Root is mindful that England’s previous Test win – the nine-wicket victory 
over West Indies in Grenada –was followed by defeat in Barbados, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/west-indies-beat-england-five-wickets>
 which resulted in the series ending in a draw, an outcome that ultimately cost 
Moores his job.

“That was such a disappointing game in Barbados because of the one hour we 
were poor,” Root said. “It is about making sure small periods of play don’t 
cost us and trying to limit them to as few as possible. Fingers crossed Lord’s 
was not just a one‑off and it is the start of us moving forwards as a side.”

Much of the attention during the three‑day turnaround between Test matches has 
been on Ben Stokes, who followed scores of 92 and 101 with the bat and figures 
of three for 38 in the fourth innings at Lord’s by scoring the winning goal in 
England’s pre-training game of football on Wednesday.

Root sees the 23-year-old Durham all-rounder remaining unaffected by the hype. 
“The thing about Ben is, every time he pulls on the shirt he gives absolutely 
everything,” he said. “I don’t think that is going to change.

“When he is bowling, he will run in until he barely can’t move any more. And 
when he is batting, he is a free spirit who plays his shots and puts sides 
under pressure.

“He is one of those blokes you want in the side because he rubs off on you and 
gives everything. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/25/england-new-zealand-first-test-match-report>
”

Meanwhile, Kevin Pietersen has confirmed he will play for Surrey in the 
Division Two County Championship fixture against Lancashire at The Oval after 
recovering from an achilles injury that ruled him out of the latter stages of 
the IPL.
 