
Here's a piece of writing - in the form of an open letter to the late Anna 
Politkovskaya 
<http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2012/10/from-anna-politkovskaya-to-marie-colvin/>
 - that deserves as wide a journalistic audience as possible.

It is written by Razan Zaitouneh, a Syrian human rights lawyer who won the 
Anna Politkovskaya Raw in War Award 
<http://www.rawinwar.org/content/view/148/213/> in 2011. 

Addressed to Politkovskya, who was murdered in Moscow in October 2006, it 
concerns the death of theSunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> correspondent, Marie Colvin, 
who was killed in Syria in February this year. She was the posthumous recipient 
of this year's raw in war award.

Dear Anna,

I feel the irony of fate. Firstly, because I am writing to you again, Anna 
Politkovskaya <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, following 
a year, which passed like a century while we still run between dream and death.

Secondly, because I have been commissioned to present the award in your name 
to another woman who left us while trying to convey the truth that cost her 
life.Marie Colvin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/marie-colvin>, the 
courageous reporter, never feared searching for truth in the face of death.

Marie went to many countries wracked by wars and conflict to bear witness. She 
lost her eye while covering the civil war in Sri Lanka.

In Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, Marie chose the capital of 
the revolution, Homs, to report, both in sound and through images, an aspect of 
the revolution that the regime turned into an all-out war against the Syrians. 
Marie was not wrong in her choice.

At that time, Homs was the whole event, the focus of most journalists, the 
symbol of the revolution, and the symbol of survival despite voracious death. 
Right up to the last, Marie Colvin was sending reports that show the ugly 
crimes committed against the city and its people. Within a few seconds, she 
became the headline and content of the news.

About 70 foreign reporters and local citizen journalists died during the 
months of the revolution. The regime's shells and tanks do not differentiate 
between one who holds the camera and the pen, the demonstrator who holds 
banners, or the child who holds his future in his small hands.

Everyone, without exception, is a target of a destructive, insatiable machine. 
It does not distinguish between Syrians and non-Syrians, as long as they have 
the vocabulary of freedom and truth in their dictionary: Marie Colvin, Rémi 
Ochlik, Mazhar Tayyara, Basil Shehadeh, Rami al-Sayed, Anas Tersheh, Mika 
Yamamoto, Hassan Azhari and dozens of others.

'The number of martyrs is over 30,000'

We often followed their reports and videos and spread their news, without 
paying attention to those behind the camera, handset or computer screen. It was 
only later that we realised they were always in the grip of death.

It is said that the shoes of Marie Colvin led to her death. She removed them 
upon entering the hall of the building that was used as a revolutionary media 
centre in the area. When the shelling began, Marie rushed to retrieve her shoes 
in order to flee with the others, but the shell did not wait. She and her 
colleague, Rémi, and others were killed.

It seems a shameful, humiliating fact, yet also demonstrates, Anna, the 
reality of a country where practising any form of life, with the daily, trivial 
minutiae that make us ordinary human beings, has become impossible.

The number of martyrs is over 30,000, including about 2,650 children and more 
than 1,700 women. We are working hard to collect their photos and curiously 
intervene in the details of their lost lives, desperately trying to keep 
mementos of their existence.

This is a fraction of our duty towards them, but is also an important part of 
resisting death, carried out by us, the living.

There is not a stone left unturned in my country — the government army's 
relentless destruction has made sure of that. Normally, we hear the roar of a 
plane, and after a few seconds, we hear the sound of shelling.

We wait a little bit to start counting the martyrs and watch a video showing 
that what was once a building with floors, apartments, furniture, child beds, 
family pictures and toys has become a pile of dust and stones.

Ancient neighbourhoods and markets, that store our memories and are part of 
our history, and lanes, a womb of our memories, were burned to the ground and 
our hearts burned with them.

'The dull stupidity of the world'

Maybe I do not have the right to complain, Anna. You paid with your life for 
what you believed in. Marie, who we honour today in your name, paid the same 
price. As did your friend and the first recipient of the award, Natalia 
Estemirova, inChechnya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chechnya>.

However, I just cannot fathom the dull stupidity of the world, of governments 
and regimes east and west! I feel there is no difference between your 
government, which was responsible for your death, Anna, through shameful 
standing with a criminal and murderous regime, and the governments that 
condemned your killing, as they have condemned the killing of thousands of my 
people.

They do not find an "incentive", a sufficient interest, to defend human lives 
by more than a few trite words. Words are yours alone, Anna, you and Marie 
Colvin, Rami al-Sayed, Jel Jakiye, Abdul Aziz al-Sheikh, Mohammed Badie 
al-Kasem, and all the others who gave a new meaning to words and images, with a 
lot of love and determination.

Finally, let me, in your name, Anna Politkovskaya, honour your courageous 
colleague, Marie Colvin.

I would like also to honour everyone carrying the obsession of freedom and 
truth in their heart; in Syria, which is tired and sad but determined to 
realise freedom; in occupied Palestine; in Chechnya; in Darfur; in Afghanistan; 
in the countries of the Arab Spring; in states where people do not have a 
chance of resurrection; in Iran, where the people aspire to be liberated from 
tyranny; and in every corner of this world, where people are still suffering to 
live in freedom and dignity.

Source: Index on Censorship 
<http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2012/10/from-anna-politkovskaya-to-marie-colvin/>
 