
Energy companies were in the spotlight, with announcements of new oil and gas 
discoveries, as the market made a bright start to the week - mainly thanks to 
Ben Bernanke.

Tullow Oil topped the leading index, rising 97p to £15.70 after its first 
exploration well in a drilling campaign taking in Kenya and Ethopia discovered 
light crude oil. Tullow's exploration director Angus McCoss said:
 This is an excellent start to our major exploration campaign in the East 
African rift basins of Kenya and Ethiopia. to make such a good oil discovery in 
our first well is beyond our expectations and bodes well for the material 
programme ahead of us. 
Elsewhere BG added 27p to £15.19 and Ophir Energy climbed 75.6p to 477.6p 
following news of a gas discovery in Tanzania, where the two have a joint 
venture. BG said its fourth success in the country came from the Jodari-1 well, 
which could have up to 4.4trn cubic feet of oil.BG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup> holds 60% of the Tanzanian 
venture and is the main operator, while Ophir holds the rest.

Ophir chief executive Nick Cooper said the find was the largest discovery in 
the company's history, and materially exceeded pre-drill estimates:

On Ophir analyst Stuart Joyner of Investec said:
 We substantially increase our valuation of the Tanzania gas play, based on 
the analogous data to Mozambique's outboard basin fan play across blocks, and 
increase our target to 480p a share [from 277p]. 
Meawhile International Power, where majority shareholder GDF Suez has been 
tipped to buy out the rest of the business it does not own, rose 9.6p to 382.4p 
after tidying up its assets in Pakistan. It sold its 17% stake in the Hub Power 
Company for €51m and at the same time buying another 20% of power station UCH 1 
to take its shareholding to 94.6%.

Overall the market rallied, boosted by hopes that Germany would agree to an 
increase in the European bail out fund this week and more specifically, by 
comments from USFederal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> chairman Ben Bernanke 
that suggested low interest rates were here for the foreseeable future and also 
hinted at the prospect of further quantitative easing. So theFTSE 100 finished 
47.81 points higher at 5902.70, with Wall Street up around 120 points by the 
time the London market closed.

Aberdeen Asset Management added 10.9p to 260.8p after a trading update showed 
an inflow of £1.4bn in the first two months of the year. Stuart Duncan at Peel 
Hunt said:
 On current forecasts, Aberdeen is trading on an annualised December 2012 of 
10.3 times, which compares to the sector average of 9.3 times. With Aberdeen's 
balance sheet continuing to strengthen from organic cash generation, the yield 
of 4.2% looks well supported, with upside risk to our dividend forecasts if the 
business continues to deliver as expected.

We had downgraded to hold believing most of the good news in the short term 
was largely reflected in the share price but, with the shares having drifted 
back, there is now upside of 12% to our unchanged target price of 280p and we 
upgrade to buy. 
Gold miners were lifted by a rise in the bullion price, up around $25 an ounce 
to $16.85.Randgold Resources, under pressure last week on worries about its 
projects in Mali after a coup in the country, recovered 130p to £57.80.

African Barrick Gold climbed 29.5p to 424p.

Elsewhere Cable & Wireless Communications climbed 0.8p to 32.97p on revived 
takeover talk.

Easyjet soared 34.4p to 495.8p after it said it expected its first half loss 
to be less than expected.

Lower down the market Bowleven, the exploration group focused on West Africa, 
rose 17.25p to 105.5p. The company - where Dragon Oil recently made a bid 
approach before dropping its interest - reported reduced half year losses of 
$5.5m, down from $15.7m.

Premier Foods, which last week said it would have to sell further businesses - 
£330m worth - under the terms of a refinancing package, added 2p to 15.25p as 
UBS raised its price target from 2p to 10p. The company is struggling with a 
near £1bn debt mountain and saw profits fall 29%, and UBS analyst Alan Erskine 
kept his sell rating, saying:
 Back in November, we thought it likely existing shareholders would see their 
ownership significantly diluted in any refinancing. In the event the new 
management team has been able to at least secure a two year breathing space in
which (1) their effective cost of debt will ratchet down, from just over 6% to 
just over 3%; (2) they will not have to make any deficit contributions to the 
pension fund (having been running at close to £50m per annum); (3) they are not 
required
to repay any debt (other than disposal proceeds); and (4) their covenants are 
not particularly challenging.

However, in some respects (helped perhaps by an element of mutually assured 
destruction) they have done the easy part. The hard part, in our view, will be 
simultaneously re-energising/shrinking Premier's portfolio (in a challenging 
environment) in a way that addresses the still very significant debt burden and 
pension liability.

In our view the current valuation represents too big a leap of faith. 
Meanwhile Moody's downgraded the company's credit rating from B2 to B3 with a 
negative outlook.
 