
Tullow Oil led a buoyant market higher on renewed takeover talk and hopes of 
positive drilling news.

Last week Tullow gained ground on speculation that China National Offshore Oil 
Corporation could be interested in the company, with a price of £16 to £17 a 
share mentioned. The story did the rounds again, pushing Tullow shares 82p 
higher to £11.68, a 7.5% increase which made it the biggest gainer in the FTSE 
100 . Traders are also awaiting developments at some of the company's 
exploration projects, especially in French Guiana. In a recent note Credit 
Suisse said:
 We think the market's eager anticipation of the Zaedyus and Montserrado wells 
neatly sums up Tullow's investment proposition at present: as the UK's largest 
exploration and production company, it simply needs another 'elephant' 
discovery in order to keep investors interested and maintain the hefty premium 
at which it trades relative to core net asset value.

For potential 'elephants' we look to upcoming wells Zaedyus in French Guiana 
(+53p a share potential), Jaguar in Guyana (+58p a share potential), 
Monteserrado in Liberia (+38p a share potential), Jupiter and Mercury in Sierra 
Leone (+21p a share potential), and two wells in Cote d'Ivoire (+86p a share 
potential). 
Meanwhile BP bounced 14.85p to 386.5p after it announced its second major oil 
discovery in the Gulf of Mexico in two days. An appraisal well at its Mad Dog 
field found oil, which could mean it has up to 4bn barrels in place. On Tuesday 
Chevron unveiled a discovery withBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> 
at the Moccasin prospect in the Gulf.

Ahead of President Obama's key speech on Thursday, when he is expected to 
announce measures to boost the flagging US economy, investors rediscovered 
their appetite for risk, pushing theFTSE 100 up 161.75 points to 5318.59, its 
biggest one day rise since May 2010.

Markets were also heartened by news that a German court ruled the country's 
backing for the Eurozone rescue package was not illegal, which helped lift 
European markets around 4%. There was also talk that China's central bank might 
ease monetary policy in the next few months.

Banks rebounded after their recent falls on worries about their exposure to 
the Eurozone crisis and news of US legal action on subprime mortgages.Lloyds 
Banking Group gained 1.98p to 32.73p, Barclays was 9.2p better at 159.95p and 
Royal Bank of Scotland rose 1.29p to 22.46p. Giles Watts, head of equities at 
City Index, said:
 Considering the uncertainty over banks at present in the midst of charges 
relating to sub prime mortgage selling, potential downgrades to come from 
ratings agencies and exposures to sovereign debt, the reaction today is 
immensely positive but we need to see these gains hold and form a base upon 
which more gains could come. 
But with gold falling nearly $60 an ounce to around £18.13 as investors move 
away from safe havens,Randgold Resources dropped another 160p to £67.80 and 
African Barrick Gold dipped 4p to 599.5p. African Barrick, which has four gold 
mines in Tanzania, said it planned to list on the country's exchange by the end 
of the year. This is later than the initial plan of making the move by the end 
of this month. It also said it was planning to double output to 2m ounces by 
2024 from an expected 1m ounces in 2014. It produced 700,000 ounces last year.

Elsewhere among the fallers Imperial Tobacco lost 40p to £20.65 after Goldman 
Sachs removed the cigarette maker from its pan-European buy list and cut its 
target price from £24 to £21.90.

But Marks & Spencer added 12p to 313.8p on speculation of possible private 
equity interest. There were suggestions of an approach for the 3.7% stake held 
by investment group Brandes at around 400p a share.

Among the mid-caps Regus rose 8.15p to 77.5p - a near 18% increase despite the 
shares going ex-dividend - on vague talk of a possible takeover of the office 
space specialist. But traders pointed out that it was unclear who a predator 
would be, and in any case chief executive Mark Dixon holds around 34% of the 
business, while other directors have been buying stock recently.

Prezzo rose 3.5p to 61p following a 17% rise in half year profits from the 
restaurant chain.

Finally IQE, which supplies materials for semiconductors, fell 3.5p to 28.5p 
despite a 28% rise in half year profits as it made cautious noises about the 
global economic outlook, although it maintained it would meet current market 
expectations. Analysts at Investec moved from buy to hold and halved their 
target price from 62p to 31p, saying:
 We continue to see IQE as an exciting, high-growth proposition over the 
medium term. However, against a more difficult macroeconomic backdrop and a 
reduced appetite for risk we are conscious of the speed with which a downturn 
could impact IQE. It already appears that the upgrade story has paused and we 
now see an element of forecast risk to the downside.  