
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has attempted to shut down questions from Labor about the validity of the 
government’s citizenship revocation laws by borrowing a locution from the 
Abbott era and advising the shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus to “get on 
Australia’s team”.


In question time on Monday Labor referenced a media report 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/citizenship-act-terrorists-aussie-citizenship-to-be-torn-up-in-highstakes-test-case/news-story/4a7dad20395f17e01ccbcbbc48a78af7>
 saying a “notorious terrorist” was set to have their citizenship revoked in 
the first case to be taken under the government’s citizenship revocation laws.

The report suggested the government was anticipating the move would be tested 
in the high court.

Dreyfus asked the prime minister whether the case referenced in the Daily 
Telegraph report would proceed under the same legislation where the attorney 
general had “incorrectly represented advice from the solicitor-general?”

The solicitor general, Justin Gleeson – courtesy of a bitter public dispute 
with the attorney general, George Brandis –has said very clearly he did not 
sign off on the final citizenship bill passed by the parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/06/george-brandis-contradicts-solicitor-general-and-says-justin-gleeson-was-consulted>
, an account which cuts across a suggestion made by Brandis at the time that 
Gleeson had advised the government its citizenship revocation package had a 
good prospect of clearing the high court.

George Brandis contradicts solicitor general and says Justin Gleeson was 
consulted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/06/george-brandis-contradicts-solicitor-general-and-says-justin-gleeson-was-consulted>
Turnbull moved to shut down the line of questioning from Dreyfus by first 
mocking and minimising the dispute between Australia’s first and second law 
officers as a “disturbance in the bar common room” – then suggesting the shadow 
attorney general was being unpatriotic.

“What the shadow attorney general is now doing is taking his feud with the 
attorney general into an area where he is putting our national security at 
risk,” Turnbull told parliament on Monday.

The prime minister said Dreyfus needed to “get over these petty personal 
animosities and get on our team, get on Australia’s team, to ensure that we 
have the right legislation”.

Turnbull’s argument was if Dreyfus had issues about the constitutionality of 
the bill, he should raise those issues in parliament’s joint intelligence 
committee or with Brandis himself, “hold[ing] his nose” if necessary – not by 
way of parliamentary questions.

“The member opposite believes he has a great legal brain,” Turnbull said of 
Dreyfus.

“Let him bring it to the committee and ensuring that we get the right 
legislation, not these questions that are designed simply to derive political 
advantage for Labor.”

Dreyfus persisted in his questioning: “Given this is the same legislation 
where a letter the attorney general provided to the intelligence committee 
incorrectly represented advice from the solicitor general, what are the risks 
to national security in the event of a successful legal challenge?

“What is the reason for the government misrepresenting the advice of the 
solicitor general?”

Turnbull said Dreyfus was “party to a unanimous, bipartisan set of recommended 
amendments to the legislation to which he presumably gave his very best 
attention”.

Ian Macdonald could do with a lesson on the art of respectful questioning | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/ian-macdonald-could-do-with-a-lesson-on-the-art-of-respectful-questioning>
“He makes assertions about legal advice not being given. The government as he 
knows does not comment on its legal advice but the allegations that he has made 
have been rejected, as he knows, elsewhere by the attorney,” Turnbull said.

Labor expressed concerns about the constitutionality of the citizenship 
revocation proposal throughout a process of inquiry on the legislation 
conducted by the joint committee on intelligence and security.

The government had originally wanted to give the immigration minister powers 
to revoke citizenship in cases where there hadn’t been a conviction, but the 
proposal was walked back by the government because of concerns from Turnbull 
and other cabinet ministers that it would be unconstitutional.

Labor eventually supported the government in passing the legislation. Brandis 
supplied a letter to the intelligence committee suggesting that Gleeson had 
advised the package was soundly based.

Brandis, in a radio interview after his dispute with the solicitor general 
entered the public domain, has said that Gleeson was consulted on the 
citizenship revocation proposal “from time to time”.

“It was an issue on which, to be blunt, the cabinet was divided between on the 
one hand, me, Mr Turnbull and Julie Bishop and others, and on the other hand, 
the then prime minister Mr Abbott, and Mr Dutton, who was then the responsible 
minister, as to how extensive the power of executive detention should be,” 
Brandis told the ABC on 6 October.

“There were many, many chapters to this political controversy, during the 
course of which Mr Gleeson was involved from time to time.”
 