
Television executives are out of touch with the public mood when they replace 
older presenters with younger stars – such as whenArlene Phillips was axed to 
make way for Alesha Dixon on Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
 – according to a survey.

An ICM poll of more than 2,000 adults, commissioned by the charities Age 
Concern and Help the Aged, found that 71% of respondents were happy to see 
older women such as Phillips on screens, while 80% agreed that television 
favoured younger presenters.

Phillips, a 66-year-old choreographer, was axed from the new run of the BBC1 
dancing talent show and replaced with Dixon, a 30-year-old singer.

The BBC denied the decision was age-related, although the move sparked a 
backlash from politicians and viewers, with the equalities and women's minister 
Harriet Harman describing it as "absolutely shocking".

Newsnight's political editor, Michael Crick, also BBC criticised the BBC on 
the issue last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/aug/14/bbc-ageism-newsnight-michael-crick>
, calling it "barmy" and accusing it of "utter contempt" for its viewers in its 
pursuit of younger audiences.

Crick, 51, said the claim that the BBC was "obsessed with youth" was a "gross 
understatement", adding that it was more difficult for older women than men in 
the corporation.

The Phillips move followed the dropping of Moira Stuart, 59, from the 
Sunday-morning news bulletin and the replacing of Countryfile's Michaela 
Strachan, Charlotte Smith, Miriam O'Reilly and Juliet Morris, who are all in 
their 40s and 50s, with younger hosts.

Respondents to the ICM survey also said they believed there should be more 
older women reading the news, with just 9% disagreeing.

However, ageism – particularly towards women – is a problem which extends 
beyond television, with 65% agreeing that older women face more ageist 
attitudes in the workplace than men.

The head of public policy at Age Concern and Help the Aged, Andrew Harrop, 
said: "It is deeply worrying that people are seeing age discrimination right 
before their eyes, particularly against women. The belief that television 
favours younger over older women sends out an incredibly negative message, 
suggesting that as women grow older they are no longer valued or trusted.
Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> is incredibly 
powerful and if ageism is to be stamped out, it must represent positive images 
of older women.

"Time and again the public have made it clear they want to see older people 
treated equally, whether on TV or in the workplace. Broadcasters must take this 
lesson to heart and the government must set an example too, by scrapping the 
senseless default retirement age. We must finally get past people's ages and 
concentrate on the skills and experience they have to offer."

ICM interviewed a random sample of 2,047 adults from its online panel between 
14 and 16 August.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 