
Castle
10pm, Channel 5


When male grooming mogul Damian Wilder is found perplexingly bludgeoned, shot 
and burgled, it looks like Castle and Beckett might need a third brain to help 
unravel it all. Beckett ropes in robbery detective Tom Demming to assist, 
swiftly leading to a stand-off between Castle and the new man, both desperate 
to impress with their investigative skills. It's a feud that drags on into the 
season finale (which follows) when – much to Castle's chagrin – Denning starts 
dating Bennett. The cad.MJ

Andy Parsons – Gruntled Live
10.30pm, BBC2


A year is a long time in comedy. When this standup was recorded, back in 2011, 
Max Clifford ("A parasite on a leech on a slug" as Parsons puts it) hadn't been 
arrested yet, and Gaddafi was still alive, furious at the west for "bombing all 
the equipment we previously sold him". While the likable Parsons is happiest 
chatting about politics, you suspect he knows there's an element of his Mock 
The Week-loving audience who would really rather he didn't; hence lighter riffs 
on Innocent Smoothies and finding underpants in a jar of Hellman's. Good fun, 
in any case.AJC

Mashed
11.40pm, Channel 4


Rich Fulcher introduces a look back at the year's news interpreted in a 
succession of "media mashups" put together by – and this is quite the claim – 
the "internet's most famous names". No, not Brad Pitt or Kate Middleton, but 
the likes of rapper Dan Bull, Cassetteboy and David Schneider, all of whom have 
been commissioned to produce something cutting-edge and viral, taking in 
subjects including the Olympics, the London riots and Duncan Bannatyne. Some 
are puerile, some po-faced, some mildly amusing, some not. Like the internet, a 
mixed bag.BA

24
From 6am, Sky2


At a time of year when we try to relax, this bit of box set-style scheduling 
seems instead designed to ratchet up the anxiety: an entire dusk–to–dawn airing 
of the show's final season. The tension, suffice it to say, barely lets up. 
Perhaps that's because no one ever goes to the toilet. Against the backdrop of 
international arms negotiations, Jack Bauer hits New York, where he covertly 
battles assassination attempts, and wages his own campaign against the Russian 
government. A tough assignment, dammit.JR

The Richest Songs In The World
9pm, BBC4


Mark Radcliffe counts down the 10 biggest musical earners of all time, and 
tells the stories behind them. He also explains just how much of that royalty 
pie the artist gets to eat after all the expenses are paid off. Previews 
weren't available at the time of going to press, but we're hedging our bets 
that Napalm Death's You Suffer won't be among that top 10. They're more likely 
to include an unassuming little ditty about Norma Jean, or a repetitive dirge 
about a craggy bit of Scotland.AJC

Dark Days In Monkey City
9pm, Animal Planet


"The elephant reminds Gemini of hope … could this be a sign from the gods?" 
Considering Gemini is a monkey, the narrator is assuming a lot here: the 
internal workings of a primate's mind; that animals can abstract the future; 
and that they have a personal belief system. Docudrama shows about animals, 
where their lives are turned into soap operas with characters that have 
human-like emotions aren't new, but this may as well be a Pixar animation for 
all it's got to do with natural history. Surely there's enough wonder in nature 
without having to splice it with comic-book animation?MS
 Jude Law, Noomi Rapace and Robert Downey Jr in Sherlock Holmes: A Game Of 
Shadows. Photograph: Daniel Smith Photograph: Daniel Smith 
FILM: Sherlock Holmes: A Game Of Shadows
(Guy Ritchie, 2011)
10am, 8pm, Sky Movies Premiere


Ritchie concocts another hyper-energised Sherlock adventure, pitting the 
brilliant sleuth and his doughty Watson (torn from the arms of his fiancee) 
against their archenemy Moriarty (Jared Harris), the action ripping through 
London and Paris to the doomy Reichenbach Falls. Robert Downey Jr and Jude Law 
are a superb double-act, and amid the lightning deductions and crunching 
fisticuffs, room is made for the considerable presence of Stephen Fry as 
Mycroft, Sherlock's cleverer brother.PH

FILM: Tamara Drewe
(Stephen Frears, 2010)
12.25am, BBC1


Frears and screenwriter Moira Buffini make a funny, touching and witty film 
out of Posy Simmonds' marvellous cartoon strip that spatchcocks awful 
middle-class country life. Gemma Arterton is a delightful Tamara Drewe, the 
young woman who returns to her native west country village with a nose-job, 
micro-shorts and an ambition to write a chicklit blockbuster; she 
understandably stirs up the passions of ex-boyfriend Andy (Luke Evans), pop 
star Ben (Dominic Cooper) and slimy middle-aged philanderer Nicholas (Roger 
Allam).PH
 