
With all the major US networks signed up to Twitter Amplify and European 
broadcasters such as ITV now following suit, momentum behind the social 
platform's flagship TV initiative is accelerating. So how exactly does Twitter 
Amplify work and how is it going to impact the TV industry?

Twitter Amplify allows broadcasters and rights holders to share live TV clips 
and video content into Twitter in real-time, giving users the opportunity to 
watch the videos without leaving Twitter. It also drives viral distribution and 
discovery of that content, as Twitter users retweet their favourite clips and 
push them out to their own followers, extending the reach of the videos more 
broadly.

However, the most important aspect of Twitter Amplify (and the piece which is 
often misunderstood) is that it allows content owners to use paid media support 
from sponsors and advertising partners to fund the distribution of their 
content across Twitter.

One of the challenges when distributing (and consuming) video on Twitter is 
that many consumers have fast feeds. Twitter Amplify makes it possible to pin 
the video tweet to the visible part of the feed so the user is more likely to 
see it and engage with it. Moreover, if a broadcaster sends a tweet from its 
own Twitter account, it can target only the people that are following that 
account (ie its "organic reach"). However, when a sponsor runs a paid campaign 
with Twitter Amplify, it can target anyone tweeting about that topic or content 
at that time, or any other user who may be interested in the content (because 
they have followed a relevant account, tweeted against a particular hashtag or 
discussed an associated topic in their feed).

Therefore, broadcasters can ensure their video tweets are seen and use paid 
media distribution (Twitter Amplify) to extend this reach to a much wider and 
relevant demographic. Indeed this audience can be many times the size of their 
existing, organic reach – potentially the entire audience of Twitter.

Furthermore, paid media Amplify campaigns encourage extended viral 
distribution as Twitter users (that do not follow the broadcaster or rights 
holder directly) discover these new video tweets in their feed, pushed to them 
via promoted tweets, and share them with their own followers, driving a second 
wave of viral distribution and greater earned media value for the broadcaster 
and brand.

By enabling broadcasters to have this extended social reach paid for by a 
brand sponsor – one that wants to align itself with the premium content and 
push its campaign message across social platforms – Twitter Amplify represents 
a highly compelling ad-funded distribution model for content.

Given individual real-time video clips can drive hundreds of thousands of 
views within just a few minutes of being shared and 72% of clip plays take 
place across mobile devices, it also provides brands with a highly effective 
platform to scale engagement efforts and connect with relevant consumers around 
live events. And it's not just the key broadcast TV moments that generate high 
levels of engagement – huge spikes of traffic are generated from a range of 
other entertaining, irreverent and unusual content. The World Cup promises to 
be a significant revenue driver for Twitter; it is understood that Twitter UK 
has several brands spending in the region of £500,000 each around the event, 
with the largest campaigns pushing £1m – all of which will drive awareness and 
understanding. Limited only by the creativity of the brands that choose to 
participate, Twitter Amplify is set to become a significant advertising channel 
– and therefore create very significant new value for broadcasters and content 
owners.

Broadcasters can also use real-time video to promote new shows and other 
relevant formats to their audience as well as drive interactivity such as 
voting, betting, payments and, for pay TV customers, sell additional packages, 
upgrades and content services. This process closes the virtuous circle for 
social video distribution: from sharing short-form, live video clips which 
generates huge levels of engagement across social platforms to driving core 
KPIs for the broadcaster or rights holder. As such, Twitter Amplify will play a 
key role in future business models for TV distribution and consumption.

Gareth Capon is CEO at Grabyo <http://about.grabyo.com/>. You can follow him 
on Twitter@garethcapon <https://twitter.com/garethcapon>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 