
In a voicemail on Tuesday, Dutch researcher Marc Cornelissen, founder of Cold 
Facts, an organization supporting scientific research in polar regions, laughed 
at his predicament. He explained that unexpectedly warm weather had forced him 
and fellow explorer Philip de Roo to complete that afternoon’s skiing in the 
CanadianArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> in their underwear.

“I’m glad you guys don’t have pictures of us on the ice,” he said with a 
chuckle. “But it was the only way to deal with the heat.”


The same heat had also contributed to melting the sea ice near Bathurst 
Island, the researchers’ ultimate destination. In his voicemail, Cornelissen 
said the pair might have to take a detour to the north as there seemed to be 
thin ice ahead of them.

That message turned out to be tragically prescient. The next day, the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police in Resolute Bay received an emergency distress message 
from the team, approximately 200 km south of Bathurst Island. A pilot flying 
over the area spotted the pair’s equipment in an area with poor ice conditions 
and open water. Their sled dog was found sitting on the ice nearby.
 Cold Facts researchers on the ice Photograph: Cold Facts 
 No further traces of the explorers were found. On Friday, police called off 
the search.

Collaborating with other scientists working in the region, the police are 
attempting to use any available information about the area, as well as recent 
satellite images from Nasa and the European Space Agency, to try to recover the 
bodies. So far, the mission has been hindered by the same poor ice conditions 
that apparently proved fatal for the Dutch explorers.

Cornelissen and de Roo departed Resolute Bay for Bathurst Island on 6 April as 
part of the Last Ice Survey expedition, with the goal of exploring and 
researching an area known as the Last Ice Area. Both were experienced polar 
explorers and researchers.

 In addition to his work with Cold Facts, de Roo traveled to Antarctica in 
2000 to conduct climate research on behalf of the World Wide Fund for Nature.

Inspirational climate researchers feared dead on Arctic expedition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2015/may/05/inspirational-climate-researchers-feared-dead-on-arctic-expedition>
Climate and sea ice models have indicated that the region in the high Arctic of
Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and Greenland, where 
Cornelissen and de Roo were gathering data, will be the last stronghold of 
summer sea ice as the planet continues to warm.

“We think we see thin ice in front of us, which is quite interesting, and 
we’re going to research some of that if we can,” Cornelissen said in his last 
message.

Models have projected that summer sea ice will remain there through 2050. Ice 
researchers in the area hope to determine whether those predictions will bear 
out. Meanwhile, the World Wildlife Fund is spearheading an effort to launch a 
sea ice management program in the area to protect the ice for polar bears.

The type of thin ice Cornelissen and de Roo encountered could be an obstacle 
to that effort. According to Stephanie Pfirman, an environmental science 
professor at Barnard College, the latest research brief on the area indicates 
the region has “less and less of the thick, old ice that persisted from one 
year to the next. Because the ice is thinner, it is easier to melt all the way 
through, making it more vulnerable to future warming”.

Canada’s Arctic ice has been melting at a rapid rate since 2005, according to 
a 2014 memo from the country’s environmental agency, Natural Resources Canada. 
TheNational Research Council presented a report 
<http://nas-sites.org/americasclimatechoices/files/2015/04/Arctic_Matters-booklet_final-web.pdf>
 earlier this month that backed up this research.

“The Arctic is warming faster than just about any place on Earth,” Pfirman 
said in a conference call about the report. “And the Arctic winters are much 
milder than they were in the past.”

Cold Facts’ mission has been to gather data in the world’s polar regions to 
feed into various ongoing research projects, and information from this 
expedition would have contributed to the work of scientists studying the rapid 
melting of the Arctic. “We feed data into existing research activities and do 
not aspire to be a research program in itself,” the group’s website explains.

Sadly, gathering further data on the rapidly deteriorating Arctic seems to 
have cost de Roo and Cornelissen their lives.

Marielle Feenstra, a spokeswoman for Cold Facts, said the organization would 
keep the public informed on the progress of the recovery mission, and that it 
plans to continue the work Cornelissen and de Roo started.

 * UPDATE: On 12 April, the Guardian received news about the recovery efforts 
from Cold Facts: “During a risky recovery operation, a team of local volunteers 
and Canadian experts retrieved a body at the location of the accident. The 
Canadian coroner has identified the body as that of Marc Cornelissen. An 
extensive search at the scene did not find the body of the second polar 
explorer. The status of Philip de Roo remains missing.” The sled dog 
accompanying the pair was rescued from the ice unhurt.
 