
Investigators today said they had solved one of Russia's most notorious 
killings and had arrested a man and a woman for the murders of the human rights 
lawyerStanislav Markelov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/20/russia-lawyer-murder> and the 
journalist Anastasia Baburova.

Markelov – a friend of the assassinated journalist Anna Politkovskaya – and 
Baburova weregunned down in January in central Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/28/murders-kremlin-moscow-russia>. 
They had been walking towards the metro when a hitman shot Markelov in the back 
of the head. Baburova may have tried to grab the assassin and was also shot, 
dying in hospital.

Today Russia's federal security service (FSB) named their killers as Eugenia 
Khasis, 24, and Nikita Tikhonov, 29. While Khasis appears to have no previous 
convictions, Tikhonov is a veteran neo-Nazi activist wanted in connection with 
the murder of an anti-fascist campaigner.

News of the arrests came as the human rights group Memorial said that gunmen 
loyal to Chechnya's pro-Kremlin president hadabducted an activist in Moscow and 
flown him to Chechnya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/nov/05/kadyrov-critic-khachukayev-abduction>
.

Chechen security officials grabbed Arbi Khachukayev this afternoon and then 
bundled him on to a flight to Chechnya's capital, Grozny, Memorial said. Its 
staff were deeply concerned for his safety, it added.

Khachukayev runs a Chechen human rights organisation, Law, which has exposed 
human rights abuses allegedly committed by forces loyal to Chechnya's 
Kremlin-appointed president, Ramzan Kadyrov. Last night Chechnya's interior 
ministry claimed that Khachukayev had been seized for taking part in an "armed 
assault".

"He's now back in Chechnya," a human rights worker, Svetlana Gannushinka, told 
the Guardian. "It's not clear whether he's a hostage or a defendant. As soon as 
I found out about his kidnapping I faxed the office of the interior ministry at 
Vnukovo airport. They didn't answer."

President Dmitry Medvedev has promised to improve Russia's dismal human rights 
record following a string of unsolved killings of human rights workers and 
reporters.

The head of the FSB, Alexander Bortnikov, took the rare step of personally 
briefing Medvedev about today's arrests – claiming the killer had "confessed".

According to the Kommersant newspaper, citing FSB sources, the two suspects 
worked in tandem. Khasis allegedly acted as a "spotter", trailing Markelov and 
Baburova as they set off from Moscow's independent press centre. Tipped off, 
Tikhonov was then alleged to have shot them using a silencer-fitted pistol, 
sources told the paper.

Today however, friends of the murdered lawyer and journalist urged caution. 
They said it was too early to say whether the suspects were involved in the 
killings, and pointed out the murders did not resemble other bloody attacks 
carried out by violent ultra-nationalist gangs. Their hallmarks are large 
groups and knives.

The murders 10 months ago proved deeply embarrassing for the Kremlin, and 
followed the killing of Politkovskaya in October 2006 in her Moscow apartment. 
Both Markelov and Baburova were associated with Politkovskaya's paper Novaya 
Gazeta, with Baburova working as a freelance.
 