
Two Britons who attempted to smuggle 13 Albanian men and a child across the 
Channel in a small motor boat have been jailed.

The boat owner, Jonathan Bridgeman, 42, was sentenced at Lewes crown court to 
two-and-a-half years in prison for assisting unlawful immigration into the UK, 
while Deshan Laci, 35, was sentenced to three years in prison for the same 
charge, the Home Office said.

After setting off from Brighton marina, the men docked in Dieppe for a few 
hours before setting off on the return journey to the UK at about midnight on 
15 November 2014.

Bridgeman, of Burgess Hill, West Sussex, was caught after the vessel, named 
Sea Paz, got into difficulty outside the entrance to Sovereign Harbour, in 
Eastbourne, East Sussex.

UK volunteers with donations for Calais denied entry to France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/uk-volunteers-with-donations-for-calais-denied-entry-to-france>
The harbour master towed the boat into the marina and, once docked, the 
passengers tried to flee but were detained by harbour staff and police. Laci 
evaded capture.

Laci, a British citizen of Albanian birth from Ridge Langley, south Croydon, 
was later found to be the owner of a car wash in Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, and 
immigration enforcement officers discovered a man working there illegally 
during a raid on 15 February 2015.

Bridgeman pleaded guilty at Lewes crown court on 23 October 2015 and Laci 
admitted the charge on 2 September.

Twelve of the migrants have been removed from the UK and one has a pending 
asylum application with the Home Office. The child had been handed over to 
social services.

The former car wash employee has also been deported and the business has been 
served with a civil penalty.

Assistant director Dave Fairclough, from the immigration enforcement criminal 
investigations team, said: “These convictions show how different agencies are 
working together effectively to secure our borders.

“It is thanks to the prompt action of the harbour staff, the swift response of 
the police and the thorough investigation subsequently conducted by my 
immigration enforcement officers that Bridgeman and Laci have been brought to 
justice.
 