
"But first of all, we present to you life's most delicious, charming and 
respected greetings. To this effect, be our support and our assistance. You are 
for us, in Africa, those to whom it is necessary to request relief. We implore 
you, for the love of your continent, for the feeling that you have towards your 
people and especially for the affinity and love that you have for your children 
whom you love for a lifetime."

As reported in the Guardian at the time, Yaguine Koita and Fode Tounkara were 
just children themselves when they wrote this letter. On 28 July 1999 the 
14-year-olds clambered aboard flight 520 bound for Brussels to deliver it by 
hand to the "Excellencies, Messrs. members and officials of Europe".

The land disappearing beneath them was that of Conkary, the capital city of 
Guinea. Yagione and Fode, as with many other children in Guinea, lived in 
extreme poverty. The World Bank estimates that 43% of the 10 million people of 
Guinea live on less than £1 a day, making it one of the poorest countries in 
the world.

Yaguine and Fode's letter formed the basis of a plea, not for money, nor even 
food, but for a chance at an education. "We want to learn", they wrote, "and we 
ask you to help us in Africa learn to be like you".

Most Guinean children do not attend school, those that do sit in makeshift 
classrooms with upwards of 85 other children. Despite primary education being 
compulsory, girls are often forced out of the classroom at an early age to help 
provide for their families. Yaguine's mother, says her son "adored lessons and 
wanted to become a lawyer or a writer….he always asked me to send him exercise 
books, pens, even law books". Yet prohibitive school fees meant Yaguine like so 
many others of his age, left school to seek paid work.

This distinct lack of schooling within Guinea's young translates to one of the 
lowest literacy rates in the world. In 2003 UNESCO estimated that less than 30% 
of adults in the country could read and write, the consequences being a poorly 
performing economy with few signs and little hope of improvement.

UNESCO's 'Education for all' is a universal commitment to ensure all children 
are afforded at least a basic education. Driving the movement is a tripartite 
cooperative: consisting of the public sector acting through Governments; the 
private sector via businesses; and the third sector, through charities and 
NGOs. Approaching the final year of the innovative 12 year project, thousands 
of schools have been built and thousands of pounds invested in teacher training 
within Guinea.

However political instability has stagnated progress, so much so that the 
number of children attending school in Guinea has actually fallen since 2007. 
An elections loom on the horizon, and the future of the next generation of 
children hangs in the balance.

Faced with almost certain unemployed and little hope, Yaguine and Fode 
believed that they had no other option but to flee to Europe. However, unlike 
the other passengers on flight 520, they could not afford the fare. In a state 
of desperation they risked their lives and hid within the landing gear, two 
stowaways looking for a better life.

Three days later their bodies were found huddled together, having frozen to 
death.

The letter found in their possession is certainly suggestive that the boys did 
not expect to survive the flight. They acknowledged the risks they were taking. 
Ironically, had they in fact survived, they would have almost certainly been 
sent back to Guinea on the next flight. Their letter unread and their message 
undelivered.

What of the future for Guinea? Without educating its children the country has 
little hope of eradicating the poverty that has crippled this generation. 
Yaguine and Fode spoke out for all of the children suffering in Guinea, in 
Africa, to be given the chance "to learn", a chance of a real education.

"Finally, we appeal to you to excuse us very, very much for daring to write 
this letter to you, the great personages to whom we owe much respect. And do 
not forget it is to you whom we must lament about the weakness of our abilities 
in Africa."
 