
Mo Farah will be staying with Alberto Salazar’s training group after an 
independent audit set up by UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> found there was “no reason” to 
lack confidence in his training programme at the Nike Oregon Project – and “no 
reason” to be concerned about any other British athlete or coaches involved 
with the Oregon Project.

The news will come as a massive relief to Farah, who has always said that he 
would stuck by Salazar unless he was shown clear evidence of wrongdoing, as 
well as to the British Athletics performance director, Neil Black, and the head 
of endurance, Barry Fudge, both of whom have worked closely with Salazar.

UK Athletics said it was not able to give full details of the review by its 
performance oversight group, composed of Jason Gardener, Dr Sarah Rowell and 
Anne-Wafula Strike, because the United States Anti-Doping Agency had asked them 
not to while they continue their investigations into Salazar.

However in a statement 
<http://www.britishathletics.org.uk/media/news/2015-news-page/september-2015/18-09-15-pog/>
 it confirmed that the audit had found no evidence of any wrongdoing. “In July 
we said that there was no evidence of any impropriety on the part of Mo Farah 
and no reason to lack confidence in his training programme,” it said. “The 
oversight group have restated that view today. They have also found no reason 
to be concerned about the engagement of other British athletes and coaches with 
the Oregon Project.

“The review established that the vast majority of the endurance program’s 
interaction with the Oregon Project is in fact focussed on Mo Farah, with very 
little other UK Athletics related activity. Coaching and support forMo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah> will remain the focus of our 
engagement with the Oregon Project.”

The performance oversight group was set up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/12/uk-athletics-mo-farah-alberto-salazar-review-relationship>
 in the wake of an investigation by the BBC’s Panorama and the US news website 
ProPublicawhich alleged in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/mo-farah-angry-frustrated-allegations-alberto-salazar>
 that Salazar had violated a series of anti-doping rules, including given 
Farah’s training partner testosterone as a 16-year-old. Both Salazar and Rupp 
have denied any wrongdoing and there was never a suggestion that Farah had done 
anything wrong.

The oversight group was tasked with finding out whether the UKA’s confidence 
in the Nike Oregon Project and Farah’s training was well-founded by looking 
specifically at three areas: Farah’s training programme with the Oregon 
Project, the endurance programme within the Oregon Project, and the lessons 
learned for the wider UK athletics endurance programme.

While no one has doubted the oversight group’s intentions, some have wondered 
whether having a former athlete investigating such serious allegations was the 
best way to get to the bottom of the accusations. And with Usada asking for 
further details not to be made public it is difficult to know how forensic and 
intensive their investigations were, although the Guardian understands that 
many of the witnesses in the Panorama documentary were spoken to by Gardener.

In their statement UK Athletics said that the oversight group had made a 
number of organisational and procedural recommendations “which UK Athletics’ 
performance director Neil Black will take forward and implement over the coming 
months”.

It added: “Obviously since our review was set up Usada announced that it was 
conducting an investigation into allegations made in respect of staff within 
the Oregon Project. Usada is clearly the right body to look at anti-doping 
issues. They have asked us not to give any further details of our review until 
their work has concluded. We respect their request and are of course giving 
them our fullest support and co-operation.”
 