
Afghan torture victims who helped jail a notorious warlord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jul/19/afghanistan.world> in a landmark UK 
trial may be at risk after British authorities released him from jail and 
returned him to Afghanistan on Wednesday, without warning some witnesses or 
offering protection.

Faryadi Sarwar Zardad was known for keeping a “human dog” at a checkpoint on a 
key highway, who savaged victims on his command. He was convicted in 2005 of 
orchestrating a “cruel and merciless” campaign of torture and hostage-taking.


Human Rights Watch said 16 Afghans who testified against Zardad, mostly by 
videolink, were now potentially at risk. The group’sAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> researcher Patricia Gossman 
said the decision to release him without preparing or protecting witnesses was 
irresponsible.

“There is no concern for the people who risked their lives to testify,” she 
said. “I’m pretty sure he’s out for revenge.”


If witnesses were attacked by Zardad or his supporters, it could damage future 
attempts to bring war crimes perpetrators to justice in Afghanistan and beyond, 
analysts and human rights activists said.

Zardad was met at Kabul airport on Wednesday by a group of supporters who had 
got through the first layers of normally strict security, at least one of them 
carrying a gun, a sign of the influence he still wields after nearly two 
decades out of the country. He was reportedly taken into custody on arrival, 
with authorities debating how to handle his case.

Zardad’s trial a decade ago was the first of its kind under the UN torture 
convention. He had fled to Britain as an asylum seeker in 1998 on a fake 
passport and was prosecuted in Britain even though he is not British and the 
offences he committed were carried out in Afghanistan.


It was considered so important that the then attorney general, Lord Goldsmith, 
initially led the prosecution himself. Zardad was eventually sentenced to two 
concurrent 20-year sentences. This week he was released on parole and deported.

Kate Clarke, of the Afghanistan Analysts Network 
<https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/afghan-war-criminal-zardad-freed-no-protection-for-witnesses/>
, said: “The conviction of Zardad was a landmark case, helping to establish 
that the most severe crimes can be prosecuted anywhere. If witnesses cannot be 
assured that they will be protected from reprisal, however, it will become 
impossible to get this sort of justice.

“At least some were not informed by the UK government that he was coming back 
to Afghanistan, nor have any measures been put in place to protect them.”

The government admitted at the time of the trial that witnesses were scared of 
publicly speaking out against a man famed for his brutality.


“We had to find witnesses in remote parts of Afghanistan and give them the 
confidence to come forward to give evidence in a British court,” Peter Clarke, 
who headed Scotland Yard’s anti-terrorist branch at the time, said after the 
conviction.

Gossman said officials convinced witnesses it would not be dangerous to 
testify, and said Zardad would not get early release.

“Two years ago, the UK embassy said that when he came up for parole there was 
no way they were going to release him,” she said.

The British embassy said normal procedure would be for UK police to contact 
witnesses before the release, but declined to say whether that had happened 
with those who testified against Zardar.


The Ministry of Justice, Parole Board and the Metropolitan police unit 
responsible for the investigation – which included sending officers to 
Afghanistan under armed guard to question witnesses – did not respond to 
requests for comment on the case.

Zardad fought the Soviets with the mujahideen before setting up his personal 
fiefdom on the highway between Kabul and the Pakistani border, using 
checkpoints to extract income from terrified travellers.

Samim was among them as a young man. He was dragged off a bus, hung upside 
down, chained and beaten for seven days until his family sold their house to 
pay the ransom for his release.

“I don’t believe in democracy because this man was released from prison,” said 
Samim, who did not testify at the trial. More than two decades on he still 
bears physical and mental scars, and is so scared to criticise the warlord 
publicly that he asked for his name to be changed in this report.
 