
Farmers have called on retailers to do more to support the British lamb 
industry, with only one major supermarket chain selling entirely UK-grown lamb 
for Easter.

A classic roast leg of lamb remains a popular family dish over the Easter 
holiday. However, despite industry efforts to reduce the amount of chilled and 
frozen lamb imported fromNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>, only the German discount chain 
Aldi will sell entirely British-grown fresh lamb on a significant scale this 
Easter.

Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>, Lidl, Asda, Sainsbury’s, 
Marks & Spencer, the Co-op and Morrisons are all selling New Zealand lamb this 
Easter, typically topped up by small supplies of early season British lamb 
which is more expensive. The higher production costs associated with rearing 
lambs “out of season”, in indoor conditions in the winter months, mean it 
attracts a premium price. This is particularly relevant this year because 
Easter takes place earlier than in recent years.

Tom Fullick, the National Farmers’ Union’s livestock adviser, said all 
retailers shouldmake clear to farmers when they wanted to source from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/mps-urge-supermarkets-to-help-farmers-more-pric-milk-labelling-food-orign>
, so they could plan their production cycle all year round if necessary.

 “We welcome this move by Aldi and we hope it will encourage other retailers 
to follow suit,” he said. “Our peak lambing season is March to May, but we can 
produce lambs earlier provided we get sufficient notice. If the supermarkets 
want it, we can produce it, but it’s a lengthy planning cycle, and a consistent 
frustration for farmers is that labelling on sourcing is not clear enough for 
consumers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/tesco-talks-dairy-farmers-protests-milk-imports-avonmouth>
”

The UK is the world’s third largest lamb exporter – after Australia and New 
Zealand – with just over a third of the market. According to retail analysts 
Mintec the peak for lamb consumption in the UK is typically in the month which 
Easter falls, with an average of almost 8,000 tonnes eaten.

“Lamb is a dish for all year round,” Fullick added. “Lamb gave turkey a run 
for its money in the run-up to the Christmas period and it actually 
outperformed turkey in value sales.”

Aldi’s <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> fresh whole leg of British 
Lamb will retail at just £3.79 a kg, undercutting many competitors’ half price 
Easter promotions on New Zealand imports. The German discounter – the UK’s 
sixth largest supermarket – said its competitors relied solely or significantly 
upon imports from New Zealand for their Easter whole leg promotions, taking 
advantage of lower buying prices and greater availability.

Tony Baines, joint managing director of corporate buying, said: “At Aldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>, we pride ourselves on offering 
customers the best of British all year round. Our British Easter lamb 
proposition underpins our long term commitment to British farming and 
reinforces the fact that we will not be beaten on price.”

Kantar data revealed that Aldi has a 5.1% volume share of lamb across UK 
retailers, with sales growing at 36.5% over the quarter to the end of February.

The Co-op is offering shoppers special offers on lamb for Easter, but all the 
cuts have been shipped in from New Zealand. Fresh legs of lamb are currently 
half price – now £6.24 a kg – which will continue through Easter. A Co-op 
spokeswoman said: “We have been working hard with our farmers and suppliers and 
are really pleased that this year we are able to significantly increase the 
length of our British lamb season. We only replace British lamb with New 
Zealand during late winter/early Spring when British lamb is out of season.”

Morrisons is stocking 24 British lines of lamb and one imported line, for 
supply top-up reasons. But its Easter offer – £4 a kg – is a leg of lamb from 
New Zealand, while its British lamb leg is only available from the meat counter 
and at £10 a kg is not part of the offer.

Lidl said it is committed to sourcing all its fresh listed lamb from British 
farmers from July until the end of the year, while it sells Scotch lamb all 
year round in Scotland. The Easter “specials” it is currently promoting include 
a New Zealand lamb carvery leg (costing £3.79 a kg but with no mention of New 
Zealand in current press adverts), a Deluxe West Country spatchcock lamb leg 
and a Deluxe prime Scotch rack of lamb.

A spokeswoman said: “We are currently selling both British and New Zealand 
lamb in our UK stores, and are proud to report that we are experiencing the 
strongest year-on-year growth in fresh lamb sales within the UK retail sector, 
as reported by Kantar World Panel. We feel that this can only be a positive 
contribution to the British lamb industry and we will continue to support and 
champion British lamb farmers as much as we can.”

At Marks & Spencer, New Zealand lamb will be sold alongside new season British 
lamb which will be going on sale from Wednesday, produced by a small number of 
selected farms in Lincolnshire, Derbyshire, Gloucestershire and Yorkshire and 
available only in selected stores.

Anna Playfair-Hanney, agricultural expert at M&S said: “New season British 
lamb is a lovely family tradition for Easter and we’re delighted we’re able to 
offer customers the first of the season just in time for Easter. Through our 
long-standing relationship with our famers, we are able to source our 
speciality range of UK lamb from some of the best suppliers in the country.”

Waitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> will be selling New 
Zealand lamb in pre-packs in its chiller section, while on its service meat 
counter it will stock British lamb from Dorset and the West Country, and Welsh 
lamb in Wales and Scotland.


The UK’s largest retailer Tesco, a major importer of New Zealand lamb, is 
working closely with UK farmers to increase its offering said it will next 
month launch a trial to develop a cost of production model for lamb, along of 
the lines of that in the dairy industry.

A spokeswoman said: “What we are looking at with this trial is not the 
short-term fix, but how we, farmers and processors can work together to help 
make sure we have a truly sustainable lamb industry in the future.”


• This article, and the subheading, was amended on 22 March 2016. An earlier 
version said Aldi was the only supermarket chain selling entirely UK-grown lamb 
for Easter. It is the only major supermarket chain to do so.
 