
Europe and the United States tried to bridge differences over emissions 
standards for aircraft on Sunday as global aviation leaders prepared to adopt 
new rules that could affect Boeing Co andAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> Group’s production of the largest 
jetliners and freighters.

Proposals being debated in Montreal by the International Civil Aviation 
Organisation (ICAO), the United Nations’ aviation agency, would force makers of 
the world’s largest passenger jets to upgrade or stop producing certain models 
as early as 2023, according to sources close to the negotiations and documents 
seen by Reuters.

US and European negotiators are trying to come up with the world’s first 
carbon dioxide emissions standards for aircraft as part of the industry’s 
contribution to efforts to combat climate change.

Aviation was not included in the global climate deal agreed by a UN conference 
in Paris in December, but ICAO is trying to nail down the first of its two-part 
strategy as soon as Monday after six years of talks. It is due to finalize a 
market-based mechanism for all airlines later this year.

Differences remain on where to place the bar on efficiency, with the United 
States and Canada pushing for more stringent targets than the European Union, 
while environmental groups have accused Europe of dragging its feet.

“The CO2 standard will push industry to be as fuel-efficient as possible in 
all market conditions to reduce GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions and the impact 
of aviation on climate change,” stated the Canadian paper presented at ICAO 
last week.

The proposals could revive pressure on European planemaker Airbus to upgrade 
the world’s largest passenger jet, the A380 superjumbo, with new engines. 
Airbus recently examined that proposal to boost sales, but it has dropped down 
its list of priorities.

It could also spell the end for Boeing’s struggling 747-8 passenger jet and 
freighter and force the U.S. planemaker to upgrade at least one of its two 
smaller freighters. Airbus andBoeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/boeing> declined to comment on 
negotiations.

The Montreal talks, which run until 12 February, are designed to set ambitious 
rules for new types of aircraft in the future. A less stringent standard would 
apply to aircraft already in production, but this has led to the fiercest 
arguments since some of these planes would need to have costly improvements.

The fuel efficiency standards would apply to smaller business and regional 
jets, along with larger commercial planes weighing at least 60 tonnes that 
account for the majority of aviation sector emissions, two sources familiar 
with the matter said.

The rules for in-production aircraft would come into effect by 2023, but could 
also be phased in over a five-year period until 2028, one source said. The 
tougher standard for new designs could go into effect by 2020.

Participants have been weighing 10 different options for new targets, with one 
being the weakest and 10 requiring the greatest reduction in emissions, the 
documents seen by Reuters showed.

European representatives have said they will not back a standard higher than 6 
on large planes in production. The United States and Canada had initially 
backed options 8 and 9 but said they would not budge below a 7, and at one 
stage did not rule out breaking off talks, the sources said.

However, on Sunday some progress was reported in narrowing differences. 
Tougher standards have higher cost implications for planemakers.

While Airbus and Boeing have already planned more fuel-efficient upgrades to 
most of their programmes, including the popular A320 and B737, some jets would 
have to be upgraded or cease being produced by as early as 2023. “They’re not 
content,” one delegate said of the jetmakers.

A question mark remained over the current-generation wide-body jets produced 
by Airbus and Boeing, the A330 and 777-300ER. Both are likely to be superseded 
by new models before 2023, but aviation analysts have said recent market 
experience and low oil prices suggest demand for older jets can be resilient.

Environmental groups said the standard will boost efficiency, but it will only 
make a small dent on the industry’s greenhouse gas emissions, which are 
projected to triple or quadruple from current levels by 2040. They say the 
standard needs to be accompanied by a strong global market-based approach.
 