
The radio coverage was two or three seconds ahead of the television coverage, 
something that first became apparent 58 minutes into Equatorial Guinea's game 
againstSenegal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>. Roars could be 
heard across the city, followed by a great groan of disappointment. On the 
screen I was watching in Banapa, the district of Malabo around the city's 
stadium, the winger Randy was still loping into the right side of the box at 
the stadium at Bata on the mainland. As two defenders went to close him down, 
he squared towards Fidjeu.

It should have been a clear shot on goal, with the keeper scrabbling across 
from his near post – not a tap-in, but a chance you would expect him to take. 
The ball, though, stopped in heavy surface water on its way to Fidjeu, allowing 
Kader Mangane to get across and clear. It was the first incident in the game to 
prompt anything like excitement from the home support; until then it had been a 
case of clinging on as Senegal wasted chance after chance. They should have had 
a penalty when John Doe tripped Issiar Dia (the most likely explanation for 
Khalid Abdulrahman's decision being to spare the world a raft of Sound of 
Music-related puns had he awarded a penalty for a foul by Doe on Dia …), Danilo 
tipped over a Papiss Demba Cissé lob volley, Demba Ba dragged a Dia cut-back 
badly wide and then placed a free header from a corner the wrong side of the 
post …

On it went, chance after chance squandered, until slowly you began to see the 
confidence drain almost physically from Senegal, as though they came to believe 
they would never score. And as they became increasingly desperate, they began 
to become ragged. Four minutes after the water had thwarted Ekanga, Kily, the 
adventurous right-back, got forward and crossed perfectly for Randy to head in. 
The roars were extraordinary, and tinged with a sense of disbelief.

On Wednesday I met Ismail Nguru, the right-back of Ela Nguema, winners of the 
Equatoguinean Cup last season. I wondered if he minded the fact that of 
Equatorial Guinea's 23-man squad, 21 were born outside the country, but he 
seems genuinely not to care. There was no mumbling or pat evasion, just a shake 
of the head and a grin as if accepting international football isn't for him. He 
was planning to spend Wednesday night watching the game in a bar, but promised 
to take any celebrations easy – he'll be turning out, for the second time, in a 
training game against Ivory Coast on Friday.

"Last time I was marking [Abdul Kader] Keïta," he said proudly. "I made one 
foul on him and he said, 'Hey, hey,tranquilo … I have to play in the Cup of 
Nations'." For Nguru, the tournament represents an unexpected opportunity. He's 
an amateur player – "there is no professional football in Africa," he insisted, 
which is far from being true, but may as well be for an Equatoguinean player – 
and playing against Africa's best, even in training, is beyond anything he 
dreamed of.

Later on, a few of us drove about an hour up the coast towards Lubo (a small 
town featuring a statue of its founder, a slave-trader from Sierra Leone called 
Maximiliano Jones). We stopped off by a beach and bought lunch from some local 
fishermen. As one of their wives cooked a selection of that morning's catch, a 
thin boy wearing just a pair of maroon Y-fronts kicked a flat football about 
aimlessly. He said he was eight, but he looked younger. Asked his favourite 
player, he looked sheepish and mumbled something. We asked him to repeat it: 
remarkably, he had said what it sounded like he had said: "Karim Benzema."

His preference seemed telling. It's understandable, of course, that he should 
pick a player from Real Madrid or Barcelona, particularly given Equatorial 
Guinea's colonial ties to Spain, but the fact he went for a player who wasn't 
Lionel Messi or Cristiano Ronaldo, and his recognition that he was offering an 
unusual answer – one, you suspected from the reaction of a handful of other 
kids who soon turned up, for which he had been mocked – suggested a depth of 
knowledge. It's too simple to say thatEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> isn't a football 
nation; people care about the game here, there's just not very much of it 
played.

Senegal resumed their assault. Moussa Sow headed a Mamadou Niang cross just 
wide, but the chances didn't come as they had in the first half. The heavy 
pitch, the result of torrential rain that caused yesterday's games to be 
delayed by 75 minutes, perhaps didn't help them, but before that's used as an 
excuse, it should perhaps be noted that the water and mud produced the two most 
exciting games of the tournament to date. It would be farcical, of course, if 
most football was played in such conditions, but the occasional quagmire does 
nobody any harm: one of the beauties of football is that it can be played in a 
wide variety of conditions. Tiki-taka played on a carpet might be the most 
aesthetically pleasing form of the game, but there is surely space also for 
lion-hearted defiance in a rainstorm.

Then, just as Senegal seemed to have given up, they scored, a flurry of 
distant groans presaging Sow hooking in after Niang's initial shot had been 
blocked. That would have meant Equatorial Guinea and Zambia both on four 
points, three clear of Libya and Senegal, and meeting each other on Sunday in 
Malabo; just as locals were calculating that a draw would take both through, 
the air was rent by joyous screams. Surely not? They swelled as the realisation 
dawned of what it must mean. Javier Balboa, on the left, played the ball square 
for Kily, 25 yards out. He struck it first time and, as we had known it must, 
it flashed into the top corner.

Gilson Paulo, Equatorial Guinea's Brazilian coach, seemed to be in tears at 
the final whistle – it would be easy to be cynical about such a show of emotion 
from a man who has led the nation through such ups and downs over the past, er, 
fortnight and a bit, but it was a night for sentiment, a night when everybody 
who wasn't Senegalese surely felt a lump in their throats.

It was well after midnight when I walked back to the hotel. At every bar, on 
every street corner, there were groups of red-clad locals celebrating, shouting 
to make sure I'd seen the game, that I knew what had happened. Every now and 
again, a packed truck or minibus would hurtle past, horn tooting, flags 
fluttering.

They may not be a football country, but right now Equatorial Guinea's record 
in the finals of the Cup of Nations reads: played two, won two. And while 
Senegal, with their much-vaunted forward line, contemplate a meaningless final 
game and then the exit, the co-hosts are in the quarter-finals.
 