
One area where the NHS can make a real difference to cut carbon emissions is 
in procurement.

Carbon associated with the assembly, packaging, transport, storage and 
handling of products and materials consumed by the service's providers accounts 
for 60% of the entire carbon footprint of the NHS.

It's a fact that was all too obvious to the University College London 
Hospitals Trust, an early member of the 10:10 campaign and one of the largest 
NHS trusts in the UK.

In UCLH's case, carbon from procurement was even higher than the NHS national 
average, accounting for 76% of all emissions.

Consequently, it partnered with the Carbon Trust to jointly produce low-carbon 
procurement guidelines for the public sector.

The scheme initially involved a three-month pilot study intended to embed 
carbon reduction into UCLH's purchasing and introduce "whole life" carbon 
costing alongside quality and price considerations.

As well as cutting the hospitals' own emissions, it would provide a blueprint 
to help other NHS trusts establish their own schemes.

To tackle the issue, UCLH worked with partners to launch neutral vendor, a 
groundbreaking supply chain initiative .

Working with other local NHS trusts, all goods are delivered by suppliers to a 
single warehouse and held centrally.

Loads are consolidated before being transported, so fewer vehicles are needed 
to distribute goods to participating trusts.

This reduces transport on the roads by about 15%, improves local air quality, 
noise levels and health in London and is expected to achieve year-on-year 
savings of 7,000 tonnes in CO2 – way beyond what could be achieved by solely 
using more efficient lighting or upgrading boilers, for instance.

The UCLH trust's carbon reduction and innovation group (crig) supports neutral 
vendor and other projects that aim to achieve a total carbon reduction of 
15,000 tonnes of CO2, or 50% of its carbon footprint.

But this will be no mean feat, especially against a background of organisation 
growth and improved patient care. UCHL's six hospitals are situated in and 
around the borough of Camden and has a diverse estate of six hospitals, 
offering an extensive range of services.

In just 12 months, however, the group achieved a 4,324 tonne reduction in CO2 
emissions – 14% of the trust's footprint.

Projects are selected using three main criteria: maximum carbon impact, 
minimum cost and greater collaboration.

For example, the trust is also working in partnership to reduce the 3.5m 
patient transport miles travelled each year to cut both carbon and costs by 10%.

Supported in these efforts by 60 volunteer carbon champions, the trust is also 
sourcing local fruit and vegetables, free range chicken and red-tractor 
certified meat, offering low-carbon menu options to staff and patients, at no 
extra cost.

As a founder member of the carbon disclosure project, it is also raising 
awareness of the need to reduce the carbon intensity of goods and services 
among suppliers.

Collaboration is the key, says UCLH. The aim is to find opportunities to 
reduce carbon as well as cost and to work in ways that enable others in the 
health, public and private sectors to do likewise.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 