
"Well, if you don't like it, leave and find another job at another university" 
was the harsh response from the human resources department. I had asked for 
their advice on dealing with a senior academic whose persistent verbal abuse 
and sustained and determined efforts to undermine me threatened my post at one 
of the UK's top universities.

This wasn't my first academic job or the first time this had happened. At the 
university post I'd held immediately before, there had been less verbal abuse 
and more snide remarks, but keeping me on the bottom rung of the ladder 
appeared to be a common goal, with similar tactics employed to achieve this.

A social scientist, I'd relocated from an Australian Group of Eight 
<https://go8.edu.au/> university to the UK to take up this position, and left 
the office at the end of each day with the phrase "what the hell have I done?" 
going through my mind.

Billed as interdisciplinary and offering me the opportunity to work at a more 
senior level, the job turned out to be anything but. The "don't speak until 
you're spoken to" attitude of senior academics was palpable during a meeting 
about future research options and I was berated later by my line manager for 
daring to offer my opinion. On another occasion I was forbidden from arranging 
a meeting with a senior academic from another department. I was, to use my 
grandmother's terminology, "above my station".

Part of a string of events, these incidents were the clearest demonstrations 
of the difference between Australian and UK university life I'd experienced. 
I'd studied and worked in both countries but resolutely sticking to the 
hierarchy and waiting for permission and instruction was never part of my 
experience in Australia.

Friends suggested the problem was that I was a well-qualified and ambitious 
woman and that my male colleagues, in the almost exclusively male environments 
in which I'd worked since arriving in the UK, didn't like it. While all three 
Australian universities I had worked in had more women in senior roles as 
course leaders and heading up faculties and research centres, none of my male 
colleagues there had demonstrated sexist or misogynistic behaviour.

In Australia my suggestions and efforts to cross departmental boundaries in 
both teaching and establishing research groups were well-supported, and when 
potential collaborators at different universities, or in the public or private 
sector, were identified, engaging beyond the school was enthusiastically 
endorsed. While UK departments in my field seem to be increasingly specialised, 
establishing ever more focused research centres, the Australian tenet is 
cross-department, inter- and multidisciplinary and wide open. Australia, it 
seems, likes academic innovators more than the UK.

The funding drawn into the Australian departments I worked for was prized as 
highly as funding from theAustralian Research Council <http://www.arc.gov.au/>, 
the country's main funding body, but it's not just about balancing the books.

Attracting both the best people and funds from non-academic sources and 
publishing beyond peer-reviewed journals was seen as a boost to the 
universities' relevance and prestige. My experience in this area was completely 
dismissed by my British employers. In the UK, it's a listed research council or 
bust.

Expat Australian academics I've met at international conferences have 
criticised Australian universities for being incestuous: working too close to 
the canvas, not having a broader world view, and with too small a community to 
innovate, advance or make an impact.

My view is quite different. Australia is a vast country with universities 
clustered in cities a plane ride apart. These clusters create communities, 
foster engagement and engender a collegiate spirit lacking in the UK, and the 
output is all the more relevant and resilient for that.

So, is the sun-scorched Australian grass really greener? Yes. There are still 
problems, notably with long-term funding, but as someone who gladly embraced a 
new career after my last contract ended, they might be the only institutions to 
tempt me back into academic life.

This week's anonymous academic has worked as a lecturer and senior research 
associate at both Russell Group and Group of Eight universities in the UK and 
Australia.

This blog post is part of our two-week series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight> on 
the differences and similarities between Australian and UK higher education.

If you'd like to contribute an anonymous piece about the trials and 
tribulations of university life, contactclaire.shaw@theguardian.com 
<mailto:claire.shaw@theguardian.com>.

Join the higher education network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered. <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd> 
 