
Joyce was 16-years old and the only girl at her school to have completed 
primary education when she became pregnant and contracted HIV.  "A man offered 
me money to have sex. I did not know what contraception was," she recalls. Food 
and income often became unexpectedly scarce in her hometown, which lies near 
the intermittent warzone area that marks the border between South Sudan, and 
its parent country and long-time opponent, the Republic of Sudan.

Pregnancy carries enormous stigma for unmarried girls in South Sudan. Joyce 
remembers her sense of guilt and fear. "My parents allowed me to study instead 
of marriage, so I was even more frightened to tell them."

She took one of the few options open to pregnant adolescents in South Sudan, 
where abortion is illegal and modern contraceptive methods are almost unheard 
of. Joyce sought the help of an itinerant traditional healer, who attempted to 
induce an abortion and left her bleeding heavily, alone and afraid for her life.

Now a serious young woman of 22, she reflects on how lucky she was to survive. 
"When my parents found out they took me to a hospital. They finished the 
abortion because I was bleeding a lot." After nearly two months of recovery, 
she was released. Determined to avoid another abortion, she now visits a family 
planning charity in the nearby town of Malakal for contraception.

With access to contraception and an understanding of how to use it, Joyce's 
story had a happier ending than those of most South Sudanese women. Despite the 
huge risks associated with unprotected sex in South Sudan, including an HIV 
epidemic and one of the highest maternal mortality ratios in the world, the 
rate of contraceptive prevalence amongst women of childbearing age remains at 
just 1.7%. A 15-year-old schoolgirl in South Sudan has a higher chance of dying 
in childbirth than of finishing school, and those who survive can expect to 
face danger again, as each woman bears an average of six children in her 
lifetime.

Family planning is not a well-understood concept throughout much of the 
country, and misunderstanding surrounds both the term itself and most 
contraceptive methods. "When you ask people what family planning is they say 
making sure children go to school, making sure the compound is clean," remarks 
Dan Williamson, country director for Marie Stopes in South Sudan. "Those who do 
understand it a bit more sometimes think it's sterilisation, and many associate 
it with prostitution."

Healthcare is rudimentary in South Sudan, with a lack of basic medical 
supplies dating back to the 1990s. Medical facilities not in use by either the 
government or the SPLA rebel group became inoperable, taking a heavy toll on 
the training of nurses and other medical professionals. "As you get into the 
field, many nurses and midwives don't understand what contraception is, let 
alone the methodology of its use." Williamson adds.

The government of the newly independent nation is working on a draft plan to 
begin establishing both the awareness and the structures required to spread 
family planning. But the country's war-ravaged infrastructure has made the 
collection of reliable data an almost impossible task. The country's 
politicians, currently preoccupied with maintaining an increasingly fragile 
peace, have little concrete information to guide their reproductive health 
policies. Current proposals take their cue from the government's 2008 action 
plan, which focused on integrating contraceptives into the healthcare system 
and improving facilities.

Unaddressed in all this is a significant cultural obstacle to contraceptive 
use in South Sudan, with deeper roots than the common misconceptions. In areas 
where women enjoy a basic understanding of contraception, the attitudes of 
their male partners can often prevent access. In a town not far from South 
Sudan's capital city, Juba, 17-year old Jane describes her search, for 
contraception that her husband would not discover, after a painful miscarriage 
two years ago. "He would not use a condom. To him, it is not natural."

Jane visited a clinic run by local health care workers to ask for a 
contraceptive injection. "They had lots of condoms that no one was using. They 
told me, you need the permission of your father or husband." The male-dominated 
nature of South Sudanese culture can make it almost impossible for women to 
access contraception alone, whilst their partners and families remain wary.

It is a problem that disproportionately affects the young. Girls are widely 
expected to marry upon reaching puberty, meaning that adolescents face cultural 
pressure to have intercourse without protection, and to experience regular 
pregnancies. The tradition is driven, like so much in South Sudan, by the civil 
war's legacy of poverty and violence. Marriage offers protection from sexual 
assault and a source of income for the bride and her parents.  Of the more than 
20% of women aged 15-19 in South Sudan who experience pregnancy, most are 
married.

"It's difficult for women who want to use contraception, because there is a 
lot of resistance from partners," remarks Nhial Wiyat, head of the Reproductive 
Health Programme run by the American Refugee Committee (ARC) in South Sudan. 
"They think the condom is not good for them, or that if their wife or lover 
suggests it maybe she thinks he has HIV, or is sleeping with other men. There 
is huge demand for hidden methods, like implants or injections."

The spread of family planning in South Sudan poses a monumental challenge, 
requiring the government to extend its work beyond a drive for general 
contraceptive awareness through healthcare facilities. In the long-term, this 
will require the return of reliable infrastructure and an end to the cycle of 
poverty and violence that drives girls and their families to seek protection 
and income in return for sex, both within marriage and outside it.

For now, male engagement must be made more of a priority. "Women on the whole 
absolutely want family planning when they hear about it," says Wiyat. "But 
until men understand it and accept its implementation, both married and 
unmarried women will struggle to access contraception."
 