
Some people may dismiss it as a frivolity, but I've always thought that having 
a lot of "play" in a community hugely improves its feel and its ambience. 
Whenever we go and see groups of humans living together "deliberately" 
(Thoreau's great phrase), I keep an eye out for the chess board, the snooker 
table or the deck of cards. If a place doesn't have them, or something similar, 
I tend to know I'm not going to like it much.

Because play is serious stuff: it teaches us about freedom, fairness and 
fantasy, about boundaries and honour, rules and ruthlessness, about each other 
and everything else. Friedrich Schiller once said that man "is only completely 
a man [or woman] when he [or she] plays".

For a place like this there are huge advantages to play. We're not a miserable 
bunch, but people invariably come here because of some kind of sorrow. Games 
can balance that. They create laughter and fun. We believe in the survival of 
the weakest here, and games offer the chance of David-and-Goliath moments when 
the underdog actually wins. According to Johan Huizinga, author ofHomo Ludens, 
play takes us into the "magic circle", somewhere wonderful outside reality 
where we taste both freedom and order; where we're no longer concerned with 
material profit (unless you're playing poker, that is).

We never consciously thought about such things when we amassed so many games, 
but we've now accumulated a piano, a table-tennis table and various board 
games. I yearn to add a snooker table to the list, and I almost wonder whether 
we shouldn't have an archery range and start making bows from our trees.

Music changes the vibe, too. This week a new guest arrived and something 
blissful happened. He's been a busker for years, moving overland between 
England and Greece, making music. Within hours of arriving he had taken out his 
guitar and so Benny, our six-year-old, got out her harmonica (for Christmas we 
gave her the cheapest, most indestructible musical instrument we could find). 
Listening to the two of them, ahem, "jamming" was incredible: there were 
giggles but also glimpses of harmony. You could see that the busker had also 
been a teacher, and knew how to lead a child through play to learning. I think 
my fascination with the play/learning curve is the reason why I'm much more 
drawn to something called "Godly Play" (dreadful name for a great concept) than 
I ever am to invariably infantile Sunday schools.

There are also dangers in games: they often lead as much to fights as to fun. 
Some people get competitive and have to win. Others just wish people weren't so 
competitive. Although I'm a good loser (from years, sadly, of practice), I'm 
still in the first category. The other day I was playing another guest at table 
tennis and the baby was asleep in the rucksack on my back. I didn't care. I was 
flinging myself left and right to beat the git on the other side of the net. I 
learned my lesson: Leo woke up and I still lost.

I guess a cure for the possible divisiveness of games is to play in groups as 
well as individually. The next project in the workshop is to make a rounders 
bat from one of the ashes we felled and have team games in the spring. And when 
we play Monopoly we pair up: it's so much easier being sent to jail with 
someone else. You can both ignore the game for a few rounds and just catch up.

Every community needs some sort of external adversary, something that brings 
the members together by showing them what they're up against. That, of course, 
can occasionally lead to weirdness and extremism, but in the context of games 
it might be very useful to have an opponent. I'm beginning to wonder whether we 
shouldn't pick a metaphorical fight with a local bridge team or snooker club, 
or throw down the gauntlet to some chess fiends in a nearby school. We'll 
probably lose, but I'm sure we'll learn something about ourselves and our 
surroundings.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 