Thrill rating 6/10 
Danger rating 6/10

Fitness rating 8/10

In a nutshell ...

An eclectic series of urban thrills that's fast catching on in the UK (and 
across the world), appealing to thrill seekers who haven't the time to head to 
the country - or who simply prefer the city centre. These multi-activity group 
adventures (very popular for team building) can include abseiling, kayaking in 
the river or docks and other water sports, mountain biking (though not on any 
mountains), running and climbing.

There's also a mental element, with teams having to navigate and orienteer 
while solving brainteasers along the way. Not only do the groups face fierce 
competition from rival teams, they are also up against the clock.

What's the buzz?

Doing things in your picturesque home city (such as the historic streets of 
Bath and Oxford) that you'd never normally do for fear of being arrested. The 
Adventurous Activity Company also runs its "urban adventure challenges" in 
Bristol, summing up the challenge colourfully as: "Think The Crystal Maze meets 
The Krypton Factor meets Challenge Anneka (if you can remember all of those)." 
How could we forget?

Thrill a minute? 

If you want serious thrills, sign up for one of the Rat Race urban adventure 
series. These slick and snazzy events have so far been held in Edinburgh, 
Manchester and Bristol - with the inaugural London event is happening on 
Setember 29 and 30. The Rat Race concept started in 2004, with 115 teams taking 
part around Edinburgh. This year, the same location drew 203 teams.

Adrenaline peak

Groups who sign up for the Adventurous Activity Co's Bristol challenge are led 
to the Avon gorge, a mile or so west of the city centre. The gorge has plenty 
of cliffs to abseil down, including one (staggering) 50-metre drop.

Where to do it

Although the Adventurous Activity Co has plans to add Cardiff to its roster of 
urban adventure locations, it also promises to set up a "customised challenge 
for the city of your choice".

Meanwhile, past Rat Race courses (the details of which are kept a closely 
guarded secret from competitors until just before the start of each race) have 
included kayaking under the Forth Road and Rail Bridge in Edinburgh and doing 
parkour off walls in Manchester City Centre.

Who can do it

For the Rat Race you have to be over 18 to enter, (genuinely) physically fit 
and experienced in running, abseiling and kayaking. They do, though, offer 
refresher courses and facilities in the build-up to each race. The Adventurous 
Activity Co's events are suitable for most people including children, although 
kids are only accepted as part of a family group booking.

What to take

The obvious sporty gear and refreshments, and if you choose to include 
kayaking or canoe orienteering in your urban challenge, bring a complete change 
of clothes too.

Typical prices

Adventurous Activity Co prices vary depending on whether you choose a half- or 
full-day's activities with or without physical challenges, from £30 to about 
£75 per person. Rat Race entry costs from £35 for the "rookie" event.

Impress your pals 

Keen to use the urban landscape as their playground, or something, actor Ralph 
Fiennes and self-styled celebrity adrenaline junkie Jack Osbourne have both 
taken part in a Rat Race urban adventure.

YouTube searchwords 'rat race edinburgh 2006'

Good links

adventurousactivitycompany.co.uk <http://www.adventurousactivitycompany.co.uk>

ratraceadventure.com <http://www.ratraceadventure.com>

urbanadventuregear.com <http://www.urbanadventuregear.com>

urbanadventureracing.com <http://www.urbanadventureracing.com>


The Rat Race comes to London

If urban adventures sound like your cup of tea with the taste of the Thames, 
bring your enthusiasm (and decent fitness levels) along to take part in the 
very first London Rat Race, held this weekend (Sep 29 and 30). The fun starts 
Friday at5pm with the Mean Streets adventure, which will see groups of three 
running around the city getting to as many checkpoints as they can within a 
three-hour time span.

Then, bright and early on Saturday at 8am, those who are still standing will 
continue with part two, the big one, the city-wideRat Race which promises to 
cover 50km of the city "by bike, boat, foot and rope!" It's a long stint and 
you need to be physically fit; organisers warn that you could spend up to six 
hours on your bike (luckily there are short cuts if it gets a bit too much).

While the exact components of the London course are a secret, be prepared to 
get sweaty touring around some famous landmarks - and don't be afraid to look 
slightly daft either (previous events featured a space hopper challenge, among 
other zaniness).

At the end of all this adventurous madness, there'll be stunt displays, a 
party and free music in the "base camp" village at Potters Field, next to City 
Hall (note, wise spectators can spy on the whole event from here without having 
to earn a sweaty stain badge of honour).
 