
The US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> on 
Tuesday sided with Samsung in its big-money smartphone patent fight with Apple, 
throwing out an appeals court ruling that said the South Korean company had to 
pay a $399m penalty to its American rival for copying key iPhone designs.


 The justices in their 8-0 ruling sent the case back to the lower court for 
further proceedings.

The decision gives Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> 
another chance to try to get back a big chunk of the money it paid Apple in 
December following a 2012 jury verdict that it infringed Apple’s iPhone patents 
and mimicked its distinctive appearance in making the Galaxy and other 
competing devices.

 The court held that a patent violator does not always have to fork over its 
entire profits from the sales of products using stolen designs, if the designs 
covered only certain components and not the whole thing.

The ruling followed a ferocious legal battle between the world’s top two 
smartphone manufacturers that began in 2011 whenApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> sued Samsung, asserting that its 
rival stole its technology and the iPhone’s trademarked appearance. It was one 
of the most closely watched patent cases to come before the top US court in 
recent years.

 Samsung had been seeking to pare back $399m of $548m it paid Apple in 
December following a 2012 jury verdict finding that it infringed Cupertino, 
California-based Apple’s iPhone patents and copied its distinctive appearance.

 After a trial in 2012, Apple was awarded nearly $930m in damages. The US 
court of appeals for the federal circuit in Washington, in May 2015, upheld the 
patent infringement verdict but said the iPhone’s appearance could not be 
protected through trademarks. That cut Samsung’s damages back by $382m.

 The legal dispute centered on whether the term “article of manufacture” in US 
patent law should be interpreted as a finished product in its entirety, or 
merely a component in a complex product.

 In court papers, Samsung, Apple and the US government all agreed that the 
term could mean a component.

 But Apple urged the supreme court to affirm the appeals court’s ruling 
because Samsung presented no evidence that the article of manufacture in this 
case was anything less than its entire smartphone as sold. Samsung, meanwhile, 
said that it did not have to present such evidence.

 Justice Sonia Sotomayor, writing for the unanimous court, said that the 
patent law is clear. The term “article of manufacture is broad enough to 
encompass both a product sold to a consumer as well as a component of that 
product”, she wrote.

 Samsung in December 2015 paid Apple $548m. But it took the matter to the 
supreme court, saying it should not have had to make $399m of that payout for 
copying the patented designs of the iPhone’s rounded-corner front face, bezel 
and colorful grid of icons that represent programs and applications.

 Apple said its iPhone’s success was tied to innovative designs, which other 
manufacturers quickly adopted in their own products. Samsung in particular made 
a deliberate decision to copy the iPhone’s look and many user interface 
features, Apple said.

 Samsung argued that it should not have had to turn over all its profits on 
phones that infringed iPhone design patents, saying those elements contributed 
only marginally to a complex product with thousands of patented features.

 With the products that used iPhone designs, Samsung went on to become the 
world’s top smartphone maker.

 The supreme court heard arguments in the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/supreme-court-samsung-iphone-apple-patent-infringement>
 on 11 October.

 Design patent fights very rarely reach the supreme court. It had not heard 
such a case in more than 120 years.
 