
The British had an ancient delusion that America was Britain gone wrong, Mr 
Alistair Cooke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alistaircooke>, chief 
American correspondent of the “Guardian,” said in London last night.

This he described as an extension into manhood of the impulse of every child 
to assume that it was the other person who was odd. No nation - except only and 
always the French - clung to this reflex more tenaciously than the British, who 
had been able to impose on the natives of India and Africa the assumption that 
Windsor soup and toast racks were as normal as coats and ties.


In fact, since the First World War, and more than ever since the Second, the 
influence of the Anglo-American in politics, social customs, literature, and 
American life had vastly declined.


Mr Cooke was speaking at a dinner of the Pilgrims held in his honour at the 
Savoy Hotel. He said that, in spite of the decline, there were still nuggets of 
the English legacy which were gratefully received, adding: “In the biggest 
cities, there is a very lively prejudice in favour of shaggy young English 
university wits (considered as comedians) and in favour of even shaggier 
females (considered as femmes fatales) who have turtles at their necks and 
dragons on their legs - for you have successfully managed to export, I am sorry 
to say, what is known as the Chelsea Look.”


Examples of British genius universally applauded by this generation of 
Americans were Shakespeare, Richard Burton, Terry-Thomas, and the Beatles. Mr 
Cooke gave Mr Wilson some advice on the Prime Minister’s coming visit to 
President Johnson:

“He would be well advised to seal everything negotiable on his person when he 
walks into the presence of our lord and master. Nothing is more touchingly 
innocent about the British cartoonist’s view of our beloved President than the 
picture of a bemused cowboy.”


The President was “an amiable, all-embracing man who combines the political 
insight of Machiavelli with the political instinct of Franklin Roosevelt and 
the outward approach of Will Rogers.”


Mr Alastair Hetherington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/oct/04/guardianobituaries>, editor of 
the “Guardian,” proposing the health of the chief guest, said that Mr Cooke was 
a true transatlantic citizen. He was a great journalist, and more than a 
journalist: he was a historian at well.


When academics came to write of American life in the mid-twentieth century, of 
American politics, and of Anglo-American relations, it was to writing such as 
Alistair Cooke’s that they would turn. They would not have to do much 
rewriting: the record would be there, perfectly reported and perfectly 
presented.


Sir Christopher Chancellor, chairman of the Bowater Corporation Ltd and a 
trustee of Reuters Ltd, paid tribute to Mr Cooke’s work as a broadcaster, 
particularly in his “Letter from America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/02/radio.broadcasting>” for the BBC.
 