
It's an interesting time for book publishers in the app world, to say the 
least. The creative potential of apps is vast, and still largely untapped. Most 
publishers are experimenting with apps with varying levels of budget and 
ambition, across genres including adult fiction, non-fiction, education and 
children's books.

While some book-apps have done well – Alice for iPad made a packet, and 
Faber's The Waste Landrecouped in less than two months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/aug/08/ipad-the-waste-land-app>
 – there's acreeping sense elsewhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/jul/25/book-apps-roundtable?INTCMP=SRCH>
 that apps aren't (yet) as lucrative as many publishers hoped.

Design studio ustwo was one of the first companies to blow that issue out in 
the open, when its co-founder Matt Mills (known simply as Mills within the 
industry)told a books conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/jun/17/futurebook-apps-conference>
 that ustwo's acclaimed Nursery Rhymes with StoryTime book-app had only made 
£24,048 in revenues versus the £60,000 spent making it, despite being an App 
Store Books category chart-topper.

Can the company's second book-app do any better? Papercut 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/papercut-enhanced-reading/id459776726?mt=8> is 
live on Apple's App Store, and is being billed as an "enhanced reading 
experience" for iPad. It includes three short stories, with animation, 
interactivity and sound woven around them. As readers scroll through the text 
using the touchscreen, it triggers the additional elements. In other words: no 
page-turning.

"We wanted to experiment with storytelling," says Mills. "If you look at most 
of the children's books in the App Store, they're quite basic: they have pages, 
some interactions and sound, but they don't really try to explore the 
possibilities of telling stories in a new way."

Jonas Lennermo, a Swedish former-journalist who worked on Papercut from the 
beginning within ustwo, admits to feeling nervous about how it will be 
received. It was something of a labour of love, working with publisher 
Shortfire Press to secure the three short stories for the app, while also 
tapping his music contacts back home to bring in bands to provide the 
soundtrack.

"It's very flexible, and works with lots of different content," says Lennermo. 
"The only restriction really is how much content you can create for it. We 
could easily do a novel, but it would take a long time and a lot of content 
creation. We were surprised at how much content this platform swallowed: it's 
almost like creating a light film. There are plain books and then films, and 
this is somewhere in between. We think about it as a new genre."

What's interesting about Papercut is the way it makes the storytelling process 
even more collaborative: an author working with sound designers, musicians and 
user experience designers. That's one reason Ustwo wanted authors to write 
stories specifically for Papercut, rather than simply whack in a collection of 
existing stories.

Can Papercut make more money than Nursery Rhymes with StoryTime? ustwo sound 
hopeful, but maintain that they want it to have a creative impact first and 
foremost, before commercial considerations.

"I think people will like it, but will also be quite confused," says Mills. 
"We are experimenting, and showing everyone we need to push the envelope. This 
is a time of exploration and experimentation in apps, and we're not saying this 
is perfect, but we're trying really, really hard."

Here's the challenge for Papercut: people who buy it will love it, but they'll 
soon burn through the three short stories and want more. Yet it's clearly 
fairly time-consuming to create each new stories using the platform, with 
not-insignificant costs. Ramping up to release, say, one new story a week is a 
big ask for a company like ustwo, whose business mainly comes from its design 
and branding work rather than its skunkworks apps team.

That's why it describes Papercut as a platform rather than an app: a platform 
that's presumably licensable to book publishers for use in their own apps. But 
making a creative splash remains ustwo's main aim, with the company's 
characteristic confidence that this will ultimately pay off.

"A lot of people are releasing shit apps because they want to make money," 
says Lennermo. "Let's forget about money for a while and try to create good 
stuff. Then things will happen…"
 