
In a way, V for Vendetta by Alan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> and David Lloyd is almost too 
obvious a choice for the Guardian’s series on literature about fighting back. 
Defiance is in its DNA. Revolution is its bread and butter. Standing up against 
injustice and fascism runs through it like the name of a seaside town in a 
stick of rock.

You may only know V for Vendetta from the Wachowskis’ adaptation starring Hugo 
Weaving and Natalie Portman, or you may be distantly aware of it thanks to the 
adoption of the Guy Fawkes mask by Anonymous and various protest groups. Or you 
may not know it at all.
 Photograph: DC Comics 
V for Vendetta was published in the 1980s in the avant garde British comic 
magazine Warrior. The magazine folded in 1985 and DC comics picked up the 
series, first reprinting the story so far in colour (a suitably muted palette, 
but still akin to one of those ghastly “colourised” classic movies compared to 
the bleakness of the original) and then continuing and ultimately concluding 
the mini-epic.

The story takes place in 1997 – which was at the time of writing the near 
future. A nuclear war has devastated much of the world; Britain’s Labour 
government has succeeded in its disarmament policies so the UK is largely 
unscathed. But the turmoil brought about by the conflicts allows hard-right 
organisations and surviving corporations to come together under the banner 
Norsefire, quickly establishing a dystopian, fascist order in a Britain on the 
edge of chaos.

By the time we meet desperate teenager Evey, about to be brutally punished by 
undercover policemen, Britain has achieved a sort-of even keel, though one 
without ethnic minorities, homosexuals, radicals, transgender people. Anyone 
who isn’t straight, white and compliant has been disappeared into concentration 
camps and Britain has long since been ethnically, socially and sexually 
“cleansed”.

V rescues Evey and takes her to his secret hideout, furnished with the 
elements of British society that have been systematically erased. He employs 
her in his vendetta against those who incarcerated him and experimented on him 
in Larkhill Resettlement Camp in the early days of the reborn society, but V 
has a wider agenda; to bring down the state and create The Land of 
Do-As-You-Please.

While V’s flash-bang terror tactics against the new world order are pleasingly 
rousing, they are just the catalyst. It is the smaller, more human acts of 
defiance that really drive the narrative: Evey’s realisation that the 
dictatorship she has lived most of her life under is not the only way; 
policeman Eric Finch, whose investigation of V leads him to question the 
difference between state-approved law and actual justice; the small girl 
writing BOLLOCKS on the pavement, having realised that the all-seeing gaze of 
London’s pervasive CCTV network has been blinded by V.

At the heart of the story is the tale of Valerie Page, a gay actor who 
occupied the next cell to V in Larkhill. Her handwritten memoir, hidden in the 
wall, inspires him to escape the camp, and later encourages Evey in her own 
ultimate act of defiance during her apparent incarceration by the state.

In 1987, I met Alan Moore in Manchester, where he was signing copies of 
Watchmen with artist Dave Gibbons. DC had just announced they were reprinting 
and continuing V for Vendetta, two years after the story had been left hanging 
by the cancellation of Warrior.

Would we, I asked Moore somewhat nervously, be finding out who the 
perpetually-masked V actually was?

To his credit, he didn’t reply as I expected (“What do you think this is, 
sonny? Some kind of bloody superhero comic?”). Instead, he smiled enigmatically 
and said: “After a fashion.”

It would be a couple more years before I found out what he meant. The movie 
version made heavier weather of driving this message home, but the result was 
the same: we don’t find out who’s under the mask, because it’s potentially any 
of us. V is an idea, a symbol, and as he says himself: “Ideas are bulletproof.”

Two things strike me now. One is how the majority of the British population 
were happy to accept control and turn a blind eye to atrocities, so long as 
they were fed a diet of vaguely familiar sitcoms and tabloids. The other is 
that even at the height of the Thatcher years, Moore and Lloyd thought that 
something as epochal as a nuclear war would be necessary before Britain 
embraced fascism.

As we sleepwalk towards something closer to what Moore and Lloyd showed us, I 
am reminded of the cover of Warrior magazine number five, and its tagline, 
“Pray the future will never need … V for Vendetta”, and I can’t help but 
wonder: are we already there?
 