
The most exuberant England cricketer of the age has had his spirits sapped by 
captaincy and now the time has come for a shrewder, more calculating leader to 
restore order to the ranks and return him to his former glories. The lead 
players in 2007 are Andrew Flintoff and Michael Vaughan but the parallels with 
the famous Ashes summer of 1981 are impossible to ignore.

Then Ian Botham, the cricketing heartbeat for his own generation, made a pair 
against Australia at Lord's, felt the crowd's silent condemnation and resigned 
two Tests through the Ashes series. Mike Brearley, who was as cerebral a man as 
Botham was a force of nature, resumed the captaincy, his champion all-rounder 
was instantly re-energised and at the summer's end the Ashes had been won.

This time it is all too late. The Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> are already lost. Vaughan has not 
emulated Brearley by returning halfway through the series although, for all 
Flintoff's assumptions that he had the job for the entire Test series, England 
harboured secret hopes that the former captain might regain fitness in time to 
make a miraculous return.

There are other differences. Vaughan's reinstatement as captain can, at best, 
steady England in a one-day triangular series and take them into the World Cup 
with renewed optimism that it will not necessarily be the disaster that 
everybody supposes. Unlike Brearley he has no plans to become a psychoanalyst. 
Flintoff, too, while briefly mentally exhausted, is certainly not consumed by 
the bitterness that Botham was 26 years ago. Vaughan's restoration task sounds 
straightforward by comparison. But it is just as welcome.

Vaughan's rallying cry, as he returned yesterday to the England captaincy that 
was never officially taken away from him, six months after many deemed his 
playing career ended by a fourth knee operation, certainly struck a chord. He 
issued a rousing call for Flintoff to become England's inspiration once again. 
"Average teams have one captain," he said. "Great teams have many, many 
captains." With one line, the Vaughan-Flintoff axis had begun.

His "brief chat" with Flintoff came the morning after the shattering defeat in 
Sydney and his champion all-rounder was "a bit hung over". That was 
understandable. But when England regroup today for tomorrow's Twenty20 bunfight 
in Sydney and the subsequent Commonwealth Bank triangular series against 
Australia and New Zealand, the message will again be rammed home. Flintoff 
might not be the captain but he can be the catalyst. He might no longer set the 
fields but he can set the mood. He might feel that his reputation has 
diminished but the chance of further heroics awaits.

"It's not easy in Australia," Vaughan said. "I think that Fred will be looking 
forward to getting out there playing. I want to see him enjoying his cricket, 
trying to smack the ball out of the ground, batting, bowling and fielding. He 
will still be the focal point. That is what I want to see him doing - doing 
what he does best.

"Fred has lacked a lot of the experience around him in this Ashes series that 
I had in 2005 - players like Marcus Trescothick and Ashley Giles. My challenge 
is to get him playing as he did a year ago, to be a leader on the pitch and a 
leader in the dressing room."

Inspiration comes in many forms. In entrusting the captaincy to Flintoff 
England put their faith in a cricketer with an outsized heart, hoping - but 
perhaps not entirely believing - that by sheer force of personality he would 
surmount all obstacles and carry the fight to Australia. David Graveney, the 
chairman of selectors, was surely just parading blind faith when he said 
yesterday: "There is nothing I have seen about Fred's captaincy that would make 
me change my mind. If he retains captaincy aspirations in the future, that is 
understandable."

Forget the PR. The illusion of a Flintoff captaincy has been shattered, just 
as it was shattered in the case of Botham. Vaughan might not study the 
psychology of Flintoff quite as professionally as Brearley did Botham but he 
will bring the same attention to detail - what he calls the "one per cent 
things" - and then will encourage England's one-day players (it is hard to call 
it a squad, so much has it changed) to express themselves and not be 
intimidated by the challenge.

"I realise that there will be effects from the Ashes whitewash," Vaughan said. 
"It is a great challenge to see how we react. It will be interesting to see 
what state they are in from a technical and mental aspect. My job is to make 
sure they don't feel intimidated, to challenge them and raise their confidence 
and get them to go out and express themselves. Their challenge is to learn from 
their mistakes and try to develop a winning culture again.

There are other differences, too, between Brearley and Vaughan. Brearley had a 
dodgy batting average, Vaughan has a dodgy knee. However good the signs after 
his fourth operation, the nagging fear remains that it could collapse at any 
minute. He is too professional to reveal his innermost thoughts. Impressively 
he is showing no hint of vulnerability.

"I have done everything possible. Six months ago I was told that I probably 
wouldn't play again. To be told that is hard to take. It was a hard road but 
since I have been in Australia I have tested it out continually, on a 
day-to-day basis. I've been twisting, running between the wickets, falling in 
the field and there has been no reaction. The biggest test comes now but I'm 
confident that I will get through it.

"Even before the injury I didn't move incredibly well. I will be able to field 
anywhere I want. I won't be hiding. Before the operation I was restricted in 
some of the shots that I could play. Now I am playing the pull shot again. But 
playing Brett Lee will be a bit of a test. It might take a couple of games to 
get my game sorted.

"The year I have had has made me a more rounded person. Being away from the 
team a bit gives you a bit more of a perspective. You recognise a few things. I 
want all 11 players out there thinking as a captain and thinking about the 
game. I am certain that they will have gained experience from what they have 
gone through."
 