
Michael Vaughan's long-awaited return to the leadership of the England cricket 
team <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> was marked by a 
blunt analysis of their one-day prospects in the run-up to March's World Cup in 
the West Indies. "I think you can go back to 1992 since we last had a really 
good [one-day] side," Vaughan admitted yesterday. "If we're honest, since then 
we've been very average in World Cups."

Apart from the 2004 Champions Trophy final on home soil, when they were beaten 
by West Indies, England have not threatened to win a major one-day trophy since 
reaching the 1992 World Cup final, and expectations are low for the coming 
weeks, starting with tomorrow's Twenty20 match against Australia.

"I realise there will be effects from the 5-0 Ashes whitewash. I know when we 
lost the Ashes 4-1 four years ago that it did have an effect for a while. There 
will be a few mental frailties after what's happened, but that can soon change 
once you start winning a couple of games. What is important now is that we draw 
up a strategy and stick with it for the next four months," said Vaughan, who 
had surgery on his right knee last year and has not played for England since 
December 2005.

"I hope we can win a few games, entertain a few people and try and get that 
freedom of expression back in the players. That's my job in the next few weeks 
- that they don't feel inhibited, they don't feel scared and take Australia and 
New Zealand on in this one-day series."

England's fortunes almost mirror Vaughan's own career at one-day level, where 
he has continually under-performed, averages 28 from 74 appearances and has yet 
to score a century.

"It's [his form] been a bit like the team's - inconsistent," he said. "But the 
year I have had has made me a more rounded person. Being away from the team 
gives you a bit more of a perspective."

He now faces the challenge of stepping up to the top level again, having 
played most of his comeback games for the Academy against second-team players 
or for the MCC against players of all ages. Vaughan added: "A 74-year-old got 
me out the other day, so playing against Brett Lee is going to be a different 
challenge."
 