
For an actor who showed such promise at the beginning of the 1990s, when he 
fought off challengers like the then-svelte Alec Baldwin, the still sane Val 
Kilmer, longtime MIA Vincent Spano and chief party-boy Charlie Sheen for the 
plum role as Al Pacino's crazy nephew in Godfather III,Andy Garcia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-garcia> never seems to have capitalised 
on his early potential. Sure, everyone knows his name and he probably needn't 
work again in his life, but where, oh where, is the great career that was 
surely his for the asking?

Perhaps the pressures were different back then, having to do with ethnic pride 
and the non-anglo actor's need to remain close to his roots without being 
subsumed by them altogether. In our age of J-Lo, Salma et al, it's easy to 
forget that back then, Garcia, born in Havana in 1956 and moving to the US in 
1961, was the most visible Latin-American actor since Anthony Quinn. But he was 
all alone, at least on the A-list, and pioneers often have a heavy row to hoe.

Garcia made his first movie splash as a cartoon Latin crime-lord in the 
utterly forgettable 8 Million Ways To Die. But his star was rising, and the 
next few years saw good work in Black Rain, The Untouchables and Internal 
Affairs.

But after Godfather III - a financial success and aesthetic catastrophe - 
Garcia proved unequal to the challenge of making his talent stick. It was 
probably that early-career interlude that afflicts young actors: the period 
when you're still stupid enough to believe your own publicist's bullshit 
patter. Everyone wises up in the end (except Sly Stallone), but Garcia still 
managed to unleash a string of overblown performances (a problem in many of his 
films). There was Jennifer 8 - less exciting than its own porno knock-off, 
Jennifer Ate - the swiftly forgotten Hero, and opposite a drunk Meg Ryan in 
When A Man Loves A Woman. It appeared Garcia's momentum had finally deserted 
him.

Only recently, when he played creepy Terry Benedict in Ocean's Eleven, did 
Garcia slip right into focus. With his sleazy-slick demeanour, his shiny suits 
and his narrow little mouth, Garcia made a perfect villain. Like Alan Alda and 
Hugh Grant he only becomes really interesting when you can hate him outright, 
and I've always found that Garcia makes that really easy for us.

 Career high 
Internal Affairs, Ocean's Eleven, Things To Do In Denver When You're Dead. 

 Career low 
How about Hoodlum? Or Jennifer 8? Confidence? 

 Need to know
Famously private most of the time, he did lend his support to right-wing Cuban 
exiles and their disgraceful efforts to keep Cuban refugee Elian Gonzales in 
Florida against his Cuban father's wishes.

 The last word 
"In a lot of cases the fact that I'm in a movie at all is success enough for 
me. I'm blessed that people want to pay me really good money to do this."
 