
Thrill rating 7/10

Danger rating 3/10

Fitness rating 6/10

In a nutshell ...

Make like a Victorian miner and climb the vertiginous old route to the top of 
reopened Honister Slate Mine, thanks to the UK's one and only via ferrata. It's 
an Italian-inspired, permanently fixed cable to which you are attached by a 
harness and rungs (think of it as your steel placenta of security).

Climb ladders, cross a worryingly narrow iron bridge, creep through old 
mineshaft tunnels and try not to faint at the soaring Lake District views as 
you zigzag your way up 650 metres to the top of Fleetwith Pike. Opened in May, 
via ferrata means "iron way" in Italian, and has been a popular system of 
transporting everyone from troops to tourists up the Dolomites and Alps for 
more than a century. All trips at Honister are guided, and you even get to wear 
a miner's-style helmet with head torch.

What's the buzz?

"I wanted to provide an activity for the man on the street, to get him out of 
his comfort zone and doing something a bit different," enthuses the slate 
mine's owner, Mark Weir, whose grandad worked the slate here for many years. 
"It's an adrenaline rush with an essence of natural beauty. We're convinced it 
will be incredibly popular, not just with walkers but young families looking to 
create lifelong memories - and see views you only normally get from an 
aeroplane."

Thrill a minute? 

The climb is done at a pace to suit everyone in the 12-strong tour group (for 
larger numbers phone in advance) but still the thrills come thick and fast. As 
well as the sheer mountain drops and stunning views, you should spot some rare 
flowers, and will shake your head in wonder at the engineering feats once 
employed to carry slate down the mountain (aided by a rickety railway and 
packhorses).

Adrenaline peak

Reaching the, gulp, Titanic Exposure. Forget Leo and that bloody sinking ship, 
this Titanic is a section of the via ferrata where you can, if you feel so 
inclined, walk out to the cliff face and hang over the edge (oh joy). Just clip 
off the main fixed cable and on to one that stretches out at a right angle to 
the very edge ... There's also the aforementioned narrow bridge, which boasts a 
300 metre drop (looking down is optional).

Where to do it

Honister Slate Mine is nestled by the mountain tarns and streams of the Lake 
District, nine miles from Keswick (an extremely popular location with climbers 
and walkers). Your arrival in Honister might well be heralded by a sloshing 
noise from your walking boots - this is, after all, renowned as one of the 
wettest places in England, with approximately 250mm of rain per year.

Who can do it

Children from 10 years (so long as they are over 4ft 7in tall) to much older 
adults with a reasonable physical fitness level. Unlike many Italian via 
ferratas, which are free to climb, you'll also need £20 handy in order to join 
a group ascent (you won't be allowed to go up unaccompanied, no matter how 
experienced a climber you are). Mark Weir stresses that, at Honister, it's the 
man on the street that he's trying to coax out of the city and on to the peaks, 
not the hardened rock climber.

What to take

Good walking shoes, no loose clothes that could get caught on a rock, and a 
waterproof jacket (it rains a lot here, remember). Be prepared to feel a little 
chilly on the way up, but rather hot, sweaty and euphoric on the descent.

Typical prices

Family climb: £55 (two adults and two children). Adults £19.50, 16- and 
17-year-olds £15, kids £9.50.

Impress your pals

If they're bringing a car, make sure you tell them about the deal to "Fill Ya 
Boot" (as in car, not wellington) with Honister slate for just £10. It's 
quality stuff, too, having been used to grace the roofs of Buckingham Palace, 
St Paul's Cathedral and the Ritz hotel.

YouTube searchwords 'via ferrata, OFC'

Good links

honister-slate-mine.co.uk/via_ferrata.asp 
<http://www.honister-slate-mine.co.uk/via_ferrata.asp>

lakedistrictoutdoors.co.uk/newsdetail.cfm?newsid=54 
<http://www.lakedistrictoutdoors.co.uk/newsdetail.cfm?newsid=54>

Head down a mine but watch out for 'knockers'

As via ferrata is a (relatively) gentle introduction to the world of rock 
climbing, so mine exploration offers an altogether less terrifying alternative 
to caving. Furthermore, Britain's disused mines are a fascinating relic of our 
industrial and ancestral past.

So, having braved the "iron way" (and quite possibly the rain), why not take 
shelter inside the slate mines at Honister? There are three tours on offer: 
Kimberly, the Edge and the Cathedral. Kimberly is suitable for all ages: a 
guide will take you horizontally into the mountain for a flat and easy tour of 
the mine. The Edge, as the name suggests, is for the more adventurous and 
experienced hiker. You'll be taken into the mountain and out through the other 
side, on to the edge of Fleetwith Pike where the winds can reach speeds of 
80mph (height and weather restrictions apply). Finally, the Cathedral tour is a 
bespoke, personal tour of the working mine by its owner, Mark Weir. The guides 
at Honister have a complete local knowledge of the mining industry and are 
deeply passionate about the subject. Their aim is to give you a realistic 
"working life tour" of Honister.

Another fascinating mine is Box Quarry in Wiltshire. This stone quarry was 
operational until the second world war, when the Ministry of Defence laid off 
the miners so the tunnels could be used to store live ammunition. What you'll 
find is a frozen time capsule of the mine as it was when the workers downed 
tools more than 60 years ago. The mine (Britain's largest stone quarry) is an 
English Heritage site but public access is permitted, provided you are 
accompanied by an experienced guide. Keys and maps to the mine are kept behind 
the bar at the local pub - the Quarryman's Arms (of course) in Box.

If you do decide to descend to the dark depths of Britain's man-made 
underworld, keep one eye out for "knockers" - mythical "little people" who were 
believed to live underground, leading miners towards rich seams of minerals.

More at nettleden.com <http://www.nettleden.com>
 