
After more than 20 years, two Olympic gold medals, nine world titles and a 
Commonwealth Gold, Victoria Pendleton's career is over. The 31-year old from 
Stotfold, Bedfordshire, left cycling to a rapturous, deafening reception here 
but it was left to her old rival Anna Meares to play the part of pantomime 
villain, defeating Pendleton in the final in two straight rounds and leaving 
her with a silver medal in her final race in front of a discomfited crowd. It 
was an emotional rollercoaster, but that in its way exemplified the way 
Pendleton's career has run.

Pendleton's exit this week has been marred by the intervention of the 
referees, who had also played a significant role in her acquisition of her 
sixth world title ahead of Meares back in April. Pendleton and her partner Jess 
Varnish were deprived of a gold or silver medal in the team sprint on Friday 
when the commissaires ruled that they had changed outside the designated zone, 
and here they intervened again, relegating Pendleton from first place in the 
first match to set her the near-impossible task of taking two straight matches 
off the Australian, the world champion in 2011.

Pendleton and Meares lined up in the final as all had hoped, for one final 
encounter in the rivalry that has defined their careers. It was as tense and 
venomous as might have been expected given their history. In the first match, 
Pendleton led the early laps, looking nervous as Meares shadowed her two 
lengths back. The Briton made her effort up the back straight, and the 
Australian came at her strongly.

Meares put an elbow into Pendleton's thigh as the British woman briefly moved 
off her line as they sped through the final banking. Pendleton held on by 
barely half a tyre to take the match, with the crowd first delirious with 
delight what appeared a clear win in the face of Australian skulduggery, before 
the commissaires ruling turned the cheers into a chorus of boos. That left 
Pendleton needing two straight wins to take gold.

The British woman had to win the second match to stay in the hunt, and was 
drawn outside Meares. She shadowed the Australian who won the match on the 
second banking, in effect, when she slowed to a virtual standstill at the top 
of the slope, forcing Pendleton to jump into the lead. That left the Australian 
able to run at Pendleton, who looked mentally rattled, and stalled coming out 
of the penultimate banking. Her acceleration down the back straight was matched 
by Meares, who overtook her coming into the final banking, punching the air 
with delight.

Pendleton hit the Games in the form of her life thanks to a training programme 
devised by her fiance Scott Gardner, having overcome back and shoulder injuries 
caused by weight training. She qualified fastest for the sprint tournament on 
Sunday having won the keirin title in commanding style on the Friday, and 
progressed straightforwardly through the early rounds before meeting Kristina 
Vogel of Germany in the semi-final here.

In the first match of the semi, Pendleton was equally impressive, responding 
to a challenge from Vogel as they entered the back straight and holding off the 
German as she attempted to pass through the final banking. In the second match, 
the German had the more propitious position on Pendleton's wheel, but was 
unable to stall the Briton as she sped past to maintain her unbeaten record in 
the tournament.

That put her through to the final against Meares, the script that had been 
written since the pair's dramatic clash in the sprint world championship in 
April, when Pendleton stole a march on the superstrong Australian. She briefly 
lost that psychological whip hand on Tuesday, and it cost her the perfect 
farewell to the sport that has been her life for two decades. The love affair 
has been long and tumultuous but it is now over, one suspects to her great 
relief.
 