
A Victorian anti-Islam extremist conducted surveillance of “leftwing” premises 
where he planned to launch deadly bombing attacks, police allege.

“Loss of life to persons possessing leftwing ideologies was the focus of the 
attack,” they said of 31-year-old Phillip Michael Galea.

Galea is also accused of trying to recruit others to help carry out his plans.

He is charged with two terrorism-related offences over his alleged activities 
between September 2015 and early August this year.

He was remanded in custody after facing Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> magistrates court on 
Monday, when documents outlining police allegations were released.

Investigators say Galea has been linked to the far-right groups Reclaim 
Australia, United Patriots Front, Patriots Defence League Australia, the True 
Blue Crew and a “neo-Nazi, self-confessed militant group” called Combat 18.

He allegedly ordered ingredients for smoke bombs last year, and mercury – 
which has explosive properties – was found at his Braybrook home in November.

Video footage seized in the same raid shows Galea carrying out reconnaissance 
of a target, the documents allege.

Police say he met with an associate in April this year and discussed plans to 
attack two locations associated with the political left.

“Galea outlined his intentions were to cause as much devastation to these 
locations as possible in a team coordinated attack, using smoke bombs and 
improvised explosive devices,” police allege in the documents.

“Galea’s plans were to recruit at least five other capable persons to assist 
with his plan.”

The documents do not name specific targets.

Galea is accused of researching homemade bombs, ballistic armour and guns.

He was also allegedly preparing a “Patriot’s Cookbook” based on The Anarchist 
Cookbook and his own research.

Galea’s lawyer, Allan McMonnies, requested an adjournment of the case on 
Monday after telling the court his client had been moved last week to Thomas 
Embling hospital, a high-security mental health facility.

He was moved there for treatment after being assessed by a psychiatrist at a 
remand prison, the court heard. “Thomas Embling has indicated to us he is not 
well enough to attend court,” McMonnies said.

Galea, who appeared via videolink, spoke out after his lawyer. 

“I am not, and have never been, suffering from any form of mental illness,” 
the accused said.

He did not apply for bail and was remanded in custody until 19 December.

Galea is charged with collecting or making documents to prepare for terrorist 
acts between November 2015 and early August 2016, and carrying out acts in 
preparation for a terrorist act between September 2015 and early August this 
year.
 