
New York's Museum of Modern Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/moma>
 will be home to something more often associated with pasty teens and bar 
scenes when it opens an exhibit on video games on Friday.

Tetris, Pac-Man and the Sims are just a few of the classic games that will be 
housed inside a building that also displays works by Vincent Van Gogh, Claude 
Monet and Frida Kahlo.And though some may question whether video games are even 
art 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2012/nov/30/moma-video-games-art>
, the museum is incorporating the games into its Applied Design installation.

MoMA consulted scholars, digital experts, historians and critics to select 
games for the gallery based on their aesthetic quality – including the 
programming language used to create them.MoMA's senior curator for architecture 
and design, Paola Antonelli, said 
<http://www.moma.org/explore/inside_out/2012/11/29/video-games-14-in-the-collection-for-starters>
 the material used to create games is important in the same way the wood used 
to create a stool is.

With that as the focus, games are presented in their original formats, absent 
the consoles that often define them. Some will be playable with controllers, 
and more complex, long-running games like SimCity 2000 are presented as 
specially designed walkthroughs and demos.

MoMA's curatorial team tailored controls especially for each of the playable 
games, including a customized joystick created for the Tetris game.

Some of the older games, which might have fragile or rare cartridges, will be 
displayed as "interactive emulation", with a programmer translating the game 
code to something that will work on a newer computer system.

Tell us: What video games is MoMA missing? 

The museum has acquired 14 games out of its approximately 40 game wish list, 
which includes Pong and the original version of Snake (pre-Nokia phone).

The 14 games acquired from the wishlist include: 

• Pac-Man
• Tetris
• Another World
• Myst
• SimCity 2000
• vib-ribbon
• The Sims
• Katamari Damacy
• EVE Online
• Dwarf Fortress
• Portal 
• flOw
• Passage 
• Canabalt

They hope to eventually acquire: Spacewar, an assortment of games for the 
Magnavox Odyssey console, Pong, Snake, Space Invaders, Asteroids, Zork, 
Tempest, Donkey Kong, Yars' Revenge, M.U.L.E., Core War, Marble Madness, Super 
Mario Bros, the Legend of Zelda, NetHack, Street Fighter II, Chrono Trigger, 
Super Mario 64, Grim Fandango, Animal Crossing, and Minecraft.

MoMA's selection is only a small sampling of more than five decades of video 
games, so we want to know what you think about the collection. Which games 
should be off the list? Is your favorite missing? Or is MoMA's collection a 
good sample of video game history? Tell us your thoughts in the thread below.
 