
French industrialist Vincent Bolloré, the largest shareholder in London-listed 
marketing companyAegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> Group, has 
signalled that he is open to offers for his stake.

Groupe Bolloré, which first bought into Aegis in 2005 with a view to merging 
the company with French advertising groupHavas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/havas>, announced that it is no longer 
consolidating Aegis numbers in its own results.

"They are sending a signal to the ad agency marketplace that perhaps this is 
an asset that is for sale, as opposed to one that is part of an Aegis and Havas 
consolidation story," said Credit Suisse media analyst Simon Baker.

Bolloré's stake in the £1.8bn marketing services group, Britain's largest 
after WPP, now stands at 26.5%, down from a 2009 high of 29.8%. The holding was 
diluted after Aegis paid in cash and shares last year for Australian ad group 
Mitchell Communication Group.

With new management at Aegis and an ad market recovery, broker Altium has a 
target price of 168p for the shares.

Altium analyst Roddy Davidson said: "Is Aegis more likely to be taken out this 
year than it was last year? I would say yes. And there is decent momentum on 
both sides of the business at the moment."

Bolloré holds a 32.9% stake in Havas, the Paris listed advertising holding 
company. He bought his holding in Aegis in 2005 and repeatedly attempted to 
place directors on the board, but was rebuffed.

The Aegis chief executive, Robert Lerwill, resisted Bolloré's attempts to 
consolidate, arguing there was too much overlap between the two companies for a 
cost-effective merger. He was removed in 2008 after the arrival of a new 
chairman, John Napier, who attempted to build bridges with Bolloré.

In 2009 Napier led discussions with private equity group Apax Partners and 
research firm GfK to sell Synovate, the Aegis market research arm, which would 
have left Havas free to acquire the rest. However, with the ad market remaining 
depressed in 2009, talks stalled.

Bolloré, whose holding company owns plantations and factories, has recently 
switched his attention to making battery powered smart cars, and has won a 
contract to supply Parisians with 250 of his Blue Cars in a public use plan 
along the lines of the city's Vélib cycle scheme.

Groupe Bolloré accounts for its share of Havas in its annual results, meaning 
it contributes to revenues and profits. It began to include Aegis numbers in 
2008, after Lerwill's departure, on the grounds that the block to Bolloré's 
influence over the company had been removed.

However, it was announced in full year results this month that as of last 
summer, Aegis had been deconsolidated from the accounts. This reflects recent 
statements from Bolloré that while Havas remains a strategic investment, Aegis 
is a purely "financial investment". He told reporters recently that "Havas can 
live without Aegis".

Credit Suisse estimates Bolloré bought his shares for an average of 120p, and 
Aegis is now trading at 138p. Baker said Publicis, Omnicom and WPP could all 
benefit from a merger with Aegis, with the cost savings allowing them to put a 
23p premium on the share price.

WPP, which has for some time coveted Synovate, could still make a break-up bid 
with Havas, said analyst Helen Snell at WPP corporate broker Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch. In a note last week Snell wrote: "Also conceivable is joint bid 
for Aegis by WPP and Havas (with Bolloré's blessing) with WPP taking Synovate 
and Havas retaining media buying."

Groupe Bolloré was not available for comment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 