
Berti Vogts came close to concocting a winning formula and Nigeria came close 
to pooping their biggest rivals' party. But, in the end, Vogts's plan 
unravelled just as it seemed certain to succeed and the Super Eagles fly home 
knowing they could have evicted their hosts.

Vogts began with a 4-3-2-1 formation that blunted the Black Stars. The 
midfield trio marshalled by Obi John Mikel left Michael Essien and Anthony 
Annan chasing air. Further forward, the zest and dazzle of Ikechukwu Uche and, 
in particular, Peter Odemwingie tormented a Ghanaian defence made to seem 
stodgy and Ayegbeni Yakubu offered a powerful and intelligent pivot.

With their defence comfortably containing the maladroit Junior Agogo and 
Asamoah Gyan, the Super Eagles were superior in every sector of the game, by 
far the more fluid side. The absence of Stephen Appiah was achingly apparent 
and Ghana's only real threat in the early stages was Quincy Owusu-Abeyie, whose 
jinks and jiggles befuddled the full-backs - but too frequently his team-mates 
found his passing just as difficult to read.

Essien was having a stinker. When he could get on the ball his touch was 
treacherous and his distribution wayward. In what looked like being a reversal 
oflast year's friendly in Brentford 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/sport/2007/02/07/glorious_ghana_trounce_super_e.html>
 - when Essien lorded it over Mikel and the Black Stars battered Nigeria 4-1 - 
Mikel was clearly on top of the battle of the Chelsea team-mates.

For all his class, however, Mikel lack assertiveness (though not aggression). 
In a spellbinding bout of possession just before the half-hour mark, he 
orchestrated a sequence of flicks and one-touch passes that Ghana simply didn't 
look capable of - however, the move lacked purpose: keeping possession is all 
very well but Mikel seemed too satisfied with that, not bold enough to drive 
towards a target.

Fittingly, it was immediately after that spell of snappy but aimless passing 
that Essien sprung into action - as if riled by Mikel's delicate dithering, he 
seized the ball in his own half and simply stormed towards the Nigerian box 
before teeing up Gyan. The striker took the ball in his stride and smashed it 
against the outside of the post.

Moments later Agogo would have opened the scoring but botched his first touch. 
Nonetheless, when Nigeria found the net three mintues later, their lead was 
deserved. The Algerian referee could already have awarded Nigeria a penalty and 
several dangerous free-kicks but instead constantly penalised Odemwingie rather 
than the home defence he was bamboozling. When John Mensah wrestled him to the 
ground in the 31st minute, it was a Ghanaian foul too far. After Yakubu 
converted the penalty, Ghana seemed to be on their way out. Indeed, the shot 
that Essien pumped yards wide two mintues later looked not so much like the 
harbinger of a revival but the symptom of a dearth of better ideas

You don't often see referees allocate three minutes of additional time at the 
end of the first half (though they frequently should) but that's what Mohamed 
Benouza did and Ghana were soon to be grateful. Because at a time when most 
officials would have already signalled a break, Sulley Muntari swung a cross 
into the centre and Essien, surging between the centre-backs, planted a header 
in off the post. The Ohane Djan Stadium bounced throughout the interval as the 
Black Stars' fans exulted. But after the resumption it quickly became clear 
that Nigeria were still the more coherent unit. Ghana suffered from awkward 
spaces between their various components and looked like they were trying to 
advance by missing out a step.

On the hour mark, Nigeria tore through Ghana's middle and Odemwingie, 
collecting a clever through-ball, cut in front of Mensah. Ghana's captain 
chopped the Nigerian down and deservedly saw red. From the resultant free-kick 
Taye Taiwo unleashed a trademark thunderbolt and Richard Kingson saved superbly.

It was then that Vogts's limitations came to the fore. With Ghana down to 10 
men and Essien drafted into defence, the circumstances were changed utterly - 
but Vogts neglected to react accordingly. Afterwards he said he instructed his 
players simply "to attack, to keep on going". That wooliness failed to address 
the fact that the expulsion compelled Ghana to find extra steel.

"After the red card we went into a huddle and said 'we now have big 
responsibilities to our country'," explained MUntari. "We told each other to 
make sure we were big enough to handle them."

The Ghanaian players' resolve, perhaps epitomised most by Agogo, who, though 
now alone up front, suddenly transformed himself into a rampaging menace, was 
matched by that of their manager. Claude Leroy's changes were audacious. And 
effective.

Gyan was withdrawn and Laryea Kingston introduced in the middle, where he 
contributed creativity. Quincy was replaced by Haminu Dramani, whose entrance 
was greeted with suspicion by the crowd. The winger's first touch gave an 
indication why - after mis-controlling the ball he ran to retrieve it but 
instead headed it straight out of play.

His second touch, however, ignited the fans and his team-mates. Showing the 
directness Quincy so often spurned, he simply skinned Obinna Nwaneri and fired 
the ball into the middle, only for brave blocks by Yobo and Danny Shittu to 
keep Ghana at bay.

Ghana kept coming and Vogts still did nothing. On 81 minutes Dramani again 
drove towards the box and this time fed Muntari, whose shot-cum-cross was 
hammered into the net by Agogo.

Now, at least, Vogts reacted. But his switch to a desperate 4-2-4 simply 
ensured Ghana maintained their newfound dominion in the middle. The Black Stars 
were so sure Nigeria hand been neutered that Kingston and Hansu Adu Sarpei 
decided to entertain the crowd by each juggling the ball before flipping it 
provocatively over Taiwo's head. The ball then came to Muntari on the far side 
and he got into the spirit of things by nutmegging Obinna. Three mintues to go 
and the Ghanaian party had begun. By the look and sound of things around Accra 
now, it's not going to stop any time soon.
 