
Monday

In this referendum debate, you take your heroes where you find them. When 
Steve Hilton was David Cameron’s barefoot director of strategy at No 10 in the 
early days of the coalition, most of the rightwing media liked to characterise 
him as an establishment space cadet.

Now that he’s declared himself a paid-up member of the Brexit camp, those same 
newspapers are branding him an anti-establishment guru for our times. That 
Hilton has been so vocal recently of course has nothing to do with his having 
the paperback version of his book More Human to promote.

In case you missed it, here’s a brief summary: “Deep down, we are all human, 
and if only we could get away from some of the things that make us less human, 
we could all be a bit more human … We need not be frightened of the future. Not 
all technology is bad. Google, where my wife, Rachel, is a senior executive, is 
an example of a positive force for change, because children can expand their 
minds by looking at pictures of the Amazon rainforest as well as porn. Vote 
Steve. A better world is a Hiltworld.”

Tuesday

The Chelsea flower show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow> is like entering 
two parallel universes. If your only contact with the show is via the 
newspapers and TV it can appear as if it is a playground for royalty and minor 
celebs to be photographed and for designers to witter on about the tranquillity 
of a green space that doesn’t look too different from any other green space 
while the judges dock points for a lupin being planted in the wrong place. But 
go there and you’ll find people who couldn’t give a toss which garden ends up 
with a gold medal and have just turned up because they love plants.

The first time I went, I went berserk at 5pm on the Friday when the show ended 
and bought up huge quantities of flowering plants that the exhibitors were 
flogging off rather than taking home. For about a week, my garden looked 
magnificent and then they all died at the same time, leaving it a wasteland.

Wednesday

The Institute for Fiscal Studies is the latest respected economic thinktank to 
be rubbished by the Vote Leave campaigners for having predicted that leaving 
the EU would make Britain worse off in the short term. This isn’t the first 
time the IFS has been accused of bias. Over the years it has been criticised by 
the Tories and Labour for having the temerity to question their economic data; 
which probably makes it about as independent as these kinds of organisations 
can get.

For the record, the IFS costed each party’s manifesto pledges before the last 
election. Their overall findings were that no party would have passed a GCSE 
economics paper on the basis of their arithmetic. The Tories’ numbers may have 
been by far the worst, the SNP may have been imposing greater austerity than 
Labour, but there were huge gaps in everyone’s figures.

Nothing came close to adding up, everyone would have to borrow more and tax 
more than they claimed, and most of the unprotected government departments 
would barely exist by 2019. Just so you know.

Thursday

It’s fair to assume Alan Sugar’s appointment as the government’s new 
enterprise tsar has more to do with him having been the frontman for the 
Apprentice on television for the past 10 years than for his career in building 
amplifiers and computers that didn’t always work very well as well as satellite 
dishes for Sky.

The government and the BBC could so easily have done worse; Lord Sugar got the 
Apprentice gig only after Sir Philip Green turned it down – presumably because 
it would play havoc with his wife’s tax exile arrangements in Monaco.

Just think, the Beeb and the government could have ended up with an enterprise 
tsar who had flogged BHS to a declared bankrupt for £1. As it is, we’ve merely 
got a tsar whose principal achievement has been to launch the career of Katie 
Hopkins.

Friday

The worst kept secret in football is out: José Mourinho has been confirmed as 
the new manager ofManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>.

According to some reports, the Special One has been on the United payroll for 
the past three months so it was no surprise Louis van Gaal looked to be the 
most miserable manager to lift the FA Cup since the competition began in 1871.

The bigger mystery is what took Mourinho so long, as he was in the frame for 
the job when Sir Alex Ferguson stood down. Some cynics reckoned Fergie cared 
more about preserving his legacy than continuing the club’s success and was 
keen to hand over to David Moyes, a manager with no experience of running a big 
club.

Still, now that Mourinho and Manchester United are an item, almost every 
football fan in the country will be desperate for them to fail.

Digested week, digested: 

With or without EU
 