
 African Nations Cup 

 DR Congo 1 Masudi 35  Guinea 2 Camara 68, Feindouno 81 

 Mick Wadsworth's competitive debut as the Democratic Republic of Congo coach 
ended in a defeat almost as confused as his team's preparations.

The Englishman abroad seemed set for victory when Alain Masudi's volley 
emphasised the early Congolese superiority, but control turned to chaos in a 
last half-hour of staggering Guinean domination. Titi Camara and Pascal 
Feindouno scored the goals that put Guinea joint top of group A with Tunisia, 
who had beaten Rwanda on Saturday by the same score.

"I can't explain it," Wadsworth said afterwards. "We controlled the game for 
an hour but only scored once. They controlled the game for only 30 minutes but 
they scored twice. We were stretched, ragged, and all we had worked on 
disappeared."

Congo's terrible half-hour was undoubtedly the result of preparations which 
have been the epitome of incompetence.

"Some of the team were up until one o'clock in the morning the night before 
the match, discussing bonuses and financial issues with the federation," 
Wadsworth said, adding that the team had been "messed up big time" by poor 
training facilities.

"I only saw four of my players for the first time this week," the former 
Huddersfield and Colchester coach complained.

One player Wadsworth knows well, Newcastle's for mer Colchester forward Lomana 
Lua Lua, ought to have put the game beyond Guinea. Four times in the initial 35 
minutes he burst clear of the Guinean captain Morlaye Soumah only to fire wide 
or over.

"We gave them the game really," said Lua Lua. "I should have scored a 
hat-trick or four goals in the first half."

Masudi, though, showed him how to finish: Marcel Mbayo's cross was inviting, 
the Sturm Graz winger's volley only half-hit but fully accurate.

The Guinean resurrection was sparked by Feindouno on the right wing and fanned 
into life by Fodé Mansaré on the left. Feindouno hit the bar with a chip, and 
Mansaré's pull-back allowed Camara, once of Liverpool and West Ham, to stroke 
in an equaliser. With 10 minutes remaining, Mansaré broke down the left and 
Souleymane Youla hit a shot on to the bar, leaving Feindouno with a simple 
header.

Next up for DR Congo are Tunisia, but Wadsworth has little idea how the hosts 
will play: he was refused a ticket for the opening game. "They would not let me 
have an accreditation," he said. "Read between the lines: we're in the same 
group as the host nation."

Tunisia won the opener, in which each side had a man sent off, through goals 
from Zied Jaziri and Francileudo dos Santos, Joao Elias replying for Rwanda.

•  In group C the favourites Cameroon were held to a 1-1  draw by Algeria, and 
Egypt recovered from a goal by Sheffield United's Peter Ndlovu to beat Zimbabwe 
2-1.
 