
As a schoolboy in Barnsley during the 1960s Mick Wadsworth was always 
fascinated by Africa's complex political geography. The man whom Sir Bobby 
Robson would later hail as "one of England's finest coaches" even wrote the odd 
essay on the Congo's myriad problems in the years between its independence from 
Belgium and temporary renaming as Zaire.

Four decades on the country is far more than just an intriguing page on an 
atlas to the 53-year-old. Appointed national coach of the Democratic Republic 
of Congo last autumn, Wadsworth is currently in Tunisia where Guinea, Rwanda 
and the host nation await in the initial stage of the African Nations Cup.

Although he admits to having fallen a little in love with his new job, 
Wadsworth, formerly assistant manager at Newcastle and Southampton and manager 
of Carlisle, Scarborough, Colchester, Oldham and Huddersfield, has endured 
profound culture shock.

"Working with the players is great but the other stuff has been a logistical 
nightmare," said Wadsworth. "Because the new government took control of the 
Congo only five months ago and the sports minister lacked a budget, the 
administrative back-up in Kinshasa is not ideal.

"When we had our first training camp in South Africa in early December we had 
only eight balls, so when I returned to England over Christmas, I bought 20 
balls and quite a bit of kit which I brought out to Cairo for our January 
training camp in Egypt and eventually got through customs.

"In Egypt I was provided with a car but I had to buy the petrol, and the 
mobile phone they gave me didn't work. The first Cairo hotel we were booked 
into was a long way from European standards, so I checked into a Novotel and 
negotiated with Kinshasa not only to get the money to move the players in as 
well but to rent training pitches."

Faced with such privations many English managers would have been straight on 
the first available Heathrow-bound flight. Yet an eclectic CV which has seen 
Wadsworth failing to make the playing grade at Scunthorpe, spending a brief 
stint down a Barnsley mine, teaching in a Sheffield comprehensive and working 
for the FA, has imbued him with an outlook somewhat broader than that of the 
average football man.

He has taken the prayer sessions which precede and conclude every training 
session in his stride - "our coach driver thinks he's Ben Hur, so I see prayer 
as an alternative to brakes" - and is well aware that many of the Congo's 68m 
inhabitants will be avidly following television coverage of the African Nations.

"The country is vast, as big as Western Europe," Wadsworth explained. "But no 
one has failed to be affected by the civil war in which three or four million 
people died. Hardly anyone in the Congo has disposable income and, out of my 
20-man squad, the five players who are home-based [the rest are domi ciled in 
Europe and South Africa] don't even own things like CD players.

"These footballers are very different from English ones. They are prepared to 
adopt a monastic lifestyle because they just want to improve. Every player is 
always in his room before the nightly curfew and the only place they've wanted 
to go out to in Cairo in the evenings is the internet cafe. After working 
within the less monastic English football culture I've really had my eyes 
opened."

The Congolese were persauded to appoint their first foreign coach by their 
star individual, a forward whose tales of the hedonistic player lifestyles 
enjoyed at Newcastle United are barely comprehended by some compatriots.

"I first coached Lomana Lua- Lua at Colchester and, later, Newcastle. He was a 
refugee from the civil war and we used to chat about the Congo. Then, when I 
was out of work after leaving Huddersfield last year and the Congo needed a 
coach, Lomana mentioned my name and Bob [Robson] also recommended me," said 
Wadsworth.

So might he stay longer? "I don't know. I found it very difficult and missed 
England at first but the Congolese are lovely people and these players have 
inspired me. Even though logistical things like missing paperwork mean that 
moving the squad from place to place can seem almost as slow as transporting 
them by camel train, I can see how easy it is to fall in love with all this, to 
get caught up with trying to qualify for Germany 2006."

It will not be easy. "As Zaire the Congo became the first African nation to 
qualify for the World Cup finals [in 1974] but the war has taken it's toll and 
mine is an inexperienced squad," cautioned Wadsworth. "Unfortunately 
potentially top Congolese players who became refugees like Claude Makelele and 
Emile Mpenza opted to play for their countries of adoption."

And Wadsworth, whose team faces Guinea tomorrow, had another headache 
yesterday when a lack of paperwork forced Fifa to order the late withdrawal of 
one of his best players, Franck Matengo of Bastia, whose previous incarnation 
as a French Under-21 striker has caused a problem.

 TV: Tunisia v Rwanda, Eurosport, ko 6.30pm today; BBC3 7.40pm

 