
No English, Irish or Scottish players are among the 40 nominations for Uefa’s 
team of the year poll but three Welshmen make the cut: Joe Allen, Gareth Bale 
andAaron Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey>.

Now in its 16th year, the online poll asks fans to pick their formation and 
team from a list of four goalkeepers, 12 defenders, 12 midfielders and 12 
forwards.

As well as the usual suspects from La Liga, there are 12 Premier League 
players on the list, including Riyad Mahrez and N’Golo Kanté from the 
champions, Leicester City, although the France international is now at Chelsea.

Arsenal are the best represented Premier League side with Ramsey, Laurent 
Koscielny and Alexis Sánchez among those considered by the uefa.com editorial 
staff to have had a great year for a European club or national team, which 
explains the presence of Allen and Ramsey.

Gareth Bale envisages finishing career at Real Madrid after signing new deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/31/gareth-bale-envisages-finishing-career-real-madrid-new-deal>
Real Madrid, however, lead the way with eight nominations, including Cristiano 
Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> who was named for a 
record 13th time. Their Spanish rivals Atlético and Barcelona have five 
nominations each.

In terms of the 18 nationalities represented, France and Spain both have five 
players nominated while there are four from the European champions, Portugal.

The absence of Harry Kane and Jamie Vardy might disappoint some English fans 
but it is hard to pick fault with a list that can find room for only one 
Brazilian, Neymar, and no space for Germany’s Manuel Neuer, widely considered 
to be the best goalkeeper in the world.

Fans can vote for their choices at en.toty.uefa.com <http://en.toty.uefa.com/> 
until 3 January, with the final line-up announced on 5 January.

Uefa team of the year nominations

Goalkeepers Gigi Buffon (Juventus), Keylor Navas (Real Madrid), Jan Oblak 
(Atlético Madrid), Rui Patricio (Sporting).

Defenders Toby Alderweireld (Tottenham Hotspur), Jérôme Boateng (Bayern 
Munich), Leonardo Bonucci (Juventus), Dani Carvajal (Real Madrid), Diego Godin 
(Atlético Madrid), Raphael Guerreiro (Borussia Dortmund), Juanfran (Atlético 
Madrid), Joshua Kimmich (Bayern Munich), Laurent Koscielny (Arsenal), Pepe 
(Real Madrid), Gerard Piqué (Barcelona), Sergio Ramos (Real Madrid).

Midfielders Joe Allen (Stoke City), Yannick Carrasco (Atlético Madrid), Kevin 
De Bruyne (Manchester City), Andrés Iniesta (Barcelona), N’Golo Kanté 
(Chelsea), Toni Kroos (Real Madrid), Grzegorz Krychowiak (PSG), Riyad Mahrez 
(Leicester City), Luka Modric (Real Madrid), Dimitri Payet (West Ham United), 
Paul Pogba (Manchester United), Aaron Ramsey (Arsenal).

Forwards Sergio Agüero (Manchester City), Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (Borussia 
Dortmund),Gareth Bale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale> (Real 
Madrid), Antoine Griezmann (Atlético Madrid), Gonzalo Higuaín (Juventus), 
Zlatan Ibrahimovic (Manchester United), Robert Lewandowski (Bayern Munich), 
Lionel Messi (Barcelona), Neymar (Barcelona), Cristiano Ronaldo (Real Madrid), 
Alexis Sánchez (Arsenal), Luis Suárez (Barcelona).
 