
Train services across Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> came to a 
halt on Monday because of a drivers’ strike, causing misery for tens of 
thousands of commuters and travellers.

 On the first day back to work and education for millions after the festive 
break, many were forced to drive or catch taxis or buses, which caused 
congestion on main roads; others walked or cycled, while many opted to work 
from home or take an extra day’s holiday.

Members of the Aslef union walked out for 24 hours after a dispute over terms 
and conditions withArriva Trains Wales (ATW) 
<http://www.arrivatrainswales.co.uk/>. 

 ATW said none of its services in Wales would operate on Monday and some early 
trains could be disrupted on Tuesday. There would be no replacement bus 
services as there were not enough vehicles to cover the 1,000-plus rail 
services it ran daily.

Wales train strike: Aslef members at Arriva begin 24-hour walkout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/04/wales-train-strike-aslef-members-at-arriva-begin-24-hour-walkout>
 It meant huge problems for people hoping to use rail routes including in the 
south Wales valleys and around Cardiff, Swansea and Wrexham. There was also 
disruption to services between Wales and English cities and towns including 
Manchester, Birmingham, Chester and Crewe.

 The dispute has also affected many people trying to travel home after 
holidays away, such as students, many of whom face the first day of exams.

 ATW apologised for the cancellations. A spokesperson said: “We deeply regret 
this disruption and continue to do all we can to avert strike action, however 
we are advising customers to make alternative travel arrangements for Monday 
January 4 and to check their travel plans for Tuesday morning, January 5.

“An indefinite train driver overtime ban is also currently in force which may 
impact some timetabled services until the dispute is resolved.”

 Gareth Thomas, human resources director for ATW, said: “We are extremely 
disappointed that the train drivers unions have not accepted our latest offer 
of improvements to terms, conditions and pay for their members, and that they 
have opted to take industrial action, even though we submitted a revised 
proposal to them on December 23, following productive pre-Christmas talks.

“Directors at Arriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> 
Trains Wales have been in contact almost every day with union officials in a 
bid to resolve this issue and stress the urgency of the situation if disruption 
to customers was to be avoided.”

 A deal between ATW and Aslef was agreed in November stipulating that the 
maximum working day for drivers would be nine and a half hours. However, later 
that month the company sent the union a document saying there could be 
exceptional circumstances when they might need to work for longer.

 These include factors such as engineering works, special events, staff 
shortages and police operations – which the union argues can happen frequently. 
In December it announced that drivers had voted overwhelmingly to strike, 
claiming management had reneged on its agreement.It said more than 80% of 
members had voted to walk out. 
<http://www.aslef.org.uk/information/100012/143617/aslef_drivers_on_atw_vote_to_strike/>

The company tried to stave off the strike just before Christmas but did not 
put a new formal offer on the table.


 Simon Weller, Aslef’s national organiser who is leading negotiations for the 
drivers, said: “The company has not made a new offer. It has sent us a form of 
words. But it is not new and it is not an offer.”

 He denied that striking on the first day after the holidays was cynical. 
Speaking on BBC Radio Wales, he said: “Any day is going to be disruptive … 
There is never a good day to have a strike. Why not today?” He accepted that 
calling a strike on a busy work day was “economic leverage”.

 Aslef said it was available for talks to resolve the dispute but added there 
was nothing at the moment to discuss. It claimed the company was trying to 
“railroad through” changes to terms and conditions.

Mick Cash, leader of the Rail, Maritime and Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> union, whose members at ATW are also 
on strike, said: “RMT salutes our driver members on Arriva Trains Wales who are 
standing rock-solid, shoulder to shoulder with Aslef colleagues in the action 
which has closed down all services.

“This strike is about basic workplace justice and decent working conditions 
and it is down to the company to recognise the anger amongst the workforce 
shown this morning and to meet with the unions for genuine and meaningful talks 
on the issues in dispute.”

 The leader of the Welsh Conservatives, Andrew RT Davies, said the strike 
would cause immeasurable chaos for commuters and called on the Welsh government 
to minimise the disruption.

 A Welsh government spokesman called for the situation to be resolved as soon 
as possible.


 