
Domenico was sitting silently by the deserted monastery, sheltering from the 
sun under a fig tree, and our sudden appearance took him by surprise. Jumping 
to his feet, he took one look at us – a pair of bedraggled walkers – and 
gestured towards the moth-eaten armchairs in the courtyard.

He spends his days looking after ramblers that pass by the 16th-century San 
Domenico convent, which clings to a mountainside overlooking the Amalfi coast, 
and rushed away to fetch a bowl of figs and cups of freshly squeezed lemon 
juice. 

We enjoyed this heavenly reward on the Path of the Gods, named for the Roman 
temples that once stood here. It's a 10km section – between Praiano and famous 
Positano – of one of Italy's most picturesque hiking routes, along the Amalfi 
coast. For more than an hour we had climbed steps that zig-zagged up the 
mountain. Lizards lazed on rocks and butterflies fluttered among the trees. 

The views became more dramatic with every step: the sea fizzing over the 
craggy coast and, further ahead, Positano's landslide of matchbox houses 
tumbling down the cliffs. Far below, Praiano's traffic hummed.  

Most people choose to drive the Amalfi coast, swerving around the 1,000 
hairpin bends in small Fiats or on rattling Vespas, but walking the 40km 
coastline takes you beyond the celebrated spots and, with cooler temperatures 
and fewer crowds, autumn is the time to do it. 

Our self-guided hike along the coast's ancient pathways would take us from the 
town of Amalfi to Sorrento, walking around five hours (9-13km) a day, via 
lesser-known villages hidden deep in the valleys and forested peaks. 

Before setting off, I spent a day exploring the area around Amalfi. Tiny 
Scala, built by shipwrecked Romans en route to Constantinople, is the oldest 
settlement on the coast, dating from the fourth century, and we wandered its 
empty streets, forgoingsanguinaccio – a pudding made from chocolate and pig's 
blood – in favour of a scoop ofnocciola (hazelnut) gelato from the only cafe, 
on the small cobbled square.

After a night in Amalfi, visiting limoncello shops and sleeping at the Hotel 
Lidomare, an early 14th-century building full of antiques – we made for the old 
fishing village of Praiano. The trail passed small shrines adorned with flowers 
and was mostly deserted until we emerged at a roadside to find shacks selling 
small, fiery chillis and a truck piled high with melons.

Praiano was quiet (as usual, said the receptionist at the Tramonto d'Oro 
hotel), but appealing, with pretty bays, colourful local characters and a great 
restaurant, La Strada (lastradaristorante.it <http://www.lastradaristorante.it>
), carved into the rock face with heart-stopping sea views from its terrace. On 
the menu was sea bass cooked in "Crazy Water" – a broth of garlic, parsley and 
tomatoes originally used by sailors who cooked using seawater when Amalfi was a 
maritime republic in the 1100s.

We spent a few hours at Praia, on a tiny pebbled beach where swimmers dived 
from the pontoon into the sapphire water, and chatted to Paolo Sandulli, an 
artist who had turned an old cylindrical stone defence tower – built in the 
Middle Ages to ward off the Saracens – into a studio. Then it was a sweaty 
ascent to the San Domenico convent (580m), a vertiginous route beside sheer 
rocky drops.

For all the glitz and glamour, luxury boutiques, big yachts and helipad, 
Positano, when we arrived three hours later, was all style and no substance. 
But a short way up the mountain was Montepertuso, little more than a church and 
cluster of whitewashed homes, where we discovered the area's real heart and 
soul. It had one greengrocer and only five places to eat, including the 
fantastic Il Ritrovo (ilritrovo.com <http://www.ilritrovo.com>). Draped over 
the dining room's wooden beams were hundreds of vine tomatoes, hanging in 
grape-like bunches for preservation ahead of winter. Owner and head chef 
Salvatore Barba told us, modestly: "All my food is spectacular!" – and he was 
right. The bruschetta, the panna cotta, the pasta with porcini, sausage and 
creamy smoked cheese were all extraordinary. I left Il Ritrovo feeling 
crestfallen.

"Why?" asked a worried Salvatore.

"I fear I may never again eat anything quite so perfect," I replied.

Salvatore laughed. "You know, Montepertuso is a special place. This is where 
locals from Positano come. Now it's easy but before the road was built 20 years 
ago, the only way up here was to take the steps – all 1,700 of them. We all had 
very good legs …

"Positano is beautiful but, up here, this is the true spirit of Amalfi."

• Nick's trip was provided by On Foot Holidays (01722 322652, 
onfootholidays.co.uk <http://www.onfootholidays.co.uk/>). A seven-night 
self-guided walking trip along the Amalfi coast costs from £690, including B&B 
accommodation and one night in a family-run 18th-century agriturismo. EasyJet 
(0843 104 5000,easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com/en>) flies to Naples from 
Stansted, Bristol, Edinburgh and Liverpool from £53 return. More information at
italia.it <http://www.italia.it/en/home.html>
 