
Mud-splattered boots, elegy inducing fells - and a pickled brussels sprout. 
Could there be a better way to kick start spring? The local snack, a 
distinctive blend of the devil's vegetable and cloudy vinegar - and speciality 
of Arncliffe's Falcon Inn - might not be to everyone's taste, but few areas 
offer a more invigorating blend of landscape, history, culture and locally 
sourced cooking than the Yorkshire Dales - and the best way to enjoy all four 
is a good walk.
 Quoits in West Burton. Photograph: Anthony Cake 
You won't be the first. And that's a good thing. Iron age Brits, Romans, 
Vikings and medieval traders have kindly left a network of trails between 
different communities. More recently, they've been researched, walked and 
served up in perfect pub-to-pub sized chunks - 12 to 14 miles is a reasonable 
distance for our newly lengthened days - by award-winning hiking guide and 
author of the Inn Way series, Mark Reid.

"It's slow-cooked travel," he says, supping a pint on the eve of departure. 
"People moved around like this for centuries, a gentle pace with a day between 
dales, where each was a different world. It's multisensory: you feel the wind, 
hear the birds and discover the layers of history. Savour the walk. I don't 
ever want to hear, 'Are we there yet?'"

Reid isn't alone in his enthusiasm; it's contagious. Bass, Squids and Krusty 
are three Canadian brothers who present a series of epic journeys on National 
Geographic TV. They might be more Pepsi Max triathletes than cagoule-clad 
ramblers, but they're convinced this slice of Yorkshire is spot-on for the new 
season.

Day one of Reid's glorious five-day, 61-mile circular route, which takes in 
nine dales and 18 pubs, will be an early test. We stride out from the freshly 
revamped rooms at Kettlewell's Racehorses Hotel. Centuries ago it stabled the 
muscular steeds that dragged stagecoaches up a murderously steep local pass. I 
can empathise. It's like starting a Stairmaster session on gradient 10.

Our climb exposes the curved barrel of Wharfedale, where dry stone walls rise 
like the wooden ribs of an ancient shipwreck. After a blustery march over high 
springy moorland, the clouds fragment and Cecil B DeMille takes over the 
choreography. Biblical spotlights of sun rake Littondale, illuminating 
Arncliffe between wooded slopes and a meandering cobalt river. If they ever 
bottle the essence of soft rural England, this should be on the label.

As should the village's Falcon Inn. It has a coal fire, a fading photo of a 
champion marrow from 1900, and Timothy Taylor ale served in ceramic jugs from 
wooden barrels. It's wonderful, but Squids looks alarmed. Days before he was 
catching the perfect wave off Nicaragua, now he's facing the far scarier ordeal 
of a pickled sprout. "Well, gentlemen," says landlord Robin Miller. "You've had 
your greens."

But not our walk. We crack on along Littondale, arriving as the Queen's Arms 
closes for the afternoon, before climbing 607m to cross Old Cote Moor and Birks 
Fell. Straight ahead, in early evening light, is Buckden village, described by 
Alfred Wainwright as "perched on a hillside like a Tibetan monastery". Either 
he'd never seen the Himalayas or he'd over-imbibed on the Buck Inn's Golden 
Pippin Ale.
 White Lion Inn 
I wouldn't blame him. It's lovely. And sets us up for a monster pie supper at 
the nearby Cray's White Lion Inn. The pub's Ring The Bull challenge hints at 
rodeo-style adrenaline, but whereas medieval competitors tossed hoops over a 
decapitated bull's horns, you now swing a ring on a string over a hook. Dominos 
is more physically demanding.

We compensate the next morning. A steady climb, and we're tackling the Roman 
road towards Stake Moss: a truly wild corner of the dales. As ghostly figures 
of mist and peat hags rise around us, the skies darken. "Locals call it lazy 
wind," says Reid. "It can't be arsed to go around you so it cuts straight 
through."

But scenery and history can distract you from the grimmest weather. We're 
passing Raydale's high fells, once owned by monks, now by farmers diversifying 
to survive. Derek Kettlewell holds bespoke tastings of preserves and pickles 
cooked on-site at School House Farm. Chilli-stuffed Hellish Relish ignites the 
gums, but the Extra Hot is seismic: my left contact lens appears to melt.

It's safer outside. Derek offers occasional herding demonstrations with 
sheepdog Dylan. "Never work with children or animals," he says, as we trek 
through stone-walled pastures. "And get a quad bike instead." He's being 
modest. Dylan's a blur of fur, cajoling the herd into a tight swarm. When we 
try it's a pantomime of waving arms, frantic shouts and stampeding Swaledale 
sheep. The flock scatters into two fields, while Dylan appears traumatised.

Our work here is done. We trek along England's shortest river, the 
two-and-a-half-mile Bain, passing fences hung with eerie strings of dead moles 
- evidence of mole catchers, not satanists - before reaching Wensleydale for a 
pint at Worton's Victoria Arms. The classic front-room pub, run by landlord 
Ralph Daykin since 1956, serves Black Sheep Riggwelter Ale next to the rear end 
of a stuffed fox, pimped with a water pump. At judicious moments, it lifts its 
tail and "pees" on surprised customers.

Our 13-mile day ends in the White Rose and the King's Arms in photogenic 
Askrigg. The iron rings among its cobbles are a legacy of Elizabethan days when 
tethered bulls were taunted by snarling dogs for public entertainment - early 
inspiration for Endemol.

The next day's walk is less brutal. Slightly. It starts with a killer climb on 
to Askrigg Common. "Dude," gasps Krusty. "I'm spanked." And not just by the 
hills. After passing the vertiginous limestone crag of Oxnop Scar above 
Swaledale, he has a navigational disagreement with Bass. The ensuing punch-up, 
caught on camera - "we tell it as it is" - leaves his brother with fractured 
ribs. It's shaping up to be compulsive viewing.

An hour later all is forgiven. We're on the Corpse Way, a 12-mile funereal 
route first used by local Vikings to mirror the mythological journey to the 
afterlife - although it ends not in Valhalla, but Grinton. Just over Ivelet 
Bridge is a coffin-shaped stone, where pallbearers rested bodies. It's a divine 
final journey. Ochre hills are bathed in soft sun and steep banks drop to a 
river so languorously curling that it hisses rather than flows. I'd far rather 
this than a hearse to the local crematorium.

It's accompanied by an apparently bottomless keg of history, including 
Gunnerside's 200-year-old smithy, run by the sixth successive generation of the 
Calvert family. After pumping its ageing bellows to stoke the fire, we examine 
old lead mining equipment straight out of Wallace & Gromit - sumpters, kibbles 
and clevis prickers - in the petite museum.

But, hell, it's more than 12 hours since the last pint. Time for Gunnerside's 
King's Head. Recently rescued just days before closure, the pub serves local 
brews alongside Glenn Miller 78s on a wind-up gramophone. As so often on the 
hike, it merits a lingering lunch. But there's 11km left, passing the hamlets 
of Crackpot and Low Row, where corpse carriers once stored stiffs in the Dead 
House - it's still there - while drowning their sorrows in the Punchbowl Inn.
 The Bridge in Grinton 
We prefer Reeth's Georgian pubs and The Bridge in Grinton, home to the route's 
best food, including a wickedly tasty pork belly and an ale called Dirty 
Tackle. Meanwhile the Canadian dudes invade Friday night bell-ringing practice. 
"Hey, none of you guys looks like Quasimodo," is an opening gambit rarely heard 
at Grinton parish church.

Morning four eases the impact of yet another fried breakfast with a three-dale 
hike. A three-mile tramp past old mine workings into Apedale reveals views more 
Texas widescreen than Yorkshire, before crying curlews and lapwings announce 
our rapid entry into Wensleydale.

Today's lunch promises to be a bit special. Bolton Castle, built between 1378 
and 1399 by Richard Le Scrope - wasn't he in Blackadder? - looks exactly like a 
castle should: thumping thick walls and dungeons where excavators found a 
skeletal manacled arm.

Our guide, Tom Orde-Powlett, Lord Bolton's son, serves up excellent local 
pies, pâtés and cheeses before revealing a vineyard courtesy of dad - "it 
produces about three bottles a year" - and an electric portcullis courtesy of 
Cate Blanchett: the castle was a location in Elizabeth.

It isn't Wensleydale's only movie link. In nearby Carperby, the Wheatsheaf 
Hotel's guest book includes one visitor whose address was simply "Hollywood". 
It leaps out among the Bradfords, and Northallertons. And so does the guest: 
Greta Garbo. The actress, entertaining troops in 1942, waxed lyrical about the 
Wheatsheaf's black pudding.

Only joking. Perhaps it's the anticipation that my next fried pig's blood is 
just 14 hours away. For now I amble into Bishopsdale to sample the sporting 
zeitgeist on West Burton's village green. Quoits, where you lob 5lb disks over 
a metal pole surrounded by gloopy clay, is enjoying a renaissance.

"It's booming," explains quarryman Phil Davidson, heaving his quoit from the 
sticky pit. "Our league had four more teams last year, and two this. The world 
championships in Arkengarthdale get about 100 people - mostly from Yorkshire."

I'd like to report that I hike the final day's 14 miles. I'd like to, but I'd 
be lying. After a roast lunch at the isolated Thwaite Arms in Horsehouse, where 
the decor seems little changed since the second world war, we blag a lift off a 
friendly farmer, cutting out a five-mile grind to the wind-hammered head of 
Coverdale. It leaves a gentle trudge and climatic views from Great Hunters 
Sleets, before a downhill stroll to Kettlewell for a final celebratory lamb 
shank - my third of the walk - at the Blue Bell. Our hiking circle is complete.

My pedometer - sad, I know - shows I've walked 122,029 steps, while consuming 
roughly 15,000 calories, washed down with 23 pints. I've gained a spare tyre of 
historical knowledge, but lost a pound in weight. More importantly, I've had a 
cheek-tingling, hair-mangling, head-clearing hit of fresh air. I don't want to 
be premature or provoke Yorkshire's fickle weather gods, but it feels as if 
spring has finally arrived. Hallelujah.

Way to go

Getting there

London King's Cross to Skipton from £27 return with National Express 
East Coast (0845 722 5333, nationalexpresseastcoast.com 
<http://nationalexpresseastcoast.com>). Buses run from Skipton to Kettlewell. 

Where to stay 

Mark Reid (innway.co.uk <http://www.innway.co.uk>) tailormakes walks, or you 
can follow the suggested routes in his books. Racehorses Hotel, Kettlewell 
(01756 760233,racehorseshotel.co.uk <http://www.racehorseshotel.co.uk>), White 
Lion, Cray (01756 760262,whitelioncray.com <http://whitelioncray.com>), White 
Rose, Askrigg (01969 650515,thewhiterosehotelaskrigg.co.uk 
<http://thewhiterosehotelaskrigg.co.uk>), Fox and Hounds, West Burton (01969 
663111,www.fhinn.co.uk <http://www.fhinn.co.uk>). All offer B&B doubles from 
£70. Arkleside Hotel, Reeth (01748 884200,arklesidehotel.co.uk 
<http://arklesidehotel.co.uk>) offers B&B doubles from £75.

Further reading

The Inn Way ... To The Yorkshire Dales, by Mark Reid (InnWay, £9.95). 

More information

Eager Brothers' travel documentary whichwayto.tv <http://whichwayto.tv>
 