
Five tests, three wins. Another loss to Eddie Jones’ powerful English outfit 
but several new players blooded and combinations tested.

In a tortuous 12 months where the Wallabies failed to end their Bledisloe Cup 
drought, were white-washed by England at home and missed out on winning the 
Rugby Championship, relief is yet to fully come.

England see off Australia’s fast start to establish themselves at No2 | Andy 
Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-australia-fast-start-no2>
After the high of last year’s World Cup, 2016 was tough to swallow. With a 
mammoth campaign of 16 matches completed, easily the most in a non-tournament 
year, Michael Cheika will be still struggling to broker a smile today.

A wobbly Wales were blitzed in a high-tempo first half in Cardiff. A slip-up 
against Scotland was avoided at Murrayfield, thanks to the boot of Bernard 
Foley. France were downed, only just, as the Wallabies recorded their first win 
on French soil in six years.

They came unstuck in Dublin, as Ireland continued their amazing assault on the 
top of world rugby. At the Aviva Stadium the Wallabies were guilty of only 
turning up in the second half and were penalised within an inch of their life. 
The result was a 27-24 defeat, Irish eyes smiling and the end of the green and 
gold’s faint Grand Slam hopes.

And at Twickenham, scene of that wondrous demolition at the World Cup that 
marked the end of Stuart Lancaster’s coaching reign and Sam Burgess’ brief 
union jaunt, the tour ended on a low note.

The England game was the one that really mattered, especially after the 
humiliation at home. Former Wallaby boss Jones has done a tremendous job with 
England and he has done it with a cohort of Aussies at his side at different 
times – Glen Ella, Jason Ryles and Dean Benton. Being beaten by the colonial 
cousins 3-0, and with their fellow countrymen at the heart of it, certainly 
smarts.

Now make it 4-zip. Considering the intensity of the Anglo-Australian rivalry 
in every sporting pursuit around, it’s a painful stat.

It was a familiar script for the Wallabies. Play well in fits and bursts but 
be architects of your own downfall. Look brilliant at times and diabolical at 
others, with handling errors and poor discipline aplenty. Of course the higher 
the quality of opponent the harder it is to impose yourself on the match.

Australia have long been guilty of matching the All Blacks for periods – a 
first half here, 60 minutes there – but falling away as the clock ticked down. 
Now they can add Scotland, France, Ireland and England into the mix.

They rode their luck against the Scots and French and come out the other side, 
but their lethargy was brutally punished in Dublin and London.

After a week of barbs and insults in the media, with ex-Randwick teammates 
Jones and Cheika sledging each other within an inch of their life, the 
Wallabies fell apart in the Twickenham pressure-cooker.

England appeared tired and scrappy early, perhaps weakened from their match 
against Argentina the weekend before where they were forced to play nearly 80 
minutes with just 14 men.

They were missing the brutish Billy Vunipola and Jones’ find of the series 
down under, star second-rower Maro Itoje. Essentially they appeared there for 
the taking.

Whatever the reason, they started slow and Australia raced to an eye-catching 
10-0 lead. The Wallaby passing was crisp, their running lines superb and they 
should have been further ahead.


However, a few crucial errors and mistake or two allowed England back in. 
Jonathan Joseph touched down under the posts after Sekope Kepu dropped the ball 
and it was hacked through, which gave the home side an unlikely lead.

Australia poked their noses back in front 16-13 at half-time but it was a 
mirage. England upped the ante and broke the Wallaby resolve. The men in white 
caught Israel Folau and co napping at the back with a number of well-time 
grubber kicks, while the knife to the heart was Ben Young’s dummy on the way to 
his try.

England 37-21 Australia: rugby union autumn international – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/03/england-v-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-live>
37-21 to England, the ninth loss of 15 tests in 2016. Yes, three of those came 
against New Zealand, but it remains an alarming record.

Twickeham might have been turgid but several Wallaby newcomers enhanced their 
reputations in Europe. Fijian freak Sefa Naivalu established himself as a 
potential star of the future. All hard-running and try-scoring, Naivalu is a 
winger of extreme promise.

Outside backs Reece Hodge and Dany Haylett-Petty continue to learn the ropes 
at international level. Both have demonstrated signs to show that they are up 
to rigours of Test rugby.

Then there’s Adam Coleman and Rory Arnold. The two locks have given Cheika 
depth and food for thought in a position that has been a worry for the 
Wallabies for several years.

The much-hyped Kyle Godwin debuted against France and was solid under heavy 
Parisian pressure, while Nick Frisby got some valuable experience. Lopeti 
Timani added some power and aggression in periods to the back of the scrum that 
was sorely needed.

But the tour re-empathised two sore issues – the Wallabies heavy reliance on 
Will Genia and David Pocock. Genia was in and out on the tour with club 
commitments, while Pocock will be unavailable for the next 12 months as he goes 
on a sabbatical.

Nick Phipps is too inconsistent and the Australian back-row will need to be 
reshuffled without the presence of Pocock. It remains to be seen if Timani, 
Dean Mumm or Sean McMahon wins a regular spot alongside Michael Hooper in 2017.

Two important points for Cheika to ponder over Christmas. That, and the small 
problem fixing the Wallabies’ inability to remain composed and compete for the 
full 80 minutes. The coach might be hoping Santa is especially generous this 
year.

In a season when Ireland and England submitted their strong claims to be the 
second-best team in world rugby, while South Africa disintegrated and Argentina 
struggled, Australia are clearly in fourth position.
 