
Michael Cheika is expecting critics to “put the boot in” after the Wallabies 
were swept 3-0 by England in their June series but expects a handful of 
experienced European exiles to boost Australia’s Rugby Championship campaign.


The 44-40 third Test defeat in Sydney on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
 was a fourth straight defeat for the Wallabies going back to last year’s World 
Cup final and their next two matches could not be harder – back-to-back Tests 
against New Zealand in August.

Australia captain Stephen Moore says England deserved series whitewash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-captain-stephen-moore-england-deserved-whitewash>
“I know there will be plenty of people looking to put the boot in, and I’m 
ready for that,” Cheika said. “But I’ll always get back up and as a team we’ll 
come back and try and play that style of footy. The people I feel for most are 
our supporters. We’ve let them down.”

Cheika said there would be no compromise over the attacking tactics that saw 
Australia outscore England 10 tries to nine over the series but lose all three 
Tests.

“I want us to be able to play that type of footy and we can do it without as 
many errors and that means working harder, being fitter, being more accurate 
and getting guys to fulfill their potential more,” he told reporters after the 
match.

“I will always accept full consequences from that style of game. That’s how 
I’ve been brought up. That’s when I came into coach Australia they wanted the 
team to play like that and that’s how I want to coach.

“I believe we can keep working on it and be in the situation where we get 
results and play like that. It hasn’t happened this time, but we’ll keep 
working at it.”

Injuries to loose forward David Pocock in the first Test and lineout caller 
Rob Simmons in the first and third Tests did not help Australia’s cause and 
left the side on the pitch at the end of the series very different to that 
which started the World Cup final.

Cheika said part of his plan for the England series was to try and create more 
depth in some positions and he felt the performances of the likes of centre 
Samu Kerevi and lock Rory Arnold had given him that.

He was still, though, looking forward to welcoming back European-based 
stalwarts like centre Matt Giteau, scrumhalf Will Genia and outside backs Adam 
Ashley-Cooper and Drew Mitchell for the Rugby Championship.

“The plan was always to bring back the guys from Europe,” he added. “I saw 
them all in January and asked them who wanted to keep playing and they all put 
their hand up to play. We gave those guys a break, you can’t play rugby for 12 
months of the year and in that came the opportunity to blood some new blokes in 
this series.”

Flyhalf Quade Cooper might also be in line for a return if, as expected, he 
signs up for an Australian Super Rugby team for next season before the start of 
the Rugby Championship.

“Experience makes a big difference,” said Cheika. “I think we uncovered three 
or four new guys this year who can definitely make the difference. So add those 
in what we already got and add a few more later on then we’ll start building 
the depth in several positions.

“It’s very painful right now, but we will dust ourselves off and come back and 
do our absolute best when the Bledisloe Cup starts.”
 