
The US is facing what many are describing as an opioid crisis, with growing 
numbers of deaths associated both with opioid medications andoverdoses on heroin
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-prescription-painkillers-heroin-addiction>
 – 19,000 in 2014 linked to opioids alone. But in the swirl of debate over the 
subject, there’s one group of Americans we aren’t hearing from: chronic pain 
patients, many of whom need to use opioids on a long-term basis to control 
their pain effectively.

Unlike patients with acute, short-term pain or pain associated with terminal 
illnesses such as cancer, they’re looking at a lifetime of living with 
conditions such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, fibromyalgia and endometriosis, 
along with many other disorders associated with chronic pain. Others are 
dealing with persistent pain from injuries.

 Many have conflicted relationships with the medications they need to enjoy a 
good quality of life, and they fight an tough battle against negative public 
perception and cultural attitudes. They’re struggling with issues that aren’t 
being accounted for in conversations about dependence, addiction and the safe 
use of opioids for long-term pain management.

Heather Ace Ratcliff, who has Type 3 Ehlers-Danlos, a connective tissue 
disorder characterized by hypermobility which allows her joints to dislocate 
and subluxate easily, says uninformed views can stigmatize chronic pain 
patients who are struggling to access relief. “I am regularly treated as if I 
am overreacting, a hypochondriac, or a drug addict for wanting an increase in 
pain management,” she says, illustrating the consequences of misinformation 
about opioids and pain.

But those attitudes are internalized as well. Even though many patients 
recognize that opioids help them manage pain effectively, some still fear them, 
worrying that their relationship with their medication may be sliding into 
addiction. At the same time, they’re dealing with side effects like fatigue, 
“brain fog” and gastrointestinal stress. In an environment where physicians who 
aren’t extensively familiar with pain management and opioids can leap to 
conclusions, it can be difficult for patients to have honest conversations with 
their doctors about their concerns, as they may fear being chastised or cut off.

Shayla Maas, another patient with Type 3 Ehlers-Danlos who also has an 
autoimmune disorder, says that the conversation surrounding opioids sometimes 
makes her paranoid about her medications. “Maybe I’m just blowing it out of 
proportion,” she says, “looking for attention, looking for meds.” She can 
hardly be blamed for her self-doubt, as that’s precisely the kind of messaging 
she receives as a chronic pain patient, and it’s easy to internalise the fear, 
she says, that you might become a “dope fiend”.

Anna H, a patient with fibromyalgia, shares these worries. “I’ve been taking 
relatively small doses of pain meds every day for about six years, but I’m 
still afraid that taking a certain amount of pills – even if I’m in a lot of 
pain – will send me down the path of addiction.”

Their fears are to some extent grounded in reality: opioid medications can 
have an addicting effect. But the real story is more complicated.

“Opioids are the cornerstone of the treatment of pain,” explains doctor Anita 
Gupta, a board-certified anesthesiologist, pain specialist, pharmacist and 
vice-chair of Drexel College of Medicine’s division of pain medicine in 
Philadelphia. Among her many roles, she also serves as vice-chair of the 
American Society of Anesthesiologist’s ad hoc committee on prescription opioid 
abuse and has a vested interest in addressing the misuse of opioids. But she 
also has concerns about inadequate information that harms both patients and 
providers.

Gupta makes an important distinction between dependence and addiction, cutting 
to the heart of one of the greatest misunderstandings in the conversation about 
pain management. “If you’re on opioid medication for a long period of time, you 
become dependent,” she explains. “When a need becomes a want, that is really an 
example of when someone can become addicted. When you want it and you can’t 
live without it, can’t survive without it, it interrupts your day to day life, 
that’s addiction.”

Though organizations like the American Academy of Chronic Pain Management, US 
Pain Foundation and the American Chronic Pain Association engage in patient 
advocacy work, it can be a struggle. Even with the weight of patients, family, 
and medical providers behind these groups, they aren’t always treated as 
stakeholders in processes like developing new guidelines for opioid 
prescription and use.

“There’s a saying that goes something like: ‘We are all one drink or pill away 
from addiction,’ and I know this is meant to destigmatize what addicts go 
through, but I feel like I’ve been seeing variations on this ‘common knowledge’ 
more and more lately being used (on social media) as a cudgel to remind 
patients to not overdo it,” Anna says, speaking to the dual-edged sword of 
awareness. A motto designed to humanize the experience of addiction has been 
turned into a weapon that targets people who rely on opioids for pain 
management, and that translates to real-world stigma.

“When other people find out that I’m on opioids,” Maas explains, “depending on 
how close they are and how well they know me, I might get an ‘it sucks that 
your pain is so bad’ to a slightly narrowed side eye.” The judgmental comments 
she receives make her feel like people think she’s taking opioids for the fun 
of it.

“Believe me,” she says, “this is not for fun.”

“I haven’t really experienced the stigma personally other than some 
ill-informed comments from acquaintances,” says Anna. “But the media coverage 
of the ‘opiate epidemic’ as driven by pill pushing-doctors and by pain patients 
worries me a lot, and I think it is already being used to forward the idea that 
people in chronic pain should not have access to relief from their pain.”


Both Maas and Anna articulate worries that chronic pain patients are being 
“thrown under the bus”. Doctor Jerrold Winter, professor of pharmacology and 
toxicology at the University at Buffalo, tends to agree, and is concerned that 
new CDC guidelines and other efforts to address opioid use could actually make 
the situation worse.

“I think [the CDC guidelines] go much too far and a) will leave many in pain 
and b) will drive some seeking pain relief into the illicit market with all its 
hazards,” he says. “Indeed, two NIDA officials recently pointed out that the 
rate of deaths from prescription opiates between 2011 and 2013 were stable 
while heroin-related death rates rose dramatically. I fear that this trend will 
only worsen under the CDC guidelines.”

I take opioids to treat chronic pain. Stigmatizing them will harm me | Sonya 
Huber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/22/chronic-pain-management-medication-opioids-prescription-drug-epidemic>
Gupta points out that the most important tool for addressing addiction is a 
simple conversation: patients need to be open with their care providers, 
working with them on an effective pain management plan and addressing warning 
signs of addiction promptly. Patients experiencing cravings for their 
medication along with symptoms like mood changes, difficulty sleeping, 
oversensitivity to stimuli and increased blood pressure may be exhibiting signs 
of dependence that has transitioned into abuse.

The ability to be open about these symptoms along with concerns about degree 
of dependence on opioid medication will help patients make sound decisions 
about their care.

That requires both clinician and patient education, as well as listening to 
the fears of chronic pain patients like Maas and Ratcliff as they attempt to 
balance chronic pain, fears about forming addictive habits and frustration with 
public perception. Both doctors and patients need to be playing a more 
prominent role in the unfolding conversation about how to deal with a very real 
American public health crisis.
 