
I read of Adrian Mitchell's death in December with the sadness of anyone 
reading of the departure of a member of a fraternity to which both belong. I 
didn't know Adrian - I met him only once, a long time ago - but his presence on 
the poetry scene always made itself felt. I've read two tributes to him; both 
preface their remarks by quoting a well-known sentence of his: "Most people 
ignore most poetry because most poetry ignores most people."

I always have to grit my teeth when I read this and often wonder what Adrian 
himself thought of it. It prefaced his first book of poems, in 1964; he would 
have been in his 30s when he wrote it. Perhaps Adrian still stood by his 
remark; I don't know. At any rate, I do feel once and for all that I have to 
take issue with it, not just because it has been used by popularisers and 
publishers to back up the publication of unworthy material, but because it is 
poison in the well.

The point at issue is this: you cannot speak of a poem "ignoring" its readers 
any more than you can speak of a building "ignoring" its inhabitants. The verb 
"to ignore" requires a human agent. Adrian, of course, uses the word "poetry" 
not "poems", but the reader will be in no doubt that what he had in mind were 
the latter - "constructions of feeling elaborated in words", or however you 
wish to define them.

Ah well, you may say, Adrian was being poetical. He meant, obviously, that most
poets ignore their readers. That can't be true. Take any poet: whatever kind he 
is, whether radically linguistically innovative, motivated by hatred of the 
capitalist system, alert to performance values in poetry, productive of the 
most stunningly nuanced villanelles, obscenely loud, or erudite beyond the wits 
of all - he is driven principally by his need to find readers. His readers 
won't be most readers. They will be - as the marketing men have it - niche 
readers. Quite a small niche. That is the way of it. But the poet will never 
ignore his readers; he loves them. They define his existence. Without them, he 
is writing for his desk drawer.

The verb "to ignore" means, in contemporary usage, "to disregard 
deliberately". When Adrian proposes, therefore, that "most people ignore most 
poetry", I'd say that too is untrue. Everybody encounters - and enjoys - the 
pleasures of rhythmical arrangements of language at some point in their lives. 
Very few people go out and buy books of verse, but that's beside the point. 
It's in the nature of poetry, I think, that people expect it to be free, like 
church admission, or air.

Perhaps Adrian really believed that poetry could make things happen, bring 
about desirable changes in society. I'd be the last to deny that poems express 
the zeitgeist, but as vehicles for social, rather than personal and 
philosophical transformation, they don't seem to me to be effective. Every 
human being in his right mind is against war, rape and torture, but a poem is 
not a placard to be held up at a demonstration. The message of self-conscious 
"protest poetry" tends to be directed at those who are already converted. If, 
at the back of Adrian's mind when he wrote that sentence, a suspicion lingered 
that poets who do not directly deal with problems of war, poverty, disease and 
so forth were somehow dodging the issue, I'd say he was wrong. All poetry is 
protest. And the strongest protest is made by the best poem, which may not 
address such subject matter at all.

Some years ago, I introduced the poet James Fenton at a reading. Through the 
pages of the New Statesman Adrian had just challenged Fenton to a poetry 
speaking bout. There was a photograph of the challenger in boxer shorts, 
pumping up his biceps with a finger. I thought this was hilarious, showed it to 
the audience and asked Fenton, who looked bemused, if he would take up the 
challenge. He didn't. Perhaps the combative (and challenging) tone of Adrian's 
sentence comes from the fact that he believed poetry, or at least some of its 
practitioners, had become too humourlessly self-important. There is always that 
danger. But what would he have said of Yeats, Pound, Eliot, Graves, Auden, 
Thomas, Graham, Larkin? Took themselves too seriously? Ignored most people? I 
don't believe he would.

The fact is, his sentence was a sentence of the moment, of the dismal 60s; it 
has fallen into the hands of the publicists, and the danger is that because few 
people examine what it is really saying (or rather not saying) it has become a 
convenient dagger to plunge into poetry's back. Real poems ignore no one. (They 
cannot.) Real poems bear witness to the long unfolding situation that is the 
present that has been going on forever. They may have been written 50 years 
ago. Or 500. But as Ezra Pound said, they stay news. It may not benew news of 
course, in fact it rarely is. Actually, it usually turns out to be rather old 
news expressed in such a way as to make it unforgettable. That's how the news 
stays that way.
 