
Leicester kicked off their Heineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> campaign with a well-earned 
victory over Aironi but failed to secure a bonus point.

With Clermont Auvergne and Ulster making up the remainder of Pool Four, the 
two-time European champions would have targeted a maximum-points haul in 
northern Italy, but despite dominating the first half they were unable to run 
in the necessary four tries.

Tom Croft and Alesana Tuilagi crossed for tries in a rampant first-half 
display butLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> took 
their foot off the gas after the interval and it was not until the 80th minute 
that Niall Morris crossed for their third try.

It is 10 seasons since Leicester won back-to-back Heineken Cup titles and they 
enter their latest assault on Europe following a dismal start to their domestic 
campaign. Hit by an excess of injuries and international call-ups during the 
World Cup Leicester won two of their opening eight Premiership games.

After throwing away a 17-point lead against London Irish last week their 
England fly-half Toby Flood admitted the Tigers let the down head coach, 
Richard Cockerill, and called on his team-mates to make amends here.

Cockerill made three changes to his side with Horacio Agulla the latest to 
join an extensive injury list that also includes Ben Youngs, Jordan Crane, 
Anthony Allen, Manu Tuilagi and Billy Twelvetrees.

Leicester were more than aware of the threat Aironi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aironi> pose after they caused the biggest 
upset of last year's competition with a 28-27 victory over Biarritz, but they 
got off to a flying start at Stadio Brianteo in Monza . The visitors surged 
into a 13-0 lead within 15 minutes thanks to a pair of quick-fire penalties 
from Flood and a try from Croft.

With Sinoti Sinoti in the sin-bin Leicester stretched the hosts either way and 
after working the overlap Alesana Tuilagi released Croft to squeeze in for a 
converted try.

Cockerill's side continued to threaten in attack and they scored a second try 
after 25 minutes when Tuilagi took a short ball off Flood and crashed over.

The England fly-half converted to take the score to 20-0 but Aironi quickly 
hit back with a penalty. They continued their resurgence with a second Orquera 
penalty on 33 minutes to bring the scores to 20-6 at the break.

Flood struck the uprights within two minutes of the restart but he made no 
mistake three minutes later to stretch Leicester's lead to 23-6. Orquera 
quickly struck back with his third penalty and following sustained pressure he 
slotted another on 68 minutes to make it 23-12.

That appeared to rouse the Tigers and they should have grabbed their third try 
on 72 minutes but the unmarked Tuilagi failed to hold on to Matt Smith's wild 
pass.

Leicester continued to hammer away at the hosts but could not break the 
unforgiving defence until it was too late. Following some strong carrying by 
Thomas Waldrom, the visitors worked the overlap and their captain, Geordan 
Murphy, threw a pinpoint miss pass to fellow Irishman Morris for a touchdown in 
the corner.
 