
Baron Ashcroft, the Conservative peer, is selling his Watford shares to 
Laurence Bassini, the owner ofWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> FC Limited, a recently formed 
shell company. WFCL will take control of the Championship club through a 53.95% 
stake after Ashcroft, Graham Simpson and Yianna Simpson agreed to sell their 
shares for about £450,000 last week. Yet Bassini is not a registered 
shareholder of WFCL. Instead the Highgate-based knee surgeon Panos Thomas, who 
is, will hold the shares on trust for Bassini. Why, how and where those shares 
will be held for Bassini are not explained.

Much about Bassini's business past has been inscrutable. He has admitted to 
the Watford Observer to having been declared bankrupt "for about a year" from 
2007, and temporarily claimed benefits. This led to him changing his name from 
Laurence, or Lawrence (which he had also used), Bazini. "Businessmen have their 
highs and lows," he said. It is hard to discover Bassini's highs.

Digger has found 12 companies where he has served as a director. One, which he 
founded alongside others in 1995, still trades but he left its board in 1996. 
Another was struck off in 2000, four years after its incorporation, having 
shown a deficit of £19,372 in the only accounts it ever filed. The other 10, 
apparently mostly retail and restaurant companies ("Dancing Divas", anyone?), 
were struck off without ever filing accounts.

Bassini has suggested he has previously received financial help from his "very 
wealthy" family, which includes a barrister brother. Digger contacted this 
brother, who refused to corroborate or deny this claim. Digger also called 
Thomas to ask about his new business partner and why there was a need for 
WFCL's convoluted share structures. He also refused to comment.

So Watford will receive a "£3.5m working capital facility" (or loan) from a 
man whose wherewithal is impossible to gauge. But the money is not his own. 
WFCL's spokesman told Digger "he has access to sufficient funds" but "has no 
obligation to disclose his backers". That is not good enough.

Saddlers' pension pot 

Jeff Bonser, the Walsall chairman, has his pension with Suffolk Life, as 
discussed here on Wednesday, and Suffolk Life is described byWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> as their "landlord". It holds 
commercial property on behalf of clients' pension funds. Bonser retains control 
over the asset inasmuch as it is by his instruction that Suffolk Life has put 
the ground on the open market for sale. The Bescot Stadium site could very well 
now end up in the hands of someone with no connection to the club or community.

It seems a terrible shame that Bonser, who has run a tight ship at Walsall for 
so many years, has not reunited the club with its property assets rather than 
selling them as separate entities. In the seven full seasons since the ground 
was transferred to Suffolk Life, Walsall have made a cumulative trading loss of 
£322,000. Over that time they have paid their "landlord" (ie Suffolk Life's 
shareholders or Bonser's pension; take your pick) almost £2.5m in rent. It 
seems the club and stadium have been pretty good to their owners and it would 
be a pity to disadvantage Walsall now.

Loan danger 

It is difficult to disagree with any proposal from Lord Burns for football – 
unless you are a Football Association stakeholder. His Burns report had modest 
aims and even they were rejected by the FA's reactionary grass roots. Yet even 
now he continues with his sensible suggestions for the game. On Thursday Digger 
attended an event held by the liberal thinktank CentreForum at which Burns 
advanced another idea: ending the practice of directors' loans to clubs. Almost 
all recent club failures have been preceded by vast sums injected by directors; 
eventually the clubs rely on such props, which are invariably withdrawn, and 
clubs can find they are dangerously stretched. Burns is bang on again.

Power cut for ex-Sky duo

Andy Gray's loss is Andy Townsend's and Garth Crooks's gain. E.On has called 
the ITV and BBC pundits off the bench to replace the former Sky anchor for its 
FA Cup-based radio ads as a result of the unseemly events that led to Gray 
leaving Sky. So now we have an odd situation whereby TalkSport has seen ads 
featuring Gray, its star new signing, forcibly withdrawn.

Follow Matt Scott on Twitter: @diggermattscott 
<https://twitter.com/diggermattscott>

• This article was amended on 18 March 2011 to remove a reference to Richard 
Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> featuring in E.On 
advertisements. E.On say the voice in the ads is not his, but that of an actor.
 