
My first thought when I heard about the shooting of Alton Sterling last 
Tuesday was:OK, here we are again. Then after reading about the killing of 
Philando Castile the next day, and the shooting of police at a Black Lives 
Matter protest in Dallas the day after, the domino effect of violence left me 
paralyzed. I felt in my heart it was time to put something out there and call 
on my fellow athletes to band together. I had to say something. I just didn’t 
know what.

Every time something like this happens, people rush online to Twitter and 
Instagram to share their opinions. Everybody says the same thing but we never 
get anywhere. At first I wasn’t going to post anything because I wanted to get 
all the information first. I slept on it overnight and woke up in the middle of 
the morning to a nagging voice:What am I going to say? I didn’t want it to be 
the same things as everybody else: #AltonSterling, #PhilandoCastile, 
#DallasPoliceShooting. WhenI chose to speak out 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BHmtRkehDV8/>, it was a matter of being honest, 
speaking from the heart about what’s going on and calling on my colleagues to 
step up, get out there and put pressure on the people in charge to not let this 
happen anymore. No more hashtags.

Do athletes have a responsibility to stand up? I don’t want to put it all on 
athletes. I believe all people need to rise up and make their voices heard. But 
I do think that athletes have the biggest reach, especially now with social 
media and all the people that follow us. We have one of the biggest platforms 
to speak out, one where people pay attention to what we have to say, whether 
it’s everyday civilians or those in positions of power. We have that influence. 
It’s just a matter of if we want to use it or not. Everybody uses it for 
different reasons. But at a time like this, you have to put aside the politics 
of business and whether a sponsor or somebody from a company that you represent 
is going to call you about it. If you’re a human being, this affects everybody.

Whether you’re the CEO of a Fortune 500 company or you’re a mailman or you’re 
homeless, this affects you. No athlete should think:If I speak up, I’m going to 
lose an endorsement or a sponsorship. Because if that’s the case then you have 
to question the kind of people that you’re doing business with and ask yourself 
where their heads and morals are at.

Barack Obama calls for peace at Dallas memorial service for five police 
officers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/obama-dallas-memorial-five-officers-killed-protest-shooting>
So what next? I don’t have the answer. Nobody does. But what we can do is 
start bring a continuous awareness and keep this conversation going. We can’t 
keep riding on this merry-go-round where tragedy happens, it’s all over TV and 
social media, everybody talks about it, then in three and four days it’s over 
with.

In three weeks I’ll travel to Rio with the United States’ Olympic team to 
perform on a global stage. I haven’t spoken with my team-mates yet about the 
opportunity before us and how we can take advantage of it, because at the end 
of the day I want it to be genuine. If you don’t feel like you want to make a 
statement or make a stand, then don’t do it. You shouldn’t feel forced to do 
it. You have towant to do that. For me, I do feel like this is a platform where 
we should – we as athletes, we as Americans – use it for something. Whether we 
make a statement out there or send a message, we can show the world that we’re 
united. Whatever way we want to do it, this is a chance to do something 
meaningful before an audience of billions. I don’t know what that something is 
yet, but we still have time to figure it out.

But how can we make a change back home? You can start off small. If everybody 
just focuses on their own community, then we’re making progress. We can’t try 
to solve all the issues at once. We’ve just got to zero in on our own 
individual communities and once we build that up and that becomes stronger, 
then I think everything will settle down and be cool again. There needs to be a 
mutual respect from both sides: between the police officers and the people in 
the streets. We have to reintroduce that respect factor into our local 
communities because there’s no respect from either side anymore.

We all know our history, especially when it comes to sports and activism. We 
know Ali. We know Jim Brown. We know Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. But over the years as 
athletes started making more money, they started thinking:I don’t want people 
to talk bad about me for talking politics. But this is not really about 
politics. There’s nothing political about taking a stand and speaking on what 
you believe in. The teams and the support systems around athletes urge them to 
stay away from politics, stay away from religion, stay away from this, stay 
away from that. But at certain times you’ve just got to put all of that aside 
and be a human being. That time is now.
 