
Dressing girls in pink is wrong, says Hannah Webster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/04/here-come-the-pre-teen-feminists>
, a spokesperson for the Independent Association of Prep Schools. Colour-coding 
children in this way reinforces gender stereotypes, she says – and she is 
right, of course. Every culture has ideas about what is feminine and what is 
masculine. Those ideas, though, diminish us as individuals because no one fits, 
nor should they be made to think they have to fit, such a rigid mould. That is 
the very reason I would never choose to dress my girls in pink. Yet, almost 
every day, theyare dressed in pink.

Other progressive parents might look at me judgmentally when we walk the 
streets of our neighbourhood, but I refuse to be bothered. I stand by my 
daughters' choices. I let them wear pink because, as a proponent of children's 
freedom, I think it is important that they be allowed to make decisions in 
their own lives as much as possible.

My youngest daughter, Sasha, who is five years old, will wear nothing but 
pink. She loves being a girl and everything that is associated with it. It 
gives her an important sense of identity, and I must respect that. But I have 
to admit that the identity Sasha is discovering is one that on a deeper level 
I'm not entirely comfortable with. When she entered her princess period about a 
year ago, I asked her what princesses are good at. She answered: "Running fast 
and jumping high!"

Many princess movies, books and dolls later, I posed the same question and her 
answer was: "Dressing fancy!" "What else do you think?" I asked. "Um, making 
shoes?" Sasha has yet to learn that most real princesses would rather buy 
tremendously expensive Italian-made footwear from sparsely decorated stores. 
Hopefully, once her princess phase is over she will adopt role models for other 
reasons than their skills at picking out flattering clothes.

Some might ask: can't we keep pink and blue and fill them with different 
meaning, and in that way expand what it means to be a girl or a boy? Well, 
there is a trend in the toy industry that attempts to do this, taking areas of 
play traditionally reserved for boys and marketing them to girls, and to a 
lesser degree the other way around. Sometimes the motivations for these 
endeavors are purely financial. One toy currently on store shelves is a foam 
dart-blasting pink gun that aims to raise girls' interest in shooting 
projectiles at their friends: something boys have done for decades with 
similar, non-pink proto-weapons.

Other efforts are more noble in their intentions. One example is a pinkish 
construction set designed with the purpose of getting girls more interested in 
technology. The set comes with a story about a girl who helps save her animal 
friends from boredom by making them spin on top of different technical 
contraptions.

While the pink gun is clearly a step backwards, the pink construction set is 
more of a mixed bag. On one hand, it encourages some girls to discover a new 
area of play. But on the other hand, it tells girls: "Only a pink toy is for 
you; all these other non-pastel coloured construction toys, not so much." It 
says to girls that they need a story about a kid and her cute animals to enjoy 
construction play, and it is also unfair to boys who feel attracted to this 
more humanistic approach to technology. No matter how entertaining the 
accompanying story might be, most boys wouldn't risk their social status by 
being seen playing with a pink toy.

Ultimately, the problem is that it is impossible to make a product solely 
directed at either girls or boys without excluding the other group. The harder 
you try, the harder you fail. It is for this reason that the company I helped 
found, Toca Boca, never markets any of its apps to one gender over another, 
regardless of subject matter.
 Toca Boca's Hair Salon Me 
Here is an example: we have an app, Toca Hair Salon, where kids can cut 
people's hair. We chose to make the customers women and men, because the simple 
reality of life is that both women and men need to get their hair cut. To our 
knowledge, male hairdressers enjoy their work just as much as their female 
counterparts, so the app is not pink because we want boys who are interested in 
haircuts, beards and moustaches to feel this digital toy is just as much for 
them.

We applied the same logic when we created apps that are themed around cars, 
cooking and hospital visits, because we welcome future racing-car drivers, 
chefs and physicians of any gender. If you look at the top of the charts in the 
children's sections of any app store, you will see that our approach works: 
Toca Boca's apps have been downloaded more than 65m times.

As for my girls, I trust that in a couple of years they will return from the 
pink path they are on, once they discover that it is a dead end. The toy 
industry, however, will probably need a decade or two more before it realises 
what insurmountable barriers it has set for itself, and, more importantly, how 
they limit children's freedom.

• Jens Peter de Pedro is a play designer at tocaboca.com <http://tocaboca.com/>
.
 