
Few people in Britain can have failed to rejoice at the deportation of Abu 
Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> to Jordan. He was a 
threat to this country, and it was right to remove him. Full marks to Theresa 
May for the painstaking approach she took that enabled him finally to be 
deported after eight years of trying but without breaching the international 
law to which the UK has signed up. I agree with her, too, that there is 
something wrong with a system that takes so long to achieve its aim and at 
enormous cost to the taxpayer. But I don't agree with the general lesson which
she is reported to have learned from this episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/08/theresa-may-human-rights-abu-qatada>
: that we should consider withdrawing from the European convention on human 
rights.

Most of us in Britain live our day-to-day lives without coming into contact 
with the law. But then you are knocked down by a car, your bag is stolen, or a 
simple operation goes wrong; at that point we expect the courts to step in to 
right the wrong that has been done. We expect and receive a fair and impartial 
arbiter of such disputes funded by the state.

But what if the wrongdoer is the state itself? What if the dispute is not 
between two individuals but between the state on the one hand, whether as 
central or local government, and an individual or organisation on the other? 
Who decides then what the rules are and who enforces them?

It's entirely understandable, due to the high media profile given to such 
cases, to think that human rights are just for the benefit of murderers, 
rapists, terrorists and failed asylum seekers. It's not surprising that people 
then ask why we need the concept of human rights at all. And why don't we have 
the right to decide as a state when to deport an undesirable person, or whether 
we lock people up for ever? Why it is that a European court should make that 
decision?

Concentrating on such cases paints a distorting picture. Ordinary members of 
the public need the protection of human rights legislation too. Take Mark 
Neary, who his autistic son back home after successfully arguing that his son's 
right to freedom and family life underArticle 8 of the convention 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Convention_on_Human_Rights&action=edit&section=11>
 was being breached by Hillingdon council, which was holding him in a care 
home. Or the young man in "T v Chief Constable of Manchester", cautioned when 
he was 12 for a minor offence he did not commit. Years later he wanted to 
become a PE teacher and found that he could not get a job because he was 
subject to an enhanced criminal records check, covering not just actual 
convictions but also any accusations of offences resulting in a caution. He was 
able successfully to challenge the law using Article 8, which protected his 
right to privacy. How many parents wouldn't want their child to be afforded 
that protection?

And for the children in Z v UK, whose abuse and neglect by their parents was 
overlooked for years by the social services departments who were supposed to be 
protecting them, Article 3 was a means by which the negligent local authorities 
were held liable to pay them damages and the overall law changed to make such 
neglect less likely to happen in the future.

Or look at what has been happening in Ireland this week, where, after a long 
battle, the abortion laws have been clarified. The immediate cause for that was 
the public outrage at the tragic and preventable death ofdentistSavita 
Halappanavar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/19/savita-halappanavar-medical-misadventure-inquest>
, who died in a Galway hospital from complications after a termination of her 
pregnancy was delayed. But there was another, less-publicised reason. The Irish 
government was obliged to clarify the law because two years earlier, in a case 
involving a different Irish woman, the European court had held that the lack of 
clarity in Irish law of when a termination was permissible to save the life of 
the mother, was a breach of her human rights, as she had a rare form of cancer 
and feared it would relapse if she became unintentionally pregnant.

These are but two examples of the real, individual impact of human rights 
which are rarely reported.

But I would also defend the rights of those whose behaviour I might abhor to a 
fair trial, and to the protection of the convention – even if that's not what 
they would offer me. I may disagree, and I often do, with the judgments made by 
the European court, but I support absolutely its right to make them. Like the 
NHS, it is there to serve everyone, deserving or at times less deserving.

None of the decisions of the court about prisoners, including the most recent 
one on whole-life tariffs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-23245254>, prevents the 
government protecting the public – indeed the same human rights legislation 
also requires the state to protect us from serious crime. The court simply 
ruled that the cases must be reviewed after they've served 25 years in prison.

The concerns about long delays and constant appeals in the Abu Qatada case 
could be addressed by streamlining the appeal process. At the moment, once the 
courts have declared a piece of legislation incompatible with theHuman Rights 
Act <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> there is a fast track 
for parliament to change the law. Why not fast-track any appeals challenging 
those legislative changes straight to the court that overturned the original 
law, and so avoid the long and costly climb back through the high court and the 
appeal courts, which so contributed to the delays in the Abu Qatada case?

Respect for human rights is part of Britain's DNA. It was why, at the end of 
the second world war, when disrespect for human rights had devastated our 
continent, Europe looked to politicians like Churchill and to British lawyers 
to help shape and bring into being the European convention on human rights. To 
turn our backs on that legacy now would be a denial of their efforts, which 
have served us well over the last 60 years.

Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> are indivisible 
and universal. They are the most integral part of you, as a human being. They 
are the last (or first) line of defence between the individual and the state, 
and they need defending. You might not think you need them now, but you may 
just miss them if they're gone.
 