
The great contest of the cuts has begun. Whose axe is biggest? Fastest slasher 
takes all. If that is the electoral battleground, then all is lost. Only by 
shifting the argument altogether and changing the language of debate can sanity 
prevail.

No sign of it so far, as Ed Balls swings his mallet first with an incredible – 
yes, I mean literally unbelievable – promise to cut £2bn from schools by axing 
heads and deputy heads, often the best school talent around. It's to be done by 
that magician, "natural wastage", a wish-think we will hear much of. That's 
a bad start, but all too typical of what will happen in this disastrous 
anything–you-can-cut-I-can-cut-better gladiator fight.

For the truth is that cutting well is even harder than spending well. Those of 
us who have lived through savage cuts before know how it's done: there is 
rarely time for a rethink, let alone a re-organisation or rationalisation. 
Assuming a near-certain Tory win, straight after Osborne's emergency June 
budget, local managers will be told to cut a set sum by a set date – fast. 
(Devolution is very handy in hard times.) So what goes?

First, cut the more junior staff, usually on the frontline, because sacking 
senior people is too expensive with their pricey redundo. That means sacking 
more people, as each junior makes less saving. Then cut any outside contracts 
ASAP because it's easier, even if the contracted-out service is essential and 
efficient. Stop any building repairs: we are returning to a long age of public 
squalor. Stop anything preventive: chiropody services are cut quicker than you 
can say bunion, though it makes old people immobile and soon in need of much 
more expensive care services. Cut other home care that keeps them independent: 
no one can see those. But beware of axing highly visible, if less useful, 
hospital treatments, because patient groups and hospital consultants make most 
fuss. Noise counts most.

Drug treatments for addicts can be cut as they have no voice: if crime rises, 
it's not my budget, guv. A&E gets clogged again – forget the four-hour rule – 
as other preventive community services shut. Bed blockers fill acute wards 
again for lack of services to take them back into the community. One service's 
cut is another's added pressure: forget "partnership working" as everyone 
clutches the shrinking budget in their silo. There is no time for health, 
social care, local authority, police and all the rest to work out how best to 
pool dwindling resources. School welfare and school nursing work will vanish, 
more kids in trouble, more antisocial behaviour – but that's not on the 
school's budget. Sharing is for lush times – in the panic of cuts it's every 
service for itself.

So what would good rationalisation look like? Take education. First, reduce 
its objectives to a basic three: educate everyone to the highest level; educate 
the top brains – the scientists, engineers and ideas generators of the future; 
use every resource to redress the damage done by destructive social backgrounds.

Then ask, where is the best bang for every education buck? Ask why it is we 
spend most where it's least use, and least where lives can still be 
transformed? Early years matter most, the younger the better for children at 
risk of failing. Primary schooling is already remedial, but can still change 
lives. Secondary schooling is mostly already too late, while university adds 
least to life chances. So why do we spend 50% more a head on undergraduates 
than on primary schoolers, and even less on under-5s?

Good reordering would radically reduce the inexplicable cost of university 
degrees; make most courses two intensive years somewhere close to home, wasting 
no more on hotel costs for two-bedroom students. (Research money and MAs for 
top brains come from a different budget already). Channel university savings 
into intensive one-to-one help for the youngest: once every seven-year-old can 
read, write and add up, the rest of education is easy. Everything else becomes 
cheaper too, since prisons and social services are peopled with the illiterate 
and helpless.

That's what clever cuts might look like – creative, productive, purposeful. 
But don't hold your breath. Great headline-grabbing axes don't do wise and 
thoughtful.

Have your say at theguardian.com/anewpublicservices – the best responses will 
be published in the paper next Wednesday
 