
First things first: the best team won. Many, including myself, dismissed 
Egypt's chances of defending their crown because of a ropey qualifying campaign 
and having lost a number of important players from their 2006 squad. But the 
Pharaohs showed that their domestic league continues to cultivate quality 
footballers, and top European clubs are surely now mulling moves for the likes 
of Mohamed Aboutrika, Hosny Abd Rabou and Wael Gomaa.

The stirring football and adventurous tactics made this the most prolific 
African Cup of Nations ever in terms of goals and the most enjoyable football 
spectacle since Euro 2000 - despite many of the billboard names failing to 
justify the hype. El Hadji Diouf was symbolic of a disgracefully disappointing 
Senegal side, John Utaka didn't turn up, Frederic Kanoute and Kolo Toure 
appeared to be hampered by injuries, and Didier Drogba and Samuel Eto'o - 
despite being top scorer - wavered between dynamic commitment and showbiz 
strops.

In their place, less familiar names emerged such as Angola winger Ze Kalanga 
and the country's striking duo of Flavio and Manucho; Zambia midfielder Felix 
Katongo; tricky Guinean Souleymane Youla; several slick South Africans; 
Alexandre Song - the wise-passing teenager at the heart of Cameroon's midfield; 
and Frederic Mendy, perhaps the only Senegalese to emerge from the tournament 
with his reputation enhanced.

But individuals don't win tournaments: teams do. And managers make teams. 
Hasan Shehata stuck with the 3-5-2 formation he used in 2006 and didn't bend it 
to suit one star individual. He memorably shouted Mido down two years ago, and 
this time around Shehata kept the gifted but self-indulgent Mohamed Zidan on a 
tight leash, ensuring he wrought the best possible performances from the 
striker. No manager came up with a way of disrupting Egypt's flow or stifling 
their creativity.

Just as Egypt's players should be sought after, so too should their manager. 
But I can't think of any top flight European club that has ever put an African 
in the managerial seat (apart from Pape Diouf at Marseille on a caretaker 
basis). There are rumours that Benfica are about to become the first by hiring 
Luis Goncalves, who has worked wonders with Angola. Shehata should surely be 
wooed too.

Of course, it's not just Europeans who are reluctant to hire African managers 
- African teams are too. Only four of the 16 countries competing in the Cup of 
Nations were run by Africans. Cameroon, Benin and Namibia all qualified for the 
tournament with African managers and then immediately replaced them so that 
they arrived at the finals with Europeans in charge. In fairness to Namibia, 
Ben Bamfuchile would almost certainly have remained in charge had he not 
stepped down in December due to an illness that ultimately took his life two 
weeks before the tournament kicked off - but still, could no other Namibian 
have replaced him? Why the obsession with European coaches?

I've put that question to hundreds of African players, administrators, 
journalists and fans over many years and I always get the same answers.

1. No African has experienced of managing clubs at the top level, such as in 
the Champions League - therefore an African manager would not know how to 
handle, nor get respect from, the likes of Michael Essien, Nwankwo Kanu, etc. 
But surely that would depend on the manager? If he had the charisma and 
knowledge of a leader then he would convince his charges to follow, just as 
Jose Mourinho, Gerard Houllier and others did when they came into the game with 
backgrounds in translation, teaching and so on. Furthermore, what Champions 
League experience do the likes of Claude Le Roy, Otto Pfister, Reinhard Fabisch 
and Arie Schans have?

2. There is so much suspicion between ethnic groups in many African countries 
that only a European, who's perceived as being neutral, can effectively manage 
in many of them. According to this logic, the Super Eagles shouldn't be managed 
by, say, a Yoruba because he will be biased towards Yoruba players. This is a 
troubling logic because it invites a follow-up question along the lines of, "if 
you can't trust Nigerians to manage the national football team fairly, how can 
you trust them to manage anything else fairly? Should a European be hired to 
take over the country's presidency too?" It's not a popular line of argument. 
Except in football, for some reason.

3. Local coaches would be more corruptible than Europeans because the FAs 
don't pay them as much. I remember telling Festus Onigbende, the Nigeria 
manager at the 2002 World Cup, that this was a common reply to my question. He 
shook his head, said he'd often heard it too and declared: "If that's the case, 
shouldn't we demand not that our FAs hire European managers but that they give 
equal pay to Africans?"

Ghana have won the African Cup of Nations four times, each time with a 
Ghanaian at the helm. Fred Osam-Duodu, now in charge of Ghana's U-17 team the 
Black Starlets, won it in 1982. "Yet now they keep giving the job to Europeans 
even though only Africans have been successful at it," he lamented when I 
bumped into him after yesterday's final. "If they don't think Africans are good 
enough any more, they should do something about it - if they can find 40,000 
dollars a month to pay European coaches, then they can also find money to 
nurture local coaches. The Ghanaian FA, for example, should be paying for local 
coaches to do Uefa badges and other such courses abroad to complement their 
local knowledge. That's the next step for African football."
 