
Herman Carnie and Charles Meng are on the front lines of poverty in America. 
They direct food banks that serve thousands of families each week. Charles Meng 
heads theArlington Food Assistance Center 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=f&rct=j&url=http://www.afac.org/&q=&esrc=s&ei=nrNdUrOaDZCY0QWS34HwCQ&usg=AFQjCNGtU3LImbkZ2GJWxN53W0vZxgcFrA>
 in a suburb of Washington, and Herman Carnie is director of food acquisition 
at the Greater Chicago Food Depository 
<http://www.chicagosfoodbank.org/site/PageServer>. They are opening up today 
about their typical work day, the people they serve and how what happens in 
Washington can impact America's poor.Post questions below in the comments and 
they will check back later in the day.

Do you have a story? Help us report on America's food banks. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/oct/15/help-us-report-on-americas-food-banks>

1. What's your typical day like? 

Charles Meng (Arlington, Virginia): The typical day starts with our drivers 
picking up perishable and non-perishable food donations from the various 
grocery stores, bakeries and specialty stores which are delivered back to the 
Arlington Food Assistance Center warehouse. Our daily distribution begins with 
the arrival of our volunteer team to stock our shelves, sort donations that 
arrived overnight and assist our families in choosing the foods they need. 
While distribution begins at 9:30am, a line has normally formed by 8AM. Our 
mornings are very busy while the afternoon brings more individual and team 
volunteers to repackage produce and other foods that we buy in bulk, rice 
beans, and oatmeal. For example, every Wednesday night our chicken bagging team 
repackages bulk cases of chicken into 3 lb packages. Another dedicated 
volunteer team picks up food donations from the two nearby and very generous 
Trader Joe's grocery stores.

Herman Carnie (Chicago): No two days are the same. I'm responsible for 
managing our food sourcing, inventory and transportation teams. Our facility is 
a 268,000 square-foot warehouse and distribution center located on Chicago's 
southwest side. It's a massive effort across the board for our organization to 
run smoothly. I arrive at 5:30am when the building opens and attend a 6am 
meeting where we review routes and assignments with our truck drivers. From 
that point forward my focus is on sourcing food and managing inventory.

Donations are the primary way we receive food. Shelf-stable food donations 
have dwindled in recent years, so we make a concerted effort to contact food 
manufacturers. If we get a call that there's a truckload in Cook County, we 
make plans to get the food. A phone call can change your day. We manage our 
inventory across 18 core food categories. If we're short on any item, we look 
to purchase. Healthy options are the biggest thing. It's a balancing act – we 
provide food for children so we're looking for nutritious items that kids will 
enjoy. At the same time, we also serve older adults, so foods that are easy to 
open and prepare are a necessity.

2. How many people does your food bank typically help?

Charles Meng: Currently we are serving 1,517 families each week – that is 
3,531 individuals, a third of whom are children under the age of 18. At the 
start of the recession, we were serving about 650 families each week. At our 
peak in February, 2012 we were serving 1,707 families each week – an increase 
of 262%.

Herman Carnie: We provide food through a network of 650 pantries, soup 
kitchens and shelters. In the community we serve, more than 860,000 people are 
food insecure. This means 1 in 6 people is unsure where their next meal will 
come from. People are hungry all year-round. I volunteer every month at a 
pantry, and I see that many of the other people volunteering are now in line 
for food, too – they need the support. More people are in need of work.

3. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while 
on the job?

Charles Meng: A local women suggested, in all seriousness, that we find 
hunters who could kill and dress the deer foraging in her backyard so that we 
could serve it to our families. I referred her to the local animal welfare 
league.

Herman Carnie: Four years ago, a donor came up with the idea of planting 20 
acres of sweet corn to give to us. In the first year, we harvested 71,366 
pounds of corn with the help of a farmer and our volunteers. We've now added 
five acres of squash, and have harvested more than 625,000 pounds of food 
total. In a few hours the corn and squash goes from the field into the hands of 
people in need.

4. What do you wish politicians and more of the public would understand about 
poverty and hunger in America?

Herman Carnie: Any cut to programs affects people in a huge way, especially 
with SNAP (food stamps). We can't fill that gap, and the need won't go away. 
Every food stream that we have now will be tapped to a higher level. We have a 
team that helps to sign people up for SNAP. It's hard-working people who are 
just trying to make ends meet. There actually are a lot of people who are 
eligible for SNAP who don't know it's available. A lot of it is tied to red 
tape.

Charles Meng: Hunger has a pernicious effect on all who suffer from it – 
children go to school hungry cannot focus on their studies as they need to, the 
elderly skip meals or go to the local fast food establishment where everything 
is high salt, high fat and high sugar, parents must work two and three jobs 
just to make ends meet but they never do meet, and pregnant mothers who do not 
have the resources to feed themselves and their growing child. The effects are 
a huge burden carried by our schools, our medical care system and our economy 
through higher costs, service demands and in numerous other smaller and larger 
ways.

5. What makes for a really good day on the job? 

Charles Meng: The best part of my job is being thanked by our grateful 
clients. And, it is not frequently on the job but rather on the street, or in a 
store where a cashier will stop me and say "thanks for what you do".

Herman Carnie: Our team volunteers in the community a few times each year. 
This is an opportunity for us to see how grateful they are for the food they 
receive. It pulls it all together.

6. Has the shutdown had an impact on your organization or the people you serve?

Charles Meng: In the last two weeks of September, we saw an increase of 96 
families. We cannot tell yet if this is just because of the change in seasons 
or attributable to the government shutdown. However, while we are serving 1,500 
families each week, we have over 2,500 active referrals, which means that any 
economic change, whether it be gas and food prices or a shutdown, will cause 
more families to come to us for help rather quickly.

Herman Carnie: Not yet, but the shutdown could affect the people we serve if 
it doesn't end soon. We often ask ourselves: how do we continue to fill the 
widening gap.

7. What do you think will happen when food stamp benefits are reduced 
<http://www.cbpp.org/cms/?fa=view&id=3899> on 1 November?

Charles Meng:  Any reduction will drive more families to come to AFAC for 
help. Here in Arlington the average SNAP benefit is $28.21 a week ($4 a day). 
That is not much for a family of four to live on. We provide supplemental 
groceries – fresh fruit and vegetables, mike, eggs, chicken, fish, a number of 
staples, cereals and an assortment of canned goods.
 