
Week by week, the Egyptian authorities are jailing journalists. The latest to 
be sentenced is a photographer, Ali Abdeen, who works for the news website 
El-Fagr.

He got two years, according to his outlet, for inciting illegal protests, 
obstructing traffic and that catch-all offence known as “publishing false news.”

Abdeen, also known as Ali Beka, was arrested in Cairo on 25 April while 
attempting to cover protests against an Egyptian government deal to hand 
control of two Red Sea islands to Saudi Arabia.

El-Fagr colleagues presented testimony to the court on 14 May that Abdeen was 
on assignment at the time of his arrest. It made no difference. He was sent to 
jail immediately, although an appeal will be heard on Saturday (21 May).

At least 33 journalists were detained on the same day as Abdeen. Most were 
released. But a group called Journalists Against Torture Observatory, said it 
documented 97 violations against journalists, including 46 detentions, 16 
beatings and 10 cases of equipment being confiscated.

“The Egyptian authorities insist on punishing the press for merely reporting 
the news while denying, with a straight face, that journalism is the reason for 
these arrests,” said the Committee to Protect Journalists’Middle East and North 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast> programme coordinator, 
Sherif Mansour.


In a separate development, at a meeting of the UN security council on 11 May, 
Egypt’s foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, denied that journalists were being 
arrested arbitrarily.

He told the meeting: “Anyone who has been imprisoned has been imprisoned for 
having circumvented laws or having perpetrated violent activities.”


Shoukry said journalists who had protested against a raid by authorities on 
the Egyptian Journalists’ Syndicate in Cairo earlier this month were 
“harbouring” people who were urging the assassination of Egypt’s president,
Abdel Fatah al-Sisi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>.


In response, two lawyers who are representing two jailed Yanair news website 
journalists, Amr Badr and Mahmoud al-Sakka, pointed out that the journalists 
had not been accused of inciting such as assassination.


Badr and al-Sakka were ordered to be detained for 15 days after being arrested 
on 2 May for allegedly inciting protests, attempting to overthrow the regime, 
and “broadcasting false news with the aim of disturbing public peace.”

 The journalists, who were staging a sit-in protest at the time of their 
arrest, deny the accusations. At a hearing on 14 May, a criminal court renewed 
their detention for 15 more days.


Source: CPJ 
<https://cpj.org/2016/05/journalist-covering-protests-in-egypt-jailed-for-t.php>
 