
If the British think about their tax collectors with anything other than 
resentment, they imagine them to be a tedious collection of men and women. 
Hearing ofDave Hartnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/nov/14/vodafone-tax-evasion-revenue-customs>
, Her Majesty's permanent secretary for tax, they might picture a fastidious 
and humourless bureaucrat returning every day to a home counties commuter town.

He would kiss his wife, but not too passionately, engage in an appropriate 
hobby for a Revenue officer – building a model railway, maintaining the 
herbaceous border – have one glass of wine with his dinner and go to bed.
Newsnight would provide the greatest excitement in his life.

Dave Hartnett's ominous achievement is to make the Revenue interesting. The 
record of his socialising with the City institutions he is meant to tax is 
exhausting in itself. Lunch at BDO Stoy Hayward; drinks reception at Deloitte; 
dinner at KPMG; a spot of breakfast atJP Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> Cazenove; followed by yet more 
backslapping and hail-fellow-well-metting through 107 City breakfasts, lunches 
and dinners in the space of two years.

The best that MPs on the Commons Public Accounts Committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-archive/committee-of-public-accounts/>
 can say is that they do not believe that Hartnett is corrupt. They have 
accused him of "lying" to Parliament and "ripping off" the taxpayer. They have 
told him that he has given probably the most rapacious and unscrupulous 
investment bank on the planet a sweetheart deal the Revenue would never grant 
to "a small business that is hounded and punished for interest payments", and 
dismissed his explanations as "laughable". But they do not believe he is on the 
take.

They believe he is suffering from delusions of grandeur.

Go back before the crash of 2008 and remind yourself how politicians, 
bureaucrats and journalists treated high finance. Not one of the media 
organisations that covered business – not theWall Street Journal, Bloomberg 
News, theEconomist, Forbes, Fortune or the Financial Times – warned of the 
coming crisis or campaigned to reform banking before it was too late.

A couple of columnists, most notably Allan Sloan of Fortune and Gillian Tett 
of theFT, served their readers well, but their editors and colleagues stayed 
silent when speaking out might have made a difference. Meanwhile, a Labour 
government, nominally committed to defending the many, not the few, knighted 
dangerous men who were leading their banks to ruin – Fred Goodwin at RBS and 
James Crosby at HBOS – and somehow found a way to turn Alan Greenspan, who had 
pumped up the greatest bubble in the history of capitalism, into "Sir"Alan 
Greenspan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan>, even though as 
an American citizen he made an unlikely knight of the realm. Meanwhile, 
regulators in Britain, America and beyond did not produce one worthwhile 
investigation or seek to do their duty and protect their countries.

In all the explanations for the failure of the watchdogs of democratic 
societies, one should not underestimate the seductions of power-worship. 
Confronted with financiers who appeared to have mastered the mysteries of 
globalisation, regulators wanted to be their friends and hoped that the princes 
of the investment banks would treat them as their equals, if only for a while. 
The trouble with Hartnett is that, despite all we have been through, he still 
does.

If he were a politician, the press and the opposition would have forced him to 
resign by now for the favours he gaveGoldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs>. The Revenue had been 
fighting for five years to retrieve tax and national insurance Goldman owed on 
the salaries and bonuses of its bankers it had paid into accounts in the 
British Virgin Islands. Other companies that tried the same trick accepted they 
had broken the law and paid the appropriate back tax and penalties. Goldman 
stalled for years and disputed "every conceivable point". If you, dear reader, 
did the same, the Revenue would fine you and imprison you if you refused to 
comply.

But Hartnett could not have been friendlier to Goldman. He proved that he, a 
humble official of HM Revenue & Customs, could still be "a player" – the go-to 
guy who could cut a deal with the big boys – by overriding his underlings. He 
called in a Goldman's exec from New York and allowed the bank to escape 
interest payments and penalties worth millions in return for paying the back 
tax.

The British remain reasonably honest. I am not saying that there is not 
widespread fraud across all social classes, rather that most people accept that 
they should pay their taxes and assume that the administration of the tax 
system is fair. If the notion takes hold that there is one tax law for the rich 
and another for everyone else, the effects on the national culture will be 
profound.

In Boomerang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/21/boomerang-michael-lewis-review>, 
his account of how the crisis has hit Europe, the great American financial 
journalist Michael Lewis makes an essential point about corruption.

Societies where confidence in the integrity of public life collapses aren't 
charming countries filled with lovable rogues and blushing couples looking 
forward to their big fat Greek weddings. They are suspicious, small-minded and 
mean. "The hardest thing to do inGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is to get one Greek to compliment 
another," he writes.

"No success of any kind is regarded without suspicion. Everyone is pretty sure 
everyone is cheating on his taxes, or bribing politicians, or taking bribes or 
lying about the value of his real estate. And this total absence of faith in 
one another is self-reinforcing. The epidemic of lying and cheating and 
stealing makes any kind of civic life impossible; the collapse of civic life 
only encourages more lying, cheating and stealing."

For all the demonstrators in Athens saying that their sufferings are the fault 
of the rich, no one can blame the Greek crisis on the banks. It is the fault of 
a corrupt society and of a European Union and local politicians, who tied 
Greece into the straitjacket of the euro, which has left it with no means of 
breaking out of debt and recession.

There is an exception to the rule, however. One investment bank helped Greece 
hide the true extent of its deficit from the European authorities by arranging 
currency swaps, which, staggeringly, appear to be legal. Greece could then 
pretend that its debt was not debt at all and mask the full extent of its 
liabilities. The bank was Goldman Sachs, which received $300m in fees. This is 
the same bank Her Majesty's permanent secretary for tax excuses from the tax 
demands the rest of us must meet, as he strives to Hellenise the British and 
turn this country into Greece without the sunshine.
 