
When it comes to public expenditure, welfare is the big one. Add the 
Department for Work andPensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> 
budget to the family tax credits and cash paid out by the revenue, and the 
combined total is £170bn – rather more than a quarter of public expenditure. So 
you might have expected that, amid the talk of retrenchment, all eyes would be 
trained on the bill for benefits.

The difficulty, though, is that with cash payments, unlike with state-provided 
services, there can be no possibility of doing more with less. Saving £1bn of 
the annual budget is straightforward – if you can point to a million families 
to take £1,000 a year away from.

When cuts are unavoidable, targeting has been the traditional way to go. 
Although the opposition parties grumble about Gordon Brown subjecting so many 
families to means-testing, it turns out their response would be to means-test 
his tax credits even more aggressively. That may sound incoherent, but in fact 
it is not. If the money is withdrawn more sharply as earnings rise, then 
payment ceases at a lower income level than at present, and so fewer people end 
up in the system.

Deeper cuts could be found by restricting benefits currently paid as of right 
to the poor. Child benefit is one potential target, although Nick Clegg's 
rapidly retracted promise that the Lib Dems would "look at" taking it off the 
rich illustrates the difficulties. The disability allowances that help with 
care and mobility costs have a £14bn budget, and could also be withdrawn from 
people above the breadline. But it goes without saying that this would be 
highly controversial – at least unless it were coupled to great improvements in 
social care.

It would be far more popular to save on unemployment by getting people into 
work, but that's not easy to do in a slump. Not long ago, the fashionable idea 
was that contracting-out the work of job centres to innovative private firms 
would ensure that people were placed more efficiently in jobs. When recession 
came, though, the contractors jacked up their fees. There are various 
welfare-to-work proposals that could make a difference, but most require cash 
upfront – cash the Treasury does not have.

The biggest expenditure of all is not unemployment but pensions. It consumes 
more than a third of the welfare budget, and is set to consume more as male 
baby boomers hit the age of 65 over the next few years. Accelerating the 
planned rise in the pensionable age, and perhaps pegging it to current life 
expectancy, is one move that really could soon start to save serious cash.

Tom Clark is the Guardian's social affairs leader writer

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 