
Thrill rating 4/10

Danger rating 3/10

Fitness rating 4/10

In a nutshell ...

As befits the laid-back demeanours of western gods John Wayne and Clint 
Eastwood, this is a more relaxed style of horse riding, with a longer stirrup 
and more comfortable saddle (for those long, rough rides down to El Paso - or 
Basingstoke). "It's the difference between riding in an armchair and sitting 
perched on a stool," summarises one of the hands at Rocky's Western Horse 
Riding Adventure in the Peak District.

It's not just the saddle that makes western-style riding less stuffy and 
increasingly popular in the UK (despite much sniping from the traditional 
horsey brigade). It's the costume and horses, too: wear your full-length, 
cowboy-style chaps with pride over jeans - blue, of course - as you saddle up a 
beautiful Appaloosa (with its distinctive leopard-spotted coat) or Argentine 
Criollo.

What's the buzz?

You'll soon get used to the basic riding technique (the trick is to lean back 
and press your legs forward as you go downhill, then lean forward for uphill 
climbs). Such a relaxed way of riding is, for instance, perfect for admiring 
the spectacular coastal scenery of Argyll on the west coast of Scotland with 
Appaloosa Holidays. As part of the trip you can visit some local saloons 
(village inns) and ride along the sea shore.

Alternatively, Rocky's centre organises treks along the Trans Pennine Trail, 
past ruined castles and through bubbling streams as the vultures (sorry, 
kestrels) hover overhead. In summer, watch out for lots of horse-less gringos 
on this trail.

Thrill a minute?

From her ranch near Holmfirth, Rocky caters for all riding levels: you can 
begin with a two- or four-hour ride through the canyons, stopping for a picnic 
en route. And if the taster days leave you wanting more, she also lays on 
four-day ridin', cookin' and campin' trips (although you can stay in a 
luxurious, catered farmhouse if you don't fancy the cookin' and campin' bit).

Adrenaline peak

Learning the traditional art of "cattle drifting" - rounding up hill cattle - 
at the Ardfern Riding Centre in Argyll (which doubles as the HQ of Appaloosa 
Holidays). Even if the cows misbehave, the views down over the little islands 
and out toward Shuna from your comfortable saddle will mean you won't mind a 
bit.

Where to do it

Always assuming you're not planning to go the whole hog and head out west to 
the Texas Range, the not-very-romantically named Corporate Horse offers one- 
and two-day western riding courses in the New Forest in Hampshire, the latter 
including an overnight camp in the heart of the forest.

Who can do it

Twelve seems to be a common minimum age to start heading for the ranches 
mentioned here - while the upper limit is dictated purely by how long you 
retain the ability to haul yourself up on the back of a horse.

What to wear

As discussed, jeans or, at a pinch, jodhpurs (which is just as well, because 
jodhpurs are in this season) plus proper riding or hiking boots. Riding helmets 
will be provided - sadly, cowboy hats are not acceptable.

Typical prices

Beginners' taster sessions start at around £20, rising to about £100 for a 
full one-day ride.

Impress your pals 

The extraordinary Sergio Leone-directed western trilogy, begun in 1964 with A 
Fistful Of Dollars, featured Clint Eastwood as an enigmatic 19th-century bounty 
hunter with a passion for cigars and for chasing down criminals in America's 
Wild West. Yet in fact, all three films were shot in the dustbowls around 
Almeria in southern Spain. Apparently, some of the fake cowboy-town sets 
survive there to this day.

YouTube searchwords 'western riding show'

Good links

westernridingadventures.co.uk <http://www.westernridingadventures.co.uk>

corporatehorse.co.uk <http://www.corporatehorse.co.uk>

aboutscotland.com/argyll/appaloosa.html 
<http://www.aboutscotland.com/argyll/appaloosa.html>

Saddle up, then head for the beach

If you're tired of circling the paddock, kicking up the same old grass, why 
not head for the coast and try kicking up some waves instead? The exhilaration 
of beach riding is hard to beat. Gallop along golden sands, churn up the waves 
beneath you, and immerse yourself in the spectacular British coastal scenery - 
this, surely, is what the good Lord had in mind when he first set his mind to 
designing the horse.

Our green and pleasant isles are ringed with hundreds of beautiful beaches, so 
there's no end of places to feel the wind in your hair and the sea spray in 
your face. Some wonderful spots to try include the beaches on and around Holy 
Island in Northumberland, for their haunting scenery and windswept beauty (not 
to mention size), and Dorset's Studland Beach for its towering white cliffs and 
stunning sands.

Riders with their own horse can often simply turn up, unhitch the horsebox and 
start riding - although our more popular beaches have regulations limiting 
equine access to certain hours or months. And please, remember to check out the 
tide times to avoid getting cut off!

The horse-less can join an organised ride. A perfect base for a riding holiday 
is Nolton Stables in Pembrokeshire: with four beaches within two miles of the 
stables and 50 horses to choose from, there's something for everyone from the 
horse-shy to the master equestrian. Many places also offer shorter trips 
including half- and full-day hacks; try Murthwaite Green Trekking Centre in 
Cumbria for a half-day picnic ride on beautiful Silecroft Beach.

kimmerston.com <http://www.kimmerston.com>

studlandstables.com <http://www.studlandstables.com>

noltonstables.com <http://www.noltonstables.com>
 