
The AFL and Western Bulldogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/western-bulldogs> have hit back at a report 
raising questions about the league’s handling of the investigation that cleared 
the Talia brothers late last year.


It was claimed that then Bulldogs defender Michael gave intimate tactical 
information to his brother Daniel atAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> before the Crows defeated the Dogs 
in the elimination final at the MCG.


AFL trades: Collingwood defender Nathan Brown joins Saint Kilda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/afl-trades-collingwood-defender-nathan-brown-joins-saint-kilda>
The Herald Sun reported on Monday that the premiers were angry about the 
league’s handling of the probe and its exoneration of the brothers. TheAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> branded Monday’s article unfair to all 
concerned parties.

“The Australian Football League stands by the investigation conducted in the 
2015 post-season period, and its decision, and notes that the Western Bulldogs 
have accepted the outcome,” a statement read.


“In this matter, the AFL received numerous submissions and conducted a broad 
range of interviews. The documents made public today are only one side of the 
story, and their publication is unfair to all parties involved.


“The AFL reiterates that the Western Bulldogs acted appropriately in reporting 
the matter.”


The report said that president Peter Gordon, on behalf of the Bulldogs, had 
contacted the AFL questioning the finding as they had “independent 
corroboration” of the allegations.


The Talias, who have always maintained their innocence, were cleared by the 
AFL last November after a 63-day integrity unit investigation.


Gordon said while he felt the investigation had some “bumps in the road”, the 
Bulldogs had accepted the outcome.


“They’ve ultimately made a decision that we accept and we’ve moved on,” Gordon 
told SEN radio. “We have a great deal of faith [in the AFL] and these things 
will always test the processes but we believe the competition is in good hands 
and everyone did the best they could ultimately.”

The Bulldogs condemned the newspaper and said it had presented “one side” of 
the investigation and would seek legal advice about the use of the documents.


“We didn’t provide them, we didn’t agree to them publishing them,” Gordon 
said. “They’re confidential documents and we’re pretty disappointed that 
they’ve seen the light of day.

“It’s our side of the story; we don’t have the power that the AFL have got to 
go and see the other side and hear their version. I don’t think it serving 
anyone’s interest to be rehashed.”

Meanwhile, Daniel Talia asked for his family’s privacy to be respected with 
his grandfather in poor health.


The Crows star posted an emotional message on Instagram.


“At the moment my family is going through something bigger than football so I 
ask that everyone please respect our privacy as my inspiration and my Pa Harvey 
fights his own battle,” Talia wrote.
 