Thrill rating 4/10 
Danger rating 2/10

Fitness rating 2/10

In a nutshell ...

Witness incredible sealife without expanding your carbon footprint with a 
flight to New Zealand. At least 29 species of whale, dolphin and porpoise can 
be sighted around the coastline of the UK, with orcas (killer whales) and minke 
whales the species most commonly seen.

Although it's possible to catch a glimpse of these magnificent creatures from 
the shore, a boat trip is the best way to get close to the action and see wild 
whales in their natural habitat, frolicking in the waves, chasing the boat, or 
just chillin' on the surface, effortlessly blowing water metres into the air.

Sadly not every boat-trip operator out there is responsible and some trips can 
compromise the welfare of the whales. Seek out organisations that are carrying 
out studies and research to benefit these amazing creatures.

What's the buzz?

"Your first glimpse - or even your 101st glimpse - of a whale in the wild can 
be life-changing," says Vanessa Willams-Grey of the Whale and Dolphin 
Conservation Society (WDCS). Being within splashing distance of these vast 
mammals is a breathless experience (and not just because of their breath - they 
suffer from horrendous halitosis).

Thrill a minute?

Whales don't perform to a schedule so expect lots of waiting around and, 
potentially, a fruitless voyage. But the educational presentations provided on 
many trips help while away time before, hopefully, there's a sighting - and a 
rush to that side of the boat.

Adrenaline peak?

Watching a whale upend itself to dive down, majestically flicking its tail as 
it goes (fluking). Or, if you're extremely lucky, seeing the whale exit the 
water in a spectacular arc and diving or bellyflopping back in with a mighty 
crash (breaching).

Where to do it

In the Shetland and Orkney islands orcas are fairly common in summer, while 
minke whales tend to prefer the waters off the west and east coasts of 
Scotland. Responsible operators include Sea Life Surveys from Tobermory on the 
Isle of Mull (Easter to September), or the Gairloch Marine Life Centre on 
Scotland's west coast (April to October). Check out the guidelines for choosing 
operators on the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society website. Out of the 
Blue is the WDCS's own tour operator, offering holidays in Cardigan Bay, 
Pembrokeshire and the renowned dolphin haunt at Moray Firth.

Who can do it

Whale watching is perfect for all the family; no extreme fitness or youthful 
fearlessness is required. Residents of the far-flung Scottish islands will find 
it more accessible than urbanites from down south, though, with travelling 
times from London making day trips difficult.

What to take

Although whales are a lot larger than you are, binoculars will still be vital 
for spotting them if they decide to stick to faraway waters. Strong sea legs 
are a good idea, too, as the waves can get very choppy.

Typical prices

Full day-trips cost around £70pp. Trips with Out of the Blue start at £399 for 
four days in Cardigan Bay and Scotland, including transfers, accommodation and 
most meals.

Impress your pals

Whales have a long history of firing people's enthusiasm for green causes, as 
Guardian journalist Stanley Johnson discovered. When Mitsubushi wanted to open 
a vast salt factory in Mexican waters a few years ago, then-president Ernesto 
Zedillo was seriously considering the proposal until he went whale watching. 
Out on the water he saw his wife kiss a whale on the head, and promptly dropped 
the project so as to save the lagoon in which they lived.

YouTube searchwords 'fin whales ireland'

Good links

wdcs.org <http://www.wdcs.org>

sealifesurveys.com <http://www.sealifesurveys.com>

porpoise-gairloch.co.uk <http://www.porpoise-gairloch.co.uk>

whalewatchingtrips.co.uk <http://www.whalewatchingtrips.co.uk>

sealife-adventures.com <http://www.sealife-adventures.com>
 