
Whoever Mario Lanza was imploring to Come Back to Sorrento, I only hope they 
made straight for the Hotel Excelsior Vittoria.

Our intention was to try a week's self-catering sandwiched in between two 
short hotel stays that would allow for some pampering. Certainly the Excelsior 
Vittoria did not let us down in that department, recapturing as it does some 
sense of past grandeur when celebrities such as Caruso were regular patrons.

Conveniently situated at the heart of Sorrento, it is insulated from the noise 
and bustle of the Piazza Tasso (the Renaissance poet of the same name was born 
here) by extensive grounds that include an elegant swimming pool. The floors 
and walls of the interior are clad in gleaming marble, and the terrace and 
open-air restaurant (with excellent cuisine) afford stunning views across the 
bay of Naples.

My wife and I had chosen the town because it is such a good base for 
sightseeing. Boats of all kinds ply back and forth to Naples, Capri, and 
Ischia, while the Circumvesuviana Railway offers cheap and frequent services to 
Pompeii and Herculaneum.

Sorrento is built along the top of a high cliff, and getting up and down to 
the seafront can be a tiring and tedious trek. But the Excelsior Vittoria has 
its own private lift, which transports you straight from the terrace to the 
harbour. One morning we left our room at 9.10am, took the lift, bought a return 
ticket to Capri, stepped on to a hydrofoil, and disembarked at the Marina 
Grande 20 minutes later.

By 10am, after a short trip on the funicular railway, we were each sipping a 
cappuccino in the sun outside the Gran Café in the Piazzetta of Capri Town. The 
little square was swarming with people, but its charm survives the daily 
sea-borne invasion, and it doesn't take long to find peace and quiet on the 
island. We walked out of the town, up steep narrow alleys, shaded by trees and 
flowering shrubs, and blessedly free from motorised vehicles, to the ruined 
Villa Jovis which the Emperor Tiberius built as his retreat on the edge of a 
precipitous cliff from which those who offended him were hurled to their deaths.

I had recently read Shirley Hazzard's memoir, Graham Greene on Capri, which 
describes this walk. We didn't have time to look for the novelist's villa in 
Anacapri, but we did have lunch - a buffet of tasty antipasti - at his 
favourite restaurant, Gemma, in Capri Town, which is reached by a quaint, 
crooked alley bored through the rock, and where his photograph is proudly 
displayed, pasted to the ceiling of the tiny lobby along with those of many 
other celebrities.

Our other main excursion from Sorrento was Pompeii. I won't attempt to add 
anything to what so many literary visitors have said about this astonishing 
place over the centuries, except that the famous moulded corpses of the 
original inhabitants, preserved forever as they were at the moment when they 
were overwhelmed by volcanic ash, strongly reminded me of the statues of 
Anthony Gormley exhibited in the forecourt of the Royal Academy last year, and 
I wondered whether he was influenced by them.

There seemed to be as many people in the streets of Pompeii as there must have 
been in AD79 when the wrath of Mount Vesuvius descended upon the inhabitants. 
Tourists squeezed into the Casa dei Vettii to look at the naughty frescos, like 
punters in a Soho peepshow. The pretty avenue that leads to the Villa dei 
Mysteri outside the walls was, however, comparatively empty, and you could 
easily picture it with togaed citizens and solid-wheeled ox-carts going up and 
down.

The Amalfi Coast and its environs are spectacularly beautiful and full of 
historical interest, but also very crowded in the high season, and the 
topography pushes people even closer together. The corniche from Sorrento to 
Salerno is described by Michelin as the finest in Europe, but when we drove 
along it to our next destination I was too busy negotiating the blind hairpin 
bends, traffic jams and anarchic roadside parking to appreciate the scenery. It 
was a relief when, south of Salerno, the countryside became flatter, more open, 
and less densely populated.

The Palazzo Belmonte is wedged into one end of Santa Maria di Castellabate, 
once a small fishing village and now a thriving seaside resort mainly 
patronised by Italian families. Fortunately, most of the new development has 
taken place at the other end. The ancient rooms of the Palazzo have been 
converted into apartments of various sizes, comfortably furnished and well 
equipped. It has a delightful flower-fringed swimming pool with bar, and a 
small private beach on the other side of the boundary wall. The beach is sandy 
and shelves gently - ideal for children. Lunch and dinner (if you don't want to 
cook your own or go out) are served under umbrellas on a grass terrace 
overlooking the sea, an ambience that seems more picnic than restaurant. The 
dishes on the limited menu range from good to adequate, and the service is 
enthusiastic rather than professional. The atmosphere of the whole place is 
pleasantly informal and conducive to rest and relaxation; but there's a busy 
pedestrianised shopping street just five minutes' walk away, where you can buy 
excellent local produce very cheaply, and cafés, where you can sit and watch 
authentic Italian pavement life.

We occupied one of the gallery apartments, converted from the former store 
rooms of the Palazzo into split-level, open-plan accommodation. It was 
terrific, apart from one design flaw: hot air and kitchen smells rise into the 
upper bedroom level. The Palazzo has no air-conditioning, relying on its thick 
walls and high ceilings, which is fine in the more traditional apartments, into 
which we enviously peeped, but the gallery apartments must be uncomfortable in 
really hot weather. We were also disconcerted to find that our "sit-out" 
balcony faced out on to a public lane, above a row of dustbins, and, as a 
result, we made little use of it. If you're thinking of booking into the 
Belmonte, check out the accommodation in detail. With that caveat, it offers an 
attractive compromise between the convenience of a hotel and the independence 
of self-catering.

Perched on a conical hill above the palazzo is the old village of 
Castellabate, a warren of odd little houses, tiny squares, narrow alleys and 
steep steps, which is interesting to explore and contains several restaurants. 
We enjoyed an unfussy but good dinner at Il Callice on an open terrace as the 
sun set over the Gulf of Salerno.

Only 40 minutes away is Paestum, with its three Greek temples, reputed to be 
the finest surviving specimens on the Continent. Two of them are currently 
undergoing restoration, but the site is still well worth visiting, if only to 
see the exquisite Temple of Ceres. The museum nearby contains amazing frescos, 
including one that looks startlingly modern, taken from the Tomb of the Diver. 
In essence, it is a kind of Roman David Hockney.

After an excellent lunch at the local Helios Hotel, it was back to the Amalfi 
coast, and Ravello. Like most first-time visitors, we found it enchanting - and 
surprisingly peaceful considering its fame. Perhaps the narrow and tortuous 
road up from the coast deters the really big tourist coaches. We stayed at the 
Hotel Palumbo, an elegant and comfortable five-star hotel converted from 
another old palazzo, with astonishing views of both the mountains and sea from 
its terrace and an atmosphere of civilised calm.

There is not a great deal to see in Ravello, apart from its two villas - the 
ruined Rufulo, which has open-air concerts in the evenings, and the Cimbrone 
with its lush gardens overlooking the sea - but it is pleasant just to ramble 
through the cobbled lanes or linger over a drink in a café on the main square.

Many writers have passed through the town over the years, and plaques record 
that Gide, Forster and DH Lawrence wrote some of their works here. The current 
writer in residence, and Ravello's most celebrated inhabitant, is Gore Vidal, 
who kindly invited us to drinks one evening. His white villa, full of fine old 
paintings, statues and mosaics, clings to the steep mountainside overlooking 
the Gulf of Salerno. Pleasure boats look like toys on the sea hundreds of 
metres below, but the writer claims that he can sometimes faintly hear the 
amplified voices of the tour guides pointing out "the house of Gore Vidal..." 
in different languages.

He entertained us with wit and whisky on his balcony, a literary Tiberius 
metaphorically tossing politicians, critics, and a good deal of contemporary 
literature over the balustrade and into the abyss. He also recommended a fish 
restaurant called Zachario down on the shore just outside Amalfi, where we 
enjoyed a delectable lunch the next day.

Amalfi, itself, was heaving because it was the feast of the patron saint, the 
apostle Andrew. "Is there a legend connecting him with the town?" I asked 
innocently at the ticket booth for the cathedral museum. "No, it is true," said 
the lady, severely. Apparently his body was brought from Constantinople in the 
4th century, and is entombed in the cathedral, a fascinating architectural 
fusion of Moorish and European styles.

I wondered idly why Andrew hadn't generated an international pilgrimage cult, 
like his fellow apostle St James in Santiago. Perhaps Amalfi was just too small 
and congested even in the middle ages. We were glad to take the bus back to the 
tranquil comforts of the Hotel Palumbo. As far as I am concerned, they can 
re-write that song as Come Back to Ravello.

 The practicals


Rooms at the Excelsior Vittoria in Sorrento start from L390,000 (approx £130) 
for a single, L435,000 for a double. Tel: 0039 081 807 1044/fax: 0039 081 877 
1206www.exvitt.it. <http://www.exvitt.it.> CV Travel's Italian World (020-7591 
2833) offers a week's self-catering at the Palazzo Belmonte in a gallery 
apartment plus three days' half-board at the Hotel Palumbo in Ravello for 
££1,274 per person including British Airways flights to Naples and transfers.
 