
Unique among the main UN organisations, the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> Relief and Works Agency was 
set up to deal with what was then regarded as a temporary refugee problem, and 
an individual one at that: the plight of Palestinian refugees.

Established in 1949 <http://www.unrwa.org/who-we-are> the body was mandated to 
carry out relief and works programmes supporting about 750,000 Palestinians who 
had fled their homes in the conflict, which was triggered by the establishment 
of the state of Israel.

The UN general assembly, which mandated the UNRWA’s establishment, has 
continued to renew the organisation’s mandate in the absence of an agreed 
solution to the Palestinian refugee problem, both those who were internally 
displaced to camps in the West Bank andGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> and to neighbouring countries such as 
Syria, Lebanon and Jordan.

By 1965 the UNRWA’s definition of whom it would serve had been changed, first, 
to the third generation of refugees – born after 14 May 1948 – and by 1982 to 
all generations of descendants, totalling upwards of 5 million people.

The agency’s main task is to maintain and provide services – including 
education and healthcare and relief during times of conflict – in the large 
network of camps, the most substantial of which are in Gaza. In particular 
UNRWA schools educate 500,000 pupils across the region.

The UNRWA has faced criticism from Israeli political figures and pro-Israeli 
commentators over a number of issues, most significantly whether its existence 
perpetuates the refugee problem and over issues of neutrality, to which it has 
always responded forcefully.

Its facilities in Gaza have been the target of Israeli military strikes, most 
recently during last summer’s conflict when UNRWA schools being used as 
shelters were struck, causing numerous fatalities.

In recent months the agency has faced a pressing new problem – its worst 
funding crisis . It was triggered by last summer’s conflict in Gaza and the 
continuing war in Syria, where it supports refugees in camps such as Yarmouk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/09/in-yarmouk-damascus-syria-hope-only-currency-value>
, which is suffering a typhoid outbreak. The agency’s costs have spiralled as a 
result.

In Gaza, the agency says, the long-term effects of the joint Israeli-Egyptian 
blockade have seen those going to the UNRWA for food assistance rise from 
80,000 in the year 2000 to 860,000.

Despite announcing that it would be investing $750m in reconstruction in Gaza, 
the agency has received only a third of the amount promised by donors. It 
warned earlier this summer that it might not be able to run its schools.

The funding crisis has, in turn, created frictions with Palestinians. There 
have been demonstrations outside UNRWA offices, and the UN secretary general, 
Ban Ki-moon, has been drawn in to help end the cash shortage from donors.

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.  