
What is Activate?

On 20 November 2013 some of the world's most influential and inspirational 
figures will gather at theMetropolitan Pavilion 
<http://www.metropolitanevents.com/> to discuss and debate how technology is 
changing the way we do business and live our lives.

From economics to politics and beyond, technology is fundamentally 
transforming and reshaping the world. Activate is the Guardian's platform for 
innovators working across all sectors who are using technology for change and 
innovation.

This year, we have assembled an exciting multi-disciplinary programme of 
presentations, debates and lightning pitches to discuss and debate the 
following questions:

• After the NSA revelations, how can we balance privacy, publicness and 
security on the web?
• How can we find and fund the next wave of tech entrepreneurs and grassroots 
activists?
• In what ways is cloud technology driving business innovation?
• Can brands really solve pressing social and environmental problems?
• Is the sharing economy sustainable?
• How is technology improving civic engagement?

In addition to the Activate New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-new-york> Summit, we will 
be hosting the Activate tech talent day at the Metropolitan Pavilion on 19 
November 2013. This year, we are looking for 10 of the brightest tech startups 
to pitch their ideas to our group of venture capitalists, angel investors and 
industry experts. Further details to be announced shortly.

Who speaks?

The Activate Summit programme combines established thinkers and doers 
alongside grassroots innovators and activists.

Click here to view the latest speaker lineup for the Activate New York Summit 
2013.

Past speakers include: 

Vint Cerf, Google
Helen Clark, UNDP
Maria Eitel, Nike Foundation
Reid Hoffman, LinkedIn
Arianna Huffington, AOL Huffington Post Media Group
Wadah Khanfar, Sharq Foundation
Pierre Omidyar, Omidyar Network
Ev Williams, Medium
Fred Wilson, Union Square Ventures
 