
Anyone meeting Alison Jackson would say either that she doesn't look like an 
artist or that she doesn't act like one. She has a dyed-in-the-wool grooming, 
and you couldn't imagine her wearing a smock or a taffeta corset. (I'm 
consulting my female artist template, here - it is a cross between Barbara 
Hepworth and Tracey Emin.) There's nothing about her that is shambolic, bolshie 
or inarticulate - if you were asked which, of any contemporary artist, you'd 
want as your MP, you'd sayAlison Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/alison-jackson>. I don't mean she 
prevaricates and fudges, I'm talking about an ideal MP - acute, engaged, 
thoughtful, clear, measured, human, energetic. Oh, never mind what I mean. 
You'd never be asked that.

Jackson's latest book, Private, continues in the same vein as her TV series 
Double Take, her adverts for Schweppes (those Schhh ... You Know Who ones), her 
art installations, indeed, everything she's done, stretching back to her degree 
show in 1999. She takes a famous person lookalike and photographs or films them 
doing something - it doesn't have to be compromising, necessarily, it might 
just be a graphic realisation of a mundane activity that tessellates so neatly 
with the myths surrounding the person that the tableau feels both strikingly 
real and comfortingly familiar. Although it isn't either, of course. It's a 
lookylikey.

Mostly, they are fairly comic - George Bush patting his dog, for ages, in the 
television series, was a marvellously understated, impressionistic portrait of 
a complete simpleton; the Blairs, with Carole Caplin, frolicking around a pool, 
misted in vaguely nauseating sexual frisson, like English people trying to be 
in an Updike novel, but finding themselves too English. And Chris Evans, 
rolling about looking drunk - it's not like a devastating attack on him as a 
person, nor is it meant to be. There he is, just drunk. In the BBC series, he 
was sitting on the loo chatting to Billie, drinking a Guinness. Even within the 
fairly narrow margins of what this could mean, there was some critical discord 
- I, for instance, found this rather a charming portrait of marital ease. 
Others took it to be a stark insight into his depraved ways.

But that's not the point - the point is that Jackson gives us what we think we 
know, confirmed, illustrated, there in front of us. There's a kind of 
impossible satisfaction to it, like being able to mind-read, or see into the 
future. And then, of course, because it is a setup, and it's less real than 
even the flimsiest tabloid rumour, it highlights rather starkly the fact that 
reality and truth have a very slender appeal, set against the visible 
certainties that you can create with the unreal. It makes you feel the way an 
excellent novel does, as it ends - a kind of queasy mournfulness that you 
actually preferred the book to your life.

It plays, Jackson says, to the very nature of the medium: "Photography acts as 
a teaser, suggesting we can know something that we can never know. And the more 
we can't obtain it, the more we want it." She adds rather blithely, "I'm sure 
every celebrity knows that it's not about them," and, in the sense that her 
interest is not gossip of any sort, manifestly it isn't. But, considering most 
of these myths and impressions are, broadly speaking, unflattering, wouldn't 
celebrities object to the use of their image for such a project, even while it 
had a conceptual basis to which their lives and behaviours were irrelevant? In 
fact, there's been very little response from these icons. "Of the few people 
who have made comments, one woman said that she couldn't remember posing for 
one of my photographs, which was actually a photograph of her lookalike 
counterpart."

It was while at art school, as a mature student (she worked in television for 
10 years), that Jackson had this epiphany about photography. Back then, she had 
a thing for religious iconography that has segued, naturally, into her current 
fixation with celebrities. "I did versions of Leonardo da Vinci's Last Supper, 
and they were living performances, but they were utterly still. So they were 
three-dimensional, obviously, but when you looked at them, because they were so 
static, you thought they were photographs. At the same time, I was making 
photography look three-dimensional, and exhibiting my live performances next 
door to my photography. It was at that stage I realised it was easier and more 
seductive to look at the photograph. And then I saw that the power of 
photography was just phenomenal ... If I take a photograph of someone, and put 
it beside them, you want to look at the photo, not the person. You want an 
object, I suppose is what I'm saying, you don't want to have to deal with the 
subject. I think this is what's behind throwing eggs at David Blaine. We were 
essentially trying to vandalise him, which you can with an object, but you 
couldn't with a subject. Why else would we try to defile him?"

Jackson first sprang to notice as a result of a semi-scandal surrounding her 
portraits of a lookalike Di and Dodi, pictured with a mixed-race baby. "When 
Princess Diana died, people said they mourned her death more than their own 
relatives'. But they only knew her through a set of images. And I thought that 
was an extraordinary gap. So I just replace Diana - would people actually mind? 
And all those questions: was she pregnant, was she going to marry Dodi? That's 
where those images came from. There was an absolute outcry at the time, some 
people found it disgraceful and tasteless, and the only reason they found it 
disgraceful and tasteless was because of the idea of a mixed-race child 
entering into the pure-bred British monarchy. It was all just completely, 
wantonly outrageous, it was just racism. What else can you think?"

This was when Ann Widdecombe came out with the hilariously clunky description 
of Jackson as a blot on the face of Tony Blair's cool Britannia, though it was 
on the basis not of the portraits, but of a film of the Di lookalike, 
commissioned for an art installation in Leicester Square, which Jackson says 
Widdecombe (how could it be otherwise?) hadn't seen. "It was a single, 
slow-motion image; I just panned the camera up and down a lookalike Diana's 
body, with all her clothes on, but because it was so slow, it suddenly seemed 
very sensual. You start to look at the pores in her hand, you run the camera 
across her lips, it's sensual. Anyway, it got banned. They said that it was 
some kind of Sharon Stone analogy - I mean, she was crossing and uncrossing her 
legs, but you couldn't see anything. It made people aware of their own 
voyeurism, that they wanted to look up Diana's skirt. I'm not interested in 
seeing anything rude."

It was as a result of this notoriety that the Schweppes contract came about; 
they wanted to use the lookalike concept, but not for the unsettling ambiguity 
so much, more to sell tonic water. "I was really worried, really, really, 
really worried, because I'd left all that commercial stuff to go through this 
hell of art college, and I'd created this new concept that I was working on and 
was fascinated by ... I didn't want it ruined for me. But in the end, it was 
brilliant, I really enjoyed working with them. The work changed, obviously, the 
readings of it changed. Art work is inconclusive. It opens your mind up. At 
least, that's what I hope it does. And advertising, using exactly the same 
photograph, closes things down. It makes it conclusive. It sells a product, and 
that is its primary function."

Besides which, if she hadn't worked with them, someone would have pinched it 
anyway, probably. Look what happened to Gillian Wearing (a campaign stole her 
adults with kids' voices idea and when she threatened to consult a lawyer, they 
said the only reason it wasn't more like her work was that they'd already 
consulted one).

Jackson has a very detached aspect when it comes to current affairs - "I'm 
really interested in how we view the public figure, what makes a public figure, 
what makes a celebrity, and how images make politicians, so I take an interest 
in politics, but it's really an interest in the image."

She's the only person I've ever heard talking about September 11 in a 
conceptual way. "It was a visual bomb, from a country that doesn't permit 
images. Because Bin Laden's culture doesn't permit the worship of images, they 
understand how powerful images are. We wouldn't have thought of creating a 
visual bomb. In a way, he's chopped down two iconic buildings, and used our 
very truth imagery, to express himself. It's fascinating ... I mean, dreadful."

In a totally different way, that is what these photographs do - set off a 
tiny, confusing explosion of recognition and non-recognition; Elton John having 
a colonic irrigation, the Duke of Edinburgh looking at a naked lovely, Tony 
looking down Cherie's bikini. It's fascinating ... I mean, dreadful.

· Private, by Alison Jackson, is published by Michael Joseph at £14.99. To 
order a copy for £12.99, plus p&p, call the Guardian book service on 0870 066 
7979.
 