
Kanya King, founder, MOBO Awards
 Photograph: Ivan Coleman 
You need the determination to make it work, the persistence to keep at it when 
things do not go according to plan and the absolute conviction that anything is 
possible if you really believe in it hard enough: Understand and accept that 
more often than not there will be no instant gratification when you start up 
your own business. Running a business is having the stamina to go all the way. 
Whenever you fail or make mistakes, pick yourself up, get back on your feet and 
learn the lessons and apply them. Use that enriched experience to go faster and 
better.

James Caan, founder and CEO, Hamilton Bradshaw
 Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Have a smart growth strategy and your SME will achieve real long-term success: 
Small and medium sized enterprise obviously has a huge part to play in the UK 
economic recovery and focusing on growth and expansion will in turn lead to the 
creation of more jobs. To successfully grow your SME it is vital to understand 
the unique nature of the business proposition and the market it serves, that 
should always be your starting point. It is also extremely important to have a 
robust and workable growth strategy in place and to review it at regular 
intervals.

Lara Morgan, founder, Company Shortcuts
 Photograph: PR 
Selling is the key to success: If every business spent the maximum available 
sales hours of the day selling, consistently week in week out, they are 
guaranteed to sell more. Selling is the key to success, it builds a buffer for 
growth experience and gives momentum to every other part of a business; making 
growth acceleration easier. SELL MORE, repeat.

Charlie Mullins, founder, Pimlico Plumbers
 Photograph: PR 
Always try to build your business on solid foundations: It will save an awful 
lot of stress and angst when things start to take off – believe me I know!  
What I'm talking about here is coming up with a structure that will stand the 
test of time like a pyramid. And when it comes to building something that will 
last and stand the inevitable growing pains of business, the cornerstones of 
your pyramid's foundations are good people. Get them in at the beginning and 
you'll soar above the rest.

Justine Roberts, co-founder, Mumsnet
 Photograph: PR 
Do your research, know your competition and look for a USP: Then make sure you 
listen to your audience/customers and always keep listening.

Simon Duffy, co-founder, Bulldog Natural Skincare
 Photograph: Bulldog 
One of the most important lessons I have learned about running my own business 
is that you will improve your chances of success by being a great collaborator: 
Finding the right people to do the right things at the right time is a key 
skill that every successful entrepreneur needs to master. That's important both 
internally when trying to build your own team, and externally in terms of the 
network of contacts and other companies that you will need to work with. In my 
experience, great collaboration is one of the key foundations of business and 
should not be underestimated.
 