
On Tuesday night, Andrea Levy's novel Small Island was named the "Orange of 
Oranges", the best winner of the women-only book award since its inception in 
1995. After the award, Levy discussed her inspiration with judges Jenni Murray, 
Sandi Toksvig and Kate Mosse. Below is an edited extract of the transcript.

Jenni Murray: You said you used not to be a reader ...

Andrea Levy: No, I'm a working-class girl, I grew up watching the telly. And I 
didn't actually read a book until I was 23.

JM: What switched you on?

AL: The Women's Room by Marilyn French. Because every book that I'd read 
before then was for my A level - and I must tell you, your son with his A*, I 
whispered to my husband, "I can tell her how he did it!"

JM: How did he do it? You know all the crib books do you?

AL: Absolutely. I had to read a lot of 19th-century literature, and at the 
time it had no relevance to me whatsoever. I was growing up, living on a 
council estate. It was nothing to do with me. My storytelling came from 
Crossroads andCoronation Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street>, to be honest with 
you ...

Since then I have read a few books, I hasten to add. Yes - it wasn't until 
somebody bought me The Women's Room and I read this book and realised that 
fiction could actually speak about your life, could speak to you on a personal 
level. Before that I genuinely thought that reading was a form of torture.

Kate Mosse: And once you'd fallen in love with that book, did you then start 
to hunt down other books that you thought would?

AL: Yes - and then I had a lot of reading to do, a lot of catching up to do, 
and I'm still trying to catch up. I'm going back over those classics. I'm well 
into 19th century literature now, as well as trying to read all those things 
that I should have done.

A friend of mine said about the book "Yeah - you've got a couple of EastEnders 
moments. Da da da da dom dom dom ... I do think that that comes from learning 
my storytelling that way - or imbibing it: I wouldn't say I was sat there 
going, "Oooh ... storytelling ..." But just imbibing the way stories are told, 
so when I finished a chapter I am sort of thinking, I'm going to leave it here 
so we think, "Oh, what's happening here ..." And when I'm writing, I kind of 
see it as if it was on the telly.

KM: And, of course, soaps do as you have done, so successfully, take the 
narrative forward from a different person's point of view in each little 
section.

Sandi Toksvig: So, obviously, the next thing is that you'll become an A level 
set text, so I was wondering if you could give me a couple of pointers. My kids 
will be coming up to that age, and I can write the crib sheets for them ...

KM: I'm not sure this is entirely what we were expecting ... A levels without 
having to read the books.

AL: I'm sorry for lowering the tone.
 