
Town

Now that summer's here in all its downpours 'n' hosepipe bans glory, where 
nicer to spend some time than sunnyBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bournemouth> by the sea? There are seven miles 
of sand, landscaped parks and gardens, and better-than-average weather. As 
you'd expect, there's a good representation of retired folk playing rummy and 
family holiday-makers wielding buckets and spades. But there are also plenty of 
students around and therefore lots of scope for a party.

Gown

The institute is long-established (since 1885) and is now a top choice for 
education in arts, design and media, with an excellent track record for 
postgraduate employment. Its degrees are validated by the Surrey Institute of 
Art and Design, but it is aiming for university college status and its own 
degree-awarding powers.

The main site is at Wallisdown, on the outskirts of Bournemouth. It has good 
facilities, not least the £3.5m Enterprise Pavilion, which opened in 2004 and 
features purpose-built "incubation units" for recent graduates to rent while 
they start up their businesses.

Top-rated teaching departments

Art and design, as you might expect.

Top-rated research departments

Wasn't included in the 2001 RAE - it's more of a hands-on kind of place.

Celebrity academics

Charles Kriel, senior lecturer in film, has an interesting double life - he's 
an in-demand VJ, creating images to accompany the platter-spinning of Fatboy 
Slim, Pete Tong, Darren Emerson and Sasha. Peter Parr, principal lecturer and 
course leader in animation, has a distinguished career as an illustrator, stage 
designer and animator.

Head count

Last year the institute had 1,845 full-time and 414 part-time students.

Academic pay

Course leaders, principal lecturers and senior lecturers earn £30,000 on 
average.

Climate

Lovely. Not entirely immune to rough winds that shake the darling buds, but 
summer's lease hath altogether a longer date here.

Transport links

In conjunction with the University of Bournemouth, the institute runs the 
handy Uni Linx bus service, with three routes crossing the Bournemouth area.

Beyond that, there are good links to the M3 and M27. It takes about two and a 
half hours to London by car, just over 90 minutes if you do the journey by 
rail. There's an international airport in Bournemouth, but only for flights to 
Europe. Ferries from Poole.

Entertainment

Plenty of the old-fashioned variety: end-of-the pier shows, walks along the 
prom (where the brass bands play tiddly om pom pom). You could probably even 
find the odd Punch and Judy. But there's no shortage of the more modern variety 
either, from snazzy bars to good-time clubs.

Lots of shops, including the homegrown department store Beales (one of 
Bournemouth's most visited landmarks, apparently). The Pavilion and Pier 
theatres and the Bournemouth International Centre attract good shows and 
concerts.

The Oceanarium provides an opportunity to discover life beneath the ocean 
waves. Or try life (far, far) above them in the Bournemouth Eye, a tethered 
balloon that affords great views of the coast line and countryside.

And that brings us to the biggest attractions of the whole lot: the 
three-times Blue Flag-winning beach and all the gorgeous landscapes surrounding 
you.

Schools

A pretty good selection to choose from. St James's CofE primary will get you 
off to a flying start. St Katharine's CofE is a safe bet, too. After that, 
Bournemouth school and Bournemouth school for girls are the undoubted stars, 
but they are selective. St Peter's Catholic comprehensive is another good 
option.

House prices

Fairly reasonable. Detached houses average £276,000, semis cost £182,500 and 
terraces about £175,000. The above-average sea views cost well above average, 
however.

What to say in the common room ...

"But is it art ?"

The essentials

www.arts-inst-bournemouth.ac.uk <http://www.arts-inst-bournemouth.ac.uk>

· To order a copy of the Guardian University Guide 2006 for £14.99 plus p&p, 
call 0870-836 0749
 