
Are there still countries in the world that haven't produced a feature film? 

Magda Pobrec, Nantwich

Around 180 countries have now produced features, but many have still to make a 
film of any kind. Oceania is particularly barren, with Samoa yet to venture 
into production and Fiji, Tonga and Papua New Guinea reliant on overseas 
support. Collaboration has also been the watchword in Africa, with several 
states producing features in conjunction with former colonial powers. Sudan and 
Somalia have produced independent pictures, but it's difficult to confirm their 
running times. So Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gambia, Lesotho, Malawi, 
Seychelles, Sierra Leone and Swaziland currently stand as the African nations 
outside the cinematic community.

French Guiana, the Falklands and several Caribbean islands have also to 
register their first feature and the same is also true of the Vatican, Kosovo 
and Montenegro (although the latter pair have only just claimed independence). 
Elsewhere in Europe, the likes of Andorra have had to settle for co-producing 
features, although the equally diminutive Liechtenstein made its mark on the 
70s Euro horror scene, while Monaco's credits include Mario Bava's Blood and 
Black Lace (1964) and Sergio Leone's For a Few Dollars More (1965).

Greenland recently ended its screen dependence on Denmark to produce its first 
full-length drama, Otto Rosing's Nuummioq (you can watch the trailerhere 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qOrgXUfRAHU>). But, perhaps more notably, 
Prince Alwaleed bin Talal has just announced that the previously cinephobic 
state of Saudi Arabia intends to capitalise on the pioneering efforts of 
Abdullah al-Eyaf and Haifaa al-Mansour and produce its own first feature in the 
near future.

Why was the Academy Award for Dance Direction dropped after just three years?

Amanda Tarleton, Hammersmith
 Tripping the light fantastic ... Top Hat. Photo: Kobal 
Presented between 1935-37, the Oscar for the year's best screen choreography 
was largely discontinued as it was felt there were too few candidates for the 
category to be much of a competition. Doubts were also cast about a voting 
system that led to Dave Gould taking the inaugural statuette with I've Got a 
Feeling You're Fooling from Broadway Melody of 1936 and Straw Hat from Folies 
Bergère, while Hermes Pan was consigned to second place with Piccolino and the 
title number from the Fred and Ginger gem, Top Hat, and Busby Berkeley could 
only manage third for The Words Are in My Heart and the magisterial Lullaby of 
Broadway from Gold Diggers of 1935. Changes to the nomination process still 
couldn't prevent the triumph of Seymour Felix's grandiose A Pretty Girl Is Like 
a Melody from The Great Ziegfeld (1936). So the award was retired after Hermes 
Pan was commended for his work with Fred Astaire on the Fun House routine in A 
Damsel in Distress.

Sad to see that king of the voice-overs Don LaFontaine died last week. When 
were trailers introduced?

Matt Warren, Tiverton

It's one of the great movie myths that trailers were introduced in the 1910s 
to bore audiences out of picture palaces in the days of continuous programmes. 
Equally specious is the claim that projectionists homemade trailers by splicing 
together scenes from the film due to play at their venue later in the week.
 Who knew Rin Tin Tin was quite so big? Photo: Kobal 
As is so often the case in screen history, the actual pioneer was Georges 
Méliès, who ran a promotional reel outside the Theatre Robert-Houdin in Paris 
some time in 1898. The first instance in the United States seems to have taken 
place at a concession stand at Rye Beach, New York in 1913, when the first reel 
of the serial The Adventures of Kathlyn was shown with a cliffhanging caption 
asking whether Kathlyn Williams would escape from a lion's den. Nils Granlund 
claimed to have used a slide show to promote a forthcoming Charlie Chaplin 
short at Marcus Loew's Seventh Avenue Theatre in Harlem in 1914, but Famous 
Players became the first company to launch a concerted advertising campaign 
when it trailed clips from Ashley Miller's The Quest of Life in September 1916.

Paramount Pictures established Hollywood's first dedicated trailer division in 
1919, while Rin Tin Tin and John Barrymore featured in the first sound trailers 
produced on Vitaphone by Warners in 1926. However, from 1920 until the early 
1960s, the majority of US trailers were produced by the New York-based National 
Screen Service.

Got a question you just can't answer? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 