
We've been felling for the past two weeks and it's been exhausting, 
exhilarating work. Every morning B and I sharpen, clean and refuel our 
chainsaws. We look like orange snowmen in our boots, overalls and gloves. We 
begin on the "plateau", a grandiose term for a dense, overgrown area high above 
the chickens and the pond. We wander around for 10 minutes, chatting about what 
to fell and what to leave. "Hit it hard" was the advice of a forester friend 
who lives nearby.

It's hot work. Within a few minutes I've knocked over a couple of large trees 
and have stripped to a T-shirt. I try to lift off the ear defenders when a tree 
is about to go because the sound of a falling trunk is awesome: the quiet creak 
giving way to a thunderous rip and a final thump as a few tonnes of timber 
smack on to the rocky ground.

As each trunk comes down we sned it, stripping off the lateral branches. Since 
the boiler takes logs of up to half a metre, we cut the trunks into lengths of 
two chainsaws (160cm) which we can then cross-cut later in the summer into four 
40cm lengths. With such a lethal machine in your hands it takes a bit of 
concentration. And it's when you switch off that dangerous things happen: 
having brought down a big beast, I couldn't sned it because a tiny hawthorn, 
the size of a wrist, was trapped under the trunk and bent like a bow. So I 
nicked it at the base with the tip of the saw and the tension made it spring up 
sharply and smack me in the kisser. As our daughter's always saying when she 
gets a tiny scratch: "There was blood everywhere."

We stop for a break and sit on two stumps. It always amazes me that even with 
all the noise, the birds move in the minute you stop the chainsaw. We sit there 
drinking tea and about a dozen birds are already all over the place, picking 
through the debris. It's noticeable how much lighter it already feels. There 
are snowdrops everywhere.

In the afternoon we try to clear up with the help of guests, friends and 
volunteers. We start chucking the logs down to the path below. After an hour 
there's a beautiful stack 10ft long and 6ft high. That's the easy part. It's 
the brash, the thin branches in the crown of the tree, that's a bugger. And 
goat willow is full of it. We weave it into windrows – neat dead hedges along 
boundaries and ditches. Either that or create huge brash piles, packing them as 
densely as possible.

A few days later we move into the adjacent area. It's so covered in dense 
hawthorn and blackthorn that it looks like the fire swamp inThe Princess Bride: 
dark, dangerous, unwelcoming. It's hard work for little or no return. There are 
no massive logs here, just matted thorns. We make a pile of small branches to 
make charcoal. It's not much, but the rich orange circles of hawthorn look 
attractive. And it's great what you unearth in the process: a new cave, a few 
fossils, some saplings.

The second week we're working at the far end of the wood. We bring down a 
huge, multi-stemmed ash and another massive goat willow. All around them are 
overgrown hazel stools: thick, gnarled and intertwined. We cut them off at 
ground level, on a slight slope so that rainwater runs off. The hope is that if 
the deer don't get them, they'll send up shoots in the spring. Again we make a 
huge log pile and L weaves his fantastic dead hedges along the sides of the 
paths.

There's still more brash around than we know what to do with, so we drag it to 
a central spot. P makes a tiny fire with dead wood and we spend a whole 
afternoon grabbing brash and branches and chucking them on. It's wet, green 
wood, so doesn't immediately catch, but once the fire's got a bit of momentum, 
it roars.

As sun sets, we down tools, gather round and watch the flames. We're scratched 
and bruised, but it's been a good fortnight. And we know, as we watch the twigs 
glowing and snapping in the flames, that now the creative fun can start: next 
week we're planting 300 trees.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 