
Vincent Bolloré's decision to cash in his stake in Aegis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> has raised questions over whether he 
remains committed to Havas – the French ad network in which he is the largest 
shareholder – which has been left isolated as a small global player potentially 
open to sale or break up.

The French billionaire, who is developing a taste for Vivendi and is set to 
become one of its largest shareholders with a 5% stake, gave up any idea of 
merging Aegis withHavas <https://www.theguardian.com/media/havas> in 2010 when 
he began describing his 26.4% stake as a "strategic investment".

On a purely financial basis the sale of the stake is clearly compelling. 
Bolloré has made anet gain of €450m (£356m) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jul/12/dentsu-buys-aegis-for-3bn> since 
buying into Aegis in 2005, and outwardly he says that Havas's fortunes have 
transformed since he took control seven years ago when it laboured under a 
€750m debt pile.

"Havas has developed successfully and reimbursed its financial debts, as a 
result of which Bolloré has determined that its participation in Aegis was no 
longer strategic," said Bolloré Group, the Frenchman's investment vehicle.

Nevertheless Bolloré's move has done Havas few favours, leaving it a very 
distant sixth in the holding company stakes. Revenues of about £1.4bn put it at 
just over a third the size of the newly minted Dentsu/Aegis, which analysts 
predict will make £3.8bn.

"This deal leaves it as the remaining smaller global agency network. This may 
be viewed as the next potential target in the global agency space," said 
Catherine O'Neill, an analyst at Citi.

But sources say that it is wrong to assume that 60-year old Bolloré, who plans 
to step back from running the family business interests when he is 70, is set 
to back out of Havas next.

"Competitors like to speculate that this is a precursor to a selloff of Havas, 
but that would be completely wrong," said one source close to Havas. "In fact 
it is the complete opposite, he remains completely committed".

Indeed Bolloré recently chose not to participate in a €253m share buyback by 
Havas, which purchased 12% of its shares from investors, underlining his 
commitment to the company as his stake surged from 32.84% to 37.05% as a result.

The view from the Havas side is that the sale of Aegis to a Japanese rival – 
with all the integration issues that might raise, instead of a potentially 
easier fit into an arch-rival such as Publicis Groupe or Omnicom – could 
actually open up opportunities.

"Being taken over by a Japanese company with a very different corporate 
culture will lead to a lot of uncertainty around Aegis," says one source close 
to Havas. "Look at the issues Howard Stringer has had at Sony. I feel it will 
weaken Aegis and that will provide opportunities".

 The source talks of the "fallacy of size" that is pushed by major players 
such as WPP, the world's biggest marketing communications group, pointing out 
that relative minnow Aegis beat the global leaders in landing the $3bn General 
Motors account – the third largest advertiser in the world.

Nevertheless Bolloré has previously recognised the need for scale and has in 
the past held a series of talks with Michael Roth, the head of the fourth 
largest ad network IPG.

Some observers believe Havas needs to rekindle thoughts of a tie-up with IPG, 
although Maurice Lévy's Publicis Groupe has long been considered to be a suitor 
in waiting for the US holding group.

"Senior Publicis executives believe that Maurice wants to do one last big deal 
and then leave in a year, 18 months, and the question is: will it be the long 
rumoured IPG or not?" said a second industry source.

Bolloré, who has just 5% of his group's invested capital in advertising 
assets, will receive £743.8m from the sale of his Aegis stake and speculation 
is mounting over what he will do with the cash.

His latest focus has been on Vivendi, through a deal to sell his TV channels 
in France to pay-TV subsidiary Canal+, which is potentially headed for break-up 
after chief executive Bernard Levy resigned after a decade in charge following 
a disagreement over the strategic direction of the company.

Bolloré has also expressed admiration for Canal+ - which is 80% owned by 
Vivendi and 20% by Lagardere, which is keen to sell off its stake - and could 
look to raise his holding in Vivendi further and aim to take a seat on the 
board.

Analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch believe that his interest in Vivendi 
Universal means he is unlikely to use the cash to mount a full takeover of 
Havas, which has a market capitalisation of €1.5bn.

One source says that as a family-owned business Bolloré takes a long-term view 
on assets in a way no publicly, or even privately, held company can consider.

In March last year he appointed his 32-year-old son, Yannick, as vice-chairman 
of Havas. He also holds a seat on the board.

"He is planning for the future, he won't sell Havas," said one source.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 