
The blood flows into the mud, where it carves thin red paths. The slope is 
dark with mould and decay, and soon the blood will be absorbed and will 
disappear. The skull is crushed, the limbs lifeless. Not so much as a whimper 
is heard.

Red drops have splashed his trousers, but he can rinse them off in the water 
that flows in the flat riverbed below. With the brick still in his hand he 
feels strong, invincible and calm. He stands looking at the lifeless eyes. 
Blood still trickles out and is sucked into the sediment. He kicks the corpse 
and walks down to the river. The scrawny mongrel will soon be food for new 
stray dogs, and later for flies and maggots and other crawling things.

Once, he drowned a cat in a sewage ditch, but it didn't give him the same 
feeling as killing dogs. Now he mostly kills dogs. And pigeons. They perch by 
the dozen up in the tall apartment buildings. He sends them scattering in 
fright from the kitchen to the living room to the bedroom and lavatory, right 
through holes in damaged walls where the concrete dangles in huge chunks. The 
apartments are like half-crushed shells; rows of rooms are no more than piles 
of masonry and dust. Everything usable that wasn't destroyed in the attacks is 
stolen, devoured. A few dilapidated things remain: a warped stool, a broken 
shelf.

The buildings were left standing as walls of defence on the flat landscape 
when the first rockets were aimed at the city. Here the city's defenders 
barricaded themselves; here, they thought, they would stop the invasion. 
Throughout an unyielding, bone-chilling winter the battles raged from 
neighbourhood to neighbourhood, from street to street, from house to house. The 
resistance fighters had to keep withdrawing further out of the city, 
surrendering the rows of deserted apartment blocks like eerie shooting targets 
for the Russians' rockets. In some of the buildings you can still read the 
rebels' graffiti on the walls - Svoboda ili Smert - Freedom or Death!

On stairways without banisters, on ledges where one false step means you 
plummet to the bottom, in rooms where at any moment the ceiling can collapse on 
top of him or the floor give way under him - this is where Timur lives. From 
the top of the concrete skeletons he can peer out through holes in a wall at 
the people below. When he gets hungry he startles the pigeons, which flutter 
away in confusion. He chases them into a corner and chooses his victim. The 
fattest. Grasping it tightly between his legs, he breaks its neck with a 
practised grip. He twists off the head, quickly turns the bird upside down, and 
holds it like that until all the blood flows out. Then he plucks it, thrusts a 
stick through its body and roasts it over a fire he's lighted on the top floor 
whose roof has been blasted off. Sometimes he roasts two.

He knows how to kick well. His best kick he does backwards: advancing as if to 
attack with his fists, he suddenly spins round and thrusts out a leg with a 
quick movement, striking high and hard with a flat foot. He practises up in the 
apartment building, kicking and hitting an imaginary enemy. In his belt he 
carries a knife; this and the bricks are Timur's weapons. His life is a battle 
with no rules.

He is too much of a coward to be a good pickpocket. There's one thing in 
particular he's afraid of - a beating. So he steals only from those smaller 
than himself. When it starts to get dark he waylays the youngest children who 
beg at the bazaar or by the bridge across the Sunzha and intimidates them into 
handing over the coins they collected during the day. He beats up those who 
object or try to evade him, and he hits hard. The unfortunate victims are left 
in tears. The young predator slinks away.

Summer is coming, and the little wolf will soon be twelve years old.

When he was only a few months old, towards the end of 1994, he heard the first 
bomb blasts. That first winter of war he lay wrapped in a blanket on his 
mother's lap in a dark cellar while the sounds assaulting his ears formed his 
first memories. Before he could walk he saw people stagger, fall and remain 
lying on the ground. His father joined the resistance and was killed in a 
rocket attack on Bamut in the foothills of the south-western mountains when 
Timur was one year old. His widowed mother then carried the boy in a shawl to 
the home of her husband's parents. A couple of years later, she, too, was gone.

Timur's grandparents died when he was seven. At the second funeral it was 
decided that he should go to live with his father's brother, Omar, a young man 
in his mid-twenties. Liana, who was one year older than Timur, would go there, 
too. The two children had the same father, different mothers, and had not known 
about each other before.

They moved into the uncle's one-room flat in a bombed-out building in the 
Zavodskoi district of Grozny. Towards evening Omar sat down with a bottle of 
booze and told the children, aged seven and eight, to go to sleep on the dirty 
kitchen floor. They lay next to each other listening to the sounds in the 
ravaged apartment building.

The next morning the uncle ordered them out into the street. If they didn't 
come home with money - enough money - they would get a beating.

That's what invariably happened. The uncle used an electric cable that had 
been stripped of its plastic insulation. Only a small piece of plastic remained 
at one end, the part he gripped when he hit them. He held the metal over the 
stove until it glowed and whipped it across their naked backs again and again 
as they lay together on the floor with their knees curled up under them.

They learned quickly.

The siblings adapted to street life, but living in the gutter affected their 
appearance in different ways. The more devilish a thief she became the more 
angelic Liana appeared - people saw only two large childish eyes and an 
emaciated body - whereas Timur became more stooped and scowling. He looked like 
a petty crook, in fact, but preferred to gather bricks from tumbledown 
buildings rather than risk being caught stealing. He was paid two roubles for 
the bricks - about four pence - at building sites. It was hard work because the 
bricks weren't scattered individually; they might form part of a wall, a 
doorway, a brick edging. You had to hack away pieces with a sledgehammer before 
you could scrape off the plaster, concrete or cement. Only then would you get 
anything for them. He had to fight for the best locations because there were 
many who tried to earn money this way, adults with families to feed as well as 
children like him. To deal with the larger pieces of masonry the young boys 
preferred to work in groups, where the youngest children, who cleaned off the 
plaster, were only six or seven years old. Timur stood hunched over as he 
hacked with his hammer; sometimes he got so tired he had to sit back on his 
haunches. He was so thin that when he squatted to clean the bricks his bones 
stuck out like two points from the seat of his trousers.

Dusk was the worst. Every afternoon, just before it got dark, he was ordered 
to leave while his sister had to stay at home. Timur wasn't allowed to come 
back before the last rays of sunlight had disappeared.

One afternoon when the door had been locked behind him, he drifted down to the 
river and began throwing small stones into the water. The sun was setting and a 
rosy glow that had settled over the rooftops struck his eyes. One pebble after 
another created rings on the surface until they disappeared in the current as 
the river passed on under the bridge. His eyes followed the patterns until he 
began to shiver. The warm light was suddenly gone, the city looked bleak again. 
A couple of dogs limped around in the rubbish along the water's edge. He looked 
around, picked up a large stone from the rubbish, and whistled to one of the 
dogs. He leaned down, clucked and beckoned as if he had something to offer. 
When the animal approached him, he raised his right hand, the one holding the 
rock, and brought it down on the creature's head with all his strength. The dog 
howled and sank to the ground. Then Timur took the sharp stone in both hands 
and struck again. They were such wretched creatures, these mutts - scrawny, 
weak and trembling. Hungry dogs weren't dangerous. It was the satiated, the 
well-fed ones, that bit you.

He sat by the river for a while. The rocks were ice-cold. The air was raw and 
the damp seeped into his clothing. He started to get up to go home, but then 
sat down again. He couldn't bear the thought of his uncle, the foul-smelling 
apartment, his sister's sobs. He decided he'd never go home again.

When it got dark, he lay down in some large pipes a little further along the 
riverbank. They provided a little shelter, but all night he lay cold and 
frightened, listening to the wild dogs howling. The dogs that were so easy to 
kill during the day became slavering wolves in the darkness.

At night they were the strongest ones.

The little dog killer lives in Russia. He was born in Russia, he speaks 
Russian, he looks like a Russian, with pale eyes and blond hair. During the few 
days he attended school he learned the same Cyrillic alphabet as the children 
in Siberia, had the same history lessons as students along the Volga, and he 
memorised the same poems by Pushkin as the children in St Petersburg. He is one 
person among Russia's declining population, one of barely 150 million citizens. 
If a proper census were taken across the nation, and if someone had found him 
down there by the muddy riverbed, he would have counted as but one citizen in 
the far-flung realm. But at no time in his life has any state wanted to count 
him in. Let alone wanted to look after him. Or cared about what he's lost: his 
parents, his childhood, his schooling. Or what he's never had: care, 
upbringing, security - because of a war that this same government started.

Timur is not among those whom most Russians would call 'one of us'. On the 
contrary, boys like him are a problem. A threat against the true citizens. The 
true Russians. There are two words for being a Russian. There's rossianin, 
which means a Russian national, and then there's russky, which refers to 
ethnicity. Only Slavs are russky, 'one of us'. When President Vladimir Putin 
speaks to the people of Russia, he will of course, rightly and properly, use 
the word rossianin which includes all citizens, be they Orthodox Christians, 
Muslims, Buddhists or Jews. Timur is rossianin but not russky. He's a citizen 
of Russia, but not a Russian. Timur is Chechen. In addition to Russian, he 
speaks his mother tongue, Chechen, but he's never learned to write it. He knows 
his culture through myths and legends, but has never learned his history. He 
knows he's a Muslim, but has never learned to pray. He tries to be proud, but 
doesn't really know what he's proud of. He knows he wants to fight, and he 
knows against whom.

A census would have revealed many things. Soviet figures from 1989 showed that 
the number of Chechens had just reached one million. Since the wars started, 
five years after that, around one hundred thousand Chechens have been killed. 
Among the dead are thousands of children. They could hardly be called bandits 
or terrorists, as the authorities label those who resist. Not yet, anyway. But 
if you ask Timur what he wants to be when he grows up, he answers that he wants 
to be a resistance fighter. He wants to trade his knife for a Kalashnikov. He 
wants to fight, to fight back. He wants to exchange the dogs for Russians. He 
wants people to be afraid of him. That's what he wants most of all.

You can try to count the dead. You can argue about the numbers. You can count 
the maimed. You can argue about those numbers, too. What does it matter to lose 
a leg. An arm. To become crippled. To become blind. To have your hearing 
blasted away.

Where in the statistics do you find a violated childhood?

UNICEF reports that since 1994 up to the present day twenty five thousand 
children in Chechnya have lost one or both parents. Some of them live in 
cardboard boxes, in bombed-out apartment buildings or in pipes by a riverbank.

A blanket of pitch-black darkness wraps itself icily around him. The night is 
bitterly cold. Is it wolves or dogs that are howling? Or jackals maybe? Huddled 
inside the pipe he tries to stay awake, because he's afraid the wild animals 
will attack him while he's asleep. And when the first streaks of light filter 
through his eyelids he creeps out, trembling with cold, and begins gathering 
pieces of wood and cardboard to make a hut. Before the sun is up he has built 
himself a small shelter out of the concrete pipe on the riverbank. It doesn't 
protect him against the cold night air but he hopes it will help against the 
dogs.

He tries to imagine that he's a wolf, a merciless wolf, a swift creature with 
teeth sharp as an awl. But the game doesn't warm him up and he has to abandon 
it.

After a while Timur moves in with gypsies. He pays them a few roubles to be 
allowed to sleep in their huts and sit by their fires, while he dreams of 
belonging to the real wolf pack. The resistance fighters, the heroes who attack 
the Russians from bases in the mountains, who blow up armoured vehicles. Up 
there, in the snow-covered mountains, that's where he wants to go. He wants to 
fight, as the wolves before him have fought for three hundred years according 
to his grandfather.

Even if he hardens himself, he still harbours painful thoughts. He has left 
his half-sister in a helpless situation. Alone with his uncle. He fantasises 
how he will rescue her. How he will break in when the uncle is lying in a 
drunken stupor, how he will threaten the man with a knife and save his sister.

He kills a dog instead. Kicks yet another corpse. Dopes himself up, sniffs 
glue. He ends up in a fight with the gypsy boys and is thrown out of the roving 
pack.

Once again he sleeps alone down by the riverbank with the dogs around him. 
Dogs that he can kill at any time. They're so weak, so cowardly, he snorts. 
They've forgotten they're actually wolves.

· (c) Åsne Seierstad <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asne-seierstad>, 2007. 
The Angel of Grozny: Inside Chechnya is published March 6 by Virago.
 