
I'm slightly ashamed to admit that I was, for a few moments, frightened. Every 
time the inflatable boat banged off a two-metre wave the woman next to me 
screamed. Wind gusting up to 50 knots blew sheets of cold salty spray into us. 
Usually it helps to think: "What's the worst that can happen?" This time the 
answering image of upturned boat in the Arctic-cold water was not comforting. I 
tried not to remember being told two days before that we might be the only ship 
in nearly half a million square miles of the Hudson Bay.

Then I saw the murres: first one or two, then dozens of purposeful tiny birds 
skittered around us as we banged our way to the bottom of the high cliffs of 
Cape Wolstenholme. We looked up from calmer waters at a teeming colony, birds 
perched on every ledge.

I was travelling with Cruise North Expeditions, which makes two claims to be 
extraordinary. First, it is majority-owned by a non-profit Inuit company; 
second it claims to be the only cruise operator dedicated to the Arctic's 
summer season, from June to October. Antarctica reputedly had nearly 30,000 
visitors last "summer", but the Arctic cruise scene is far less developed.

The first thing to do when you visit this part of the Arctic in summer is to 
banish images of ice and snow. Below the "high Arctic" the landscape is mostly 
granite rock and raw tundra. Even seasoned guides were unprepared however for 
more than 20C of humid heat when we arrived on a chartered flight from Montreal 
to the town of Churchill on Hudson Bay in northern Canada.

Waving away big black flies and mosquitoes, we trundled on old school buses 
around the self-proclaimed "polar bear capital of the world" (human population 
about 800). Suddenly there was a rush to the right hand side of the bus: our 
first polar bear, padding about on a small patch of grass. It was a far cry 
from proud images of these great furry beasts waiting patiently over seal holes 
or stamping on walrus, but already we could tick off one of the Arctic "Big 
Five". Later, in the Churchill River, we watched beluga whales. A few hours and 
already two out of five: only caribou, musk ox and walrus to go. It was about 
to get harder, though.

On the first day, our cruise ship struck out into Hudson Bay. A few passengers 
succumbed to seasickness, while the rest of us wandered between our tiny but 
spotless cabins, the glorious sunshine on deck, and a series of lectures - 
introductions to the region and its mammals, whaling history, seafaring 
superstitions, and an explanation of the different definitions of the word 
Arctic. Though we were south of the Arctic Circle, and well below the Arctic 
Sea, our trip was an "Arctic" one because it was mostly north of the tree line, 
the wavy zone between the 53rd and 68th parallels where stunted pines peter out 
to be replaced by tiny flowers, grasses and the miniature Arctic willow.

It was also an opportunity to get used to life on board the 185-berth Lyubov 
Orlova. As well as a lecture room, the boat has a small exercise room, a bar, a 
library, and a dining room. We were encouraged to spend as much time as 
possible on deck. As the sun sank over an oil-blue sea with a 360-degree 
horizon, beyond any mobile phone signal or email, I felt liberated.

Our first day's excursion was cancelled because of high winds, and instead we 
had a lecture about the Inuit, learning a few words of Inuktitut, and also how 
Scottish reeling was brought to these parts by the whalers, explorers, miners 
and other fortune-seekers who travelled here.

But Europeans also brought disease and alcohol - and missionaries, who 
persuaded the Inuit to abandon their traditional customs, and changed many 
communities from small nomadic groups into larger villages. The more settled 
communities found it hard to adapt when the incomers left and cut off supplies 
of dollars and tinned food.

The legacy of all this is widespread social problems, which Cruise North hopes 
to help address. The company is three-quarters owned by the Makivik Corporation 
which is run by and for the benefit of the people of Nunavik, one of the three 
autonomous Inuit regions of Canada. The other quarter is owned by Dugald Wells, 
a Toronto engineer whose idea it was to bring some of the riches of polar 
tourism to the Canadian north.

The company has a policy of taking on Inuit trainees so I was surprised to 
find few Inuit staff on our ship. Wells said this was because older trainees 
found it hard to adapt to the fairly regimented life; now they are hiring 
younger trainees, some of whom are being encouraged to use their new skills to 
find other work or go back to education.

The key to a rewarding expedition, we kept being told, is to be flexible. And 
later we were rewarded: the wind calmed and we got our first landing, on Coats 
Island. Arctic animals can be elusive, but on Coats Island, the compensation 
was right beneath our feet, with an unexpected richness of plant life: purple 
saxifrage, yellow Arctic poppies, white cottongrass, the blush-pink thrift, and 
burning orange lichen. Then half-way into our walk news came by radio: walrus, 
around the headland. We made a five-minute slow pass in the inflatable boat, 
peering through camera zooms at these monstrous-looking masses of brown blubber 
with great tusks.

On day four the highlight was a visit to Kangiqsujuaq (population 590). Yaka, 
who lives in the village, showed us the 'sights', including the Northern and 
Co-op stores, the museum for a national park 85km away, and a swimming pool and 
community centre built with money from a company mining nearby. At the centre 
children danced and sang for us and an elder told how, before the Northern and 
Co-op opened, the people here were sometimes so hungry they ate their sled dogs.

After lunch we took the boat over to nearby Diana Island, where dozens of 
tourists in waterproofs huddled together, giggling, trying to look like a 
single animal so the musk ox would be confident enough to approach - a tactic 
which, hilariously, worked.

On the final day, it was too rough to land - "Sorry, but nature is in charge," 
said Julio, the expedition leader - so we spent the afternoon gawping at 
glaciers and learning to recognise the glide-flap-glide flight of a fulmar, 
before finally making a beautiful sunset entry into an almost still George 
River, and our first sight of a tree for a week.

Essentials

Cruise North's eight-night Arctic Odyssey (00 1 866 263 3220; 
cruisenorthexpeditions.com <http://www.cruisenorthexpeditions.com>) costs from 
US$5,245, plus $1,265 for domestic flights. BA (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) 
flies to Montreal from about £404. Audley Travel (01993 838 700;audleytravel.com
 <http://www.audleytravel.com>) has packages from £3,800 including all flights 
and three nights' pre- and post-cruise accommodation. Quebec Tourism: 0800 051 
7055;bonjourquebec.com <http://www.bonjourquebec.com>.
 