
App: Which? Your rights 
<http://www.which.co.uk/consumer-rights/buying-services/consumer-rights-iphone-app/>

By: Which?

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, iPad and 
iPod touch

What is it?

It's the violent shoot 'em up you've all been waiting for, where you get to 
blast evil shopkeepers and faceless online retail managers with the latest 
military hardware, pumping them full of lead likeMichael Douglas in Falling Down
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-eREiQhBDIk>. Just kidding. This is a mobile 
guide to consumer rights that will arm you with all you need to know in your 
fight against retailers, from dealing with faulty goods to returning unwanted 
Christmas gifts.

Who is it by?

Which?, the popular consumer rights organisation formed in the 1950s.

What does it promise?

"Our free, easy-to-use app gives you advice and information on how to stick up 
for your rights and what you are entitled to by law as a consumer. We cover 
areas such as buying goods and services, guide you through common consumer 
problems and ways to solve them, and help you make complaints if you've been 
treated unfairly by a retailer, company or organisation."

How does it work?

Click on one of the 10 categories (Dealing with faulty goods, Pricing 
disputes, Online shopping and catalogue problems etc) to find out the current 
rules, your rights and how to make complaint. It also offers sample letters you 
can use in your own fight against the retailers. Legal nerds will particularly 
enjoy the two lengthy sections on the Consumer Credit Act and the Sale of Goods 
Act.

Is it easy to use?

Part of the appeal is its simplicity – click on a header and read the relevant 
information. The app works if you just wish to pre-arm yourself with consumer 
knowledge, but is also useful as a mobile, lightning-quick reference tool for 
those occasions when a shop assistant breaches consumer law. The ability to 
bookmark specific sections is useful, as is a search facility. There are no 
confusing games designed to help you understand your rights; there are no 
whizzy graphics flung at you – this is a text-based app offering exactly what 
it says on the tin.

Is it fun?

If sticking it to the Man is your idea of fun, and you can use this app to 
help stick it to him, then yes it will be great fun. It genuinely is a really 
handy reference guide that could ultimately save you money.

Is it pretty?

I'm not a fan of the colour pallete used on the Which? logo here, which sees 
the organisation's strong red brand undermined by an insipid aqua green/blue, 
But perhaps other app users won't have such an extreme reaction, especially as 
colour is kept to a minimum throughout. You'll either take issue with the 
extensive use of text (relieved only by the odd grey graphic to denote 
something that can be bookmarked) or be pleased that the screen isn't cluttered 
with needless bursts of colour.

Should you download it?

Yes you should. This is an incredibly informative and helpful app with which 
it is difficult to find fault.
 