 Eva Wiseman Photograph: Katherine Rose 
Eva Wiseman <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/evawiseman>: Dancing is 
rubbish. Overrated, sweaty, rubbish, rubbish, it's for people who feel 
attractive and people whose arms and legs don't jerk away from their bodies 
like mine do, like teenagers ashamed to be seen with their mums. It's not right 
and it's not OK, especially in public, a place where some of us eat. If one 
must dance, I'd hope one'd have the decency to do it alone in one's bedroom, 
where only the dolls and JLS posters are there to see. How dare Arlene attempt 
to inflict dance on us, we who are clumsy and shame-filled and heavy on our 
feet. Imagine the humiliation of a village forced to polka. Imagine the smell.
• Eva Wiseman is a journalist

Mary Warnock <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/marywarnock>: Obesity is much, 
much worse. But then I adore dancing and don't care whether it's public or 
private, whether it's Scottish or Viennese. Or that lovely free-for-all, the 
twist. I am also rather larger than is ideal (I hesitate to say obese). If
dancing made me thinner, that would be another thing in its favour. Perhaps 
the government will pay me to help the good Arlene to teach people to dance 
reels or waltzes or even the Irish jig. I would be the new John Sergeant, enjoy 
myself as much as he did, and become famous overnight.
• Mary Warnock is a philosopher and crossbench peer
 Donald Macleod 
Donald Macleod <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/rev-donald-macleod>: How 
ridiculous can you get! People are obese because they eat too much: give them 
more exercise and they'll eat even more. Meanwhile, poor anorexics will be 
dancing desperately, bemoaning their fatness. It could be a clever government 
ruse. Have us all feel guilty about our body shapes and we'll be in no mood to 
point the finger at politicians. A few of us may die of obesity, but more will 
die of stress, traumatised by having either to upgrade to a size 16 or make 
fools of ourselves in public. Why bother? I know the only reason I have a 
protruding waist is that I have a hollow in my back.
• Donald Macleod is principal of the Free Church College, Edinburgh 

Diane Abbott <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/dianeabbott>: The rational 
mind says that obesity is worse than dancing in public. Obesity is wrong. 
Obesity is ugly. And obesity can kill you. But obesity creeps up on you. By 
contrast, there is nothing gradual about dancing in public. One minute, you are 
standing there, indistinguishable from everyone else. Next minute, you are 
whirling around with multiple opportunities for humiliation. Will you fall 
over? Will you step on your partner's toes? Is everyone laughing at you? So, 
while I know that I should be out there doing the tango, I think I'll stick to 
eating a little more lettuce.
• Diane Abbott is MP for Hackney north and Stoke Newington
 