
An unnamed Australian intelligence agency had “serious gaps” in record-keeping 
that impeded the investigation of serious allegations from a whistleblower.

The case is one of four public interest disclosures made to the Inspector 
General of Intelligence and Security (Igis) andlisted in its annual report for 
2014-15. 
<https://www.igis.gov.au/sites/default/files/files/Annual-Reports/2015/IGIS_AR_14-15.pdf>

The report notes that an individual “who had previously had a close working 
relationship” with one of Australia’s intelligence agencies raised concerns 
about misconduct with the inspector general under the disclosure scheme.

Under the Public Interest Disclosure Act, intelligence whistleblowers are 
permitted in some limited circumstances to raise concerns with the inspector 
general where there are serious concerns over the agency’s conduct. Public 
disclosure of such allegations is not permitted for intelligence matters.

The annual report said: “After a lengthy investigation which was conducted 
under the Igis Act, the Igis found there were serious gaps in the 
record-keeping of the relevant agency which impeded the Igis investigation.

Asio terrorism investigations doubled to 400 in 2014-15, agency report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/02/asio-terrorism-investigations-doubled-to-400-in-2014-15-says-agency-report>
“Some of the discloser’s concerns were serious and Igis considered that better 
systems should have been in place to ensure these were detected and addressed 
earlier.”

The report refers to concerns over additional payments and entitlements, 
suggesting the allegations related to expenditure issues, but it is not clear 
what the nature of the dispute was.

The inspector general concluded: “At the conclusion of the investigation the 
agency concerned agreed that valuable lessons had been learnt.”

The agency is not named in the annual report, but the inspector general 
oversees the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Asio), Australian 
Signals Directorate (ASD), Australian Secret Intelligence Service (Asis), 
Defence Intelligence Organisation and Office of National Assessments.

The Asio annual report notes that the agency received disclosures that were 
investigated. But it said that these investigations found “no findings of 
maladministration, wastage of public money or abuse of public trust, but cases 
did produce recommendations aimed at improving organisational communication, 
effectiveness and overall accountability”.

Asis does not file annual reports, and the ASD’s annual report is part of the 
defence department’s broader report, which has not yet been published.

In another case, an “anonymous discloser” complained about the release of 
sensitive information to the media. This disclosure was made internally to one 
of Australia’s intelligence agencies. But the inspector general wrote that 
“investigation of this concern revealed that this was an authorised rather than 
an unauthorised disclosure, and that no further action was warranted”.

The annual report referred to Asio’s destruction of records from information 
gathered from surveillance and intelligence activities.In 2014 it was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/28/asio-has-never-destroyed-any-web-or-phone-data-collected-on-australians>
 that it appeared Asio had never destroyed any phone or web data collected on 
Australians.

The inspector general began investigating, and noted in the most recent 
report: “There was no evidence that Asio has actually destroyed any electronic 
records that are eligible for destruction.”

It continued: “Asio advised that the electronic files created in the current 
version of their case management system have not yet reached the full term of 
the disposal category assigned. Igis will continue to monitor whether 
electronic records that are eligible for destruction are appropriately 
destroyed.”

The report also made some observations about Asio’s investigation of 
“issues-motivated groups” who engaged in protests. The inspector general 
conducted an inspection into some Asio records relating to these groups and 
found overall investigations were reasonable and justified.

But it noted that in a small number of cases “broad statements were made about 
a person’s ‘history’ of involvement in activities of security concern or 
‘support for the use of violent protest’.”

It continued: “It is best practice to clearly articulate what is actually 
known or suspected about the person’s activities, rather than making general 
statements that could potentially suggest a stronger justification for 
investigative activities. The project also identified inconsistencies in 
record-keeping and documentation of reasons for requests to access certain 
information and in the descriptors used in some of Asio’s electronic records.”
 