
Whitehall's dependence on external consultants and interim staff, which cost 
more than £1bn last year, has come under scathing attack by MPs.

A report from the Commons public accounts committee says that, despite 
spending so much on temporary staff, central government departments are still 
"largely in the dark about whether this represents value for money".

Margaret Hodge, the Labour MP for Barking who chairs the committee, said there 
are legitimate reasons for a department to buy in specialist skills where they 
are in short supply internally, but she added that departments have become too 
reliant on buying in core skills rather than developing them among their own 
staff.

The report also highlights huge differences between different departments in 
their use of consultants and concludes that the reason for this is unclear. For 
every £100 spent on staff costs, the Department for Transport spends £70 on 
consultants, a very high proportion compared with HM Revenue and Customs, which 
spends only £2.

The committee report follows an equally damning set of findings 
<http://www.guardianpublic.co.uk/nao-report-consultant-spend> by the National 
Audit Office in October. It says there is an unacceptably poor understanding of 
whether a department's use of consultants is justified. It is also scathing 
about the Cabinet Office and says it has not done enough to improve the core 
professional skills in government despite repeated recommendations by the 
public accounts committee in its reports published in 2002 and 2007, and the 
Cabinet Office's own report in 1994. "We recognise it takes time to grow such 
skills, but there should have been more progress after 16 years."

Releasing the report, Hodge said: "It is a mark of departments' poor 
understanding of spending on consultancy that some have reacted to cost 
pressures by cutting that spending in an uninformed way." The report says 
consultancy spending has fallen by 46% since 2009-10, but that this "stop-go" 
approach is not sustainable and will not deliver value for money.

"We do not accept the view expressed by the Cabinet Office that it is 
impossible to assess the value for money of consultancy work, and we are 
surprised that there is such a poor central understanding of spending on 
consultancy," says the report. "We recognise that there are legitimate reasons 
to buy in specialist skills where government does not have them internally, but 
we are concerned that some departments have failed to grow the skills they 
require, leaving them heavily reliant on consultants. Relying on consultants 
for commonly required skills is expensive and repeated use suggests poor value 
for money."
 