
In 2000 it was the $164bn (£103bn) AOL takeover of Time Warner in America. In 
2007 it was the-then Sir Fred Goodwin's £49bn acquisition of ABN Amro that 
signalled that the markets had peaked and were about to crumble.

Every financial crisis has its totemic moment; a decision that even at the 
time seems to defy logic and in retrospect is seen as an act of gross 
stupidity. Yet it takes more than one individual banker, no matter how 
powerful, to make a crisis and when the historians come to chronicle the Great
Recession <https://www.theguardian.com/business/recession> of 2008-09 the list 
of guilty men and women will include more than one former knight of the realm.

Here, then, is a (far from exhaustive) list of those who might be considered 
most culpable – who caused, exacerbated or failed to prevent the worst downturn 
in the global economy since the 1930s.

Alan Greenspan


Laughably given an honorary knighthood in 2002 for his "contribution to global 
economic stability", Greenspan's responsibility for the crash cannot be 
underestimated.

A fanatical believer in the self-righting qualities of financial markets, he 
was the bubble king who allowed the dotcom boom of the late 1990s to get out of 
hand and then, when plummeting share prices pushed the economy into recession, 
started the whole process off again, this time in the housing market.

As chairman of the Federal Reserve, he cut interest rates and left them at 
rock-bottom levels for two years.

Cheap borrowing costs encouraged Americans to load up on debt to buy homes, 
even when they had no savings, no income and no job prospects.

These so-called sub-prime borrowers were the cannon fodder for the biggest 
boom-bust in US history. The housing collapse brought the global economy to its 
knees.

Sir Mervyn King


Britain was mini-me to the US in the days of grand illusion before the crash, 
having its debt-fuelled party where growth was concentrated in the speculative 
sectors of housing and finance.

King became Bank of England governor in 2003, and while he has subsequently 
been one of the most pro-active central bankers with a refreshingly robust 
approach to the banks, the case against him is that he failed to "lean against 
the wind" during the economic upswing, leaving interest rates too low, and then 
waited too long when the economy was nosediving into its most severe postwar 
recession before cutting bank rate.

Under the government's tripartite system of regulation, the Old Lady was 
supposed to ensure developments in the City did not pose a systemic risk to the 
economy. It failed in that task.

Gordon Brown


We have abolished Tory boom and bust, Brown said repeatedly in his 10 years as 
chancellor of the exchequer. He hadn't.

His last big speech before becoming prime minister, made at the Mansion House 
in June 2007 just as the financial crisis was about to break, praised the 
bankers for their remarkable achievements and predicted "the beginning of a new 
golden age for the City of London". It wasn't.

Brown presided over the loss of a million manufacturing jobs and an 
ever-widening trade deficit while cosying up to the City. He used to quip that 
there were two types of chancellors: those who failed and those who got out in 
time. He got that one right.

Bill Clinton


One Democratic president, Franklin Roosevelt, put a cage round Wall Street 
after its excesses in the 20s led to the Wall Street crash and the Great 
Depression. Another Democrat,Bill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton>, gave Wall Street the cage keys.

After a fierce lobbying campaign, Clinton agreed to repeal the Glass-Steagall 
Act, which ensured a complete separation between investment and retail banks. 
The move heralded the coming of superbanks, huge behemoths that took in retail 
deposits and used them to take highly-leveraged punts in the markets.

To make matters worse, Clinton beefed up Jimmy Carter's 1977 Community 
Reinvestment Act to force lenders to take a more relaxed approach to 
disadvantaged borrowers. Liberalised banks plus millions of new sub-prime 
customers equalled one big problem.

Eugene Fama


The economics profession failed to cover itself in glory in the run-up to 
2007. Not only did economists fail to spot that financial institutions were 
loading themselves up with vast quantities of toxic sub-prime debt, most of 
them thought it was theoretically impossible for a crisis to happen.

In large part, responsibility for that lies with Fama, a Chicago University 
economics professor who in the 70s came up with the efficient markets 
hypothesis (EMH), which stated that financial markets price assets at their 
true worth based on all the publicly available information, encouraging the 
belief that the best thing to do was to pile in when prices were rising. 
Bubble-think, in other words.

Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher


Just as many trends in modern popular music can be traced back to the Beatles, 
so politics was shaped by the activities of Reagan and Thatcher, the Lennon and 
McCartney of deregulation, market forces and trickle-down economics.

The changes pushed through in the US and the UK in the 80s removed constraints 
on bankers, made finance more important at the expense of manufacturing and 
reduced union power, making it harder for employees to secure as big a share of 
the national economic cake as they had in previous decades.

The flipside of rising corporate profits and higher rewards for the top 1% of 
earners was stagnating wages for ordinary Americans and Britons, and a higher 
propensity to get into debt.

Hank Paulson


The US treasury secretary in 2008, Paulson was the Sir Anthony Eden of the 
financial crisis. He had all the necessary credentials a Republican president 
would consider necessary for the job – chief executive of Goldman Sachs with an 
MBA from Harvard. He was considered the brightest and best of his generation. 
Like Eden over Suez, he was faced with a monumental challenge. And he blew it.

Paulson's big mistake was to put Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae into 
conservatorship, wiping out the stakes of those who had invested $20bn in the 
two government-backed mortgage lenders over the previous 12 months.

Unsurprisingly, there was no great rush among private investors to rescue 
Lehman Brothers when it ran into trouble the following week, and when the US 
treasury allowed the investment bank to go bust every financial institution in 
the world was seen as at risk.

Fred the Shred destroyed a bank; Paulson triggered the biggest economic 
downturn since the Great Depression.

Kathleen Corbet


No rogues' gallery of the crisis would be complete without a representative of 
the credit rating agencies. These were the bodies that took fees from the banks 
while giving the top AAA rating to collateralised debt obligations, the hugely 
complex financial instruments that bundled together the toxic sub-prime 
mortgages with the sound home loans.

Corbet was CEO of Standard & Poor's, the biggest of the rating agencies, and 
she left her post in a "long-planned" move in August 2007 just as the financial 
markets were shutting down.

The justification for the top-notch ratings was that the poor-quality loans 
would be lost in the mix, but when the crisis broke the reality was more like a 
food scare, in which supermarkets know there are a few dodgy ready-made meals 
on their shelves but must bin the lot as they are not sure which ones they are.

Phil Gramm


"Some people look at sub-prime lending and see evil," said this senator in a 
debate on Capitol Hill in 2001. "I look at sub-prime lending and I see the 
American dream in action."

Gramm, who thinks Wall Street a "holy place", was the main cheerleader in 
Congress for financial deregulation, putting pressure on the Clinton 
administration to ease restrictions – not that it needed much persuading.

The fact that he had been the biggest recipient of campaign fund donations 
from commercial banks and in the top five for donations from Wall Street from 
1989 to 2002 was, of course, entirely coincidental.

The bankers


Was it Fred Goodwin at RBS or Adam Applegarth at Northern Rock – the first UK 
high street bank to suffer a full-scale run on its branches since the 1860s? 
Was it Dick Fuld, the man in charge at Lehman Brothers when it went belly-up? 
Jimmy Cayne, who spent the first month of the crisis playing bridge rather than 
running Bear Stearns?

Or Stan O'Neal, whose attempts to rid Merrill Lynch of its fuddy-duddy image 
saddled the bank with $8bn of bad debts?

How about Andy Hornby, the whizzkid running HBOS? Or perhaps the man chosen by 
Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> to be HBOS's 
white knight – Sir Victor Blank, chairman of Lloyds?

Choose any one from a very long list.
 