
Not many people like being called old. The language used to describe people in 
their fifties and beyond almost always has negative connotations. Even though 
we are often told that 50 is the new 30 or 60 is the new 40, somehow the word 
“old” conjures up negative images. Old is associated with elderly, frail, past 
it, over the hill, decrepit – even words such as mature, senior or pensioner 
are terms that diminish the perceived value of older adults.

Perhaps the language is well-intentioned, an attempt by society to care for 
its oldest members who may have become less able to look after themselves in 
the past. But chronological age should not be assumed to imply infirmity.

Can curry cure Alzheimer’s? Four healthy ageing diet myths busted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/07/healthy-ageing-diet-myths-busted>
The pejorative perceptions need to be challenged – and not only because they 
are incorrect and damaging. Society must move on from stereotyped views that 
condition how we think about chronological age.

Surveys show that the vast majority of over-50s, when asked whether they feel 
old, say no. When asked at what age they thought they might be old, most said 
not until they reached their 80s – if at all. Life is changing, but attitudes 
and social norms have been slow to keep up. This is a waste for all of us.

Of particular concern is that the word “old” has negative implications when it 
comes to employment. The stereotype of over-50s and over-60s is that they are 
over the hill, soon to become frail – as depicted in the road signs, showing 
two stooped people with walking sticks.

Yet being 50, 60 or 70 in the 21st century is no longer a predictor of 
physical or mental abilities. It certainly does not signify that someone has 
failing health and will soon be unfit to work, or no longer able to learn new 
skills. People at that stage of their lives could be ready for a whole new 
beginning, a new career,; they could be full of energy with a quest for fresh 
experiences. Many want or need to carry on working and have valuable experience 
to offer employers.

Last-time buyers: help older people to solve the housing crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/17/last-time-buyers-solution-housing-crisis>
People can keep working much longer due to tremendous advances in healthcare 
and working practices. But ageist attitudes hold back employers – and indeed 
individuals themselves –from embracing later-life working.

Age is no longer a predictor of performance. “Old” is not a useful word to 
determine ability, any more than other stereotyped labels. Individuals will age 
differently, so employers and society should not make sweeping generalisations 
or judgments on the basis of chronological age.

It is high time to eradicate discrimination from employment thinking. Whether 
or not someone is suitable for a particular role should be based on their 
abilities, personality, skills or past experience, or willingness to learn.

It’s time to shed the labels. Describing someone by their age should be as 
unacceptable as describing them by their gender, race, religion or skin colour. 
These characteristics do not necessarily signify fitness for work, recruitment 
for a particular position, or training for certain skills.

Why is advertising not aimed at the over-50s?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/03/why-no-advertising-targeted-over-50s>
Such prejudiced views may have been prevalent in the past but are no longer 
acceptable. It is time to do the same for age. Discrimination should not be 
permitted to colour the thinking of employers, or wider society, about a 
person’s characteristics and abilities. This is important because our aging 
population will otherwise not make the most of its talents and opportunities. 
Societal norms and stereotypes can also negatively impact the lives of millions 
of people who will assume they are no longer fit for work, consigning them to a 
lower lifetime income and poorer later years.

Calling someone over 65 a pensioner may be technically correct, but it is an 
unhelpful label in the workplace. The entire notion of retirement needs to 
change, with many people wanting to enjoy a period of part-time work before 
stopping completely.

So can we come up with positive or non-judgmental language? Factual 
descriptions without negative imagery? How about “older adults”? That’s about 
the closest I can suggest to a fairer description that allows people to be 
considered on their own merits, as individuals rather than social stereotypes. 
Let’s leave labels behind and recognise the wonderful diversity that advancing 
age can bring to society, the economy and individuals themselves.
 