
For two years, I have resisted use of the term Arab Spring to describe the 
events that have been unfolding in Egypt and theMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast>. It is an unrealistic label to 
use, its application verging on naïve, even lazy, in this situation. Spring is 
a time where something with strong roots, carefully nurtured, flourishes and 
grows. We are not there yet; I hope that we may be soon.

What the world witnessed in the initial 18 days of uprising and subsequent 
political and social developments was a rediscovery of our ability to effect 
change, a realisation that mass protest is one way to make our collective voice 
heard.

But just as the myriad causes of that uprising had been entrenched in our 
society since long before the 25 January 2011, so have we seen in the two years 
that followed that they will not be solved by demonstrations alone. The voices 
of Egyptian citizens need to be heard everywhere: in courtrooms, in newspapers, 
in schools, in religious buildings, in government institutions.

We need processes and initiatives that offer real solutions to our social 
problems and we need to take responsibility for implementing them ourselves. We 
are in the middle of what I call the Arab Awakening.

I have been an activist and a campaigner for the rights of the marginalised 
and oppressed for more than 30 years. When I launchedAshoka Arab World 
<http://ashokaarabworld.tumblr.com/> in 2003, it was with a sense of conviction 
that the region, Egypt especially, was full of dynamic people committed to 
changing the underlying structural issues that perpetuate endemic problems. I 
knew these social entrepreneurs were out there; now our regional office in 
Cairo supports 69 of them in seven countries – and the number is growing.

Social entrepreneurship is by its very nature a highly creative and democratic 
process. We are dealing with individuals who have identified the root causes of 
severe problems within their own communities and found outstandingly innovative 
ways to solve them.

Sameh Seif <https://www.ashoka.org/node/4452>, a long-time Ashoka Arab World 
fellow, has made huge strides in reducing a great public health hazard in rural 
upper Egypt; by designing and building low-cost sewerage systems within 
communities, he has improved overall sanitation and living conditions for 
20,000 inhabitants of the poorest part of the country. This is a vital 
undertaking, given that, traditionally, the government and international 
agencies have mainly focused upon improving water cleanliness and sanitation 
within urban communities, despite the fact that only 29% of Egypt's rural 
population has access to piped water, compared with 82% of the urban 
population. In many villages, waste flows directly into holes in the ground, 
with no preventive mechanisms to ensure it does not contaminate drinking water 
or land used for growing vegetables. Thanks to Sameh's replicable, cost 
effective initiative, the reduction and perhaps eventual eradication of a 
health hazard that clearly contributes to the poverty of the area is realised 
through the vision and labour of community members themselves; it is 
sustainable and it is not imposed from the outside.

Ashoka is not a political organisation, but by offering our support to 
carefully identified members of the community, multifarious in their interests, 
goals and individual personalities, but all possessed of the same passion for 
implementing social transformation, we do what politicians should be doing. We 
facilitate the development of a stronger and more cohesive society by 
supporting initiatives that bring demonstrable, positive change. Our elected 
community representatives do not seek personal glory or power. Picture the 
dedication and singlemindedness associated with being an entrepreneur; now see 
that imagination and tenacity, that eccentrically endearing quality of being 
consumed by a project, directed towards social change. You have a social 
entrepreneur.

All the qualities that are most celebrated in the instigators of the 
revolution, who stood in Tahrir two years ago and who continue to protest for 
social and political change, I see in the social entrepreneurs I know. A sense 
of indomitable pride and the refusal to be stereotyped emanate fromNurredin Amro
 <http://sirajalqudsschool.wordpress.com/page/2/>, a recently elected Ashoka 
fellow who has established a new kind of learning environment in public school 
classrooms in the Levant, where visually impaired and full-sighted children 
learn side by side. First-hand experience of the challenges of integration 
spurred Nurredin to pioneer his initiative, groundbreaking in a region where up 
to 95% of disabled children are excluded from mainstream education, often 
leading to widespread unemployment and poverty.

Likewise, disabled women in the Palestinian territories, doubly marginalised 
because of the discrimination they face because of their gender and their 
disabilities, have a formidable advocate inOla Abu al Ghaib 
<http://www.disabilityrightsfund.org/users/ola-abu-al-ghaib.html>, who has 
campaigned fiercely and with great success to change entrenched perceptions of 
them. By raising community awareness of the exclusion they face from the 
workforce and how it has an impact on their social participation, while 
simultaneously providing them with specialised training to increase their 
employability and enhance their own awareness of their capabilities, Ola 
empowers this group of women to direct the course of their own professional 
lives boldly, with results that ripple through their communities.

The courage of protesters who face physical harm – clashes with the police, 
the threat of teargas and, in the case of women, an increased likelihood of 
sexual assault – for the sake of having their voices heard cannot be 
overestimated. But equally astonishing is the courage of a woman who challenges 
taboos and rails against the norms of her society in order to press for the 
rights of one of the most disenfranchised groups of all: sex workers. In many 
societies, the existence of prostitutes is a barely acknowledged fact; within 
Egypt's conservative culture, they face an avalanche of judgment and 
condemnation, even as it is tacitly accepted that many male customers will 
partake of their services.

The vision of our Ashoka fellow (who shall remain anonymous to ensure her own 
safety) is to care for this group of women holistically, educating them on 
their health and legal rights. She offers practical support to sex workers, 
increasing their knowledge of pertinent health issues, distributing condoms and 
providing them with access to socially responsible legal counsel when 
necessary. Not only is her work improving public health by reducing the spread 
of sexually transmitted diseases, it marks a fundamental shift away from the 
traditional characterising of prostitutes as being unworthy of respect or care. 
It is a radical first step towards the reshaping of social norms, whereby in 
time it may be understood that by giving sex workers the tools and support to 
improve their health, their self-image and their legal status, they are also 
giving them the opportunity to make different choices – choices that they may 
not originally have realised that they had.

The Arab Awakening has begun, but in the midst of our country's existential 
crisis it is in danger of being hijacked by powers that want to increase 
sectarian divisions and promote conflict in order to secure power and change 
the landscape of our country for the worse. I can think of no better remedy for 
this disaster than promoting social entrepreneurship.

Two years ago, we called for bread, freedom and social justice. While our 
politicians squabble about the meaning of these demands and how to satisfy them 
and our revolutionary champions are torn between paying for them with their 
safety and retreating into despair and apathy as anticipated change fails to 
materialise, another group is working to create strong roots that reach down 
into the fibre of our society so these demands can be met. It is the social 
entrepreneurs who are working hard to bring about the Arab Spring that we all 
want to see.

Dr Iman Bibars is vice-president of Ashoka Global 
<http://www.comminit.com/global/node/299392> and regional director of Ashoka 
Arab World <http://ashokaarabworld.tumblr.com/>. To attend An Evening with Dr 
Iman Bibars – she will be speaking on the Arab awakening and the role of social 
entrepreneurs in building a new society –register here <http:>. The event takes 
place this evening (Wednesday 6 February) at 6pm.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the social 
enterprise network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>.
 