
It's been a funny old series. When you look at the various stats and think 
about how each Test unfolded, for the scoreline to have ended so one-sided is 
quite amazing. Australia will be going home wondering how they've been beaten 
so convincingly. That said, though there were a lot of good signs, the bottom 
line is that it's still been a pretty awful tour for them.

It's now nine Tests without a win – four against India and then five against 
England – of which they've lost seven. Whichever way you cut it, that's not 
good reading.

They're still searching for the right combination in the batting line-up. 
Whether they've found it yet or not I don't know but I like to think they're 
getting closer. Consistency in selection is great but it's a whole lot easier 
if you've got players who warrant that consistency through their performances.

They've now got three months before Brisbane to consider which way to go. 
It'll be interesting to see what they do in terms of selection. Personally I 
hope they stick with the players currently in place for a little bit longer, 
because there were good signs all round and the whole set-up was beginning to 
take a bit of shape. I liked Shane Watson coming in as an opener but, when he 
came in at three, he did very well – 176 isn't a bad dig at all. Maybe Watto at 
No3 is the way it's going to go come the winter – it's tricky because you've 
got Watson who wants to open, David Warner who wants to open and Chris Rogers 
who is more of a traditional opener than either of them.

In the middle order, whether Michael Clarke wants to bat at No4 or No5 remains 
to be seen but, if the top three can score some runs, it makes where he bats a 
null-and-void issue really. And then you've got Steve Smith, after a 
confidence-boosting maiden Test century at The Oval, coming in at No5. I'd 
prefer to see Brad Haddin down at No7 rather than six, so I still don't think 
the Australian batting line-up is set by any stretch of the imagination – and 
that No6 spot could be up for grabs.

Australia have now got six ODIs in the UK in September and then seven in India 
in October and November. You wonder if anyone can make an impact there and 
force their way into Test reckoning. Going back to the one-day format gives a 
few guys an opportunity. It's a different team and, if you can impress, then 
you never know. If, for example, someone comes out and bashes a few centuries 
in those games, then the selectors have to take notice, particularly as people 
like Stuart Broad and James Anderson will be in the England ODI team. 
Bowling-wise you look at someone like Mitchell Johnson who has been bowling 
really well of late. Maybe those guys will start to factor in. Either way the 
selectors will be watching closely. If you go out there and do the business, 
then they can't ignore you for too long.

James Faulkner has certainly put himself in the mix for Brisbane with his 
performance at The Oval. I'd have no problem with him being considered for a 
role as third seamer. He didn't hold back, showed a bit of character and seems 
a pretty confident guy. You have to say he made the most of his chance.

Pitch-wise come the winter, Australia will produce their normal wickets – good 
cricket tracks, with a little more pace and a little more bounce. To be honest, 
they're going to suit the England bowlers pretty well. As a bowler if you're 
prepared to really run in hard and hit the deck, put the work in, you'll get a 
bit of reward. They are not going to turn as much as the pitches we've seen in 
England, although Adelaide may well provide some assistance for the spinner 
later on, and Sydney is renowned for it. So you'll get a bit of turn on the 
fourth and fifth days, which is as it should be. Graeme Swann will still have 
an important role to play.

Whether Australia will benefit from the home crowd advantage I'm not sure. I 
dare say there are going to be more English fans there than Australians. And, 
as Darren Lehmann got in trouble for saying, I'm sure Broad will be expecting 
to cop a bit. I know when we travelled to the UK, to South Africa, to India, we 
copped it. I copped it all the time on the fence. And I'd be disappointed if I 
didn't. In one sense it's a sign of respect if the opposition really get stuck 
into you. It's not going to come as a shock to Broady, and it might be the same 
for any English player. The only issue I have is that, if there are more 
English fans in the crowd than Aussies, then it might be the Aussies copping it.

I'm staying positive, as always, but at the moment you definitely won't be 
getting any 5-0 predictions from me. England will deservedly line up at the 
Gabba as favourites to retain the urn.

If England get off to a good start, they may just continue their winning ways 
through the series. But if Australia can work out a way of getting on top of 
Ian Bell and somehow get off to a good start, then it'll be game on and we'll 
have the sort of tough, close competition that maybe even a few England fans 
want to see. With the rise of Twenty20 and IPL-style competitions popping up 
all over the world you need strong teams in Test cricket. And Australia need to 
be one of them.
 