
From anonymous male

Dear Carole, Why does my girlfriend enjoy being tied up? Sex always involves 
rope, handcuffs or restraints of some sort, and often uniforms. She is anything 
but submissive outside the bedroom, but seems unable to achieve orgasm without 
being restrained in some way.

When we have "vanilla" sex she enjoys it, but when tied she always has 
multiple orgasms. While I'm not complaining at her tastes, I'm not sure I can 
see the evolutionary benefit … apart from attracting men who are dominant in 
bed, which, at the risk of doing myself down, seems a dubious sort of goal at 
best.

(If it's all the same with you, in the event that you publish this, I'd rather 
remain anonymous: she reads the Guardian too.)

Carole replies:
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Are you dominant in bed? Once an adult is handcuffed and restrained the other 
party becomes, by default, the dominant one. You say that outside of the 
bedroom your girlfriend is "anything but submissive". Is it possible, 
therefore, that in the bedroom it is actually you who is dominated? After all, 
it is her desire and not yours, for a ritualised, fetishised sex that evidently 
dominates your sex life.

Orgasm 

Non-human primate females commonly experience multiple orgasms during sex1. 
Within a short space of time, oestrus females can have sex with many partners 
and experience cumulative orgasms. Any number of males could be the father of 
the resulting infant and with a mix of sperm from various males in her 
reproductive tract the strongest swimmer makes it to the ovum first. Many 
primate species, including humans, are sexually dimorphic; frequently the males 
are larger and more powerful. During a process of multiple matings the oestrus 
female may be raped by competing males she does not favour; yet she may 
experience an orgasm and an infant may also result.

Western science finally accepted that women experienced orgasms in 19662. It 
was then theorised the female orgasm was uniquely human and evolved to 
encourage women to bond to their men. Until the early 1970s it was widely 
assumed, by male primatologists, that the non-human female primate did not 
experience orgasm. But women field primatologists studying wild apes and 
monkeys interpreted the sexual physiology of the female primate differently and 
accepted that orgasm occurs naturally and did not need to be proved. Instead, 
they were interested in why the female orgasm had evolved.

To settle the debate laboratory-based male scientists strapped captive female 
monkeys into ankle grips and dog harnesses3. They then stimulated the animal's 
clitoris and inserted an instrument, in place of a male macaque penis, into the 
animal's vagina. They observed the female monkeys experienced orgasm similarly 
to women. Three stages were noted, firstly an excitement phase in response to 
clitoral and vaginal stimulation, secondly a plateau phase where the monkey 
grunts, calls, makes an open mouthed face and reaches out, and finally a 
resolution phase, post orgasm, where the female tries to escape.

It has been suggested that sperm retention takes place via the biological 
function of the female orgasm aiding that particular male's chances of 
fertilising the ovum4.

Testosterone 

It has been theorised that rape is an evolved reproductive strategy in male 
primates, including humans5. From DNA data it has been estimated that 13th 
century Mongol emperor and war lord Gengis Khan has approximately 16 million 
male descents alive today6. Gengis and his sons and grandsons acquired 
thousands of women from conquered territories and enslaved them as concubines. 
Clearly those women did not choose Gengis, he chose them for their looks and 
virginity. But today, more than a thousand years later, because they were 
sexually dominated by a powerful man, the genes of the women who produced sons 
like Gengis proliferate in the region of the former Mongol empire.

During the first half of the menstrual cycle women's testosterone levels 
increase. By the time they ovulate their testosterone peaks and during the 
latter half of the cycle testosterone falls.

Testosterone levels help to promote sex drive in both males and females, 
women's sexiness coinciding with their most fertile time. Testosterone levels 
vary in women as they do in men.

Research has shown that women higher in testosterone are more attracted to 
more macho behaviour in males7 8.

You don't say that your girlfriend wants you to restrain her and dominate her 
during her most fertile time of the month, but this may be the case. It may 
also be the case that your girlfriend has above average levels of testosterone, 
which may help facilitate a successful dominance in other spheres of her life.

But her dominating personality may prevent her from seeing herself as innately 
sexy or as the cultural stereotype of "feminine". It is possible for her to 
achieve a self-image as an alluring sexy female, she may (perhaps wrongly) 
believe she needs to play a submissive role. Studies on the sex lives of female 
primates have revealed that female homosexual behaviour is frequently favoured 
and that female primates can dominate sexual activity by initiating hetero and 
homosexual coitus, partaking in varied couplings and positioning and invariably 
experiencing orgasms9.

Prelapsarian sex 

The paraphernalia of handcuffs, rope and blindfolds used by modern humans 
during sex inflicts passivity and a removal of freedom of choice upon the 
restrained one. For self-reflective sophisticated communicators, which most 
humans are, sex of this sort becomes reductive and objectified.

It is possible that at these times your girlfriend experiences sex with you 
via the third person objective. Your focus on her external appearance is 
realised by her, via your gaze upon her, where you, your body, your mind and 
your objectification of her all become essential elements of the very common 
sex game being played out privately in your safe bedroom.

For some women this physiological process may evoke primal, primitive reflexes 
and consenting human adults may be able to psychologically simulate something 
similar to the emotional content of prehistoric animal sex. With one party 
blindfolded or gagged communication channels, in terms of mind-reading or the 
spoken word, are reduced.

We separated from ancestral monkeys (new and old world) some 30m to 40m years 
ago. The female orgasm predates the evolution of spoken language and our 
prehistoric female monkey ancestors were experiencing cumulative orgasms long 
before human self-reflection and self-awareness evolved.

Sexual submission is common occurrence in the natural world of wild primate 
females. Your girlfriend is not submissive, nor is she without female choice as 
you are her partner of choice, but for a short fantasy period she chooses to 
reverse her role in life into one of sexual subjugation. Because this sex game 
is repetitive she has learned through practice (possibly with previous 
boyfriends) that it will give her sexual satisfaction.

If I were you, instead of asking, "why does my girlfriend enjoy being tied 
up?", I might question, when those handcuffs come out, whether it's really me 
she wants. Or is she just feeling horny and in need of a male to animate her 
reductive, prelapsarian fantasy?

References

1. Small, M (1993) Female Choices, Sexual Behaviour of Female Primates 
<http://www.amazon.com/Female-Choices-Sexual-Behavior-Primates/dp/0801483050>. 
Cornell University Press

2. Masters, W H and Johnson, V E (1966) Human Sexual Response  
<http://www.amazon.com/Human-Sexual-Response-William-Masters/dp/0316549878>

3. Burton, F D (1970) Sexual climax in female Macaca mulatta 
<https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/retrieve/5029/14_sexual_climax.pdf>. 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Congress of Primatology, Zurich. 3: 180-191

4. Thornhill, R and Gangestad, S (1996b) Human female copulatory orgasm: a 
human adaptation or phylogenetic holdover 
<http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0003347296902316>. Animal 
Behaviour52: 4, 853-855

5. Cowan, G (2009) The Causes of Rape: Antisociality and Reproductive 
Strategies, Sex Roles <http://www.springerlink.com/content/h5753w8304142p33/>. 
61, 1-2 6. Zerjal, T (2003)The Genetic Legacy of the Mongols 
<http://web.unife.it/progetti/genetica/Giorgio/PDFfiles/ajhg2003.pdf>. American 
Journal of Human Genetics 72

7. Welling, L L M et al (2007) Raised salivary testosterone in women is 
associated with increased attraction to masculine faces 
<http://alittlelab.stir.ac.uk/pubs/Welling_07_RaisedT_MascPrefs.pdf>. Hormones 
and Behaviour, 52: 156-161.

8. Gangestad S W et al (2004) Women's Preferences for Male Behaviour Displays 
Change Across the Menstrual Cycle 
<http://pss.sagepub.com/content/15/3/203.abstract>. Psychological Science 15: 
3, 203-207 9. Suzanne Chevalier-Skolnikoff (1974)Male-Female, Female-Female, 
and Male-Male sexual behavior in the stumptail monkey, with special attention 
to the female orgasm <http://www.springerlink.com/content/n52035222n183628/>. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior. 3: 2
 