
In an article heralding the new film of Swallows and Amazons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/24/swallows-and-amazons-review-kelly-macdonald-rafe-spall-arthur-ransome>
 released yesterday, the Daily Telegraph pointed out that Arthur Ransome saw 
the children’s novel as his last chance of popular success as an author – if it 
failed, the piece added, he feared it would leave him “languishing as a 
journalist on the Guardian”.

Although there is a kernel of truth in that account, the reality of his 
situation in 1930 was a little more complicated. He had been recruited by the 
Manchester Guardian’s editor/proprietor CP Scott in 1919, and was a close 
friend of Scott’s son and successor Ted (they had been contemporaries at 
Rugby). At 46, Ransome appears to have been an unusually pampered journalist, 
with ample spare time for writing books and sailing in the Lake District.

Once he returned to Britain after covering the Russian revolution and its 
aftermath, his lenient Guardian workload consisted of occasional assignments as 
a foreign crisis “fireman” plus dashing off light Saturday columns, first on 
fishing and then miscellaneous musings. According to Roland Chambers’s 
biography The Last Englishman, he had rejected the chance to be Berlin 
correspondent in the previous year and also resisted joining the leader-writing 
team.

Yet Ransome had always seen his career as a mere fact gatherer as a detour, 
albeit a spectacular one in which he had witnessed the Bolsheviks’ seizure of 
power at first hand and known Lenin and Trotsky (whose former secretary he 
married) personally. An author of children’s fiction and literary biographies 
as a London bohemian before 1914, he became a foreign correspondent covering 
the wartime Eastern Front and Russia because he knew the country from earlier 
visits to collect folk tales. Returning to the Lake District in the 20s offered 
an opportunity to reclaim his true vocation as a spinner of yarns, if he could 
minimise and compartmentalise the distraction of his crust-earning newspaper 
duties.

This was the complex background to Ransome becoming the first Guardian 
journalist to write enduringly popular fiction. He is certainly not the only 
journalist turned bestselling novelist, however. The Sunday Times boasts Ian 
Fleming and Jilly Cooper as alumni, and the Observer can match that with George 
Orwell and Robert Harris. Val McDermid worked on the People. Quitting the BBC 
was the making of Frederick Forsyth, as was quitting Granada Television (though 
not in a journalistic role) for Lee Child. Martin Amis and Julian Barnes were 
colleagues on the New Statesman. The Times, which had earlier seen its former 
subeditor Bill Bryson topping the sales charts, had Paula (The Girl on the Train
) Hawkins on its roster as a finance journalist.

The most convincing claim to be a home for hit-makers, though, is that of the 
Independent titles, despite their having a much shorter history than their 
rivals. Over just 30 years, Indy and Sindy writers have included Sebastian 
Faulks, Zoe Heller, Allison Pearson and Jojo Moyes, author of the bestsellingMe 
Before You. And then, of course, there is Bridget Jones, who first appeared in 
Independent columns by Helen Fielding – a photo of a personal assistant on the 
paper was used on the distinctive jacket ofBridget Jones’s Diary.
 