
On 13 June 2011, Recep Tayyip Erdogan was re-elected Prime Minister of Turkey. 
His election manifesto 'Target 2023' promises the people a new constitution 
that supports democracy and freedoms, and that Turkey will, within ten years, 
become one of the top ten economies in the world. Four days prior to his 
election victory, he abolished the Ministry for Women and Family, leaving 
Turkish parliament with no specific department with an explicit focus on 
women's rights.

Meanwhile, in a small office in a leafy suburb of Ankara, women's rights 
organisation Ucan Supurge has been gathering intelligence about child 
marriages. They've spoken to women like forty year-old Hanife who, aged 
fifteen, was forced to marry a man twenty years her senior. "I don't have big 
dreams," she told them, "but I wish I knew how to read and write." They've met 
Zozan, who said "I was so young when I got married that I didn't even have any 
dreams."

They've discovered that one in five girls of the 1.5 million Romas living 
north-west of Istanbul is married by the time they turn 15. They've heard 
countless stories of girls who had dreams to study and become teachers and 
lawyers and police officers, but who are prematurely removed from school to 
become wives and mothers and slaves to their husband's families. "Everyone 
thinks this is an issue in east Turkey and the Kurdish area," says Selen Dogan, 
who coordinates the Child Brides project, "but that's not true. We've been to 
54 different cities. This issue is everywhere."

Historically, precise statistics on Turkey's child brides have been scarce. 
Early marriages mostly take the form of an Imam Nikah – a religious ceremony 
that is unregistered and goes undetected by the state. But since 2008 a small 
team from Hacettepe University's Population Studies Unit has been working on 
the first ever national study of marriage practices.

Their findings, presented to the Grand National Assembly in January 2011, 
indicate that almost 40% of Turkish women between the ages of 15 and 49 were 
married by the time they turned 18. These figures are considerably higher than 
earlier estimates of the extent of the problem, and rank Turkey's child 
marriage rates alongside sub-Saharan African countries like Zambia and 
Tanzania, according to statistics published by the International Centre for 
Research on Women. "The Commission is planning on publishing that report," says 
Dr Mehmet Ali Eryurt of Hacettepe University, "but probably they will not do 
anything else."

To understand why this practice persists in a country striving towards 
European integration and with the world's 17th largest economy is to understand 
centuries of tradition that has infected the national psyche. Dr Nilufer Narli, 
Dean of Sociology at Istanbul's Bahcesehir University and an expert on the role 
of women in Turkish society, says that "when a girl turns from a child to a 
woman in the body, the family wants to marry them as soon as possible." She 
explains how even today Turkish girls are under the burden of honour and 
virginity – a constant pressure to protect the reputation of the family.

"Part of the problem in Turkey specifically is that early marriage is not seen 
as a problem," says Ms Dogan. And so, even though the legal marrying age is 18, 
communities turn a blind eye to the teenage girls throughout the country – 
particularly in poor and rural communities – who continue to be forced into 
underage religious marriages by their parents and relatives. Families continue 
to be able to exploit loopholes in the law which, for example, permit marriages 
from the age of 16 with court approval.

From violence and rape to maternal health issues, the problems associated with 
child marriage are well documented. Yet it appears the fundamental issue is 
that a girl's life is, in a sense, frozen in time when she becomes a child 
bride. She is taken out of school to become a labour force for her husband's 
family. She is deprived of her education and the opportunity to work or acquire 
skills - presenting a major obstacle for self-realisation. Those who have been 
married by a religious ceremony alone are particularly vulnerable, as under 
current Turkish law they can't access social services and have no right to 
property accumulated during marriage without a legal marriage certificate. 
"These girls become very poor when they are married," notes Ms Dogan. "They 
have no education. They can't get employed. They just sit at home."

It would be unfair to say that Turkey has not taken steps to improve the 
plight of women in recent years. There have been notable changes to the civil 
code, the penal code and the constitution - including a constitutional 
guarantee that "the family is the foundation of Turkish society and based on 
equality between the spouses."

But with 5.5 million Turkish women who are or were child brides, 27% female 
participation in the workforce, and millions more illiterate women than men, 
there is a clear disparity between official law and customary practices. Given 
that the Prime Minister Erdogan himself obtained a court order so that his son 
could marry 17 year old Reyyan Uzuner in 2003, it seems a near certainty that 
early marriage and its consequences will not feature highly on the national 
political agenda in the foreseeable future.

Which is why, as Ucan Supurge works its way around the country, meeting the 
human faces of the child brides problem, Ms Dogan has concluded that: 
"Education is the key to the problem door. It's not enough to change the laws 
because the laws cannot change the mentality of the people."

And clearly, it's not just a matter of educating the girls at risk of early 
marriage; but also the parents, families and friends who make early marriages 
socially acceptable, people like Yeliz, from Istanbul, who says "when I hear 
these true life stories I feel like it's happening in another country," as well 
as the government and judiciary, which ultimately bears the power and 
responsibility to implement and enforce the legal protections and freedoms that 
have been promised.


This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 