
When Roger Milla danced around corner flags in Italy 12 years ago and inspired 
Cameroon's progress to aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> quarter-final, it 
seemed Pele might be the next Nostradamus after all. The Brazilian had 
predicted an African team would win the game's greatest prize in the 20th 
century and the Indomitable Lions' displays suggested that the striker's 
soothsaying would prove as accurate as his shooting.

It took two Gary Lineker penalties to deny Cameroon a place in the semi-final 
and Africa's progress appeared confirmed four years later when Nigeria stormed 
into the second round. They were two minutes from eliminating Italy until 
Roberto Baggio struck twice.

Since then, though, has come World Cup stagnation. None of Africa's five 
qualifiers came close to the last eight in France and, when the 23rd African 
Nations Cup starts here today, millions will be looking for clues. Will the 
promise remain unfulfilled in South Korea and Japan or might Pele just have 
been wrong by two years?

For England, who meet Nigeria in Osaka on June 12, and the Republic of 
Ireland, who open their World Cup against Cameroon, events over the next three 
weeks hold particular interest. Nigeria and Cameroon are favourites, with South 
Africa, Senegal, Egypt and Ghana in the pack behind.

Talk of stagnation may seem odd given that football's past two Olympic golds 
have gone to Cameroon and Nigeria. But Africa knows the World Cup is a vital 
test. True progress is not measured at Olympics, essentially an under-23 
tournament and treated lightly by some.

"Africa must repeat or go one better than before [at the World Cup] in order 
to remain among the world football elite," admitted Issa Hayatou, president of 
the Confederation of African Football. "That is why our wish for Africa's five 
representatives - Cameroon, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tunisia - is 
that they succeed in their mission as standard bearers for Africa and win the 
continent a ticket for the semi-finals."

Many experts consider that unlikely. Emmanuel Maradas, editor of African 
Soccer, feels Cameroon offer the continent's only genuine hope and that the 
last eight is the best the Nations Cup holders can achieve.

"The general feeling is that the Africans will not make as big an impact as in 
1990 or 1994," Maradas said. "This time there are a lot of problems. Number one 
there is the economic situation of most African countries. Number two, some key 
players for leading nations such as Nigeria and South Africa are past their 
prime.

"Also Nigeria are not the unit they were. This is just a selection of good 
players. The 1994 team were a unit led by [Daniel] Amokachi and able to compete 
with any team in the world. But no great player has emerged as a dominant 
figure in this team, so I doubt they will pass the first round."

There is, though, no shortage of talent, as the squad lists here confirm. 
Nigeria's Nwankwo Kanu and Cameroon's Lauren Etamé Mayer are at Arsenal; 
Ghana's Sammy Kuffour is at Bayern Munich; Jay-Jay Okocha, widely regarded as 
Nigeria's biggest star, plays for Paris St-Germain. And that is just a taster.

Cameroon's 22 are all based in Europe and Nigeria's squad is similar. Yet 
Maradas believes Cameroon remain too inexperienced and prone to moments of 
madness to succeed this summer, and their new German coach Winfried Schäfer 
admits there is work to be done.

"I have no doubt about the individual ability of my players," he said. "But I 
feel they lack self-belief, tactical discipline and organisation - virtues that 
make German football tick."

 Familiar squabbles


 Matters off the pitch also continue to hold back African teams. It is easy to 
overlook the disadvantage of never playing a World Cup on home soil, though 
that should change in 2010, and the build-up to the Nations Cup has offered 
reminders of issues that are a habitual hindrance: preparation, organisation 
and money.

When it comes to self-destruction only Holland come close to matching African 
sides. A row over salaries and bonuses undermined Cameroon's efforts at USA 
'94, and Nigeria had similar problems there and four years later. The lead-up 
to the start here has seen familiar squabbles.

Liberia dropped their threat to pull out over a pay dispute as late as 
Wednesday, the day after their player-coach George Weah arrived to take 
training only for none of his squad to turn up. Senegal have been embroiled in 
a row relating to bonuses and Nigeria, too, have been affected.

Their protest over the non-payment of World Cup qualification bonuses prompted 
them to refuse to go to Egypt for a friendly this month and left them with only 
one warm-up game, an unimpressive draw in Ivory Coast. Some of their players 
arrived in the capital Abidjan for that match to find it was being played four 
hours away.

Several of Shuaibu Amodu's squad were absent when their training camp opened 
on December 28. Kanu left Highbury less than a week ago - with a knee injury 
that rules him out of Monday's game against Algeria. Not that Amodu sounded 
worried. "We need only a couple of weeks together," he said, "and we will be 
unbeatable." Only first place will guarantee he retains a job that Louis van 
Gaal, Ruud Gullit and Frank Rijkaard have been linked with.

Ipswich's Finidi George insists everyone is "committed and dedicated" and the 
Nigerian public expects nothing less. Questions are asked in some quarters, 
though, as to whether the wealth and pampering the stars enjoy in Europe saps 
their hunger with the national side.

"Sometimes with African players when they were earning less you saw them 
fighting, giving you everything," said Maradas. "When you have £1m in the bank, 
a villa in Lagos and two cars in front, you are home and dry."

Yet poverty does nothing to help. African national associations have little 
money and domestic leagues are mainly poor in pay, quality and conditions.

The well of talent is hardly running dry, though. Last year Ghana finished 
second in the world under-20 championship and Nigeria took silver in the 
under-17s. Everyone is waiting for such showings in the competition that 
matters most.

Best African performances

 World Cup 

Quarter-finals (Cameroon 1990) 

Last 16 ( Nigeria 1994, 1998) 

 Olympics 

Winners (Nigeria 1996, Cameroon 2000) 

 World Youth Cup (u20) 

Runners-up (Ghana 1993, 2001, Nigeria 1989) 

 World rankings 

Fifth (Nigeria April 1994) 

 Women's World Cup 

Quarter-finals (Nigeria 1999)
 