
Graham Linehan's new stage adaptation of the classic 1955 Ealing movie The 
Ladykillers, directed by Sean Foley, is up and running in London's West End. My 
colleague Michael Billington has deliveredhis verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/dec/08/the-ladykillers-review-michael-billington>
 and I went to see it the other day. The questions this production throws up – 
apart from "Wasn't that brilliant?" and "When for goodness' sake can I see it 
again?" – are "How has Mr Linehan bucked the trend of film-to-play adaptations 
being so cynical and awful?" and "How has he succeeded where the Coen brothers 
failed?"

Joel and Ethan Coen produced their own remake of The Ladykillers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-ladykillers> in 2004. The original had a 
wacky criminal gang, led by Alec Guinness's loopy professor, renting a room in 
a tumbledown old house in London's King's Cross from a sweet old lady, whom 
they later discover they need to kill. The remake updated this to America's 
Deep South, with Tom Hanks playing a florid Southern gentleman whose gang rent 
a house from a more robust African-American woman. The Coens' Ladykillers 
wasn't as bad as all that, but it was disappointing and flat.

Graham Linehan's version sticks to the original plotline and characters: we 
are back in 1950s Britain, but with different dialogue. His version differs 
from the Coens' in one crucial respect: it is funny. Now, the point is not that 
the Coens' film is massively unfunny, but that Linehan, with what seems to me a 
comedy writer's professionalism and rigour, has taken care to write funny jokes 
and ideas, putting as many as possible of them into his script. And it is 
always a surprise to me how many critics imagine that doing this is an easy or 
trifling business, and that what counts is some new "interpretation" or "idea". 
The Linehan/Foley Ladykillers delivers something much more difficult and 
rewarding: laughs. And these dissolve any worries you might have about the 
point of mounting a new adaptation of The Ladykillers. Linehan has honoured the 
original with a firework display of verbal brilliance and gags: just as Sean 
Foley and Hamish McColl's comedy classic, The Play What I Wrote, honoured the 
genius of Morecambe and Wise. Foley's direction is great and the cast are all 
outstanding. It is invidious to pick people out, but I have to mention Peter 
Capaldi's marvellous Professor, and Marcia Warren's Mrs Wilberforce.

Another part of the success of this stage play is that it doesn't feel the 
need to create some kind of spurious interpretative progress, to move the 
original on to some new era or setting or idea. On the contrary: part of what 
makes it so inspired is that it looks as if it might have existed before the 
film, that it could be a classic, well-made stage play which was developed into 
the classic movie.

Looking through my theatre programme, I see a new show is coming to the Palace 
Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue in February 2012: the Chichester FestivalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> production of Singin' in the Rain – 
based on the MGM film, as it says under the title. Of course, I haven't seen 
this, and I have no idea what it is like. I hope it's great. But asking why 
everyone involved was initially drawn to the idea of adapting Singin' in the 
Rain, is like hearing, once again, Mrs Merton's immortal question to Debbie 
McGee: "What first attracted you to the millionaire Paul Daniels?"

It surely could not have been the same with The Ladykillers. Of course, it is 
a cinema gem, and well loved, but not an obvious moneyspinner.Graham Linehan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/graham-linehan> and Sean Foley were 
clearly drawn to it, because they thought they could make it work creatively. 
(Interestingly, Linehan has said that he did not begin the project as a 
lifelong fan of Ealing comedies.) And the fact that it has worked creatively is 
a joy. The cast should settle in for a long run, and make sure their passports 
are up to date for the Broadway transfer.
 