
In the summer of 2003, a clerk at the US embassy in London informed me that 
under new 9/11 laws, I was considered “unstable”, and my request for a tourist 
visa would be denied. Never mind that on the invitation of my aunt – a US 
citizen – I had bought non-refundable, round-trip tickets to Philadelphia (both 
the written invitation and the confirmed bookings were prerequisites), or that 
I was at the end of the second year of a four-year degree course at Liverpool 
University, or even that I had a visa and job confirmed in France, where I 
would be spending my third year.

None of that mattered. I carried a Cameroonian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cameroon> passport, and the job of the 
consulate team was to presume I had no intention of leaving the US, unless my 
documentary evidence convinced them otherwise, which clearly it hadn’t. As I 
left the embassy, my face wet with tears, I invented scenarios to console 
myself: “Her husband has obviously just left her for her best friend, she’s 
obviously taking out her frustration on me.”

Immigration systems and visa requirements aren’t designed with actual people 
in mind

Over the years it’s not just Americans who have looked at my forest green 
passport and seen the warning: “Beware! Likely to spread contagion or disappear 
into the black market.” Queuing in Lille in northern France to upgrade my visa 
from visitor to work permit was like waiting in line with the disallowed – 
easily 200 of us jostling to be seen by the gendarmes, emotions ranging from 
hopeful to desperate, depending on how many times you’d been turned back for 
some trivial reason. “Revenez demain” (“Come back tomorrow”) became the most 
painful words to hear.

Much of my time in Britain has also been punctuated by the cycle of visa 
applications, the prices for which escalate with each change of government. My 
conversations with immigration officers have become something of a chess match: 
they make their move then I make mine.

“How long have you been in the UK?” I’m asked, as the immigration officer 
feels up the page to which my visa is stuck, checking to make sure it didn’t 
belong to a different passport. “Oh, only 10 years,” I say, insouciant; using 
my BBC Radio 4 voice. “What did you study at university?” “Do you mean my first 
degree or one of my masters?” Neither of us break eye contact.

They were only doing their job, but I felt as though I too was doing mine: 
subtly making the point that I had every right to be here. I’d studied a 
British curriculum, taught to me by British teachers in African schools; and 
after my parents raised the thousands of pounds needed to pay for the British 
university education they thought would help me establish my place in the 
world, I just wanted to be left to get on with it.

But this is not just a problem in the west. My most painful visa transactions 
have, sadly, been on the African continent – the place where passports should 
be recognised immediately for the useless, artificial construct they are; where 
members of the same ethnic group are separated by barriers imposed from outside.

But Africa’s leaders have been among the most ardent defenders of national 
boundaries. In 2013, the African Development Bank wrote: “African countries 
remain closed off to each other, making travel within the continent difficult. 
Africa is one of the regions in the world with the highest visa requirements. 
This situation is even more restricted for Africans travelling within Africa, 
as compared to Europeans and North Americans. On average, African citizens 
require visas to visit 60% of African countries 
<http://www.afdb.org/en/blogs/afdb-championing-inclusive-growth-across-africa/post/visa-restrictions-and-economic-consequences-in-africa-11987/>
.”

But immigration systems and visa requirements aren’t designed with actual 
people in mind. Instead, they are a reflection of the geopolitics of the day 
and of voter sentiment. The number of countries your passport grants you access 
to is directly proportional to how many friends your government has, and
Cameroon’s Paul Biya is famously reclusive 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/11/29/us-cameroon-islamists-idUSBRE9AS09020131129>
.

That said, Cameroon is not the worst. In a 2014 ranking of countries by the 
strength of their passport 
<http://awesome.good.is/infographics/how-powerful-is-your-passport/516>, Finns, 
Swedes and Brits can travel the most freely, swanning into 173 countries of 
their choosing. Cameroon came in at 43, alongside China, Congo, Jordan and 
Rwanda. The least desirable passport was Afghanistan’s, giving its citizens 
access to a paltry 28 countries.

The system is broken, and the idea that where you are born is a lottery 
exempts us from our collective responsibility to change that system. But I’m an 
idealist with wanderlust. So I studied hard for theLife in the UK  
<https://www.gov.uk/life-in-the-uk-test/book-life-in-uk-test>test, pledged my 
allegiance to the Queen, and swapped my forest green passport for a crimson red 
British one – all so that I could just finally roam free.
 