
They came with great expectations and the most vaunted forward line in the 
tournament, but Senegal limped home from the Africa Cup of Nations having lost 
all three of their matches. In the usual run of things, you'd expect the coach, 
Amara Traoré not to be long for his job. A scapegoat, says the logic of 
international football, must be found, andthe coach is as convenient a figure 
to sacrifice as anybody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/sep/16/england-fabio-capello?CMP=twt_gu>
.

Unsurprisingly, El Hadji Diouf has been foremost in calling for Traoré's head. 
It was Traoré who rejected Diouf's offer to come out of international 
retirement in 2010 (although Diouf was subsequently given a five-year ban from 
international football having refused to turn up for a disciplinary hearing 
into comments he made on French radio that "the whole of African football is 
corrupt").

"The Senegal team has no soul," Diouf said after Senegal's exit. "I have 
always said that Amara Traoré knows nothing. He doesn't have the level of 
experience and knowledge to handle the team. The FA people are jealous of 
Senegal's 2002 generation. They don't want us to associate with the team. Some 
of us have experience. I'm completing my coaching course in England and I could 
be useful to the team but they have mixed politics with football inSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal> and things will never change."

Yet the noises within the team, for once, are supportive of their manager. 
"The coach has always been there to take a bullet for us," said the captain 
Mamadou Niang. "Now we have to stand by him."

When Traoré took over, after all, the team was in as big a mess as it had been 
for quarter of a century. Thirty members of the federation board had resigned 
en masse in 2008, leading to a three-month leadership vacuum during which 
Senegal were unable to travel to away games. Lamine N'Diaye, the new coach, was 
placed in an almost impossible position. His Senegal side were left needing to 
beat their neighbours Gambia at home to qualify for the Cup of Nations in 
Angola.

The Reuters journalist Dan Magnowski, then based in Dakar, had to travel to 
the airport on the afternoon of the game. "I saw smoke billowing up from across 
the city," he said. "I asked the taxi driver what it was, and he told me it was 
the football federation building. They'd only drawn." Against the country the 
Senegalese refer to as "the suppository of Africa", that was some humiliation.

Although there were familiar problems over bonuses before the tournament that 
led to a couple of warm-up matches being cancelled, Traoré's Senegal have 
generally given the impression of calmness and steady progress. Although the 
Senegal football federation has promised an evaluation, he, certainly, is 
adamant he wants to carry on. "I won't resign, even if the responsibility rests 
with the manager. I began this project two years ago, the team can't be 
useless. I've got the strong desire to continue," Traoré said.

"To call for the head of Amara or the minister doesn't achieve anything. As 
the 2013 [qualifying] Nations Cup approaches there are things to improve … but 
not by giving the team to a Mourinho, Capello or Ferguson. What happened is the 
responsibility of the coach and I take responsibility. We have to analyse, 
evaluate and move on from there. We have to correct our mistakes as to err is 
human.

"The question is why are we not scoring? I wonder … we are not a team that 
does not create opportunities. We play well and I will have to correct that 
shortfall. The Cup of Nations is a very difficult tournament and it has always 
been so for us. Most people described us favourites but I thought otherwise. My 
team cannot be compared to Ivory Coast and Ghana in terms of experience. It is 
a young team that showed character."

So what did go wrong? Well, perhaps to an extent a strength became a weakness 
– the glut of strikers made the team top heavy, and the fact that seven 
forwards were included in the 23-man squad meant there was little flexibility 
to change approach. It's not insignificant that the most effective Senegal 
player was probably the Fenerbahce right-winger Issiar Dia, who offered both 
width and an attacking option from deeper.

The problems were evident from Senegal's first half-hour, against Zambia. The 
Chipolopolo sat deep, knowing Senegal's front three, as natural forwards, would 
continue to push high when perhaps the more useful thing would have been to 
drop off and seek space. They broke with pace and intelligence, the movement of 
Emmanuel Mayuka forcing the Senegal back four deep and opening vast swathes of 
turf, in which Chris Katongo schemed while Rainford Kalaba and Isaac Chansa 
surged. They scored twice in the first 25 minutes, could have had four or five 
by half-time and, although Senegal improved radically after half-time, the game 
was won.

Then there is the matter of personnel. Six qualifying matches (in one of the 
tougher groups) brought 16 goals, thanks largely to the forward line of Niang, 
Moussa Sow and Papiss Cissé. Traoré brought in Demba Ba, leaving out first 
Cissé, then both Sow and Niang. Perhaps that disrupted the rhythm of the 
established front three, but if it was a mistake it was a readily 
understandable one, and one that most of the football world, having seen Ba's 
form for Newcastle, would have made.

In truth, Senegal were undone by a combination of a bad first half and 
dreadful luck. Traoré probably should take some credit for the way he 
rearranged things against Zambia, plugging the gaps so that his side dominated 
the second half. They pulled one goal back, but the defeat meant they couldn't 
afford further slip-ups, and certainly not the ill fortune they endured against 
Equatorial Guinea when they pummelled the hosts for an hour and somehow failed 
to score. Yes, they were sloppy to concede, but having got the equaliser, who 
realistically could have expected Kily, a Spanish fourth division player, to 
score a 25-yard drive with the outside of his right foot in the final minute? 
Senegal paid for 30 poor minutes against Zambia and for a couple of moments of 
raggedness against Equatorial Guinea. After that it was too late.

The tournament may have been a disaster for Senegal in terms of results, but 
the performances weren't that bad. For two years those in charge of Senegal 
have given the impression of good sense and calm forward planning. It would be 
a shame if 10 days of madness were allowed to spoil that.
 