
Sitting in a doctor's room, a young man is answering questions about his 
lifestyle choices. How often do you eat fruit and vegetables? Smoke? Drink? 
What is your family medical history? This scene is one you might have 
experienced or can picture in the surgery practice down the road.

A familiar scene in high-income countries such as the UK, it has recently 
become the experience of hundreds of Kenyans and Nigerians as they take part in 
pilot projects aiming to tackle the rise of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) 
such as cardiovascular diseases (CVD), diabetes and cancer in developing 
countries.

The success of these projects, managed by Family Health International (FHI), 
have provoked calls to integrate CVD screening into Kenya's National AIDS 
strategy. It is a stepping stone in the movement of international health 
organisations to bring attention to the global burden of NCDs.

The facts and figures speak for themselves. Accounting for 60 per cent of 
global deaths NCDs are the largest causes of mortality worldwide. Of these 
deaths 80 per cent occur in low- and middle-income countries, making them an 
urgent development issue.

However, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) set out in 2000 by the United 
Nations outlined targets to combat infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, 
malaria and TB but did not include any references to NCDs such as heart 
disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease or diabetes.

 "It is a major problem", says Jo Hopkins, Director of Fundraising at World 
Child Cancer, a charity that is a member of the international campaign group 
NCD Alliance.

"It means that developing country governments have no incentive in terms of 
international funding to do anything for non-communicable diseases."

This helped to fuel a perception that cancer and heart disease were the 
burdens of affluent societies, whereas developing countries were associated 
with infectious diseases. However, with the urbanisation of many low-income 
countries this is increasingly not the case.

"Particularly as more people are adopting a western lifestyle and tobacco 
companies push their products on low- and middle-income countries, cancer is a 
major problem," says Hopkins.

However, in 2011 a UN High-Level Summit will be held in New York on September 
16-19 to raise the profile of NCDs. This meeting has been likened to the 2001 
UN conference on HIV/AIDS that sparked the formation of the Global Fund to 
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, which raised nearly $10bn.

Similar funding for NCDs could relieve the financial burden they create for 
developing countries. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), 30 per 
cent of people dying from NCDs in low- and middle-income countries are under 60 
years old and are in their most productive period of life. In conjunction with 
a WHO report on NCDs released in April, WHO Director-General Dr Margaret Chan 
said that the rise of NCDs presents an enormous challenge.

"In wealthy countries deaths from heart disease and strokes have declined 
significantly. But this gives a distorted picture," says Dr Chan. "For some 
countries, it is no exaggeration to describe the situation as an impending 
disaster; a disaster for health, for society, and most of all for national 
economies."

For those in lower socio-economic groups, who may have limited access to 
healthy food or places for physical activity, the risk is high and the 
financial burden of NCDs can be devastating. According to the World Heart 
Federation, parents can be forced to reduce basic consumption and children can 
be withdrawn from school to assist in care or to work. In China, expenses from 
strokes pushed 37 per cent of patients and their families below the poverty 
line. Research from the International Diabetes Federation in 2009 found that of 
2300 people with type 2 diabetes one in six could not work because of their 
health, and more than half could not buy all the medicines they needed.

Dr Jothydev Kesavadev, a diabetes specialist in India outlines the financial 
burden of care for his patients.

"The average income of a person is less than $2000 a year," says Kesavadev. 

"With the development of multiple combinations of diabetes the average cost of 
treatment would be more than $3000 per year. Incredible - how can they treat 
the disease?"

Following September's meeting it is hoped that more funding will be available 
for the prevention and treatment of NCDs. However, health programmes will 
require co-ordination between the health sector and non-health sectors such as 
agriculture, urban planning, and education. This co-ordination is also 
essential for the control of infectious diseases and, as the FHI projects 
indicate, some global health organisations believe that infectious and 
non-infectious health programmes can be successfully integrated.
Speaking in March a few days before an event held by NCD Alliance and Partners 
in Health (PIH) in Boston, co-founder of PIH and Professor at Harvard Medical 
School Paul Farmer suggested that health systems can be strengthened by NCD 
health programmes and by adapting existing programmes to new demands.

"A good cardiac surgery program would improve the quality of surgical care in 
general," Farmer said.

"If you have a good vaccination program for polio, measles, or tetanus, it is 
a delivery system for the cervical cancer vaccine, Gardasil."

Working in hospitals in developing countries, World Child Cancer see the 
impact that improving cancer care can have.

"Children with cancer need medical support such as blood tests and bone marrow 
tests so we often spend money on increasing standards in the pathology dept," 
explains Hopkins.

"This has a knock on effect with adult tests and other child diseases. 
Anecdotal evidence shows that when you start treating children with cancer in 
major hospitals it ups the game in other departments."

Broad health programmes and international co-ordination could help prevent 
further increase in NCD cases but during a recent speech in Moscow, Dr Chan 
warned that the time to act is now.

She said: "In the absence of urgent action, the rising financial burden of 
these diseases will reach levels that are beyond the capacity of even the 
wealthiest countries in the world to cope."

This feature was written for the Guardian International Development Journalism 
competition before 13 June 2011.
 