
Last week iSpeech <http://www.ispeech.org/>, a text-to-speech startup, 
announced that it had acquired its first publishing client: Pearson. Claiming 
"the most natural-sounding TTS audio on the market" and previously known for 
driving-direction applications and audio cues for the home, iSpeech wants to 
help publishers automate the creation of audiobooks. The default voice on 
iSpeech is pleasantly lilting, but it's still definitely not human, and more 
akin to a pre-recorded bus announcement in its odd pauses and stumbles. Pearson 
intends to use the service primarily with textbooks; the robotic voice is 
definitely not ready for the emotional range and styles of fiction yet.

Text-to-speech has been tried many times before, but it's technically very 
difficult to pull off, and legally complex. Amazon got into trouble in 2009 
when it rolled out basic text-to-speech for theKindle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kindle>. Publishers said that Amazon 
was abusing its copyright and it withdrew, much to the chagrin of, among 
others, the blind and partially sighted community, reliant on audiobooks, who 
briefly gained access to Amazon's vast library. The problem is the cost of 
creating an audiobook. This involves studio hire and voice talent and can reach 
thousands of pounds, which is often difficult to justify in sales, while 
iSpeech offers automation costing just fractions of a penny per word.

But while the cost of creating quality audiobooks prevents much contemporary 
work being made available, older work is being "acoustically liberated" by 
collaborators on the internet.LibriVox <http://librivox.org/>, founded in 2005, 
recently passed 6,500 books in its collection: all in the public domain, all 
recorded by volunteers. LibriVox's moderators assemble teams of participants 
who take a chapter each. While the tone might sometimes vary as much as 
iSpeech's robot, LibriVox's enthusiastic volunteers are now putting out three 
classic audiobooks a day, a victory for networking the passion of readers.
 