
Philip Clarke survived his third annual meeting as chief executive of Tesco. 
Will he be there for a fourth? Half the City is playing the game of fantasy 
chief executive, and some formerTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> directors have been muttering 
darkly about Clarke's supposed strategic errors and how the company's woes 
shouldn't be dumped on former boss Sir Terry Leahy.

Clarke certainly has made mistakes. He should have binned Leahy's US folly, 
the Fresh & Easy chain in the US, immediately.

But shareholders have good reason to ditch Clarke only if they believe his UK 
strategy is wrong and that he has misread a market where discounters are on the 
march. This boils down to a simple question: do investors believe Tesco should 
cut its prices deeply, take the fight toAldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> and Lidl, and accept that profit 
margins of 5% are no longer viable?

"Be in no doubt, reducing prices doesn't result in an immediate increase in 
sales," said Clarke. "These things take time." In other words, he is not the 
man to launch a price war. He is seeking "the right blend of price, quality, 
range and service", as he put it in February.

The sermon sounds complacent. The view from the tills, as expressed by one 
shareholder-employee, is that customers don't want vouchers and "price 
promises", they want lower prices.

Over at Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> – where the 
latest sales figures were even weaker than Tesco's – Dalton Philips also has a 
very different take from Clarke's. The "brutal reality", he said this week, is 
that big grocers need to fight back or risk discounters grabbing 25% of the 
market, versus 8% today. Look what Ryanair and easyJet did to traditional 
airline carriers, he argues. And look at how Carrefour, the big boy in France, 
has regained market share by cutting prices.

Do Tesco shareholders really want to sanction a price war, which would mean 
accepting a lower share price, at least in the short-term? Most, one suspects, 
are not convinced by Clarke's strategy but still hope he might be proved 
correct. Another profits warning would force them to get off the fence. If it 
doesn't happen, Clarke ought to be safe. But a warning after three years of 
heavy capital investment would surely force a strategic rethink.

The Bank of England's new normal

Another day, another message from the governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> on interest rates. 
This time Mark Carney cited 2.5% as the market's definition of a "new normal" 
bank rate and said it could arrive in the first quarter of 2017.

An "old normal" rate was 5%, he told the Today programme, but the world has 
changed. UK consumers and the UK government are still heavily indebted, the 
eurozone is weak, the pound is strong and banks have to hold more capital and 
will pass on costs to borrowers.

One can understand why Carney wants to return attention to the Bank's "big 
picture" view that increases in rates will be "gradual and limited". It was a 
mistake to ignite a debate on the actual timing of the first rise, as Carney 
did in his Mansion House speech when he made the electrifying remark that the 
moment could come "sooner than markets currently expect".

Inevitably, the comment would be over-analysed, notwithstanding the get-out 
clauses. Equally inevitably, Carney would be obliged to clarify, or at least 
emphasise, the uncertainties in the data. As a result, MP Pat McFadden at the 
Treasury select committee this week called Carney "an unreliable boyfriend". 
The label will stick.

What to make of this latest talk of the "new normal" being 2.5%? The precision 
jars. The Bank's forecasting record on the economy is poor. It is perfectly 
possible that bank rate could be stuck at 1.5% in early 2017 if growth in wages 
continues to be sluggish and if the eurozone is still in a funk. On the other 
hand, one can imagine the "new normal" being close to the "old normal" if 
events turn out differently.

Mervyn King <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mervyn-king>, Carney's 
predecessor, had a stock answer on interest rates: decisions are made by the 
monetary policy committee on a month-by-month basis. It was not illuminating 
but it was accurate. If Carney felt such stonewalling would be unhelpful in the 
current climate, his "gradual and limited" phrase struck the right note – 
reassuring but vague. Why offer a hostage to fortune by talking actual numbers?

Barclays back in the news for the wrong reasons

"I have always made it clear that cultural change will take time," says Antony 
Jenkins <https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, chief executive 
of Barclays, in a memo to staff describing his "deep disappointment and 
frustration that our business is back in the news this week for the wrong 
reasons".

Perfectly true. Jenkins has often said his admirable ethical crusade is a 
five- to 10-year affair and that there will be "challenges" along the way. Even 
so, copping a big fine for running a dodgy "dark pool" would look naive.

To recap, the New York attorney general alleges "a pretty flagrant example of 
fraud" atBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> in New York. 
Eric Schneiderman contends that the bank was using devious tactics to lure 
unwary investors into a private trading pool full of sharks, aka aggressive 
high-frequency traders.

That the supposed fish are actually big institutional investors, who ought to 
know to carry shark-protection equipment, is beside the point. Schneiderman's 
main allegation is that Barclays lied to customers about how many "predatory" 
high-speed trading robots were present.

Jenkins has dispatched the group's general counsel and brought in "substantial 
external resource" to establish the facts. A full response will follow. "If 
there has been wrongdoing, we will address it quickly and decisively," he says.

Fine, but if wrongdoing is admitted or proved, Jenkins will have to explain 
how Barclays failed to spot it.

Regulators have made no secret of their wish to peer into these dark, or 
private, trading pools. The US securities and exchange commission has been 
running an inquiry for the past year.

Central bankers have been fretting about ultra-fast computer trading since the 
"flash crash" on Wall Street in March 2010 when the Dow Jones industrial 
average suddenly plunged 9% and then recovered in minutes.

In short, the warning lights for operators of dark pools should have been 
written in neon.

If Barclays has slipped up, it's a question of competence. As ever in banking, 
good intentions are one thing, good behaviour is what matters.

Lawyers spur police to act over Wonga

Well done, the Law Society, which seems to have played the critical role in 
ensuring that the police will consider a criminal investigation of Wonga, the 
payday lender that sent letters to customers in arrears from non-existent law 
firms threatening legal action. Wonga this week agreed to pay £2.6m 
compensation for its actions between 2008 and 2010. But the curiosity was why 
theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority>, which 
agreed the settlement with the company, had not formally asked the police to 
investigate. The financial regulator was reluctant even to confirm it passed 
over files.

The Law Society's call for a criminal investigation appears to have made the 
difference. City of London Police said on Friday it "will reassess whether a 
criminal investigation is now appropriate" having previously left matters in 
the hands of the FCA. Quite right. The desire to get compensation quickly to 
customers should not prevent a police investigation.
 