
As we approach the first high-level meeting of the Global Partnership for 
Effective Development Co-operation <http://effectivecooperation.org/hlm2014/> 
(GPEDC) in Mexico next week, no one quite knows what to expect. Are we going to 
see the further cementing of a dynamic, evolving attempt to hold countries to 
account for how they handle development co-operation, as the most active 
participants hope? Or will the meeting confirm suspicions that the enterprise 
is somewhat precarious, with leaders and secretariat alike unsure of the next 
steps?

The Mexico meeting is the first major meeting of the Aid Effectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
 movement sinceBusan, in South Korea, in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership>
. Previous meetings were in Rome (2003), Paris (2005, where theParis 
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness 
<http://www.oecd.org/development/effectiveness/34428351.pdf> (pdf) was signed) 
and Accra (2008). In the lead-up to the Busan meeting, the OECD, which had led 
the process since the beginning, was under pressure to better incorporate the 
mega-changes taking place in development co-operation, most importantly the
(re-)emergence of non-OECD major donors (such as China, India and Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/dec/02/busan-shifting-geopolitical-realities>
). And so it was that the aid effectiveness caterpillar metamorphosed into a 
more ambitious butterfly, spreading its wings well beyond aid and the OECD to 
encompass new issues and new actors.

Ironically, it is precisely this attempt at inclusivity that seems to have 
heightened rather than reduced tensions. And the clue to why is in the name. 
Following the apparently successful attempt to bring more players into the fold 
(the atmosphere in Busan when news spread that China had "signed" was 
celebratory) the term "global partnership" was soon in use. The only problem 
being that there already is a global partnership, convoked inMDG 8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/aug/05/millennium-development-goal-global-partnership>
, solidified at the Monterrey conference on Financing for Development in 2002.

This UN-level global partnership is the subject of debate as part of the 
post-2015 process. I even heard it referred to by a senior adviser to the UN 
secretary general as the "global partnership for effective sustainable 
development", almost exactly the same wording as the GPEDC. No wonder there are 
concerns over what seems to be an inefficient double process (ironically for a 
programme of work aimed at streamlining efforts).

The big question is, how can the Global Partnership for Effective Development 
Co-operation, with its more limited focus on aid and finance, fit with the more 
ambitious and overarching "global partnership for effective sustainable 
development".

The problem is in part political – some countries are put off by the OECD's 
continued co-leadership of the process, while others simply use that as an 
excuse to avoid making commitments.

But it is also procedural: the GPEDC is not a formal UN process and it is 
proving hard to discuss it in New York or insert it formally into key post-2015 
documents, where it is only ever mentioned grudgingly, if at all.

After Busan, it soon became clear that the non-OECD countries persuaded to 
sign lukewarm commitments had acceded more out of politeness than a genuine 
intention to engage.

Speak to UN civil servants in New York and their tone towards the GPEDC can be 
dismissive. Its original sin, that it was conceived by the OECD for the OECD, 
remains. Instead of increasing legitimacy, the attempt to include new actors 
and issues is seen as creating tension with the truly inclusive and legitimate 
processes led by the UN. The misnomer "global partnership" does not help – 
meant to imply greater inclusivity, to some ears it sounds likeOECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> mission creep.

Non-OECD countries, riding a high of new influence in development affairs, are 
likely to prefer an alternative arena. (The stipulation to untie aid is perhaps 
the clearest example of this problem, appropriate to rich countries, but at 
odds with the theory behind south-south co-operation, which emphasises mutual 
benefit.)

It is ironic and a little unfair that the OECD countries find themselves in 
this fix. First, in the early 2000s, responding to pressure to make their aid 
better and bigger, they regulated themselves in a genuine effort to contribute 
more to the development of poor countries. Then, as the immensity of the shifts 
going on in development co-operation became clear, they sought to engage the 
new actors and issues that needed to be included in the agenda. They have 
helped create the only international process with any real teeth in terms of 
improving aid effectiveness for development, and the five effectiveness 
principles first articulated in Paris are now common currency throughout the 
development industry.

So how can this not entirely unsuccessful exercise in improving donor 
practices be preserved in a framework that works?

The deliberate ambiguity employed to collect as many signatures as possible in 
Busan, a common device in international affairs, has led to confusion regarding 
mandate. And without a clear and legitimate mandate, countries will gradually 
melt away.

The leadership appears to think that providing open invitations and focusing 
on policy issues is the way to get the process back on track and to ensure the 
engagement of key actors. It is a kind of "hit and hope" approach to 
international negotiations. I hope they are right, but I fear they may have to 
tackle legitimacy and procedural issues head-on if they are going to maintain 
the GPEDC as an effective force to monitor and improve development 
co-operation, which is its only raison d'etre – no one needs another talkshop.

Although the preparatory documents for the Mexico meeting mention the 
post-2015 process, they don't give it anything like the prominence it deserves. 
The whole point of the meeting in Mexico should be to discuss how the GPEDC 
fits in to post-2015, how it can be a part of the "how" when the "what" is 
signed in New York in September next year. But that discussion is not even on 
the agenda.
 