
Leave it to the frontman of a Canadian band to ruin a pure American spectacle 
like the NBA All-Star celebrity game. Win Butler, lead singer of 
indie-pop-arena-noise-dance-rock band theArcade Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire>, accepting his trophy as the 
Most Valuable Player, took his golden opportunity to speak to the millions of 
sleepy, bored fans who tolerated two hours of horrible flailing alleged to be 
basketball and relayed a political message about the relative merits of 
Canada’s public health care system. As you might have guessed, that didn’t go 
over too well with the good people at ESPN, which televised the “game”. Butler 
told the audience that America could learn a few things from Canada’s system, 
and before you could say “single-payer”, ESPN’s Sage Steele shut him down, 
making it very clear that :“We’re talking about celebrity stuff, not politics.” 
Thank God. The last thing I want from my novelty basketball game is anything 
that actually matters to the fate of the planet. Hopefully Sage gets a raise 
for her quick thinking.

Win Butler's political MVP speech at All-Star celebrity game cut off by ESPN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/arcade-fire-win-butler-political-mvp-speech-all-star-celebrity-game-cut-off-by-espn>
And what a spectacle it was. The word “celebrity” gets tossed around so 
cavalierly these days, what with your Kardashians and your YouTubers and what 
not. Fortunately, this event did not disappoint in the star power department. 
Megawatt celebs like Nick Cannon, Joel David Moore, the Property Brothers and 
someone named Terrence J performed true feats of athletic wonder – bricking 
free throws, flinging errant outlet passes and airballing wide-open 3-pointers 
for two ungodly hours of abject horror. When not shaming the sport worse than a 
collection of sugar-addled toddlers tripping over their own shoelaces, the 
audience was treated to several plugs for the upcoming Jesse Owens biopic Race, 
starring Jason Sudeikis and Stephen James, both players in the game. Sudeikis 
actuallyseemed refreshingly comfortable playing basketball 
<https://twitter.com/NBA/status/698302297328062464>, unlike many of his fellow 
competitors. He buried a few contested threes, showed a confident handle when 
carrying the ball, and finished a reverse layup that made me sit up and take 
notice. He was good enough that I could forgive the constant shilling for his 
film.

What I couldn’t forgive was the rest of the evening. Ice Cube’s son and star 
of Straight Outta Compton, O’Shea Jackson, had an itchier trigger finger than 
Eazy-E after one too many beers. As soon as the ball touched his hand, he was 
chucking like Nick Young in garbage time of a Laker game. He made one three 
where the ball didn’t even rotate. It just flew as though it were a duck that 
had just been pumped full of buckshot. I suppose I was supposed to laugh when 
Tracy McGrady – who is one year younger than retiring All-Star Kobe Bryant, but 
still looks 10 years older – posted up on the diminutive, 5f t3in Muggsy 
Bogues. McGrady made a nice show of the ludicrous scenario, put up a shot and 
missed, but his overmatched defender still got called for a foul. I don’t even 
know what Bogues’ infraction was other than willingly participating in such a 
risible charade.

To be fair, these affairs are essentially one big gag. It’s like the world’s 
most tedious pick-up game. No one boxes out, there’s no rhyme or reason to the 
offenses and neither team even so much as attempted something as rudimentary as 
a pick-and-roll. In short, it was kind of like watching a Nets v Sixers game, 
but with more at stake. I suppose that’s part of the appeal. Celebrities: 
they’re just like us. They’re terrible at basketball. Marvel at Anthony 
Anderson’s complete lack of utility in every conceivable position on the court. 
Chortle as tennis player Milos Raonic turns the ball over as though it’s his 
job. Giggle whenever someone calls Milwaukee Bucks owner Marc Lasry a 
“celebrity”. The announcers made a cursory effort to liven up the affair, but 
even they couldn’t be all that bothered to pay attention. Jon Barry, ESPN’s 
ostensible color commentator, was thoroughly bemused when WNBA star Elena Delle 
Donne was introduced for the USA team. “I hope I don’t say Dellavadova,” he 
said, referring to Cleveland Cavaliers point guard Matthew. Fortunately for 
Barry, they look absolutely nothing alike. As far as I recall before passing 
out from exhaustion, he was successful in not confusing them for the entirety 
of the evening, but I should be forgiven if I missed something.

Perhaps the only aspect of the game that made the night more tolerable is the 
decision to keep the clock running during routine stops in play like fouls and 
free throws. If only actual NBA games were so expedient. It would certainly 
make the Hack-a-Jordan and Hack-a-Howard moments more tolerable. Save for a 
couple standout performances – Sudeikis can play and the Property Brothers 
seemed to feed off each other the same way the Morris Twins do when they play 
together, except in a far uglier fashion – the game was, as usual, more tedious 
than watching two elderly cough syrup addicts play checkers. Kevin Hart, a 
four-time celebrity game MVP, coached the USA team versus Drake’s Canadian team 
and left the bench to “come out of retirement” in the middle of the third 
quarter, with his team down 39-33. Kevin Hart is ubiquitous atNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> All-Star weekend every year, 
interjecting himself in as many events as possible, even if you don’t want him 
there at all. I half expect him to pop up at the Slam Dunk contest, 
substituting himself for the ball during Andre Drummond’s turn. I’d pay good 
money to watch Drummond dunk little Kevin from the free throw line. That’d 
warrant a perfect 10 from where I’m sitting.

But it’s Win Butler that we’ll all remember from this year’s celebrity game, 
though not thanks to his dominant double-double performance (15 points, 14 
rebounds). After all, he was taller than just about everyone on the court, save 
for the aforementioned geriatric McGrady. If he didn’t boss around his 
opponents in the post, you’d have to question the laws of physics or his own 
coordination. What we’ll remember is his failed attempt to inject some 
seriousness in a frivolous evening. It’d be foolish to be surprised that Butler 
used his platform to try to make a meaningful point. He’s been politically 
outspoken for most of his time as a pop star. Butler’s wife, Régine Chassagne,
wrote an impassioned plea for this publication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jan/17/haiti-earthquake-aid-casualties>
 on behalf of the people of Haiti (where she has family) after the devastating 
earthquake there in 2010.

They’ve donated money and performed benefit concerts for various causes 
whenever they can. It should also not come as a shock that ESPN would shut him 
down as soon as he got too vocal about something that doesn’t involve topics 
like whether or not Cam Newton is a leader or if LeBron James is better than 
Michael Jordan. ESPN employs plenty of serious journalists like Ramona 
Shelburne and Don Van Natta Jr who do fantastic work on a regular basis, 
genuinely entertaining hosts like Michelle Beadle, and charismatic analysts 
like Jalen Rose. But they also run screaming from anything unexpected or 
potentially problematic for their position as the Worldwide Leader in Sports. 
One only has to look at the way they treated Bill Simmons (who, full 
disclosure, is my former boss at Grantland) after his comments on the Ray Rice 
scandal and the way in which NFL commissioner Roger Goodell handled the 
fallout. Would letting Win Butler finish whatever he had to say about health 
care really damage the lofty status of the ESPN brand? Doubtful. The network is 
so omnipresent and monolithic that even the full efforts of Fox Sports 1 
couldn’t loosen their substantial grip on the market. No matter what city I’m 
in, ESPN is on in the airport, just because it’s expertly made wallpaper. You 
can stare at their programming for hours and never find yourself troubled by 
what’s being broadcast. That might be their greatest asset – it’s hypnotic, 
even when it’s officious, overbearing and dumb, like whatever is being 
discussed on that day’s episode of First Take. The minute something happens 
that’s not a part of the pedantic script, the iron fist of the Worldwide Leader 
comes crashing down.

And this isn’t even an ideological disagreement on my part. If The Flash’s Tom 
Cavanagh had won the MVP and started pontificating about the need to arm 
elementary school kids to defend themselves against ISIS, I wouldn’t have been 
bothered. At least it would have been a brief opportunity for a smidgen of 
reality to seep into a drop-dead dull event that isn’t even as compelling as 
the old MTV Rock N’ Jock shows from the 90s. Besides the Win Butler incident, 
the only time I could roust myself from my slumber was when they cut toGuy 
Fieri and a child in the crowd 
<https://twitter.com/dave_schilling/status/698307455277625346>, and that was 
just because I had to laugh at Guy’s facial hair. But the NBA All-Star Game, 
like every other All-Star game, only exists to promote the brand. It’s nothing 
more than a few days of rah-rah spectacle designed to intrigue casual viewers 
who might not otherwise click over to watch a game. These nights aren’t for the 
basketball obsessive who subscribes to League Pass and can quote the top 10 
PERs in the Association from memory. It’s for the rest of the world who may or 
may not even know what PER stands for. Those are the people ESPN needs the 
most, as they bleed subscribers and struggle to figure out what their role is 
in a TV climate that increasingly bristles against the idea of even paying for 
cable.

Of course, if you flip over to TNT on a Thursday night, you might see Charles 
Barkley ranting freely about politics, race, culture, and all manner of other 
controversial topics. TNT pays Barkley a lot of money to be himself, to work 
without a muzzle, and to stir up trouble. ESPN, on the other hand, remains 
content to stifle anything resembling a real, honest moment. At what point do 
we all finally tire of the artificially placid fare on ESPN and demand 
something more?
 