
Five winners

Andrew Strauss Started the series with a reputation as a good batsman and 
competent captain. Ended it with a Compton-Miller medal and a place in the 
pantheon. An indefatigable bat and an inspiring leader, if not tactician.

Ben Hilfenhaus Under-appreciated at the start of the summer, Hilfenhaus held 
Australia's attack together. More consistent than Mitchell Johnson, more 
penetrating than Peter Siddle, he finished the series as the leading 
wicket-taker.

Phil Tufnell Having previously veered towards a more banal, news-orientated 
tone, Test Match Special had a great summer. Tufnell was a revelation - witty, 
unpretentious and insightful. Now a firm fixture on the TMS team.

Andy Flower The full extent of his contribution will be known only by the 
England players, but he deserves credit for his team selections and strategies, 
and especially for the intangible, steely willpower that characterised 
England's comeback.

Geoff Miller The selectors backed their own instincts over Jonathan Trott, 
ignoring the clamour from elsewhere, and shrewdly shuffled their bowling 
attack. A strong contrast with their Australian equivalents, who fluffed the 
crucial decisions time and again.

And five losers...

Mitchell Johnson He had a ferociously tough tour, and was put under more 
scrutiny than any player on either side. Thought to be the best quick in the 
world before Cardiff, he stuttered, spluttered and almost fell apart before 
getting his act back together again.

Ravi Bopara No longer nailed on for a place in England's top six, let alone at 
No3. Bopara, like Johnson may come back stronger for the experience, but only 
if he improves his technique to eliminate the flaws exposed in the Ashes.

Monty Panesar Played arguably the most crucial innings of the entire series at 
Cardiff. And was then dropped. His terrible bowling form prohibited against a 
recall, and with all eyes on Adil Rashid's progress at Yorkshire, it may be a 
long time before he is back in the team.

David Penberthy Until recently the editor of Australia's Daily Telegraph, 
Penberthy was forced to publicly, and privately, apologise and pay damages to 
England's 12th man Bilal Shafayat after calling him a "member of Al-Qaeda" in a 
misguided 'joke'.

The ECB and the BBC As the furious comments on phone-ins and blogs suggested, 
the one big stain on the series was the lack of terrestrial TV coverage. The 
ECB blame the BBC, and the BBC blame the ECB, while the public miss out. Only 
1.92m people watched the final day's play.
 