
Police warnings that anyone attempting to burn a union flag during the royal 
wedding next week will be arrested are part of a worrying drift towards a 
legally sanctioned fetishisation of symbols both religious and secular in 
Britain.The warning came following an application by the far-right Islamist 
group Muslims Against Crusades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/apr/19/royal-wedding-police-arrests-crusades>
 (an offshoot of the outlawed al-Muhajiroun) to protest near Westminster Abbey 
on 29 April.

Earlier this week, Andrew Ryan, an English Defence league member with a 
history of public order offences, including racial chanting, was sentenced to 
70 days in prison for burning a Qu'ran (he also received a 30-day sentence, to 
be served concurrently, for stealing the book from a local library).

The symbolic burning of books is wrong. The imprisonment of English Defence 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/english-defence-league> member Andrew 
Ryan for burning a copy of the Qur'an is wrong. These two sentences are not 
contradictory.

In January, Ryan stole a Qur'an from a Carlisle library (that is definitely 
wrong, by the way), took it to Carlisle town hall and set fire to it with a 
cigarette lighter, while shouting derogatory slogans about Islam. It was, 
district judge Gerald Chalk commented when sentencing Ryan,"an act of 
theatrical bigotry" 
<http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/carlisle-man-given-70-days-jail-for-burning-koran-1.829161?referrerPath=/1.50001>
.

This is true: but does it amount to religiously aggravated harassment, for 
which Ryan was convicted?

One could claim so if Ryan had taken his one-man protest to a local mosque, or 
Islamic cultural centre, or actively sought Muslims in the area. But he went to 
the town hall. So it's difficult to see who exactly he was harassing. 
"Harassment" suggests targeted action.

He could, perhaps, have been convicted instead under section 5 of the Public 
Order Act, which is the law that did for al-Muhajiroun member Emdadur Choudhury,
fined £50 for burning poppies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/mar/07/muslim-extremist-fined-for-poppy-burning>
 on Armistice Day. That law itself is deeply insidious in its vagueness, and 
has been used several times in the arrest of street preachers putting forward 
conservative Christian views on homosexuality.

It's worth mentioning Choudhury's paltry fine, because that is certainly what 
Ryan's supporters in the English Defence League will do. Why is it that one act 
of theatrical bigotry merits a fine, and another a 70-day jail sentence? Why 
does the desecration of a symbol of national mourning merit less punishment 
than the desecration of a religious text? While judges' decisions are 
independent, this will only add to the EDL and its supporters notion that there 
really is "one law for them … ".

The English Defence League will be keen to portray Andrew Ryan as a martyr. 
They now have their very ownshahid, persecuted for his beliefs by the deadly 
combination of Islamists and an establishment all too keen to capitulate.

So here, then, we have a practical argument against both these convictions: 
when we privilege certain types of speech, we create grievance. When we 
privilege in law certain ideas, we create resentment against people who hold 
those ideas. We see this in every impotent rage against "political 
correctness"; every indignant howl on the protection of religion and believers. 
The social cohesion argument that underpins so many government and police curbs 
on free expression does not really seem to be working.

Choudhury and Ryan were both convicted for actions that some might find 
upsetting. Their convictions legitimise and deepen the culture of taking 
offence that will not be resolved unless we begin to accept that free speech is 
not always easy to defend, but vital if this not to become an island of 
seething, hidden resentments masquerading as a coherent nation. More jaw-jaw, 
less law-law?

• This article was amended at 11:54 on 20 April 2011. Andrew Ryan was 
convicted of religiously aggravated assault, not racially aggravated assault. 
This has now been corrected
 