
Lyndsey Duncan is 21 and hasn't watched any real TV for the past four years. 
She's got favourite shows – Flight of the Conchords, for instance – but views 
everything online via iPlayer or streaming sites. She's a student at a northern 
university and says she doesn't know anyone who watches TV, with the possible 
exception of the X Factor finals, because "watching it online means you can 
avoid the annoying ads and you can watch whatever you want whenever you want".

She is not alone. Matt Shepherd-Smith, former chief executive of the ad agency 
TBWA, cites Microsoft research that suggests one in seven 18-to-24-year-olds no 
longer watches linear TV. "The internet is going to overtake broadcast 
television by the end of 2010," he says. "It means advertisers are going to 
have to be much smarter about where we place our ads, which in turn will have 
revenue implications for commercial channels."

There are broader implications for the industry, too. Several launches in the 
coming months – starting with Seesaw this week – could dictate whether, and at 
what pace, the habits of Lyndsey and her friends will spread to the rest of us.

Last year Andy Duncan, then chief executive of Channel 4, outlined how he saw 
those implications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jan/15/andy-duncan-dismisses-channel-4-merger-with-five>
 to the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts, noting that TV 
ad revenue – mostly reinvested in new content – had peaked in the middle of the 
decade, and then shrunk even while the economy as a whole was growing. Online 
advertising, meanwhile, had grown almost to parity with TV, but "the bulk of 
the ad revenues – more than £2bn of that £3bn – goes straight back to the US 
and very little of the entire sum finds its way into UK content production".

Chris Anderson, the editor of Wired magazine in the US, argues that TV 
advertising works on a fundamentally flawed model: "pretty much, annoy 90% of 
the people in the hope of reaching 10%". "An annoyance-based advertising medium 
doesn't seem like a good thing ... We've been charging more and more for less 
and less reach in television for decades. It's like a house of cards, and we're 
just waiting for an alternative."

Broadcasters' fear was that the alternative would be online piracy. Certainly 
most of the online content available to date has been of dubious provenance and 
of no financial use to broadcasters. Last month, however, saw the start ofa 
legal alternative, SeeSaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva+online-tv>, 
which says that it's here to save the TV industry. Born from the ashes of 
Project Kangaroo, the joint venture between BBC Worldwide, ITV and Channel 4 
that foundered on regulatory disapproval, SeeSaw is a website that streams TV 
programmes on demand. The transmission company Arqiva bought Kangaroo's tech 
and tied up deals with BBC Worldwide, Channel 4, Five and a range of UK 
independent producers from Shed to Talkback to supply 3,000+ hours of 
programming. So far the site is free, funded by advertising, but it will 
shortly set up a payment system, in part because that's the only way it can 
show some programming acquired from the US.

And SeeSaw could be followed by a wave of similar offerings this year. The US 
streaming service Hulu – which was launched by NBC, ABC and Fox in 2008, and is 
second in US online video to YouTube – has been toying with a UK launch for 
some time. It may still set up this year despite troubled negotiations. 
MeanwhileProject Canvas <https://www.theguardian.com/media/project-canvas> – 
the broadband-on-TV successor to Kangaroo from the BBC, ITV, C4, BT and 
TalkTalk – is pencilled to start this autumn.

Internet-enabled TVs from the likes of Sony and Samsung will arrive in shops 
in the spring. Sony has deals with Amazon, Dailymotion, YouTube and AOL, as 
well as Sony Pictures and BMG Music, to provide free online content direct to 
the newS-series Bravia television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/02/channel-five-sony-content-deal-bravia-internet-video>
. Microsoft's Xbox has started offering TV content and video is also coming to 
mobile phones. Even BT is in on the act with an online download service called 
BT Vision, which has more than 7,000 hours of archive programming.

SeeSaw's platform controller, John Keeling, says: "I've been waiting for video 
on demand to take off since 2007, because I'd spent my career at MTV, Sky, 
Disney and UKTV essentially aggregating catalogue programming and then 
broadcasting it on linear TV – iPlayer and 4OD have blazed the trail and it 
feels like 2010 is the year it's finally going to happen."

But success isn't assured, as the fate of Joost proves. Created by Skype 
founders Niklas Zennstrom and Janus Friis, Joost launched in 2007 using 
peer-to-peer technology to stream content from Endemol, MTV and Paramount. In 
June 2009, it switched to providing distribution software. CEO Mike Volpi 
announced that "in these tough economic times, it's been increasingly 
challenging to operate as an independent, ad-supported online video platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2009/jul/01/joost-cuts>."

Joost's problem, argues Michael Comish, CEO of BlinkBox, a rival streaming 
site, was in its design. "It was very complicated to use and using peer-to-peer 
tech slowed everything down," he says. "In fact, online video sites can offer 
advertisers the same opportunities as they get on commercial TV at half the 
cost per thousand. It's going to be a tough and competitive market for a 
while … but [VoD] is the future."

Neither SeeSaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/seesaw> nor BlinkBox are 
planning to create content. These are archive and catch-up TV services, which 
do not directly address Andy Duncan's concerns about money leaving UK 
production.

Jonathan Webdale, editor of industry site C21media.net and Future Media 
magazine, argues that the chance of revenue from archives does help 
broadcasters, but not enough to sustain old business models. "TV viewing is 
actually on the increase in spite of all the online offerings, but the money 
isn't following," he says. "TV salaries, TV budgets the whole TV business is 
going to have to change."

"The point is, the entire media industry from TV to newspapers is facing the 
same problem," argues Rhys McLachlan, head of futures at media-buying giant 
MediaCom. "We're seeing a market-wide correction of the perceived value of 
entertainment and information … We're entering a two-tier TV market.

"There will be those huge, expensive drama like HBO's The Pacific – everyone's 
looking forward to that, and advertisers will pay a premium to be around that – 
and then you'll get the cheap stuff that fills the rest of the space. It'll be 
viewed online, on mobiles, everywhere. The TV set is just going to be the bit 
at the front that creates the demand but doesn't necessarily pay for itself."

2010, in other words, marks the point where we all start to watch like Lyndsey 
Duncan, off in our rooms with our netbooks and laptops, and we may remember the 
X Factor final as the last symbol of a shared-experience golden era.

Lyndsey Duncan is not a real name.
 