
Wolfsburg’s fans will, rightly or wrongly, never be regarded as Germany’s most 
passionate. In September the general manager, Thomas Röttgermann, admitted the 
club had a problem with the number of season-ticket holders frequently staying 
away and only coming to the biggest games against the likes of Bayern Munich 
and Borussia Dortmund, after 29% of season-ticket holders didn’t turn up to the 
home game with Schalke.

So when the players emerged on to the pitch at the Volkswagen Arena on 
Saturday afternoon before the game with Ingolstadt to be greeted with a banner 
in theFankurve saying “Reisst euch endlich den Arsch auf” 
<http://www.faszination-fankurve.de/index.php?head=Reisst-euch-endlich-den-Arsch-auf&folder=sites&site=news_detail&news_id=12014&gal_id=1234&bild_nr=1>
 (Finally get your arses in gear), there was little doubt that a line had been 
crossed. The catalyst had been last week’s 3-0 capitulation in Gelsenkirchen, 
in the return with Schalke, which extended the Wolves’ poor stretch to seven 
games without a win.

It was the club’s longest run without a victory in more than three years and 
they began the weekend in eighth place, five points behind fourth-placed 
Schalke, not to mention 18 behind Dortmund. On the same date a year ago, Dieter 
Hecking’s men had been 22 points in front of Jürgen Klopp’s old team and they 
finished second behind Bayern Munich.

So while the 2-0 win over last year’s Bundesliga II champions was hardly 
bottled directly from the fountain at Cibeles, it was desperately needed. It 
was, as the defender Robin Knoche noted, “completely different” from last 
week’s shambolic display against a direct rival for aChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> place, though the means 
paled in significance next to the ends, on this occasion.

“In the end,” wrote Kicker on Sunday, “nobody’s asking about the ‘how’. Only 
the points count”. With the Champions League last-16 tie with Gent (the draw 
thatWolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> “had been hoping 
for”, as their sporting director, Klaus Allofs, openly admitted at the time) on 
Wednesday, excuses, theories and mitigating factors have all outlived their 
use. Golden opportunities – not least the openness of the field for third and 
fourth places below a resurgent Dortmund and the leaders, Bayern – cannot be 
allowed to slip away.

The curious thing is that Wolfsburg should have been prepared for the pitfalls 
of following up last season’s exceptional campaign. Speaking pre-season, 
Hecking rejected the notion that the club were on the way to establishing 
themselves as the best of the rest. “It’s difficult to say that you’ll finish 
second when there are so many teams beneath Bayern of the same level,” he said. 
“Us, Dortmund, Gladbach, Leverkusen, Schalke.”

He also was also fully aware of the increased intensity which would come with 
the addition of the Champions League to the fixture list. “On Tuesday, maybe 
you play against Manchester United and on the Saturday against Ingolstadt,” 
Hecking pointed out. “And you have to win. That’s the most difficult thing.”

The outlook was very much in keeping with the new, saner Wolfsburg, rather 
than the money-chucking circus before the arrivals of Allofs, and then Hecking 
in 2012. The extensions of both men’s contracts last year – Allofs to 2019 
followed by Hecking committing to 2018 in August – suggested stability would 
continue to reign.

There were two major flies in the ointment, though. Firstly was the Kevin De 
Bruyne transfer saga. Allofs dealt with it as well as any executive could have, 
extracting maximum value from a painful situation. What has been more difficult 
for Hecking is reconvening the orchestra minus its conductor.

Everything ran through the Belgian. Julian Draxler is an outstanding player 
and mentally tough, but he has quite a different profile. Moreover, it has been 
hard to fit him and the other major signing, Max Kruse, in the same XI without 
one stepping on the other’s toes.

The other concern was the aftermath of the Volkswagen scandal. Bild reported 
in autumn that the club’s owner and funder had backed out of a previous pledge 
to extend its sponsorship of the DfB Pokal that started in 2012, and Allofs 
spoke of Wolfsburg having to re-evaluate their approach. It’s fortunate for 
everyone concerned that the club benefits from sensible management via Allofs 
and Hecking, and a squad already stacked with talent.

Injuries and fatigue have not helped in recent weeks. A broken foot for Bas 
Dost – promptly ending speculation that he would be sold to a Premier League 
club – robbed Hecking of his top scorer after a Dante challenge in training 
that Allofs referred to as “stupid“. The coach decided to use Kruse as the lone 
striker versus Ingolstadt ahead of Nicklas Bendtner, with Kicker claiming on 
Saturday the coach had simply grown tired of the Dane’s ”poor attitude”.

The return of Luiz Gustavo was a welcome boost too. Saturday’s game was only 
his 11th in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> this season. Perhaps 
at least partially due to a lack of sharpness, he’d picked up five bookings in 
the first 10, which forced him to sit out the Schalke game last week.

His importance to Wolfsburg is in little doubt. Since he arrived in 2013, they 
have collected 1.87 points per game with him (in 70 games) and 1.47 per match 
without him (in 17). After a week in which he said he has more pain in his 
troublesome knee Wolfsburg hope he can turn the page and pull his team up into 
the top four in the season’s closing months.

The goalkeeper Diego Benaglio missed out against Ingolstadt but his rib injury 
almost seemed a convenient excuse to omit him for Koen Casteels. Benaglio had 
been at fault for Schalke’s first two goals last week and Casteels saw 
Wolfsburg over the line against Ingolstadt with a superb one-handed save from 
Marvin Matip in the second half.

The visit to Gent on Wednesday will find Hecking and company facing another of 
their demons. They have the worst away record in the Bundesliga, with only six 
points taken from 10 games. Draxler will have to come good again, as he did 
when scoring the opener against Ingolstadt, but at least the Wolves have 
started moving in the right direction.

Talking points – After Huub Stevens retired on medical advice Hoffenheim went 
from one extreme to the other, with 28-year-oldJulian Nagelsmann replacing him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/hoffenheim-appoint-julian-nagelsmann-youngest-coach>
. The erstwhile under-19 coach had been lined up to take over at the start of 
the 2016-17 season, but the news that Stevens requires heart surgery has 
pitched the youngest head coach in the competition’s history into a relegation 
battle. Nagelsmann started promisingly in the game at Werder Bremen, which 
Hoffenheim didn’t dare lose, pressing as high as his Thomas Tuchel connections 
would suggest (after just two days of work with the squad). His side took an 
early lead through Anderj Kramaric before Papy Djilobodji’s equaliser pegged 
the visitors back. A second header by the Chelsea loanee hit the post late on 
to allow Nagelsmann and company to take a point back home.

Where will Bayern Munich’s defensive crisis end? Holger Badstuber broke his 
ankle in training on Saturday before the trip to Augsburg, leaving the Spartak 
Moscow loanee Serdar Tasci as Pep Guardiola’s only fit centre-back. Tasci still 
didn’t make his debut at the WWK Arena on Sunday afternoon, staying on the 
bench, because David Alaba partnered the 21-year-old midfielder Joshua Kimmich 
– Guardiola’s junior Javier Mascherano – at centre-back. Robert Lewandowski 
made the most of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s enforced weekend off to score 
twice and leapfrog the Gabonese as the Bundesliga’s top scorer with 21. The 
concern now is what sort of back four (or three) Guardiola will be able to 
field against Juventus in the Champions League next week.
 