
Another bout of positive US data, including rising housing starts, lifted 
markets off their worst levels, and also helped building materials groupWolseley
.

The City is hoping that, with a US recovery underway and Wolseley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wolseley> having seemingly decided 
against a major deal, the company could instead return more cash to its 
shareholders. In a buy note Liberum Capital raised its price target form £22.50 
to £26.80, partly on the prospect of rising dividend payments. Analyst Charlie 
Campbell said:
 Wolseley' shares have been strong as US recovery appears more likely. This is 
not without substance, but Wolseley remains a very interesting story as 
Ferguson [a US plumbing and heating subsidiary] is gaining market share as 
quickly as it did before the crisis ,and there is still much self-help in 
Europe. We also think that a big dividend surprise is coming sooner rather than 
later.

Wolseley's new management has passed on a major acquisition (Ahsell, 
Scandinavian number two in plumbing and heating) and not let capital 
expenditure rise much. This leads us to believe that dividends will rise up the 
list of priorities quickly. So we raise our dividend per share estimates by 
15%-29% (between 2012 and 2015) and note that these are now 7%-12% ahead of 
consensus.

In the market Wolseley shares closed 33p higher at £23.55.

The better than expected US figures - which also included producer price 
inflation numbers and weekly jobless claims - helped support a market which had 
initially been unsettled by the continuing problems in Greece and worries about 
Iranian oil supplies.

By the close the FTSE 100 was down just 6.78 points at 5885.38, having earlier 
fallen as low as 5829. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, said:
 The market started off on the back foot as concerns grew over whether Greece 
will actually get its bailout funds; however gradually the losses were 
eradicated as better than expected economic data from the US bolstered 
investors' resolve and the markets recovered from their lows.

A decline is still a decline though, showing that markets remain nervous 
Greece won't get its money. Europe is sceptical that following the Greek 
general election in April austerity measures will not be implemented by the new 
administration and the eurozone will simply be throwing good money after bad. 
Investors were steering clear of the mining sector on concerns about slowing 
global demand. Russian companies came under pressure, withEvraz down 15.5p at 
420.8p andPolymetal 37p lower at £10.75.

Finnish miner Talvivaara Mining Company fell 47.6p to 281.9p after it 
announced it would place around 25m new shares at 280p each to raise £70m. The 
cash will be used to boost its balance sheet and help ramp up production. It 
has run into a number of issues recently including frozen production lines and 
problems with some of its processes. Chief executive Pekka Pera will move to 
become executive chairman and is being replaced by mining veteran Harri Natunen.

African Barrick Gold lost 70.5p to 448p on disappointing growth forecasts, 
with power shortages expected to continue to hit its mines in Tanzania during 
the current year.

Elsewhere Randgold Resources dropped 175p to £69.80 while Anglo American fell 
46p to £26.44. ButGlencore added 4.6p to 426.6p. There was some gossip it could 
edge up its offer forXstrata, down 2.5p to £11.77, from 2.8 new shares to 3.1.

Essar Energy dipped 2.3p to 123.6p. The company's subsidiary Essar Oil has 
submitted an appeal against a judgement by the Indian Supreme Courtwhich ruled 
the company could no longer defer repayments of sales tax. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2012/jan/17/essar-tax-ruling-ftse-higher?INTCMP=SRCH>

Analysts at Morgan Stanley have moved from underweight to equal weight but cut 
their price target from 230p to 160p:
 Essar shares price in tough outcomes for both oil and power. However, 
near-term newsflow could be negative for both, and coal supply concerns could 
still be the next big issue. We upgrade to equal weight but still see some 
downside to the shares near term. 
Vague bid speculation surrounded pharmaceuticals group Shire, up 7p to £23, and
J Sainsbury, 5.9p better at 296p.

Misys jumped 9p to 314p on talk of a possible 400p a share offer from private 
equity, which could disrupt the IT group's proposed all share merger with Swiss 
rival Temenos.

Unilever added 15p to £20.70 after analysts at Liberum suggested the company 
should consider splitting its buoyant personal care business from its food 
division, whose performance looks underwhelming when compared to rivals such as 
Nestle or Danone:
 Perhaps, Unilever should follow the Kraft and Sara Lee examples (which 
PepsiCo may also have to follow) and break the company into two divisions (and 
get full value for its robust home and personal care unit, which has around 70% 
of sales generated in emerging markets). 
On a busy day for company results, publishing group Reed Elsevier rose 15.5p 
to 549.5p after reporting a 5% rise in annual operating profit and saying it 
expected another year of growth despite the tricky economic climate. Singer 
Capital Markets said:
 Reed's full year results are ahead of expectations at the profit level. In 
broad terms the outlook is supportive of our positive stance on the business to 
business sector with exhibitions and data markets in generally good shape with 
some noteworthy deviations. We note that legal markets still look very tough 
and European exhibitions outlook appears soft and Reed is clearly cautious. 
Academic publishing commentary appears to be solid and non-European exhibitions 
is encouraging.

The shares have lagged the market and only risen 2.9% year to date. The 
valuation looks modest and there is some scope for a re-rating.

But BAE Systems lost 7.8p to 325.3p on worries about the outlook, given the 
continuing cuts in defence spending in the UK and US.

Finally Alumasc, the building and engineering products group, slumped 31% to 
90p after profits for the first six months halved and the company slashed its 
dividend. David Buxton at FinnCap said:
 The interims are disappointing and the outlook statement signals the full 
year to be materially below previous expectations although it also points to 
the second half being stronger than the first.

The dividend has also been severely cut, which is particularly disappointing 
as it provided a strong yield backing to the shares and had been maintained 
through recession. 
Robin Hardy at Peel Hunt cut his price target form 173p to 90p and his 
recommendation from buy to hold:
 Cost over-runs and capacity restraints at Alumasc Precision Components have 
hit margins in the first half. Despite action to address these issues and the 
group's natural seasonality, full-year results will be materially below 
expectations. We expect profits to bounce back strongly in 2013, underpinned by 
a strong pipeline for Building Products (including two major Levolux 
contracts); however, the dividend cut is prudent.

 