
A man claiming to be the father of the banana-throwing Port Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> member in the middle of an AFL 
racism storm denies his daughter had racist intent and that she is being 
“demonised” by a sensationalist media.

On Saturday night, the fan threw a banana towards Indigenous Adelaide star 
Eddie Betts, an act condemned by theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
as “clearly an unambiguous racist act”.

On Sunday, Port Adelaide completed an investigation into the matter which 
concluded it was racially motivated. But a man calling into Adelaide radio 
station FiveAA on Monday morning said his daughter had been unfairly targeted.

AFL great Eddie Betts' artistic expression worthy only of celebration | Craig 
Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/afl-great-eddie-betts-artistic-expression-worthy-only-of-celebration>
“Unless my daughter was on drugs overnight, no way in the world,” the man who 
identified himself as “Don” said. “The thing that irritates me the most is that 
we’re playing the racist card here. It was more an act of frustration than a 
racist act where she’s thrown a banana.

“You’re playing the racist game. I’m not condoning what she’s done. This is 
called media rubbish. Why do you people sensationalise things?”

AFL aboriginal advisory Committee chair Paul Briggs said there was no debate 
as to the intent.

“While speculation and debate will occur around the motivation of such 
behaviour, it is clearly an unambiguous racist act, something most fair-minded 
Australians would find appalling and unacceptable,” he said.

Incoming AFL inclusion and social policy manager Tanya Hosch said: “On behalf 
of the AFL, I want to say that we know racism exists in our game, as it does 
still in the broader Australian society.”

Hosch did not want to comment on the individual case but drew a parallel 
between the Adelaide Oval incident and historic banana-throwing condemned as 
racist.

“The throwing of a banana and its association with slurs on indigenous 
Australians and other cultural groups, which has sadly occurred in sports 
around the world, is deeply racist and offensive, and should be rejected by 
every part of our game, including clubs, players, fans and supporters.”

“The AFL will work with the club as they finalise their investigations and 
provide support on any further action required,” Hosch said.

Later on Monday the AFL’s chief executive officer Gillon McLachlan described 
the fan’s behaviou as an “unambiguosly racist” act that left him 
“disheartened,” but that he believes the AFL industry’s handling of affair 
shows progress.

“We are on a journey to progress,” McLachlan said. “We’re really pleased that 
the behaviour was called out by so many in our community and even by Port 
Adelaide fans (at the time). We’re certainly asking our crowds to call out this 
behaviour. A silver lining in this has been the calling out from the crowd at 
the game and also the football community.”

McLachlan said he’d spoken with Betts’ wife Anna Scullie, who had shown him 
how powerful sport can be in driving social change. “I got great comfort in 
what she saw ... as progress being made and football being important in that 
conversation,” he said. “Every time we’re standing up here the outcry from the 
football community is greater ... it accelerates how far we’ve come.”

“Progress is hard fought. You have to have knocks like this that hurt you 
initially to have the conversations that take you forward and that’s part of 
our journey.”

Also on Monday, AFL players joined those calling out the behaviour. AFL 
players’ Indigenous advisory board chair and Hawthorn premiership-winner Shaun 
Burgoyne said the incident had appalled players. “There’s no room for racism of 
any form in our game and we are saddened that incidents of this nature continue 
to occur,” Burgoyne said. “Eddie Betts is one of the most popular players in 
the game and his 250th match should have been a time for celebration.”

“The AFL industry is taking great strides to ensure Aussie Rules is a game for 
everyone, but this serves as a reminder that more work needs to be done.”
 