
In a bungalow in suburban Santiago a heavily pregnant woman is lying on a bed 
of grass. Dressed in her nightgown her face is tranquil; a few beads of sweat 
gathering at her temples the only sign of a concealed distress. On closer 
inspection the greenery is arranged in ritualistic fashion, sticks of celery 
fanning out around the body of the woman like a halo, and as the camera pans 
down the expectant mother's body a splash of red flashes across the screen.

This is the closing sequence of new film, "Apio Verde", shown for the first 
time in Chile this April. Literally translated as "Green Celery" - a reference 
to the practice of using a stick of celery to perform an abortion – the film is 
based on the 2010 case of Claudia Pizarro, a 28-year-old woman denied both an 
abortion and treatment for cancer despite being pregnant with an anencephalic 
foetus.

Chile is one of only five countries worldwide to prohibit abortion in all 
instances. This includes cases of rape, foetal malformation, therapeutic 
abortion, when a pregnancy puts the woman's life at risk, and even ectopic 
pregnancy. 'This is not a fiction, it's a psychological reality," director 
Franscec Morales says, keen to emphasis the reality behind the film's shocking 
portrayal.

"Many women feel to be true 'human coffins,'" Karen Espíndola explains. "We 
are women who had to think, not of preparing the bedroom of our future child 
but his funeral," she says blinking back tears.

Like Claudia Pizarro, whose daughter only lived an hour, Karen discovered in 
2008 that she would give birth to a child with a terminal illness. Desperate 
for an abortion to avoid the despair of watching her child die, her pleas were 
ignored. Karen gave birth to a son Osvaldito in early 2009. He died two years 
later. She has campaigned for a change in the law ever since.

In the last 20 years more than 15 abortion-related bills have been submitted 
to Congress for discussion. Half of these have called to increase existing 
penalties. In April this year three bills to decriminalize abortion, including 
therapeutic abortion, were rejected, despite a poll conducted by a Chilean 
university showing that 63 percent of Chileans support abortion to save the 
mother's life.

"In Chile we are forcing our women to be martyrs, which is something 
unthinkable in a democracy," Karen says outraged. "This whole process is a real 
psychological torture, one that the State encourages against its own 
citizenship."

In the most recent debate on the topic, Jaime Mañalich, Chile's health 
minister, cited increased costs for public sector healthcare as a 
key-determining factor in his reason to vote against the legislation. According 
to the Pan American Health Organization, abortion, despite being illegal, was 
the third leading cause of maternal mortality in Chile between 2000 and 2002, 
accounting for 12% of all maternal deaths.

Social conservatism among both politicians and the population is a huge 
obstacle to legalizing what the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has 
called "excessively restrictive abortion laws". Michele Bachelet, the country's 
first female president, and now head of UN Women, made significant steps 
towards legalizing the morning-after pill in 2008 but never even touched the 
issue of abortion.

According to Claudia Lagos Lira, author of "Abortion in Chile", even left-wing 
politicians avoid the issue of abortion, fearful of upsetting the Catholic 
Church. Chile is one of the most Christian countries in the world: 88 percent 
of the population is Catholic or Evangelical. "Religion has a very powerful 
influence over the country," Lira says. "Many pharmacies refuse to stock the 
morning-after pill even though it is now legal and Chile's most recent Aids 
campaign failed to even mention the word 'condom'."

With enough money, an abortion is a possibility for any Chilean woman. Many 
wealthy women travel abroad for the procedure. Clandestine abortions cost 
anywhere between £50 for a packet of misopostrol pills (tablets that can be 
inserted into the vagina to induce an abortion), and £1,200 for an appointment 
in a private clinic.

But these options are not open to all women. Chile, despite being widely 
applauded as the most developed country in Latin America, was named the most 
socially unjust state in the OECD's 38-country membership in 2011. Many women 
are forced to resort to cheap and unsafe means of abortion such as 
self-inflicted torture, self-poisoning and inserting sharp objects, like 
knitting needles, into the vagina.

"The problem with clandestine abortions in Chile is a matter of equality," 
says Dr. Beatriz Sagaldo, a GP working for the Department of Public Health at 
the University of Valparaíso. "Women with resources practice abortions safely 
and in good health, while lower class women practice unhealthy abortions and 
risk their own lives. This is the reality in our country."

In recent years the advent of misopostrol, easily bought on the internet and 
selfadministered, has undoubtedly improved the safety of abortion in the 
country. According to figures from the Chilean Institute of Reproductive 
Medicine, the number of women entering hospitals between 1990-2000 as a result 
of complications from attempted abortions decreased from 36 to 29 per 100,000 
women. The world average is 14 per 100,000.

However, the similarity between the effects of medical abortions and natural 
miscarriage has resulted in increased hostility from hospital staff towards all 
women treated for such complications. It is also the doctors in Chile who most 
often turn women over to the police: if found guilty abortion carries a 
five-year prison sentence.

"Women, confronted with the knowledge that their child will be born with
abnormalities, live in fear instead of being supported," one woman said. "It's 
an atmosphere of complete claustrophobia with nowhere to turn. Doctors don't 
help, the law is against you, and many don't have the money to pay for a 
solution." Paradoxically, improvements to the safety of abortion in Chile is 
good news for women's immediate health concerns but does nothing to help 
highlight the severity and unpopularity of the law in the long run. In fact it 
removes the urgency required to lead an international campaign to end the ban, 
as well as relegating the need for social and psychological provision for women 
who have had abortions or, like Karen, have been victims of the current 
legislation.

For Claudia, Karen and many others like them, the damage is done. "The 
experience cannot be deleted" Karen says. Any change in the law, unlikely to 
happen soon, will come too late for her but she remains determined: "Although 
politicians continue this cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of Chilean 
women, every time we fight we gain consciousness and social legitimacy."
 