
Fury glints in Suan's wide, almond eyes.

"You buy from him, why you not buy from me?" she demands, standing rooted to 
the spot and glaring at the tourist as he moves quickly back to the safety of 
his vehicle. Opening her mouth wide, like a baby bird, Suan emits a torrent of 
abuse; she is nine years old and illiterate but can swear in seven languages.

As the tourist drives away she doesn't move, her eyes narrow as he disappears 
into the dazzling sunshine, and now they glint with tears.

At nine years old Suan works everyday in the shadow of the hulkingly beautiful 
Angkor Wat ruins, selling bracelets and postcards to the hoards of tourists who 
descend relentlessly upon the site. Competition here is fierce.

Suan lives with her mother, who is widowed and ill and too poor to send her 
children to school; she relies upon Suan's earnings to feed Suan and her four 
younger children. Like Suan she is uneducated and illiterate, she works long 
hours in a rickety hut behind the majestic Ta Prohm ruins making the jewellery 
that Suan's diminutive size and angelic face help her to sell. Suan says she 
would like to be a teacher or a "proper" shopkeeper, but because she doesn't 
have time for school she doesn't expect her life to be any different to her 
mother's.

This is Cambodia, but it could be anywhere in the developing world, because 
Suan and her family are trapped in an all too ubiquitous cycle: they are 
ensnared in a vicious circle in which poverty obstructs education, creating 
illiteracy and a lack of skills which, in turn, perpetuate poverty and so on 
ceaselessly until some external factor disrupts this pattern.

The second of the United Nation's eight Millennium Development Goals is to 
achieve universal primary education by 2015, however in South Asia alone the UN 
estimate that there are 16 million children out of school, globally this is 
close to 70 million. Among those in school many drop out prematurely or fail to 
achieve basic literacy and numeracy. Girls, like Suan, fare the worst.

In Cambodia, and many other countries, progress has been made in that 
education is now free, however this is not enough to allow Suan to attend 
school because she can't afford not to work, let alone compulsory school 
supplies and the 'gratitude fees' that must be paid to teachers each day.

The potential of education is immense. Nelson Mandela once said that 
"Education is the most powerful weapon we can use to change the world" and its 
instrumental role in progressing towards the UN's seven other millennium 
development goals substantiates his claim. As UNICEF explains, "educating 
children helps reduce poverty and promotes gender equality"; in school children 
learn the skills necessary for employment alongside life skills that can help 
them prevent diseases such as HIV/AIDS and malaria, and in turn, raise 
healthier children.

Education is especially inextricably linked to achieving gender equality: as 
UNICEF states, "universal primary education by definition requires gender 
parity". Educating girls is extremely effective because it has what UNICEF 
describes as a "multiplier effect"; educated women tend to marry later and have 
fewer children, these children are, in turn, more likely to survive and to be 
better nourished and educated.

However Suan's conundrum is currently voiding many advances in education in 
the developing world; whilst education has potential to be one of the greatest 
weapons for change in these areas its power is extremely limited if it is 
inaccessible to those most in need of change. If education is to become as 
instrumental as it has the potential to be, measures must be implemented to 
break the vicious circle restricting its reach.

Suan has a friend who has begun to attend school everyday, while her peers 
continue to flog trinkets in the searing heat; Teou has become a participant in 
a programme the International Labour Organisation (ILO) is funding to help 
children across Cambodia return to school. Through practical measures, such as 
providing school supplies or bicycles to help children commute from isolated 
areas, this programme is attempting to make education accessible to more 
children.

The ILO programme has been implemented in various forms in other countries, 
such as Nepal and Pakistan, and is one of many schemes pursuing the same 
objective; the World Food Programme, for example, offers "food scholarships" 
(30 kg of rice, 1 dozen cans of tuna, 5 litres of cooking oil, 7 kg of beans 
and 1 kg of salt per month) to poor families in the developing world on the 
condition that they keep their children in school. This scholarship is both an 
incentive to return children to school and a practical measure, enabling 
families to survive without their children's wages. In Cambodia 65,000 of these 
scholarships have been awarded to primary age children.

Elsewhere schemes helping impoverished pupils attend school have often been 
incredibly simple. In Uganda, for example, an initiative has created 
affordable, locally produced sanitary towels to allow girls who can't afford 
expensive imported tampons to attend school all month. This scheme is doubly 
beneficial because it returns girls to school and provides employment in the 
local area.

Schemes such as these demonstrate that it is possible to tackle the poverty 
related obstacles preventing many children in developing countries from 
attending school, however they are not yet encompassing enough to turn the 
potential of education into real power.

Whilst Teou attends school everyday, Suan and many other children continue to 
sell souvenirs in the dusty car parks of Angkor Wat. This scenario is reflected 
around the world; the UN do not expect to meet their goal of universal primary 
education by 2015.

Suan scuffs the ground and scowls, scouring the site for her next target. 
"Work is for adults" she says sulkily, kicking up a dust cloud. A second later 
she's disappeared, darting away to join the flurry as a group of cyclists 
disembark across the car park.
 