
Ever since I read The Time Machine 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/35/pg35.html> (I think I was about 12) I 
have hankered after stories of an ancient, dying earth, circling an ancient, 
dying red sun. Some might dwell on the Eloi and the Morlocks; my abiding memory 
of the novel is the "monstrous crab-like creature" scuttling on a beach 30m 
years in the future, as "the sun, red and very large, halted motionless upon 
the horizon, a vast dome glowing with a dull heat, and now and then suffering a 
momentary extinction".

It fired my imagination something proper, so I am at a loss to understand why 
it's taken me until now to readJack Vance's Tales of a Dying Earth 
<http://www.sfsite.com/10b/tde91.htm>. Particularly given that it was more than 
a year ago that I said it'd be my next world of fantasy title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/aug/27/fantasy-death-master-tanith-lee>
. Moving on from my laxness - with apologies to anyone who's been waiting 
(Lioc, I am thinking of you -you made my day posting here! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/24/tolkien-hobbit-drawings-published>
) – I've finally finished it, and boy oh boy, am I excited. The omnibus, which 
collects Vance's four Dying Earth stories, is exactly, but exactly, why I set 
out onthis (much delayed) fantasy quest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jul/10/british-fantasy-awards-michael-moorcock>
 in the first place. I wanted to find those books and authors who shaped the 
fantasy writers of today, and here, in Vance, I see foreshadowings of so much.

The collection starts with Vance's 1950 debut, The Dying Earth, six 
interlinked short stories set on a far future version of Earth. "A dim place, 
ancient beyond knowledge. Once it was a tall world of cloudy mountains and 
bright rivers, and the sun was a white blazing ball. Ages of rain and wind have 
beaten and rounded the granite, and the sun is feeble and red. The continents 
have sunk and risen. A million cities have lifted towers, have fallen to dust. 
In the place of the old peoples a few thousand strange souls live. There is 
evil on Earth, evil distilled by time … Earth is dying and in its twilight." 
The "few thousand strange souls" are "feverishly merry, for infinite night was 
close at hand, when the red sun should finally flicker and go black". There is 
magic, but we learn it is somehow derived from "a strange abstract lore … 
termed 'mathematics' … Passive itself and not of sorcery, it elucidates every 
problem, each phase of existence, all the secrets of time and space. Your 
spells and runes are built upon its power and codified according to a great 
underlying mosaic of magic."

The stories are strange, and disturbing, and glowing. In the first, Turjan the 
magician journeys to the land of Embelyon to learn how to create humanity. He 
makes the beautiful woman T'sain, sister to T'sais; the pair look identical but 
T'sais was made with a warp and finds everything beautiful ugly, and ugly 
beautiful. In another, Turjan is captured and made tiny by the evil magician 
Mazirian, tormented for his knowledge until T'sain can free him. T'sais and the 
cursed man Etarr attend a Black Sabbath ritual of witches in a third, the eyes 
of Liane the Wayfarer are taken by Chun the Unavoidable in another. My 
favourite is the story of Guyal of Sfere, a man with a "void in his mind" which 
means he can't stop asking questions, and his journey to find the Curator, 
knower of all things.

The Dying Earth is followed by two books about Cugel the Clever. In the first, 
The Eyes of the Overworld, Cugel makes the mistake of burgling the home of the 
magician Iucounu, only to be caught in the act – "do not strain, as Thief-taker 
is woven of wasp-legs" – and sent in reparation to steal a "violet hemisphere" 
from the land of Cutz. It was that, or have the Charm of Forlorn Encystment, 
"which constricts the subject in a pore some forty-five miles below the surface 
of the earth", applied; Iucounu makes sure he'll keep his promises by wrapping 
the small white alien Firx around Cugel's liver. What follows is a lengthy 
peripatetic tale of adventures for the hapless Cugel; he might call himself 
Cugel the Clever, but he is tricked into being a watchman on a pedestal 
hundreds of feet above the ground, he eats a strange glowing object which turns 
out to encompass totality … he's basically utterly immoral, largely hopeless 
and hugely entertaining.

His adventures are continued in Cugel's Saga, and in the fourth novel in the 
sequence, Rhialto the Marvellous – set "toward the middle of the 21st Aeon", a 
group of magicians embark on various adventures. All is recounted in Vance's 
wonderful, unique prose. Is it possible to be both deadpan and flowery at the 
same time? I think he pulls this off, to hilarious effect. "These girls seem 
not to relish the garland of pulchritude," says Guyal of a collection of 
unattractive women. Cugel, after ditching a former princess into the hands of a 
brigand (it was his own hopelessness which led to her losing her kingdom), 
justifies himself angrily. "'The woman is a monomaniac!' he told himself. 'She 
lacks clarity and perceptiveness; how could I have done else, for her welfare 
and my own? I am rationality personified; it is unthinking to suggest 
otherwise.'"

There are remnants of ancient civilisations: floating roads and air-cars. 
There are horrific images galore: a pyramid of screaming flesh half a thousand 
feet high. And so, so much of these stories can be seen in the work of later 
authors. Mazirian's garden of nightmarish plants ("'K-k-k-k-k-k-k,' spoke the 
plant. Mazirian stooped, held the rodent to the red mouth. The mouth sucked, 
the small body slid into the stomach-bladder underground. The plant gurgled, 
eructated, and Mazirian watched with satisfaction.") reminds me a much-loved 
childhood novel, Douglas Hill'sBlade of the Poisoner 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00mbwxf>, and the poisoner's deadly garden. 
The Twk-men – tiny men-things mounted on dragonflies, with skin "of a greenish 
cast", bringPhilip Pullman's Gallivespians 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Races_and_creatures_in_His_Dark_Materials#Gallivespians>
 to mind. Mazirian's plunge into the Lake of Dreams after uttering the Charm of 
Untiring Nourishment, breathing the water as if it were air and chasing T'sain 
across the lake's bottom, recalls the scene in Harry Potter and the Goblet of 
Fire when Harry uses gillyweed to breathe underwater. And this is just the 
first 29 pages …

Most of all, though, I loved these stories for their shiveringly evocative 
images of Earth at its end of days, that sun, "old and red as an autumn 
pomegranate". As I said, I blame HG Wells for this particular obsession. "Soon, 
when the sun goes out, men will stare into the eternal night, and all will die, 
and Earth will bear its history, its ruins, the mountains worn to knolls – all 
into the infinite dark," writes Vance, and it's cracking stuff. I'm sorry I've 
finished them, and am sure I'll return to them time and time again. Meanwhile, 
there's the George RR Martin-edited Songs from the Dying Earth to be getting on 
with … and another world of fantasy title to choose. I am entirely open to 
suggestions: where shall we go next?
 