
I’m a professional writer. I write about arts and culture for UK national 
broadsheets, magazines and websites. I undertake research projects that focus 
on aspects of the arts infrastructure and I’ve worked in the sector for 20 
years. It’s fair to say that I know about the arts – and about writing. Over 
this time, I’ve read huge numbers of gallery labels and panels, and it seems to 
me there are some obvious recurring problems.

My view is that writing technique matters (really matters) and that regardless 
of professional and academic debates, many gallery texts could be improved by 
avoiding some very common mistakes.

Good interpretation enriches perception and enjoyment, without excluding or 
patronising audiences

Here are two examples of interpretative writing from two different exhibitions 
in the UK:

 Example one

All the works in this section have one core formal concern in common: the idea 
of ‘time’ (and space). X’s creative act of dissolution combines stillness and 
the intimation of motion, leading us to the very edge of identifiable form and 
playfully subverting minimalist concerns.

Example two

There has been much debate about what exactly is Englishness. We struggle to 
define it. I wanted to make something that looked like an ethnographic artefact 
that was about England. At once mystical and banal, this is the skull of a 
decaying
maritime superpower.

What do you think of these? The top quote is an example of writing for the 
public by an institution funded by Arts Council England (ACE). It’s not 
selectively quoted; it’s a whole information panel in an exhibition. To an 
initiated insider with a degree or two in fine art, it described the work on 
show well.

Even so, I had to read it twice and think about what it meant. It seemed 
unnecessarily complicated, with a dense sentence structure that had to be 
broken into its component parts. I wondered how it would come across to a 
visitor who hasn’t done a degree in fine art, or who isn’t a curator or an arts 
professional? They would probably find it opaque and unlikely to genuinely help 
them engage with the work.


Galleries: let's ditch the artspeak and artybollocks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jul/30/galleries-lets-ditch-the-artspeak-and-artybollocks>
In writing terms, it suffers from two distinct problems:

1. Forcing too much information into too short a space: the result is dense 
sentences that the reader must spend time unpicking to understand.

2. Artspeak and jargon: it uses a lot of language particular to the discipline 
of art and therefore contains words and ideas that might not be understood by 
readers who don’t know art world language and concepts.

 The problem is in the use of language and structure, but also with the use of 
concepts that are not explained. “Space” – for example – is a very common word 
when talking about art, but it’s gone from a simple word to an art term loaded 
with actual and metaphorical meaning. A casual reader might not pick up on this.

Similarly, a short sentence explaining minimalism might be a useful reminder 
for those who are already familiar with it, and a helpful summary for visitors 
who have never heard of it.

The second example quote was written by Grayson Perry for his 2011-12 show, 
the Tomb of the Unknown Craftsman. How much clearer is this? Even without 
visual information, it seems more direct, informative and engaging (and 
therefore more effective). His British Museum show had many wall panels and 
labels with explanations and stories distributed throughout the show. They were 
an absolute delight. Reading them greatly enhanced the experience for me. They 
were written in a clear, friendly and intelligent way, without succumbing to 
two more common writing mistakes:

3. “Dumbing down” or patronising the audience: by over-simplifying the 
language and omitting central concerns or concepts.

4. Unfinished narratives: beginning a story and not finishing it, ie stories 
hinted at but not told, unexplained gaps in timelines, leaps from an artist’s 
controversial status to sudden acceptance as establishment figure and so on.

Tate’s 2012 Damien Hirst retrospective 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/damien-hirst> suffered 
from number four. There was no explanation of why his work is controversial, or 
summary of the critical discussion surrounding it in the information booklet or 
the panels on the wall. Given Hirst’s debated artistic status, and his knowing 
exploitation of this, surely it should have been a central part of any 
information written about him.

 The fifth basic writing error is what writer and artist Alistair Gentry 
<https://twitter.com/alistairgentry> calls “aphasic writing” and what I call:

5. Nonsense writing: in which all the words exist and could be found in a 
dictionary, but they’re put together in an order that simply doesn’t make 
sense. Conceptual ideas that simply don’t belong together often appear in the 
same sentence. Sometimes it’s used deliberately to attach status to an artwork 
or exhibition. However it’s used, it’s always bad writing.

 To these errors, I would add a final one:

 6. Dead white male syndrome: this appears in exhibitions of more historical 
works, usually by men (who are dead, white, male and privileged in life). There 
will often be details about famous friends, affairs and obscure dinner party 
guests. Does the average visitor care? No; it’s boring information about people 
we’ve never heard of and have no interest in.

 There are many reasons why information panels and booklets look as they do. 
Interpretation has its own internal professional, curatorial and academic 
practices and logic, all of which present valid cases for how it is written.

But from a writer’s perspective, identifying these technical writing issues 
gives the opportunity to look and understand in a different way. Flaws can be 
addressed, improved or removed, leading to better writing.

 Good interpretation matters because there’s such a huge range of artistic 
practices and concerns being shown in galleries. No one can hope to know and 
understand everything they see and experience, however well educated they are 
and however much art they’ve seen. Wall panels, labels and information sheets 
give viewers an instant way in to greater understanding of the work and its 
context, theoretically, without them having to go to a great deal of effort. At 
its best, it enriches perception and enjoyment, without obscuring, excluding or 
patronising audiences.

For me, good writing really is the key to good interpretation.

This is an edited extract from Dany Louise’s Interpretation Matters Handbook, 
which is available directly from the author by emailing
talk@interpretationmatters.com <mailto:talk@interpretationmatters.com>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 