
I am, what you may call, a part-time drunk – somewhere between a binge drinker 
and an alcoholic. At 43 years old, I guess I should have figured out which, but 
I’ve always been indecisive.

To help deal with my problems, I attend a programme called Change, Grow, Live 
(CGL), which I find immensely beneficial. It is a nationwide programme that 
aims to give addicts the skills and tools to cope, using an holistic approach. 
At CGL, there are people willing to listen to me and advise me. The programme 
has changed my perspective on addiction and helped me to better understand and 
accept myself. The variety of people there and the hidden talents and 
personalities are buried from everyday view by the tag “addict”.

When I shadowed social workers, I saw how they fight for people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/aug/10/when-i-shadowed-social-workers-i-saw-how-they-fight-for-people>
I was referred to CGL after one of the nurses at my local GP surgery asked the 
much-dreaded question: “How much do you drink?” I answered honestly that time 
because I was beginning to realise I had a problem. I had thought about going 
to a support group in the past, but I was put off by the spiritual appearance 
of AA and I was unaware of any others available.

My dad died when I was nine . My mum was grieving – though I didn’t realise it 
at the time – while I became rebellious and resentful at being the “man of the 
family”. We soon moved to a new area and it was here that, amid bullying and a 
lack of understanding, my problems really started. I was looking for a father 
figure, which unfortunately led to me meeting a man who, it would later turn 
out, was just interested in grooming me.

After a spell in boarding school I left to find my first job. Within a couple 
of years I began to fall in with the wrong crowd. I left my job and started to 
fall out with my mum – something I will always regret.

I became homeless for a while and during this time I stumbled across poetry, 
as a way to woo potential girlfriends. While this wasn’t always successful, I 
kept poetry on the back burner, occasionally turning to it as a way of 
self-medicating my feelings and worries. Fairly soon I found that writing was a 
welcome distraction from everyday life.

For me, poetry is a way of shouting from the rooftops in a whispered voice. 
It’s a way of letting my emotions and feelings drain away from me through the 
pen and on to the paper and, most importantly, a way of recording the times 
I’ve been through, the things I’ve seen, or just finding out what my mind can 
do.

After some emotional times in the last few years, during which several members 
of my family died – including my mum and my nan – I had a breakdown. I’m still 
trying to recover from it but I have rediscovered my poetry – that had, 
somehow, survived the years – and a chance encounter at CGL has led me to 
creative writing.

I loved social work, until stories of despair and addiction got to me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/22/burnout-social-work-despair-addiction>
Within CGL and the creative writing group, I meet a so many people with 
different perspectives on life. The facilitator, Becky, who is a student social 
worker, has shown me different ways of collecting ideas and thoughts, and has 
given me a focus and the belief that I can go into the future with renewed 
vigour.

The group started small with only two of us, but it is now beginning to grow. 
I hope it will be rolled out across the country. Poetry has helped me in times 
of crisis before and I am glad to welcome back my old friend in this time of 
need.

A student’s perspective

Social work is about connection and it is this connection that I have been 
trying to understand and facilitate since the start of my practice as a social 
work student.

During my placement, I had a chance meeting with a poet and we formed a 
connection through a love of writing. This inspired me to start a creative 
writing group that forges connections and promotes interactions. We break down 
barriers, discussing our emotions and experiences through story-telling and 
poetry writing. Instead of asking people to explain their problems or 
difficulties, I ask them to tell a story that means something to them.

This experience has taught me that through creative methods, the connections 
we make with those we work with can be less forced and less threatening. 
Working together to create something with meaning generates feelings of 
community, mutual understanding and respect, and a safe space in which we can 
explore those feelings we find difficult to name and explain to others.Becky, 
student social worker, Sussex University

Anthony’s poem 

How dare you tear me apart
You know not what you see 
You cannot understand 
The pain inside of me 

My soul is built on anguish 
My heart beats out of time 
The scolding look and thoughtless comments 
Are yours they are not mine 

I wish you understood me 
I wished that you just knew
If it was a badge I’d wear it with pride 
The pain that I’ve been through 

Just know I’m mending slowly 
It takes a lot of time 
One day I’ll mean it when you ask 
How are you, I’m feeling fine.

 * Change Grow Live <http://www.changegrowlive.org/> is a charity providing 
free treatment and support to vulnerable people facing addiction, homelessness 
and domestic abuse. Read more of Anthony’s poetry here 
<http://facebook.com/AnthonyRussellPoetry/>.

The My Social Care Story series 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 