
Everton's record signing, Yakubu Ayegbeni, is facing an £80,000 fine from his 
club after failing to report back from the African Cup of Nations. The £11m 
striker was due on Merseyside on Wednesday after Nigeria's quarter-final defeat 
in Ghana. David Moyes, the manager, has failed to locate the striker despite 
repeated attempts to contact him and will take a hardline stance, beginning 
with the fine of two weeks' wages. Yakubu's Nigerian team-mate Joseph Yobo has 
returned.

The defending African champions, Egypt, will meet Cameroon in the tournament 
final on Sunday in a rerun of the teams' first group match, won by Egypt.

Egypt were the underdogs yesterday against the heavyweights Ivory Coast but 
they stayed on course for a record sixth African crown with a 4-1 victory. 
Ahmed Fathi, who spent a year at Sheffield United, put the north Africans ahead 
in the first half with a deflected effort and Amr Zaki headed in a second 
against the run of play after the Chelsea striker Didier Drogba missed two 
golden chances.

A rocket from Abdelkader Keita moments later gave the Elephants hope but Zaki 
quickly scored again to seal Egypt's passage. Mohamed Aboutrika put the icing 
on the cake with a fourth in stoppage-time.

Earlier in the evening Cameroon, going for their fifth title, ended the hopes 
of the hosts, Ghana, in a controversial semi-final in Accra. Alain Nkong's 
second-half strike decided a cagey affair in favour of the Indomitable Lions, 
but the game will be remembered for a moment of madness from Reading's André 
Bikey. The defender earned a straight red card in injury-time, meaning he will 
miss the final, after pushing over a member of the medical staff assisting his 
team-mate Rigobert Song.

Ghana had looked uncomfortable long before Nkong's neat finish in the 71st 
minute, having been played through by Samuel Eto'o. The suspension of their 
captain, John Mensah, who had been sent off in the quarter-final againstNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team>, had forced Claude 
Leroy to field an unfamiliar formation, a 4-5-1 with Michael Essien in the 
centre of defence. That deprived the Black Stars of Essien's dynamism in the 
middle and Cameroon were quick to take the initiative, Achille Emana and 
Mohamadou Idrissou frequently pushing up alongside Eto'o and Joseph-Desire Job 
to form a four-man attack.

Despite the sides' ambitious intent, both were betrayed by erratic passing in 
a scrappy first half. What little early composure was on display came from Alex 
Song, the Arsenal youngster in the heart of the Cameroon midfield. He created 
the game's first chance, orchestrating a fine move around the Ghanaian box 
before clipping the ball to the back post, only an urgent intervention by the 
goalkeeper, Richard Kingson, preventing Eto'o from heading into the net.

Both managers made changes early in the second half and at first Leroy's 
looked more effective, Ghana stretching Cameroon on a regular basis, but 
Rigobert Song and André Bikey repelled everything Ghana could muster and Nkong, 
playing in only his second international, sent his side into the decider in 
Accra.
 