
In Jonathan Coe’s novel The Closed Circle, a middle-aged man points at 
beautiful waitress half his age and says to his equally shopsoiled friend: 
“What do we know about her? Only that she’s young, and she has a body that we 
both crave. She could be a serial murderer, for all that we know. And yet 
either one of us, after a couple more drinks, would put our family lives at 
risk if she asked us to come back to her room. Wouldn’t we? It’s a pathological 
disorder of the male sex.”

Pathological and pathetic. As each new revelation from the Ashley Madison 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/28/ashley-madison-neil-biderman-stepping-down>
shows, men will risk their families for women who, when you get down to the 
basics, don’t actually exist. The evidence that the site was a swindle has been 
building ever since hackers downloaded its supposedly confidential data. First, 
there was the gender imbalance. Ashley Madison, whose CEO, Noel Biderman, 
resigned last week, had 31 million men on its database, but just 5.5 million 
women. As it takes two to tango, there must have been plenty of empty space on 
the dance floor.

Then Canadian journalists remembered 
<http://www.citynews.ca/2013/11/10/woman-hurt-typing-fake-profiles-for-dating-site-20m-suit-alleges/>
 that in 2011 one Doriana Silva had sued Ashley Madison for $20m, claiming that 
her former employers had forced her to create so many fake profiles of sexy 
women they left her with a repetitive stress injury. This provoked a stand-off 
and she later dropped her case.

Finally, Annalee Newitz of the Gizmodo 
<http://gizmodo.com/almost-none-of-the-women-in-the-ashley-madison-database-1725558944 
technology website> news blog analysed the leaked files. She found profiles 
full of dead data whose sole purpose was to make men think that millions of 
women were active on the site, when in fact only a few thousand appeared to be 
checking their messages to see who was inviting them to a night in a cheap 
hotel. Ashley Madison created a sci-fi world, she said, “where every woman on 
Earth is dead and some Dilbert-like engineer has replaced them with badly 
designed robots”.

How we laugh at the humiliation of others. Ugly, fat men so lost in their 
conceit they cannot even look in the mirror and see themselves for what they 
are. That they are the victims of a double crime – the scams of a dating agency 
and the extraordinary invasion of their privacy by malevolent hackers – does 
not trouble us. That many relationships that could have worked are now being 
destroyed spoils no one’s merriment either.

I’m not playing the prig here. I roared with laughter when Hamza Tzortis 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/ashley-madison-hack-islamic-preacher-hamza-tzortzis-found-leaked-list-1516688 
f>, from a fanatical outfit called the Islamic Education and Research Academy, 
issued a long, blustering statement explaining how unnamed conspirators had put 
his name, address and bank card details on the Ashley Madison site.

I’ve known for years that those who shout loudest about sin have the keenest 
lusts, which is why theBible belt is the porn-viewing capital of America 
<http://www.christiantoday.com/article/americas.bible.belt.states.indulge.in.more.online.porn.than.other.less.religious.states/42045.htm>
 . In Tzortis’s case, I could only hope that his protests that he was the 
victim of a devilish plot were true. The clerical authorities at the Islamic 
Education and Research Academy say that the appropriate punishment for adultery 
is a “slow and painful death by stoning”.

But the gloating at the humiliation of men who made themselves ridiculous 
misses how easy it has become to exploit human longing.

Ashley Madison <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> 
profited from a truth about promiscuous men that the phrase “casual sex” does 
not begin to cover. Unless you are a stupendously handsome or famous man, or 
preferably both, there is nothing casual about casual sex. It is grindingly 
hard work, with no prospect of a grind at the end. Men must hit on dozens of 
women. Ignore every rejection and bound back again. Dating websites give men 
the illusion that they can cut out the clubs and bars and make hundreds of 
approaches from their computer.

Desires beyond mere lust are just as easily exploitable. The crime you are 
least likely to see reported is romance fraud, which has exploded with the 
growth of social media. The criminals contact women and men, gay as well as 
straight, through dating sites. They then move on to personal messages and 
phone calls. For women targets, the scammers often pose as army officers – 
strong and reliable men they can trust.

For men, it is the Ashley Madison routine again: conventionally beautiful and 
tantalisingly available women who are young and vulnerable and looking for a 
man to put his arms around them. The scammer grooms the target for months, 
asking for, and sometimes sending, gifts, before cleaning them out. The police 
are threatening them and they need a lawyer. A loved one needs treatment. Their 
business is in danger of collapse.

You don’t hear about romance scams because they are so embarrassing. But 
Monica Whitty of Leicester University estimates that about230,000 people in 
Britain have been robbed 
<https://www2.le.ac.uk/departments/media/people/monica-whitty/Whitty_romance_scam_report.pdf>
. The typical targets are lonely. They dream of a romantic love that can 
transform their lives. They are dazzled when a desirable man or women feigns 
interest. They will do anything. They will send explicit films, which can later 
be used to blackmail them. They will empty their accounts of savings they meant 
to leave to their children.

In the past, a conman would have had to pass from town to town and bar to bar 
finding targets to fleece. Now the web brings him straight into a target’s 
home. Women compared the shame that followed to rape. “I just cried for a 
week,” one told Whitty. “This man was my soulmate. It was so intense. It was a 
one and only kind of relationship.”

The world directs the same mockery at them as the vain, deluded men on Ashley 
Madison. “Look at yourself, you dowdy cow,” it says. “What on earth made you 
think a dashing army officer could possibly want you for anything other than 
money?” The desperate middle-aged woman convinced she has found “the one”, the 
old queen besotted with a young beauty, are as much figures of ridicule as the 
husband who thinks that beautiful women will throw themselves at him without 
questions or strings.

But be careful before you join the world’s laughter. For this is a world where 
hackers can ruin your life – not for having an affair but for thinking of 
having an affair. A suspicious and calculating world where the best advice is 
to suspect the worst of strangers, open your heart to no one, and remember that 
anything you say online can, and perhaps one day will, be used in evidence 
against you.
 