
'An interview? Sure, just don't ask any difficult questions!' Joseph Yobo is 
joking, but if he and his Nigeria team-mates are to win the African Cup of 
Nations they will have to get used to searching examinations, such as the one 
they face against Cameroon in the quarter-finals today. Nations Cup games 
rarely come much bigger than Cameroon-Nigeria, and tend to determine the shape 
of the competition, as they did in the 1984, 1988 and 2000 finals that all 
ended in Cameroon titles.

Yobo thinks today's quarter-final is almost as important. 'This is a final 
before the final. Whoever wins this game will go on to win the tournament,' he 
told The Observer at the team hotel in Monastir. 'These are the two best 
nations in Africa, with the best players in African football.' Yobo is clearly 
among them, on the evidence of his three performances in Tunisia so far. It is 
difficult to think of a more impressive defensive performer at this tournament 
than the Everton defender. With Isaac Okoronkwo, struggling to regain match 
fitness after months in the Wolves wilderness, alongside him in central 
defence, Yobo has had a greater burden than usual to shoulder. It is a 
challenge he seems to be relishing.

'I am young but I take responsibility,' the 23-year-old says. 'I think you can 
see that in my performances - I am a better player when I have to be 
responsible.'

As Yobo comes to grips with his new role as patron of the Super Eagles' back 
four, it helps to have, in George Abbey, a familiar figure just to his right on 
the pitch, and by his side off it. A familiar figure to Yobo he may be - the 
two grew up together in Port Harcourt in eastern Nigeria - but Abbey may need 
some intro duction to the wider public, even though the Nigeria right-back 
plays in England.

Unlike his team-mates from the Premiership - Yakubu Aiyegbeni, Kanu, Jay Jay 
Okocha, Celestine Babayaro and Yobo - Abbey is scarcely a well-known figure, 
unless you happen to be a fan of Macclesfield. Abbey, 25, has been with the 
Silkmen since 1999, when he came to London to study business administration, 
and an agent took him up north for a trial. He had played in the same youth 
teams as Yobo in Port Harcourt, and with little interest expressed in the 
English third division by the Nigeria technical crew Abbey freely admits he 
owes his start in international football to his friend.

'I got my debut against Ghana in the summer, because Joseph talked to the 
coach about me,' he says. 'As a player he is one of the best in the world, or 
he will be. He never gets carried away, he wants to improve, and he is always 
encouraging everyone.' Abbey's admiration does not stop there. 'I couldn't wish 
for a better friend, he's like a brother to me. Whenever I have a problem he is 
the first person I call.' He can't do that here, as the two are sharing a 
mobile phone.

Yobo asked for Abbey's advice when deciding whether to move to Everton 18 
months ago, and gives his friend tickets to Goodison whenever Macclesfield are 
not playing. Unsurprisingly, Abbey dreams of joining his pal in the Premiership.

'I have been at Macclesfield four years, but it is not easy to spot good 
players in the third division,' says the man described by the Nigerian daily 
Vanguard as 'Abbey George, the Macclesfield defensive ace'. 'But I have been 
playing regularly here at the African Nations Cup against big players, so I 
hope big teams can see I can play at the highest level.'

Both Abbey and Yobo followed the typical African pattern of learning the game 
on dusty streets in bare feet. It has given the pair a refreshing humility and 
a burning desire to succeed. They are also both aware of the pressure that 
comes with representing Africa's most populous nation. Yobo says: 'The Nigerian 
population is more than 120 million, and it is a football country. The press, 
the fans, everyone puts pressure on you. But looked at another way, it is a 
source of motivation, a good pressure. And it brings the nation together: all 
the tribes support the national team, there is no conflict.'

Nigeria have a decent chance today, because Cameroon have yet to show the form 
that has won them the last two Cup of Nations titles. The Indomitable Lions are 
undoubtedly missing the midfield talents of Lauren, who has retired from 
international football, and Marc-Vivien Foé, who tragically died during the 
2003 Confederations Cup semi-final.

However, in recent times Cameroon have been Nigeria's bête noire . Those three 
finals victories weigh down on the Nigerian psyche, not least the 2000 
tournament, which the Cameroonians won on penalties in Nigeria. The Nigerians 
have a further disadvantage too, because the three players suspended last week 
(Babayaro, Aiyegbeni and Victor Agali) will almost certainly not return to the 
camp, despite all sanctions being lifted. 'We will miss those three, but morale 
is OK,' Yobo says. 'Our squad is smaller now, but we mustn't make excuses. And 
if we beat Cameroon we can get to the final easily.'

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 