
In a rock pool at the base of the looming cliff, Sean has discovered 
something: an innocuous yellow brick, rounded at the edges but with the 
inscription V&D faintly visible. It's the sort of thing you would normally walk 
straight past, but on this stretch of wild coast everything carries a story 
with it.

"This was cargo on the SS Clementine," says Sean squinting out to sea, "It was 
lost in 1924 and at some low tides, you can see the wreck – not today though."

Strange that the unfortunate ship should hold on to its secrets for almost a 
century, then suddenly release them, but this is a coast that has many 
mysteries. We are less than a mile south of the fishing village of Staithes, a 
huddle of whitewashed cottages squeezed between towering cliffs on the North 
Yorkshire coast. Sean Baxter has been fishing out of this place for over 35 
years, learning the ropes as a teenager from old men who had inherited 
traditions largely unchanged since Viking times. In the village's delightfully 
quirky museum, among the vast collection of archive photographs, Sean is there 
as a young man, carrying fishing lines down to the harbour in the traditional 
way – on his head.

"In its heyday Staithes had around 50 sea captains," he tells me. "Most 
famously, of course, Captain Cook came here as a boy to work in a chandler's 
shop, but then caught sea fever and left." The shop is long gone but the 
cottage is still lived in, unlike many others which have become holiday lets. 
Sean and wife Patricia are on a mission to revive the village, bring back some 
life, and communicate how fascinating this little harbour and coast are. Their 
weekend breaks are full of a sense of enthusiasm and discovery, plus the 
benefit of long experience – Patricia's family have been fishing here since at 
least the 17th century. Participants stay in a cosy fisherman's cottage next 
door to the Baxter's own home, a few yards away from the harbour and a couple 
of good pubs, one of which, the Cod and Lobster, is so close to the sea that it 
has been washed away twice. Winter, I reckon, is the ideal time to visit, with 
its huge dramatic skies and all sorts of discoveries to be made on the 
foreshore.
 Make it snappy ... Kevin's daughter, Maddy, collecting lobsters. Photograph: 
Kevin Rushby 
"Look at this!" Sean has spotted something in the rock pool where the brick 
was lying. It's a fat slug-like creature that when rolled in his hands squirts 
out a purple dye. "It's called a sea hare and the dye is what was used to stain 
the sails of Cleopatra's ships." He carefully returns the creature to the 
water. Sean's deep knowledge of this coast is augmented by years of experience 
working as a fisheries advisor around the world. From Cleopatra the 
conversation jumps to his experiences in Somalia, then Sierra Leone and the 
South Seas – an endlessly entertaining stream of stories that always, somehow, 
comes back to the magic of this section of coast.

We move on, picking our way across a flat area of rock, the scar that is only 
revealed at the base of the cliff at low tide. The rock dates back to the 
Jurassic period and, as we soon start to discover, is packed with fossils. 
Helped by Sean's teenage sons Luke and Thomas, inheritors of their parents' 
boundless enthusiasm and energy, our six-year-old, Maddy fills her pockets with 
ammonites and horn-like belemites. New finds turn up here in abundance, 
particularly during the stormier winter months. Maddy's real excitement, 
however, is reserved for the balloons she discovers trapped under an overhang – 
relic of a trawlerman's birthday party? Remarkably they are the only plastic 
flotsam we see all day.

"That's real treasure, Dad," Maddy confidently assures me.

When we pause for coffee, our seat is a stratum of fossilized tree roots. The 
sheer quantity of fossils is staggering, far greater than I've seen elsewhere. 
And further along, among the sandy tide-shadows of rocks, Sean shows us where 
to find small pieces of jet, a semi-precious stone that is fossilized monkey 
puzzle trees. He demonstrates how to distinguish it from coal, another common 
mineral here, then reveals the hollows in the cliff where jet comes from. In 
the gloom at the back, far beyond reach, there is a narrow seam of shiny black, 
not more than an inch thick.

"As kids we would come here and collect jet, then sell it in Whitby," says 
Sean.
 Cod and Lobster pub, Staithes. Photograph: Nadia Isakova / Alamy/Alamy 
Now, however, it is time to hunt for our lunch. Out at the ends of the scars, 
where the sea is thrashing and boiling, there are a few of Sean's creels which 
we retrieve from the waves. Inside are several lobsters, some undersized which 
we throw back, but a few large enough for lunch. Maddy plucks up courage and 
holds one of them, despite Sean showing the impressive array of wrist scars 
that years of wrestling with lobsters have left. There is another treat too: 
Sean has left a couple of baited shore lines out overnight and hauling them in 
we get a coley too.

"The sea here is very productive," he says, "We see lots of whales: minkes 
mainly but I've seen humpbacks and sei too. A few weeks ago we caught a big 
porbeagle shark – and released it. The harbour mouth has lots of porpoise and 
we see dolphins regularly."

As a fisherman who has worked in commercial fisheries all over the world, Sean 
is forthright on subjects like EU quotas, or that favourite bugbear of 
fishermen the world over, the effect of seal populations on fish stocks. "We 
are managing the environment, so it's madness to think seals are somehow 
exempt."

Such views might not suit everyone, but Sean is an undoubted conservationist. 
He has introduced hooks that protect marine mammals from injury and also 
champions local size limits on certain species, limits over and above the legal 
requirement. When we went out on his boat, All My Sons, the previous afternoon, 
fishing and lifting lobster pots, Maddy caught a big ling. It was not big 
enough for Sean, however. "I'm encouraging all the boats here to set a 4lb 
minimum," he explained, throwing the fish back in the sea.

Back on the scars, we explore another bay and Sean points out the signs of 
ironstone mining, an industry that prospered here in the 19th century. "The 
iron deposits were actually the reason why we have so many wrecks – they 
interfered with the compasses."

There are more than 1,700 documented wreck sites along this stretch of coast. 
Its awesome ability to claim lives and ships leading to terrible tragedies such 
as the Rohilla, a hospital ship that sank off Whitby in atrocious weather in 
1914, drowning 84 of the crew and passengers within sight of the shore and the 
gathered townsfolk.

After about three hours' gentle fossicking, we finally arrive at Port 
Mulgrave, an abandoned ironstone mining port, now home to a hotch-potch of 
beach huts, all homemade, often from beach-combed materials. Outside the 
Baxter's corrugated iron cabin, a campfire is burning and Patricia has already 
cooked the lobsters caught from the boat the previous evening. I have to admit 
that I ate three, probably too many considering there was a steep climb out of 
the bay before a walk back along the clifftops. There was Maddy's beach-combing 
collection to carry too. She had dumped the balloons, the fossils, some Fool's 
Gold crystals and the jet in favour of a carrier bag filled with silt that she 
insisted was precious clay. The balloons I moved to the hut, but the best of 
the ammonites and the jet went in my pockets. This coast really does have 
treasure for all.

• Weekend breaks with Real Staithes <http://www.realstaithes.com/> (+44 
(0)1947 840278) cost £245pp for 3 nights, including cottage accommodation in 
the village, guided walks, fishing trip, and meals (with one lobster lunch). 
Day trips £50pp, including guided coastal walk and lobster lunch. Alternative 
accommodation at Roraima House (+44 (0)1947 841423, double £80 per night), an 
excellent B&B in the upper village.Captain Cook and Staithes Heritage Centre 
<http://www.captaincookatstaithes.co.uk/> open daily 10-5pm (+44 (0)1947 
841454).
 