
Henshelwoods

You can find everything from fresh Longley Farm curds to Yorkshire-grown 
chillies on the shelves of this busy delicatessen, but for the visitor it's an 
excellent place to pick up a superior takeaway sandwich or a slice of homemade 
quiche. Ingredients, such as Mrs Appleby's Lancashire cheese and Whitby crab, 
are first-rate, as are the breads. Salad boxes are available in which you can 
mix 'n' match deli counter items and to which, if that feels a bit too 
virtuous, you can add a pork pie.
• Sandwiches from £2.35. 10 Newgate, +44 (0)1904 673877; deliyork.co.uk 
<http://www.deliyork.co.uk>

Melton's Too 
 Photograph: Andy Smith 
A spin-off from chef Michael Hjort's well-regarded Melton's restaurant, 'MToo' 
sees the Hjort ethos - precise treatment of seasonal, local produce - applied 
in a more informal setting. A tastefully renovated 17th-century workshop, 
Melton's Too is nowadays split between a cosy ground-floor cafe-bar, 
first-floor bistro and further events space, the eating options evolving with 
the day. It is a great, sedate place to linger over a late breakfast (until 
12.30pm). Try the light, creamy, intensely buttery scrambled eggs with 
stridently smoked Whitby salmon. Later, snack on tapas, or give the 
globally-inspired bistro dishes a spin. Typically, the menu might range from 
Peruvian beef dish, huatia, to roast squash and courgette ravioli with pesto. 
Express one-course lunch, £6.90, until 5pm. 
• Brunch/tapas dishes from £3; mains from £10.80. 25 Walmgate, +44 (0)1904 
629222;meltonstoo.co.uk <http://www.meltonstoo.co.uk>

J Baker's Bistro Moderne 
 J Baker's, York 
Be in no doubt, Jeff Baker takes his food very seriously. Its delivery, 
however, is fun and democratic. At lunch, thrill-seekers can cherry pick from a 
grazing menu of small and large plates, that proves a very cost-effective way 
of sampling food of real ambition and quality. At £6.95, Baker's signature 
Whitby crab salad - the crab accompanied by a citrussy, avocado creme fraiche 
"sorbet" and Indian spiced quavers - is, if not quite a steal, then certainly a 
very pleasant way to spend seven quid. The arrival, meanwhile, of an amuse 
bouche of tiny baked potatoes, served in a paper bag, alongside a little smoked 
salt and a generous slick of anchovy and black olive butter, is, at these 
prices, genuinely amusing. The service is warm and appealing, too.  
• Lunch dishes from £3.75. 7 Fossgate, +44 (0)1904 622688; jbakers.co.uk 
<http://www.jbakers.co.uk>

The Hairy Fig 
 The Hairy Fig, York 
The Fig claims it sells York's finest pork pie. Certainly, it is a mighty fine 
pastry product. Delivered fresh daily from the village of Bubwith - that is as 
much as the Fig will reveal - said pies feature supremely tasty, properly 
chunky mild-cured pork encased in supremely thin, crisp pastry. The Fig also 
sells Pieminister pies; its own cakes; various olives and cured meats; 
speciality breads baked in York; and Ampleforth cider (1 litre, £5.95), making 
it a great place to stock up for a picnic.  
• Pork pies from £1.30. 39 Fossgate, +44 (0)1904 677074; thehairyfig.co.uk 
<http://www.thehairyfig.co.uk>.
 

Il Paradiso del Cibo 
 Il Paradiso del Cibo, York 
With its scuffed lino, cheap, mix 'n' match furniture and Juventus 
memorabilia, Paolo Silesu's tiny Italian feels, quite deliberately, like some 
family-run back street restaurant in Turin or Rome. Silesu isn't interested in 
interior design, but in serving good, unfussy food at knockdown prices. Indeed, 
Il Paradiso has become something of a word-of-mouth sensation, not just among 
students enjoying £6.25 pizzas and pasta dishes, but local foodies, too. Look 
to the specials board for, say, a rustic plate of fat, perfectly cooked 
sardines, salad and red pesto (£4.50), or oven-baked sea bream with mussels and 
king prawns in a mixed herb, wine, garlic and lemon sauce (£11.50). Friendly, 
bright service, too.
 • Dishes from £3.95. 40 Walmgate, +44 (0)1904 611444

The Bar Convent Cafe 
 The Bar Convent, York 
The oldest working Roman Catholic convent in Britain, which "Welcomes visitors 
of ALL faiths and none", is also home to a useful cafe. The decor is a little 
drab and municipal, but the adjacent gardens and the tiled Victorian entrance 
hall lift the space. Choose from sensational cakes; interesting sandwiches 
(pastrami and sweet red pepper tapenade, for instance); simple, tasty eats like 
Welsh rarebit topped with caramelised onions; and daily specials such as beef 
bourguignon.
• Light lunches from £4.25, specials from £8.75. 17 Blossom Street, +44 
(0)1904 464910;bar-convent.org.uk <http://www.bar-convent.org.uk>
  

The Pig & Pastry  
 Pig and Pastry, York 
The locals' favourite for breakfast, brunch and (late) lunch, just outside the 
city walls, and thus off the natural tourist trail. It's an attractive space - 
big, chunky tables; a low counter laden with glossy, sexy cakes; huge plumes of 
dried peppers hanging in the windows - which chef-owner Steve Holding ensures 
delivers on its appetising promise. Squeeze on the end of a table, and tuck 
into good, crowd-pleasing dishes like pork belly cassoulet or Bleiker's kippers 
with brown bread. Attentive cooking and first-rate local ingredients mean that 
even the simplest items shine. The Pig's bacon butties, for instance, are 
exemplary.   
• Sandwiches from £3, meals around £5-8. 35 Bishopthorpe Road, +44 (0)1904 
675115
 

Cafe No.8 Bistro 
 Cafe No 8 Bistro, York 
This buzzy, casual eaterie has the looks of a 1930s diner, complete with Ella 
Fitzgerald jazzing it up over the PA. Thankfully, however, the food is 
thoroughly 21st-century. The emphasis is on Yorkshire ingredients, sensitively 
treated. Whether you're just dropping in for a bowl of soup - a warming, gently 
fiery Indian spiced tomato and ginger, say - or a 21-day aged steak with chips 
and a Yorkshire blue sauce, expect cooking shot through with a quiet, 
self-confident flare. Look out for the guest beers, like Rudgate's Camra 
champion, Ruby mild (£3.60).  
• Daytime dishes from £4.95. 8 Gillygate, +44 (0)1904 653074; cafeno8.co.uk 
<http://www.cafeno8.co.uk>
 

Goji 
 Goji cafe, York 
For years, El Piano - an elaborately tiled, tapas-dispensing slice of 
Andalusia in Yorkshire (tapas dishes £3.95; 15-17 Grape Lane, +44 (0)1904 
610676;el-piano.com <http://www.el-piano.com>) - has ruled the local vegetarian 
scene. Now, there is a new kidney bean on the block, Goji delicatessen and 
cafe. Taking a less eccentric line than its erstwhile competitor, Goji is good 
for soups, quiches, homebaked cakes (including a decent waffle with hot 
chocolate sauce and ice-cream). The speciality cafetiere coffees, however, were 
a disappointment.  
• Snacks from £1.50, larger dishes from £7.25. 36 Goodramgate, +44 (0)1904 
622614;gojicafe.co.uk <http://www.gojicafe.co.uk>
  

Le Langhe  
 La Bottega delle Langhe, York 
Located on one of York's less historic streets, just up the road from Allied 
Carpets, it would be easy to overlook Le Langhe. For local foodies, however, 
this deli-cafe is one of the city's most breathtaking sights. It is a treasure 
trove of artisan Italian produce - cured meats, imported cheeses, buckets of 
glistening olives and phalanxes of wine and olive oil cover every available 
surface. It can get expensive, particularly Thu-Sat evenings, when Le Langhe 
morphs into a restaurant proper. But, by day, you can pick up a fantastic 
sandwich – for instance, tart, smoky speck with rocket on a springy, chewy 
ciabatta from Le Langhe's bakery (£2.95) – or head into the elegant dining room 
for simple hot dishes, salads, and meat and cheese platters. 
• Starters from £3.95, pasta £8.95. The Old Coach House, Peasholme Green, +44 
(0)1904 622584;lelanghe.co.uk <http://www.lelanghe.co.uk>
 
• Tony travelled to York with Northern Rail <http://www.northernrail.org>. 

This article was updated on 1 May 2012
 