
When he was a contestant on The Apprentice he was dismissed by Baron Sugar as 
someone who “couldn’t organise a piss-up in a brewery”. But 25-year-old Tim 
Stillwell may yet have the last laugh after signing a deal withTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> to develop Mexican food outlets in 
the supermarket chain’s stores.


Stillwell, who began Burrito Kitchen in a takeaway van at the University of 
Birmingham before appearing on theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
television show, is to initially open two outlets in Tesco stores in London. 
The first, on Villiers Street in the West End, will open Monday, and a second 
on Cheapside in the City, next month.

The former Apprentice candidate, who began his food business while still a 
student, was sacked by Sugar in only the second episode of the 2013 series 
after his team failed to sell as much beer as their rivals. Stillwell admitted 
at the time he had put himself at a disadvantage by boasting the former Amstrad 
boss had not seen the best of him.

After being sacked, Stillwell claimed: “I think my business will be my last 
word.”


Burrito Kitchen opened its first standalone outlet in West Midlands’ Merry 
Hill shopping centre in July 2013 and continues to operate Burrito Van at 
Birmingham University. It’s not clear how many more outlets might open in Tesco 
stores.

Mexican food is increasingly popular in the UK and is challenging the 
dominance of Indian and Chinese takeaways. Former Masterchef winner Thomasina 
Miers’ Wahaca chain and its rival Barburrito have both been expanding rapidly, 
while the Chiquito chain of Tex-Mex restaurants is due to open nine new outlets 
this year.

The Burrito Kitchen venture is part of a change of tack for Tesco, which is 
trying out a number of food outlets in its stores in a bid to tempt in more 
shoppers. It opened In Farm We Trust, a concession of a Farringdon-based 
independent that sells food from British growers, in its Goodge Street store in 
London earlier this month.

Tesco, which has suffered from falling sales and profits in the past few 
years, bought the Giraffe chain of family restaurants in 2013 and a stake in 
Harris + Hoole coffee shops the previous year. But new chief executive Dave 
Lewis, who was brought in to turn around the business, is widely expected to 
sell off these to cut costs. Harris + Hoole lost £12.8m with sales of £6.6m in 
2013.

Loosening ties with the chains would also give Tesco more freedom to try out 
different eateries suited to the local demographic across the very varied 
locations it operates in across the UK and elsewhere.

Restaurants and takeaways are becoming an increasingly important to 
supermarkets, which are trying to create more exciting experiences that will 
tempt shoppers away from the fast-growing discount stores. All the major 
grocers have seen sales decline as shoppers turn to convenience stores and 
ordering online, as well as cheap and basic chains such as Aldi and Lidl.

Asda recently launched a trial of cheap eateries where everything on the menu 
costs just £1, while, at the other end of the spectrum, Waitrose is trying out 
wine bars and deli counters.

While pursuing his entrepreneurial interests Stillwell managed to obtain a 
first-class degree in international business. As well as setting up his burrito 
van, which was inspired by a backpacking trip around Mexico, he has also 
developed a lower-calorie soft drinks brand, Refresca.

 This article was amended on 2 July 2015. An earlier version said that Merry 
Hill is in Birmingham.

 