
The first thing that the scientists running my experiment asked me was simple: 
what's your goal? At first, this sounded like a trick question - surely the 
answer is as simple as "to run marathon". There's a reason why this column is 
called "Marathon Man" and there's a reason why I've just sent off a form to 
enter the London Marathon next April. Simple answer, right?

But, in reality, my innocent little non-running brain just didn't grasp the 
complexity of their question.Running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/running> a marathon is one thing but 
did I want to run it in a certain time? How hard was I willing to train? How 
much was I expecting from the time I had available (21 weeks and counting)?

Meeting the people who would turn my flabby mess of a body into the honed 
perfection of a marathon runner for the first time was daunting enough without 
having to come up with a detailed psychological reasoning behind my project. 
But these scientists, at the Human Performance Unit at Essex University, were 
unperturbed by my flapping about in talking about my goals.

That first meeting was a whirl of ideas on how to train, when to train, what 
to eat and drink, why shoes are important and what was realistic. They were so 
brutally honest about my chances that I sometimes winced - training me to run 
the whole marathon without falling apart was one thing; training me to run it 
in a time as good as, say, 4 hours would obviously be impossible.

But this was all theoretical. What they needed first was a measure of just how 
fit I am, a measure of what my running ability actually is. I nearly choked 
when they outlined their first challenge for me: find a 10k race in the next 
week, run it and report back with the time.

Bear in mind that I have never run anything over a half a mile in the last ten 
years without needing a sit-down and a cup of tea and you can imagine my horror 
at the idea of racing against regular runners well before any serious practice. 
I had imagined my first few sessions would have been gentle walks or slow 
canters, just to get me used to the idea of using my legs at running speeds. Oh 
no.

I was in right at the deep end. And it's not as if my guides had any sympathy 
either - one of them said that, though I wasn't prepared properly for the race 
and that I'd feel terrible throughout it and maybe even need a rest half way 
through, the results would nonetheless be valuable for their planning. I might 
even vomit, one of them helpfully added. Fortunately, I had pre-empted the 
meeting by going out and doing some very light jogging (you couldn't call what 
I was doing running or even jogging - it was more of an attempt to stay upright 
while wheezing heavily). My God did it hurt for the first week. By the second, 
though, I could run comfortably-ish for 15 minutes or sometimes more depending 
on how much beer had gone through my system the day before. But running a 10K 
was a different beast altogether - that meant running for an hour or more. At 
least.

I felt that I couldn't fall at this first hurdle, despite suddenly 
understanding what a monumental task this marathon training would be.

So, on Sunday December 5, I'll be running a 10k with the Mornington Chasers in 
Regent's Park in London. It's my first race of any sort since I was in school 
and, needless to say, I'm very apprehensive. See you on the other side. If I 
make it.
 