
We are going to need something more specific than the mystical Spirit of 
Cricket if incidents like the dismissal of Ben Stokes on Saturday are notgoing 
to erupt into a war of words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/england-ben-stokes-dismissal-australia>
 in future.

First, the wicket. Stokes, for me, was out by the letter of the law. It’s a 
case of interpretation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pKqDCD6qRBY>, of 
course, and in this instance the two on-field umpires said not out but the 
third umpire, Joel Wilson, overruled them. Like me, he believed Stokes’s arm 
had no right to be where it was and therefore he was obstructing the field.

In an ideal world, the two men out in the middle would have had the courage of 
their convictions to make the call themselves rather than send it upstairs, but 
in this era of technology this is obviously optimistic. That grumble aside, a 
decision was reached that was the one I would have made.

Ben Stokes incident sours Australia win over England in second ODI
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/ben-stokes-incident-australia-england-second-odi>
There are different readings of Law 37. The wording is grey and opinion is 
divided. That is fine but what frustrates in these instances, given we are 
supposed to accept the decision of the officials, is when the Spirit of Cricket 
is used by some to suggestSteve Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-smith>, the Australia captain, should 
have recalled the batsman and by not doing so, he was somehow damaging the game.

I don’t think this was immaturity from Smith, as some have claimed. If he was 
a wise old pro at 36 or starting out as captain at 26, as he is now, I fancy he 
would have had the same conviction in sticking to the appeal. In doing so, 
Smith believed himself to be going with the decision of the officials and 
therefore operating within the spirit.

Smith has been very harshly treated by those criticising him and also the 
supporters who booed him at Lord’s. He was playing according to the laws of the 
game and that is within the spirit. Others will say: “Dizzy, you’re wrong, he 
was out of order to stand his ground.”

And this is it, the Spirit of Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> – which, judging by the reactions, 
is something greater than the preamble to the laws we have at present – means 
different things to different people and countries.

You could, for example, argue that the England one-day captain, Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, was contravening it by 
questioning the decision of the officials and the integrity of his opponent at 
Lord’s on Saturday evening.

So let’s end the debate by getting some wording down that is more tangible on 
the actual spirit than the jargon we have at present. We need more detail in 
the wording or it will continue to come down to interpretation. Thankfully, as 
far as the spirit of the remainder of the series goes, I see no reason why the 
two sides will take any bad blood into the next three games.

In terms of the cricket we have seen so far – and let’s not forget, there is 
more to this series than one contentious call – Australia are living up to 
their billing as the world champions. They have been a well-oiled machine 
against an England side at the start of their development.

What has been impressive with Morgan’s side throughout the summer has been the 
positivity in their approach and the fact we have seen good cricket played, 
even if results remain patchy. They are going out there to express themselves.

Players are being backed to perform, in the main, although the decision to 
stand downJos Buttler <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jos-buttler> after 
playing the Twenty20 and the two one-dayers is a curious one. The England 
management say he is being rested but the cynics out there, when they consider 
his returns this summer, would see it as being dropped.

I just don’t understand how Jos has gone from ready to continue into the 
limited-overs series that followed the Ashes to mentally fatigued in the space 
of a week. If he had scored a few runs more in these games, would he still have 
been in need of a rest?

But even though he hasn’t produced the runs this summer, we are told he will 
be back in the side for the tour of the United Arab Emirates. What does this 
say to his replacement, Jonny Bairstow? And if he deals with this extra 
pressure and goes on to bag three hundreds, what happens then?

There is a dangerous precedent here because the message sounds like Jonny is 
just keeping the seat warm for another player. Putting my Yorkshire head 
coach’s hat on, I am feeling for him right now because he had six weeks in the 
Caribbean unused, went straight into the season without a break and has been 
going ever since.

I just hope he is not being used here and that this is a genuine opportunity 
to nail down that place.
 