
Libyans face extraordinary uncertainty as the Ramadan holiday gets under way, 
though Muammar Gaddafi's boastful claim that the tide of war is turning against 
his rebel enemies and theirNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> 
supporters looks wildly premature.

"The will of the Libyan people is stronger than Crusader aggression," the 
"brother leader of the revolution" declared in his latest characteristically 
defiant address, pledging "never to abandon" the battle.

Gaddafi was quick to gloat about the mysterious assassination of Abdel Fatah 
Younis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-younis>, his former 
interior minister who defected to become military commander of the 
Benghazi-based opposition. To Gaddafi it proved the movement is disorganised 
and incapable of running the country, just as, to his evident fury, it had won 
wide international – and then British – recognition as the legitimate 
government of Libya.

Tripoli has tried unsuccessfully from the beginning of the crisis to portray 
the rebels – who certainly include significant Islamist elements – as promoting 
an al-Qaida agenda, so ostensible evidence of internecine strife is useful for 
propaganda reasons. Yet it remains possible the "rogue" action that killed 
Younis may have been carried out by a "fifth column" working for the Gaddafi 
regime – no slouch when it comes to deception and clandestine operations. That 
explanation is, naturally enough, the one favoured by the National Transitional 
Council which is investigating the incident.

"Regrettable but containable," is the official council line about his death.

"This is not a revolution based on one man," one opposition official said. "It 
is based on six million people." Another avenue of speculation is that Younis 
might have been playing a double game.

News of fighting involving rival Islamist factions came as yet another 
worrying sign of internal division at a time when western political and 
military support for the rebels has reached the point of no return.

The bigger question is whether the disarray in Benghazi, compounded by new 
reports of dissent in the coastal enclave of Misrata, will slow an accelerating 
though still uneven military momentum, backed by Nato air power, with rebel 
forces in the western mountain areas now getting uncomfortably close to Tripoli.

Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the NTC chairman, clearly understood the need for calm 
and continuity when he announced the appointment of General Suleiman Mahmoud 
al-Obeidi – by no coincidence a member of the same powerful eastern tribe as 
Younis – as interim chief of staff.

Younis's killing has deepened concern among the rebels' western and Arab 
backers, who are worried about a lack of unity and the Islamist influence. But 
the rebels are, at the end of the day, the only anti-Gaddafi forces available.

"These events are embarrassing but I don't think they will affect the overall 
thrust of Libyan events," said Ashour Shamis, a London-based opposition 
activist and commentator.

The US, Britain, France and Nato as a whole have invested far too much to 
abandon this war in the face of one setback, however serious. The bombing of 
Libyan state TV satellite transmitters in Tripoli suggests the overall alliance 
strategy is continuing. France, hawkish from the start, vowed to carry on, with 
its defence minister Gerard Longuet calling for an uprising in Tripoli. It 
looks like being a long hot Ramadan inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.
 