
This week, Culture at King’s <http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/index.aspx> at 
King’s College London published anew enquiry 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/culturalenquiries/youngpeople/Step-by-step.pdf> 
(pdf) into access to the arts for young people. The report was inspired by a 
pair of speeches in June 2014. One, from culture secretary Sajid Javid, called 
for arts organisations todo more 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/culture-for-all> to increase access, 
especially for young people. The second,via shadow culture secretary Harriet 
Harman 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/88265413304/speech-on-young-people-and-the-arts-by-harriet>
, launched a Labour party consultation on young people and the arts. It was a 
welcome statement of commitment from both parties, but to long-standing 
observers it all felt somehow familiar.

Half a century of arts policy

These statements, from across the political divide, prompted Culture at King’s 
to ask what we have learnt in the 50 years since Jennie Lee launched the UK 
government’s first-ever arts policy, APolicy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/policy> for the 
Arts: The First Steps. What is the role of institutional memory in policy 
development? And what does institutional memory mean in the context of changing 
governments, civil servant turnover and funding body churn?

We decided that a look backwards might help to inform the future. We wanted to 
understand how successive governments and their agencies have devised policy in 
an attempt to increase young people’s engagement with the arts. Our approach 
was three-pronged: to review published literature, to listen to individual 
testimonies and to research through the archives.

Our initial ambition was to evaluate historical policy interventions by their 
own measures of success. But for the most part, we failed to find either the 
objectives that set out success criteria, or the data that could be used to 
judge them. What we did find was a generation of pioneers, from the 1970s 
onwards, who advocated passionately on behalf of young people, battling 
entrenched cultures that reflected wider social attitudes to children – and to 
what constituted good art. They also had to struggle against early resistance 
to the Arts Council having any involvement whatsoever with education.

From time to time, there was a distinct sense of Groundhog Day. The familiar 
debate about the purpose of arts policy weaves its way through the many decades 
we explored in the project. Should policy be directed towards improving 
understanding and knowledge of the arts, building audiences for the future, or 
inculcating civility in preparation for adulthood? Or should it be about 
fostering young people’s innate creativity?

Perhaps today we finally understand it’s about all those things. We’ve come a 
long way since Jennie Lee and yet, despite actions by successive governments to 
improve young people’s access to the arts, there is still a significant 
engagement gap, with education and affluence the major factors influencing 
likelihood and levels of engagement.

Lessons learned

So what can we learn from this retrospective focus? Some of the lessons are 
obvious: that historical precedents should be analysed and insights 
incorporated into the policy development process. That restructuring 
organisations such as the Arts Council can lead to loss of institutional 
memory, and of valuable insight and experience. That longitudinal evaluation is 
vital to capture the impact of engagement in later life and to measure the 
relative efficacy of initiatives. Finally, that the Arts Council archives are a 
hugely valuable, and largely untapped, resource.

The missing elements

For me, though, it was what was missing from the story that provided the most 
valuable learning.

The importance of early intervention in shaping outcomes in later life is now 
widely understood. Given the evidence, it’s highly likely that providing arts 
engagement for very young children would have a significant impact on their 
engagement in later life. There are excellent examples ongoing in the sector, 
but we uncovered very little evidence in our research of policy directed at 
early years, or towards supporting arts engagement outside the school system, 
despite what’s known about the role of family and social life in shaping 
identity and later experience.Sure Start centres 
<https://www.gov.uk/find-sure-start-childrens-centre> provide a ready-made 
infrastructure through which early years and family engagement schemes might be 
delivered.

We also found it curious that there isn’t more international transfer of best 
practice, given that we share some of the same policy challenges with different 
cultures around the world.

Greater attention to these areas – in addition to a continued focus on 
engagement via schools – might help to address the persistent disparity in arts 
engagement between those who have high levels of education and affluence, and 
those who do not. It may even increase the diversity and range of arts 
audiences and participants in a way that other initiatives are failing to do.

Our aim with this enquiry was to kick off debate in a significant year, when 
political parties will be setting out their manifestos and policy observers 
will be remembering Jennie Lee. By setting out the history of policymaking in 
this area – by highlighting the contribution of some key people and 
interventions and by unearthing unheard voices – we’re making a distinct 
contribution to an ongoing conversation.

Deborah Bull is a dancer, writer and broadcaster, and director of cultural 
partnerships atKing’s College London <http://www.kcl.ac.uk/index.aspx>

Download Step by Step: arts policy and young people 1944–2014 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/culturalenquiries/youngpeople/Step-by-step.pdf> 

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 