
The bulk of social games publisher Zynga's revenues come from its games on 
Facebook. However, the company is investing significantly in mobile gaming too, 
having built a team under former Yahoo executive David Ko, and acquired several 
mobile development studios around the world.

I interview Ko in Zynga's San Francisco office the day before Facebook's f8 
conference, the same week as it launched an Android version of its popular 
mobile title Hanging With Friends, while also adding new features and in-app 
payments to the iOS version.

"We believe that mobile represents a new social gaming frontier," says Ko. 
"We've always said we wantZynga <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/zynga> 
to be the best content creators in the world, and we are platform agnostic. 
More and more of our players are not just accessing their favourite games from 
their PC, but from their mobile devices: they want the experience on their 
mobiles and tablets, and we want to deliver that."

Zynga is no newcomer to mobile games: it released Zynga Poker early in the App 
Store's life in 2008. However, in interviews at the time, chief executive Mark 
Pincus told me that the lack of built-in viral mechanisms oniPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> - this was in the days before 
Facebook Connect - was an inhibiting factor for social games like Zynga's.

According to Ko, Pincus is now more optimistic. "Mark believes that mobile 
really has the potential to live up to its expectations that we've all been 
talking about," he says. "We see more and more players accessing stuff from 
their mobile devices. Sometimes they want an experience that mimics what 
they're seeing on their PC, and sometimes they want something very customised 
for their mobile device."

Zynga has done both: the iOS version of FarmVille mirrors the version on 
Facebook, you play the same farm across both. More recently, though, CityVille 
got a standalone mobile game called CityVille Hometown. Some rewards earned in 
the latter translated into the former, but otherwise they were separate cities: 
separate games.

"The market is very fragmented today, with iOS, Android, BlackBerry, Windows 
Phone… It's a fragmented industry, and we're trying to figure out what the best 
experience is for these devices," says Ko. "Our job is to tailor the experience 
for those people, and while you may see a more fragmented experience on mobile 
today, I do believe over time you'll see a consolidation of that experience."

Words With Friends has become the first Zynga game to start on mobile – it was 
originally developed as an iPhone game by developer Newtoy, which was then 
acquired in December 2010 – but subsequently be turned into a Facebook game. Ko 
says this made for an interesting conversion process, and possibly a better one 
than simply porting Facebook games to mobiles.

"So many times, developers think 'we can build for the PC, then take features 
away to optimise it for the mobile device', so it's essentially a different 
experience," he says. "But in this case, it was going from small to big. What 
was the best thing we can build for mobile, centred around performance, speed 
and user fun, and then build that out for a tablet and then a PC?"

Ko says Zynga is also trying to figure out how best to use specific features 
of mobile devices, like cameras, accelerometers and the touchscreens. 
Meanwhile, he is also "very bullish" on tablets, citing his own experience of 
using his PC less at home since getting a tablet

When deciding which existing Zynga games to bring from Facebook to mobile 
devices, Ko says his team does a lot of brainstorming, with people on one 
game's team invited to suggest ideas based on other titles – "just because you 
work in the mobile poker division doesn't mean you can't have ideas for things 
in the fashion industry or a CityVille Hometown type of game" – and says that 
there will be more mobile games which, like that latter title, link into their 
Facebook versions with specific quests and rewards.

Ko is enthusiastic about the improvement in mobile and tablet hardware, as 
well as the speed of mobile networks. He warns, however, that Zynga is not 
intending to make use of specific features for the sake of it.

"It's one thing many people miss: 'look at this cool function, let's just 
incorporate it'. They don't ask themselves the key question about whether it's 
fun. There are things we could use on the device but chose not to, because we 
don't think it's fun and neither do our players. It's something we always come 
back to as a company: is it fun? We ask that question every step of the way in 
the development process."

One technology predicted to spark fun times for mobile social game developers 
is HTML5, with the suggestion that their games will move back to the browser on 
mobile devices. Zynga already has a foot in mobile web gaming, having launched 
a browser-based mobile version of Mafia Wars. It has also acquired companies 
with expertise in this area, including Dextrose.

Meanwhile, Facebook is expected to unveil something called Project Spartan in 
the next few weeks, extending its web applications platform to mobile, 
providing a browser-based rival ecosystem to the Apple and Google app stores. 
Zynga will surely be heavily involved, although Ko unsurprisingly talks more 
generally about its ambitions.

"For very new platform that's introduced, if our players are asking for us to 
be on those platforms, we want to be there," he says. "HTML5 is interesting, 
although I do feel it is early. With those acquisitions, you can see into our 
thinking in this area a little bit."

Every mobile game developer and their aunt seems to be diving into the 
free-to-play social mobile games market at the moment, which Ko says he 
welcomes – "the competition will make everybody in the ecosystem get better". 
He's also keeping tabs on a host of developers, with an eye to potential 
partnerships (or even acquisitions, presumably).

He does have a warning for studios who think it is easy cracking the freemium 
business model. "The barriers to entry are low, but it's hard to scale those 
games, come out with new games and iterate quickly," he says.

"Some of the biggest titles out there in the industry had to go through many 
iterations to get to where they're at. The bar is low to get in, but high to 
develop high-quality and fun games that come out one after the other. And 
that's the key: they've got to be fun."
 