
The Melbourne-based futurist Steve Sammartino thinks it takes but four words 
to sum up the history of human labour: spear, seed, spanner and silicon.


The author of The Great Fragmentation says work has always evolved around the 
technology of the day and that the innovations reshaping the world promise to 
level the playing field for those living away from major population centres for 
the first time since the era of the spear.

“In the hunter-gatherer era, our spear and primitive tools defined work and 
location – we followed the herd,” he says.

“We lived off farms and villages in the agricultural era and moved to the 
cities en masse during the industrial revolution. But now, in the age of 
silicon, for the first time we can separate location and labour. We can live 
where we want and it provides the greatest opportunity in human history for 
remote locations. Silicon is the great equaliser.”

Sammartino is brimming with excitement over the possibilities presented by the 
so-called fourth industrial revolution of new technologies sweeping the world 
and singles out3D printing <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d-printing> 
in particular as the “biggest opportunity for remote areas since continental 
drift”.

Pay rates, insurance and superannuation: who's in charge of the gig economy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/28/pay-rates-insurance-and-superannuation-whos-in-charge-of-the-gig-economy>
Just as the internet opened up the flow of information beyond centralised city 
zones, Sammartino argues that 3D printing, otherwise known as additive 
manufacturing, will see the same happen for physical products, allowing people 
to make a living from “desktop manufacturing”, with creators no longer obliged 
to live anywhere near centres of industrial production.

“It will also have a positive impact of the cost of goods and timeliness of 
delivery to remote communities,” he says.

“In 20 years many goods which are currently produced centrally, most often in 
densely populated areas, will be produced on location via 3D printers. Simple 
things at home and more complex items in 3D printing picked up in stores you 
send your files to. This means that the cost of delivery evaporates, as does 
the time constraints, because now we are simply selling and moving files across 
the internet to make physical things.”

Whether or not Sammartino is right will be known soon enough in Australia, 
where a nationwide internet project promises to roll out satellite connections 
to the remote areas that make up 86% of the continent’s sprawling land mass but 
are home to just 3% of the population.

Residents face a diverse set of challenges, from the farmers struggling to pay 
the bills as climate change bites to the residents of remote Indigenous 
communitiesthreatened with closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/10/remote-communities-are-lifestyle-choices-says-tony-abbott>
. Some of the biggest economic disadvantages of remote living could be 
cancelled out by the arrival of the national broadband network, a contentious 
Australian government project that promises to bring the entire country online 
by 2020 – although this is just the latest revised target for an initiative 
that has been beset by a steady drip-feed of delays, cost blowouts and 
shrinking ambitions.

With robots, is a life without work one we'd want to live?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/26/with-robots-is-a-life-without-work-one-wed-want-to-live>
If and when the outback is blanketed with broadband-speed internet, the NBN 
will catapult areas that mostly missed out on the third industrial revolution 
of computing and online right into an era of smart devices, automation and 3D 
printers.

Additive manufacturing is becoming ever more affordable with machines capable 
of creating plastics-based items now costing in the order of hundreds of 
dollars and devices coming on to the market capable of producing products made 
out of hundreds of other materials.

The Perth-based company Aurora Labs has developed a high-end 3D printer that 
turns metallic powder “a bit like beach sand” into metal-based products, 
according to University of Western Australia’s head of mechanical and chemical 
engineering, Tim Sercombe, who has been consulting with the company on the 
technology.

“These printers are orders of magnitude cheaper than conventional 3D metal 
printers,” he says. “This brings the possibility of access to communities where 
the technology is currently too expensive to contemplate. They normally cost 
half a million [Australian dollars], well beyond just about any remote 
community, but this one is fifty grand, which is more likely to be raised.”

Sercombe says one function of particular interest for remote communities is 
being able to create parts on demand for things that break unexpectedly – 
whether that is a crop harvester, washing machine, or water pump.

“People in remote communities won’t necessarily have 3D printers in house but 
their town might have a local hardware or a farming supply depot, maybe a local 
mechanic or general corner store that is equipped with one,” he says. “It would 
be relatively local compared to shipping it in.”

 He says at the current price point additive manufacturing of metals is more 
suited to essential replacement repairs rather than, say, leisure equipment.

“Sure, if you break your tennis racket and can’t get one for three weeks, it 
is not the end of world. A bore pump goes down in a remote community and you 
don’t have any water – that’s much more significant.”

Humans are going to have the edge over robots where work demands creativity | 
Tim Dunlop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/26/humans-are-going-to-have-the-edge-over-robots-where-work-demands-creativity>
He nevertheless thinks 3D printing the kind of every day consumer goods 
accessible to people in urban areas but harder to source in the outback will 
soon become affordable, pointing to a Perth company called Flying Machine that 
is already offering 3D-printed bicycles.

CSIRO manufacturing group leader Dr Leon Prentice says remote communities 
could also particularly benefit from being able to access short-term medical 
solutions in times of need.

“Additive manufacturing could, for example, print custom prostheses, like 
artificial limbs for amputees, custom splints/casts/braces, possible temporary 
implants – including dental – before more formal long-term treatment is 
available, and items for patient support,” he says.

Not everyone is so gung-ho on the 3D printing revolution taking hold out bush 
anytime soon.

Daniel Featherstone, the general manager of the Indigenous Remote Communities 
Association, says the skills do not yet exist in such areas to utilise such 
technology. “It’s still too early to really see how these may have an impact in 
remote communities – our focus is on getting basic connectivity and skills in 
communities,” he says.

“No doubt once there is good connectivity and skills the possibility of 3D 
printing will become apparent, especially due to the lack of access to 
suppliers for spare parts and items that can be printed on-site.”

The chairman of Broadband for the Bush, Ray Heffernan, says that the cities 
will need to lead the way. “3D printing is primarily a manufacturing process 
and, if it comes to remote communities, I think that is only going to happen 
when it becomes commonplace in wider [urbanised] society,” he says.

Back in the city, Sammartino is concerned that the internet infrastructure in 
the works will not be up to the job of realising the full potential of 3D 
printing and other emerging technologies.

“I fear the NBN is both piecemeal and not at the level our modern economy will 
require given everything we touch will be connected to it,” he says.

Sercombe disagrees that further NBN issues would ruin Aurora Labs’ 3D printing 
ambitions in remote areas, arguing that even if lower-than-projected internet 
speed is delivered, just about any connection will be enough given schematics 
are typically between one and 100 megabytes in size.

“Dial up speed, yes that would be an issue,” he says. “But even if the NBN 
only delivers current ADSL speed, it might take a few hours [to download a 
product design]. That’s not the end of the world, I wouldn’t think.”
 