
On 17 October 2005 a 20ft-high statue was unveiled at San Jose State 
University showing their former students Tommie Smith and John Carlos frozen, 
fists aloft, as they had stood exactly 37 years earlier on the Olympic podium 
in Mexico City. “Tommie Smith and John Carlos stood for justice, dignity, 
equality and peace,” reads the inscription. “Hereby the university and 
associated students commemorate their legacy.”

Why US women are likely to outperform the men again at the Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/19/us-womens-sports-olympics-rio> 
Two years later Smith published his autobiography. In 2008 the pair were given 
the Arthur Ashe Courage Award at the ESPYs, something akin to an American 
Sports Personality of the Year awards. Carlos’s own autobiography followed last 
October. This, now, is their life, full of speaking engagements and interviews, 
publicity and publication, applause and acclaim.

In the moments before the medal ceremony in Mexico City, Carlos, Smith – as of 
a few moments earlier the 200 metres world record-holder – and the Australian 
silver-medallist Peter Norman sat in a room the athletes called “the dungeon”, 
deep in the bowels of the Olympic Stadium. As they prepared, they discussed 
what was about to happen. One of the things mentioned was the possibility of 
them being murdered on the spot.

“I remember telling Mr Smith: ‘Remember when we get out there, we’ve been 
trained as runners to listen to the gun,’” Carlos has said. “’So when we get 
out there and do what we do, if the hammer hits that bullet, hit the deck. 
Don’t be just a duck on the table for them to just shoot at.’”

Whose idea was the raised fist? With depressing inevitability, both athletes 
have claimed it. According to Carlos, just before the final he suggested it to 
Smith: “I’m going to do something on the stand to let those in power know 
they’re wrong. I want you with me.” He even claimed to have deliberately lost 
the race, because “Tommie Smith would have never put his fist in the sky had I 
won”. But if this were true, why would Smith by then have procured the pair of 
black gloves the pair famously go on to share? Smith, meanwhile, recalled: “I 
told John what I was planning to do. I said: ‘You don’t have to do anything 
that I do, but this is what I’m going to do. Just follow my lead.’” These 
competing claims caused the pair to fall out for several years, but more 
recently Carlos has stated that the protest had been planned by the two 
athletes together over a period of days.

What is currently agreed on is this: they wore gloves to represent black 
America, and removed their shoes and wore black socks to symbolise the poverty 
of the American black community. Smith wore a scarf and Carlos a bead necklace, 
recalling lynching. Both Americans wore the badge of the Olympic Project for 
Human Rights, and they planned to raise their gloved fists, which according to 
Smith at the time “stood for the power in black America”.

Norman recalled those moments in “the dungeon” thus: “They involved me in the 
conversation. It wasn’t a secret huddle, they were letting me know. It was my 
suggestion that they split Tommie’s gloves because John had left his back in 
his room. [Then] I said to John: ‘You got another one of those badges?’ ‘If I 
get you one, will you wear it?’ he asked. ‘I sure would,’ I replied.”

Neither Smith nor Carlos had a spare badge, but as they walked into the light 
of the stadium they saw Paul Hoffman, a (white) member of the US rowing team 
and OPHR activist. “I was wearing my badge and he came up and said: ‘Hey mate, 
you got another one of those?’ So here’s this white Australian, with two black 
Americans, who wants to wear an OPHR badge, and I was damned if I was going to 
be the one who says he can’t,” Hoffman told the BBC (in the excellent 
documentary Black Power Salute, which youcan currently see here 
<http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-5208725177766519995#>). “So I took 
mine off and handed it to him.”

They reached the podium, where a rather bemused Lord Burghley, the sixth 
marquis of Essex – a Conservative politician and International Olympic 
Committee member who 40 years earlier had won gold in Amsterdam in the 400m 
hurdles – placed their medals around their necks. When asked later what he had 
thought of the gloves, he said: “I thought they had hurt their hand.”

The anthem started. Smith and Carlos thrust their fists in the air. Different 
people recall the reaction within the stadium very differently: Time magazine 
reported that “a wave of boos rippled through the spectators”, but Newsweek 
describes simply a “murmur [that] rippled through the stadium”, and in the New 
York Times it is reported that the protest “actually passed without much 
general notice”. What is certain is that for everybody involved, life was about 
to change for ever.

If San Jose’s brilliant sprinting coach, Lloyd “Bud” Winter, was responsible 
for them reaching the podium, another member of the university’s staff was 
largely responsible for what they did there: Harry Edwards, the inspirational 
young sociology professor and creator of the OPHR, had done much to politicise 
the pair – particularly Smith, by nature more reserved and less militant than 
his fellow medallist.

Edwards had originally advocated a black boycott of the Games. “For years we 
have carried the United States on our backs with our victories, and race 
relations are now worse than ever,” he had told the New York Times. “It’s time 
for the black people to stand up as men and women and refuse to be utilised as 
performing animals for a little extra dog food.”

The boycott was also supported by Martin Luther King, who had met Edwards and 
several athletes including Carlos in New York a few days before he was 
assassinated in April that year. “I would like to commend the outstanding 
athletes who have the courage and determination to make it clear that they will 
not participate in the 1968 Olympics until something is done about these 
terrible evils and injustices,”he said 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E2wTMGZVRu8&feature=player_embedded>.

But many black athletes were keen to compete in Mexico, and when South Africa 
and Rhodesia were disinvited from the Games – one of the OPHR’s three main 
demands – the boycott plan was dropped. Other ideas swiftly took its place, and 
at the US trials a few weeks before the Games, officials were warned to “expect 
almost anything”.

So immediately after Smith and Carlos made their stand a statement was 
released which stated: “US Olympic officials knew they planned to do it,” and 
that they “did not expect to take any action”.

But then Avery Brundage got involved.

Brundage was the IOC’s president from 1952 to 1972, and he was also an 
antisemite, white supremacist and Nazi sympathiser, whom the athletes preferred 
to call “Slavery Avery”. His removal from office had been one of the OPHR’s 
other key demands. His pet hate – ironically, given his active involvement in 
the 1936 Games in Berlin, which became a propaganda exercise for the Nazi party 
– was the use of sport for political or nationalistic ends. He detested and did 
his best to ban medal tables, and in 1964 came close to passing a motion that 
would have denied Smith and Carlos their memorable moment, by ending the 
raising of national flags and the playing of anthems at medal ceremonies and 
replacing them with the Olympic flag and “a fanfare of trumpets”.

He might have been presenting the medals himself that day, had he not been in 
Acapulco watching the sailing (the original purpose of the gloves, according to 
Carlos, was as protection in case they were required to shake his hand). But 
Brundage had seen the ceremony, and he was mad as hell.

The IOC criticised Smith and Carlos for “advertising their domestic political 
views”, which amounted to “a deliberate and violent breach of the fundamental 
principles of the Olympic spirit”. The US Olympic Committee, threatened with 
the expulsion of its entire team unless action was taken, suddenly changed its 
tune, putting out a second statement apologising for an act of “untypical 
exhibitionism ... which violates the basic standards of sportsmanship and good 
manners which are so highly regarded in the United States”. Smith and Carlos 
were given 48 hours to pack their bags and leave the country. Hoffman, for the 
crime of lending Norman his badge, was very nearly expelled as well, and got 
away with it only because his father was a judge and a personal friend of many 
American officials.

The protest had not been much better received back home. “’Faster, Higher, 
Stronger’ is the motto of theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. ‘Angrier, nastier, uglier’ 
better describes the scene in Mexico City last week,” reported Time, describing 
the protest as “a public display of petulance that sparked one of the most 
unpleasant controversies in Olympic history”. Associated Press called it “a 
bizarre demonstration”. One of few voices of support from white America came 
from Robert Clark, the enlightened president of San Jose State, who praised 
them as “honourable young men dedicated to the cause of justice for the Black 
people in our society”.

Back in Mexico City, Jesse Owens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2011/dec/21/jesse-owens-four-gold-medals>
 was sent to talk black athletes out of staging similar protests (though he was 
ignored, and considered a white apologist by many). They were told “A 
repetition of such incidents ... would warrant the imposition of the severest 
penalties at the disposal of the US Olympic Committee.” But protests of varying 
degrees of subtlety abounded. After a black American clean sweep in the men’s 
400m, won by Lee Evans, another student of Edwards at San Jose State, all three 
athletes wore berets to their medal ceremony.Long-jump gold-medallist Bob Beamon
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/nov/23/50-stunning-olympic-bob-beamon>
 wore black socks pulled up high, while the bronze-medallist, Ralph Boston, 
went barefoot. “They’re going to have to send me home, too,” he said. They did 
not. The women’s 4x100m relay team publicly dedicated their own gold medals to 
Carlos and Smith.

(But another athlete, the heavyweight boxer George Foreman, who claims he 
“thought about going home myself” in solidarity after Smith and Carlos were 
expelled, then celebrated his own gold medal by waving a little American flag 
in the ring. He was castigated in the black community. “I felt what I did was 
right, and I think they appreciate me more for doing what I think was right 
than following what they think was right,” Foremansaid the following month 
<https://diva.sfsu.edu/collections/sfbatv/bundles/190455>. In his autobiography 
Smith says Foreman’s flag-waving made him “very bitter, very angry”.)

What happened next?

The BBC paid them $1,000 in cash for an exclusive interview. Will you not 
benefit from the notoriety and publicity the protest has generated, they were 
asked. “I can’t eat that,” Carlos said. “And the kids round my block can’t eat 
it. They can’t eat publicity, they can’t eat gold medals. All they want is an 
equal chance to be a human being.”

The truth of this observation was clear after their return to America. After a 
near-violent scrum of reporters assaults them in Los Angeles, they board a 
second flight to San Jose. “Once we got back we were ostracised, even by our 
own,” Smith said. “Folks were scared, man. No jobs. We couldn’t find work. 
People even told us, ‘We can’t get close to you guys because we have our own 
jobs to protect.’ These were my friends. At least, they were my friends before 
I left for Mexico City.”

Smith’s agent cancelled their contract, and Smith was sacked from his job 
washing cars. Within two years his mother had died, his marriage was over, and 
he was unemployed and broke. “My mother died of a heart attack in 1970 as a 
result of pressure delivered to her from farmers who sent her manure and dead 
rats in the mail because of me,” he said. “My brothers in high school were 
kicked off the football team, my brother in Oregon had his scholarship taken 
away.”

Carlos fared little better. “I came back ‘John Carlos the neighbourhood bum’,” 
he has said. “I would soon have no money and I had to beg, borrow, steal and 
gamble to pay my rent. I remember chopping the furniture up for firewood and my 
wife looking at me as if I was crazy. But our heating was electric and I 
couldn’t pay my electricity bill, so we had to take the kids to sleep by the 
fireplace.” His wife left him, and in 1977 she took her own life. “I lost my 
first wife in this thing. But I’ll never be bitter toward anyone,” he said. 
“Not for the criticisms or the death threats or anything. If I’m bitter, they 
win.”

Peter Norman’s time of 20.06 remains an Australian record, and would have won 
the gold medal in two of the past three Olympics. He continued to race, 
competing in the 1970 Commonwealth Games, but even though he comfortably 
reached qualifying standards in 1972 for both the 100m and 200m, for which he 
was at the time ranked No5 in the world, he was not selected, and Australia 
travelled to Munich with no sprinters at all. When the Olympics were held in 
Sydney in 2000 notable Australian former medallists were invited to take part 
in a ceremony at the Olympic Stadium; Norman was not among them. He made it to 
the stadium only after officials from US Track & Field heard of their plight 
and stepped in. “They treated us like royalty,” said his second wife, Jan (his 
first marriage also failed after 1968). When Norman died in 2006, Smith and 
Carlos acted as pallbearers. “He didn’t raise his fist,” Smith said, “but he 
did lend a hand.”

The redemption of Smith and Carlos started in 1983, when the president of the 
organising committee of the Los Angeles Games, Peter Ueberroth, hired Carlos as 
special consultant on minority affairs. Ueberroth personally handled the 
resulting storm of protest, but Carlos’s work was later seen as one of the key 
factors behind the success of the Games.

Looking back at the bad times, Carlos has said: “If I’ve got to take a 
whuppin’ for something I believe in, I’ll take that whuppin’.”

What the Guardian said: 18 October 1968

Although every athletics expert was aware that the United States Negro 
athletes might protest, the manner of it surprised many in the Olympic Stadium 
here last night.

It was more restrained and yet more effective than some had thought. There was 
the possibility that Tommie Smith or John Carlos, overwhelming favourites for 
the sprint events, might refuse to appear at the medals ceremony. In fact, both 
showed a keen awareness of the publicity values involved, and their appearance 
in black socks and black scarves, and each with a single black glove, Smith’s 
on the right hand, Carlos’s on the left, showed a knowledge of public relations 
equalled only by Cassius Clay, now Muhammad Ali.

US men's volleyball has no pro league – but it has its eye on Olympic gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/14/volleyball-usa-mens-olympic-gold>
At the press conference afterwards, the same awareness was apparent. The 
representatives of the world’s press crowded into a room perhaps 40 feet by 30. 
The organisation insisted that questions and replies were put in English, 
Spanish and French.

International press conferences usually begin with pussy-footing questions of 
remarkable banality. The first question to Carlos was why he looked over his 
left shoulder and whether it cost him second place – a good technical question 
but utterly remote from the emotional context of the occasion ...

Questions concerning which coach had meant most to Smith were hooted off court 
by all except the conscientious interpreters. Finally Carlos lost patience and 
burst out with the statement: “We are black and we are proud to be black in 
white America.”

Black Americans, he said, would understand the nature of their demonstration.

“We are not a show horse doing a performance, so if we do a good job we get 
paid some peanuts. All through these Olympics I hear them say ‘Boy, boy, boy, 
you’re doing well.’ I am tired of that. I want the whole press of the world to 
hear what I say and either say it as I say it or not say it at all.”

... The US team officials were obviously left with a problem. What, if any, 
disciplinary action would be taken. “I’d pack them all back home,” one British 
official said trenchantly. He perhaps has no White House to deal with.John 
Samuel, Mexico City
 