
For over 20 years, Plastic People in London has been revered as one of the 
world’s great clubbing institutions, the place where all the potential ills of 
nightlife – harassment, vomit, generic music – evaporate in front of its 
perfectly calibrated sound system. It suddenly announced that it was closingits 
doors last weekend 
<http://www.dancingastronaut.com/2015/01/legendary-london-nightclub-plastic-people-closes-doors/>
, with a typically intimate “friends and family” party as its swansong.

Here, founder Ade Fakile and resident DJ Sam Shepherd – aka Floating Points – 
remember how the club began, flourished, and nurtured a host of legendary 
nights, including Trash, FWD, Innervisions, and Theo Parrish’s celebrated 
residency. Please leave your own memories in the comments section below.

Ade Fakile

Sometimes you listen to a song at home and think it sounds amazing. You go 
out, someone plays it, but it doesn’t quite sound the way you know it. That was 
my main aim with Plastic People: I wanted to give DJs around the world an 
incredible, clean sound system, and somewhere they could truly play whatever 
they wanted.

From 1994 to 1999, I don’t think I spent one night away from Plastic People. 
When I started at Shoreditch, from 2000 to 2005, I missed just four nights per 
year. Then I was lucky enough to find a new club manager, Charlotte. She ran it 
the way she wanted to run it, and it was brilliant. It’s closing because she’s 
leaving – rather than anything to do with licensing, or rent. I don’t think it 
would be easy to find someone to run it like she did. She was an industrial 
designer at university – she does the ugly things that make a club run 
perfectly.

I was 22 when it first started. I had been in London three years after moving 
from Nigeria, where I grew up, and was two weeks away from my final exams at 
university studying economics. There used to be a club called Fish on Oxford 
Street, an incredible basement with high ceilings and it was very dark (my 
whole idea of a dark club comes from Nigeria – you can stay in one corner for 
three hours, and no one would know you are there). I was passing the club on a 
Monday and a guy was taking off the sign, and for some crazy reason I asked if 
I could run it, as it was closing down. I spoke to the person who owned the 
building; he asked for some money, I gave it to him and that was that.

The first three years were a crash course in nightclub-running. The only thing 
I got right was the sound system. I was paying 40% of the revenue on sound 
system rental every week, but it was worth it – I had every DJ I wanted playing 
there, from Masters at Work to the first ever Daft Punk gig in London. All of 
these kinds of DJs have studios, and spend so much money on their speakers – so 
when they go out to play it’s often a let-down. But if you give them a 
something that’s as close as possible to their studio, they’ll tell their 
friends. You don’t have to call anyone any more.

Eventually, the lease expired and we moved the club to Shoreditch. From those 
nights, I have memories where I thought Ade – you’ve done good.Fran 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OFPjAP3SxA>çois Kevorkian 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OFPjAP3SxA> once did a two-day residency. On 
the Saturday there were two hours where everyone in the room was literally 
making the same movements – it was incredible.Martyn 
<http://www.residentadvisor.net/dj/martyn> would strike the right balance of 
keeping you on the edge, keeping you happy, then play something dark. The first 
two hours ofTheo Parrish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/14/theo-parrish-teddys-get-down-review-barbican-london>
’s sets were always amazing too. His core supporters, 15 of them, would be 
there at 10pm come rain or shine. Rhythm and Sound were also incredible. If 
you’re not careful, dub can bore you to death, but for them to play dub for two 
hours and make everyone in the room move in the same way, you just need to stop 
and marvel.

The concept of giving musicians a platform for what they imagine in their 
heads hasn’t died in me though. I still want to be in this city doing music, in 
one way or another. I like to see people’s faces, everyone having that same 
emotion at the same second is incredible. Gathering like-minded people around 
to listen to music: that idea is still burning.


Sam Shepherd aka Floating Points

Around six years ago I came down to London for university, and started going 
to Plastic People for a night calledCD-R <http://cdr-projects.com/about/>. 
You’d make friends there among a big community of lots of London producers. Me 
andSBTRKT <https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/newbandoftheday+sbtrkt> 
would always go down together and play the music we were working on. They 
eventually asked if I wanted a monthly party there, and I went on to do it for 
five years.

At other nights I was going to, there would be DJs who had a certain sound and 
genre – but at Plastic People that was generally abolished.Four Tet’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/13/four-tet-beautiful-rewind-review>
 night, for example, was completely genre-less. The thing that’s unifying is 
that the music was always inviting, reaching out of the speakers and pulling 
people in and together.


Theo Parrish was a massive inspiration to me. Ade, too – he’d be playing 
spiritual jazz records for an hour and then go from a Mala dubplate that no one 
owned to Strawberry Fields Forever. The vibe was amazing. To have that ballsy 
attitude, to have no fear of what you can play – people responded to it really 
well. Ade has records that are so phenomenally rare, that you will never see 
again, and it’s not a big deal to him. Hearing people like him and Theo playing 
really informed how I played, the ability to consider jazz, soul, disco and 
techno as a lineage that’s OK to mix together. They’re all the same music, some 
made by humans controlling machines, some by humans controlling instruments, 
and you don’t have to believe a club night needs one specific sound.

Although Shoreditch has now become apocalyptic after 1am, Plastic People never 
changed. We all maintained that it’s a safe haven away from it all. The people 
coming down to the nights were so nice, and became regulars; suddenly it became 
a room full of 200 friends. You knew their dance moves, you knew the guy who 
screams when you played a certain track. It didn’t feel like randoms off the 
street.


Brilliant Corners in Dalston has a great sound system; Cosmic Slop in Leeds 
has the greatest sound system in the world. A lot of places in Japan have great 
systems. But there is a paucity of places driven by a person who just has to 
hear music in the best possible way, and I think that people’s connection to 
music and each other can be so much greater with as good sound as possible. Why 
not achieve excellence? I hope Plastic People was one of the places in the 
world, just like Paradise Garage and these other mythical venues, that help 
people understand that we can do better at reproducing music. That’s one of its 
legacies: it’s a blueprint for seeking perfection.
 