
With every Underground line affected and London’s roads jammed as a result of 
the disruption, Monday’s 24-hour tube strike has caused significant problems 
for commuters. But some Guardian readers reported that their employers had 
taken an understanding view of their plight.

Harry Hewitt, who works in film production, spent an hour trying to get into 
work only to end up going back home:

I live near Manor House and travel to Holborn. I spent an hour watching bus 
after bus go past in crawling traffic as the crowds at the bus stop grew larger 
and larger. The majority of the people in my area rely on the Piccadilly and 
Victoria lines to get into town and it’s utter carnage on the roads today.

My employer finally sent me a message to say I could work from home this 
morning but to try coming in later when it calms down (if it calms down). I’ve 
been given leave to work from home this morning but they want me to try to get 
in at some point. Given the state of things I’m not sure when I’ll be able to 
do that and even less sure of how I’d make it home at the end of the day even 
if I do make it into town.

Melanie from Southgate in north London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
, a graphic designer for an investment bank, had a similar experience and gave 
up trying to get into the office:

I left home an hour early. I attempted to take the tube to Finsbury Park from 
Arnos Grove to catch a bus. What is normally an hour-long journey turned into a 
three-hour one. With no Piccadilly line or any other viable options to get to 
Mayfair, I gave up and went home.

I had to email my employer an hour before I was supposed to be in work to say 
there was no way for me to get in today. It was my first day back after the 
Christmas holiday and my first day as a full-time employee (I used to be an 
intern). My boss was supportive as she was also having tube trouble, so I felt 
lucky she was so understanding. Now working from home today without the proper 
files and contacts I need to do my job properly.”

Tube strike: all lines hit and most central London stations closed – live 
updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-all-lines-hit-and-most-central-london-stations-closed-live-updates>
Jayne, from Greenwich, south-east London, works in development and was allowed 
to work from home. She is eight months pregnant:

I’m fortunate to work for an employer who is understanding, so I am working 
from home. Being eight months pregnant, there was no way I was going to be able 
to negotiate the crowds during the strike. If my employer wasn’t understanding 
I would have had to use up a much-needed day of annual leave.

Louise, 30, a heritage trust worker travelling from Camberwell, south London, 
said her commute a reminded her of how poor the city’s cycling infrastructure 
is:

I normally cycle every day but noticed a huge increase in the number of 
cyclists today. It’s great that more people are getting on a bike in times like 
these, however it made me realise that perhaps some of our new cycling 
infrastructure – the cycle superhighways in particular – are not designed for 
this many cyclists.

One other issue I faced was the sheer amount of people walking to work – lots 
of them crossing the road carelessly while looking the wrong way or staring at 
mobile phones. People were walking in the cycle lanes, which was unhelpful when 
they were already overcrowded. The best thing about the tube strike was that 
the car traffic was very static, with long traffic jams which meant that 
cycling on the road was easier as none of the cars were moving.

I’m in the office today but all of my team are working from home. My manager 
is very flexible and even suggested that I work from home.

Craig, 61, an assistant headteacher from Brighton, said his daily commute into 
London had become so unreliable he had had to resign:

I’m working at home today. With the Southern rail chaos compounded by this 
recent tube strike, it makes it almost impossible for me to get to work on 
time. My head has been very understanding, but the recent months have made my 
job untenable and therefore I have been forced to resign. My daily trip to work 
regularly takes two-and-a-half hours and frequently longer due to 
cancellations, signal problems and staff shortage. This is my third year and, 
quite frankly, enough is enough.”

Some names have been changed for anonymity purposes

 