
Whether or not you agree with reports at the weekend that the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is facing a “humanitarian crisis”, 
caused by delayed discharge and unprecedented demand for services, it is 
abundantly clear that when it comes to health and social care, the status quo 
is not an option.

As calls grow for the government to do more to tackle the funding gap in 
social care – predicted to reach£2.3bn by 2020 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/autumn-statement-2016>, David Miles, 
chief executive of Mears Group, agrees that the social care sector’s position 
is precarious.

The funding gap has become so severe that Housing and Care 21, Mitie and Saga 
have all decided to stop providing domiciliary care services. And as one of the 
UK’s biggest providers of homecare for elderly and vulnerable people, Mears has 
certainly been feeling the pinch. In 2014, its care business made a loss of 
£400,000. The following year, losses had spiralled to £5.1m, with no sign of 
this slowing in 2017.

But Miles dismisses any suggestion that Mears could walk away from its care 
business altogether. “That won’t happen, categorically not,” he says. “But we 
have given up 20% of our homecare contracts in revenue terms, where we believe 
the gap between the national living wage and the rate we enjoy from our clients 
is not enough to continue delivering services.”

The problem is that, reeling from austerity cuts, some local authorities have 
been slashing the rates they pay for homecare. Across Britain, providers 
receive just under £15 an hour, but a number of councils have cut these fees to 
£12-£13 an hour, which the UK Homecare Association, which represents 
domiciliary care providers, says barely covers a care worker’s salary, travel 
time, travel costs, statutory holiday pay, sickness and pension entitlements and
does not cover the cost 
<https://www.ukhca.co.uk/mediastatement_information.aspx?releaseID=233393> of 
providing the service or regulatory costs. At the same time, payroll costs have 
risen following the introduction of the “national living wage” of £7.20. 
According to the UKHCA, the totalfunding gap for homecare is £513m 
<https://www.ukhca.co.uk/mediastatement_information.aspx?releaseID=233612>.

Mears has already handed back its contracts 
<https://www.mearsgroup.co.uk/notice-served-liverpool-city-wirral-councils-unacceptable-carer-wages/>
 with Sefton, Liverpool and Wirral councils because they were no longer viable, 
publicly condemning the authorities for offering new rates that were “nothing 
short of encouragement to providers to breach the national living wage”. It has 
alsorefused to bid 
<https://www.mearsgroup.co.uk/mears-condemns-council-care-contract-danger-public/>
 for new contracts with Solihull for the same reasons. And unless local 
authorities change how they contract with domiciliary care providers, Mears 
could decide to hand back more contracts.

Miles agrees that the government needs to do much more. Part of the solution 
to the funding crisis is integrated health and social care budgets, he says. 
“Better homecare, with better-trained care staff, would actually reduce the 
need for hospital beds and other NHS services. It is a vicious circle at 
present and someone needs to own both budgets and go for it.”

“The Manchester Devo could be the right solution, however, it needs to happen 
now, because the situation needs a long-term fix, not more short-term, 
knee-jerk funding solutions.”

But he also wants more scrutiny of how existing funding is spent.

“If I were Theresa May, I would work out what the cost of care is and where 
the money goes,” he says. “As a taxpayer, we pay around £24 for an hour of 
[state-funded] care. How does £24 become £7.20 an hour for a care worker?”

“Care work is really tough, when you think what these people are expected to 
do,” he says. “We shouldn’t be paying them minimum wages.” Miles advocates 
making care a more skilled job, with pay rates to match – he suggests around 
£11 an hour – and argues that this would actually save money in the long run. 
“Let’s make sure more of the money goes to paying care workers, making sure 
they’re properly trained. And then maybe they wouldn’t need as much supervision 
and management as currently.”

Paying more would also help to address the perniciously high turnover rates of 
care staff, leading to better services and reducing recruitment costs.

But Miles believes councils could stretch their social care budgets much 
further if they had fewer, larger, long-term contracts, instead of multiple 
providers on 18- to 24-month deals. “If you have lots of contractors as many 
councils do, that’s a lot more costly to administer than managing one or two.”

While Mears has won a handful of long-term contracts – Wiltshire and Richmond 
being the most notable examples – it is extremely unusual. Yet in housing, 
single-provider, five- to 10-year contracts are common, even though the 
recipients of the services are often the same.

“How is it possible that the same local authority chief exec allows the 
housing department to come up with a long-term single-provider model, but 
allows social services departments to use lots of providers working on a 
cascade system on short-term contracts, with no qualitative scores? I don’t get 
it.”

Miles argues that longer-term contracts provide certainty of revenue and allow 
staff to be paid more, so recruitment and retention costs are lower due to less 
churn, and the quality of services improves. In addition to providing homecare 
services to 25,000 people, Mears also repairs and maintains more than 700,000 
social homes in the UK, accounting for 85% of the company’s turnover. In recent 
years, it has also expanded beyond maintenance into housing management and 
building new homes.

Miles welcomes last week’s announcement of a £7bn “affordable homes fund” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/government-offers-7bn-affordable-homes-fund-housing-providers>
 as a “great opportunity” as long as it happens quickly – so many housing 
initiatives have come and gone “with little impact”, he says. What about the 
garden village proposal?

“The principle is a good one, but waiting lists for affordable housing 
normally are at their highest in already densely populated areas, with little 
to no affordable land available, therefore it will be very difficult to build 
new homes to the quantity required.”

Miles does not really believe that housebuilding will solve the lack of 
affordable homes. “Personally I’m not sure building’s the right way to go. The 
UK’s got lots of space in certain areas to build, but that’s not necessarily 
where people want to live.”

He thinks councils would be better off buying back homes, pointing out that 
many of the 3 million people on the waiting list for social housing are in 
private rental accommodation. “I don’t understand how the private landlord can 
make that work and why a local authority can’t make it work. Is there not a way 
to convert people on the waiting list into more properties for the local 
authority?”

So far, Mears has not spoken out much about housing policy or social care. But 
as council budgets continue to be squeezed, that looks likely to change.

For Miles, 20 years after he joined the company, it’s all about helping to 
improve people’s lives. “I am very boring,” he says – “I like trying to make 
a difference.”

Curriculum vitae 

Age 49 
Lives London 
Education West Hatch high school, Chigwell, Essex. Professionally qualified 
electrical engineer (IEE)
Career 1985-1992: senior engineer, Cairn Electrical Engineers; 1992-1996: 
senior manager, Mitie; 1996-present: chief executive, Mears Group
​Interests The environment​
 