
‘I got out of a violent relationship but the court threw me back into harm’s 
way’

Sarah was cross-examined in a family court for more than two hours by a man 
who was the subject of a restraining order because of his violence towards her.

Michael had attacked her while she was pregnant with his child. He also had 18 
convictions for violence, including two attacks on a previous girlfriend, one 
while their child was present, and had served at least two prison sentences.


Revealed: how family courts allow abusers to torment their victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/revealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims>
Sarah had moved to a secret address to escape his stalking and was a high-risk 
victim of domestic violence, according to police officers, probation staff and 
other specialists.


Their relationship had always involved violence and threats. In 2010, when she 
was pregnant with their child, Michael attacked Sarah in a carpark. He was 
convicted of actual bodily harm and jailed for 17 weeks.


He was jailed again for 30 weeks when he punched another man linked to Sarah.

By 2013, Sarah had found the courage to leave. But the abuse did not stop. 
Michael stalked and harassed her for weeks, following her every movement and 
forcing Sarah to call the police 40 times. He was jailed again for breaching a 
non-molestation order. When he was released the criminal court imposed a 
restraining order against him, which prevented him from contacting Sarah or 
going near her.

But Michael initiated proceedings in the family court for contact with his 
child and in November 2014, during a fact-finding hearing, he was allowed to 
stand a few feet from her and question her.

She said: “When he was questioning me, it was like I was back in the house 
with him. I don’t think for one second the judge had any idea what I was going 
through. I don’t know how I had the strength to sit there with him asking me 
all these ridiculous questions and the judge didn’t intervene. But I did it for 
my children.

“The court’s attitude was that just because he has been violent in the 
relationship doesn’t mean he cannot have a relationship with the child.”

The court found the majority of facts presented about his abusive behaviour to 
be true. But after more than 25 hearings, Michael was granted supervised 
contact with his child, which would eventually move to unsupervised meetings in 
a church hall. “He has attacked me in public and many others,” Sarah said. “Yet 
they were suggesting a few ladies in a church hall would be enough protection 
for me and my child.”

When the child refused to see Michael, saying: “He hurts my mummy, I want to 
go home”, the court pursued contact for him.

An official from Cafcass, the children and family court advisory service, 
tried to persuade the child in several interviews, but eventually the official 
told the court that further persuasion was inappropriate and essentially 
abusive. The court upheld his recommendation with a final order of no contact 
for Michael.

Sarah said: “When I first went to court I was blind really. He had all of 
these convictions, he has been arrested, he has been to prison. I thought he 
has got no chance. How wrong I was.

“I got out of a really violent relationship but the court threw me back into 
harm’s way.”

‘I am terrified the court is going to put me and my family in more danger’

Andrea has been going through the family courts for three years after her 
ex-partner applied for contact with his child. He has a criminal history of 
stalking and harassing her. Police say he poses a high risk to her and her 
family.

Andrea ended the relationship while she was pregnant because of his obsessive 
behaviour and harassment. He then began stalking.

“When my baby was two-months-old, he came to my new home late at night, he 
told me he had moved to be near me,” she said. “I agreed to meet him with my 
baby, but when I did he was only interested in resuming our relationship, which 
I did not want. He frightened me and tried to manipulate me so I stopped 
responding to him.”

Andrea reported his behaviour to police and he was given a caution. In May 
2012, he was arrested and pleaded guilty to harassment, getting 12 months’ 
probation. Andrea was granted an indefinite restraining order.

When the child was 18-months-old the father applied to the family court for 
contact. “The family court ignored the restraining order the criminal court had 
put in place and continued with his application,” said Andrea. “They forced me 
to attend court without putting any safeguarding in place.”

Within two days, her ex-partner had set up a fake social media profile and 
used it to harass Andrea. He was convicted of breaching the restraining order 
and fined £100. But in the family court he pursued contact with his child.

Separate Cafcass reports strongly recommended no contact between the man and 
the child because of the high risk he posed to Andrea.

But in 2015, lay magistrates said he should have indirect contact with his 
child. They were satisfied the man was engaging with mental health services as 
required.

Andrea was promised she would be able to give evidence via video link but was 
later told she had to attend.

“I just couldn’t do it, it was just feeding his obsession. I was terrified,” 
she said. As a result, her written evidence was disregarded. The case is now 
with a more senior judge.

In late 2016, a senior Cafcass official urged the court to make a final order 
of no contact, saying any contact may feed the man’s obsession and place mother 
and child at risk. He wrote: “It is time the matter was ended … the facts do 
not argue for contact.”

Another Cafcass official agreed, saying a well-documented history of 
harassment and stalking meant there should be a final order of no contact.

But the judge is continuing the man’s application for contact.

“It feels like they are targeting me and my family,” said Andrea. “I am 
constantly terrified the court is going to put me and my family in even more 
danger.”


‘It shocks me that a judge can see all these violent threats … and consider 
allowing him contact with his child’

Clare is a victim of extreme domestic violence, who is considered at risk of 
severe harm or murder at the hands of her ex-partner.

In 2014, while she was tending her baby, he attacked her at home. He was later 
refused contact with the child but is now challenging that through the family 
courts.

For the last year Clare, who received legal aid as a victim of domestic 
violence, has submitted documents, text messages and witness reports to provide 
evidence of his violence, repeated threats to kill her and her children and his 
controlling behaviour.

In a two-day fact-finding hearing, the judge upheld almost all of the facts 
alleged by Clare against her ex-partner, including threats to set fire to her 
and the children and a threat to rape her. The judge said the threats to kill 
Clare and her children were “hideous”.

He acknowledged the behaviour was that of an overly jealous man who wanted to 
control her, saying one incident was the most “upsetting and distressingly 
abusive” thing he had ever heard.

However, the judge is ordering the agencies involved to find a way of allowing 
the father contact with his young child. Clare said: “For me as a mother it 
shocks me that a judge can see all these violent threats, and see from his 
criminal record that this is a man who does what he threatens to do, and can be 
considering allowing him contact with his child. That leaves me speechless.”


 * Names have been changed  