
A bill giving the UK intelligence agencies and police the most sweeping 
surveillance powers in the western world has passed into law with barely a 
whimper, meeting only token resistance over the past 12 months from inside 
parliament and barely any from outside.


The Investigatory Powers Act, passed on Thursday, legalises a whole range of 
tools for snooping and hacking by the security services unmatched by any other 
country in western Europe or even the US.

The security agencies and police began the year braced for at least some 
opposition, rehearsing arguments for the debate. In the end, faced with public 
apathy and an opposition in disarray, the government did not have to make a 
single substantial concession to the privacy lobby.

US whistleblower Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> tweeted: “The UK has just 
legalised the most extreme surveillance in the history of western democracy. It 
goes further than many autocracies.”

Snowden in 2013 revealed the scale of mass surveillance – or bulk data 
collection as the security agencies prefer to describe it – by the US National 
Security Agency and the UK’sGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>, which 
work in tandem.

But, against a backdrop of fears of Islamist attacks, the privacy lobby has 
failed to make much headway. Even in Germany, with East Germany’s history of 
mass surveillance by the Stasi and where Snowden’s revelations produced the 
most outcry, the Bundestag recently passed legislation giving the intelligence 
agencies more surveillance powers.

The US passed a modest bill last year curtailing bulk phone data collection 
but the victory of Donald Trump in the US presidential election is potentially 
a major reverse for privacy advocates. On the campaign trail, Trump made 
comments that implied he would like to use the powers of the surveillance 
agencies against political opponents.

The Liberal Democrat peer Lord Strasburger, one of the leading voices against 
the investigatory powers bill, said: “We do have to worry about a UK Donald 
Trump. If we do end up with one, and that is not impossible, we have created 
the tools for repression. If Labour had backed us up, we could have made the 
bill better. We have ended up with a bad bill because they were all over the 
place.

“The real Donald Trump has access to all the data that the British spooks are 
gathering and we should be worried about that.”

The Investigatory Powers Act legalises powers that the security agencies and 
police had been using for years without making this clear to either the public 
or parliament. In October, the investigatory powers tribunal, the only court 
that hears complaints against MI6, MI5 and GCHQ,ruled that they had been 
unlawfully collecting massive volumes of confidential personal data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/uk-security-agencies-unlawfully-collected-data-for-decade>
 without proper oversight for 17 years.

One of the negative aspects of the legislation is that it fails to provide 
adequate protection for journalists’ sources, which could discourage 
whistleblowing.

One of the few positives in the legislation is that it sets out clearly for 
the first time the surveillance powers available to the intelligence services 
and the police. It legalises hacking by the security agencies into computers 
and mobile phones and allows them access to masses of stored personal data, 
even if the person under scrutiny is not suspected of any wrongdoing.

Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> groups are challenging the 
surveillance powers in the European court of human rights and elsewhere.

Jim Killock, the executive director of Open Rights Group, said: “The UK now 
has a surveillance law that is more suited to a dictatorship than a democracy. 
The state has unprecedented powers to monitor and analyse UK citizens’ 
communications regardless of whether we are suspected of any criminal activity.”

Renate Samson, the chief executive of Big Brother Watch, said: “The passing of 
the investigatory powers bill has fundamentally changed the face of 
surveillance in this country. None of us online are now guaranteed the right to 
communicate privately and, most importantly, securely.”

Trump’s victory started speculation that, given his warm words for Vladimir 
Putin, he might do a deal with the Russian president to have Snowden sent back 
to the US where he faces a long jail sentence. Snowden has lived in Russia 
since leaking tens of thousands of documents to journalists in 2013.

But Bill Binney, a former member of the NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa> who became a whistleblower, expressed 
scepticism: “I am not sure if the relationship a President Trump would have 
with President Putin would be bad for Snowden.

“In Russia, he would still be an asset that maybe Putin would use in 
bargaining with Trump. Otherwise, Snowden does have a large support network 
around the world plus in the US and Trump may not want to disturb that. Also, I 
think any move to get Snowden out of Russia and into US courts would also open 
up support for at least three other lawsuits against the US government’s 
unconstitutional surveillance.”

 * This article was amended on 19 November 2016. The act has not yet received 
royal assent, as stated in an earlier version.
 