
Here I sit in my wretched hiding place behind a black curtain, clenching on to 
a round coffee table – a makeshift shield made of plastic that’s hard, but 
surely not hard enough. This is not the death I would wish for. Is this really 
how it ends?

The fight for freedom of speech has always been the most important thing for 
me. But was it really meant to be that I would die for it? Martyrdom is for 
fanatics, not democrats. Imagine dying for an ugly drawing of a Swedish dog 
with a prophet’s face. What an absurd reason to die. What an absurd reason to 
kill.

Like a fool I hold my coffee table shield in front of me, knowing it will not 
provide any protection whatsoever if the perpetrator – or could there be more 
than one? – forces himself into the hall and starts shooting, as he has done 
outside. Then it will surely be over. Like Charlie Hebdo’s editorial staff, we 
are all helpless victims in this room. We are sitting ducks. How painful is it 
to be riddled with bullets? How long does it take to die? What will become of 
my girlfriend? What will become of my son?

Copenhagen killings: bewildered Europe struggles to defend freedom of speech 
and religion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/15/copenhagen-attack-islamist-extremism-europe-freedom-speech-religion>
Was it for minutes or seconds that these thoughts crossed my mind? Looking 
back, the terror spreads out in a long, foggy dream. But how could I forget 
that death was the reason I was here, that we all were – we members of the Lars 
Vilks committee, set up to defend the freedom of speech in the name of the 
cartoonist who drew that famous image of the prophet Muhammad back in 2007. Our 
debate comes against the background of the terrible assault on Charlie Hebdo.

Inna Shevchenko, a spokeswoman for the Ukrainian feminist group Femen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen>, is talking about the thing that 
unites us all. “It’s about freedom of speech, but,” she says. “The key word 
here is ‘but’. Why do we still continue to say but when we – ”

Bang bang bang bang. What the hell is going on? Is it fireworks? 
Troublemakers? A sick practical joke? Everyone is paralysed for five or 10 
seconds. There’s a short silence. Somebody outside shouts in a foreign 
language. A hideous howl, filled with ferocity and a deep hatred. And then it 
begins, the mass escape. Not with hysteria, shrieks and cries, but with an 
absolute will to save oneself, whoever can. Many head towards the back 
entrance, others find cover behind chairs and desks, but where is shelter? 
Where are the hiding places? Nowhere. Here, there is no safety, absolutely none 
at all.

Shots are still being fired – no longer with an automatic weapon, but with 
pistols. There is more shouting, this time in Danish. It’s the police’s 
incident commander, who is commanding his officers.

An agitated man walks in. He is totally bloodshot, as if he’s on the world’s 
worst adrenalin rush. He runs back and forth, heavily limping due to a bullet 
wound in his leg. There is blood on his trousers, and his face is convulsed in 
pain. He says we should stay where we are. This is absurd, I think to myself. 
God, it’s like he’s Bruce Willis, a muscular little guy with a drawn gun … what 
kind of a sick film have I landed in? But I recognise ‘Bruce Willis’ as a 
friend, a protector. He is the one standing between us and the murderous maniac 
or maniacs out there.


The automatic weapon is now silent. I stay in my pathetic hiding place for 
what seems an eternity. It’s quiet now. Ten minutes pass before we hear police 
sirens. Is the danger over? Are there others who are wounded? Are there any 
victims? We know nothing. I move to place myself in a larger group who have 
taken shelter behind the bar.

Copenhagen police investigate whether gunman acted alone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/15/copenhagen-police-investigate-whether-gunman-acted-alone>
More time passes. There aren’t many of us left. Most of the attendees have 
decided to escape through the back door, including all of the panelists except 
one. What are we to do? We are trapped here. The police has set up a perimeter 
around the building. I am apparently the only committee member in the hall. I 
blurt out: “We must continue, there is nothing else to do. Continue with the 
people who are still here!” And Agnieszka Kolek, the chairwoman of the 
committee, is here. So we listen to her.

Kolek, a fortysomething woman with a sharp face, is remarkably succinct. 
There’s no sign of anxiety. She is completely uninhibited in her body language. 
Calmly, she asks for the lights to be dimmed so we can have a better look at 
the details of the pictures in her PowerPoint presentation. The remaining 
attendees slowly find their chairs, as if they are sleepwalking. Kolek speaks 
and completes her presentation. But nobody seems to be listening. Everyone is 
hunched over their mobile phones and texting; they are silent, and shaking.

Shortly afterwards, the evacuation bus arrives to take us all for 
interrogation at the police station. Outside we find out that someone from the 
seminar has died. It is our good friend Finn Nørgaard. It was not a bad dream, 
not a stupid film. Terror has hit, it has hit Copenhagen, it has hit us all 
right in the heart. The question is, how long will this nightmare last?

Niels Ivar Larsen is a Danish journalist. This is an edited version of a piece 
published by his newspaper, Information.

Translated by Mashaal Mir
 