
“People that live out in contracting camps or mustering stock camps or 
outstations, and even a lot of the people who live in the bush on cattle 
stations, spend probably 100% of their waking hours out on the land and have 
very minimal contact with other human beings,” says Tracey Hayes, the chief 
executive of theNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> Cattlemen’s 
Association.

“You can imagine how isolating that would be without having access to the 
outside world via radio during the day while you’re out in the workplace. But I 
don’t think they took that into consideration.”

Related: Jaws drop at ABC as Michelle Guthrie defends Radio National cuts | 
Weekly Beast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/jaws-drop-at-abc-as-michelle-guthrie-defends-radio-national-cuts>

Hayes is referring to a recent announcement by the ABC that, at the end of 
January, it would terminate its shortwave radio service, which broadcasts to 
the NT, Papua New Guinea and some parts of the Pacific region.

It said the move was “in line with the national broadcaster’s commitment to 
dispense with outdated technology and to expand its digital content offerings”.

For some people living and working in the outback, shortwave is the only way 
they can listen to the ABC.

AM and FM bands don’t have the geographic reach across the sparsely populated 
territory and online streaming and Vast satellite radio is largely only 
available at home, close to the required infrastructure.

But as essential as the service’s supporters say it is, they are few in 
number. And so the ABC decided in early December it would reinvest the $1.2m 
into bringing digital radio to Darwin and Hobart.

It’s essential, to keep feeling mentally stimulated and feeling like you’re in 
touch with the world
Tracey Hayes 
Hayes has spent her life on cattle stations. She suggests the ABC 
decision-makers on the east coast have little understanding of the isolation of 
outback living and how big a role the ABC can play in people’s mental and 
emotional wellbeing.

“It’s essential, to keep feeling mentally stimulated and feeling like you’re 
in touch with the world and the rest of the community, to listen to our 
national broadcaster,” she says, and accuses the ABC of “loftiness” in 
dismissing their reliance on shortwave.

Michael Mason, the ABC’s director of radio, said in December the broadcaster 
would service the “limited audience” of shortwave radio “through modern 
technology” instead.

Hayes says that technology is of little help to people who aren’t in an office 
or home, and she questions the fairness of the ABC sacrificing their only 
remote mobile service in order to give city-dwellers yet another way of tuning 
in.

“When I live in Darwin I enjoy listening to the radio via the broadcast app, I 
can hear it in my car, we don’t really need another one,” she says.

“I’d certainly like to see the provision of resources go to people to people 
who are already disadvantaged.”

She says the ABC has demonstrated “complete disregard” for people who live in 
the bush, who are of equal importance to people who live in urban areas.

“It shows a loftiness that is disappointing,” she says. “Taxpayers are funding 
those decision-makers and I think they’ve got some explaining to do.”

The ABC has largely dismissed the backlash, with the managing director, 
Michelle Guthrie, claiming just a handful of complaints had been made and many 
of them were from ham radio enthusiasts.

It has also dismissed claims that the shut-off could endanger lives.

ABC local radio is the official national emergency broadcaster and all 
Australians are instructed to tune in during events such as bushfires, floods 
and cyclones. Ranger servicestold the ABC’s Country Hour 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-08/abc-shut-shortwave-radio-service-met-with-anger/8103096>
 they relied on it during long remote trips, rather than secondhand reports 
over HF radio.

But the ABC has sought to reassure people emergency alerts and weather updates 
can still be heard, via the Bureau of Meteorology and the rural flying doctors 
service’s HF broadcasts. It’s also urged people to tune into VHF radio, 
primarily used by mariners.


“It’s not just about picking up the weather, it’s about picking up a lot more 
than that,” says Jay Mohr-Bell, a cattle station manager 100km southwest of 
Katherine.

“They’re discounting the value of everything else that’s being picked up – 
even just a bit of local news. You listen to a show like the Country Hour and 
it’s info you wouldn’t get anywhere else.”

Mohr-Bell claims he and others in the Katherine region approached the ABC a 
few years ago about moving local radio to the AM band so they could pick it up 
more often. He says the ABC refused at the time, specifically citing the 
shortwave service as a reason it was unnecessary.

“It just goes to show it’s a decision that was made and they don’t care about 
the consequences and it’s done and dusted,” he says.

You should be left in no doubt that the ABC has failed to adequately or 
properly assess the needs of Territorians
Malarndirri McCarthy and Warren Snowdon 
Both Mohr-Bell and Hayes say they learned of the proposed scrapping via media 
reports, and there was no community consultation. “That in itself in this day 
and age shows a complete disregards and a level of arrogance that is not 
acceptable from a government-funded broadcaster,” Hayes says.

NT Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy and MP Warren Snowdon have spent much of 
the summer lobbying against the decision. McCarthy and the acting shadow 
communications minister, Mark Dreyfus, are expected to meet with Guthrie on 
Wednesday.


McCarthy told Guardian Australia she felt the ABC had made a “massive error” 
in not seeking to find out who would be affected.

“This is about short notice, and notice given at a period of the year when we 
know everyone is concentrating on Christmas and New Year and that’s unfair. 
Secondly they haven’t done their homework and given respect to the people of 
the Northern Territory by asking for information.”

McCarthy and Snowdon wrote directly to Guthrie, who offered a response to what 
Guthrie called their “personal concerns”.

In turn they replied that Guthrie had “clearly misunderstood” their role as 
representatives of constituents, and accused the ABC of having “no real idea of 
who will be affected and what alternative arrangements are available” for those 
losing the shortwave service.

Related: 'She doesn't get what we do': has ABC boss Michelle Guthrie got the 
insiders on her side? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/she-doesnt-get-what-we-do-has-abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-got-the-insiders-on-her-side>

“You should be left in no doubt that the ABC has failed to adequately or 
properly assess the needs of Territorians who see shortwave as their only 
option.”

Mohr notes there are lower level ABC staff, including rural reporters, who 
understand the importance of the service, but there’s nothing they can do. It’s 
the final nail in the coffin for him.

“Once they shut this down for us out here, we’ve got no relevance with the 
ABC. We won’t be continuing to support them at all.”

The ABC did not respond to questions.
 