
This time last week, the last thing Theresa May really fancied was a trade 
mission to India. All that travel, all those meetings spent not discussing Tata 
steel and coming to speculative decisions that would be entirely dependent on 
Britain’s not-yet-started Brexit negotiations. But after the embarrassment of 
last Thursday’s high court ruling that the government couldn’t invoke article 
50 by royal prerogative, India looked a much more attractive destination. Let 
someone else take the flak.

David Davis: supreme court may not rule on article 50 until January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/07/david-davis-parliament-will-not-dictate-brexit-talks>
With the justice minister, Liz Truss, having gone to ground after taking 
rather too long to realise that part of her job was to actually defend the 
independence of the judiciary – who would have guessed? – that person was the 
Brexit minister. As this was the third time in almost as many weeks thatDavid 
Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> has been made to come 
to the house to try and fail to persuade MPs that the government really did 
know what it was doing, it was understandable that Grumpy was at his grumpiest.

“We want to bring back control of our laws to the UK,” he growled. Except for 
those ones which we don’t trust British judges to adjudicate on in the way we 
would like them to. Sovereignty has its limits apparently. “The government came 
to the conclusion that it was perfectly OK to invoke article 50 using 
prerogative powers,” he continued. Kindness prevented him from commenting on 
whether May had made a misjudgment of her own in appointing Jeremy Wright – a 
man described by former Tory MP, Stephen Phillips, as “a third-rate 
conveyancing lawyer” – as attorney general. “The court came to a different view 
and we are disappointed by that.”

Disappointment was the least of it. Fury, outrage and humiliation were more 
like it. But Grumpy was in no mood to back down. Having repeatedly told MPs 
that the result of the referendum must stand and there should be no going back, 
Grumpy sounded awfully like someone who was having a major sulk about not 
getting his way and was going to carry on fighting until he did. “We’re going 
to the supreme court, who we believe will tell us we are being proper and 
lawful,” he insisted. And if the supreme court let him down, he’d go to the 
supreme supreme court. And if that failed he’d just appoint some judges of his 
own. Job done.

Keir Starmer, Labour’s shadow Brexit minister, took a more measured tone. He’s 
in for the long haul and his doctor has told him to watch his blood pressure. 
“This is the third statement you’ve made and we are still none the wiser,” he 
observed. Grumpy had failed to condemn the Daily Mail and theDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> for their attacks on the 
judges; he had failed to explain the government’s contingency plan in the event 
of it losing its appeal; he had failed, end of.

There was no way Grumpy was going to condemn the press – it’s always easier to 
overlook a bit of homophobia and racism when they’re coming from your own 
supporters, so he went back to his default setting. Anyone who tried to stop 
the government from doing exactly what it wanted was trying to thwart the will 
of the people and was therefore an enemy of the state. There could be no 
question of the government revealing its negotiating strategy – not least 
because it doesn’t have one – as it would undermine its already ropey position. 
The idea that the government has already given away a key bargaining position 
by declaring it will invoke article 50 before the end of March, doesn’t seem to 
have occurred to Grumpy.

MPs from both sides of the house invited the government to put forward a 
resolution to invoke article 50, in order to allow the house to prove its 
concerns on this issue were over parliamentary sovereignty and not to delay 
Britain’s exit from the EU. “No,” snapped Grumpy. “We’re going to go to the 
supreme court and that’s that.” Giving parliament any say in Brexit would be 
the thin end of the wedge. Give MPs an inch and they’ll take a mile.

Could Grumpy give any hint of what transitional arrangements might be made if, 
as everyone expects, the EU negotiations cannot be concluded within two years? 
No, he bloody well couldn’t. They were a secret which was his. The more 
reasonable the request, the grumpier Grumpy became. By the time the speaker 
concluded the session, a fuse had blown and Grumpy had become almost entirely 
monosyllabic. Yes and no. He wasn’t entirely sure which. But one of the two. 
Definitely, maybe.
 