
The “snooper’s charter” bill extending the reach of state surveillance in 
Britain was given royal assent and became law on Tuesday as signatures on a
petition calling for it to be repealed 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/173199> passed the 130,000 mark.

The home secretary, Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>, hailed the Investigatory 
Powers Act 2016 as “world-leading legislation” that provided “unprecedented 
transparency and substantial privacy protection”.

But privacy campaigners claimed that it would provide an international 
standard to authoritarian regimes around the world to justify their own 
intrusive surveillance powers.

The new surveillance law requires web and phone companies to store everyone’s 
web browsing histories for 12 months and give the police, security services and 
official agencies unprecedented access to the data.

It also provides the security services and police with new powers to hack into 
computers and phones and to collect communications data in bulk. The law 
requires judges to sign off police requests to view journalists’ call and web 
records, but the measure has been described as “a death sentence for 
investigative journalism” in the UK.

How can I protect myself from government snoopers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/nov/24/how-can-i-protect-myself-from-government-snoopers>
The Home Office says some of the provisions in the act will require extensive 
testing and will not be in place for some time. However, powers to require web 
and phone companies to collect customers’ communications data will be in force 
before 31 December, the date when the current Data Retention and Investigatory 
Powers Act 2014 expires.

The home secretary said: “The Investigatory Powers Act is world-leading 
legislation, that provides unprecedented transparency and substantial privacy 
protection.

“The government is clear that, at a time of heightened security threat, it is 
essential our law enforcement and security and intelligence services have the 
power they need to keep people safe. The internet presents new opportunities 
for terrorists and we must ensure we have the capabilities to confront this 
challenge. But it is also right that these powers are subject to strict 
safeguards and rigorous oversight.”

Jim Killock, executive director of the Open Rights Group, responded to the 
home secretary’s “world-leading” claim, saying: “She is right, it is one of the 
most extreme surveillance laws ever passed in a democracy. The IP Act will have 
an impact that goes beyond the UK’s shores. It is likely that other countries, 
including authoritarian regimes with poor human rights records, will use this 
law to justify their own intrusive surveillance powers.”

He said the legislation was debated and passed while the public, media and 
politicians were preoccupied with Brexit: “Now that the bill has passed, there 
is renewed concern about the extent of the powers that will be given to the 
police and security agencies.

“In particular, people appear to be worried about new powers that mean our web 
browsing activity can be collected by internet service providers and viewed by 
the police and a whole range of government departments. Parliament may choose 
to ignore calls for a debate but this could undermine public confidence in 
these intrusive powers.”


The European court of justice is due to clarify its rulings on state 
surveillance shortly,in a case brought by the deputy leader of the Labour 
party, Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/bulk-data-collection-can-only-be-used-to-fight-serious>
. The court’s ruling could lead to parts of the new legislation being declared 
unlawful and in need of amendment, including restrictions on how the personal 
confidential data involved can be used and accessed.
 