
A couple and their dog who spent the night in freezing conditions on a 
Scottish mountain range have been found safe and well by rescue teams.

The man and woman, aged 59 and 56, and their collie dog got lost in the 
Cairngorms after bad weather closed in on them during a New Year’s Day walk.

They were were forced to spend the night high up in blizzard conditions as 
temperatures dropped to -20C (-4F). Rescuers said they survived by sheltering 
in a bivouac sack, or bivvy bag.

The Cairngorm mountain rescue team (CMRT) started searching on Sunday evening 
after the couple failed to return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/02/search-continues-for-couple-missing-in-cairngorms>
 to their campsite. But rescuers could find no trace of the pair, thought to be 
from England.

Six members of the team braved severe conditions to search through the night 
without success. In the morning they were joined by around 50 people including 
specialists from Police Scotland, the Royal Air Force mountain rescue team, 
Braemar mountain rescue team and the coastguard helicopter.

CMRT’s leader, Willie Anderson, said the couple were found a few hundred feet 
below a 1244-metre (4084ft) summit and were very cold. “They misjudged how long 
their walk would take them yesterday and then the cloud closed in and it 
started snowing.

“They were a bit disorientated but at least they had a bivvy bag to shelter 
them. That probably saved their lives.”

Anderson said the pair had tried to find a way off the mountain but were 
disorientated when a fierce blizzard blew in.
Cairngorms 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/cairngorms-zip/giv-3902EnsDv6ppTeqU/>
“It was probably -20C with the wind chill … They were experienced walkers and 
had gone for a day out with their dog but after they failed to return it became 
a very concerning situation,” he said.

He said the wind reached 30mph at times, and praised the rescue team who 
continued to search the mountain throughout the night, braving “atrocious 
conditions.”

“It was blizzard conditions at times … It was pretty horrendous weather. We 
are just very pleased to have had a successful outcome. You can be an 
experienced walker but you may have never experienced Cairngorm weather before 
– and that can catch anybody out.”

The couple were found just after midday. Rescuers walked them to a track 
vehicle because poor visibility meant it was not safe to use a helicopter. They 
were then driven to the funicular railway and taken off the mountain.

The pair were checked over by medics and found to be safe and well.

The Mountaineering Council of Scotland says extra care is needed before 
tackling Scottish mountains in the winter with shorter days and adverse weather 
conditions requiring extra preparation.

It gives a 10-point safety checklist 
<http://www.grough.co.uk/magazine/2011/11/10/experts-issue-10-point-safety-checklist-for-winter-mountain-trips>
 which includes making sure people have all the right kit including head 
torches and bivvy bags or emergency survival bags. It also states that people 
should carry extra clothes and equipment to help them survive if they get stuck 
on the high peaks after dark.
 