
Spanish prosecutors are seeking a nine-year prison sentence for a man who 
claims he set up fake sniper positions overlooking public events to expose the 
vulnerability of the royal family, senior politicians and high-profile 
footballers to attacks.

Last week, Spain’s central criminal court, the Audiencia Nacional, heard that 
Santiago Sánchez Ramírez had booked into hotels close to the scene of Spain’s 
national day parades in 2012 and 2013 and of King Felipe’s coronation in 2014.

He trained a telescopic video camera on targets including Felipe, his father, 
Juan Carlos, and the Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy. Sánchez also 
smuggled real guns into hotel rooms.

The videos – one of them entitled: “The day I could have assassinated the 
king” – were then uploaded to social media, complete with crosshairs on the 
targeted individuals.

Sánchez told the online Spanish newspaper El Confidencial: “I had the weapons 
in a suitcase. They were totally real. I got them through all the police 
controls; all I had to do was show my national identity card and say I was on 
my way to the hotel. That was it. No one said anything to me. I was there all 
night and all day.”

According to prosecutors, the videos were professionally edited and raised in 
“a convincing manner the possibility of attempts against high-profile 
personalities … suggesting that such acts are easy to carry out”.


El Confidencial reported that he also staked out Real Madrid players, 
including Cristiano Ronaldo and Gareth Bale, as well as the club’s president, 
Florentino Pérez. Officials at Real Madrid raised the alarm after he sent them 
the pictures, which were taken at the club’s training ground in Valdebebas.

Police arrested Sánchez in July 2014 and found replica and deactivated guns in 
his properties. However, the weapons shown in one of the videos – among them 
five rifles, including an assault rifle, and five pistols – are alleged to be 
real. If Sánchez is found guilty of possessing ammunition and weapons of war, 
prosecutors want a nine-year jail sentence and a 10-year ban on holding a 
firearms licence.

Sánchez claims all the weapons were obtained and held legally and that his 
sole motive was to try to flag up security failings. He said he repeatedly 
attempted to raise concerns with police, politicians and the intelligence 
services.

“I wanted to warn them of the serious security failings that are taking place 
in Spain and let them know that lone wolf jihadist terrorists could use them to 
carry out an attack,” hetold El Confidencial 
<http://www.elconfidencial.com/espana/2016-11-18/francotirador-santiago-sanchez-ramirez-simulacro-asesinato-reyes-juan-carlos-i-felipe-vi_1291453>
. “But no one paid me any heed.”
 