
Working with no employment rights is one of the big downsides of the so-called 
gig economy. Now foster care workers are joining bike couriers and taxi drivers 
to fight for the recognition they deserve.

Sarah Anderson fosters teenagers and is so angry she is the new face of the 
Foster Care Workers Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/foster-carers-fight-working-rights-trade-unions>
. Its aim: to secure employment rights for the55,000 foster families in the UK 
<https://www.thefosteringnetwork.org.uk/advice-information/all-about-fostering/fostering-statistics>
. While some have joined existing unions such as Unite, this is the first 
dedicated union for foster carers.

Anderson says the current system is essentially broken and does not help those 
who need it most – the children – because it is archaic. Foster carers are 
technically self-employed, but they can work for only one local authority or 
independent foster agency at a time in England, and will often only earn while 
they have a child placed with them.

“We’re the epitome of the gig economy,” says Anderson. “But the care we give 
these children on behalf of their corporate parent – the government – is 
important. We need and deserve workers’ rights and professional respect.”

Anderson loves her job, but she says most foster care workers are underpaid 
and undervalued, and desperately need the help of the new , a branch of the
Independent Workers Union of Great Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/19/jason-moyer-lee-gig-economy-threat-independent-workers-union>
 (IWGB), launched in September 2016. “There are many thousands of us who are, 
frankly, being taken advantage of through low pay, slashed allowances, no job 
protection and the fear of false allegation,” she stresses.

Anderson is one of the 60 foster care workers who voted to unionise and is now 
the branch’s spokeswoman. “I fundamentally think this will drive up standards 
in foster care. If you treat people better whilst they’re doing a job – and 
this is a job – they’ll do it better.”

Social care cuts have gone “from the fat to the bone”, according to The 
Fostering Network. The charity reported in April 2016 that two-thirds of foster 
care workers in the UK felt falling budgets had harmed the children they look 
after, with 70% saying their own payments were cut. Just last week, Bradford 
became the latest council tovote to cut allowances for its foster carers 
<http://www.thetelegraphandargus.co.uk/news/local/localbrad/15013926.Cries_of__shame__as_Council_bosses_vote_to_cut_foster_carers__allowances_in_fraught_meeting/?commentSort=score>

Foster carers receive an allowance per child, which varies according to age or 
if they have special needs – this is to be spent solely on the child’s share of 
food, utilities, school uniform, transport and other essentials. Thebasic 
weekly allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/foster-carers/help-with-the-cost-of-fostering> for a 
primary school-aged child is £139, but this increases in London and the 
south-east to £163 and £156 respectively.

Some also receive a feeThe Fostering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/fostering> Network says half of all UK 
foster carers receive no fee at all and are increasingly subsidising cut 
allowances from their own pockets.

Agencies that supply foster carers to local authorities, at some cost, 
typically pay them much more and are capable of fronting up financial benefits 
– so-called golden hellos. It is a practice Anderson disapproves of because it 
puts councils – who cannot offer such incentives – at a disadvantage.

Although money is not the main reason families choose to foster – herself 
included – , Anderson believes earnings should be significant for the most 
experienced who look after the most challenging children. “We do what nobody 
else wants to,” explains Anderson. “We’re looking after some of our most 
troubled, difficult children, 24 hours a day. It’s a job which can bring you to 
your knees, but it’s worth it when you see a child succeed, even in the 
smallest way.” Anderson can net up to £58,000 in fees and allowances a year 
looking after two “damaged and traumatised young people with serious mental 
health needs”. But broken down, the £550 in fees and allowances she gets per 
child per week equates to around £3.20 an hour. “I think that shows we’re no 
fat cats,” she observes. “People think we’re the baddies for taking money, but 
you wouldn’t ask a paediatric nurse or a teacher to work for nothing. We are no 
different – and the more highly skilled we are, the more we should be paid.

“This is my career. We do a valuable job for society, but because we have no 
employment status, we’re terribly insecure. We can be deregistered by a local 
authority or agency at any time, with no explanation. We absolutely need this 
union,” she says, adding that during a time of cuts, safeguarding workers is 
more important than ever. “Put it this way: if there are no foster carers, 
there’s no foster care.”

Anderson says having workers’ employment status would give foster carers more 
recognition from social services, the government and also the public. “I think 
many people have no idea what it’s like to do this job,” she says with a wry 
smile. “Not only are we in loco parentis, providing a stable, loving and 
boundaried home environment, we are highly skilled, highly trained workers. If 
you’ve trained and worked hard to be a professional, you need to be treated as 
one.” She also believes the perceived low status is putting potential foster 
carers off, something the system can little afford, given that around9,000 more 
are needed in the UK 
<https://www.thefosteringnetwork.org.uk/advice-information/all-about-fostering/recruitment-targets>
 in the next year.

Although the union is in fledgling stage, with just a few hundred members, 
momentum is high, according to the IWGB. Its most pressing task is to get 
legislation passed to get workers’ rights status. “We want job protection, fair 
pay – including pay protection – holiday entitlement and protection when we’re 
sick – just like any other workers,” says Anderson.

Although she says there is no shortage of volunteers among foster carers for a 
test case, such as the one recently won by IWGB on behalf of a courier for 
CitySprint, this isn’t being pursued yet. Instead, the union is setting up an 
all-party parliamentary group (APPG) – rekindling a former group on adoption 
and fostering, inactive since 2012 – in a bid to get legislative change.

“We need the APPG to lobby parliament to change legislation for foster carers, 
dragging the way we currently work into the 21st century,” she says.

Anderson also wants foster care workers protected from unfounded allegations. 
“I’ve got direct experience of the stress and upset of this, as well as the 
loss of livelihood whilst they’re investigated. It should not take upwards of 
four months to investigate an allegation – we want a shorter and more 
transparent process and appropriate union and legal representation for the 
foster care workers facing them. We also want compensation if they are proved 
unfounded.”

And because they do not have worker employment status, foster carers are not 
protected by current whistleblowing law 
<https://www.gov.uk/whistleblowing/what-is-a-whistleblower> either – this is 
something the union will address, too – although Anderson is cynical about 
whether this alone will be an incentive for carers to speak out. “Often, foster 
carers are working in a climate of fear,” she says.

The union also wants a central and independent register for foster care 
workers – for their own benefit as well as for that of the local authorities 
and agencies. “Currently, local authorities and [independent fostering 
agencies] have to assess foster care workers each time they move, which costs 
time and money and removes them from the carer pool. This will save time and 
money,” says Anderson. But would it be safe? “All foster care workers need to 
be thoroughly vetted and under any new system they would be.”

She also wants the union to give independent support and advice to foster care 
workers. “Most existing advice has been devised by social workers – any job in 
child social care is difficult, but they’re at a different coalface to us.”

Most of all, Anderson wants to see positive change affecting the outcomes of 
the children she looks after. “We love them, but someone has to stand up and 
say that looking after a child, keeping them safe and giving them a chance in 
life – whilst being paid and treated as a professional by society – are not 
mutually exclusive.”

CV

Age: 58

Family: Married, one daughter

Lives: Guildford

Education: Lady Margaret School, Fulham; Bath Academy of Art, fine art and 
graphics degree; Roehampton University, BSc (Hons) counselling psychotherapy

Career: 2016: foster care worker, press and communications officer Foster Care 
Workers Union; 2005-10: counselling psychotherapist, NHS adolescent mental 
health youth counselling service; 2000-05: full-time student at Roehampton and 
caring for daughter; 1983-2000: Design Animations Art & Design Solutions, 
London, account executive

Interests: politics, reading and walking
 