 The state prosecutors wore their Italian wool overcoats loosely round their 
shoulders, mafia style, and there were 18 butts in their ashtray before the 
court rose for the judge at 10.20 yesterday morning.
 The room was lit with four 1,000 watt bulbs powered by a generator and the 
sound system at the back would have served a modest rock concert. The judge at 
Sarajevo's first war crimes tribunal made it to the bench by crawling between 
the tripod legs of a TV camera and past Vioca, the stenographer, who jostled 
for space to type below the photographer from Reuter.

 Borislav Herak, self-confessed Serbian rapist, killer and ethnic cleanser, is 
the first Serb to stand trial for war crimes in Bosnia - where, according to 
international bodies, half the population have been driven from their homes, 
120,000 people have been killed and up to 20,000 women had been systematically 
raped.

 Herak's appearance filled the village hall-sized courtroom on Defenders of 
the City street in the centre of the devastated Bosnian capital. All the 300 
people in the room were journalists or court officials: no local inhabitants 
attended.

 When Herak entered through a side door, photographers and cameramen, who had 
been allotted their positions, slid defiantly across the floor. For seven 
minutes, while the judge watched from the bench, they crawled and wriggled 
below the accused. He lowered his eyes to a spot on the floor: when he dared 
lift them, there was a clatter of camera shutters.

 Over six feet tall, Herak's gangly arms hung out from under the short sleeves 
of a shabby beige corduroy jacket. His brown wool trousers were too short and 
his thick brown soldier's boots had no laces. He walked into court with slumped 
shoulders to sit down beside two stocky policemen who posed for the cameras as 
though they were at their children's wedding.

 Boris Herak appeared with two other accused - but it was Boris the media 
wanted: Borislav Herak, born January 17, 1971, the Sarajevo textile worker who 
stands charged with 32 murders and 16 rapes, including the murder of 12 of his 
16 rape victims.

 In a interview with the Guardian, he gave a detailed confession of how he had 
raped and murdered, and said he expected to be shot. But before - and if - the 
military court assembled in the shabby 19th century courtroom finds him guilty 
at the end of a trial expected to last 10 days, they want to show Borislav 
Herak to the world. In the next week, he will, they hope, confess, as he has 
done to several journalists who have interviewed him, how he was ordered by his 
commanders to go into the villages around Sarajevo clearing out anyone who had 
a Muslim name and killing or raping anybody who resisted.

 After the reading of the charges, the defence rose to protest that the 
prosecution had not provided sufficient detail as to the dates and times of the 
alleged crimes. The court adjourned to consider this before sitting again this 
morning.

 Round the corner from the courtroom, in a street piled with debris from 
shelled buildings and domestic rubbish, life in Sarajevo went on as normal. One 
of the foreigners attending the trial drew a comparison with the scenes in 
Liverpool when two children accused of the murder of Jamie Bulger appeared in 
court. 'But this is not Liverpool,' said Aida Cerkez, a translator working for 
the Associated Press agency. 'This stuff is happening all the time here - 
nobody in Sarajevo is interested in Borislav Herak. We all know it already.'

 What Borislav Herak remembers most about the first women they raped in the 
Cafe Sonya was that she was pretty and had long dark hair. There were normally 
three of them who went together to the Cafe Sonya where Miro Vukovic kept the 
women downstairs for Serb fighters who came back from the front. At the cafe, 
the three men would select only one woman. Herak is puzzled when you ask him 
why they preferred to gang rape their victims. He says that was just the way it 
was done.

 Their commander had told them it was good for morale to rape Bosnian women. 
He can remember only some of their names - Emina, Sabina, Amela, Fatima. 
Sometimes, the men killed them afterwards sometimes not.

 Miro Vukovic, who ran the cafe not far from the United Nations headquarters 
in Sarajevo, told them he always had new women to bring in. Fatima, he told the 
New York Times, was 'a nice woman about 30 years old'.

 Afterwards, Herak and his companions took her at gunpoint to Zuc mountain. 
'We stopped by a small bridge and I told her to get out. She walked about three 
metres away from the car, with her back to me and I just shot her, I think in 
the upper back or in the back of the head. I went to her just to be sure that 
she was dead.'

 ON the wall of the office where journalists go to get accreditation for the 
trial a black and white poster reads: 'Borislav Herak, War Criminal.' It is 
posted alongside a picture of the Serbian leader Radovan Karazdic, also branded 
a war criminal as the political leader of the 'ethnic cleansing' operation in 
Bosnia which has taken 120,000 lives in the name of Greater Serbia. 'What is 
wrong with Greater Serbia?' he asked the Washington Post recently, 'There is a 
Great Britain isn't there?'

 Since Herak's arrest late last year, when he strayed into a Bosnian 
checkpoint, he has compiled with interview requests from journalists and, while 
admitting his guilt, says he was under orders to carry out the cleansing 
operation. He tells how his commanders and reports on Serbian television 
convinced him that the Muslims in Bosnia had plans to declare an Islamic 
republic.

 In an interview with John Burns of the New York Times, he described how he 
and three other young Serbs were brought to a farm outside near Sarajevo and a 
65-year-old volunteer demonstrated how to wrestle pigs to the ground to cut 
their throats - a skill he used days later to cut the throats of three Muslims 
he captured. One was a man called Osman. 'I have pictures in my mind of many 
things I did and they return every night I sleep,' Herak went on. 'Osman is 
always there saying: 'Please don't kill me I have a wife and two small 
children.' '

 As Borislav Herak faced the court for the first time yesterday, General 
Philippe Morillon, head of the United Nations in Bosnia, gave an interview on 
Bosnian radio to call on aid convoys to follow him to the town of Srebenica, 
attacked earlier this week by the Serbs. He talked of thousands of refugees 
fleeing from the heavy shelling and, according to Bosnian radio, described what 
he had seen as a criminal. Over 10 months after Borislav Herak cut his first 
throat, ethnic cleansing continues in Bosnia.

 In the same week as General Morillon was trying to break through to the 
besieged towns of Cerska and President Slobodan Milosovic of Serbia was meeting 
Lord Owen and Cyrus Vance in President Mitterrand's Elysee Palace in Paris. The 
Serbian leader was there to inform them that the Serbs rejected the Owen-Vance 
peace formula which would reward the Serbian policy of ethnic cleansing with 
limited autonomy over land of Bosnia.

 As men like Herak continue their work on the ground, Slobodan Milosovic has 
been stringing the international community along. The man who presided over the 
killing fields of Bosnia can still afford to dismiss international public 
opinion. He rejected the Owen-Vance peace plan in Paris on Thursday knowing 
that none of the foreign powers has the will to stop Serbian attacks on Bosnia 
or will consider lifting the arms embargo to allow the Bosnians to defend 
themselves.

 On March 5, the Clinton Administration ruled out any form of military 
intervention in Bosnia - threatening only continued sanctions against Serbia. 
But despite months of sanctions, petrol shortages and a plummeting currency, 
Milosovic is still the undisputed hero of Greater Serbia.

 The people of Belgrade are largely unaware of what has happened in their name 
in Bosnia and feel victimised by the west. The tightly-controlled media has 
ensured that news of the devastation of villages and mass killings of Bosnians 
does not filter through.

 Last Wednesday, a Serbian journalist reported that the bodies of massacred 
Serbs were floating down the River Miljaca, which runs through Sarajevo, a 
sight none of the 50 foreign journalists in the city had witnessed.

 In December, Radovan Karazdic issued a list of Sarajevo 'rape camps'. When 
the Guardian visited these locations, the buildings had either been destroyed 
by shells or were homes for refugees.

 Despite international condemnation of the Serbs, their forces continue their 
advance in Bosnia, blocking aid convoys, stopping UN soldiers bringing water to 
villages, shelling retreating refugees as the western powers continue to wave 
the sad sanctions stick in front of the Serbian bull.

 In one incident late this week, Serb shells were reported to have killed at 
least 16 civilians in a village where British troops were blockaded for 24 
hours after they had gone in to help the evacuation of wounded people. A 
British spokesman said the casualties included six children under the age of 
five, two of whom had their legs blown off. 'The fire was very well-aimed, they 
obviously had an observation post in the mountains,' he added.

 Yesterday, crowds of civilians were reported to have prevented General 
Morillon from leaving the besieged town of Srebrenica where a World Health 
Organisation doctor reported that up to 30 people were dying every day. 
'Children and women are preventing him from leaving,' one official said.

 UNTIL the icy morning of Borislav Herak's trial, the spring sun had been 
shining in Sarajevo this week. It was sniper weather: clean crisp blue skies 
with no mist to cloud the sights of the rifle aimed from the hills. On 
Wednesday morning behind the Holiday Inn, a young man's scream pierced the 
sheet of plastic sheeting covering the broken window of my hotel room.

 By the time we got the windows opened, the young man had picked himself up - 
in the middle of the rough parkland outside, we could see his crooked shape 
shambling sideways. He was howling from the pit of his stomach. It was not the 
sound of a human being but the cry of an animal in agony. His screams seem to 
bounce from the buildings round the park. 'Pomoch meni! Pomoch meni! (Help me! 
Help me!)' Then he lay down on the grass, wimpering. From our fifth floor 
window, we wished him up, but watched the goulish show wondering if the hunter 
would strike again. Then, the young man was up, staggering sideways and howling 
until another man ran from the cover of an apartment block to drag him in, and 
others took courage and came to help.

 In the end, he survived, but three others standing in front of our hotel in 
the early morning did not. The blast that killed them blew in the windows of 
the Holiday Inn's dining room, covering the tables with glass and coating the 
bread baps kept cool on the window sill with debris. Later in the morning, the 
waiters took the baps downstairs to dust them off for lunch.

 In the hotel lobby, hundreds of people queued for black market cigarettes 
which Sarajevo television had announced would be on sale. The Serbs had been 
tuning in, too, and on Thursday morning exploding bullets from an anti-aircraft 
machinegun danced along the facade of the next apartment block.

 Midway through Thursday morning, we gathered at the window of the BBC room, 
watching a man fetching plastic cannisters of water throw himself flat on his 
face as exploding bullets passed over his head. He lay totally still under his 
little wheelbarrow for so long that we got bored and moved back into the room. 
'Quick, look - he's making a run for it,' shouted a photographer whose 
telephoto lens was pinned on the man. We scrambled for a better view as he 
zig-zagged for cover. The water man made it. The photographer with the big lens 
lowered it and said: 'Would have made a great shot.'

 Downtown, along a main street, a pizza bar has opened where they serve sweet 
rapidly brewed beer that still smells of yeast. In the Saraj cafe, there's 
sweet Turkish coffee. Young soldiers back from the front drink under posters of 
Clint Eastwood, Charles Bronson and Robert Redford in cowboy outfits. Boys of 
18 with bags under their eyes are wrinkled like men in their fifties.

 UP ON the hills above the Victor Buban prison, where Borislav Herak is 
preparing for the second day of his trial, families sit out in the sun. Despite 
11 months under siege, they are opposing the Owen-Vance proposals to divide 
Bosnia into cantons and give great chunks of territory to Serbia and Croatia - 
even if it would end the war. The editor of Oslobojena, the Sarajevo newpaper 
named newspaper of the year in London last month, describes the plan as a 
blueprint for disaster.

 'If the plan were accepted it would be the beginning of a whole new phase of 
ethnic cleansing,' Kemal Kurspahic says. 'It would be interpreted as giving 
each ethnic group the right to start driving everyone else out of their canton 
and it would be saying to the Serbs you can get away with this.'

 Up on the hill above Herak's cell, an old woman is wondering what 'Mr Owen 
and Mr Vance think they are doing'. Or, as another woman told Reuter news 
agency: 'They are dividing up Bosnia like their fathers gave it to them as an 
inheritance.' In her rambling apartment block, Serbs, Croats and Muslim - all 
calling themselves Bosnians - have little time for the talks in New York and 
Geneva that would carve out Bosnia along ethnic lines. They live together 400 
metres from the front line. 'How can we be divided?' asks one. 'My brother in 
law is Serbian. My other sister is married to a Croat. We are upset with the 
great powers. They are still talking to the Chetniks (Serbian fighters) who are 
lying that we can't live together.'

 Have the people of Bosnia any choice other than to sue for peace and accept 
the proposed division of the country? The same answer comes in the tower 
blocks, the cafes and on the street: 'Lift the arms embargo against Bosnia and 
allow us to defend ourselves.'

 Zakira Puskar, Commandant of the Second Brigade in Sarajevo, insists that his 
soldiers will never accept the division of the country. 'We have shed a lot of 
blood for a free and united Bosnia,' he said.

 Sead Yelec, a mechanical engineer is going off to work at the bus station. 
'Europe is sleeping,' he says. 'There is not enough understanding of us for 
them to come up with such a conclusion.' An 82-year-old Serbian man living in 
the block tells how his son, a doctor, was killed because as a Serb he refused 
to join the Serbian cleansing operation in Bosnia.

 'We have lived together for a thousand years,' he says. 'Where did they come 
up with this crazy plan to divide us up? Why don't they come and talk to us?'

· Maggie O'Kane was named Journalist of the Year in the What The Papers Say 
awards for her reporting from Bosnia
 