
Is he, I tentatively asked Placido Domingo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/placido-domingo>, the best? 'Without any 
doubt,' came the great tenor's instant reply. 'What can I say?' Bernard Haitink 
once told another interviewer, 'He is an extraordinary man, above all the 
others.' 'Carlos,' says Mark Elder 'is the head and shoulders above the rest of 
us. He's the best conductor in the world. And I'd have said exactly the same 
while Karajan was alive.'

Superlatives attach themselves naturally to Carlos Kleiber . Yet, even today, 
Kleiber is still more a highbrow cult figure than a household name. The 
explanation is not hard to find. The man of whom musicians speak with such awe 
and adoration has refused to play ball with the international music business. 
He won't take a permanent orchestral appointment, though if he did, Placido 
Domingo says, 'He could turn it into the greatest ensemble in history. It would 
be a dream.'

He refuses to be at the beck and call of the record industry or the opera and 
concert managements who bombard him with offers. Even an admiring Herbert von 
Karajan himself was unable to tempt Kleiber to take a date with the Berlin 
Philharmonic, an engagement which any other conductor in the world would have 
grabbed without a second thought.

The reason, according to Karajan, was that Kleiber does not really enjoy 
conducting. 'He tells me, 'I only conduct when I am hungry.' And it is true. He 
has a deep-freeze. He fills it up, and cooks for himself, and when it gets down 
to a certain level then he thinks, 'now I might do a concert'. He is like a 
wolf.'

Kleiber has few of the airs of a man who can probably command at least 20,000 
Pounds (pds) for a single performance. In London last week a tall grey haired 
man walked in unannounced off the street in jeans and anorak carrying an old 
plastic bag to see a friend. 'My name is Mr Kleiber. I'm from Munich,' he 
announced to the receptionist.

Twelve months ago this morning Carlos Kleiber 's name suddenly became known to 
millions, as he marched briskly on to the platform of the Grosser Saal of the 
Musikverein in Vienna to conduct the traditional New Year's Day concert of 
waltzes and polkas which is nowadays televised to all corners of the globe.

As he stood on the rostrum, his head slightly bowed so that he seemed to be 
smiling to himself rather than to the cheering audience, Kleiber was not just 
giving the concert which had preoccupied him for months. When he launched the 
Vienna Philharmonic into Johann Strauss's Accelerationen Waltz, Carlos Kleiber 
was coming as close as he will probably ever come to offering himself to the 
world at large.

The Vienna concert was a stupendous success. Pieces of music which are often 
encrusted with performance cliches and sloppy interpretation were served up 
fresh, sharp and ravishing. On the BBC, Richard Baker was moved to remind 
listeners of the reaction of a local critic to Kleiber's Vienna debut fifteen 
years earlier. 'It was as though Homer had returned to recite the Iliad in 
person,' the critic had written of his performance of Beethoven's Fifth 
Symphony. Not surprisingly, Vienna now wants a second helping and Kleiber has 
provisionally agreed to return there in 1991.

No one can say if he will in fact do so. For Carlos Kleiber is a law unto 
himself. The repertoire of works he will perform is very restricted. He gives 
few performances, most of them in the opera house, and fewer still in the 
concert hall. His list of recordings is tiny. He never gives interviews and 
dislikes having his photograph taken. He is loathe to commit himself far in 
advance and, although he imposes strict conditions for his appearances, he 
rarely signs contracts.

At the end of this week, Kleiber is due to conduct the first of four 
performances of Verdi's Otello at Covent Garden, with Placido Domingo as the 
Moor. Earlier Kleiber/Domingo Otellos in 1980 and 1987 have been among the 
supreme events in Covent Garden's recent troubled history, and the new 
performances have been sold out for weeks. Time and again in researching this 
profile, contacts have given warnings not to put the Otello at risk that to 
publish this or that fact could endanger patiently and laboriously constructed 
working relationships with Kleiber and provisional agreements with him over 
future work. He is a celebrated canceller and, it is said, an avid reader of 
the newspapers.

Placido Domingo has worked, gloriously, with Kleiber on Otello, La Traviata 
and Carmen. He would also, he said in London last week, like to sing for 
Kleiber in Don Carlos, Fidelio, Tristan and Tannhauser and hopes - 'my big, big 
dream' - to record Otello with him too.

'I admire his total involvement in a score,' Domingo explains. 'He knows it so 
much better than anybody else. He has studied the meaning of the music like no 
one else. To hear him explain these things is incredible. Carlos can describe 
everything. It is just amazing. Very few people have this gift.

'He is just like a magician,' Domingo continues. 'He always has a trump card 
up his sleeve. He never repeats. Other conductors do everything the same way. 
But just watch the total independence of Carlos's hands. With one hand he can 
give the idea of a big long line beaten in four, while with the other he is 
beating in twelve with total independence.

'With him in charge I just feel that the music and I are absolutely as one. We 
feel it all the same way. I have never had any better moment in any musical 
experience than when he accompanies me in the 'Doi, mi potevi' monologue in act 
three of Otello. He notices everything. I try to please him all the time, not 
just because I want to please him but because I know he's right.

'One of the sad things is that Carlos doesn't work more. He chooses his work 
with such care. That's marvellous in one way, but it means the world misses so 
much. It's a pity he's the way he is.'

Carlos Kleiber is a deeply private man, hugely devoted to his family, who 
loves to read, study and write. His witty handwritten letters are the delight 
of his close acquaintances. He has tried his hand at stories and novels - he is 
a great lover of Saki - though none has ever been published. He is easy, 
unpretentious and delightful company. He watches a lot of television, smokes, 
eats a lot while remaining thin, and is extremily interested in politics. His 
sympathies are left of centre social democratic and, while no admirer of 
General Noriega, he has been ardently critical of the American invasion of 
Panama. He doesn't need to work more often than he does. And why not?

Kleiber has in fact conducted in Britain far more than in most countries. His 
relationship with Covent Garden dates from his 1974 debut conducting Richard 
Strauss's Der Rosenkavalier. He was back in 1977 for Elektra, in 1979 for La 
Boheme and in 1980 for Placido Domingo's first London Otello. Seven years then 
passed before he again worked at Covent Garden, once more in Otelle with 
Domingo, in the production which he revives this month.

In the whole of that 15 year relationship with Covent Garden, though, Kleiber 
has conducted just a solitary orchestral concert in this country. The story of 
that concert - perhaps the single most controversial London concert hall event 
of the 1980s - goes a long way to explain why people in the music business are 
so sensitive about press comment about the conductor.

In 1981, the London Symphony Orchestra's ailing president, Karl Bohm, was 
forced to cancel a long awaited Festival Hall date. Kleiber was hastily 
contacted and agreed to deputise. The surge of public interest was enormous. 
When the concert took place, on June 9, 1981, the audience was studded with 
famous musicians and the atmosphere was electric. At the end of the programme 
of Weber's Freischutz overture, Schubert's third symphomy and Beethoven's 
seventh, the reception was tumultuous.

Next morning came the reckoning. With the exception of the Observer's Peter 
Heyworth who thought it 'one of the most marvellous concerts I ever heard', the 
reviews were devastatingly hostile. The Daily Telegraph's Robert Henderson 
called it 'a disastrously unhappy affair' adding that the concert was 
'bewildering in its coarseness and insensitivity.' The Guardian's Edward 
Greenfield felt that 'at no point with such aggressive exaggerations and 
idiosyncracies was it quite possible to dismiss the suspicion that here was a 
conductor determined at all costs to do things differently, to attract to 
himself rather than to the music.'

Kleiber was furious. He is said to have vowed never to conduct a London 
concert ever again. 'It was desperately unfair and terribly stupid of the 
critics,' recalls an LSO musician. Despite the reviews, the LSO remains in 
close touch with Kleiber and managing director Clive Gillingson believes 
'Carlos wants to work with the band again.' But not in London, unfortunately.

Carlos Kleiber has lived a restless life. He was born in Germany, grew up in 
South America, had an English governess, became an Argentine citizen, knows 
Cuba well, went to college in New York, studied chemistry in Switzerland, lives 
in Bavaria, is now a naturalised Austrian and has flirted with emigrating to 
Australia. His sister Veronica is now an Italian citizen who lives in Milan, 
while his wife Stanka is a Yugoslav (the Kleibers have a son Marko and a 
daughter Lilian.) He speaks six languages fluently, including Slovenian, and 
his excellent English was learned from his American mother Ruth and at English 
boarding schools in South America in the 1940s.

When Carlos was born in Berlin in 1930 his father Erich Kleiber was musical 
director of Germany's most important opera house, the Berlin Staatsoper, where 
he had conducted the world premiere of Berg's Wozzeck in December 1925. When 
Carlos was five, Erich Kleiber resigned in protest against Nazi interference, 
leading his family from temporary home to temporary home, before settling in 
Buenos Aires.

The young Carlos quickly showed musical ability. He began composing at nine. 
Famous father was apparently no best pleased. 'What a pity he is musical,' 
Erich Kleiber wrote in a letter from Lima. But the conducting bug was too 
strong and in 1954 he made his debut in Potsdam, appearing under the name Karl 
Keller so as to avoid attention. Apprentice years followed, as an assistant 
opera conductor in Dusseldorf, during which he performed a much wider 
repertoire than is nowadays associated with him, before his appointment from 
1966-68 as Kapellmeister at the Stuttgart Opera. It was the last fulltime job 
he ever held.

The modern Carlos Kleiber , the hugely sought after but unpredictable 
conductor with the unparalleled international reputation, dates from this time. 
Over the last 20 years, he has confined his appearances mainly to opera, 
chiefly in Munich, Milan, Vienna and London, interspersed with occasional 
concerts, mainly with the Bavarian State Orchestra, and increasingly rare 
forays into the recording studio.

His studio recordings, indeed, now seem to have entirely dried up. The first, 
an electrifying version of Weber's Der Freischutz, was produced in 1973. The 
last, a searing and extraordinarily underestimated interpretation of Wagner's 
Tristan und Isolde, was made in 1982. In between came La Traviata, which he 
almost abandoned midway, and Die Fledermaus, as well as an acclaimed handful of 
Beethoven, Brahms, and Schubert symphonies with the Vienna Phlharmonic. There 
have been other projects, including a Ring for EMI, but nothing has come of 
them. His few subsequent recordings have been taken from live concerts, like 
the Vienna New Year's Concert and his Munich Beethoven Fourth of 1985.

The smallness of Kleiber's performing repertoire remains a perpetual enigma. 
Yet it masks the extent of his scholarship and sympathies. 'He studies a great 
deal,' says a friend. 'He knows everything. He knows every goddam piece. I know 
he does. I've seen the scores.' He once told the English National Opera's 
general manager Peter Jonas that he would like to conduct The Mikado, and when 
Jomas was in charge of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra he even persuaded Kleiber 
to perform George Butterworth's first English Idyll.

His detailed preparation of the pieces he does perform is the key to the 
intensity and fluency of his interpretations. 'When I work with him,' says 
Placido Domingo, 'I feel that he knows somehow why the composer wrote every 
note, treated every phrase.' The LSO cellist Francis Saunders says: 'He has a 
very clear picture and he knows exactly what he wants - but he also has the 
skill of making you create within it.'

Kleiber's ability to communicate imaginatively is what most impresses the 
musicians who work with him. This is partly a physical gift. 'His stick 
technique is very clear, but he uses his body terribly well too,' says 
Saunders. It is also psychological. 'He has this tightly drawn temperament 
which gives him this extraordinary ability to impart trust to an orchestra,' 
says Mark Elder. 'He makes them feel they can do it.'

But Kleiber also gets his way by wit, language and diplomacy. 'Violins - 
please put some butter on it,' he once upbraided the Covent Garden orchestra in 
a Rosenkavalier rehearsal. On the same occasion, when striving for a special 
interior quietness during the Marschallin's Act One monologue, he suggested: 
'Only those people with psychic tendencies please play this chord.'

He thrives on creative tension. He demands intensive rehearsals, but every 
performance is a fresh discovery. Jonathan Summers has sung Marcello in La 
Boheme for Kleiber in several theatres and has been impressed by this quality. 
'I remember once during rehearsals he must have thought we were going through 
the motions a bit, because he suddenly threw down his baton and shouted: 'No, 
no. Do something different. Give me something to do.' That's what he likes. He 
really listens to you and if you try to do something different he responds.'

His performances, which are often very fast, are renowned for their hyperaware 
intensity. They are minutely expressive and dizzyingly dangerous. He takes 
risks and asks for similarly audacious striving from his fellow performers. 
About his performances, suggests the writer Helena Matheopoulos, there is a 
Dionysioan divine madness. Certainly Kleiber performances are unforgettable and 
he inspires a rare fanaticism in his admirers. Yet perhaps his truer project, 
like Prospero's, is simply to please.

Of course Kleiber is a complex figure. But there is no law that requires a 
genius to run here, there and everywhere on the say-so of record company 
moguls, corporate sponsors and agents. Kleiber's music making is supreme, but 
there are, perhaps, other things in life. As he once told Leonard Bernstein: 'I 
want to grow in a garden, I want to have the sun, I want to eat and drink and 
sleep and make love, and that's it.'
 