
Legend has it that once, at a dismally inept amateur boxing match in Hull, 
Philip Larkin turned to his neighbour with the words "Only connect." In its 
way, this is typical of Larkin. Not only that he should thus introduce a 
hallowed Forsterian nostrum into a coarse context, but also that he should 
yearn for aggression and directness.

Introducing Betjeman's work to American readers, he began with relish: "The 
quickest way to start a punch-up between two British literary critics is to ask 
them what they think about the poems of Sir John Betjeman." The nice thing 
about Larkin is that he was a reactionary. Or, put it another way, a 
counter-puncher. He enjoyed hitting back at received progressive opinion on 
Picasso, Pound, Charlie Parker and pulling out the troops.

His poetry, though we are used to it now, is full of explicit aggression 
against the idea of poetry itself. His first book, The North Ship, shows a 
young writer hypnotised by the example of Yeats, the old spell-binding tenor he 
was to repudiate with the help of Hardy: "When I came to Hardy it was with the 
sense of relief that I didn't have to try to jack myself up to a concept of 
poetry that lay outside my own life - this is perhaps what I felt Yeats was 
trying to make me do." After two novels, Jill and A Girl In Winter, Larkin 
returned to poetry with a voice of his own - a voice content with the middle 
range.

The note it strikes is apparent in the title, The Less Deceived, the authentic 
Larkin note of sceptical disenchantment. And a poem like I Remember, I Remember 
takes the standard literary presentation of childhood, backs it into a corner 
and dishes out a tremendous pasting: Larkin had little time for poetic props 
and easy atmospherics. Groping back to bed after a piss, one poem begins, 
identifying the speaker with l'homme moyen sensuel, before going on to ridicule 
artistic treatments of the moon as "Lozenge of love. Medallion of art".

Larkin censored nothing on the grounds that it was unpoetic. His verse, like 
Betjeman's, was "resigned to swallowing anything".

A camera himself, rejoicing in disruptive accidents to compositional decorum, 
he remarked to a photographer who was about to take his picture: "I tell this 
to all photographers: I am not bald, I do not have a double chin, and this 
doesn't exist."

"This" was his ample stomach. It wasn't vanity. It was a wry comment on vanity 
and its absurdity, followed by a rich guffaw. He included himself with the mass 
of humanity. And when Larkin praised writers it was always for this: his 
reservations about Tennyson ("vapid onomatopoeics") are balanced by praise for 
his "gruff ability to hit the nail on the head in matters of common concern." 
He likes Hardy because he is direct - a man speaking to men. He reveres Wilfred 
Owen: "His secret lies in the retort he had already written when WB Yeats made 
his fatuous condemnation "passive suffering is not a theme for a poetry. Above 
all, I am not concerned with poetry."

Neither was Larkin. And yet, having disposed of it, having written it off, he 
can touch us easily and directly with the real thing, without the capital P
Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>, when it comes, is earned. It 
has to live in a world where people grope back to bed after a piss, where 
people fuck each other up, where boys puke their hearts out behind the gents. 
Only then can the moon be seen for what it is.

A mixed blessing, is what one takes away from Larkin. But a blessing 
nevertheless. To return to EM Forster, his phrase applies in full to Philip 
Larkin: "Only connect the prose and the passion, and both will be exalted, and 
human love will be seen at its height."
 