
Britain's intelligence agencies want to prevent a leading Libyan dissident and 
his pregnant wife, who were abducted with the help ofMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> and then tortured, from seeking justice 
because of "political embarrassment", the high court heard on Wednesday.

Court documents released on behalf of Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and his Moroccan-born 
wife, Fatima Bouchar, say the government's attempt to get the case thrown out 
is "incompatible with the rule of law and has grave constitutional 
implications".

The documents say that if the government were right, it would "leave anyone 
who is a victim of torture without any remedy if another state was involved in 
some way in the conduct".

Lawyers acting for MI6, a former senior MI6 officer, Sir Mark Allen, the 
former foreign secretaryJack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, and MI5, argue that since the 
abduction took place abroad and involved officials from other countries, they 
had no case to answer in a British court.

However, Richard Hermer QC, Belhaj's counsel, said the traditional doctrine of 
state immunity from prosecution did not cover torture and other human rights 
abuses. He told Mr Justice Simon the government was deploying a "doctrine of 
political embarrassment".

Belhaj, former leader of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, was detained with 
his wife in China in 2004 at the behest of British and US officials. They were 
then transferred to Malaysia and Thailand before being flown in a CIA plane to 
Tripoli in 2004.

The forced rendition took place at the time Tony Blair's government was 
establishing close relations withMuammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi>, then Libya's leader.

Documents released on Wednesday by Belhaj's lawyers and the human rights 
charity Reprieve, say Bouchar, who was heavily pregnant at the time, was 
blindfolded, taken to a cell and "chained to the wall by one hand and one leg" 
before being "taped to a stretcher tightly, making her fear for her baby" and 
forced on board a CIA jet.

Belhaj says he was beaten on arrival in Tripoli, and his wife "could no longer 
feel her baby move in her womb and was concerned that he had died". The couple 
were taken to Tajoura prison, a detention facility in Tripoli operated by the 
Libyan intelligence services.

Cori Crider, a lawyer at Reprieve, said neither Blair, Straw, nor the current 
government, was prepared to give the apology "deserved". She said: "Instead 
they are running a specious and immoral argument that British courts cannot 
judge British officials when they are said to have conspired with foreign 
torturers."
 