
As a retired lawyer I read your front-page report on the abuse of women in the 
family courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/revealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims>
 (23 December) with sadness, frustration and anger. Toward the end of my 
career, the government was determined to cut the civil justice budget by 
steamrollering the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishing of Offenders Act 2012 
through parliament.

My energy and that of colleagues in other organisations went into providing 
detailed and considered responses to the government’s consultation. We 
highlighted the serious issues that would result from an increase in litigants 
in person, and the effect on women of the government’s proposals. We pointed 
out that the government had not understood the findings of research on 
litigants in person, and drew attention to the fact that their civil servants 
were keen to know more about this. We brought our concerns the justice select 
committee’s inquiry into Access to Justice in 2011.

We were ignored and the proposals passed into law, with the devastating and 
predictable effects your article describes.
Alan Bean
(Co-chair Association of Lawyers for Children, 2009-12) Birmingham

• I was horrified but not surprised to read your report concerning abuse of 
women in the family courts. As an approved chairman of the family courts I saw 
at first hand the difficulties faced by all parties in giving evidence and 
carrying out the necessary cross-examination required for justice to be seen 
and undertaken. The cross-examinations were undertaken by carefully trained and 
sympathetic solicitors who were able to obtain the necessary information 
without resorting to aggressive tactics and who gained the respect of all 
parties for their careful work and preparation.

As family panel magistrates we were carefully trained in overseeing the 
process and ensuring that the intimidation of witnesses was never allowed. In 
this we were again supported by the solicitors who understood the procedures 
and all of us were prepared and had sight of the relevant paperwork well in 
advance. In this manner all parties were protected from aggression and invasive 
cross-examination. Sadly, over time, with the cuts in legal aid and procedural 
changes we began to see a rise in litigants in person with unrepresented 
parents having to conduct these extremely complicated cases without the 
necessary support provided in the past by solicitors.

While we could, and did, protect women and sometimes men from aggression, it 
became increasingly difficult since magistrates are not there to take the place 
of the advocates available in the past but to hear the evidence and make a 
judgment based on the presentations by all parties. What is urgently required 
in the family courts is a return to the system where submissions and 
cross-examinations are made by carefully trained solicitors sympathetic to the 
parties but with a clear understanding of family law and the role of the 
courts. The role of the family proceedings court was never to act in an 
adversarial fashion but to hear and evaluate the often complex evidence in an 
atmosphere that enabled all parties to have the best interests of the child in 
mind. It is the current changes and lack of funding that has led to this 
situation where parties can feel free to intimidate and act in a manner that 
helps no one and only causes the distress highlighted so well in your article.
Michael Shaw JP (Supplemental)
St Albans 

• Magistrates have long argued for the same provisions in the family court as 
in the criminal courts to protect victims of domestic abuse from their 
perpetrators. We argued at the time of the debates concerning what is now the 
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act that removing most legal 
aid from family cases would heighten the risk of that abuse being continued in 
the courtroom, but our call for the extension of the requirement on the court 
to appoint a lawyer to conduct any examination of the victim in family 
proceedings was rejected. Practice Direction 12J when followed, as it always 
should be, is a good attempt by the judiciary to achieve the same end, but it 
is not as good and would not be necessary if family court users were afforded 
the same protection as those in the criminal court.
Malcolm Richardson JP
National chairman, Magistrates’ Association

• Shared parenting charity Families Need Fathers welcomes suggestions by Sir 
James Munby, chief family judge in England and Wales, to bring further 
transparency to the family court (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/23/family-court-public-james-munby-trial>
, 24 December).

According to a survey of our service users, on average £23,000 is spent (per 
parent) on legal costs in family disputes. These disputes typically escalate to 
absurd levels, largely because they take place behind closed doors and are 
egged on by our adversarial legal system which cannot help but divide people 
into winners and losers.

We believe that separated parents would behave very differently when resolving 
their disputes in an open court. They would be deterred from drawing out 
proceedings into lengthy battles with allegations and counter-allegations, and 
costing sums they (and the state) can ill afford. Could it not be a simple 
matter to reach a reasonable, responsible parenting agreement – especially if 
that entails the parents doing what they had been doing perfectly well for 
years before separation? Children suffer far more from these battles than they 
would if their parents’ protracted debates were shortened by several years by 
being exposed to public scrutiny.

Our current experience is of a closed system that inadequately serves the 
children and families it is meant to protect. Sir James is to be praised for 
stripping back the cloak of excessive secrecy from the family court.

We believe that, with adequate safeguards for children and vulnerable adults 
alike, transparency will lead to great improvements in family dispute 
resolution, possibly taking many cases out of court altogether. Currently the 
public don’t realise how ineffective the family justice system is at producing 
good outcomes for the difficult cases that turn to it. Nor are they aware of 
how the hidden and adversarial system actually escalates many family disputes 
instead of resolving them.
Jerry Karlin
Chair and managing trustee, Families Need Fathers

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 