
“Uganda was the first country in Africa that I worked in and your first love 
stays with you forever,” sighs Milutin Sredojevic – known as “Micho”. “I love 
and respect the country and feel it is a part of me.”

As international coaches go, it’s fair to say the man who has taken Uganda to 
their firstAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> finals since 1978 
takes his job very seriously. On Tuesday the Cranes face Ghana in a rematch of 
their 2-0 defeat against the Black Stars in the final nearly 40 years ago as 
they attempt to qualify from a group that also includes Mali and the 
seven-times winners Egypt with a squad that is almost totally comprised of 
players from clubs in Africa.

Afcon 2017: a group-by-group guide to the Africa Cup of Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview>
But Micho, who originally moved to Uganda in 2001 to take over at 
Kampala-based Villa SC before spending two years in charge of Rwanda, may just 
be their secret weapon. “One time I went to his home and he had this room set 
up that looked like he was strategising for a war,” remembers Joseph Owino, a 
Ugandan journalist and businessman who runs the Kawowo sports website. “There 
were all sorts of charts and graphs everywhere – at one point I was wondering 
to myself, ‘does this guy ever sleep?’ This was way before the qualification so 
he has been working on this project for a long time.”

Micho’s abrasive approach is certainly getting under some people’s skins. 
Spotted by his opposite number, Avram Grant, in the stands at Ghana’s final 
warm-up match last week in Dubai against Bunyodkor from Uzbekistan, the former 
Chelsea manager could not resist a dig at an opponent he has faced three times 
in the last three years. “You claim to know everything about my team so why did 
you come to spy on us again?” taunted Grant in his post-match press conference.

“I never claimed I know all about & never seen your team live play except 
direct match it’s total nonsense u call it again spying,” Micho shot back a few 
hours later via his often-entertaining Twitter account. “He had all his life 
everything served on silver plate (new analyst) I didn’t spy I just gave 
prof[essional] respect to my sport opponents.”

Micho has yet to taste defeat against Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> after Uganda followed up a win and 
a draw in qualification for the 2015 Afcon with a 0-0 away draw in World Cup 
qualifying in October, and the 47-year-old has every reason to feel confident 
of repeating the trick in Port Gentil. But despite being treated as a hero in 
Kampala after a series of near-misses culminated with sealing qualification 
against Comoros in September, Micho came close to walking away a few weeks 
later due to a row over $60,000 of unpaid wages. This was resolved only in 
November amid speculation South Africa were attempting to lure him away.

“Even today,” says the man who owned every Bee Gees album when he was growing 
up in the Yugoslavian (now Serbian) village of Prokuplje says, “the work I am 
doing is staying alive. When you have a clear vision and strategy like I had 
for the country with the support I’ve had from the president of the Ugandan FA, 
Moses Magago, then nothing is impossible and everything is possible.”

In a country with severely limited resources, Micho not only acts as coach but 
performs several other roles, including scouting, fitness and even occasionally 
offering his players counselling. “His nature has helped to push things through 
in a country that doesn’t have blueprints for the future,” says Owino. “He’s 
very outspoken and always ready for a fight – itching for it sometimes. He’s 
happy to take on the government and the press. But I think he really needs that 
to keep up the energy levels. You need that kind of person for a country where 
football is not yet fully developed.”

A 3-1 defeat against the tournament favourites, Ivory Coast, in their final 
warm-up game in Abu Dhabi in a match that was watched by thousands of Ugandans 
who live in the United Arab Emirates may have dampened expectations slightly 
among Cranes’ supporters, although a healthy blend of experienced hands and 
rising stars promise to be no pushovers. Much will rely on the goalkeeper, 
Denis Onyango, who was voted CAF’s Player of the Year based in Africa after his 
exploits helped South Africans Mamelodi Sundowns to their Champions League 
title last year. But he was surprisingly overlooked in the Ugandan FA’s 
player-of-the-year award, a decision that hinted at some of the issues behind 
the scenes.

Further forward, the Standard Liège forward Farouk Miya will be expected to 
provide the inspiration again after his goal sealed qualification. Only 21, he 
is already approaching 40 caps and tipped as the first Ugandan to make the jump 
to one of Europe’s biggest leagues, along with Luwagga Kizito, who is at 
Portugal’s Rio Ave. “Ugandan players are just unfortunate that they have not 
been spotted so far,” insists Micho. “Given time and a real chance then they 
have all the qualities needed to play for some of Europe’s biggest clubs.”

Owino adds: “There was a lot of excitement when Miya moved to Belgium so you 
can imagine what it would be like if that happened. We’ve had players go to 
some European countries like Sweden in the past but not being able to progress.”

There is also a tragic element to Uganda’s story in Gabon. Just after 
Christmas, the defender Murshid Juuko’s wife gave birth to triplets but 
received the news that all three had died as he was about to set off for the 
team’s training camp. But in a country where President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni 
celebrated his 30th anniversary in power this month amid accusations that he 
rigged last year’s election, their presence at the tournament will provide a 
timely distraction.

“The national team is the single unifying factor in Uganda, cutting across 
political and religious divides. It’s the only thing that will bring people 
together,” says Owino. “We are a nation that is divided by religion and 
politics. The moment the national team plays, every single person is behind 
them.”

Around 3,000 Cranes fans are expected to attend Tuesday’s game, with millions 
watching back home to see if the team can emulate the class of 1978 and go all 
the way to the final in Libreville.

“Life in Uganda is not easy and problems are a part of peoples’ lives,” admits 
Micho. “We are trying our best to make all of them happy, proud and with a 
sense of identity and belonging.” With his enthusiasm, they are guaranteed that 
at the very least.
 