
The airplane crash that decimated the Chapecoense football team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/colombia-plane-crash-brazil-declares-three-days-of-mourning-chapecoense>
 has threatened to stir up a diplomatic storm after the Bolivian air traffic 
controller who revealed irregularities about the flight requested asylum in 
Brazil.

'What he did was mass murder': little sympathy for Colombia plane crash pilot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/colombia-plane-crash-pilot-brazil-chapecoense>
Celia Castedo, an official from the Viru Viru airport in Santa Cruz, fled 
across the border rather than face an investigation by Bolivian authorities who 
suspect the small LaMia chartered plane took off with a flight plan showing the 
intended route would push the limits of the plane’s maximum possible flight 
time.

Seventy-one people died when the aircraft fell from the sky just short of its 
destination of Medellín, where Chapecoense – a Brazilian team – had been due to 
play in the final of the Copa Sudamericana.


Castedo said the accident could have been prevented if her warnings had been 
heeded inBolivia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia>, where the plane 
had made a stopover. She told Brazilian officials she needed asylum to avoid 
repercussions from the authorities.

However, the Bolivian interior minister, Carlos Romero, said Castedo had 
crossed the border illegally to avoid justice. She is accused of negligence for 
allegedly approving the flight.


“There is no argument to justify an asylum request,” Romero told reporters. 
“Logically, in a case like this there should be a process of automatic 
expulsion (from Brazil).”


Several high-ranking aviation officials have already been suspended in 
Bolivia. The government there also filed a lawsuit against LaMia on Monday.


While Brazilian officials consider Castedo’s request for refuge, prosecutors 
from the two countries will meet to discuss how to cooperate on the 
investigation.

The main focus is likely to be the captain of the flight, Miguel Quiroga, who 
was also one of the owners of LaMia. Investigators will examine allegations 
that his business interests may have prompted him to buy the minimum amount of 
fuel for the journey, rather than add sufficient extra to account for delays 
and diversions – as is stipulated in aviation regulations. A planned refuelling 
stop was also abandoned.

Further muddying the waters are reports in the Spanish and Brazilian media 
this week that claim Quiroga was due to go on trial for abandoning the air 
force.

Survivors said the pilot did not tell the passengers they faced an emergency 
situation.

“We all believed we were going to land,” Erwin Tumiri, a Bolivian flight 
technician, told a news conference on Monday in Cochabamba, where he is being 
treated for injuries.

“The pilot had already announced the landing and we were waiting for that,” 
Tumiri said.


The football players, he said, were happily listening to music as the plane 
descended.

 