
Airbus and Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup>, 
two of the biggest manufacturers in Britain, have warned that the government 
needs to swiftly secure favourable terms in trade negotiations with Europe to 
avoid jeopardising investment in the UK.

Rolls-Royce said it has held “high-level” talks with ministers about the areas 
that it is keen to resolve after the Brexit vote, while the UK boss ofAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> said he did not want to deal with 
thousands of pages of documents and tariffs when dealing with his colleagues in 
mainland Europe.

Airbus, which makes the A380 superjumbo, employs 15,000 people in Britain and 
issued some of the gravest warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/20/eu-referendum-airbus-uk-chief-brexit-hurt-jobs-investment>
 about the consequences of a vote to leave the EU in the run-up to the 
referendum. Speaking at the Farnborough airshow, leading figures from the 
Franco-German company and other major aerospace groups said they remained 
committed to their existing UK operations.

Tom Williams, chief operating officer of Airbus’s commercial planes unit, said 
on Tuesday that nothing had changed at the company in the short term, but it 
would have to make “big decisions” in three years’ time about investing in 
Britain, where Airbus makes wings for the A380 in Broughton, north Wales.

“We haven’t pulled back on investment in the months running up to Brexit. We 
have no major decisions on the horizon, which gives us two-three years for the 
whole thing to settle down. But then there will be big decisions,” he said.

“We need a situation that is no less favourable than now. When I build a set 
of wings in Broughton and send them to Toulouse, I don’t need a thousand pages 
of documents and tariffs. That’s not just for me, but all UK industries.

“With Brexit, nothing has changed in the short term, but of course future 
investment does come under review. But we could see a situation where we are in 
a positive scenario.”

Engine maker Rolls-Royce stressed that it was keen to secure agreements on the 
movement of labour, environmental standards and aviation regulations. Warren 
East, the company’s chief executive, warned that the main potential downside of 
Brexit for the company was uncertainty. Three-quarters of Rolls-Royce’s 
business is done outside the EU. “They [circumstances] may play out in an 
advantageous way, but it will be some years until we know,” he said.

Meanwhile, the chief executive of Boeing, Dennis Muilenburg, said Brexit would 
not change its approach to investing in the UK. The US aircraft manufacturer 
announced on Monday that it isdoubling the size of its British business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/boeings-jobs-pledge-shows-uk-is-open-for-business-says-cameron>
, creating 2,000 jobs.

“We have been here for 75 years and we have a very long-term perspective on 
our investment in the UK. So Brexit and some of the recent activities here 
doesn’t change that. We are going to maintain that long-term perspective and it 
doesn’t change our plans,” Muilenburg said.

Separate from Brexit, East raised the possibility of further cost reductions 
and job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/rolls-royce-warren-east-announce-turnaround-plan-is-working>
 at the company as it undergoes restructuring. East has targeted up to £200m of 
annual savings by the end of 2017, but internal documents show that Rolls-Royce 
could earn an extra £1bn by boosting its profit margins, which would include 
further cost-cutting.

“I do not see any reason why we cannot achieve the sort of benchmark margin 
levels and that would imply that sort of number [£1bn], but it is not a fixed 
target. We will come out with another target when we have got something that we 
are sufficiently confident in that we can talk about tying a number to a period 
of time; like we have talked about £150m-£200m by the end of 2017. I do not 
want to come out with some sort of vague, hand-wavy ‘it’s a billion pounds ... 
sometime ... never’.

“One of the challenges we mentioned back in February with our full-year 
results is that we have to rebuild investor trust and you do not build trust by 
having hand-wavy arguments that nobody can really test you against.”
 