
Albion Rovers are offering season tickets for as little as £10 to try to fill 
the terraces. TheScottish League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-two> side hope the 'pay 
what you can' scheme will boost supporter numbers and help fund the 
refurbishment of Cliftonhill Stadium.

Last season Rovers charged £140 for a season ticket – now they are asking for 
a minimum of £10 to cover administration costs.It follows the "overwhelming 
success" of a pilot in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/10/albion-rovers-fans-pay-what-they-can-montrose-match>
 when they asked cash-strapped fans to pay only what they saw fit for a game 
against Montrose.

Brentford and Mansfield in the English Football League have previously boosted 
attendances through a similar scheme. TheAlbion Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albion-rovers> chairman, John Devlin, 
said: "Obviously we're hoping people pay a bit more than £10 and they pay what 
they can afford, but we're grateful for any donations provided to us.

"It's a fantastic offer and the objective for us is to increase our home 
support as we set out to refurbish the infrastructure round about Cliftonhill.

"We are very keen to attract more people along to watch Albion Rovers and I'm 
also of the opinion that Scottish football is over-priced at this level and we 
are trying to redress that now.

"I would fully expect our normal season ticket-holders to pay there or 
thereabouts what they normally pay. Why wouldn't they? It's their club and they 
want to see it grow and prosper. Investing in it is one way to see the club 
move forward. We're going to get a mixed bag but we think it's a risk 
absolutely worth taking."

Rovers hope to reopen a disused terrace at Cliftonhill and potentially double 
their usual attendance of around 500 spectators if the initiative is successful.

Devlin said: "As a club we are keen to retain standing areas and there's a 
large terracing that has been closed for the best part of 10 years. We are keen 
to reopen that, double our capacity and allow us to play more games here."

A club spokesman said: "The Rovers board hope the initiative will be received 
in the true spirit it is intended and people will be fair and honest in their 
evaluation of what is affordable and realistic."
 