
The cricket bat on the cover, along with utterances about cups of tea and the 
Queen, announced that the White Stripes were a long way from Motor City for 
their fourth album. They also seemed, at times, a long way from the decade in 
which this was made. Elephant was laid down in east London's Toerag Studios for 
just £5,000, on analogue equipment built before 1963, whereas the sleeve notes 
boasted that it was recorded and mastered without using a computer. This 
stripped-back approach to rock'n'roll influenced countless Stripes imitators at 
the start of the decade, but nobody matched Jack and Meg when it came to 
creating a colossal sound out of such basic ingredients. Elephant, after all, 
was the release that banished preconceptions about the White Stripes' 
self-consciously limiting format and affirmed that they were consistently and 
swaggeringly magnificent.

Their first recording for a major label, the 14 tracks had a gritty truculence 
that was still accessible enough to transform them from a cult act to a global 
concern. Meg White's guileless, tick-tock drumming style was the perfect anchor 
for the mangled blues and squalls of noise Jack White wrung from his guitar. 
Beneath the seismic grumble of Seven Nation Army or the caterwauling helium 
chorus of There's No Home for You Here were pithy specimens of songwriting 
craft.

At its heart was Jack's hankering to be born in an age when men were gallant 
and women swooned with feminine modesty. It was subtitled The Death of the 
Sweetheart and was rife with thwarted love affairs, boiling sexual tension and 
declarations of desire. More often than not, however, Jack came across as a 
rascally old-school chauvinist. Along with his mannered vocal style and the 
ludicrous insistence that he and Meg were siblings, fans gobbled it up as part 
of the White Stripes' theatrical intrigue. This was the occasion when the 
Detroit odd couple triumphed on their own irresistible terms. Righteous fury, 
melodramatic wit, hookline-and-sinker choruses – it was all here, in one 
brilliant package.

Buy this Sunday's Observer for the full top 50 countdown, plus an interview 
with the winner
 