
Alex Cuthbert’s try four minutes from time, converted by Rhys Patchell, gave 
Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> a 29-27 win over 
Scarlets in a thrilling Guinness Pro12 derby at the Arms Park. The visitors 
appeared on course to overcome the loss of three players to the sin-bin, with 
Lewis Rawlins, Steffan Evans and Emyr Phillips all receiving yellow cards, but 
Cuthbert levelled matters before Patchell added the extras to seal a Blues 
victory.

Cardiff had extra reason for cheer after four tries through Cory Allen, Dan 
Fish, Kristian Dacey and Cuthbert guaranteed them a bonus point, with Patchell 
converting three of them and kicking a penalty. The courageous and 
injury-ravagedScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> scored 
three tries from Ken Owens, DTH van der Merwe and Gareth Davies, while Aled 
Thomas converted all three and kicked two penalties.

Northampton Saints put the squeeze on Exeter Chiefs to earn tight win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/01/northampton-saints-exeter-chiefs-premiership-match-report>
Scarlets were without the international forwards John Barclay and Jake Ball, 
who were both injured in last week’s game againstOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, but they received a boost with the 
return of their scrum-half Gareth Davies.

For Blues Allen made his first league appearance of the season with Patchell 
switching to outside-half to accommodate Fish at full-back.

Cardiff began brightly and took a second-minute lead with a Patchell penalty 
after Gethin Jenkins was tackled high by his opposing prop Rob Evans but two 
bad mistakes from the home side handed Scarlets the lead. A poor pass from 
Patchell was collected by Davies, who raced 60 metres to secure his side a 
lineout in Cardiff’s 22. It was the Blues’ throw but Dacey overthrew straight 
to Owens, who crashed over.

Worse was to follow for within five minutes the Blues had given away another 
seven points. This time a telegraphed pass from Tom James was intercepted by 
Van der Merwe, who ran more than 60 metres to score under the posts with Thomas 
converting for a 14-3 lead. The frenetic opening continued as Cardiff scored 
their opening try when Rey Lee-Lo made the break for Allen to go over. Patchell 
converted before Thomas kicked two penalties for the visitors.

Just before the interval Scarlets’ lock Rawlins was shown a yellow card for 
dragging down a driving maul but the visitors went in at the break 20-10 ahead.

Rawlins remained absent for the first nine minutes of the second half and it 
looked as though Blues were not going to make their man advantage count. Then 
just before the lock’s return they scored a splendid try. Manoa Vosawai put the 
opposition defence on the back foot and the ball was spread wide to send James 
tearing down the left before the wing passed inside to Fish, who scored.

Cardiff were becoming increasingly dominant and a try looked a probability 
until the Scarlets wing Evans deliberately knocked on to earn a yellow card. 
Minutes later Phillips joined his team-mate in the sin-bin for collapsing a 
driving lineout.

Down to 13 men was too much of a disadvantage for Scarlets and they conceded a 
third try when Dacey drove over for Patchell to convert and Blues were 22-20 
ahead going into the final quarter. Amazingly Scarlets, still with 13 men, 
rallied to regain the lead as Davies forced his way past an attempted tackle 
from Sam Hobbs and over the line for a try which Thomas converted.

The visitors were restored to a full complement of players but Cardiff had the 
final say when Cuthbert forced his way over from close range, with Patchell’s 
conversion breaking Scarlets’ hearts.

Earlier in the day Ospreys fought off a determined second-half fightback from 
Newport Gwent Dragons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newportdragons> for a 
12-7 Guinness Pro12 win. After their narrow victory at Scarlets on Boxing Day 
the Ospreys held firm to beat Dragons by two tries to one, despite not scoring 
a point in the second half.
 