
Bristol had averaged two tries a match this season while conceding a total of 
21 and, if in the final match in their run against last season’s top three they 
took until the final 10 minutes of the game, rather than the first half, to 
give up a bonus point, they could not prevent Saracens showing in a largely 
uninspiring affair why they are the European andPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> champions.

Despite the largely one-sided nature of the contest which Saracens controlled 
from the off, they never went off script and indulged themselves, sticking 
instead to the direct formula that has made them so successful in recent 
seasons. Where Wasps and Exeter gave Bristol a few bones to gnaw on, all they 
had fromSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> was a plate 
licked clean.

Harry Mallinder boots Northampton to thrilling win over Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/northampton-exeter-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
The outcome was Saracens’ biggest Premiership victory over Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby>, who failed to muster a point 
at home in the tournament for the first time and remain adrift at the bottom. 
They will not be judged by how they get on against the champions, last season’s 
beaten finalists, Exeter, and the current leaders, Wasps, but their 
performances against the teams in the bottom half of the table, starting with 
Newcastle next weekend.

Bristol held Saracens to 10 points in the first half, defending stoutly and 
attacking sporadically. Saracens, who at one point had a territorial domination 
of 74%, never deviated from the tried and proven, running hard, taking play 
through phases and waiting for defensive lapses which grew as fatigue became a 
factor.

Their first try came after 12 minutes when Alex Lozowski, marking his 
elevation to England’s elite squad in his fifth appearance for Saracens having 
been third choice at Wasps, ran at the outside shoulder of Jack Lam and away 
from the flanker. Otherwise Bristol held firm, defending driving mauls 
effectively and keeping their shape, restricting their opponents to a Ben 
Spencer penalty for the rest of the opening half.

Within five minutes of the restart it was all over. Spencer kicked his second 
penalty before Lozowski charged down Adrian Jarvis’s laboured clearance and 
somehow managed to apply downward pressure on the ball a millisecond before it 
and he reached the dead-ball line. It was a rare moment of skill on the night 
when the only issue was when Saracens would secure the bonus point.

They did so on 70 minutes. The full-back Chris Wyles had scored their third 
try, profiting from a pass by Schalk Burger, who spotted Ryan Edwards coming 
out of the defensive line too quickly and timed his pass to ensure Wyles had 
only space in front of him and the fourth immediately followed Max Crumpton’s 
dispatch to the sin-bin as the hooker paid for what had become persistent 
infringing by his side.

The penalty was turned into a driving lineout and there was no stopping Jamie 
George. The extra point did not satisfy Saracens who kept rolling forward and, 
after Jack Tovey had made his side’s first and only line break, George Kruis 
completed the scoring on the stroke of full-time, rewarding his side’s 
relentless, grinding efficiency.

Bristol had their moments, stealing a couple of lineouts, turning two driving 
mauls into scrums and shoving their opponents back in the scrum occasionally, 
but it was a night when their inexperience showed against opponents who gave 
them nothing. If Saracens had not been coming off the back of a rare defeat, 
they might have been more incautious but, given the unfamiliar back division 
they fielded because of injuries and the suspension to Chris Ashton, that was 
never likely on a night when their focus was on playing to their strengths and 
winning.

“I am bitterly disappointed,” said Bristol’s director of rugby, Andy Robinson, 
who opted in the post-match media conference to issue a monologue rather than 
take questions. “We started better but did not perform for 80 minutes and 
wasted the good work of the first half in the first five minutes of the second 
by giving away a penalty and having a kick charged down, things that were in 
our control. We have to learn and whether we are doing so quickly enough we 
will find out at Newcastle.”

Saracens moved to the top of the table, although their stay will be brief if 
Wasps defeat Harlequins on Sunday . If they were missing experience behind, 
they were at full throttle at forward where Kruis, Maro Itoje, Burger and Billy 
Vunipola, until he was taken off as a precaution following a knock on his 
shoulder, had too much know-how for Bristol. “It was a professional 
performance,” said their director of rugby, Mark McCall. “We put Bristol under 
pressure throughout and it told when they became weary.”

Bristol J Williams; Edwards (Wallace,60), Tovey, Hurrell (Jarvis, 29), 
Amesbury; Pisi, Cliff; Traynor (Bevington,48), McMillan (Crumpton, 60), 
Perenise (Cortes,60), Phillips (Joyce, 57), Sorenson, Fisher, Lam (capt; 
Eadie,55), Crane.

Saracens Wyles; Ellery (Perkins, 72), Tompkins, Barritt (Bosch, 67), 
Gallagher; Lozowski, Spencer (Wigglesworth, 55); M Vunipola (Barrington, 55), 
George (Spurling, 72), Du Plessis (Figallo, h-t), Itoje (Hamilton, 63), Kruis, 
Wray, Burger, B Vunipola (Rhodes, 46).

Referee I Tempest. Attendance 11,592.
 