
Apologists for Steffon Armitage and Nick Abendanon need look no further than 
the RDS Arena on Sunday for a poignant case study. It is certainly not an 
exaggeration to say that Charles Piutau, who will turn out for Wasps in their 
European Champions Cup tie at Leinster, would be wearing a World Cup winner’s 
medal now had he not chosen in Marchto sign a contract with Ulster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/07/the-breakdown-rugby-union-countries-convenience>
 which does not actually start until next summer.

During the World Cup itself he was under contract with the NZRFU, making 
himself far more available to the All Blacks than Armitage or Abendanon had 
made themselves to England. But Steve Hansen articulated his anger over the 
matter quite clearly, and in October Piutau was forced to settle for a 
runners-up medal in the ITM Cup with Auckland.

“It was real tough,” he said of watching the Rugby World Cup, in which his 
brother, Siale, appeared for Tonga. “No one likes to be a spectator. You do 
have those what ifs, but I’m the type of person, once I’ve made my decision I’m 
happy. I knew it was a possibility that [the Ulster contract] could affect my 
chances of making the team. I hoped it wouldn’t, but I knew it could. I was 
told by the coaches that that wasn’t the reason, but I felt it was part of it.”

So entrenched was the anger that the NZRFU blocked the Super Rugby contract 
the Blues wanted to offer him for the first half of next year, leaving him 
without a team for nine months. That decision allowedWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> to come in with the offer that 
means he will play in England for the rest of this season, alongside Frank 
Halai, fellow All Black and alumnus of Wesley College.

Charles Piutau makes instant impact as Wasps sweep Gloucester aside
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/08/wasps-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
Others would do well to note the dignity with which Piutau has taken his 
exclusion, or indeed to note the very fact that such policies exist – and have 
long existed – in countries other than England. A cynic might wonder why he did 
not keep the Ulster deal to himself until the World Cup was concluded, but the 
man himself comes across as too honest to play such games. “I could have,” he 
acknowledges. “But I backed myself to make that team, and I gave it everything. 
It wasn’t to be.”

His All Blacks career will pause for now on 17 caps, the most recent earned in 
this year’s Rugby Championship. New Zealand travelled to England with only one 
specialist full-back and three wings, one of whom was returning from a broken 
leg, so a full-back-cum-winger such as Piutau might have been seen as just the 
ticket. There is little doubt that the decision to join Ulster cost him dearly, 
if it rewarded him in other ways.

“Financially it’s a great support for me and my family,” he admits. “But I 
guess the new culture and the different experience, living in a different 
country – it’s a big thing for me. You’re quite lucky in rugby if you get 10 
years, let alone five. I wanted to make the most of it.”

Piutau turned 24 the very day his erstwhile team-mates raised the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
. The reason his departure touched such a nerve is that he represents just the 
kind of brilliant youngster with a long All Blacks career ahead of him who is 
not supposed to be tempted by the approaches of the north. Piutau has sympathy 
with the very policy that has excluded him, but fears it will be tested like 
never before in the years to come.

“I think it’s fair to say that there’s a different type of generation coming 
through in New Zealand. Sometimes players wait so long to try to get a crack at 
playing in the black jersey. I wouldn’t say people have become more realistic 
but this option to come here is one to think about. But with the talent that is 
always coming through in New Zealand, no matter who leaves, there’s always 
someone there.”

It appears there are a few talents here, too. Piutau may have made his debut 
for Wasps only last Sunday inthe win over Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/08/wasps-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
 but he dovetailed with his new team-mates as if he had been playing in black 
for years, never more so than when he combined with Christian Wade and Elliot 
Daly for the former’s brilliant try, the three of them transcending the soaking 
elements for a moment. Piutau is impressed.

“I don’t think I’ve seen someone as fast as Wadey, and I don’t think I’ve seen 
anyone with as big a boot as Daly. To be on the same team as them and their 
skill set is awesome. I remember Wadey from the Under-20 World Cup. He caught 
my attention, because his pace is unreal.”

England may have looked like rabbits in headlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster-10-reasons>
 when it mattered most this autumn, but if they can learn to harness talents 
such as Wade’s the outlook need not be all bleak. Piutau knows a team who would 
find a way. “The All Blacks would love players like Wadey and Daly. Talented, 
attacking boys like that. I’m biased, but I’d love to see my team-mates play 
international rugby.”

And so should we love seeing Piutau play European rugby. His decision to come 
here may have proved controversial but he made it with his own mind and has 
borne the consequences like a man. Now let’s see what he can do for rugby on 
this side of the planet.
 