
Ally McCoist says he was "neither surprised nor disappointed" by Celtic's 
response to the ruling that Rangers gained no competitive advantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/01/neil-lennon-rangers-undisclosed-player-payments>
 from years of making undisclosed payments to players.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were this week found 
guilty of breaching Scottish Premier League rules by not disclosing some 
payments relating to Employee Benefit Trusts between 2000 and 2011.

Oldco Rangers were issued with a £250,000 fine but the club avoided the 
ultimate sanction of being stripped of titles after an independent commission – 
chaired by Lord Nimmo Smith – ruled that no sporting advantage was gained as a 
result of the non-disclosure.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> on Friday night issued a 
statement declaring they were "surprised by the parallel conclusion that no 
competitive advantage was gained from these arrangements".

Asked for his reaction to the Celtic comments, the Rangers manager McCoist 
said: "I was neither surprised nor disappointed to be honest with you. It went 
to a commission with Lord Nimmo Smith and two very prominent QCs.

"You would have to say that's what Lord Nimmo Smith does for a living, making 
decisions. I'd have to say he's very good at it. So I would rather take his 
decision than anybody else's so we are delighted."

McCoist was speaking after Rangers fought back from behind to claim a 3-1 
victory over East Stirling in the Irn-Bru Third Division.

Shire silenced Ibrox when they took the lead through Andrew Stirling five 
minutes before the break. The home side hit back in the second half thanks to 
an Andy Little double and a goal from the captain Lee McCulloch, who was back 
in action after eight weeks on the sidelines.

McCoist said: "It's been a fantastic 48 hours for the club and it ended really 
well. The first 45 minutes obviously weren't great but the victory was the most 
important thing. It's been a great day."

The icing on the cake for the Rangers manager was the sight of the club legend 
Sandy Jardine back at Ibrox for the first time in months as he receives 
treatment for cancer.

McCoist added: "The three points were massive but seeing Sandy back at the 
club was a massive boost for everybody. Everybody was delighted and visibly 
moved to see him back. I thought he was looking brilliant.

"He came in for a cup of tea before the game. He obviously looked a little bit 
weaker than normal after what he's been through, but I think he's looking 
remarkable.

"He's still got a good bit to go but, having spoken to him, if anybody is 
ready for the challenge and the fight ahead, it's Sandy Jardine."
 