
Wales are set to be without one British and Irish Lions Test captain but could 
be buoyed by another’s return from injury when they face England at Twickenham 
on Sunday.

Robin McBryde, the Wales assistant coach, says that the England game is “too 
early” for the national team’s captain, Sam Warburton, as he continues his 
recovery froma shoulder injury sustained last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/sam-warburton-injury-cardiff-blues-ospreys-wales>
.

But the lock Alun Wyn Jones, who has not played since Wales’s Six Nations 
defeat against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 just over 10 weeks ago because of a long-term foot problem, is in the 
selection frame.

“Alun Wyn is good. He took a full part in training this morning,” McBryde 
said. “He hasn’t had rugby in a long while. This game has been put in the diary 
in order for us to get up to speed – that intensity – before we face the All 
Blacks. Anybody who hasn’t had that much rugby stands a good chance of being 
involved against England.

“Alun Wyn has made great strides. More time is going to benefit anybody, 
obviously, but at some stage you are going to have to dip your toe in the water 
and see how you react to games.

Wales tour squad puts Warren Gatland on collision course with French clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/10/wales-tour-squad-warren-gatland-french-clubs-rugby>
“He has progressed. He has followed the medical advice, and there is no better 
professional than Alun Wyn Jones, and if you couple that professional attitude 
with the medical team that we have got – they have worked wonders with players 
in the past, and it just goes to show when you follow protocols, anything is 
possible.”

Jones, who led the 2013 Lions to a third Test win against Australia in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/australia-lions-third-test-match-report>
, went off during the second half at Twickenham when Wales lost 25-21 in March.

“Alun Wyn was frustrated [with] himself in the Six Nations because he couldn’t 
reach the standards that he demands from himself,” said McBryde. “When you have 
got a player of that ability, he sets his own standards. That’s great, really. 
From a coaching point of view, you haven’t got to say a lot to him. I do hope 
he will get back up there pretty quick.”

Warburton is on course to be fit for Wales’s tour opener against New Zealand 
in Auckland on 11 June, and he has a major role to fill, given that the Wales 
head coach, Warren Gatland, has selected no other specialist openside flankers 
in his tour squad.

“This weekend will be too early for Sam, but he is getting much stronger, 
feeling much better about himself, and that is evident in the way he is 
carrying himself and contributing to the meetings.”

The prop Paul James, meanwhile, will have a fitness test this week on a calf 
muscle injury, with Gatland due to name his team for Twickenham on Friday.

With Wales heading to New Zealand for a demanding three-Test mission and 
England tackling Australia Down Under in June, the match on Sunday is 
indisputably more about tour preparation than anything else.

It does, though, give Wales an opportunity to go some way towards erasing 
memories of a first-half no-show last time out against England, when they fell 
16-0 behind and never really recovered, despite a late rally.

“This game has been put in the diary for bigger things, and I don’t mean that 
disrespectfully to England,” McBryde said. “It has been put in there as a 
stepping stone to play the world champions on their own patch, and that is the 
way we are treating the game. It is there for us to have a taste of that 
intensity, and what better place to go?

“I know there are a number of changes in the England team, but the nucleus of 
the team that won the grand slam is there. They are riding on the crest of a 
wave, and that is going to filter down to the rest of the squad.

“To go there at this time, you are not going to play in a much better 
atmosphere to prepare you to go on to New Zealand.”
 