
It is never a pleasant experience watching your football team being well 
beaten by your oldest and keenest rivals in a match your team was expected to 
win comfortably. At the end of such encounters, you head sullenly for the exit, 
bitterly resenting refereeing decisions and your manager’s tactical myopia 
while wondering why your highly paid defenders were made to look like 
Teletubbies. Several hours later and only with deep reluctance might you be 
forced to acknowledge the other team’s superior skills and desire to win, your 
mood having been softened perhaps by the caress of South American liquor.

Last Sunday’s Scottish Cup semi-final between Celtic and Rangers was a bit 
different. Long before the end, even though Celtic took the game to penalty 
kicks (football’s version of Russian roulette) you knew that they had had their 
arses well and truly skelped by Rangers all over the park. Midway through the 
first half, whenRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were 
giving us a lesson in movement and one-touch passing, something happened that 
I’d never before encountered in a game involving our two great clubs.

All around me high up in Hampden’s south stand, Celtic supporters were 
espousing grudging admiration in low growls for the manner in which Rangers 
were playing. “When was the last time you ever saw a Rangers team playing the 
ball out from the back like this?” “We look like the lower division team here.” 
“That’s the way we’re supposed to play.” An industrial-strength challenge from 
theRangers left-sided midfielder Barrie McKay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/17/rangers-v-celtic-scottish-cup-semi-final-live>
, the best player on the park, would normally have been met with howls of rage. 
Instead, there was respect. “I wish more of our players had that attitude.” 
Obviously, I have omitted several words beginning with the letters “f”, “c”, 
“b”, “d” and “w”, lest you think that the most passionate club match in the 
world had become gentrified.

In the end, a Rangers team that, following financial ruin and liquidation, had 
spent the past four seasons playing the likes of Peterhead, Alloa Athletic and 
Arbroath had shown what can be achieved with a proper football coach and a 
strong unity of purpose. In doing so, they might also have renderedCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> a massive favour as well as a 
dose of reality.

During this period, many Celtic fans have done little more than obsess about 
the legal status of Rangers while mocking the hubris and sense of entitlement 
that led to their financial downfall. Would that there had been a similar level 
of scrutiny of Celtic’s financial arrangements in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s and 
1980s beforeFergus McCann arrived to save the club in 1994 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/fergus-mccanns-battle-save-celtic-3013568#xMYYGDdoMCYfuVjv.97>
.

The Rangers pantomime has averted our eyes from the catastrophic mismanagement 
of Celtic in recent years. It has taken a historic defeat by a Rangers team 
playing in the lower leagues to show that Celtic are in turmoil and have been 
for a while. The first casualty of this, inevitably, wasCeltic’s hapless young 
Norwegian manager, Ronny Deila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/06/ronny-deila-appointed-celtic-manager>
. By the middle of next month, he will probably have delivered a second 
successive league title, but in a league shorn of Rangers’ presence and with a 
budget dwarfing that of every one of their opponents, this was the least that 
could have been expected of him.

Celtic's hardest task is finding spare seats for all the expensive flops who 
do nothing more than top up their pensions

His two-year reign has been characterised by a style of football best 
described as leaden. It has seen Celtic beaten in the big cup competitions by 
Ross County and Inverness Caledonian Thistle and humiliated in Europe over and 
over again. The first team squad is bloated, with so many players that a system 
of shifts must now operate to use the dressing room showering facilities. The 
most difficult task at the end of the week is finding spare seats for all the 
expensive European flops who have gathered in Glasgow’s East End to do nothing 
more than top up their pensions. At their training academy in Lennoxtown, on 
the outskirts of Glasgow, I’ve been told that the atmosphere is unpleasant. 
With one exception there has been no pathway into the first team for the 
disillusioned young native talent that Celtic rear to go out on loan to their 
rivals.

Deila is a rookie manager, a low-budget appointment who I hope might yet 
blossom into something better. He was appointed because Celtic thought they 
could hoover up all the prizes in Rangers’ absence for a minimum outlay. The 
blame for Celtic’s decline lies squarely with a board of directors as 
dysfunctional and out of touch as any that have ever served this great club. 
Celtic have one of the poorest and most socially disadvantaged fan bases in 
British football, yet they still refuse to sign up to the national living wage 
campaign for their lowest paid employees.

The club’s majority shareholder is one of the UK’s richest men whose name 
cropped up in the Panama Papers. They market the myth that they are “more than 
just a football club”, implying that they are St Francis of Assisi in a world 
of Donald Trumps. Last year, clubchairman Ian Bankier said some fans were 
criminally racist for daring to criticise his fellow director, Ian Livingston 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-3327997/Celtic-chairman-Ian-Bankier-blasts-racist-rants-director-Lord-Ian-Livingston.html>
, a Conservative peer who had voted in favour of cuts to tax credits, a measure 
that would have adversely affected many of the families who support Celtic. 
This occurred at an annual meeting presided over by a chief executive on a 
salary and bonus package of £1m a year.

I welcome Rangers back to the top flight of Scottish football; I’ve missed our 
passionate, dramatic and occasionally ugly encounters. Ours is a rivalry based 
on culture, politics, ethnicity and faith. Many of the men and women who 
participate in it have had their identity and dignity stripped bare by the 
political classes, whose gerrymandering of wealth and influence in this country 
has silenced and subjugated them. These people condemn the inevitable 
antisocial consequences of the Celtic/Rangers games while refusing to address 
the deep-rooted health and social inequalities that proliferate in those 
communities where the rivalry is most keenly joined.

In 1993, a grassroots, supporter-led organisation called Celts for Change 
<http://www.thecelticwiki.com/page/Celts+for+Change> was established and 
succeeded in overthrowing a previous dysfunctional and incompetent board 
regime. The leaders of that campaign are all still happily with us. Perhaps 
it’s time they got together again.
 