
The words inscribed on the grave say Mark Robinson "fell asleep" on 19 
October, 1959. He was a seven-year-old boy who died of a congenital heart 
defect, the only child to Joan and William Robinson. They died in 2009 and are 
buried in the same grave, listed on the headstone as "Mummy" and "Daddy".

It is perhaps some solace that Mark's parents never lived long enough to 
discover how the identity of their son may have been quietly resurrected by 
undercover police without their knowledge. The controversial tactic – in which 
covert officers spying on protesters adopted the identities of dead children – 
stopped less than a decade ago. More than 100 children's identities may have 
been used.

Last week the home secretary, Theresa May, announced that a chief constable 
from Derbyshire would take over an inquiry into undercover policing of protest, 
after revelations by the Guardian into the use of stolen identities.

Despite an internal investigation that has cost £1.25m, senior officers seem 
genuinely baffled at the activities of two apparently rogue units that have 
been monitoring political campaigners since 1968.

The story of the officer who appears to have used the identity of Mark 
Robinson, adopting it as his own, reveals much of what has gone wrong with 
police infiltration of political groups. Bob Lambert, who posed as an animal 
rights campaigner in the 1980s, not only adopted the identity of a dead child. 
He was also accused in parliament of carrying out an arson attack on a 
Debenhams department store and deceiving two women into having long-term sexual 
relationships with him.

One of them has now revealed how Lambert fathered a child with her before 
vanishing from their lives when his deployment came to an end in 1989. She only 
discovered he was an undercover police officer eight months ago – more than 20 
years after he disappeared from the lives of mother and child, claiming to be 
on the run.

Using the pseudonym Charlotte, she said in a statement to the home affairs 
select committee: "There can be no excuses for what he did: for the betrayal, 
the manipulation and the lies … I loved him so much, but now have to accept 
that he never existed."

Gravestone


The story of how Bob Lambert became Bob Robinson begins on the outskirts of 
Poole, Dorset, in 1983. For almost 25 years, a sculpture of the boy stood guard 
above the grave in Branksome cemetery. "Safe in the arms of Jesus," the 
engraving said.

Lambert would have come across the boy's paperwork in St Catherine's House, 
the national register of births, deaths and marriages. It was a rite of passage 
for all spies working in the Special Demonstration Squad (SDS), a unit 
dedicated to spying on protesters. For ease of use, SDS officers looked to 
adopt the identities of dead children who shared their name and approximate 
date of birth. They called it "the Jackal Run", after its fictional depiction 
in Frederick Forsyth's novel The Day of the Jackal.

Mark Robinson was the ideal match. He was born in Plumstead, south-east 
London, on 28 February, 1952 – just 16 days before Lambert's date of birth. His 
second name was Robert, which the spy could abbreviate to Bob. He died of acute 
congestive cardiac failure after being born with a malformed heart. Other SDS 
officers are known to have chosen children who died of leukaemia or were killed 
in road accidents.

Undercover police did not merely adopt the names of dead children, but revived 
entire identities, researching their family backgrounds and secretly visiting 
the homes they were brought up in.

When the spy made his debut in London as a long-haired anti-capitalist, he 
introduced himself as Bob Robinson and said he was born in Plumstead. He had 
fake identity documents, including a driving licence in the name of Mark 
Robinson. Recently, he is understood to have said his full undercover alias was 
Mark Robert Robinson. The date of birth he gave is still in a diary entry of 
one close friend: it was the same date as that of the dead child.
 Bob Lambert, aka Bob Robinson Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
Double life

It was the start of a surreal double life. For most of the week he lived as 
Robinson, a gardener and active member of the environmental group London 
Greenpeace. For one or two days a week, he returned to the more conventional 
life with his wife and children in Hertfordshire. SDS insiders say Lambert was 
revered as one of the best operatives in the field. He helped jail two 
activists from the Animal Liberation Front who were convicted of planting 
incendiary devices in branches of Debenhams in protest at the sale of fur in 
July1987.

Lambert's relationship with Charlotte, then 22, helped bolster his undercover 
credibility. When they met in 1984, Lambert was her first serious relationship, 
and 12 years her senior.

"He got involved in animal rights and made himself a useful member of the 
group by ferrying us around in his van," she said. "He was always around, 
wherever I turned he was there trying to make himself useful, trying to get my 
attention. I believed at the time that he shared my beliefs and principles. In 
fact, he would tease me for not being committed enough."

Around Christmas that year, Charlotte became pregnant. "Bob seemed excited by 
the news and he was caring and supportive throughout the pregnancy," she said. 
"Bob was there by my side through the 14 hours of labour in the autumn of 1985 
when our son was born. He seemed to be besotted with the baby. I didn't realise 
then that he was already married with two other children."

Two years later, Lambert's deployment came to an end. He told friends police 
were on his tail and he needed to flee to Spain. "He promised he would never 
abandon his son and said that as soon as it was safe I could bring our baby to 
Spain to see him," Charlotte said. Instead, the man she knew as Bob Robinson 
disappeared forever.

She was left to bring up their son as a single parent. It was an impoverished 
life, made worse because there was no way she could receive child maintenance 
payments. "At that time I blamed myself a lot for the break-up and for the fact 
that my son had lost his father," she said.

When Charlotte's son became older, the pair tried to track down Bob Robinson, 
who they presumed was still living in Spain. They could not have known he was 
working just a few miles away.

In the mid-1990s, Lambert was promoted to head of operations at the SDS, 
giving him overarching responsibility for a fleet of other spies. Just like 
their boss, they adopted the identities of dead children before going 
undercover to cultivate long-term and intimate relationships with women. That 
was the unit's tradecraft and Lambert, with his experience in the field, was 
its respected spymaster. "I chatted to Bob about everything." said Pete Black, 
an SDS officer who infiltrated anti-racist groups under Lambert. "You used to 
go in with any sort of problems, and if he could not work out how to get you 
out of the shit, then you were fucked."

After his senior role in the SDS, Lambert rose through the ranks of special 
branch and, in the aftermath of 9/11, founded the Muslim Contact Unit, which 
sought to foster partnerships between police and the Islamic community.

Intimate relationships

He was awarded an MBE for services to policing and retired to start a fresh 
career in academia, with posts at St Andrews and Exeter universities.

'It was my Bob'


In 2011, Lambert's past returned to haunt him. That year Mark Kennedy, another 
police spy, was revealed to have spent seven years infiltrating eco activists. 
He had several intimate relationships with women, including one that lasted six 
years. Kennedy worked for the National Public Order Intelligence Unit, another 
squad dedicated to monitoring protesters and the second, according to the 
Metropolitan police, believed to have used the identities of dead children.

Amid the outcry over Kennedy's deployment, there was a renewed push among 
activists to unmask police infiltrators. It was some of Lambert's old friends 
in London Greenpeace who eventually made the connection, comparing YouTube 
videos of Lambert speeches with grainy photographs of Bob Robinson in the 1980s.

Lambert was giving a talk in a London auditorium when members of the audience 
– veterans from London Greenpeace – confronted him about his undercover past. 
He left the stage and walked out of a side door. Outside, he was stony-faced as 
he was chased down the street by a handful of ageing campaigners. He jumped 
into a taxi and melted into the afternoon traffic.

It was only the start of a cascade of claims to tarnish the senior officer's 
reputation. In June last year, the Green MP Caroline Lucas used a parliamentary 
speech to allege that Lambert planted one of three incendiary devices in 
branches of Debenhams. No one was hurt in the attack on the Harrow store, in 
north-west London, which caused £340,000 worth of damage. Pointing to evidence 
that suggested Lambert planted the device, the MP asked: "Has another 
undercover police officer crossed the line into acting as an agent provocateur?"

At the time Lambert denied the accusation. "It was necessary to create the 
false impression that I was a committed animal rights extremist to gain 
intelligence so as to disrupt serious criminal conspiracies," he said. 
"However, I did not commit serious crime such as 'planting an incendiary device 
at the Harrow store'."

But the following day newspapers carried the story alongside pictures of the 
spy posing as Bob Robinson in the 1980s. Charlotte was leafing through a copy 
of the Daily Mail when she saw the photograph. "It was 'my' Bob, my son's dad," 
she said. "I had not had news of him for approximately 24 years and there was 
his face staring back at me from the paper. I went into shock, I felt like I 
couldn't breathe and I started shaking."

The revelation that Lambert was an undercover officer has psychologically 
traumatised Charlotte, who is one of 11 women suing the Met for trauma suffered 
after developing intimate relationships with undercover police. She sees a 
consultant psychiatrist at the Priory hospital on a weekly basis. "I don't 
understand what I am supposed to have done that I was chosen by the state to be 
treated like this," she said. "I was no threat to national security and what 
was my child – collateral damage?"

Lambert, 60, has previously offered an "unreserved apology" to a second woman 
he had a relationship with while undercover. He also said he regretted 
infiltrating London Greenpeace, a peaceful group. However, he declined to 
comment on the latest allegations, saying they are "the subject of a police and 
IndependentPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission 
investigation and are the subject of proceedings in the high court".

The Met said: "We are not prepared to comment on individual complaints or 
allegations at this stage of the investigation."
 