
Labor unions and law enforcement officials have condemned President-elect 
Donald Trump’s “cruel and baffling” nomination of fast food executiveAndrew 
Puzder for labor secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/andy-puzder-labor-department-hardees-trump-cabinet>
 on Thursday.

“Trump has once again shown how out-of-touch he is with what working Americans 
need,” said Service Employees International Union (SEIU) head Mary Kay Henry, 
calling the appointment “anti-worker extremism”. Trump hurts “working families, 
including those who elected him” with the nomination, she wrote on behalf of 
the union.

Their comments come as decades-old allegations of spousal abuse against Puzder 
have resurfaced, which may further complicate his nomination.

Trump names fast food executive Andy Puzder to head labor department
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/andy-puzder-labor-department-hardees-trump-cabinet>
Labor activists in the Fight for $15 movement said Puzder’s nomination 
signaled a shift away from the progress made during the Obama years.

Carl’s Jr cook Rogelio Hernandez called Puzder, whose company CKE owns the 
chain, “one of the worst fast food CEOs”, adding that his appointment “sends a 
signal to workers that the Trump years are going to be about low pay, wage 
theft, sexual harassment and racial discrimination”.

In a statement announcing the nomination on Thursday, the president-elect said 
Puzder’s “record [of] fighting for workers makes him the idea candidate to 
lead” the department.

“Andy will fight to make American workers safer and more prosperous by 
enforcing fair occupational safety standards and ensuring workers receive the 
benefits they deserve, and he will save small businesses from the crushing 
burdens of unnecessary regulations that are stunting job growth and suppressing 
wages,” Trump said.

But in a forceful indictment of Puzder’s credentials, New York attorney 
general Eric Schneiderman said that under Puzder, CKE “stole” from low-wage 
workers

“Andrew Puzder presided over a fast-food chain that repeatedly stole workers’ 
hard-earned wages,” Schneiderman said in a statement. “The fact that Mr Puzder 
has now reportedly been selected to lead the same agency that uncovered wage 
theft at his restaurants is a cruel and baffling decision by President-elect 
Trump.”

Puzder’s ex-wife Lisa Henning, now Fierstein, accused him of spousal abuse in 
1989. According to theRiverfront Times 
<http://www.riverfronttimes.com/newsblog/2016/12/08/andrew-puzder-trump-pick-for-labor-department-was-accused-of-abusing-wife>
 and theSt Louis Post-Dispatch 
<https://stltoday.newspapers.com/image/139728854#>, Henning said in court 
filings that Puzder “attacked me, choked me, threw me to the floor, hit me in 
the head, pushed his knees into my chest, twisted my arm and dragged me on the 
floor, threw me against a wall, tried to stop my call to 911 and kicked me in 
the lower back”.

Puzder denied <https://stltoday.newspapers.com/image/139728854#> the abuse at 
the time and again later in a deposition for his divorce,calling 
<http://www.riverfronttimes.com/newsblog/2016/12/08/andrew-puzder-trump-pick-for-labor-department-was-accused-of-abusing-wife>
 his ex-wife’s allegations “baseless”.


Trump spokesman Steven Cheung emailed the Guardian a statement which he 
attributed to Fierstein saying that she had long since withdrawn the 
allegations against her former husband.

The Guardian was unable to contact Fierstein directly to confirm this and 
Cheung did not respond to further queries.


The allegations threatened to interrupt Puzder’s work as a prominent lawyer 
for then Missouri governor John Ashcroft’s taskforce on abortion. When news of 
Henning’s accusations were published, Puzder offered to step down from the 
organization because he didn’t “want to be an embarrassment to the governor or 
an impediment to the work of the taskforce”. Puzder helped to write a law 
restricting abortions in the state.

Minnesota congressman Keith Ellison said Puzder was not to be trusted. “How 
can we expect Puzder to do his job and protect workers when his own employees 
are having their wages stolen?” said Ellison. “Good jobs and fair wages aren’t 
in Puzder’s vocabulary.”


Both the congressman and Hernandez, the fast food cook, pointed out the gulf 
between Puzder’s salary and Hernandez’s own wages. “Puzder is paid more in one 
day than we each make in one year working at his restaurant chains, and that’s 
the way he wants to keep it,” Hernandez said.

Ellison concurred: “While he takes home a multimillion-dollar salary, many of 
his own employees are barely getting by.”


Puzder opposes an increased minimum wage and a lower threshold for overtime 
pay, both of which would raise costs at the restaurant company’s main 
businesses: hamburger chains Hardees and Carl’s Jr. Earlier this year the 
executive made headlines when he moved the company headquarters from 
Carpinteria, California, to Nashville, Tennessee, where there is no state tax 
on personal income. In 2012, Puzder’s compensation from CKE was $4.4m.

Puzder also drew controversy last year with Carl’s Jr Super Bowl ads starring 
scantily clad models devouring hamburgers, which he characterized as patriotic 
at the time.

“I like beautiful women eating burgers in bikinis,” he told Entrepreneur 
magazine. “I think it’s very American,” he said. “I used to hear, brands take 
on the personality of the CEO. And I rarely thought that was true, but I think 
this one, in this case, it kind of did take on my personality.”


CKE is a privately held company. In 2013 the company was acquired by Roark 
Capital Group, an Atlanta-based private equity firm named for Howard Roark, the 
leading protagonist in Ayn Rand’s novel The Fountainhead. Rand and her books 
remain significant influences on American libertarians and conservatives.

Not all conservatives were pleased by the nomination, however. The Federation 
for American Immigration Reform (Fair), an anti-immigration group, criticized 
the choice of Puzder based on his support for the eventual citizenship of 
undocumented workers.

“Puzder has served as an executive of a fast food conglomerate – an industry 
that has thrived on low-wage labor, illegal workers, and which has lobbied for 
greater access to foreign guest workers to maximize corporate profits,” Fair 
president Dan Stein wrote.

SEIU’s Henry said the only way forward was solidarity. “Together, workers in 
the Fight for $15 movement have made the kind of economic change America is 
crying out for by paving the way for 20 million people to get a raise,” she 
wrote. “SEIU members will not back down.”

Ellison agreed. “Working people must rise up and fight back against this 
nomination and continue to demand higher wages, overtime pay and good 
benefits,” he said. “They deserve a fair share of the wealth they are creating 
in this country.”
 