
As cleaners hosed down the cobbles of the fish market in the centre of Cannes, 
washing away the slimy leftovers of the morning's trading, a throng gathered 
outside with banners and loudspeakers, calling for a cleansing of a different 
kind.

"We've come here to denounce what's going on inside that conference hall," 
said Jake Freeland, of London's Radical Housing Network, pointing at the 
gleaming concrete fortress of the Palais des Festivals, where the world's 
largest property fair,MIPIM <https://www.mipim.com/>, was underway. "Europe is 
facing a desperate need for housing, with council estates being sold off and 
developers sitting on land, and it's all driven by the excesses of the 
international real estate businesses, happening right here."

Every year, for a week in March, this stretch of the French riviera is 
transformed into a global property trading zone, a souped-up real estate 
supermarket, where whole swathes of cities are put up for sale to the highest 
bidder. From Astana, Kazakhstan, to Zagreb, Croatia, no region is left 
unrepresented by a glowing Perspex fantasy or interactive fly-through animation 
in the sprawling exhibition halls, no investor left unschmoozed by a lavish 
party on a rented yacht.

"People talk about 'the invisible hand of the market', as if it was a kind of 
abstract process," said housing campaigner Rastko Novakovic, as he handed out 
leaflets detailing developers' crimes. "But here it couldn't be more visible."

For this high-octane week, no part of the resort is left untouched as a site 
of deal-clinching and relationship building. Branded marquees line the beach, 
like the advanced parties of a military invasion, while waterside apartments 
are transformed into impromptu sales suites. Street life changes from retiree 
sun-seekers to huddles of portly men in suits and shades, stalking the 
Croisette like a middle-aged Reservoir Dogs, armed with business cards instead 
of guns. Women in improbable heels teeter between tents, promoting the wonders 
of the Krasnodar Region and offering augmented reality experiences on iPads. 
And then there are the yachts – floating multistorey salesrooms stretching up 
to 52 metres long.

"It's a busy year in the port, with long waiting lists for those prime berths, 
which shows market confidence is back," said yacht broker Charles Mead of 
Boatbookings.com, whose boats can be hired for "well over half a million euros" 
for the week. Butting their polished rumps into the harbour, where a security 
cordon protects little tents of champagne and canapes, the yachts, say MIPIM 
veterans, are where the truly profitable relationships are forged. The same 
regulars proudly recount that more champagne is consumed here than during the 
Cannes film festival.

But it is not just an orgy for oligarchs. "You get the entire food chain 
here," said Amanda Baillieu, editor-at-large for Building Design magazine. 
"From the most secretive investor, conducting their dealings from a hilltop 
villa outside Cannes, to the drainage consultant patrolling the harbour in hope 
of some scraps." With a price tag of £1,300 just to enter the exhibition, many 
come here for the week to feed off the concentration of investors and city 
officials without ever stepping inside the trade halls, preferring to conduct 
business in the bar instead.

This year saw more than 20 UK local authorities taking part, the biggest 
presence since the 2008 peak. There was the Leeds city region, "where ideas 
become reality", up against Stoke-on-Trent and Staffordshire, "a low-risk 
investment location". Opposite the vibrant Rio stand, brimming with the 
sun-kissed promise of a $16bn (£9.6bn) investment opportunity, the Bristol and 
Bath region would have looked subdued, if it was not for the architect-mayor 
George Ferguson in his trademark red trousers.

"Bristol is the best place to invest outside overheated London, and we're 
consistently top of the world's most liveable cities," he said, beaming. "We're 
benefitting from strong Chinese investment at the moment and there's a lot of 
international interest in our enterprise zone."

Public sector attendance at MIPIM has long been contentious, with budgets for 
local authorities' presence at the fair often stretching up to £500,000. The 
symbolism of council chiefs on a champagne-soaked jamboree, as swingeing cuts 
bite back home, has not gone unnoticed, prompting most authorities to find 
private-sector funding and trumpet visible results from the week of networking. 
"It's a sound investment," said Ferguson. "We meet more people here in one room 
in one afternoon than you could devise in a month in the UK."

"It's not costing the public purse a penny," said Robin Wales, mayor of 
Newham, sitting in front of a wall declaring "East London has arrived", as 
cakes iced with the names of developers were handed around the Hounslow stand 
next door. "It's all paid for by our development partners."

Back outside in the afternoon sun, as the gathering of protestors began their 
anti-MIPIM tribunal, these very same developers were being put on trial. 
Members of the European Action Coalition for the Right toHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and the City, from 13 different 
countries, took turns to accuse local councils of evicting tenants, replacing 
social housing units with luxury flats and reneging on promised affordable 
quotas.

"The boroughs might be proud that they're not here at the public's expense," 
said Freeland, "but that's precisely the problem. They're in the pockets of the 
investors, and they've come here to sell off our city. It's time to end 25 
years of MIPIMism."
 