
Anthony Pilkington struck a superb 25-yard winner as Cardiff City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> twice came from behind at 
Ashton Gate.

It was his second goal of the match and came five minutes from the end as 
improving Cardiff made it back-to-back league wins while leaving their 
opponents in deeper trouble.

Lee Johnson’s side have now lost 10 of their past 11 Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> matches – with their most 
recent victory coming against Ipswich Town at the start of December – and have 
tumbled down the league standings.

“Angry, frustrated and vexed are words that come to mind,” said Johnson. “We 
have to see that out, but there was a fear to our play and we have lost to a 
fantastic strike.

“Cardiff did not have to work that hard to win. I haven’t seen the penalty 
incident back, but I had no complaints at the time.

“We have had some excellent individual performances, but as a team we panicked 
in the closing stages and that is not acceptable.

“The players have to look hard at themselves, and the same applies to me. I 
have faith in my squad and I am sure we will turn things around. But words are 
cheap.

“There is no one hurting more than me. We work hard every day and we stick 
together.

“We have scored twice at home again and lost.”

Despite a heated atmosphere for the noon kick-off, the first half was low-key. 
Cardiff registered the first goal attempt after eight minutes, when Peter 
Whittingham’s fierce shot from distance was deflected over the bar.

Joe Bryan had a shot blocked by Sol Bamba as the hosts began to press and in 
the 25th minute he forced a diving save from Brian Murphy with a low 25-yard 
drive.

All the action came in the second half. Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> went ahead in the 51st 
minute when Bryan’s volley from just outside the area hit the crossbar and then 
struck the back of the keeper Murphy, who conceded an unfortunate own goal.

The home side looked comfortable until the 74th minute, when Mark Little gave 
away an unnecessary penalty by tripping Joe Ralls, with the ball heading away 
from goal. Pilkington drove the spot-kick down the middle to equalise.

Tammy Abraham’s 18th goal of the season, an overhead kick from a Milan Djuric 
knock-down, put the Robins back in front in the 78th minute.

Nottingham Forest confirm collapse of takeover deal with US investors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/nottingham-forest-takeover-deal-collapse>
But substitute Kadeem Harris got the better of Bryan at the far post to head a 
second Cardiff equaliser eight minutes from time before Pilkington found the 
top corner with a right-footed screamer three minutes later to earn the 
visitors all three points.

The Cardiff manager, Neil Warnock, said: “At 2-1 down I was stood there 
thinking ‘why am I still doing this job at 68?’ At 3-2 up I remembered exactly 
why I am doing it!

“It’s always special beating Bristol City for me, because you have to work 
hard for anything you get at Ashton Gate.

“The winning goal was a fantastic strike and I haven’t run so fast in ages. 
I’m delighted for our fans, who contributed to a brilliant atmosphere.

“We still need five or six players to get to where we want to be. I am meeting 
the chairman tonight and hope he will be in a good mood.

“But I am delighted with what the current squad are doing. The players are 
buying into how I want to play and we are making progress.”
 