
The family of Anthony Foley, the Munster head coach who died suddenly in a 
Paris hotel on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-ireland-rugby-union>
 hours before a Champions Cup match against Racing 92 at the age of 42, issued 
a statement on Monday saying they had been “plunged deep into an 
incomprehensible darkness”.

A date for the funeral of Foley, a former Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> and Ireland captain whose death 
generated tributes from leading figures throughout the game, has not been set 
because the cause of his death has yet to be determined.

“The family of Anthony Foley wishes to extend its deepest appreciation to the 
endless legions of friends and the wider rugby family here and abroad for the 
huge outpouring of support and sympathy since Anthony’s tragic and most 
untimely passing at the weekend,” the statement began. “With Anthony’s passing 
we have ultimately lost an amazing, adoring and loving father and husband; an 
equally caring, loyal and devoted son and brother; a central and go-to figure 
for the wider Foley and Hogan families.

Anthony Foley obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/anthony-foley-obituary> 
“Our anguish at the sudden loss of Anthony is bottomless. We have been plunged 
deep into an incomprehensible darkness and sense of loss that we must work our 
way through over the coming days, weeks, months and years.

“We know, too, that his sudden death has brought the rugby worlds of Shannon 
RFC, Munster, Ireland and much further afield crashing down. You have lost a 
former player, coach, friend and all-round inspiration – your and our hero 
both. We mourn his loss together.”

Wales, meanwhile, announce their squad for the four autumn internationals, but 
will need reinforcements for the first match against Australia on 5 November. 
Their England-based players will not be released by Premiership Rugby for the 
game with the Wallabies because it falls outside the official international 
window.

It means George North, Jamie Roberts, Luke Charteris, Taulupe Faletau, who 
would probably not have been involved anyway as he recovers from a knee injury, 
Ross Moriarty and Rhys Priestland will not be available for the interim head 
coach Rob Howley’s first match since Warren Gatland started his sabbatical to 
focus on the British & Irish Lions tour to New Zealand.

Premiership Rugby’s policy, which was agreed unanimously by the 12 clubs, is 
that non-England internationals are not released for Tests outside the official 
window under any circumstances. England have access to their players for fourth 
internationals as part of the £200m agreement with the clubs.

Better news for Howley was that his captain, Sam Warburton, who this month had 
surgery on a fractured cheekbone, is in line to return forCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> on Friday against Pau in the 
European Challenge Cup. The Blues made a winning start to their campaign at 
Bristol last week and the Ashton Gate club have signed the former England 
fly-half Shane Geraghty from London Irish on a season‑long deal. The 
Premiership’s bottom club have a crisis at No10 with Tusi Pisi, Adrian Jarvis, 
Gavin Henson and Callum Sheedy all injured.
 