
A police operation that led to the fatal shooting of an unarmed man was based 
on out-of-date intelligence and carried out by senior officers who had 
“significant problems” with their competency, a public inquiry has heard.

Anthony Grainger, 36, was shot through the chest as he sat in a car in the 
village of Culcheth, Cheshire, on the evening of 3 March 2012. Detectives 
believed he and two others were planning to hold up a supermarket and had 
access to firearms.

On the first day of a public inquiry into the shooting, Liverpool crown court 
heard that four of the five senior officers in charge of the operation did not 
have the correct training, and one had failed a firearms course.

Jason Beer QC, counsel to the inquiry, said: “The position is that of the five 
officers in a command role on the 3rd of March 2012 there are problems with the 
operation and occupational competency of four of them.”

The inquiry, led by Judge Thomas Teague QC, heard that the Independent Police 
Complaints Commission (IPCC) had identified 16 failings byGreater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> police before the shooting.

In findings revealed for the first time on Tuesday, the IPCC concluding that 
the briefings given to firearms officers prior to the operation were not 
sufficient and relied heavily on out-of-date intelligence.

That intelligence “did not support a reasonable view” that Grainger was 
violent, possessed firearms or was involved in armed robberies, the IPCC found 
in 2013, and it questioned whether the tactics used were “necessary or 
proportionate to the risk in this situation”.

It also found that the police marksmen had “conferred over their witness 
statements” despite repeated advice not to do so.

Beer told the inquiry 15 other firearms officers involved in Operation Shire 
had refused to have their testimony recorded on tape and instead provided 
separate written statements to the IPCC.

In a written statement provided to the inquiry, an officer referred to as Q9 
said he decided to shoot Grainger when he saw the suspect lower his right hand 
“in direct contradiction of [my] instruction”. It was an “obvious 
interpretation” that he was reaching for a firearm, the officer said.

Q9’s statement, written by his counsel, Hugh Davies QC, added: “[Q9’s] 
position remains as it always has: based on the briefing, the occupants of the 
car were professional criminals with access to firearms and a willingness to 
use them to execute a robbery of secure cash locations.

“The timing of the decision to arrest was not that of Q9, but demonstrably 
sought to minimise the threat to members of the public from such serious and 
organised crime.

“Q9 had to make a decision as to whether to discharge a weapon in less time 
than is taken to read a short sentence. Had Mr Grainger been armed and a 
different decision taken by Q9 – if he had hesitated – a realistic outcome is 
that a police officer would have been shot.”

The inquiry heard that Grainger had previous convictions for violent offences 
and had been sentenced to 18 months in prison for reversing into and ramming a 
police car in an attempted getaway in a stolen vehicle.

The inquiry heard that Q9 fired a single round of his Heckler and Koch MP5 
through the windscreen of the red Audi, striking Grainger fatally in the chest. 
Two other rounds were fired at the car’s tyres and a CS gas canister was thrown 
into the vehicle by another officer.

Detectives believed Grainger and two others were planning an armed robbery of 
a Sainsbury’s supermarket. However, no firearms were found in the vehicle or at 
any property connected to Grainger.

Q9 is due to give evidence from behind a screen later in the inquiry, having 
been granted anonymity by the judge. Last year the attorney general ruled that 
officers giving evidence at the inquiry would not be immune from criminal 
prosecution.

The inquiry was ordered in March last year by Theresa May, then the home 
secretary. The Crown Prosecution Service decided in January 2014 not to 
prosecute Q9 over the shooting.

The 14-week inquiry – only the second of its kind into a fatal police shooting 
– will hear evidence from about 100 witnesses, including 16 serving or former 
police officers who will give evidence in closed sessions in the absence of the 
public and press.

In a written statement to the inquiry, Grainger’s mother Marina, stepfather 
John Schofield and brother Stuart Grainger said the shooting had been 
“absolutely devastating” for the family and they feared a police cover-up.

Their counsel, Leslie Thomas QC, said: “The family recognise that some 
information cannot be revealed, for proper legal reasons. But those reasons 
should not be misused.

“It is only if the inquiry ensures that as much relevant material as possible 
is made public, that the family and wider public may have confidence that the 
police have finally been held to account.”

 