
Less than a minute after replacing Ivan Rakitic during a strangely discordant 
el clásico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/barcelona-v-real-madrid-el-clasico-live>
, Andrés Iniesta had Barcelona humming sweeter harmonies again. His first act 
was to float to the centre, collect from Gerard Piqué and exchange a wall-pass 
with Lionel Messi – bam, bam, bam – which started a 31-pass move. His next was 
to set up Neymar for a chance he smashed over. Later he steered a glorious eye 
of the needle ball that Messi, with the match at his feet, screwed wide.

True, Madrid stole an equaliser at the death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 but with Iniesta back from injury as Barcelona’s conductor and collagen the 
team looked whole again. Of course his technical and physical talents remain 
worldy, even at 32, but it was his football intelligence – that ability to find 
space and time amid the crush and rush, the right pass, the right everything – 
that really stood out. No wonder the Belgium manager, Roberto Martínez, 
suggested afterwards that Iniesta had a “third eye”.

Real Madrid and Sergio Ramos grab point at the last from Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Most of us understand what supremely high football IQ looks like from watching 
and playing for years. But, intriguingly, a group of Scandinavian scientists 
based mostly at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm – one of the world’s most 
prestigious medical universities – are now convinced they can identify it, and 
break down its constituent parts, merely from brain games in a laboratory.

Their initial research was based on testing the cognitive abilities of 57 men 
and women footballers of similar ages and education levels from the top three 
divisions in Sweden. Their aim was simple: to determine each player’s 
“executive function” – in layman’s terms, their skills in areas such as 
“problem-solving, planning – multitasking, cognitive-flexibility and ability to 
deal with novelty”. The academics stress that this is different from IQ. During 
one test, for instance, players had to draw a series of non‑repeating geometric 
patterns on paper to test their “design fluency”, a well‑known examination of 
creativity under pressure.

This sounds about as relevant to professional football as proficiency at 
juggling oranges is to owning a juice bar. Yet the academics’ paper, Executive 
Functions Predict the Success of Top‑Soccer Players, produced two surprising 
findings.

First, both senior-elite and semi-elite players had significantly better 
measures of executive function compared to the normal population – with elite 
men and women outperforming the semi-elite. Second, executive function was able 
to predict which players would do better in terms of goals and assists over the 
following two years.

You might be sceptical. If so, it might reassure you to know that Iniesta and 
Xavi were as well when the scientists turned up to test them. Professor Predrag 
Petrovic tells me that both men had played the previous day and had been 
training and at various functions before the test, so they were entitled not to 
be at their sharpest. Yet Iniesta was in the top 0.1% for design fluency and 
also scored incredibly well in what neuroscientists call “inhibition” – the 
ability to alter one’s learned behavioural responses in a way that makes it 
easier to complete a particular task. Xavi, too, had very high scores in tasks 
that involved scanning ability, analysis and imagination.

Here's a thought: how do footballers do what they do? | Gregg Bakowski
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/heres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do>
There is surely something here for clubs. An obvious starting point would be 
to consider executive-function tests on smaller youth-team members that may 
alert them to football intelligence that may be muscled out. As the 
psychologist Torbjorn Vestberg starkly put it: “Are we sure a 16-year-old 
Iniesta would have made it in Swedish or English football, which often prizes 
physicality at that age?”

Such tests might also be used as part of a broader medical, allowing clubs to 
assess players’ cognitive strengths and weakness. Perhaps even – and this is a 
stretch – to see whether by training of executive function outside the football 
field, by using computer-assisted training, it can make better players.

Blake Wooster, co-founder of the football consultancy 21st Club, which works 
with several leading sides, believes such research may yet be a “quantum leap”. 
He does, however, also point to another way to measure game intelligence: using 
match film and analytics. “Imagine looking at situations where a winger has the 
option to cross, cut it back or shoot,” he says. “We can already assess the 
impact of the player’s decision on the probability of a goal being scored, 
which could translate into a measure of game intelligence.”

As the scientists put the finishing touches to a new paper on whether 
executive function can strongly predict the success of 12- to 19-year-old 
footballers, meanwhile, Morten Kringelbach, a professor at the University of 
Oxford, admits he is surprised there is not more interest from clubs. “Very few 
are taking this seriously yet,” he says. “They are putting money into scouting 
and player recruitment but here is a potential gold mine.”

Perhaps it is because the methods of using shapes, dots and lab tests to 
identify football intelligence are a little esoteric. But Iniesta’s recent book,
The Artist <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artist-being-iniesta.html>, tells 
the story of Tonny Bruins – Johan Cruyff’s right‑hand man – teaching the 
concept of total football by using shapes and a whiteboard. Eventually a player 
asks: “Is that it?” And Bruins, with his basic Spanish, replies: “Yes, it’s 
everything. Football is simple. You divide the pitch into triangles and the key 
is always to have the ball and to create superiority.”

And Iniesta does it better than almost anyone.
 