
My friend and colleague Arnold (originally Arno) Paucker, who has died aged 
95, was a distinguished scholar of German-Jewish history and literature, having 
arrived in Britain as a refugee from Nazi-occupied Europe.

He was born into a middle-class family in Berlin, to Wilhelm, a manufacturer 
of leather goods and Minna, who had inherited a tobacco business. Arnold became 
politically active at an early age. As a schoolboy at the end of the Weimar 
Republic he joined the Social Democratic Republican defence league, the Iron 
Front, and, once this was banned after the Nazi takeover, the leftwing Zionist 
Werkleute (Labouring People) and later the underground Communist Youth League. 
When life became too dangerous, his parents sent him to Palestine, where he 
boarded at the progressive Ben Shemen school.

In 1941 he volunteered for the British army, in which he served for five 
years. As a member of the Eighth Army he took part in the liberation of Italy. 
A formative experience for him was the celebration of VE Day in Bologna with 
Italian partisans. A further step in his life was the encounter in Florence 
with an English art student, Pauline Pond, whom he married in 1949.

Though never losing his love of Italy, he was happy to move to England with 
Pauline and to embrace his new home. He never regarded himself as an exile: 
“When I return toGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>,” he 
wrote, “I feel that I am visiting a foreign country where it so happens that I 
speak the language rather well.” It was in England that he realised his 
academic yearnings, studying at Birmingham University, achieving a first in 
German, and then an MA at Nottingham University, his research subject being 
Yiddish versions of German popular literature.

His chance to become a historian came with the surprise invitation to become 
director of theLeo Baeck Institute London <http://www.leobaeck.co.uk/>, 
dedicated to rescuing and recording the history and culture of German Jewry. On 
the retirement of the first chairman, Robert Weltsch, he took over the 
institute’s Year Book, turning it from a compendium of memoirs into a scholarly 
journal and the leading international medium on its topic. He was awarded a PhD 
from Heidelberg University on the basis of his publications.

I became involved in the institute in the 1970s, becoming its chairman in 
1997. We had a harmonious partnership, cemented by Arnold’s belief that 
colleagues should be friends and strengthened by his expert editorship.

His work was recognised by being appointed OBE in 2011, by the award of the 
German Federal Cross of Merit and by an honorary doctorate from the University 
of Potsdam.

He is survived by Pauline and by his niece, Alice.
 