
The Sybil Fawlty degree course in stating the bleedin’ obvious has just 
welcomed a new student. Step forward Olivier Giroud, captain for the day at 
Preston and once again required to provide a late rescue act. “We need to start 
games better,” the scorer of Arsenal’s 89th-minute winner said. “We were not in 
the game first half and we set out with the idea of trying to make a better 
start than wehad at Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
.”

There is something endearingly Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> about taking the best part of an 
hour to wake up but still having the class to come back from a deficit, even a 
three-goal one, as had been the case at Dean Court the previous week. Preston 
were never that far in front, though they could have been, and Arsène Wenger 
did not beat about the bushwhen asked if he had given his players a rocket at 
half-time. “I was angry,” he admitted. “We are a top-level Premier League side 
and we were being dominated.”

Aaron Ramsey, who began the fightback within a minute of the restart, in a 
clear sign that Wenger’s words had an effect, confirmed that Arsenal needed to 
be shaken out of their lethargy. “I’ve played in the Championship and I know 
how difficult the games can be, yet still Preston took us by surprise,” the 
former Cardiff midfielder said. “At first we couldn’t match their energy and 
commitment but thankfully we showed a different attitude after the break.”

In part Arsenal were able to do that because Preston had not capitalised on 
their chances, Callum Robinson and Jordan Hugill in particular wasting one 
glorious opportunity to put the Championship side two-up in the first half 
after Aiden McGeady’s marvellous ball skills had created the opening for the 
former to score the first goal.

But the odd aspect to Arsenal’s near-identical performances in their past two 
games is that they survived the now obligatory Cup reshuffle.

Wenger made five changes for the Preston game and apart from Danny Welbeck, 
whose 10 minutes on the pitch at the end amounted to his first appearance in 
eight months, he did not really have any experienced cavalry on the bench to 
send on if the situation needed saving. The character that Giroud claimed had 
saved the day had to be found from within, and Arsenal managed it in the nick 
of time, though it will obviously be a relief when warriors such as Mesut Özil 
and Theo Walcott return to help prevent their side finding themselves on the 
back foot so often.

The Preston manager, Simon Grayson, thought his side deserved more from the 
game, which was fair enough after a sparkling first half, though as Arsenal 
were just as dominant in the second a replay would have sufficed. The final 
result was no injustice, though Preston will be forever kicking themselves for 
not making life harder for their opponents when they were on top. Grayson had 
challenged his players to make themselves proud, and at least they managed that.

“We gave Arsenal a game,” he said. “We were brave, we weren’t there just to 
make up the numbers. We wanted to have a go at them and we did.”

Arsenal break Preston hearts as Olivier Giroud scores last-minute winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/preston-north-end-arsenal-fa-cup-match-report> 