
Triggering article 50 without consulting the devolved assemblies in Cardiff, 
Edinburgh and Belfast would dissolve “the glue” that holds together the UK’s 
unwritten constitution, the supreme court has been told.


On the final day of the four-day hearing, the 11 justices have been hearing 
arguments about the significance of theSewel convention 
<http://www.gov.scot/About/Government/Sewel/KeyFacts>.


The convention says that if Westminster is introducing legislation on issues 
that have been devolved it “normally” has to seek the consent of the devolved 
assemblies in Edinburgh, Belfast and Cardiff.

Brexit: article 50 supreme court hearing final day – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/08/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-four-live-updates>
Richard Gordon QC, for the Welsh government, told the court: “The force of the 
Sewel convention is not its legal enforceability but that it’s a dialogue 
between legislatures.


“If the [UK government’s] prerogative powers can be used to short-circuit this 
dialogue, it’s to ignore the modern dynamic which we now have.


“A convention is a very important force in our society and it’s like the glue 
which can only hold an unwritten constitution together.”


Gordon dismissed the UK government’s argument that the Referendum Act 2015 
gave ministers authorisation to trigger article 50, which formally signals the 
UK’s intention to leave the EU.


“The Referendum Act has nothing to do with the issues in this case,” he said. 
“It’s a statute that had died. It has fulfilled its purpose. You cannot revive 
a corpse by tearing up the death certificate.”

And turning to the government’s contention that it relies on residual royal 
prerogative powers, Gordon said: “There’s no existing prerogative powers … a 
child of six could understand this.”


James Wolffe QC, Scotland’s lord advocate, also raised the importance of the 
Sewel convention, saying it should not be ignored even if it does not amount to 
a veto for Holyrood.


“The convention constrains the UK parliament in order to respect the authority 
of the Scottish parliament,” Wolffe said.


The Westminster parliament might legislate to trigger Brexit negotiations 
without the consent of the Scottish parliament, Wolffe anticipated.


“If the consent would not be given, it would be for the UK parliament to 
legislate in the face of a refusal of consent. There would be no legal sanction 
if the UK parliament chose to do so,” Wolffe said.

Manjit Gill QC, who represents the children of European Economic Area 
nationals who could be directly affected by Brexit, dismissed the government’s 
claim to possess prerogative powers to withdraw from the EU without legislation 
in parliament as an “outlandish proposition”.

“As for [the government’s argument] that parliament can stand up for itself,” 
he added, “why should they have to react to what could be politically 
mischievous conduct by a usurping executive? This is not time to turn to a 
flexible constitution. It’s a slippery slope.” The court should not let go of 
the “bedrock” of accepted constitutional conduct.

Gill said the children he represents were in danger of being told to “pack 
their bags and go” when Brexit occurred. “This case is not a hard case,” he 
said. “Some people [by which he means the government] are trying to make it 
hard and putting their counsel [James Eadie QC] in a position of contortions 
where they say contradictory things.

“No one thought that the 2015 Referendum Act was ever intended to confer 
prerogative powers [on the government to withdraw from the EU without reference 
to parliament]. The reason for this is a political point because no one ever 
thought there was going to be a leave vote. That’s why there was no reason to 
consider prerogative powers.”

Earlier Helen Mountfield QC, for the crowdfunded People’s Challenge, accused 
the government of fictional creativity and myth-making in its assertion of its 
prerogative powers. “It’s much like attempts to catch the Loch Ness monster,” 
she suggested. “Because no one has caught it, it is said to be assumed to still 
roam free.”

The claim had been brought, she explained, “not as an attempt to persuade 
judges to usurp the powers of any other arm of the state in an illegitimate way 
or to persuade the court to undertake judicial law-making.” Nor is the court 
being asked to decide whether or not the UK should leave the EU. It is simply 
about whether the government’s plan to trigger Brexit “is a lawful act in the 
absence of express authority”.

The hearing continues.
 