
To appreciate the immense emotional gulf between the British and the 
Continental experience of World War II you only have to compare two recent 
biographical films by directors now in their mid-50s - John Boorman's Hope and 
Glory and Louis Malle's Au Revoir Les Enfants (Curzon-Mayfair, PG).

Boorman looks back truthfully and with guiltless affection to a time when 
British communities were united by the Blitz and shared hardship, when no one 
got up to anything more wicked than a little dabbling in the black market and 
adultery with glamorous allied servicemen, and when children willed friendly 
bombs to fall on their schools. There is much that is universally human in 
Boorman's nostalgic film but there is also a general absence of 'Le Chagrin et 
la Pitie'. He did not have to ponder exemplary careers ranging from the craven 
collaboration of Pierre Laval to the courageous resistance of Jean Moulin, that 
Europeans and Scandinavians must confront when reviewing the war years.

Malle's subtly detailed movie takes place in occupied France during January 
1944, less than six months before D-Day, at a school for the sons of wealthy 
Catholics outside Fontainebleau. The crowded dormitories, poor food, freezing 
classrooms and stern discipline suggest the world of Dickens. The central 
relationship, however, contains hints of Alan Fournier's Le Grand Meaulnes.

When a new boy called Jean Bonnet is introduced into a class of 12-year-olds, 
he is made the object of practical jokes and bullying despite a special request 
from the priests that he be treated with kindness. Initially the brightest lad 
in the class, Julien Quentin, joins in, to ingratiate himself with his fellows 
and because he recognises in the clever, scholarly Jean an academic rival.

But gradually the two become friends, sharing an interest in music (in a 
lovely scene the pair play a boogie-woogie piano duet) and literature. And 
Julien discovers that this anxious outsider, posing as a protestant, is in fact 
Jean Kippelstein, one of three Jewish boys being hidden by the fathers - though 
precisely what a Jew is he cannot understand.

For much of the way, Malle appears merely to be creating a vivid portrait of 
an enclosed community, its essential austerity simply intensified by war 
conditions. The occupation is resented, certainly, and this is expressed 
through a superior distaste for the Boche. Yet schoolboys can unthinkingly echo 
their parents prejudices - 'At least Petain knows how to get along with the 
Krauts,' one says; 'Better Krauts than Jews or Reds,' says another.

The occupying power apparently represents little threat to the schoolboys. A 
young German soldier asks one of theteachers to hear his confession. Lost in 
the forest on a boy-scout expedition, Jean and Julien are brought safely home 
by a German patrol. When a pair of vicious, anti-Semitic French militiamen 
demand to see identity cards in a smart restaurant (one of the most brilliantly 
orchestrated sequences in the film), a drunken German officer orders them to 
leave, largely to impress the middle-class French diners.

Eventually, of course, the Gestapo come, tipped off by an informer. But even 
here the most violent act by their leader is to snatch offensive allied flags 
from a war-map on the classroom wall, and he gives the assembled boys a lecture 
on German discipline. The ending is quiet, understated and shattering. Denying 
us the easy comfort of tears, Malle makes us share a memory that has haunted 
him for over 40 years, a memory that must have become intensified over the 
years, as Julien increasingly understands the background from which Jean came, 
the destination to which he was being sent, and the historical circumstances 
that made such a tragedy possible. This can never be exorcised.

Au Revoir Les Enfants is not only the best movie on the subject of the 
Occupation since Malle's own Lacombe Lucien: it is also one of the best 
pictures ever made about childhood, and the finest French film for several 
years. The performances that Malle has drawn from Gaspard Manesse and Raphael 
Fejto as Julien and Jean are not to be faulted.
 