
Myanmar leader Aung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> accused the international 
community on Friday of stoking resentment between Buddhists and Muslims in the 
country’s northwest, where an army crackdown has killed at least 86 people and 
sent 10,000 fleeing to Bangladesh.


Aung San Suu Kyi appealed for understanding of her nation’s ethnic 
complexities, and said the world should not forget the military operation was 
launched in response to attacks on security forces that the government has 
blamed on Muslim insurgents.

‘It will blow up’: fears Myanmar's deadly crackdown on Muslims will spiral out 
of control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/myanmar-deadly-crackdown-muslims-rohingya>
 “I would appreciate it so much if the international community would help us 
to maintain peace and stability, and to make progress in building better 
relations between the two communities, instead of always drumming up cause for 
bigger fires of resentment,” Aung San Suu Kyi told Singapore state-owned 
broadcaster Channel News Asia during a visit to the city-state.

 “It doesn’t help if everybody is just concentrating on the negative side of 
the situation, in spite of the fact that there were attacks against police 
outposts.”

The violence in the northwest poses the biggest challenge so far to Aung San 
Suu Kyi’s eight-month-old government, and has renewed international criticism 
that the Nobel Peace Prize winner has done too little to help the country’s
Rohingya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> Muslim minority.

Her comments come as Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> 
said Myanmar’s treatment of the Rohingya amounted to “ethnic cleansing”.

“The fact that only one particular ethnicity is being driven out is by 
definition ethnic cleansing,” Malaysia’s foreign ministry said in a statement.

“This practice must stop, and must be stopped immediately in order to bring 
back security and stability to the Southeast Asian region.”

Muslim-majority Malaysia has been increasingly critical of Myanmar’s handling 
of violence in northern Rakhine state.

 Soldiers have poured into the north of Rakhine State, close to the frontier 
with Bangladesh, after attacks on border posts on 9 October that killed nine 
police officers. Humanitarian aid has been cut off to the area, which is closed 
to outside observers.

 Myanmar’s military and the government have rejected allegations by residents 
and human rights groups that soldiers have raped Rohingya women, burned houses 
and killed civilians during the operation.

Aung San Suu Kyi’s remarks came as a commission led by former United Nations 
chief Kofi Annan arrived in the state, where ethnic Rakhine Buddhists and 
Rohingya Muslims have lived separately since clashes in 2012 in which more than 
100 people were killed.

Despite often having lived in Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> for generations, most of the 
country’s 1.1 million Rohingya are denied citizenship, freedom of movement and 
access to basic services such as healthcare and education.

 The UN’s human rights agency said this week that abuses suffered by the 
Rohingya may amount to a crimes against humanity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/rohingya-flee-to-bangladesh-to-escape-myanmar-military-strikes>
, repeating a statement it first made in a June report.

 The Rohingya are not among the 135 ethnic groups recognised by law in 
Myanmar, where many majority Buddhists refer to them as “Bengalis” to indicate 
they regard them as illegal immigrants from Bangladesh.

 In northern Rakhine, one of the poorest parts of the country, Muslims 
outnumber the ethnic Rakhine population.

 “In the Rakhine, it’s not just the Muslims who are nervous and worried,” said 
Suu Kyi. “The Rakhine are worried too. They are worried about the fact that 
they are shrinking as a Rakhine population, percentage-wise.”

 UN officials said this week more than 10,000 people have fled the recent 
fighting to Bangladesh.

 There are continuing reports of people fleeing across the river border in 
flimsy boats, bringing accounts of razed villages, uprooted communities and 
separated families.

 Still, Aung San Suu Kyi said the government has “managed to keep the 
situation under control and to calm it down”.
 