
The Swiss town of Davos might seem like an unlikely place for a revolution but 
that was the hot topic for those there to attend theWorld Economic Forum  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>last month.

“We stand on the brink of a technological revolution that will fundamentally 
alter the way we live, work and relate to one another,”wrote the economist, 
engineer and founder of the World Economic Forum, Klaus Schwab 
<http://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond>
. “In its scale, scope, and complexity, the transformation will be unlike 
anything humankind has experienced before.”

Dubbed the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0, it is a term to 
describe a world in which machines interact and respond intelligently to the 
physical environment. The Internet of Things, artificial intelligence and data 
science are current technologies that will play major roles in the revolution.

“What people can start expecting is a more responsive environment,” says Kevin 
Bloch, the chief technology officer at the tech company Cisco Australia. “It’s 
responsive because we’re measuring and collecting data then making decisions on 
that data to change the actual city itself.”

Bloch says people monitoring real-time traffic conditions on Google Maps, 
technology that’s already readily available, is an early and small example of 
responsive technology. With computers integrated into every piece of physical 
infrastructure, machines adapt to human behaviour and physical conditions to 
provide convenience, feedback and efficiency.

An emerging example is traffic lights automatically adjusting to divert 
vehicles to less congested areas. Human behaviour feeds into machines, machines 
respond and human behaviour is altered – a system that Bloch calls a “closed 
loop”.

“Today we’re in very much an open loop – something happens, a human makes a 
decision and that’s it,” he says. “In the future, we’re moving to what I call a 
closed loop environment, where the human will have data coming to it telling 
you – don’t go this way, go that way, or panic, somebody’s just died over here 
– all sorts of things can start coming to you without actually humans 
intervening in it.

Davos 2016: it's time to talk about gender inequality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/jan/28/davos-2016-its-time-to-talk-about-gender-inequality>
“You go to watch a sports game. Because there are 70,000 people all going to 
the one stadium, the cost of parking will dynamically go up.

“At the end of that afternoon, because it knows that people are leaving, the 
cost of parking will dynamically drop.

“The actual city itself starts telling you [how to optimise] rather than you 
just blindly doing what you’ve been doing for the last 100 years.

“That’s what they call cognitive systems, autonomous intelligence or 
artificial intelligence, which starts making the city even smarter than, 
perhaps, humans are.”

Energy consumption and pollution are ripe for reduction with responsive 
technology. For example, smart street lights would intelligently work out the 
number of people in close proximity and what they’re doing to adjust how much 
illumination is required.

Driverless cars would drive with efficiency unmatched by humans, who have 
pesky tendencies to accelerate fast, brake hard, lose concentration and be 
distracted by the children.

At home, plants would receive exactly the correct amount of water needed, with 
the pot keeping track of the state of the soil, atmospheric conditions and time 
of day. Water wastage would be minimised with an entire city of smart plants.

There are already examples of smart cities around the world that demonstrate 
the fruits of the fourth industrial revolution. Barcelona’sCityOS 
<http://ibarcelona.bcn.cat/en/o-government/city-os> technology platform 
constantly uses real-time data feedback from the urban environment to regulate 
resources energy consumption, water use and waste management. South Korea’s
Songdo <http://songdoibd.com/> business district was created from scratch to 
have intelligence built into all its infrastructure.

But, Bloch says, Australian cities need to “giddy-up” to compete 
internationally, with bureaucracy and inertia threatening innovation.

“It’s a people and business model problem,” he says. “That is why it takes a 
bit more time. For example, in Sydney, who wants the problem? Who’s going to 
lead?

“What we’re finding is, actually, the people who are running ahead of the 
small councils and who are more autonomous and can make decisions, likeAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> for example, made 
decisions quite quickly and pulled their various people together.”

Cisco, as part of its push for smart cities, designated Adelaide a “lighthouse 
city” 
<http://www.theleadsouthaustralia.com.au/industries/technology/cisco-names-adelaide-as-first-lighthouse-city-in-australia/>
 last year. Adelaide city officials and businesses now have access to resources 
from the tech company to accelerate the automation of urban infrastructure.

With the government’s blessing, the private sector has been actively deploying 
responsive technology in Adelaide. The US firm Sensity has piloted 
sensor-enabled parking and smart street lighting, while Australian internet 
provider iiNet will roll out public Wi-Fi. In November,Cisco opened a Smart 
City Studio 
<http://www.iothub.com.au/news/cisco-launches-smart-city-studio-in-adelaide-412336>
 in the heart of the central business district that will “identify and generate 
commercial opportunities ... and support their endeavours to build compelling 
smart city solutions”, according to Adelaide city council.

At the CSIRO, a group of industry 4.0 experts are excited about the 
possibilities for Australia.

Dr Elliot Duff, a product program manager at the CSIRO, compares the way his 
field of expertise, robotics, has changed with the arrival of the fourth 
industrial revolution.

“The new generation of manufacturing, which is the agile manufacturing of the 
future, is about mass customisation rather than mass production,” Duff says. 
“You’re not building the same thing over and over again. You may even be 
building one-offs.”

A senior research scientist at the CSIRO, Nico Adams, says customised and 
intelligent manufacturing is an issue for all industries and lessons learnt 
from the multinationals could help small to medium-sized Australian businesses 
grappling with industry 4.0.

“We found very, very similar problems replicated no matter where we looked,” 
Adams says. “That led us to take a more general look into how Australian 
companies use ICT [information and communications technology] in their 
business.”

We can’t allow the tech giants to rule smart cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/25/we-cant-allow-the-tech-giants-to-rule-smart-cities>
There could be drawbacks to the revolution. Just as previous industrial 
revolutions provoked fear about loss of jobs to technology, deterioration in 
human relationships, urban decay and environmental degradation in the 19th 
century, similar anxieties are also stoked by the fourth industrial revolution.

Schwab warns that “inequality represents the greatest societal concern 
associated with the fourth industrial revolution” as the biggest beneficiaries 
are the ones with contributing “intellectual and physical capital – the 
innovators, shareholders, and investors”. Those purely providing labour may 
find themselves dispensable and vulnerable.

Surprisingly, technology executive Bloch says all the worries are justified.

“We should fear it,” he says. “Because if you don’t fear it, then you do 
nothing about it. You get complacent and then, all of a sudden, you get 
surprised. It’s a healthy paranoia.

“Inform people that this is happening and it’s got major implications. Maybe 
not tomorrow but over the next 10 years it’s got major implications – it 
doesn’t matter who you are or what you do.”
 