
Authorities in Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/monaco> have raided 
the headquarters of an oil company, as well as the homes of some of its bosses, 
as part of a British-led investigation into a corruption scandal implicating 
businesses all over the world, the principality’s government has said.

In a statement released on Thursday, it said that the Monaco-based firm Unaoil 
was at the centre of the inquiry and that officials had acted after an urgent 
request for assistance from the UK’sSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> (SFO).

“These searches and interviews were carried out in the presence of British 
officials as part of a vast, international corruption scandal implicating 
numerous foreign oil industry firms. The information collected is going to be 
examined by the British authorities as part of their investigation,” the 
statement said.

It said that the executives had been interviewed over the course of Tuesday 
and Wednesday this week.

The Monacan authorities said they acted in accordance with European convention 
on mutual assistance in criminal matters and the UN convention against 
transnational organised crime.


An SFO spokesperson said: “We are aware of the allegations but can neither 
confirm nor deny our interest in the matter.” A Unaoil spokesperson said: “Due 
to recent developments it would be inappropriate for the company to comment at 
this time.”

Unaoil was at the centre of allegations published by the Huffington Post and 
Australia’s Fairfax Media on Wednesday. They said the business “systematically 
corrupted the global oil industry” by delivering millions in bribes on behalf 
of well-known multinationals to secure contracts.

The company has denied the allegations. Asked by both publications whether 
Unaoil paid bribes, the company’s chief executive, Ata Ahsani, was quoted as 
saying: “The answer is absolutely no.”

The publications said they drew on information gleaned from hundreds of 
thousands of internal emails between 2002 and 2012 for their six-month 
investigation.

Fairfax, which described the trove as “the biggest leak of confidential files 
in the history of the oil industry,” said the files held evidence of bribes 
paid to Middle Eastern oil chiefs and other officials.

Fairfax said Unaoil did not challenge of the authenticity of the documents 
involved and instead sent a letter through its lawyers demanding that Fairfax 
wipe the material from its servers.
 