
Guns N’ Roses frontman Axl Rose has criticised Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> for going ahead with the 
executions of eight people after he publicly appealed to the president for them 
to be spared.

In a letter to Joko Widodo dated 27 April, Rose pleaded for Australians Andrew 
Chan and Myuran Sukumaran and Mary Jane Fiesta Veloso of the Philippines to be 
granted clemency, suggesting that the punishment of the death penalty would 
exceed the gravity of their crimes.


“Under the circumstances it would seem that if they are executed regrettably 
the Indonesian government becomes the more offensive criminal,” he wrote.

He also asked Widodo whether he stood by his attorney general’s dismissal of 
the convicts’ attempts to delay their execution as “just buying time”.


Rose wrote that Widodo granting clemency to the three would strengthen global 
ties with Indonesia and “allow the world to witness an extraordinary act of 
humanity and bravery”.

“It’s true I do not know these men nor have I met them but their story has 
touched me deeply,” he wrote. “I as well as many others could easily have found 
ourselves in their unfortunate and unarguably self-inflicted position. People 
make mistakes, sometimes big and horribly regrettable mistakes and sometimes 
more importantly people learn from their mistakes ...

“To not acknowledge and give such change the opportunity to prove its value 
would seem in this case a greater crime than those originally committed.”

Signing off W Axl Rose, he asked Widodo to give Chan, Sukumaran and Veloso a 
permanent stay of execution, “and to change the course of your own life and 
place in both your country’s and world history”.

“To kill these men under these conditions of their profound and proven change 
for the better seems a barbaric, backward and truly disgraceful act of pride, 
ego, fear and prejudice.”

Rose also sent the letter to the US secretary of state John Kerry, the US 
ambassador to Indonesia, the chairman of Indonesia’s national commission on 
human rights, the Indonesian representative to the United Nations and the 
Indonesian ambassador to the United States.

He published 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/guns-n-roses/axl-roses-letter-to-indonesian-president/10153791661983222>
 the letter in full on the Guns N’ Roses Facebook page on Wednesday, andtweeted 
the link <https://twitter.com/axlrose/status/593111467991269376> with the 
comment: “No word on Indonesian executions. There could still be time …”

Later that day, Chan and Sukumaran were executed, along with six others. 
Veloso was given a temporary reprieve at the last moment so she could testify 
in a case in the Philippines against the woman who she says set her up.

Rose responded to the news on Twitter, saying it was “deeply troubling” that 
Widodo ignored “international outcry”.
 Axl Rose’s tweets upon learning of the execution of eight people in Indonesia.
He also prayed that Veloso’s reprieve would be permanent. He concluded that 
“the people of Indonesia deserve better”.
 