
Babette Cole, the illustrator and author of more than 150 witty, imaginative, 
irreverent and sometimes controversial picture books for children, has died 
aged 66, after a short illness that led to a collapsed lung. Among her 
bestsellers were the Princess Smartypants series, which reimagined the 
traditional fairytale heroine as a motorbiking Ms; books about Dr Dog, a family 
pet who dispenses medical advice, which were turned into an animated cartoon 
series; and The Trouble With Mum and its sequels.

Never conventional in appearance, conversation or lifestyle, in person Babette 
was a highly entertaining companion, a brilliant raconteur of stories true or 
fanciful, told in a breathy voice and with theatrical manner. Her life as she 
relayed it seemed to be a series of entertainingly optimistic plans combined 
with disasters or near-disasters; and her picture books had a similar sense of 
high-octane drama underpinned by an anarchic sense of humour.

Despite the fun, Babette was no lightweight. She created books on the kinds of 
disgusting topics that children love and adults mostly do not, and then, 
emboldened by their success, she went on to more controversial subjects, partly 
because she liked to shock and partly because she felt she had a duty to make 
sure children were properly informed.

Born in Jersey in the Channel Islands, Babette was educated at a convent 
school there before studying illustration at Canterbury College of Art (now 
part of the Kent Institute of Art & Design). On graduating with a first-class 
degree and a distinction in animation, Babette got a job in children’s 
television, working on programmes including Bagpuss (alongside its creators
Oliver Postgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/dec/09/oliver-postgate-bagpuss> and 
Peter Firmin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/13/interview-peter-firmin-co-creator-bagpuss-the-clangers>
) andJackanory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/dec/11/jackanory-50th-anniversary-bbc-frank-cottrell-boyce>
. She also designed greetings cards and illustrated stories by authors such as
Joan Tate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/jul/07/guardianobituaries.books> and 
Annabel Farjeon, before she produced her own first picture book, Basil Brush of 
the Yard (1977).
 Illustration from Babette Cole’s Princess Smartypants series. Photograph: 
Penguin Random House 
She published at least a book a year from then on, most of them telling 
traditional stories. The appeal of her illustrations was quickly recognised; 
Nungu and the Hippopotamus (1978) was named children’s book of the year by the 
Child Study Association of America, and The Wind in the Willows Pop-Up Book 
(1983) was selected as a New York Public Library notable children’s book.

It was with Beware of the Vet (1982) that her zany sense of humour and delight 
in the absurd was first fully unleashed. The account of the mayhem that follows 
when Mr MacPlaster, the vet, mistakes cow hormones for aspirin and grows horns 
and a tail was a trailblazer for many of Babette’s subsequent titles. Taking a 
similar “what if?” premise, The Trouble With Mum (1983) stars a mum who is a 
witch and focuses on the deep and hilarious embarrassment that this causes at 
the school gates. It is a simple problem captured brilliantly by Babette in the 
best tradition of great picture books, by contrasting sparing, deadpan text 
with frothily inventive illustrations.

The Trouble With Mum brought Babette great success and led to The Trouble With 
Dad (1985), The Trouble With Gran (1987) and The Trouble With Grandad (1988). 
Her inverted fairy stories, Princess Smartypants (1986) and its follow-up 
Prince Cinders (1987), created stylishly cool images of royalty. Their enduring 
success led to the more recent addition of Long Live Princess Smartypants 
(2004), Princess Smartypants Breaks the Rules (2009) and Princess Smartypants 
and the Missing Princes (2016).
Princess Smartypants read aloud – video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hl6jIUz0e4o> 
Alongside these more traditional kinds of picture book stories, Babette wrote 
and illustrated The Hairy Book (1984), The Slimy Book (1985) and The Smelly 
Book (1987), a cheerfully grotesque trio of titles that revelled in the things 
that children find most hilarious. These marked another aspect of her work: the 
tackling of controversial subjects. Deciding that parents needed help in 
talking about the facts of life to children, Babette became passionate about 
creating books that would be useful. Since her life had been spent around 
horses and dogs – she was a passionate rider and countryside lover – she was 
quite unshockable, she felt, and thus the right person to tell children and 
their parents the truth about reproduction.

Mummy Laid an Egg! (1993) was a facts-of-life book in which the parents try to 
fob their children off with inventions, until the children tell it to them 
straight. Witty and truthful, it won best illustrated children’s book of the 
year at the British book awards and was translated into 73 languages. Babette 
tackled the difficulties for children of having a split home in Two of 
Everything (1997) and of puberty in Hair in Funny Places (1999).

Related: Prince Cinders, the spotty hero who made me hang up my tiara | 
Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/25/a-book-that-changed-me-prince-cinders>

As well as riding, she was a keen breeder of hunters. Although horses featured 
in many of her books, it was only latterly that they were given a leading role, 
in her Fetlocks Hall titles, about a magical pony school in Dorset, published 
from 2010 onwards. She adored the countryside and spent much of her life in 
Lincolnshire, before moving to Kent and then westward through Dorset, Devon and 
Cornwall. Each home was a scruffy farm when she bought it, but was transformed 
into a centre for her horses with, typically, a stableyard more lavish than the 
house.

Babette is survived by her husband, James Gutans, whom she married days before 
her death.

• Babette Cole, children’s writer and illustrator, born 10 September 1950; 
died 15 January 2017

Related: Babette Cole, anarchic creator of Princess Smartypants, dies at 66 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/16/babette-cole-princess-smartypants-dies-at-67>
 