
Oliver Postgate <https://www.theguardian.com/media/oliver-postgate>, who has 
died aged 83, was the creator of Noggin the Nog, the Clangers and other 
television characters who cast a spell over young viewers which in many cases 
lasted for the rest of their lives.

A quarter of a century after The Clangers ended its run in 1973, video 
cassettes of their original adventures were among the BBC's bestsellers; The 
Clangers, Bagpuss and Ivor the Engine still flourish in the DVD age; and in 
October a company bought merchandising rights to some of his characters. But, 
having observed how some other early heroes of children's TV had been 
"resurrected", as he put it, Postgate resisted all proposals to remobilise his 
quaint creatures.

Born in Hendon, north London, a son of Raymond Postgate, Labour Party 
historian and first editor of The Good Food Guide, Oliver grew up in an 
impeccably socialist-academic milieu. His grandfather on his mother's side was 
George Lansbury, Labour party leader from 1932 to 1935, one of his aunts 
Margaret Cole of the formidable Fabian partnership of GDH Cole and Margaret 
Cole. His brother became professor of microbiology at Sussex, a cousin is 
professor of Assyriology at Cambridge.

The young Oliver registered as a conscientious objector when he reached 
call-up age during the second world war, and spent some months in prison, 
evidently not too oppressive an experience. He liked to recall the time he was 
planning the annual pantomime with the governor. When a certain prop was 
required for one of the scenes young Oliver said he had seen just such a thing 
in a shop in the town. He would nip down and get it. "Fine," said the governor, 
then after a moment's thought, "Hey! What are you saying? You can't do that! 
You're supposed to be a prisoner."

Postgate subsequently worked for the Red Cross in occupied Germany. Back home, 
he tried both art school (Kingston, south-west London) and drama school (Lamda, 
the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art) and devised displays for the 1951 
Festival of Britain. In 1957-58 he joined one of the new commercial television 
companies as a stage manager. But it was when he was assigned to children's 
programmes that Postgate was drawn to his true niche in life. He thought the 
youngsters were getting a penny-pinching deal, especially in the matter of 
storytelling.

Marionettes on strings or glove puppets were all very well, but to keep pace 
with expanding young imaginations, he felt that fully animated cartoons or 
puppet dramas were needed. And these were far too expensive for everyday use.

With an artist friend, Peter Firmin, he set up an independent production 
outfit called Smallfilms to see if they could turn out affordable animation. 
Their studio was a cowshed (later replaced by a row of converted pigsties) on 
Firmin's farm near Canterbury, in Kent. Postgate dreamed up the characters and 
stories and taught himself the laborious skills of frame-by-frame animation.

Firmin drew the pictures or designed the sets and made the models when they 
switched to puppetry. The bassoonist Vernon Elliott came in to furnish the 
music. They began with a 10-minute cartoon series, The Saga of Noggin the Nog 
(1959), in which a stolid young Viking prince was up against an evil uncle and 
various Nordic monsters. By eliminating most overheads and taking little reward 
for themselves, Postgate and company were able to turn them out for a 10th of 
the going rate. They sold the series to the BBC.

Bagpuss, The Pogles and Ivor the Engine followed, together with books, dolls 
and toys spun off from their series, and in general a rather larger return on 
their efforts.

The Clangers, Postgate always claimed, was the result of a sudden demand from 
the BBC that - as colour became general - all independently made children's 
programmes should not only be in colour but colourful in concept, too.

This was 1968. Smallfilms scratched their collective head. What would the most 
colourful subject be at the moment in the eyes of their young clientele? Ah! - 
how about space travel and the American programme to land men on the moon? 
Postgate remembered that in one of their Noggin stories they had already 
introduced a tiny space traveller called Moonmouse. Suppose they had a whole 
family of such characters living on their own small, inhospitable moon. They 
would perhaps dwell in caves, with iron doors against the cold which they would 
clang open and shut like dustbin lids. They would be ... Clangers.

This was to be an animated puppet venture. Firmin constructed the little 
creatures' beautifully articulated skeletons, his wife Joan knitted their 
bodies. They were still mouse-like, though with long proboscidiform noses and 
gentle temperaments. With hindsight, their world can be seen as a model of the 
ultimate welfare state.

The Clangers subsisted on hot soup which bubbled up from the interior of the 
little moon and was dispensed by a fussy Soup Dragon - an idea which owed much 
to Postgate's little twin sons, who had told him authoritatively that our own 
familiar moon was full of hot soup which a giant called Edward, who lived on 
the far side, sucked up through a straw poked down any convenient volcano.

And though they were regularly faced with visitors who dropped in from other 
worlds, such as a flock of sinister trumpet-beings, the Clangers always 
prevailed in the kindest and most public-spirited way.

Postgate devised their adventures and wrote the scripts, complete with 
dialogue that was never intended to be spoken. As with the earlier Pogles 
films, he and an accomplice reproduced the rhythm of each sentence musically, 
in this case on Swanee whistles - tin whistles with a slide. So speech-like 
were the resulting squeaks and descants that most viewers were convinced they 
were hearing speech. When Postgate screened episodes at an international 
gathering the Germans exclaimed that the Clangers were talking perfect German. 
"That is not so," said the Swedes, "They spoke only Swedish."

The original transmission of the series, from 1969 to 1973, overlapped the 
American moon landings, and gave Postgate a nasty moment when the one episode 
in which a human astronaut landed on the Clangers' moon, in order to collect 
rocks - and suffer all sorts of mishaps - was scheduled just as an Apollo 
mission was due to attempt the real thing. If anything were to go wrong, there 
would inevitably be an outcry. He tried in vain to persuade the BBC to switch 
episodes. In the event, all went well, and later a Nasa scientist was supposed 
to have commended The Clangers as a valiant attempt to bring a note of realism 
to the fantasy of the space programme.

After the 13 episodes of Bagpuss were created in 1974, Smallfilms 
concentrating instead on new colour versions of Ivor the Engine in 1976-77 and 
The Saga of Noggin the Nog from 1982, in each case with a change of channel 
from ITV to BBC or vice-versa. Books and merchandising derived from all the 
series also continued profitably.

In 1989, Postgate broke new ground. In collaboration with a latter-day 
neighbour and partner, Naomi Linnell, keeper of printed books at Canterbury 
Cathedral, he published Becket, a confident re-interpretation of the story of 
the life and death of Thomas Becket arguing that the archbishop's martyrdom was 
sought by Becket himself, and not merely the consequence of an impatient 
outburst by Henry II.

This appeared as a book and also as a video, both beautifully illustrated by 
Postgate in the manner of a medieval tapestry and, with their little jokes and 
forthright text, of appeal equally to children and adults.Oliver Postgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oliver-postgate> and his wife 
Prudence, who died in 1982, had three sons: the twins Simon and Stephen and 
then Daniel, who followed his father to become a cartoonist and film-maker. 
They survive him, as does Naomi.

Oliver Postgate, author and animation film-maker, born April 12 1925; died 
December 8 2008
 