
Protesters have reclaimed Pearl roundabout in central Manama as a hub of 
anti-government dissent after security forces abruptly surrendered the site 
they had violently seized three days ago.

Bahrain's crown prince yesterday ordered troops and riot police to withdraw 
from the site they had blockaded since Thursday morning. He announced a day of 
mourning for the seven protesters killed during a week of clashes between the 
tiny nation's Shia majority and forces loyal to the ruling Sunni dynasty. 
Around 200 more people have been wounded.

By nightfall, one of the biggest public gatherings in Manama in more than 20 
years had swelled to around 40,000 people, with thousands more streaming 
towards the roundabout that has taken on Tahrir Square-like significance in 
Bahrain's anti-government movement.

The end to the standoff came suddenly, after brief skirmishes between scores 
of youths draped in Bahraini flags and retreating riot police, who peppered 
them with rubber bullets and tear gas before leaving. Crown Prince Salman Hamad 
al-Khalifa last night said the troops would not return, and protesters could 
remain in the area without fear.

As several dozen protesters were being taken to hospital, hundreds more began 
descending on Pearl roundabout. By last night they were re-pitching tents. 
Thousands prayed, while others did victory laps, cheering ambulance drivers who 
were being hailed as heroes.

The jubilant atmosphere was tempered by widespread distrust among 
demonstrators, who began their protests several weeks ago, calling for 
political reform, and claiming that Bahrain's Sunni minority has discriminated 
against the Shia majority for decades.

"They will come for us again, we know they will," said one protester, Sayed 
Majid, as he pointed out Indian food rations left on the square by the troops. 
The overwhelmingly Shia demonstrators are particularly incensed that the 
security forces they have clashed with are mainly foreign nationals who have 
been given citizenship and jobs by the regime. "I know the way they think. 
Their pride has been wounded and they will try to strike back," he said.

Fatima Majid, who had returned to her homeland to join the protests, said: "It 
is a mercenary corps protecting an artificial regime. The more of us they kill, 
the more powerful we become."

Yesterday, as in previous days since the toppling of autocratic leaders in 
Tunisia and Egypt, this sense of defiance was felt across the region.

In Algeria, hundreds of protesters calling for more democratic freedoms from 
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika's regime were thrwarted by riot police 
brandishing clubs. In Yemen, mounting dissent worsened when supporters of 
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, dressed in civilian clothing, opened fire on a 
group of students who had gathered outside the capital's Sana'a University, 
injuring at least four people, one critically.

In the eastern province of Saudi Arabia, not far from Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain>, Shia Muslims staged a protest to 
demand the release of prisoners detained without trial. The protest, reported 
on Rasid.com, a Shia website, was said to have been silent, with no banners for 
fear of provoking the authorities.

There was no such restraint at Pearl roundabout, which last night had an 
almost folk festival feel to it, as well as a palpable sense that reform was 
possible. "The government is listening to us now," said Mohammed Najib. "Not 
because they like us, but because we are in a strong position. The world is 
watching us and international opinion matters."

The order to withdraw troops came after a curt phone call on Friday night from 
Barack Obama to King Hamad al-Khalifa, in which the US president urged him to 
show restraint. The government is facing challenges on multiple fronts: Britain 
indicated on Friday that it may stop selling arms to Bahrain; next month's 
Formula One grand prix could be cancelled, and neighbouring Gulf states have 
demanded that stability be restored.

Perhaps more alarming for the 200-year-old dynasty is that demonstrators are 
no longer making a distinction between the ruling family and the government 
during their calls for reform. "Down, down with the Khalifas," they shouted in 
English as they teemed towards Pearl roundabout. "The regime must fall, they 
will kill us all," doctors and nurses chanted in the grounds of the Salmaniya 
hospital that had been the focal point of the revolt.

A national dialogue, chaired by the crown prince, is due to begin this week. 
The demonstrators want the kingdom to be a constitutional monarchy, removing 
some powers from the king. The opposition party, which walked out of the 
government on Thursday in protests at the raid, is calling for parliamentary 
reforms, which would mean an end to the country's deeply unpopular prime 
minister of 30 years and many of his ministers.

"We will not stop at regaining a piece of land," said Bassema Mousawi, draped 
in a banner that read in Arabic: Bahrain is me and I am Bahrain. "They cannot 
buy us off and they cannot appease us. Real change is what we demand. Nothing 
less." Such intransigence was heard from protesters across the region. But in 
many instances it was mixed with desperation at the heavy-handed approach of 
authorities.

Those wanting to protest in Iran and Morocco are preparing for demonstrations 
today to ram home their message to their countries' rulers. In the North 
African country, where the regime of King Mohammed VI claims to be more liberal 
than its regional neighbours, pro-democracy campaigners are urging people to 
take to the streets in the cities of Casablanca, Rabat, Marrakech and Tangier. 
"We want a government that represents the people, not the elite," said one of 
the organisers, Mont Asser Drissi.

In Iran, the opposition has called for fresh street protests to commemorate 
the deaths of two pro-democracy youths killed during rallies last week. Saane 
Zhaleh, 26, and Mohammad Mokhtari, 22, died in Tehran last Monday. Today marks 
a week since they were killed.

"In response to the brutal suppression and killing of the supporters of the 
Green Movement, we will go out in streets in major squares [of Tehran and other 
major cities] on Sunday which will mark the seventh day after the death of our 
martyrs," said the website of former presidential candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi.

In the most rigorous crackdown on the opposition since the post-election 
unrest in 2009, the regime has launched a campaign to silence the leaders of 
the Green Movement. The protesters will hope to flout that. The regime has been 
criticised for hailing the Arab revolts abroad, while refusing to give 
permission for a peaceful demonstration at home.
 