
The Bangladesh cafe besieged by militants who killed 20 hostages last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
 has quietly reopened a few blocks away from its old site, which remains taped 
off by investigating police.

For Shahriar Ahmed and the 16 other staff, some of whom were working during 
the horrifying siege, the reopening of Holey Artisan Bakery represents hope and 
a new beginning.

“This is beautiful to come back here with all my dearest colleagues,” Ahmed 
said while preparing a cappuccino for a customer on Thursday. “Our old, 
familiar guests are coming and congratulating us, congratulating from their 
hearts.”

The 1 July attack by five young Bangladeshi extremists stunned the nation and 
drew condemnation from abroad.

Dhaka cafe attack ends with 20 hostages among dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
The attackers held dozens hostage overnight, quizzing them on details of the 
Qur’an and killing some of those who failed to answer to their satisfaction. 
When Bangladeshi police and soldiers stormed the restaurant the next morning, 
killing all five attackers, they found a gruesome scene of torture and 
killings. Twenty hostages, including 17 foreigners, were dead.

The government responded by cracking down on extremist groups in the country, 
blaming one in particular – Jumatul MujahedeenBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> – but dismissing claims of 
responsibility by Islamic State.

The killings followed several years of smaller attacks targeting scores of 
individuals deemed by extremists to be enemies of radical Islam, including 
secularists, writers, religious minorities, foreign aid workers and activists.

The cafe reopened on Tuesday in a section of a shopping mall. The new location 
is smaller, doesn’t have a backyard and there’s no view of the lake overlooking 
the Gulshan diplomatic zone that had drawn so many in the past.

The previous site remains closed to the public and is under the control of 
police, who are still investigating the attack.

The new cafe is already doing brisk business. The mood is cheerful, with many 
customers greeting the waiters with smiles. “You can’t compare it with the old 
place,” one of its owners, Sadat Mehedi, said while wiping down a tabletop. 
“This is definitely small in size, but we have the same spirit. It’s heartening 
that our tables are full.”

He said reopening the restaurant after last year’s traumatic attack was “all 
about hope and aspiration to start again, to keep the spirit up”.“We want to 
grow again, want to create more jobs,” he said.

As one customer took a seat, a server named Rocky cried, “Welcome back, ma’am! 
We are ready to serve you.” The woman ordered an ice cream for her daughter, a 
toddler. “They all know me, we know them all,” Rocky explained. “It’s lovely to 
see them again.”
 