
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has warned 
that the UK would be at the “back of the queue” in any trade deal with the US 
if the country chose to leave the EU, as he made an emotional plea to Britons 
to vote for staying in.


The US president used a keenly awaited press conference with David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, held at the Foreign 
Office, to explain why he had the “temerity to weigh in” over the high-stakes 
British question in an intervention that delighted remain campaigners.

It took Barack Obama to crush the Brexit fantasy | Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-crush-brexit-fantasy-eu-referendum>
Obama argued that he had a right to respond to the claims of Brexit 
campaigners that Britain would easily be able to negotiate a fresh trade deal 
with the US. “They are voicing an opinion about what the United States is going 
to do, I figured you might want to hear from the president of the United States 
what I think the United States is going to do.

“And on that matter, for example, I think it’s fair to say that maybe some 
point down the line there might be a UK-US trade agreement, but it’s not going 
to happen any time soon because our focus is in negotiating with a big bloc, the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, to get a trade agreement 
done”.

He added: “The UK is going to be in the back of the queue.”

Standing alongside his visitor, Cameron said the referendum was the “sovereign 
choice of the British people” but it was important for voters to listen to the 
opinions of allies such as the president. “On this vital issue of trade, where 
Barack has made such a clear statement, we should remember why we are currently 
negotiating this biggest trade deal in the whole world, and in the whole 
world’s history, between the European Union and the United States.”

Obama argued that it was much more efficient for the US to negotiate with the 
EU as a bloc, rather than attempt to take on “piecemeal trade agreements”, and 
suggested that Brexit would send a signal of division to the world.

He also weighed into UK domestic considerations, arguing that if he were a 
British voter he would be wary of cutting himself off from the market that 
takes 44% of British exports and is “responsible for millions of jobs and an 
enormous amount of commerce upon which a lot of businesses depend”.

Obama insisted that he was not issuing a threat, but said he was simply 
offering a point of view.

“This is a decision for the people of the United Kingdom to make. I’m not 
coming here to fix any votes. I’m not casting a vote myself. I am offering my 
opinion, and in democracies, everybody should want more information, not less, 
and you shouldn’t be afraid to hear an argument being made,” he said.

Out campaigners were quick to point out that Obama would no longer be 
president when a trade deal would be negotiated, and claimed he was issuing an 
unrealistic threat.

The US president was on his fifth visit to London, and had come to visit 
Cameron following a 90th birthday lunch with the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh 
that was also attended by his wife, Michelle. The couple, who will remain the 
UK on Saturday, had dinner with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge.

Lavishing praise on his hosts, Obama spoke warmly about the Queen, describing 
her as an “an astonishing person and a real jewel to the world, not just to the 
United Kingdom. She is truly one of my favourite people.”

A relaxed-looking Obama responded to an article by Boris Johnson, which was 
criticised for includingclaims that the president’s “part-Kenyan” ancestry had 
resulted in anti-British sentiment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/boris-johnson-barack-obama-kenyan-eu-referendum>
.

Writing in the Sun, the mayor of London, a leading advocate for Britain to 
leave the European Union, said Obama’s country would “not dream of embroiling 
itself” in anything similar to the EU, which he said was inching towards a 
federal superstate. Johnson also referred to Obama’s heritage, whileclaiming 
that the president had removed a bust of Winston Churchill from the Oval Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/22/i-love-the-guy-obama-settles-rumours-about-winston-churchill-bust>
 in what some had described as a “snub to Britain”.

'I love the guy': Obama settles rumours about Winston Churchill bust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/22/i-love-the-guy-obama-settles-rumours-about-winston-churchill-bust>
Obliquely responding to Johnson, the president said he had voluntarily placed 
a bust of Churchill outside his private office on the second floor of the White 
House. “I love Winston Churchill. I loved the guy,” he said.

But Obama admitted that he had replaced a second bust of Britain’s wartime 
leader that had sat in the Oval Office during the presidency of George W Bush 
with one of Martin Luther King “to remind me of all the hard work of a lot of 
people who had somehow allowed me to have the privilege of holding this office”.

Cameron said he would not respond to the article written by Johnson, saying: 
“Questions for Boris are questions for Boris, they are not questions for me.”

After the article was published, Johnson sought to play down the row, saying 
he was a fan of Obama. He added: “But I think there’s a weird paradox when the 
president of the United States, a country that would never dream of sharing its 
sovereignty over anything, instructs or urges us politely to get more embedded 
in the EU, which is already making 60% of our laws.”

Cameron referred to Obama warmly, saying: “I’m honoured to have Barack as a 
friend. He’s taught me the rules of basketball, he’s beaten me at table tennis 
... I’ve always found Barack someone who gives sage advice. He’s a man with a 
very good heart. He’s a very good friend and always will be a good friend, I 
know, to the United Kingdom.”

Obama responded lyrically, arguing that he and Cameron had shared an 
“extraordinary partnership”, describing the British leader as one of his 
closest and most trusted partners.

“We shared our countries’ beer with each other. He vouches for his, I vouch 
for mine. We have taken in a basketball game in America and, David, I think you 
should recall we were actually partners in that pingpong game and we lost to 
some schoolchildren. I can’t remember whether they were eight or 10 but they 
were decidedly shorter than we were and they whooped us,” he said, to laughs 
from reporters.

Cabinet minister Chris Grayling, who is leader of the House of Commons, told 
the Guardian: “We don’t have a free trade agreement now and we are already one 
of the US’s main trading partners. Equally our security partnership has little 
to do with the EU. So it feels rather as if today was about politics and not 
reality. We should not give up our independence just because of what President 
Obama said.”

The Guardian view on a key week in the EU debate: Obama sends the right 
message | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/22/the-guardian-view-on-a-key-week-in-the-eu-debate-obama-sends-the-right-message>
The comments will come as a blow to leave campaigners given Obama’s popularity 
in the UK. But they did seize on one of his arguments, that uncontrolled 
migration intoEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> was a 
national security threat to the world.

The justice minister, Dominic Raab, said: “The president made clear that 
uncontrolled immigration into the EU is a threat to national security. I agree 
– that is why it is safer to take back control so that we can stop terror 
suspects from Europe coming into the UK.
“He argued that he thinks it is in America’s interests for the UK to stay in 
the EU but what is good for US politicians is not necessarily good for the 
British people. We want more international cooperation after we vote leave, but 
the EU is not fit for purpose, and cannot cope with the multiple crises we face 
like terrorism, Syria and mass migration.”

Raab argued that Obama was doing the prime minister a “political favour”.

“You can’t say on the one hand that the US-UK special relationship is as 
strong as ever and always will be, and in the next breath say take my advice or 
you go to the back of the queue,” he said. “I don’t think the British people 
will be blackmailed by anyone, let alone a lame duck US president on his way 
out.”

Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, said the Obama failed to understand that the EU 
was a political union and completely different from Nato and the G8.

“President Obama won’t be in office by the time we’re out of the EU 
post-referendum. Trade deals of course are in both countries’ interests.”

Labour confirmed that the president would meet the party leader Jeremy Corbyn 
on Saturday in London, putting to rest suggestions during that week that the 
Labour leader might be snubbed.





 