
Among Tenerife's big attractions are a Thai-themed water park where visitors 
can surf on fake waves, and a zoo that keeps its penguins chilled with the help 
of a snow machine. Then there are the all-you-can-eat hotel buffets, where as 
much food is thrown away as is eaten. You might be forgiven for believing that 
the closest Tenerife comes to green thinking is sloshing Midori into the "mile 
highball" cocktails.

Yet Tenerife is further along the sustainable line than you might expect: 
47.5% of the island is protected under national, natural or rural park 
designation. And there are plans for a new railway line running the length of 
the island. Greenest of all is a €10m building project, Casas Bioclimáticas, 
started in 1995 on land belonging to Tenerife's Technological Institute of 
Renewable Energies (Iter), near Reina Sofía airport on the south coast.

Architects submitted ideas for a village of "bioclimatic" homes – adapted to 
the local climate and self-sufficient in their energy needs. From 397 entries, 
25 houses were selected and, five at a time, they are being built. The project 
opened to the public in March 2010 (though the final few houses are still under 
construction) and the finished properties are available as unusual holiday lets.

"We need tourists to try them out," says Miren Iriarte, the project's 
development manager, meeting us at Iter headquarters, beside the village. Each 
house, she explains, has been built using different technological solutions to 
the sustainability problem, from thick walls and solar panels to underground 
rooms, high-grade insulation, sensors that switch off lights when people leave 
the rooms, taps with aerators to reduce water flow and wind-powered air 
conditioning. Water comes from the sea, via the village's desalination plant 
and all the houses are built using natural, recyclable materials.

Crucially (and this is where the tourists come in), each house is fitted with 
sensors that test temperature, humidity and air movement – and compare the data 
with that taken from external sensors. The scientists need the houses to be 
occupied if they are to gather valid data.

"Without occupants," says Miren, "the doors, windows and curtains are not 
opened and closed, and humidity is not created in the bathrooms and kitchens." 
Eventually this monitoring will tell Iter which building solutions work best 
and, they hope, allow the houses to be replicated in any area with a similar 
climate.
 La Estrella 
The first house we visit, La Estrella, is built from pale yellow pumice stone 
in, as the name suggests, a sleek star shape. "The stone is local," says Miren. 
"Some materials, like wood, have to be imported – you have to compromise when 
you live on an island."

The Madrid-based architects behind La Estrella orientated the building 
east-west to make the most of natural light. Kitchens have induction plates, 
energy-efficient appliances and four rubbish bins – for glass, paper, plastic 
and compost. The garden has been planted with local species.

"Generally 30-50% of the energy used on Tenerife is in homes, so there is a 
real need to find a way of reducing that," explains Miren. "Another aim is to 
show that sustainable building can be beautiful."

In the case of La Estrella and the third house we see, French-designed El Rio, 
with its high glass walls, Habitat-showroom furniture and a "river" running 
through the lounge area, it definitely is. In the second house, Noche y Día, 
the beauty is of a more distressed kind. Gloomy inside, with high chipboard 
walls, Noche y Día has flatpack cardboard furniture that even Miren finds hard 
to praise: "This is not very sustainable – the cardboard soon deteriorates and 
you have to keep replacing it."

The village's only British-designed house, Casa Bernoulli, hasn't quite come 
up to expectations either, as we see when we step inside and are met with 
rain-stained wood and plaster. "People think it's always sunny here and it's 
not," says Miren. "We want guests who stay with us to enjoy the experience, but 
they will also be helping us to test which houses work perfectly and which need 
improving."

As laboratories go, it sounds pretty cushy. So I ask if we can stay there, 
this evening, as we're leaving the island next day. Gamely, even though it's 
Easter and Miren is about to head away for the weekend, she agrees. "Give me 
your passport numbers and a credit card and come back this afternoon. I'll 
leave a key and all the information on the gate." She smiles, kissing us 
goodbye. "It's a wonderful place to enjoy. You'll have a different experience."

And we do. There are no other guests that night, so although we have the key 
to just one house, Italian-designed El Caminito, we have the village to 
ourselves.

Accompanied by the gentle whirr and slightly spooky sight of Iter's wind 
turbines, we explore our slightly Truman Show surroundings. From the outside, 
El Caminito is not the most winsome of "architectural solutions" – it's 
surrounded by what appear to be unfinished Lego-like blocks of pumice stone – 
but there is a pretty vegetable patch, ripe with lettuces and tomatoes.

Inside, there is no indication that we're being monitored (the sensors must be 
tiny, or very well-hidden). The decor is simple but smart, with an open-plan 
living and dining area, two bathrooms, two double bedrooms, two single bedrooms 
and a colour scheme that nods, ironically, to the 1980s with orange, brown and 
white details. There's a bunch of wild flowers on the dining table and in the 
vast – and well-equipped – wooden kitchen we find supplies of milk, tea and 
coffee – and organic cocoa pops. (Guests can hang a little bag outside their 
door, and it is miraculously filled with fresh bread overnight.)

We stroll around Iter's educational garden, watching the wind turbines 
reflected in its ponds, then head to the beach, a wild rocky cove five minutes' 
walk from El Caminito, where locals have camped out to fish and to party.

If we were staying longer we could hike through the "moonscape" around the 
village of Vilaflor, spot seabirds in the Montaña Roja nature reserve or go 
windsurfing. As it is there's really only time for dinner. Miren has left a 
note and a map. "El Médano is a nice village 10 minutes from here. I suggest 
Restaurante Astillero Avencio, but there are plenty of others. Enjoy it! M."

An hour later we are at Astillero Avencio (+34 922 178220) by El Médano's 
harbour, eating grilled fish, drinking wine from the local Monje winery and 
toasting sustainable living.

We wake next morning to a jet-fuelled alarm clock. At 6.30am a stream of 
planes begins flying over as they land or take off on the nearby runway. The 
project wasn't designed to remind guests how profligate their own energy use 
is, but staying at El Caminito has prompted us to go a bit easier on resources 
– and the vapour trails being crocheted together overhead are a good reminder 
why we need to.

• Casas Bioclimáticas (+34 922 747700, casas.iter.es <http://casas.iter.es/en>
) cost from €200 a night for up to six people. The houses can also be visited 
on occasional open days. Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com/en>) 
flies to Reina Sofía airport from Luton from £62 return. More information from
webtenerifeuk.co.uk <http://www.webtenerifeuk.co.uk/index.htm>
 