
With its Elizabethan walls and easy access to fine, white, sandy beaches and 
magnificent countryside, Berwick-upon-Tweed is much more tourist hotspot than 
football hotbed.

It seemed somewhat extreme when Stranraer banned "Borderers" fans from 
"sectarian tension-raising" at Stair Park last season but some BerwickRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> supporters caused upset by 
carrying club favours adorned with a St George's Cross or waving union flags.

If fans of Glasgow's Rangers are unlikely to object to the latter symbol's 
presence at Shielfield Park on Sunday many still struggle to comprehend the 
reality that the first league match their side will play in England is taking 
place in the Scottish Third Division rather than the Premier League. Neutrals 
meanwhile may be curious to spot the manyBerwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/berwick> scarves decorated with the 
crosses of both St Andrew and St George before noting that home loyalists are 
divided between those who regard themselves as English patriots, Saltire-waving 
Scots or, simply, hybrid "Berwickers".

When Ally McCoist's side travel two miles south of the border they will visit 
the club harbouring possibly Britain's biggest identity crisis. Nearer 
Edinburgh (57 miles north) than Newcastle (65 miles south) Berwick changed 
hands five times before England recaptured it from Scotland for a final time in 
1482.

Geographically, at least, it made more practical sense for the Borderers to 
join Scotland's football pyramid in 1955 rather than contemplate potential 
1,000-mile round trips to Plymouth but, at times, Berwick sit uneasily in their 
tartan skin. Despite the team being overwhelmingly Scottish – the majority of 
Ian Little's semi-professionals are from the Edinburgh area with the only 
"outsiders" in his squad being two Newcastle-born players and a solitary South 
African, Devon Jacobs – Berwick are routinely jeered as "English bastards" on 
away trips.

Tom Maxwell, an authority on his home-town club and author of The Lone Rangers 
understands the syndrome. "It's the feeling of being rejected by both nations 
that causes the biggest frustration," he says.

Ironically the home fans among Sunday's 4,140 sell-out at Shielfield – a 
ground more used to measuring crowds in hundreds and which is shared with 
Berwick Bandits speedway club – have expressed annoyance that Little has 
recently shifted the Borderers training base and youth development programme to 
Edinburgh.

If that spells limited opportunities for local youngsters while also eroding 
community links, it makes it easier for players to marry part-time jobs with 
football and Little remains unapologetic. "Most of our players are from 
Edinburgh and the central belt so it makes sense to train up there," he says. 
"It does away with the travelling."

One thing everyone agrees on is that this meeting with "the other Rangers" 
ranks as an historic occasion bound to evoke memories of 45 years ago and what 
surely ranks as the biggest upset in Scottish knockout football.

On Saturday 28 January 1967, Berwick's record attendance – 13,365 – watched 
Jock Wallace's side beat Rangers 1-0 in the Scottish Cup first round.The 
Scotsman captured the occasion's significance.

"It was Arnold Palmer missing asix-inch putt," reflected the newspaper. "It 
was Arkle tripping over a matchstick. It was Walter McGowan knocking down 
Cassius Clay. It was the most ludicrous, the weirdest, the most astonishing 
result ever known in Scottish football."

The late Wallace – a martinet manager infamous for training sessions in which 
his charges ran up and down sand dunes and also kept goal – subsequently took 
charge of Rangers to the north, leading the Glasgow club to two domestic 
trebles in three years.

Despite retaining a playing registration, the 38-year-old Little shies away 
from parallels. "Sunday's a big day for us, for the fans, the club and the 
town," he says.

"I don't think I'll have to gee people up but we are under no illusions as to 
how difficult it will be. We have to keep the ball and prevent them from 
dominating possession but Rangers are a big club and, by Third Division 
standards, they still have some relatively big names."

Berwick's singular absence of stardust – although the new midfield signing 
Damian Gielty is the cousin of Manchester United's Darren Fletcher – may be 
acute but at least no one can rival their uniqueness.
 