
Retromania was rife once more in R&B this year – witness Bruno Mars 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d2UZlwTDGbY>’ Sexual Healing ripoff Versace on 
the Floor, say, or Craig David. Praise be, then, for the raft of 2016 albums 
that showed how progressive the genre could be. Blood Orange, Solange, Bon 
Iver, Kanye West, Maxwell, Drake and James Blake all made albums that took soul 
and R&B songwriting and dissembled it with a jazz arranger’s toolkit. Some 
people found these records bloated, but if you resized your imagination to 
match, they became massively rewarding – andFrank Ocean’s Blonde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/25/frank-ocean-blonde-review-a-baffling-and-brilliant-five-star-triumph>
 was the ultimate example.

Frank Ocean: Blonde review – a baffling and brilliant five-star triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/25/frank-ocean-blonde-review-a-baffling-and-brilliant-five-star-triumph>
Four years in the making, 17 tracks long, with an accompanying visual album 
and magazine, and tens of contributors either live or sampled (including Gang 
of Four, Kendrick Lamar, Todd Rundgren and Beyoncé), it was a pink kush cloud 
of music exhaled by a man with loose but absolute authority. He lassooed rogue 
elements – a redlining Andre 3000, field recordings, his own heavily treated 
voice – so that they didn’t drag the record downwards, but still kept them 
bucking.

Blonde was high-stakes stuff, and it was Ocean’s innate melodic brilliance 
that stopped it being a lofty failure. The wandering top line ofthe Beatles’ 
Here, There and Everywhere <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iELGhAGwBdc> was 
interpolated on White Ferrari, and Paul McCartney’s bright, asexual melancholy 
was also channelled on Ivy and Solo; the jazzy spoken word on Skyline To was 
worthy of Sarah Vaughn or Ella Fitzgerald. Nights is the masterpiece, using 
dream logic to channel Drake-style dolorous arrogance into a multi-act drama, 
cohering as an impressionist whole.

Blonde is an extremely druggy record – its mood suggests dissociatives and 
rich-kid prescription pills, but mostly weed. At one point, Ocean’s friend’s 
mum warns him, via answerphone on Be Yourself, that “when people become weed 
heads, they become sluggish, lazy, stupid and unconcerned”, but like some 
sci-fi chemist, he makes a synthetic cannabinoid from sound; Blonde is perhaps 
the ultimate stoner record, actually replicating weed’s various effects. 
There’s the body high on Pink + White, languid afternoon laziness on Self 
Control, late-night astral wonderment on White Ferrari, and itchy paranoia on 
Seigfried.


But this wasn’t hotbox background music; you needed to invest energy in 
Blonde. For some fans, who found their hardbodied ennui so prettily articulated 
by Ocean’s previous album Channel Orange, it might have been a step too far. 
But to regard a more difficult record as a less successful one would be a 
shame. As brilliant as Channel Orange was, Blonde is more adventurous, more 
vividly authored.

Perhaps Blonde’s biggest achievement is expressing, in its very form, the 
psychic reality of 21st-century youth culture. This is a generation with a 
forensic cultural awareness, scoping out the whole history of art through the 
internet – Ocean reflects that with his pan-racial, era-straddling guest list. 
The flipside, of course, is that this generation has more to distract it than 
ever before, and Ocean reflects that too with his impetuous gear changes, often 
in the middle of songs. His lyrics, full of missed connections, perfectly 
conjure the Tinder era, where people talk constantly about their feelings 
without understanding a single one of them. Blonde vies with The Life of Pablo 
for being the most 2016 album of 2016, andFrank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean> makes retro popstars seem more 
creatively sluggish than ever.
 