
I have started a list in the back of a notebook, a short dictionary of the 
language of gentrification. It began with the word “decanted”. Typically we 
decant wine from a bottle into a carafe in order to separate the sediment. 
Increasingly I’m noticing it in reports of council estates being bulldozed, 
their residents being “decanted” to cheaper cities, in order, I suppose, to 
separate the sediment.

Underneath it, “revitalised”, a word also used in the marketing for vaginal 
rejuvenation, and the phrase “vibrant neighbourhood”, meaning “still has enough 
poor people to feel like real life”, and “emerging” in the context of boroughs 
that middle-class people have recently colonised. There’s a sense you get, 
through these words that are hurled against building hoardings like leftover 
milkshakes, through the language peppered across property pages and estate 
agent ads, that the areas they talk about have just been discovered, dug up 
overnight by archeologists in Topman suits. That, until the Waitrose came, all 
this was just dust.

It’s easy to become obsessed with gentrification, living in a city, and it’s 
easy to be cynical. There’s long been a shortage of decent housing – one of the 
reasons it is only now being called a crisis is that today it affects the 
middle classes, too.

The sign says 'Hospital for Children'. Why remind new residents, choking on 
their mortgages, that once babies died here?

The aspirational hoardings on a building site I used to pass have recently 
come down – those photographs of dream girls laughing over brunch – to reveal 
the fact that, while developers have gutted the building, they have chosen to 
keep the façade, including the sign that says “Hospital for Children”. Why? Why 
remind the new residents, choking on their mortgages, that once babies died 
here? Because these aren’t just new-build flats, these are “carefully crafted 
apartments woven into the fabric of the original building”. They’ve used the 
boiled down stock of the place to retain the taste. In the same way that a 
fancy hotel in Soho has installed a red neon “peepshow” sign, the building’s 
value relies on memories of what stood before. A couple of years ago, alongside 
words like “innovation” and “fresh”, one London hoarding displayed the quote: 
“I like thinking big. If you’re going to be thinking anything, you might as 
well think big.” It was from Donald Trump.

The vagueness of the words on new buildings’ hoardings reflects the vagueness 
of the processes that got them built in the first place. Public consultations 
on redevelopment are famouslyopaque 
<https://architectsforsocialhousing.wordpress.com/2016/09/27/reflections-on-the-outcome-of-the-public-inquiry-into-the-aylesbury-estate-compulsory-purchase-order/>
. A colleague told me about a public meeting for the regeneration of railway 
arches rented by market traders – the allocated two hours were dribbled away 
discussing whether the front shutters would open inwards or outwards, rather 
than whether the tenants would ever be able to return.

“Affordable” – that’s another one. The term was quietly broadened in the 
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and Planning Bill in 
January, with “starter homes” costing up to £450,000 – 17 times the average 
British salary. In the rental sector it means social housing providers must 
charge no more than 80% of market rent. In the language of gentrification, the 
word “affordable” has a very different meaning.

There is some poetry in this obscurity, of course, this language as delicate 
as clingfilm. I like to imagine the copywriting meetings happening at 4am in a 
smoky jazz club, free-associating advertisers applauding their use of vowels, 
going so deep into the etymology of a word that they come out the other side, 
enlightened. Better that than the suspicion that marketers are encouraged to 
deal in shadows, using the original meanings of words simply as scaffolding. 
The result being that councils, rather than having to improve cities, are 
allowed to sell them off square foot by square foot, displacing communities, 
but profiting from what the residents left behind.

“Poor doors”, “luxury”. Every day I add a new word. “Pioneers”, “authentic”. 
There are 50 words for the feeling you get when you wake up in a flat having 
dreamed of the ghosts that once lived there, and even more for the silent click 
of a new cutlery drawer. To live in cities today means we must all learn the 
language, and fast.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 