
The leader of the Scottish Anglican church has said he was deeply distressed 
at the widespread offence caused by a reading from the Qur’an at a service to 
mark the feast of the Epiphany at St Mary’s Cathedral inGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>.

Related: Prayer around the world – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/dec/23/prayer-around-the-world-in-pictures-religion>

David Chillingworth, the bishop of St Andrews, Dunkeld and Dunblane, and 
primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church, said ina statement 
<http://www.scotland.anglican.org/statement-regarding-koran-reading-st-marys-cathedral-glasgow/>
: “We also deeply regret the widespread abuse which has been received by the 
cathedral community.” He has launched a review of interfaith work.


His comments followed a row over the inclusion in the service of passages from 
the Qur’an read in Arabic from the cathedral’s lectern by a local Muslim 
student. The cathedral said it was part of efforts to build relationships 
between Christians and Muslims in Glasgow.


The student, Madinah Javed, 19, read from the book of Maryam, which tells the 
story of Jesus’s birth. It includes the Islamic teaching that Jesus was not the 
son of God. Muslims, however, revere Jesus as a prophet.


The reading triggered a backlash. The former bishop of Rochester, Michael 
Nazir-Ali, said: “Christians should know what their fellow citizens believe and 
this can include reading the Qur’an for themselves, whether in the original or 
in translation.

“This is not, however, the same thing as having it read in church in the 
context of public worship. The authorities of the Scottish Episcopal Church 
should immediately repudiate this ill-advised invitation and exercise 
appropriate discipline for those involved.”

The cathedral said it had become the target of offensive messages on social 
media, which it reported to the police.


A Police Scotland spokesman said last week 
<http://www.glasgowlive.co.uk/news/glasgow-news/glasgow-church-targeted-online-trolls-12451104>
: “We can confirm we are investigating reports of offensive comments made 
towards St Mary’s Episcopal Cathedral in Glasgow and inquiries are ongoing. 
Police Scotland will not tolerate any form of hate and encourages all 
communities to work together to ensure no one feels threatened or marginalised.”

The cathedral’s provost, Kelvin Holdsworth, defended the reading, saying 
similar events had “happened a number of times in the past in this and in other 
churches, and have led to deepening friendships locally, to greater awareness 
of the things we hold in common and to dialogue about the ways in which we 
differ”.


The statement from the bishop said the Scottish Episcopal Church had a long 
commitment to interfaith work. “Over many years, we have sought to develop 
friendship, understanding and mutual respect between our Christian faith and 
the other great world religions,” he said.


Chillingworth added: “Those who seek to work in the area of interfaith 
relationships must weigh carefully whether the choices which they make are 
appropriate or otherwise.

“In today’s world, those judgments must give careful consideration to good 
relationships which have been carefully nurtured over many years in a local 
context. They must also weigh carefully the way in which national and 
international issues shape perceptions of what is appropriate or inappropriate.


“The decisions which have led to the situation in St Mary’s Cathedral are a 
matter for the provost and the cathedral community, but the Scottish Episcopal 
Church is deeply distressed at the widespread offence which has been caused.”


Chillingworth said the church would bring together “all those who are involved 
in the development of interfaith relations ... to explore how, particularly in 
the area of worship, this work can be carried forward in ways which will 
command respect”.
 