
A disciplinary panel has recommended that a prominent black judge should 
receive both an apology and “formal advice” – a dressing down – after its 
members found he committed misconduct in a speech he made referring to a fellow 
judge and that the matter had not been handled well.

Judge sues Ministry of Justice for race discrimination
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/judge-peter-herbert-suing-ministry-justice-race-discrimination>
While Judge Peter Herbert welcomed the apology he also said his treatment by 
the judiciary had made him feel “like a nigger” and is appealing against the 
findings of the Judicial Conduct Investigation Office panel on the basis that 
it has racially discriminated against him.

The panel has recommended that Herbert receive an apology “from a suitably 
senior person” for the way he had been treated by some members of the judiciary 
and called for changes to the procedure for suspending judges.


The panel’s recommendations have been sent to the lord chief justice and lord 
chancellor for consideration. The lord chief justice has the right to give – 
from the least serious – “formal advice,” a “formal warning”, or a “reprimand” 
to a judge. In certain circumstancesa judge may be suspended from office 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/about-the-judiciary/the-judiciary-the-government-and-the-constitution/jud-acc-ind/jud-conduct/>
.

Herbert is a barrister and part-time recorder in the crown court as well as a 
part-time immigration and employment tribunal judge and chair of the Society of 
Black Lawyers. He has also received an OBE.

The dispute relates to a speech he made at a rally in Stepney, east London, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/judge-peter-herbert-suing-ministry-justice-race-discrimination>
 in April 2015. Herbert commented negatively about the decision to bar the 
former mayor of Tower Hamlets, Lutfur Rahman, from holding public office for 
five years and claimed that racism was present in parts of the judiciary. He 
said in the speech: “Racism is alive and well and living in Tower Hamlets, in 
Westminster and, yes, sometimes in the judiciary.”

The panel examined claims that he was guilty of judicial misconduct because of 
the inferred criticism that another judge had given a judgment on racial 
grounds.

Herbert told the panel that the way the judiciary had dealt with the case had 
caused him acute distress. “There are some occasions in our life when you feel 
as if you are being treated as a nigger. That was what it felt like,” he said.

The panel found that the speech was misconduct and “likely to undermine public 
confidence in the judiciary”. The panel added: “To say that a judge is guilty 
of racism is to make a grave attack on that judge.”

On 15 November 2015, several months after the speech was made, pressure was 
applied to Herbert to voluntarily refrain from sitting as a judge. The panel 
found that this should not have happened and requested that Herbert receive an 
apology for this. The panel also found that procedures for suspending judges 
should be changed so that future requests are not made to judges to voluntarily 
stop sitting, especially where, as in Herbert’s case, the complaint was not 
sufficiently serious to warrant a suspension.

Herbert asked the panel to consider whether a white judge who had made a 
similar speech would have been treated in the same way. The panel said they 
were not going to comment on this point. He said he believed that as a black 
judge he had been treated differently from a white judge and that this amounted 
to racial discrimination.

Herbert said: “We cannot expect to have a diverse judiciary and magistracy, 
and to recruit police officers, probation officers, prison officers and lawyers 
who look like us and are knowledgeable of our communities, if we are forced to 
operate in a system that is itself unwilling or unable to deliver justice 
equally to all. As Martin Luther King said, ‘It is not possible to be in favour 
of justice for some people and not to be in favour of justice for all people’.

“I am aware of several other cases involving black and minority ethnic judges, 
all of whom complain of the Judicial Conduct Investigations Office refusing to 
deal with race issues other than to deny their existence.”
 