
A fuel truck has exploded in the centre of a rebel-held town near Syria’s 
border with Turkey, killing dozens of people.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said at least 48 people, mostly 
civilians, were killed when the tanker blew up in front of a courthouse in the 
northern town of Azaz. Around 14 of the dead were rebel fighters or courthouse 
guards, it said. Dozens more were injured.

Turkey’s privately owned Dogan news agency said a car bomb planted by Islamic 
State was responsible. There was no immediate claim of responsibility from the 
militant group.

Osama al-Merhi, a lawyer at the scene of the blast, also pointed the finger at 
IS.

“These kinds of crimes are only committed by the terrorist group Daesh,” he 
told AFP, using an Arabic acronym for IS. “They are the ones who target 
civilians and the cadres who are building this country.”

Turkey’s state-run Anadolu news agency cited a doctor in Azaz as saying that 
at least 60 people had been killed and more than 50 wounded. An Azaz resident 
who went to the local hospital told Reuters he had counted around 30 bodies 
laid out.

The attack appeared to be the deadliest yet in the town in northern Aleppo 
province, which has been regularly hit by bombings targeting rebels and 
civilians. In November rebels said 25 people – civilians and opposition 
fighters – were killed in a car bombing of a rebel headquarters. The rebels 
accused the Islamic State group of being behind that attack.

Syria’s nearly six-year war has create a patchwork of areas of control across 
the country.Azaz is a stronghold of the Turkish-backed Free Syrian Army (FSA), 
an alliance of moderate rebel groups whose fighters have, with Turkish military 
support, pushed Islamic State militants out of the border area.

In a roundup of its military operations over the last 24 hours in support of 
rebels in northernSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, the Turkish 
military said on Saturday that 21 Islamic State militants had been killed in 
clashes.

It said its warplanes had destroyed buildings and vehicles in airstrikes on 12 
Islamic State targets.

The blast comes during a fragile nationwide ceasefire brokered by Syrian 
government ally Russia and Turkey. The truce came into effect on December 30 
and is intended to pave the way for new peace talks in Kazakh capital Astana, 
which regime ally Iran is also helping organise.

But the ceasefire and the planned talks have been threatened by ongoing 
violence in the rebel-held Wadi Barada region outside Damascus, which is the 
main water source for the capital.
 