
According to Jesse Keeler of the bass and drums duo Death From Above 1979, 
their brutal two-man troglodyte rock is only a means to an end. "I'm doing this 
so I can retire when I'm 33 and have children," says Keeler, speaking more to 
his band member Sebastien Granger than anyone else. "I wouldn't be working this 
hard if I didn't think there would be some kind of financial reward. This is 
just a means to an end."

Keeler's honesty may be refreshing when most fame- and money-hungry bands 
claim to be making music just for themselves (and if anyone else likes it, 
that's a bonus), but you have to question the wisdom of his choice of music to 
go to the top with. Death From Above 1979 are unlikely to be giving Coldplay 
palpitations about their future earning power any time soon. Listening to the 
Canadian duo's combination of heavy metal, punk and disco is like being mugged 
by a particularly ferocious fashion student. It may be a stylish way to be 
assaulted, but it still hurts.

"This band didn't really start in the normal way," says Keeler, who plays bass 
and, like his friend, is a lot trendier than the average heavy metal musician. 
"In the winter of 2000 I made up three songs using bass and drums, then made a 
website called Death From Above that had a plane dropping a bomb with the words 
'coming soon' on it. I forgot all about it, but I was with Sebastien two years 
later when he suggested we make a band out of that. Now we're making music that 
is like a building constructed of nothing but cement: it's reduced to the 
essentials. Because there is only two of us everything we do has to have 
purpose otherwise the whole thing could fall apart."

Keeler and Granger had made a name for themselves on the Toronto music scene 
before the band started, and both had grown up in musical families - Keeler's 
father was in an early line-up of the 1960s hippy rock band Steppenwolf. "I 
didn't appreciate it when I was a kid, but we used to live with Alice Cooper's 
bass player and his wife, so music and musicians were everywhere," says Keeler. 
"I remember liking Born Under a Bad Sign by Albert King, and I used to sing You 
and I by Rick James to my family when I was four. There's a line it that goes, 
'You all can go to hell', that used to make my grandparents angry."

Grainger, who sings and plays drums for the band, listened to his parent's 
record collection - the Kinks, the Rolling Stones and French-language singers 
like Jacques Brel - and the pure pop that his sister liked, and the rap his 
elder brother played. "My dad is still really into music," he says. "Like a few 
years ago he heard about Rufus Wainwright and we went to see him together. So 
my parents didn't teach me how to play music, but they did give me an 
admiration for it."

Both claim that they discovered music as a result of there being nothing to 
watch on TV. "We didn't have cable TV until I was like, 12!" says Keeler, the 
incredulity in his voice revealing his youthfulness. "So I would start digging 
through the records and making tapes. And I could only handle watching my dad 
playing guitar for so long before I had to do it myself. It's been downhill 
from then on."

Two records gave Death From Above 1979 their inspiration: In Rock by the 1970s 
heavy metal pioneers Deep Purple and Chemistry by the Parisian electronic dance 
duo Daft Punk. "In Rock is really musical, but it is brutal and solid," says 
Grainger. "It's heavy and accomplished and it has a certain soulfulness to it. 
Daft Punk confine themselves to a genre even more than we do, and make 
beautiful electronic house music. At least a part of what we do is inspired by 
the urge to trick heavy metal fans into listening to dance music, because some 
of our songs are pure disco. They just happen to be presented in a way that 
makes kids in Slayer T-shirts mosh like crazy."

Grainger claims that he and Keeler do not use music to build their identities 
with, which means that they have no particular allegiance to any genre. But 
their stylishness and vaguely ironic manner do suggest self-consciousness in 
their approach to being in a band. "We'll listen to some R&B by Kelis and 
follow it up with a track by Mastodon, who are the heaviest band around," says 
Grainger. "I've been listening to Diana by Diana Ross like there's no 
tomorrow," adds Keeler with a chuckle. "Diana Ross was hanging out at gay clubs 
in New York's Paradise Garage in the late 1970s, listening to minimal disco 
music that is so 'now'. That's what made her so great."

Need to know

First record bought: Keeler: Indian Summer/Grainger: Jimi Hendrix
Favourite film: Keeler: Down By Law/Grainger: Putney Swope
Record to grab in an emergency: Keeler: Harmonium by Harmonium / Grainger: 
Fragile by Yes
Inspiration: Both: Making money to have kids and feed them.
Recent discovery: Both: Steely Dan
 