 INDEPENDENT Bosnia-Herzegovina was born yesterday in chaos and violence as 
Yugoslav fighters strafed strategic targets, ethnic clashes continued, and 
refugees fled to the relative safety of the Adriatic coast. Washington joined 
the European Community in recognising Bosnian independence but Bosnian Serbs 
responded by proclaiming their own republic loyal to Yugoslavia and withdrawing 
from the collective Bosnian presidency - a move that seemed certain to pres age 
further territorial fighting.
Serbian leaders in Belgrade and Bosnia denounced the EC decision and predicted 
further bloodshed as a result.

The chaos was compounded by the collapse of the Bosnian government and the 
occupation of the parliament in Sarajevo by peace demonstrators calling for the 
disarming of the rival militias, fresh elections, and the formation of a new 
government of national salvation.

Meanwhile the Security Council authorised the earliest possible full 
deployment of the 14,000-strong peacekeeping force in Yugoslavia, so far 
represented only by some senior officers and advance units.

The most serious battles yesterday were reported from the region towards the 
Adriatic coast south-west of Sarajevo, where five people were said to have been 
killed in bombing raids on military sites.

Street fighting was reported in Mostar, a stronghold of Croatian radicals who 
have been at daggers-drawn for months with the large Serb-dominated federal 
army presence in the town.

Elsewhere in the region, shelling was reported around the village of Kupres, 
the scene of vicious fighting at the weekend when Croatian forces repelled army 
attempts to take control.

The region bristles with federal military sites. The aircraft bombed two of 
them, an armaments factory and an ordnance depot, apparently to prevent them 
falling into hostile hands.

Further clashes were reported from the northern town of Bosanski Brod on the 
Croatian border where five people were reported killed by sniper fire.

Two people were killed in Sarajevo, bringing to about 20 the number of deaths 
there in the past three days, but the city was quieter than on Monday when 
Serbian snipers fired on unarmed demonstrators.

The Serbian gunmen were believed to have retaken control of the Holiday Inn in 
the centre of Sarajevo, since Muslim militiamen and angry demonstrators stormed 
the building to evict them on Monday.

Bosnia's new independence raises the question of what will happen to the heavy 
Yugoslav military presence in the republic, which also houses a plethora of key 
military installations, including air bases and arms factories. Yesterday's air 
raids do not suggest that the army will be content to abandon Bosnia peaceably.

The army has already withdrawn from Slovenia and most of Croatia, and under 
the UN peacekeeping plan is to pull out of Croatia completely.

Many of those forces have retreated to Bosnia. There are estimated to be up to 
100,000 federal troops, overwhelmingly Serb, in Bosnia, and they are believed 
to be getting reinforcements from the neighbouring Serb-controlled region of 
Krajina in Croatia where UN troops are now being deployed.

In Croatia the army enabled Serb militants to wrest control of one third of 
the republic in the seven-month war in Bosnia its problems are infinitely 
greater.

Morale has fallen, Serbia has no stomach for another war, and Bosnia's rugged 
terrain makes it, unlike the flat lands of eastern Croatia, ideal for guerrilla 
warfare.
 