 AS he does most weekends, Ejup Ganic went to the barber's on Saturday morning. 
And as usual, he chatted with the Muslim owner, while the Croatian girl washed 
his hair, and the Serbian barber gave him a trim and a shave.
'It's a typical barber's shop,' says Mr Ganic, who sees himself as the next 
president of Bosnia, preferably independent, and who preaches a message of 
'neighbourhood technology' that tells Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croats, and 
Bosnian Muslims to get together, drink coffee, visit each other's homes, and 
keep the wretched prospect of ethnic war in Bosnia at a safe distance.

He seems to be doing something right in Sarajevo, a city of 600,000 where two 
out of five are Muslims, one in five is a Croat, and one in three a Serb.

While Serbs and Croats are at each other's throats in adjacent Croatia, there 
was neither rancour nor rivalry at the barber's. And the neighbourhood 
technology message is getting across among the dwellers of the 18-storey 
concrete block at 27 Brotherhood and Unity Street.

If the ethnic war spreads into Bosnia from Croatia, the enemy will be sitting 
in the flat next door, on the floor above or below in the tower block.

But on the seventh floor, the only complaint of Slobodan Bozic, aged 25, a 
Serbian Bruce Willis lookalike who is a Yugoslav army sergeant, concerns the 
chap downstairs, another Serb, who constantly pesters him to turn the music 
down.

A Croatian family lives next door, Montenegrins on the other side, and Muslims 
on the floor above. Sgt Bozic's sister is married to a Croat.

'Only the madmen here want a war. It would be terrible because of all the 
mixed marriages. Relations are the same as they have always been, good,' he 
says.

Upstairs, Djabija Omer, 54, a Muslim clerk, knows what it is like to stare 
down the barrel of a gun. As a boy, aged six, during the second world war in 
eastern Bosnia, where a vicious civil war was raging, he was playing with some 
Muslim refugee children when a gang of Serbian royalist guerrillas trained 
their guns on them. Luckily, they were saved by the arrival of Serbian 
partisans.

'Anyone who experienced those years of the (Serbian) Chetniks and the 
(Croatian) Ustashe, couldn't want a war now,' he says.

When local Serbs came door-knocking on Saturday, collecting for repairs to the 
Orthodox church, the Muslim Omer family was delighted to donate its dinars.

Meanwhile, the cynics and extremists on both sides of the Serb-Croat divide, 
the leaderships in Belgrade and Zagreb, and their local puppets in Bosnia, are 
stoking up tension, hatred, and division, as they toy with the idea of carving 
up Bosnia between them.

The Muslim community, at 40 per cent the biggest of the three, is the meat in 
the sandwich.

The pragmatism of the Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic, and the refusal of 
the media here to drum up war fever are two key factors that explain why Bosnia 
has so far been spared a war and may succeed in avoiding the nightmare.

While Serbs and Croats have been slaughtering one another elsewhere in 
Yugoslavia, Mr Izetbegovic has been talking to all sides and coming up with one 
modus vivendi after another to try to fend off the apocalypse.

When the militant Serb leaders declared a Serbian Bosnian republic last week, 
moving to partition Bosnia, he dismissed the declaration, while assuring the 
Serbs that Bosnia is their country.

When he found his republic essentially occupied by the Yugoslav army, he 
invited the army to stay and promised the generals he wanted to guarantee their 
salaries, pensions and housing privileges.

'Bosnia has been very fortunate with its outstanding Muslim leader,' says a 
western diplomat.

In contrast to the rank opportunism and cynicism of the warring between 
Belgrade and Zagreb, Mr Izetbegovic has been a model of common sense.

'Every day we have two or three small fires,' says Mr Ganic, a close aide of 
the president. 'We just try slowly to defuse a mine to prevent an explosion. We 
talk and talk. When you have a wolf, you have to work with it until it becomes 
a pet.'

Mr Izetbegovic has won respect and support across the nationalities, social 
classes, and generations in Sarajevo, while the rival Serbian and Croatian 
party leaders and more militant Muslim leaders are the objects of scorn and 
blame.

Mr Izetbegovic has asked the European Community to recognise Bosnia as an 
independent republic a request the EC does not look likely to satisfy when it 
announces its decision on recognition of ex-Yugoslav republics on Wednesday.

The impression here is that the request has been made reluctantly, solely 
because there is no alternative, despite the eagerness of the Muslims to 
negotiate a new deal.

To deny Bosnia recognition, says the Izetbegovic camp, will encourage the 
Serbian and Croatian hotheads to incite unrest with a view to dividing the 
territorial spoils between them.

That would bring certain war here, and while the Muslims currently seem the 
most rational and civilising force in Yugoslavia, they would fight to the end 
if drawn into a war. Unlike the Serbs and Croats, they have nowhere else to go.

But it may not come to that. 

'I now think there will definitely be no war in Bosnia,' says Nenad Pejic, the 
editor-in-chief of Sarajevo television. 'Six months ago I was personally 
afraid. Now I don't think I'll have to report the war in Bosnia.'

' 

If Bosnia does avoid the bloodbath, it will be due in no small measure to Mr 
Pejic.

In a war where television has been a powerful generator of hatred and lies in 
Serbia and Croatia, Sarajevo TV has resisted the blandishments of the rival 
parties, exposed the partial truths of the warmongers, and persisted with a 
mission to bridge the ethnic divide.

'It's not possible to make war in Croatia or Serbia without the television,' 
says Mr Pejic.

Last month, the rival parties in Bosnia tried to carve up broadcasting between 
them. Mr Pejic and his staff protested and resisted. In a phone-in sounding of 
public opinion, they received 10-1 support.

Every day his television screens a brief shot of the Sarajevo skyline. The 
camera lingers on the minaret of the old mosque, the spire of the Catholic 
cathedral, the cupolas of the Orthodox church, and the stars of the synagogue, 
all within spitting distance of one another.

Church bells ring and the Muslim call to prayers echoes forth. 'Can you hear 
it?' intones the voice of Goran Bregovic, Bosnia's answer to Bruce Springsteen. 
'Do you want to destroy it?'
 