
One of Bob Dudley's first acts as the new boss of BP has been to announce that 
the bill for the clean-up of the Gulf of Mexico disaster has reached $11.2bn so 
far.

BP, where Dudley started as chief executive today, also said it had pledged 
certain Gulf assets as collateral for the $20bn Deepwater Horizon trust, set up 
to pay legitimate claims from the accident on April 20. The assets include 
royalty interest in oil and gas production of BP's Thunder Horse, Atlantis, Mad 
Dog, Great White and Mars, Ursa and Na Kika sites. Meanwhile the Macondo well 
which caused the disastrous leak was finally sealed on September 19, and since 
then BP has been completing the process of plugging and abandoning the well.BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> shares have bounced 7.5p higher to 
435.3p on the news. Yesterday Dudley held out the prospect of the company 
restarting dividend payments, perhaps in the first quarter of next year.

Overall the market has started the final quarter of the year brightly enough. 
TheFTSE 100 is up 47.71 points at 5596.33, after an overnight rise in Asia and 
upbeat Chinese manufacturing data. Later comes US data, and Ilya Spivak, 
currency strategist at Daily FX, said;
 UK shares got off to a strong start on Friday, but all eyes are firmly 
focused on the US ISM Manufacturing figure set to cross the wires late into the 
session as markets continue to view the health of the world's top economy as a 
proxy for the global recovery at large. Expectations call for a print at 54.5, 
showing manufacturing sector growth cooled to the slowest pace in 10 months. 
Still, risk appetite seems well supported ahead of the report after the recent 
string of upside surprises on US economic data.

Meanwhile UK manufacturing weakened more than expected in September to show 
its slowest growth in ten months, according the monthly CIPS PMI survey.

Elsewhere BG added 57.5p to £11.76 following news of a $17.8bn joint venture 
between Spanish oil group Repsol and Chinese petrochemical company Sinopec, 
prompting hopes of further moves in the sector.

Luxury goods group Burberry slipped 10p to £10.30 as recent takeover 
speculation faded, butDairy Crest added another 15.1p to 385.9p following its 
trading update yesterday and this week's news that German rival Theo Müller had 
taken a 3.04% stake. Dairy Crestmaintained yesterday it was not for sale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/sep/30/dairy-crest-denies-muller-takeover>
 and had not received an approach from Müller.
 