
The MP for Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> West, Naz Shah, 
has appealed for calm after protesters brought traffic to a standstill over the 
fatal police shooting of Yassar Yaqub.

Dozens of demonstrators, many covering their faces, marched through the city 
on Tuesday night with protesters hurling missiles at police.

The three-hour protest was sparked by the shooting of Yaqub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/03/man-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation>
, a 28-year-old father-of-two, by armed police when they cornered his white 
Audi sports car near the M62 in Huddersfield on Monday night.

The Independent Police Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc>, which is investigating the 
shooting, said a suspected illegal firearm was found in Yaqub’s car after he 
was killed.

On Wednesday, Shah urged her constituents to be patient and support the police 
watchdog’s investigation as she called for calm on the streets of West 
Yorkshire.

“I recognise that tensions are running high within communities. The local 
police also understand the heightened tension that the events over the past 24 
hours have caused within our communities and the need to provide reassurance,” 
said the Labour MP.


“I understand that West Yorkshire police are working fully with the IPCC’s 
independent investigation into the circumstances of the shooting and there is 
due process to follow, which may mean certain information cannot be provided in 
the way that communities feel they need.”

Shah said the vast majority of those who protested on Tuesday night were 
peaceful. West Yorkshire police confirmed there had been only “minor disorder” 
when some protesters threw missiles but that there had been no arrests.

The MP added: “I have been assured that West Yorkshire police continue to be 
committed in facilitating peaceful protest and will continue talking and 
listening to communities with real concerns. The vast majority of those who 
attended tonight’s protest were peaceful in their actions. We must allow The 
IPCC investigation to take place, which will take its due course. This will 
require our patience and support.

“Finally I urge the leadership of our community to work in partnership with 
the elected members and most importantly the agencies concerned to ensure that 
lessons are learned from this tragic incident.

“I urge our community to remain calm and respect the wishes of the family who 
have lost their loved one and have appealed for calm and privacy during this 
very difficult time.”

The fatal shooting follows a recent surge in gun crime in West Yorkshire, 
including an incident on Christmas Day when a police officer was fired at while 
taking a witness statement outside a nightclub in Bradford. The officer was not 
injured in the incident, which is not believed to be connected to the shooting 
of Yaqub.

Five people remain in police custody over the investigation into Yaqub, which 
centred on the suspected illegal possession of a firearm. Three of those were 
arrested when Yaqub’s car was cornered on a slip road of the M62 on Monday 
night. Two others were held in a simultaneous stop of a car in Bradford.
 