
A man drowned in Sydney’s Darling Harbour at a world-famous event that had a 
“fundamentally flawed” risk assessment, says a coroner.

Critically, it didn’t identify the risk posed by the open waters’ edge of 
Cockle Bay or assess the need “for controls to be put in place to eliminate, 
isolate or reduce that risk”, she said.

The deputy state coroner, Teresa O’Sullivan, found that Brendan Hickey, 34, 
died as a consequence of drowning by misadventure to which alcohol intoxication 
was a contributing factor.

In her inquest findings delivered on Thursday, O’Sullivan made recommendations 
relating to the risk assessment policies, practices and procedures of bodies, 
including event management company Concept Entertainment Group (CEG).

Hickey, who immigrated to Sydney from Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, was with his girlfriend and two 
friends at the Vivid festival in May 2014, when he stood up, lost his balance 
and fell into the water.

The friends dived in but were unable to find Hickey, who couldn’t swim and had 
a fear of water. He was later found to have a blood alcohol reading of 0.256.

Minutes after he fell, the go-ahead was given to start the sound and light 
show, a move which police said interfered with the efforts of rescuers to 
coordinate an effective response.

His family was understandably distressed by this, said the coroner, who noted 
a lack of awareness and training in relation to CEG’s “stop show procedure”.

But she found the decision to start the show did not have any effect on the 
survival of Hickey, whose relatives described him as hard-working, social and a 
family man idolised by his nieces and nephews.

Vivid Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>, a “major, 
internationally renowned event”, attracted more than 1.43 million people in 
2014, but the CEG risk assessments had been “fundamentally flawed”, she said.

No reference was made to controls already in place such a lifebuoy and fixed 
emergency ladders, and no analysis was made of them in the context of Vivid and 
factors such as its proximity to licensed premises.

While CEG had made changes, there was “no evidence that the underlying 
weaknesses in CEG’s risk assessment and risk management processes have been 
addressed”.

She noted an expert’s opinion that the erection of permanent fencing to 
isolate the waters’ edge at Cockle Bay would significantly reduce the risk of 
drowning.

 