

Two top travel industry figures have warned that Britain leaving the EU could 
risk tourists’ safety and push up flight prices.

Less than a week before a crunch Brussels summit on David Cameron’s 
renegotiation package, the easyJet chief,Carolyn McCall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carolyn-mccall>, suggested a Brexit could 
herald a return to the days when flying was “reserved for the elite”.

Meanwhile, Peter Long, former boss of the Tui travel group which owns Thomson 
and First Choice, said close cooperation with other EU states was essential to 
“protect the security of our holidaymakers”.

Five previously Eurosceptic Labour figures, including shadow foreign secretary 
Hilary Benn, have thrown their weight behind Cameron’s deal. In an open letter, 
they said the EU was “not perfect” but leaving would be a “huge risk”.

Brexit could risk tourists' safety and push up flight prices, say top travel 
figures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/14/brexit-could-risk-tourists-safety-and-push-up-flight-prices-say-top-travel-figures>
Writing in the Sunday Times, McCall said: “The EU has brought huge benefits 
for UK travellers and businesses. Staying in the EU will ensure that they, and 
all of us, continue to receive them.

“How much you pay for your holiday really does depend on how much influence 
Britain has inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

McCall argued that before the EU overhauled aviation in the 1990s, flying was 
reserved for the elite who travelled on “government-owned airlines between 
state-controlled airports”.

“As a result of Britain’s membership, the costs of flights have plummeted, 
while the range of destinations has soared. That’s whyeasyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> believes the benefits far 
outweigh the frustrations – and why the UK is better off as part of the EU,” 
she said.

Long, who was in charge of Tui when dozens of its customers were killed by an 
Islamist gunman in Tunisia last year, insisted that close cooperation with 
other EU countries was essential.

He said witnessing the “human tragedy” after the Tunisian massacre gave him 
“many first-hand experiences of seeing how European governments, through their 
foreign offices, collaborate and work together in a crisis”.

“It would not be like that if we weren’t in a situation where we were as 
Europe working together,” he wrote in the newspaper.

Long, now chairman of Royal Mail, also cautioned that Brexit would cause the 
value of the pound to slump.

“For our customers, that means higher holiday prices and less spending money,” 
he added.

Alongside Benn, former Labour leader Neil Kinnock, ex-home secretary David 
Blunkett, former foreign secretary Jack Straw and MP Margaret Beckett also 
backed the prime minister in their letter printed in the Sunday Mirror. All 
five campaigned against remaining in Europe in the 1975 referendum.

But they said: “Our concern then was that membership would mean a one-way loss 
of sovereignty and investment. This has proved unfounded.

“The conclusion of the renegotiation will hopefully strengthen this 
relationship as we make the progressive case for Britain in Europe.

“Leaving would be a huge risk to prosperity, security and the opportunities of 
future generations. The EU is not perfect and improvement is always worth 
making, but the benefits outweigh the costs.”

Liam Fox, the Eurosceptic former cabinet minister, accused Downing Street of 
“scaremongering”.

“Those that wish to remain in the EU should make the positive case for the 
supranational European project rather than frightening people,” he said.


Fox, whom Cameron had tasked with taking the referendum legislation through 
the House of Lords has also announced he would be voting to leave the EU.

Lord Dobbs, creator of the hit political drama House of Cards, dismissed the 
prime minister’s renegotiation as “a mouse that barely squeaks, let alone 
roars”.

As the sides in the campaign begin to gear up for an attritional four-month 
run-up to the likely referendum date of 23 June, the US secretary of state, 
John Kerry, has voiced support for Britain staying in the EU.

Kerry said it was “profoundly” in US interests that the UK voted to remain in 
the union.

In his last big speech before the Brussels summit, the prime minister told an 
audience in Hamburg on Friday night that Europe had to “stand together” against 
threats such as Islamic State and Russian aggression.

He also appealed for Germany’s help in finalising his package of reforms, 
stressing the countries’ shared interests and values.
 