
Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, has insisted he will hold Theresa 
May to account over her plans for taking Britain out of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, as MPs overwhelmingly backed a 
government amendment endorsing the prime minister’s self-imposed March deadline 
for triggering article 50.

Both sides declared victory after a lively debate in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> on Wednesday that lasted 
more than six hours. Starmer, and pro-remain Conservative backbenchers, 
challenged David Davis, the minister for exiting the EU, to produce a 
“detailed” picture of his negotiating strategy before article 50 is formally 
triggered – but a series of interventions from MPs underlined the divisions in 
both parties.
What is the supreme court appeal about? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
The Commons passed Labour’s motion calling for “the prime minister to commit 
to publishing the government’s plan for leaving the EU before article 50 is 
invoked” by448 to 75 votes – a majority of 373 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/mps-back-disclosure-of-brexit-plan-and-triggering-article-50-by-end-of-march>
 – after it was amended by Downing Street to “call on the government to invoke 
article 50 by 31 March 2017”.

The vote is non-binding but was a highly symbolic moment as it marked the 
first time MPs had endorsed the government’s Brexit timetable, announced by May 
at the Conservative party conference. Douglas Carswell, Ukip’s one MP, said it 
was the end of a “long road”.

The Tory former Cabinet minister and leave supporter Iain Duncan Smith said 
the vote was a “historic moment” and that the government had called Labour’s 
bluff: “They have had to vote to give us a date, so that is a real blank cheque 
for the government. That means that no matter what happens now in parliament,
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is signed up to the 
principle that by March 31 next year the government will have been able to 
invoke article 50.”

More than 20 Labour MPs voted against their own party line to oppose the 
amendment, amid disquiet about the leadership’s tactics. Some disgruntled 
backbenchers suggested that scores of Labour MPs had abstained.

Labour MPs defying Starmer’s approach and refusing to back the government’s 
amendment also included three shadow ministers – Daniel Zeichner, Catherine 
West and Tulip Siddiq.

What's the significance of Wednesday's article 50 vote? Our panel responds | 
Martin Kettle, Anne Perkins and Giles Fraser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/whats-the-significance-of-wednesdays-artice-50-vote-our-panel-responds>
The SNP, Green party MP Caroline Lucas and the Liberal Democrats voted against 
the motion, with the Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron, suggesting Labour had allowed 
itself to be “muzzled”.

He tweeted: “Labour & Tories holding hands towards a hard Brexit, refusing to 
seek the will of the people on the deal. I want democracy not a stitch up.”

However, Starmer sought to show that Labour will use the motion to exert 
pressure on the government. He said a “late, vague plan” would not be good 
enough, and he would measure any published negotiating strategy against five 
tests:

 *  Does it answers key questions such as whether the UK will seek to remain 
within the customs union and the EU single market? 
 * Does it give enough detail for MPs, including on the Brexit select 
committee chaired by Hilary Benn, to scrutinise the government’s approach? 
 * Does it provide enough information for the independent Office for Budget 
Responsibility to make detailed economic forecasts?

 * Will it address the concerns of the devolved administrations in Scotland 
and Wales? 
 * Does it “have enough detail to build genuine consensus”? 
Starmer, the MP for Holborn and St Pancras, stressed the need for the 
government to act for voters who backed remain in June’s referendum, as well as 
those who wanted to leave.

“That is an important point, because the future of this country is bound up 
with the negotiations, and it is wrong in principle for the government to act 
solely for the 52% – to base its approach on the 52% or a group within the 
52%,” he said.

If Labour is not satisfied the tests are met, he said the party would seek to 
amend the bill that the government is expected to bring to parliament to 
trigger article 50, if it loses theongoing supreme court appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/05/brexit-supreme-court-article-50-appeal-case-opens>
.

Davis insisted the government had made no new concessions by agreeing to 
support the Labour motion and had always been clear it would keep parliament 
informed. He said by supporting the amended motion, Labour was “signing up” to 
triggering article 50.

“Dance on a pin as the shadow spokesman may, that’s what they’re signing up to 
– the government will invoke article 50 by 31 March 2017,” he said. He added 
that it had always been his approach to outline the government’s strategy to 
MPs, so long as it did not undermine the government’s negotiating strategy.

He said the government’s amendment had “laid down an important challenge” to 
opposition MPs who said they supported the verdict in the referendum but were 
seeking to “thwart” Brexit.


“We will see today if they’re willing to back the government in getting on 
with implementing the decision made by the voters of the United Kingdom,” Davis 
said.

He stressed that the government would need to maintain some secrecy around its 
aims in the two-year negotiating process, in order to “retain room for 
manoeuvre, including the ability to give and take, to trade off different 
interests, to maximise the value of concessions, and to do so without always 
giving the other side advance notice. We must retain the ability to negotiate 
with a high degree of agility and speed; the more complex the negotiation, the 
more parties to it, and the more time-pressured it is, the more important that 
is.”

Tory backbenchers from both sides of the Brexit divide intervened. Brexit 
supporter John Redwood said: “As we bring the country together it is important 
that people do not look for possible or imaginary problems, because we want the 
strongest possible position to negotiate the best possible answer for the 
country, and we need to unite to do so.”

Anna Soubry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/26/anna-soubry-brexit-norway-trade-worst-deal-for-small-business>
, the fiercely pro-remain campaigner who had led the Conservative rebels 
against the government, said she would back the motion but remained “nervous 
and concerned”.

“The debates we now need to have are about the value of the single market – 
let us thrash it out and hear why some say we should not be in it. Let us talk 
about the customs union and the peril of tariffs. Let us talk about immigration 
– the positive benefits of it, and some of the downsides, but let us have these 
debates and, most importantly, let us take part in that – parliament. We speak 
for our constituents. We speak for the people.”

The former chancellor Ken Clarke, pointing to the divisions on his own side, 
cautioned that the government could comply with the motion by simply providing 
“hints” about its intentions.


“This word ‘plan’ is being used in an extremely vague way, and could cover 
some of the vague assertions that ministers have been making for the last few 
weeks. Will the secretary of state accept that the House requires a description 
– published in a white paper, preferably – of the strategic objectives that the 
government will pursue,” he said, before going on to suggest ministers “have no 
idea what the strategy is anyway and don’t agree with each other”. Clarke was 
the only Conservative MP to vote against the motion.

Several Labour MPs intervened to say that they could not support the amended 
motion, with Tottenham MP David Lammy saying his remain-supporting constituents 
would not want him to support triggering article 50.

Ben Bradshaw said he could not support the motion as amended, as it gave the 
government “a blank cheque to invoke article 50 without any of us being any the 
wiser about the government’s intentions”.

Nine Labour MPs voted against the amended motion, with 149 in favour. The 
party has a total of 231 members in the house.

The Labour Manchester mayoral candidate Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 used his speech in the debate to call on his own party to do a better job of 
addressing the public’s concerns about immigration.


“There is nothing socialist about a system of open borders that allows 
multinationals to treat people as commodities and to move them around Europe to 
drive down labour costs and create a race to the bottom,” he said, in an 
apparent dig at frontbenchers including the shadow home secretary,Diane Abbott, 
who has argued strongly for the benefits of immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/21/diane-abbott-miliband-immigration>.

He called for his colleagues to “make the argument for an immigration system 
that allows for greater control and that reduces the numbers coming here, but 
that does so in a fair way”.

But the former shadow health secretary Heidi Alexander, struck a different 
note, warning against interpreting it as a rejection of immigration. “My 
fundamental concern about prioritising immigration over all else is that we run 
the risk of whipping up even more of the intolerance, division and – let us be 
honest – hatred that we saw in the referendum campaign,” she said.
 