
When the high court ruled on the use of the royal prerogative in relation to 
triggering article 50 we saw an unprecedented attack on the judiciary. 
Independent judges were labelled“enemies of the people” by the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
, and publicly lambasted for simply doing their job.

It is the duty of judges to impartially interpret the law, and it is the duty 
of the lord chancellor,Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss>, to unequivocally defend the 
law. As the supreme court ruling on the use of the royal prerogative 
approaches, we hope the lord chancellor will not be so shy this time around to 
vocally defend the independent judiciary.

The people of the UK voted to leave the EU, and this process must be carried 
out with integrity. Crucially, in exiting the EU we must not undermine our 
existing democratic structures, or inadvertently weaken the checks and balances 
on government.

An independent and transparent judiciary is a cornerstone of our democracy, 
acting as an essential check on power – in this case the very matter at hand is 
where decision-making powers lie. If our judicial system becomes subject to the 
whims of politicians and those who shout the loudest, we risk constitutional 
chaos.

The supreme court’s judgment will no doubt be controversial. If the government 
once again fails to convincingly defend the independent judiciary an alarming 
precedent will be set, and it will be hard to ignore the damage done to our 
democracy.
Alexandra Runswick Director, Unlock Democracy, Stephen Bowen Director, British 
Institute of Human Rights,Simon Burall Director, Involve Foundation, Professor 
Graham Smith Director of the Centre for the Study of Democracy, University of 
Westminster,Professor Dibyesh Anand Head of the Department of Politics and 
International Relations, University of Westminster,Professor Andrew Le Sueur 
Professor of constitutional justice, University of Essex,Geoffrey Payne 
Barrister at law, 25 Bedford Row Chambers,Antony Hook Barrister at law, Great 
James Street Chambers

• It is deeply discouraging to see Simon Jenkins (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/supreme-court-mps-article-50-parliament>
, 8 December) of all people joining the populist element currently engaged in 
bashing the judiciary. The supreme court in the Brexit case will not, as he 
says, be giving a judgment “about the utility of a one-clause bill”. They will 
be deciding the important constitutional question of whether the executive has 
the legal power to trigger article 50 or whether the law requires that it be 
done by parliament by statute. To go on to say that leavers “would be correct” 
in suspecting that “they are up against a London mafia of bad-loser judges … 
out to use every trick in the book to cheat the public of its decision” is a 
calumny. As it happens, whichever way it goes, the decision in this case will 
have no effect on implementation of Brexit.
Michael Zander QC
Emeritus professor, LSE

• Simon Jenkins makes the dangerous assertion that Brexiters would be right in 
suspecting that “they are up against a London mafia of bad loser judges” saying 
that “What the judges should do instead is turn the case back on parliament”. 
But that’s exactly what they’ve done. Judges hear the cases brought before 
them. The government agreed that this was a case the courts should hear. There 
was no dispute that the court should decide on this tricky point of law. The 
government then pursued its right of appeal. So the issue is back with the 
supreme court. This is our system: an independent judiciary reminding 
parliament how legally to exercise its sovereignty – not telling MPs how to 
vote, just saying do it legally. It is time that Simon Jenkins, the Mail and 
the Telegraph realised that vilifying the judges and seeking to undermine 
judicial independence is a very dangerous step. The UK has a precious 
reputation for the rule of law and access to justice. We must not abandon that 
vital protection for all citizens.
Diana Good
London

• We must not confuse democracy with mob rule. David Cameron’s commitment to 
enact the referendum verdict was democratic, if reckless, only because he was 
the prime minister. His decision does not imply that sovereignty has been 
transferred from the Queen-in-parliament to public opinion. If our present 
parliament thinks Brexit is against the national interest, it must dump it 
without hesitation and at the next election the public can vote accordingly, if 
it is still unpersuaded that parliament was right. Whatever certain journals 
may wish it to be, that is our democratic system.
Rod Tipple
Cambridge

• After more than 300 years of asserting parliamentary supremacy, the ghost of 
royal tyranny returns to haunt us. The supreme court considers a royal 
prerogative to leave (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/supreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway>
, 6 December), but what about when we’ve left?

The element of “repeal” in the misnomered great “repeal” bill will take the 
form of a Henry VIII clause, named for the king who, with the Statute of 
Proclamations 1539, made his word have the force of law. The clause will enable 
government ministers to repeal or amend primary legislation through a secondary 
act with limited or no further parliamentary scrutiny. Ministers will be handed 
the axe and given the chance to divorce, or behead our rights based on EU law.

The Statute of Proclamations was repealed with Henry VIII’s death. This 
country decided that no man, not even a king, should have the power to make, 
amend or repeal primary legislation without parliament. Now I fear we’ll be 
haunted by another royal ghost even if the supreme court dismisses the current 
one.
Joelle Grogan
Department of Law, Middlesex University

• You say the “urgent job” is to press for a soft Brexit, but that implies 
premature defeatism about the possibility of averting Brexit altogether, a 
challenging but still not impossible task (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/the-guardian-view-on-richmond-park-slowly-does-it>
, 3 December). The demand for parliament or the electorate to have the final 
say on any agreement with the EU27 (the rest of the EU) negotiated after 
article 50 has been triggered is incompatible with article 50. The government’s 
summary of its legal case in the supreme court says “an article 50 notification 
is irrevocable and cannot be given conditionally”. So when the two years for 
negotiations are up, we’ll be out of the EU, either with an obviously 
unpalatable agreement, or, if our government or parliament rejects whatever 
agreement’s on offer, without any agreement at all – the worst possible 
outcome. There will be no option after the trigger to reject any agreement and 
remain in the EU under the existing terms.

The choice between hard and soft Brexit will be made for us by the EU27 once 
article 50 is triggered. The task now is to convince public opinion that on the 
emerging evidence, mostly unavailable at the time of the referendum, any kind 
of achievable Brexit will be worse for ordinary working Britons than remaining 
in the EU and urgently tackling the grievances that led millions to vote to 
leave. OnceTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
triggers article 50, it will be too late. We need to do everything possible to 
ensure that the trigger is postponed long enough for the British people to 
exercise their democratic right to change their minds and call off Brexit 
altogether.
Brian Barder
London

• Simon Jenkins is mistaken in stating that “the judges should tell the MPs 
they caused this mess”. Our problems with the EU have longer, more deeply 
rooted origins than sloppy work in parliament but we are where we are and now 
need all the wise counsel we can get. We need it from judges, from businessmen, 
from social workers, from scientists – in short from the whole of the society 
that this decision will affect.

To allow such a serious matter to be reduced to a quarrel between the 
nationalist and the business wings of the Tory party is a grave mistake. That 
is why it has been so disturbing to see the Labour party flunking its duty as 
an opposition and not exposing all these questions to consideration.
Dr Martin Rosendaal
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 