
To say Bristol should have won this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/northampton-bristol-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 might be stretching it but they would certainly have been worthy of it. A win 
at Northampton, whatever the form of the home team, was the kind of result all 
but out of the question for them earlier in the season, when just avoiding a 
hammering at home was the summit of their ambitions. Yet even a small sequence 
of wins can have a remarkable effect on a team.

Jason Woodward leads heroics but Bristol fall just short at Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/northampton-bristol-premiership-rugby-match-report>
“The way they’ve grown as a team is amazing,” the Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> flanker Teimana Harrison 
said. “When we first played them they weren’t that threatening, but now, man, 
they’ve turned things round. You look at the calibre of players they’ve got – 
the back three is deadly. I think they’ll cause some upsets in the near future.”

In the end Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> came away 
with a bonus point, which tucks them in yet closer to Worcester, just a point 
behind them at the foot of the table. On this form Sale, seven ahead, are 
within sight as well. The relegation battle is on again.

No doubt there are a number of reasons to explain the upturn, but the most 
obvious is the arrival of the New Zealander Jason Woodward, who recently kept 
Julian Savea out of the Super Rugby-winning Hurricanes team. After trying him 
at centre, Bristol have installed him in his favourite position, full-back, and 
given him the goalkicking duties.

He is a big bruiser with a light touch, pace and a powerful boot. Pretty much 
the full package in other words. What is more, he is England-qualified through 
a grandparent and has a girlfriend from Manchester, whom he met while studying 
at Hartpury College. Since then, she has followed him to Australia, where he 
played for the Rebels, to New Zealand, before accompanying him back here. 
Full-back is not an obvious point of weakness for Eddie Jones at the moment, 
but Woodward is class.

He scored 21 points, including the try of the match, Bristol’s second, which 
he started with a chip from out of his own 22 and finished with pace when 
accepting an inside ball from Tom Varndell. That earned Bristol the lead again, 
55 minutes into the game, but they surrendered it immediately when JJ Hanrahan 
charged down Will Cliff’s clearance from the restart for Northampton’s 
bonus-point try. Woodward’s fourth penalty drew Bristol level on the hour but 
the home team pulled away in the final 10 minutes with a penalty from Stephen 
Myler and a drop goal from Harry Mallinder.

Woodward finished the game on the sidelines, victim of a nasty clash of heads 
with Harrison. By the letter of World Rugby’s severe new guideline it should 
have been a penalty, the minimum sanction for accidental contact with the head. 
Olly Robinson, son of Andy and rapidly developing into as fine a flanker, 
argued the case vehemently and with immaculate logic, but the referee would not 
be moved. The referee was right – and yet, in the current climate that World 
Rugby has created, wrong.

A penalty then, with two minutes to go, might have thrown Bristol a lifeline 
but Northampton were able to finish the match the stronger. A bonus-point win, 
in the context of their recent form, is welcome. Then again they remain just 
below Leicester in the table and we all know what’s just happened there. Jim 
Mallinder, the director of rugby, did not appear for his regular post-match 
debrief with the press because of a meeting he had to attend, into which we are 
told to read nothing.

A valuable win this may have been but it was far from convincing, the 
inordinate power of Louis Picamoles and that error by Cliff the main 
differences between the sides. If you had been asked to pick which of the sides 
was haunted by fear of relegation you would not have gone for Bristol.

Northampton Foden; Elliott (Estelles 12), Burrell, Hanrahan (Mallinder 67), 
North; Myler, Groom (Dickson 70); A Waller (E Waller 68), Haywood, Brookes 
(Hill 62), Lawes, Day (Craig 68), Wood (capt), Harrison, Picamoles (Gibson 67).

Tries Picamoles, Haywood, Wood, Hanrahan. Cons Myler 3. Pen Myler. Drop goal 
Mallinder.

Bristol Woodward (Palamo 78); Wallace, Palamo (Arscott 70), Hurrell, Varndell; 
Jarvis (Searle 62), Cliff (R Williams 62); Traynor (Bevington 62), Hawkins 
(Crumpton 53), Ford-Robinson (Cortes 62), Tuohy, Glynn (Sorenson 60), 
Fenton-Wells (Lam 67), Robinson (capt), Eadie.

Tries Eadie, Woodward. Cons Woodward 2. Pens Woodward 4.

Referee A Jackson. Attendance 14,872.
 