
Brock Osweiler finally looked like the player Houston spent $72m on, throwing 
for a touchdown and running for another to lead the Texans to a 27-14 wild-card 
playoff win over theOakland Raiders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/oakland-raiders> on Saturday.

NFL wild card round: Seattle Seahawks v Detroit Lions – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/07/nfl-wild-card-seattle-seahawks-detroit-lions-live>
Osweiler, benched on 18 December, got his job back this week with Tom Savage 
out with a concussion, and played his best game of the season to give the 
Texans their first playoff victory since the 2012 season.

Houston bounced back after an embarrassing 30-0 wild-card loss to Kansas City 
last season to advance to face either the Chiefs or New England in the 
divisional round next weekend.

The Raiders’ first trip to the playoffs since the 2002 season, when they went 
to the Super Bowl, ended with a thud behind the struggles of third-string 
rookie Connor Cook. He threw for 161 yards with one touchdown and three 
interceptions against the NFL’s top-ranked defense.

He became the first quarterback in NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> 
history to make his first start in a playoff game after MVP contender Derek 
Carr broke his leg two weeks ago, and Matt McGloin injured his shoulder on 
Sunday. His performance wasn’t helped by star left tackle Donald Penn missing 
the game with a knee injury, which ended a streak of 160 straight starts.

Houston (10-7) led by 13 at half-time and made it 27-7 on a one-yard run by 
Osweiler early in the fourth quarter.

The Raiders (12-5) cut the lead when Andre Holmes grabbed an eight-yard 
touchdown reception on their next possession. Oakland got a stop after that, 
but Corey Moore intercepted Cook on the next possession.

DeAndre Hopkins had a touchdown reception for the Texans and Lamar Miller gave 
Houston a 10-0 lead in the first quarter on a TD run one play after Jadeveon 
Clowney’s first career interception.

It was the first career playoff game for Osweiler, who was benched for Peyton 
Manning before the postseason last season with Denver. He finished with 168 
yards passing.

Houston took a 3-0 lead with a 50-yard field goal by Nick Novak with about 
eight minutes left in the first quarter.

Clowney batted a pass by Cook with one hand, then tipped it with his other one 
before pulling it down for the interception later in the quarter. He probably 
would have scored on the play, but in the time it took him to grab the ball, 
Raiders running back Latavius Murray had latched on to one of his ankles and 
was pulling him down.

Miller scampered untouched on the next play for a four-yard touchdown to make 
it 10-7. The Raiders got a two-yard TD run by Murray late in the first quarter.

Houston added a field goal in the second quarter before making it 20-7 on a 
two-yard reception by Hopkins. That score was set up when Osweiler delivered a 
38-yard pass to Hopkins just before the receiver stepped out of bounds two 
plays earlier.
 