
Bruce Springsteen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> exists at 
that rarefied level of fame where you get to move like a Dalek, without ever 
actually having to touch anything. When he is out in public, at least – when he 
is being the Springsteen who is Brooooooce, the Springsteen who is the Boss, 
rather than the one who’s been married for 25 years and has three kids – no 
obstacles stand in his way. No door is left unopened, no person steps out in 
front of him, and if you find yourself in his orbit, you can’t help but find 
the gravitational pull of stardom yanking you into your position.

I’ve seen and experienced this a couple of times. In 2010, when he attended a 
screening of the documentary about him,The Promise 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4de878485ffee>, at BFI Southbank in 
London, a friend and I were walking down the red carpet towards the cinema when 
there was a stir around us; we felt it before we noticed the faces lining the 
barriers turning in one direction. Behind us, Springsteen had alighted from a 
people carrier. We panicked – We’re not meant to be here! Where do we go? – and 
made ourselves as small and invisible at the edge of the carpet as we could 
while he ambled past and the energy followed behind. I don’t remember how the 
doors opened, but I’m pretty sure he didn’t have to lift a finger.

Then backstage at the Ricoh Arena in Coventry, this past June. Springsteen was 
just finishing his final number – an acoustic version of his wonderful 1975 
redemption songThunder Road <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5kXnq5IjdU>. We 
were in the access tunnel at the side of the stage, where a fleet of black 
luxury cars lined up, windows tinted, engines ticking over, waiting for him and 
the band to leave the stage, to be whisked from the stadium before the house 
lights have flashed on, while tens of thousands are still finishing their 
drinks and working out where the nearest exit is. It is, doubtless, the same 
wherever he plays.
Watch a young Bruce Springsteen perform Thunder Road 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5kXnq5IjdU>. 
The 67-year-old Bruce Springsteen who enters the room at his favoured London 
luxury hotel – door opened by someone else, naturally, and it took three people 
to wait with me for him to enter – has skin the colour of wealth and clothes so 
casual they could only be expensive: a close-fitting jacket, a slightly 
scoop-necked T-shirt, and jeans whose left leg is flecked with white paint, as 
if he’s just been touching up the cornicing in the corridors. You half wonder 
if someone splattered the paint on for him, just to keep things looking blue 
collar.

He’s here promoting his autobiography, Born to Run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/26/born-to-run-memoir-bruce-springsteen-review>
. Before London, he’d been on a nine-date book tour of US cities, meeting his 
flock, opening – touchingly – with anappearance 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7525558/bruce-springsteen-born-to-run-book-signing-freehold-new-jersey>
 in his home town of Freehold, New Jersey (pop: 12,052), to which people 
travelled from across the east coast. Even that turned into a major operation: 
theGuardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/27/bruce-springsteen-book-new-jersey-born-to-run>
 that at least eight police officers were on duty around the branch of Barnes 
and Noble, with around twice that number of private security guards.

Springsteen estimates he has scrawled his signature on 17,000 copies of the 
book. Perhaps surprisingly, he’s rather enjoyed the experience. “You meet the 
fans – only for 10 seconds, but you meet them one by one,” he says. “And they 
have an opportunity: what’s the one thing you always wanted to say over the 40 
years of the relationship we’ve had? I actually found it quite moving. Always 
enjoyed that part. I used to love to drift around, bump into people, see what 
their lives were like, wander into their lives for a few moments then drift 
back out. It appealed to the transient nature of my personality. I liked the 
idea of being here and then being gone, this little spirit moving through the 
world.”

A couple of days before we meet, he opens the European leg of his promo jaunt 
with an event in front of an invited audience of journalists at the ICA in 
London, where he notes that when the fans have met him, one of the commonest 
responses has been: “You’re shorter than I expected.” Here, too, the reverence 
is striking. When questions are opened to the floor, someone identifying 
himself as “Eddie from Ireland” tells Springsteen: “Such is the affection that 
the people of Ireland have for you, that if you ran for president of Ireland in 
the morning, you’d be elected.” When the event winds up, a throng of 
middle-aged men gathers at the front of the stage to get their copies ofBorn to 
Run signed.

In Trump’s case, the facade is easy to see through, and what you see is a 
bundle of anxiety, fragility and insecurity

It is a pretty decent book, in a genre – the rock autobiography – replete with 
stinkers. (But then, you’d hope it would be a pretty decent book given that 
Springsteen wasreportedly paid $10m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/05/bruce-springsteens-born-to-run-races-to-top-of-book-charts>
 to write it.) It deserves to have topped the bestseller lists on both sides of 
the Atlantic, for its honesty about Springsteen’s difficult childhood, his 
troubled relationship with his father, his struggles with depression, and his 
unyielding faith in the redemptive power of rock’n’roll. He writes about the 
first time depression struck, in the early 1980s, in a way that resonates 
powerfully: he is on a road trip with a friend, stopping at a small-town fair, 
when, “From nowhere, a despair overcomes me; I feel an envy of these men and 
women and their late summer ritual, the small pleasures that bind them and this 
town together. Now, for all I know these folks may hate this one-dog dump and 
each other’s guts and be screwing one another’s husbands and wives like 
rabbits. Why wouldn’t they? But right now, all I can think of is that I want to 
be amongst them, of them, and I can’t. I can only watch.”

That depression still haunts him, fended off by performing – in the book he 
talks of being “crushed between 60 and 62, good for a year, and out again from 
63 to 64” – and I want to ask what his favoured antidepressant is, whether 
Sertraline (Zoloft in the States) performed the miracles for him it did for me. 
But there doesn’t really seem to be a good way to ask about a hero’s pill 
regimen.

***

It’s less than a month, when we speak, before the US elections, and 
Springsteen is getting increasingly confident that Donald Trump won’t win. He’s 
no less scathing about the Republican candidate for that confidence, though. We 
talk about the contrast between the American ideal of masculinity – generous, 
confident, empathetic, determined; the one you think of when you imagine the 
“Greatest Generation” who fought in the second world war – and the one Trump 
presents. He laughs at the difference. “In Trump’s case, the facade is easy to 
see through, and what you see is a bundle of anxiety, fragility and 
insecurity,” he says. “It’s the thinnest possible mask of masculinity. And it 
wouldn’t fool anybody from the Greatest Generation.” There’s a faint hesitation 
around his use of those words, as if acknowledging that not everyone who fought 
in the war, including his father, was necessarily great. “It’s such a thin 
costume that for me it doesn’t hold for a moment. But there have been quite a 
few people he has attracted along the way, so I suppose the bluster works to a 
certain degree. He’s really quite an embarrassment if you’re from the USA. It’s 
simply the most rigid and thinnest veil of masculinity over a mess.”
Watch Bruce Springsteen campaign for Barack Obama in 2012. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JygWoIeW224> 
Springsteen notes that he’s been asked about Trump a lot as he’s promoted his 
book. And, despite a reputation for political engagement, he’s evidently a 
little tired of it. In fact, he’s been relatively quiet this election. Though 
he appeared atcampaign events for both Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2012/nov/06/bruce-springsteen-barack-obama-video>
 andJohn Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/oct/03/uselections2004.arts>, he hasn’t 
stumped for Hillary Clinton. His most notable piece of activism this year came 
in April when hepulled out of a show in North Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/08/bruce-springsteen-cancels-north-carolina-concert-lgbt-discrimination-law>
 in protest at the state’s “bathroom law”, dictating which public toilets 
transgender people could use: “To my mind, it’s an attempt by people who cannot 
stand the progress our country has made in recognising the human rights of all 
of our citizens to overturn that progress,” he wrote on his website at the time.

His politics are simple, and basically non-partisan. When he’s used his voice 
it has tended to be to support specific causes – his tours have supported food 
banks in cities where he’s played; he went on Amnesty International’s Human 
Rights Now! tour in 1988; he donated £16,000 to Durham miners during the 1985 
miners’ strike. In song, he has returned repeatedly – not just in Born in the 
USA – to the plight of America’s Vietnam veterans.

He believes in fairness, people being treated decently, the right to a job, 
medical treatment, education, decent housing, childcare, and open government. 
He once surprised an interviewer by observing: “To me, these are all 
conservative ideas… Economic stability. Health. That’s not remotely radical.”

Arguably the biggest influence on his politics was his manager, Jon Landau 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Landau>, the former music writer whom he met 
when he was studying a gig review pinned up outside a Boston club before his 
appearance in April 1974. Landau, the review’s writer, sidled up and asked the 
young musician what he thought. Thus began a friendship that transformed into a 
professional relationship, and something more: inBorn to Run, Springsteen 
speaks of him being “the Clark to my Lewis”. It’s not so much that Landau told 
Springsteen what to think, more that he guided him to the books and films that 
might provoke him to think.

My mother was decent, compassionate, strong, wilful. The best part of me 
picked up a lot of those characteristics

One of the binds of that, though, is the number of heartland American fans – 
the ones who are voting Trump – who believe Springsteen would think like them 
if only, as one contributor to theBackstreets fansite 
<http://www.backstreets.com> recently suggested, he hadn’t been “brainwashed” 
into liberalism by Landau and others in his inner circle. On the other hand, 
there are those who think it outrageous that someone whose songs display an 
extraordinary empathy for ordinary people should dare to have homes in New 
Jersey, Florida and Los Angeles, and charge £100 per ticket to see him (the 
guarantee he demands from promoters for live shows is reputed to be among the 
largest in music; certainly, I received no reply from Landau last year when I 
wrote offering a guaranteed £700 and a lift down from London in my Ford Focus 
if Springsteen fancied playing a solo set at Ramsgate Music Hall).

For Springsteen, politics seems to be about the way you live your life as much 
as anything. It’s about being decent. About being fair to others. Being a good 
man. So what does being a good man entail?

“That’s a big question,”

It is.

“I guess, really… I probably learned the best answers to that from my mother. 
My mother was basically decent, compassionate, strong, wilful. She insisted on 
creating a world where she could make her children feel as safe as possible, 
even though she certainly had her faults in that area. But she was consistent. 
You could count on her. Day after day after day. And she was very strong. The 
best part of me picked up a lot of those characteristics and I struggle to live 
up to them today. So I think dependability, strength, wilfulness… put in the 
service of something good – those are the things that matter to me.”
 Bruce Springsteen photographed in New Jersey, October 1979. Photograph: The 
Estate of David Gahr/Getty Images 
His mother had to be the rock because his childhood in New Jersey was, to say 
the least, peculiar. He spent a chunk of it in the early 1950s living in 
Freehold with a paternal grandmother who loved him too much, compensating for 
the death of her daughter in 1927 (“It was very emotionally incestuous and a 
lot of parental roles got crossed,” he told the writer Peter Ames Carlin); 
school was cruel, his father Doug – consumed by an often silent rage against 
the world, and against the son who mystified him – crueller still, emotionally 
at least.

Born to Run paints a picture of a childhood that is semi-feral, where 
Springsteen might refuse to go to school, and his grandmother would back him 
up. “I think I was a little unusual in that I went into rock’n’roll music to 
create order out of my life,” he says. “My younger life felt rather chaotic, so 
I was in search of some stability, actually, some order.”

As a kid, he felt invisible. That stopped when he started playing guitar. 
“Suddenly I was able to make a very loud noise, and a noise that was not so 
easy to ignore,” he says. “I had my little rock’n’roll band and we were playing 
to a small gym full of dancers and their friends, and they immediately looked 
at you as a presence in their lives.”

When he was 19 his parents moved to California, and he was free to pursue 
music, to become – as he would say on stage years later – a “prisoner… a 
prisoner of rock’n’roll”.

Politics started entering Springsteen’s music, though far from explicitly, 
with his fourth album,Darkness on the Edge of Town, in 1978. That was when his 
music ceased to be the myth-making epics of his first three albums, and he 
started writing instead about ordinary people and their struggles. He wasn’t 
informed by reading political tracts. “I just referred to my experiences 
growing up – my parents’ lives, my sister’s life.”
Watch a trailer for the documentary Springsteen & I 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HVQUeCi9V0s>. 
His parents had struggled to make ends meet, his mother working as a legal 
secretary, his father in a succession of blue-collar jobs. His sister had 
married in her teens, and she and her husband’s travails inspired his masterly 
songThe River 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/100-greatest-bruce-springsteen-songs-of-all-time-20140116/the-river-19691231>
, about a couple trying to face up to the wedge that joblessness drives into 
relationships. “I was surrounded by people who were youthful but living very 
complicated adult lives,” he says. “They were having kids at young ages and 
trying to build a work life and a home life that was very adult. It was very 
easy to draw upon. It wasn’t a stretch or a strain.”

***

The songs about ordinary lives – combined with Springsteen’s revelatory, 
ecstatic live performances – built the bond with his audience that has lasted 
more than 40 years, and itself became the subject of an extraordinarily moving 
film in 2013,Springsteen & I <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HVQUeCi9V0s>. I 
don’t think he takes that relationship for granted. He understands that people 
want a piece of him for themselves: at that BFI Southbank event in 2010, 
Springsteen came to the bar afterwards; while his entourage sat in the corner, 
talking to one another, he perched on the back of a sofa facing the room. A 
receiving line of people queueing for a photo and autograph formed, and he 
stayed until everyone had their moment (my photo was out of focus; I got the 
autograph for my sister).

People think they know Springsteen. They have an image of Bob Dylan 
(inscrutable), Neil Young (irascible), Paul McCartney (wearingly cheerful; 
Springsteen laughs when I use the oldSmash Hits name of Fab Wacky Macca Thumbs 
Aloft). But they can imagine watching sports in a bar with Springsteen, which 
perhaps accounts for why people get a bit overexcited – I do not excuse myself 
from this – at the prospect of meeting him (fan accounts of encounters almost 
always dwell, approvingly, on what an ordinary guy he is. Even if he is shorter 
than expected).

They think they know Springsteen because, these days, he’s as much an idea, an 
ideal, as a person.

“Sure, that’s true,” he says, of that notion. “You bring with you an entire 
philosophy, a certain code of living, I suppose. It’s something you pursue. My 
heroes were people like Frank Sinatra, Hank Williams, Woody Guthrie, Bob Dylan. 
These were all people who brought their entire philosophy along with them, 
created a world that would engulf you and give you you, assist you in different 
ways of living, different ways of presenting yourself. Those were the artists 
that always interested me. They always seemed to carry a realisation of what 
being a musician might mean, could mean, the possibilities of what being a 
musician could be. That was something I was at least semiconscious of trying to 
create.”
 Springsteen performing with his wife, Patti Scialfa, in 2005. Photograph: 
KMazur/WireImage 
And when did he realise he had become an idea in the minds of his public?

“I’m not sure. If you’re doing it right, it’s a byproduct of all your actions 
and all your choices and what you’ve created.”

It should be noted at this point that Springsteen appears to know exactly what 
he thinks about every aspect of his life and art and how they interact. I guess 
that’s inevitable. First, he’s just written a 500-page book about those 
subjects; second, he’s been in therapy for decades; third, he and Landau based 
their entire relationship on talking at exhaustive length about all this stuff. 
But, for an interviewer, it’s a bit odd. The most fascinating moments in 
interviews usually come when you catch a subject by surprise and you can see 
them deciding what they think about something. With Springsteen, it feels more 
like he’s searching through his mental hard drive for the relevant file.

My life was changed in an instant by something that people thought was junk – 
pop music records

That’s not to say his answers are not fascinating (they are) or cursory (they 
very much are not). When asked what he means when he says his covenant with his 
audience depends on honesty, he replies without pause, without any errs or 
urrms, in a single perfect paragraph, that requires not one piece of tidying in 
the transcription: “I guess we come out and deliver the straight dope to our 
crowd as best we can. It’s coming on stage with the idea: OK, well the stakes 
that are involved this evening are quite high. I don’t know exactly who’s in 
the crowd. But I know that my life was changed in an instant by something that 
people thought was purely junk – pop music records. And you can change 
someone’s life in three minutes with the right song. I still believe that to 
this day. You can bend the course of their development, what they think is 
important, of how vital and alive they feel. You can contextualise very, very 
difficult experiences. Songs are pretty good at that. So all these are the 
stakes that are laid out on the table when you come out at night. And I still 
take those stakes seriously after all that time, if not more so now, as the 
light grows slightly dimmer. I come out believing there’s no tomorrow night, 
there wasn’t last night, there’s just tonight. And I have built up the skills 
to be able to provide, under the right conditions, a certain transcendent 
evening, hopefully an evening you’ll remember when you go home. Not that you’ll 
just remember it was a good concert, but you’ll remember the possibilities the 
evening laid out in front of you, as far as where you could take your life, or 
how you’re thinking about your friends, or your wife or your girlfriend, or 
your best pal, or your job, your work, what you want to do with your life. 
These are all things, I believe, that music can accommodate and can provide 
service in. That’s what we try to deliver.”

I email that paragraph to a Springsteen obsessive friend, who blogs 
<https://www.burgersandbruce.com> about both Springsteen and burgers. She 
writes back: “It sounds silly, and I try to explain to people, but going to 
Springsteen shows has shaped a lot of changes in my life. I went to South 
Africa for a week on my own for four concerts, felt revived, like I could 
achieve anything. So I left my job and tried to get into journalism, something 
I’d wanted to do since I was 10. And that’s why I feel like I have to go to 
Australia [to see Springsteen next year], too, because I need to find that 
direction again. It’s a funny way to live your life, seeking these highs, 
living the lows, but ultimately I think I’m better off for it. I really don’t 
know what I’d do without his music in my life.”
Watch the video for Bruce Springsteen’s Tougher Than the Rest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_91hNV6vuBY>. 
I ask Springsteen if he ever looks at fansites and messageboards.

“No.” (I bet he does. I really, really bet he does.)

Then is he unaware of the section of his hardcore fanbase who complain that 
his sets are too predictable because he only changes half of a three-hour-plus 
set from night to night, instead of the whole thing? “I’ve seen that,” he says. 
“You have to indulge your hardcore fans. It’s really all right.”

You’re more tolerant than I’d be. I’d tell them where to get off. No one else 
changes their sets like you! They should be grateful!

He doesn’t reply. He just laughs long and hard, his head back, his eyes 
creasing.

***

On 5 June this year, as the sun set over Wembley Stadium, Bruce Springsteen 
and the E Street Band struck up the sombre opening chords ofTougher Than the 
Rest <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_91hNV6vuBY>, the 1987 single about the 
difficulties of adult love that marked his return afterBorn in the USA had made 
him the world’s biggest rock star. Stepping up to the front of the stage to 
duet with him was Patti Scialfa, a member of the E Street Band since 1984, and 
his second wife – his first marriage, to Julianne Phillips, ended quickly (in
Born to Run, Springsteen admits he was wholly unready for it). Three days after 
performing what might as well be their theme song, Scialfa and Springsteen 
marked their 25th wedding anniversary.

Her presence changed not just Springsteen’s life but his work, too. The E 
Street Band stopped being an all-male preserve, a gang, forcing a change in 
their behaviour and attitudes. “I think women are in general a good influence 
on growing up, on growing into your manhood,” he says, delicately.

And then when they had children – two sons, Evan and Sam, born in 1990 and 
1994, and a daughter, Jessica, in 1991 – his life was altered even more 
profoundly. “If I was going to chop my life into sections,” he says, “it would 
be before the children and after the children, certainly. Just changed my 
entire worldview. Changed the way I looked at myself. Changed the way I looked 
at my job. Gave me an entirely separate identity away from my music, which I 
found to be very fulfilling.”
 Springsteen performing in 1984, the year Born in the USA took him to new 
commercial heights. Photograph: Images Press/Getty Images 
Before he had children, Springsteen had assumed that whatever he was working 
on was what everyone around him should be concentrating on. He recalls his 
bafflement when Jon Landau had his first child, and would suddenly start 
leaving recording sessions at 6pm, to go and bathe his baby daughter. “I 
remember thinking…” he adopts a puzzled tone, “You gotta go home and bathe your 
daughter? We’re doing A, B, C or D, which I happen to think is the most 
important thing in the world right now. But of course it’s not.”

Having children made Springsteen realise that his work wasn’t his life, it was 
a substitute for life. “I realised that previously I’d expanded my work life so 
that I’d have something to do during the day, and into the evening. Without it, 
what am I gonna do? Go home, sit in a chair and watch TV? So I’d expanded the 
time it took me to do my job. Once the kids came along, I realised, I could 
squeeze my previous 18 hours of work day into six or eight, without any 
problems whatsoever. I realised the song is always going to be there – there’s 
always going to be a song in your heart or in your head – but kids, they’re 
there and then they’re gone. And when they’re gone, they’regone. Once I 
realised that, I found a tremendous freedom from the tyranny of my own mind.”

I still have pride in what I do. I still believe in its power. I believe in my 
ability to transfer its power to you

You couldn’t say that Springsteen has slowed down, though, especially now the 
kids are gone. This summer’s tour of European and US stadiums saw him playing 
some of his longest ever shows, breaking the four-hour barrier – with no 
intermissions, unlike his late-70s marathons – on occasion. Springsteen says he 
has no problems finding the energy to play them, but it’s not so easy for some 
of his bandmates. Before Springsteen arrives, his co-managerBarbara Carr 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/business/6406640/barbara-carr-interview-bruce-springsteen-landau-management>
 mentions thatMax Weinberg <http://maxweinberg.com>, the 65-year-old drummer, 
spends all his time between shows sequestered in his hotel room, the windows 
blacked out, the gaps between door and frame filled to block out all noise, 
simply recuperating from the previous gig.

That’s the price the band must pay in order to deliver what Springsteen wants: 
“I come out on stage to deliver to you the greatest band in the world,” he 
says. “I still have great pride in what I do. I still believe in its power. I 
believe in my ability to transfer its power to you. That’s never changed. One 
of the things our band was very good at communicating was that sense of joy, 
which I think makes us somewhat unique. Rock bands try to project a lot of 
different things: intensity, mystery, sexuality, cool. Not a lot of rock bands 
concentrate on joy, and I got that from my relatives on the Italian side – they 
lived it and they passed it down to me.”

The ambition that drove him to chase perfection 40 years ago – when he would 
spend hours shouting “Stick!” at Weinberg in the studio, insisting he somehow 
find a way to play his snare without the sound of stick hitting the skin being 
audible – is still present.

I ask if, for all his testimonies to the simple power of playing rock’n’roll, 
and how he says he’s happy pitching up for an impromptu set at a local bar with 
a pick-up band, whether he would have been content if he’d ended up precisely 
as popular as his friends and contemporaries Southside Johnny and Joe 
Grushecky, blue-collar rockers who never transcended the clubs. “I would 
probably be an old, disgruntled entertainer,” he says, then chuckles at the 
very notion that he might not have conquered the world. “I was shooting for the 
whole show. But I certainly would have made my peace with it. Any time you make 
your living as a musician, you’re way ahead of the game. You’reway ahead of the 
game. I always thought: Gee, I’m making a living scratching on a piece of wood. 
I can’t complain too much.”

In 1975, when he was promoting the Born to Run album, there was a story 
Springsteen used to tell interviewers. While he was recording the album in New 
York, he was staying in a grotty outpost of Holiday Inn, in one of Manhattan’s 
less salubrious districts. In his room was a mirror, which hung crooked. Every 
morning he would dutifully straighten the mirror. And when he returned to his 
room, the mirror would be askew again. And so, once more, he’d correct it. And 
again it would slip off centre.

It is, I suggest, a perfect metaphor for a man driven, even when the reasons 
for his drive, his desperation, might seem unclear to those around him. He 
smiles. And, rather unexpectedly, quotes Immanuel Kant back at me: “Out of the 
crooked timber of humanity, no straight thing was ever made.”

And then the door opens, and he glides away, no obstacles in his path.

Born to Run is published by Simon & Schuster (£20). Click here to buy it for 
£16.40 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/born-to-run-464799.html>

Bruce’s backpages: the songs that define Springsteen

Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)
1973
A showstopping, Van Morrisonesque epic that’s still a highlight of 
Springsteen’s live shows,Rosalita <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CYHGh6lmSbo> 
sprawls and swerves and swings, irresistibly. It also has the couplet that most 
encapsulates the joy it must have been to be young and on the cusp of 
greatness: “Tell him this is his last chance to get his daughter in a fine 
romance / Cos the record company, Rosie, they just gave me a big advance.”

Born to Run
1975
It took until his third album for Springsteen to write the song that defined 
him, and of which he has still not tired. “Good songs collect the years, 
cumulative meaning,” he says. “They grow with you. PlayBorn to Run 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IxuThNgl3YA> and it just allows more people 
in. I’ll see a 15-year-old kid singing every word, and I’ll see a grandma too! 
A good song keeps its arms open and welcomes those who come to it over the 
years.”

Darkness on the Edge of Town
1978
The album Darkness on the Edge of Town saw Springsteen ditching mythologising 
and writing about adult dilemmas. “I was very concerned about writing music 
that I felt an adult voice could sing,” he says. “I felt that was a trap some 
bands fell into. I never wanted to have to come out on stage and pretend. Of 
course, it’s all pretending, I suppose. But I wanted to feel comfortable in my 
own skin.”

The River
1980
In growing up, Springsteen says, “you have to come face to face with a lot of 
your weaknesses and the things you do poorly, so that you’re able to assess the 
landscape and find out what are the righteous paths you can travel down, and 
what are the roads that are just going to lead you to a dead end.The River 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=utVR3EgQkHs>, of course, is the song I wrote 
about that specific idea.”

Born in the USA
1982
The acoustic version recorded at the time of the Nebraska album allows none of 
the ambiguity of the stadium-crushing version released two years later. Spare 
and haunted, a howl from the margins, and utterly unsuited to being co-opted by 
Ronald Reagan, it would remain unreleased until the 1998 Tracks box set.

Brilliant Disguise
1987
Springsteen’s first marriage failed – but led to the brilliant, introspective 
album Tunnel of Love.This single <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=idnJnjV_8rg> 
seemed to be an autobiographical take on his relationship, with a devastating 
payoff: “God have mercy on the man / Who doubts what he’s sure of.”

The Ghost of Tom Joad
1995
The lives of the dispossessed were the theme of the largely acoustic album The 
Ghost of Tom Joad. Thetitle track <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-c6GphpAeY> 
seems to echo Born to Run when it claims “the highway is alive tonight”. But 
this time “nobody’s kidding nobody about where it goes”. Desolate and beautiful.

Long Walk Home
2007
An idealised small-town America turns out to be a ghost town 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iywFZqtPlhU> as the Bush years come to a close 
– “the diner was shuttered and boarded, with a sign that just said ‘Gone’.” To 
get back to the America of the national dream will take a long walk – so long 
we shouldn’t wait up for Bruce.
 