
Bruce Springsteen’s struggle with depression has taken him to the brink of 
despair, the singer will tell Kirsty Young before she leaves him to fend for 
himself with only eight records for company on BBC Radio 4’sDesert Island Discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/desert-island-discs>.

“It is something that has been a part of my life,” Springsteen told Young for 
the show to be broadcast on Sunday. “It is usually OK, but like Churchill’s 
‘black dog’, it still jumps up and bites you in the arse sometimes.”

The 67-year-old, who has won 20 Grammy awards over his 50-year career, said 
that among the useful skills he had developed to handle his crippling bouts of 
depression, acknowledging, or “naming”, the feelings helped him most. By 
recognising he was experiencing a temporary “chemical imbalance”, he could 
avoid blaming something else, he said.

His wife, the singer Patti Scialfa, also helped him, Springsteen said, as did 
the right dose of medication.

In a candid interview which celebrated the singer’s victory over sporadic 
mental illness and the power of music in his life, the “bard of blue-collar 
America”, as Young called him, also made his selection of eight discs that have 
influenced his life.

Choosing the 1964 Beatles single I Want to Hold Your Hand, Springsteen said 
that hearing the harmonies in this otherwise raucous hit in his youth prompted 
him to go back to learning the guitar.

The other tracks he chose were, by his own admission, “not an unusual grouping 
of songs”, but simply the music that electrified him. The Rolling Stones It’s 
All Over Now was among the selection.

Springsteen told Young about the central part the Roman Catholic church had 
played in his New Jersey childhood and of the “endless optimism” of his mother, 
Adele, and her three Italian-American sisters.

Bruce Springsteen: ‘You can change a life in three minutes with the right song’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/30/bruce-springsteen-interview-born-to-run-change-someones-life-right-song-donald-trump>
His relationship with his “gruff” father, he said, was much more difficult. 
“The qualities he had on the inside were the things I had on the outside, so I 
reminded him of his frailty,” said Springsteen, trying to describe the 
“terrible cross-current of emotion” between them.

He told Young that he still metaphorically “puts on his father’s clothes” to 
perform, in search of a certain kind of transcendence on stage. “The performers 
who we think are wrestling with something significant are the ones that hold 
our attention,” he said.

Picking out a single book for his desert island stay was difficult, 
Springsteen said. He was a fan of John Cheever, Philip Roth and “all the 
Russian guys”. In the end he plumped for Joe Klein’s Woody Guthrie: a Life, the 
biography that changed his attitude to what it was possible to do with music.

Springsteen’s luxury for the trip was his guitar and he selected Bob Dylan’s 
“ageless” song Like a Rolling Stone as his favourite track.

 