
The Bills have turned to Sean McDermott to try to end their 17-year playoff 
drought.

McDermott, the Panthers’ defensive coordinator, was announced as the Bills’ 
new head coach on Wednesday. McDermott replaces Rex Ryan, who was fired at the 
end of December following two disappointing seasons in Buffalo.

NFL divisional round: the teams best placed to score an upset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/11/nfl-divisional-round-cowboys-steelers-patriots>
The 42-year-old McDermott was one of four contenders for the Bills’ vacant 
position. Interim coach Anthony Lynn, Arizona Cardinals offensive coordinator 
Harold Goodwin and Seattle Seahawks defensive coordinator Kris Richard also 
interviewed for the role, but Bills owners Terry and Kim Pegula were most 
impressed with McDermott.

McDermott, who has coordinated Carolina’s defense for the past six seasons, 
becomes the 20th coach in the Bills’ 57-year history. The team’s previous eight 
coaches all posted losing records and failed to make the playoffs. The Bills 
have not made the postseason since 1999 under Wade Phillips, a 17-year drought 
that represents the NFL’s longest active streak – and is tied for the 
fifth-longest playoff drought inNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> 
history.

Panthers coach Ron Rivera said of McDermott last month: “His résumé should 
speak for itself. Sometimes when you hire people, you need to look at not 
whether or not they’re the hot guy but what they’ve done consistently over a 
period of time.”

But McDermott might have to do without quarterback Tyrod Taylor for the new 
season. Taylor, who joined Buffalo as a free agent in 2015, signed a six-year 
contract extension in August, but Bills’ management seems ready to move on at 
quarterback, and could decide to release him before $30m of his contract 
becomes guaranteed on 12 March.

Buffalo went 7-9 this season and finished third in the AFC East behind the 
Patriots and Dolphins. In 31 games as Bills coach, Ryan had a 15-16 record.
 