
In early January 1990, three young prisoners, Kenny Carter, Jason Rochford and 
Darren Brook were sharing a cell in Durham jail. There were frequent arguments 
between them, often leading to violence, for five or six days. On January 6, 
Darren Brook was found hanging in the cell.

But this was not to be one of those cases when an unhappy or disturbed 
prisoner was deemed to have killed himself and becomes another statistic in the 
roll call of penal despair. Kenny Carter was charged with the murder of Darren 
Brook, tried at Durham crown court, found guilty and jailed for life.
Effectively only two people really know what happened in that overcrowded, 
ugly cell with its three narrow bunks, its crude pin-ups and its slop bucket - 
Carter and Rochford, who was the chief prosecution witness in the trial.

The case against Carter, now aged 24, a robber with a reputation as a hard 
man, was that he had systematically bullied and harassed Brook who was 
inexperienced in the ways of prison and isolated because his parents were both 
abroad. Brook was serving his first custodial sentence for an assault on a 
barman in a pub.

Carter was said to have punched and taunted Brook, forced him to call him 
'sir' and made Brook slop out for him. As a final part of a grotesque sequence 
of bullying, Carter was said to have made Brook hang himself, kicking a chair 
away to complete the job.

Jason Rochford claimed that while he had been present while much of the 
earlier bullying had taken place, he had hidden his face in a towel at the 
moment Brook was killed, although Carter had urged him to look at the dead 
man's face.

The motive for the murder was said to be that Carter believed that prisoners 
who had shared a cell with a suicide case were likely to get early remission 
and be treated sympathetically by the prison authorities because of the trauma 
they had suffered. He was also alleged to have claimed that the whole thing was 
a bit of a 'buzz'.

When Carter was told, after the body had been discovered by prison officers, 
that he was going to be interviewed by the police, he requested that his mother 
and a legal representative be informed. This was later used as part of the case 
against him as an indication that he might have something to be concerned 
about. A prisoner who had just suffered the experience of a cell mate's suicide 
would be unlikely to regard himself as a suspect, it was argued.

Carter's defence was that he had woken up to find Brook hanging there, that he 
and Rochford had then alerted the prison officers. He claimed that Brook had 
been dead before he could be resuscitated.

Some prison officers recalled Carter and Rochford being tearful and distressed 
as they called for help, but others talked of 'crocodile tears'.
Carter says that his previous experience with the authorities had led him to 
believe that he should never be interviewed alone, even if the matter appeared 
routine, and for this reason requested a lawyer to be present. He claims that 
Rochford was lying.

Carter denied Rochford's story that he had forced Brook to put the noose round 
his head and had told him 'do it, or die'. Rochford's evidence was clearly 
accepted by the jury.

But an earlier statement which Rochford made immediately after the body was 
found told a different story. When interviewed, Rochford said that Brook had 
seemed upset during the day, that he had been punched at some time on the face 
and that his hands were swollen from a game of 'raps' with Carter. (The game 
involves penalty hits on the back of the hand, like a forfeit.)

Rochford said he had been woken by Carter's radio, which played all night, had 
got up to turn it off and saw Brook hanging.

'I jumped out of bed and woke 'Dobo' (Carter) up. He got up and started 
banging on the cell door for the prison officers to come and open our cell.'
But the following day, Rochford changed his story and it was the later story 
that was to help convict Carter.

Rochford and Carter had met previously in a remand centre. Rochford had a 
conviction for assaulting a youth in Teesside in a bullying incident. Of this 
conviction, he said that he had not been involved in the more violent part of 
it, which involved burning the boy with cigarettes.

Carter claims that he was seen within the prison service as a dangerous and 
troublesome man.

To this day he is in frequent conflict with the prison authorities. He has 
thrown urine and excrement over prison officers so it is hardly surprising that 
he is not regarded with much affection inside the prison service.

He claims that he was convicted mainly on the word of a man who had a record 
for bullying behaviour and who changed his story during the inquiry. He has 
bombarded MPs with letters and has engaged in dirty protests to support his 
claims of innocence.

Some of the evidence of Carter's earlier treatment of Brook does him little 
credit but he maintains that he never killed him and that the evidence against 
him is tainted.

Now his legal team are having the evidence of the circumstances of Brook's 
death re-examined by a pathologist in an attempt to show that he did take his 
own life.
 