
Bayern Munich reclaimed top spot in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> after crushing 
Wolfsburg 5-0 while RB Leipzig slumped to their first loss of the season – a 
1-0 defeat atIngolstadt.

“A wonderful match day,” said Bayern chairman Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, whose 
rivals all dropped points. “Ingolstadt will get a truckload of white sausage 
and wheat-beer from us.”

Arjen Robben put Bayern ahead with a fine move down the right and a superbly 
curled left-footed shot in the 22nd minute before Robert Lewandowski tapped in 
for a two-goal lead four minutes later.

The Pole replicated his move on the hour to turn in a Thomas Müller shot 
before the attacking midfielder then turned scorer, finally breaking his goal 
drought this season. Douglas Costa completed the rout in the 86th minute.

“Now we’re leaders and that will certainly do our Christmas party this evening 
good,” said Müller, who had gone 999 minutes without scoring. “It’s nice the 
goal drought is now over. It wasn’t so important to me but I know others made a 
big deal of it.”

Bayern move up to 33 points, ahead of Leipzig on goal difference, while 
Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> are just a point 
above the relegation zone in 15th place, without a win in their last four 
matches.

Promoted Leipzig’s sensational start to the season came to a halt when the 
Brazilian Roger’s glancing first-half header earned strugglingIngolstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ingolstadt> only their second win of the 
campaign. The hosts had to endure an hour of pressure as Leipzig sought the 
goal that would have kept them top, and Emil Forsberg missed a golden chance in 
the 88th minute to equalise from four yards out.

Ingolstadt were reduced to 10 men in stoppage time after the dismissal of 
Mathew Leckie but held on.

“Defeats always hurt, regardless against whom,” said Leipzig manager Ralph 
Hasenhüttl, who led Ingolstadt to promotion in 2015.

Borussia Dortmund continued their erratic domestic form and needed another 
late goal from Marco Reus, who brought his side back to 2-2 at Real Madrid in 
midweek to finish top of their Champions League group, to snatch a 1-1 draw at
Köln.

Werder Bremen moved four points clear of the drop zone through Max Kruse’s 
strike against third-placedHertha Berlin, while Hamburg forward Lewis Holtby 
left his side an uphill task before the break when he was sent off for elbowing 
Dominik Kohr in the face after he was fouled by theAugsburg midfielder.

But Kohr received his second yellow card midway through the second half and 
Filip Kostić scored two minutes later on a rebound after Nicolai Müller’s 
effort hit the post.

It was enough for Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> to 
climb into the relegation play-off place, one point above Ingolstadt and two 
aboveDarmstadt, who lost 1-0 at Freiburg.

Nils Petersen’s late penalty was enough for Freiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg>.
 