
Ousmane Dembélé ensured Borussia Dortmund ended 2016 with an unbeaten home 
record in the Bundesliga but their 1-1 draw against Augsburg on Tuesday left 
them nine points adrift of the leadersBayern Munich and RB Leipzig, who face 
each other on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/bayern-munich-rb-leipzig-top-two-bundesliga>
 , going into the midwinter break.

Thomas Tuchel’s side missed a stack of chances in being held to their third 
successive league draw and went behind in the 33rd minute when the South Korea 
international Ji Dong-won beat goalkeeper Roman Weidenfeller at the second 
attempt after a swift counterattack.

Mario Götze had almost given Dortmund an early lead, hitting the post in the 
ninth minute. They eventually found the net in the 47th minute through Dembélé 
and dominated thereafter with Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, the Bundesliga’s top 
scorer, going close half a dozen times.

Bundesliga managers on edge before winter break as Red Christmas awaits | 
Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/bundesliga-managers-on-edge-before-winter-break-as-red-christmas-awaits>
André Schubert’s days at Borussia Mönchengladbach could be numbered after they 
were beaten at home 2-1 byWolfsburg in the battle of two unlikely strugglers.

Wolfsburg took the lead through Daniel Caligiuri after three minutes, but the 
hosts levelled early in the second half through Thorgan Hazard. Mario Gómez’s 
fifth goal of the season gave Wolfsburg the lead again and that goal was enough 
to earn them a second straight victory and lift some of the pressure off their 
coach Valérien Ismaël.

Nicolai Müller and Bobby Wood helped Hamburg to a 2-1 win over Schalke, who 
took little consolation from Donis Avdijaj’s goal. Johan Djourou also missed a 
penalty for Hamburg, who moved out of the bottom two, at least for a night.

Eintracht Frankfurt moved up to third twith a 3-0 win over 10-man Mainz. 
Branimir Hrgota put Frankfurt in front and their cause was further helped when 
Mainz had Jhon Córdoba was sent off 10 minutes into the second half. Aymen 
Barkok added a second for Frankfurt and Hrgota completed the scoring.
 