
’Tis the season to wind down, buy stuff that nobody needs nor wants, avoid 
mulled wine drunkards, rummage through recycled paper bags in search of the odd 
wormless chestnut, laze about until the sun goes down again, bake Plätzchen, 
watch Johannes B Kerner or Markus Lanz feign interest in a collection of Z 
listers, musically talented kids and sickness/catastrophe/marriage breakdown 
survivors and, most of all, be grateful that we Germans have been blessed with 
peace and freedom – the peace and freedom that comes from being left alone by 
football for four weeks.

Alas, the most important unimportant thing in the world is not of a mind to go 
silently into the, er, silent night. Instead of slowing down and taking things 
easy on the way to hibernating in some cave just now, theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> has kept going, 
hurtling forward with pulsating neck-veins, a mind for blood. Every day, 
another manager gets it. Every day, another manager gets closer to to getting 
it in the neck. It’s all heading for a horrific, watch-through-your-fingers 
mid-season finale (spoiler alert). Call it: The Red Christmas.

Last Thursday, Augsburg’s Dirk Schuster became the seventh and latest manager 
to fall, quite literally. A stumble in the bathroom had left him with a cut 
above his eye, the club announced, as (unfounded) rumours about a 
training-ground bust-up did the rounds following his dismissal. “Sporting 
reasons” were responsible for the departure of Germany’s coach of the year, the 
FCA general manager, Stefan Reuter, insisted. But the mystery deepened when 
Reuter complained about Schuster’s playing-style being “completely at odds” 
with the club’s wishes. Everybody knew that the 48-year-old had saved Darmstadt 
from the drop with straightforward hoof-ball last season, notching up 
historically low possession numbers (37% on average). It’s hard to fathom why 
Augsburg were expecting the former KSC hard man to transform into a
possessionista or gegenpresser.

Villarreal liberated under Fran Escribá as Yellow Submarine enjoys calmer 
waters | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/villarreal-liberated-under-fran-escriba-as-yellow-submarine-enjoys-calmer-waters>
Further (managerial) casualties are expected at Tuesday’s Battle of the Damned 
at Borussia Park. Gladbach (13th) v VFL Wolfsburg (15th), André Schubert v 
Valérien Ismaël, could well be the first crunch game that leaves two Bundesliga 
managers out of their jobs. Schubert’s standing is extremely precarious. The 
45-year-old was booed by sections of his own supporters as the Foals lost 1-0 
at Augsburg on Saturday and continued a miserable run of one win in 10 games. 
Sixteen points from 15 matches is simply too poor return for the two-times 
Champions League participants; “we don’t have enough points, I know that things 
get edgy,” Schubert admitted.

Officially, Gladbach have said that they will use the winter break to analyse 
the reasons for the slump in form but the sporting director Max Eberl’s choice 
of words on Saturday have left little room to manoeuvre. “I can understand why 
the fans are pissed,” he said, “we’re playing shit football away from home.”

At Borussia Park, results have been a little better. But those who always 
doubted Schubert’s long-term ability to lead the team successfully – even 
during last season’s glorious comeback – have seen most of their fears 
realised. The manager has only been able to implement his tactical ideas – 
perfectly sound in theory, often half-baked in practice – sporadically, and on 
a human level, there’s little by way of an emotional bond between him and the 
dressing room. Gladbach don’t have enough individual quality to do without a 
fully-functioning, harmonious collective, so their choice seems clear, the 
result on Tuesday notwithstanding. Bar a glorious win and mass pro-Schubert 
demonstrations on the terraces and in the dressing room – all very unlikely – 
Borussia will bring in a new coach.

According to Express, Dieter Hecking is a leading candidate to take over, 
which seems a bit of strange choice, however: the 52-year-old is one of the 
last remaining old-school managers in the league, a man who never knowingly 
overcomplicates things and wouldn’t appear “conceptual” enough, for lack of a 
better word, to lift Gladbach above half a dozen of similarly strong sides.

Would Hecking not be better suited for the job at Wolfsburg, where they have 
plenty of decent individuals but no one to motivate them properly? Alright, he 
was only fired at the Volkswagen-Arena a couple of months ago, but that’s just 
one of those details, easy to overlook in the hour of need. One thing seems 
certain: the Lower Saxons are looking for a new man on the bench, as Ismael, 
whose unhappy time in the job was one of the reasons for sporting director 
Klaus Allofs’s dismissal last week, won’t be around much longer.

A 1-0 win over Frankfurt on Saturday has not helped his cause, if Kicker is to 
be believed. The magazine’s sources revealed that the Huddersfield Town manager 
David Wagner is top of VW’s wish-list for the holidays. Wagner, 45, could 
easily get a couple more calls from +49 numbers over the coming days, because 
Roger Schmidt is also in trouble. Again. “Roger out!” the cry went from the 
Bay-Arena stand as nine-man Leverkusen crashed to a 2-1 home defeat v lowly 
Ingolstadt.

“Oh wie ist das schön” (what a beautiful day this is), others were singing 
sarcastically on Sunday night. Ninth spot in the table delineates unacceptable 
performances, considering the quality and price tag of the Bayer squad. 
Schmidt’s 200mph pressing game has never been one for the purists but as long 
as results were good, nobody complained too much. The recent inconsistency has 
exposed a rift between players and the fitness coach Oliver Bartlett (fired 
last week) and put Schmidt’s future in doubt. The derby against seventh-placed 
1 FC Köln, who are doing better with a much lesser team, could not come at a 
worse time. If Schmidt loses this one, his winter break is likely to last 
considerably longer than four weeks.

Talking points

• In these unsteady times, not even Ralph Hasenhüttl is entirely free from 
speculation. In the Austrian’s case, however, the speculation is a lot more 
flattering. The Bayern president Uli Hoeness name-checked the RB Leipzig 
manager as a possible future FCB manager, in a not at all transparent attempt 
to create a bit of a commotion before Wednesday night’s top-of-the-table epic 
encounter at the Allianz Arena. Hasenhüttl’s side are only seven goals behind 
Bayern, level on points, poised to cause trouble for Carlo Ancelotti and the 
Bundesliga’s fragile ecosystem on the whole. With every win for Leipzig, the 
calls for more investors and an end to the 50+1 rule will grow louder.

• It seems a little far-fetched, but some BVB supporters would rather see the 
back of Thomas Tuchel, too. Dortmund – “still our biggest rivals,” Manuel Neuer 
felt – are in danger of spending Christmas outside the Champions League places 
after yet another draw (2-2 at unbeaten Hoffenheim) that mixed defensive 
frailty with anger about refereeing decisions. Tuchel called the dismissal of 
Marco Reus absurd, and indeed it was. But the bigger issue is a sense of 
disconnect between him, the team and some supporters. Tuchel’s demanding, 
rather cold demeanour puts players on edge and has failed to win over the 
hearts of the terraces. Dortmund’s superlative attacking ability and potential 
for a better, more balanced second half of the season should come to the fore 
and temper the discontent. But as long as results are underwhelming, these 
atmospheric disturbances will continue to receive an airing.

Results: Hoffenheim 2-2 Dortmund, Schalke 1-1 Freiburg, Mainz 3-1 HSV, 
Augsburg 1-0 Gladbach, Bremen 1-1 Köln, Leipzig 2-0 Hertha, Wolfsburg 1-0 
Frankfurt, Darmstadt 0-1 Bayern, Leverkusen 1-2 Ingolstadt.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Bayern Munich 15 26 36 
2 RB Leipzig 15 19 36 
3 TSG Hoffenheim 15 11 27 
4 Hertha Berlin 15 6 27 
5 Borussia Dortmund 15 16 26 
6 Eintracht Frankfurt 15 7 26 
7 Cologne 15 6 24 
8 Mainz 15 -1 20 
9 Bayer Leverkusen 15 -1 20 
10 SC Freiburg 15 -7 20 
11 Schalke 04 15 2 18 
12 Augsburg 15 -4 17 
13 Borussia M'gladbach 15 -9 16 
14 Werder Bremen 15 -14 15 
15 Wolfsburg 15 -10 13 
16 FC Ingolstadt 15 -12 12 
17 Hamburg 15 -18 10 
18 Darmstadt 15 -17 8  