
Joey Barton may not be accustomed to the etiquette of a substitute but Sean 
Dyche was glad he introduced the erstwhile Rangers midfielder for a 
match-winning return to thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>.

The 34-year-old scored with a free-kick in the 78th minute, five minutes after 
coming off the bench for his first appearance in England’s top flight since May 
2015. Burnley’s eighth league win at home this season moved them up to 10th.

Marko Arnautovic hits double for Stoke to pile pressure on Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/sunderland-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
Barton was an integral part of their Championship-winning campaign last season 
before his ill-fated spell at Ibrox and he rejoined Dyche’s squad this month 
despite a possible FA ban hanging over him for alleged betting breaches.

He started at Sunderland in the FA Cup last week but had to settle for an 
outing from the bench here – which happened only once in last season – though 
he soon produced the winner.

He was presented with a free-kick after Oriel Romeu fouled George Boyd. From 
around 25 yards, Barton deceived the Saints goalkeeper, Fraser Forster, 
planting the set piece low, around the wall and into the net.

Asked what such a colourful character is like as a substitute, Dyche said, 
joking: “He said, ‘What do I do?’ He was confused by being sub. He said, ‘Do I 
take my boots out with me? Wear a T-shirt or wear a warm-up top or what?’ I 
said, ‘Oi, you, get on with it!’”

Barton has struggled to find a home at several clubs throughout his career but 
atBurnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> he has a manager who 
understands him and a fan base who adore him, despite his exit last summer.

In a dull contest lacking attacking spark, it had to be Barton who claimed the 
winner, even if his effort may have gone in via a slight deflection.

“You can’t make it up,” Dyche said. “I just said to him, ‘I couldn’t write 
your story’. Sublime finish – of course, he’ll be telling everyone that anyway. 
We probably earned a scratch of luck.

“He’s experienced. There’s a manliness to the way he goes about his 
performance and there’s an assuredness from many years of playing top-level 
football.

“For all that he gets a bit of stick, he’s so used to that. He brushes it off 
and gets on with it and focuses on his football. I felt it was appropriate for 
him to come back in to us. I’ve had no question about him before and I didn’t 
see why I would again. So far, he’s slotted in nicely again.”

Burnley’s Andre Gray: ‘I was just relieved I hadn’t been stabbed in the eye’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/andre-gray-interview-burnley-premier-league-striker>
After beating Liverpool in the first leg of their EFL Cup semi-final in 
midweek,Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> slipped 
to a fourth successive league defeat. Their problems were clear as they failed 
to add to their total of 19 league goals. Only Middlesbrough have scored fewer.

Their 20th of the season might have arrived in the 58th minute had Nathan 
Redmond tried to convert Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg’s left-wing cross with his left 
foot rather than tamely side-footing into the ground with his right from 15 
yards out

Southampton had spent much of the first half on top, with Dusan Tadic twice 
unable to convert openings and James Ward-Prowse’s header was beaten away by 
Tom Heaton after Shane Long had lost Ben Mee down the right.

After the break, Ryan Bertrand and Virgil van Dijk were denied equalisers by 
Heaton, who then made a terrific double save to thwart Jay Rodriguez and Josh 
Sims.

“It’s difficult to accept this loss,” said the Saints manager, Claude Puel. 
“It was just one free-kick, a strange free-kick to win this game. It’s a big 
disappointment.

“Many games are the same – with quality, with a lot of chances. It’s important 
to be clinical and to be deserving all of this good work. It’s a big 
frustration and a big disappointment. It’s important to stop this scenario and 
to continue with the same spirit.”

Burnley also confirmed that Chelsea have recalled the striker Patrick Bamford 
from his loan spell at the club.
 