
Burton scored a quickfire double to steal a vital 2-1 win at Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham>, whose hopes of entering 2017 
in touch with their relegation-threatened rivals suffered a damaging blow.

Jonathan Kodjia spot-kick helps Aston Villa save point against Leeds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/aston-villa-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
Rotherham dominated 85 minutes of the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> match at the New York 
Stadium but the five first-half minutes where Chris O’Grady and Jackson Irvine 
scored proved pivotal as Burton registered their first away win in the second 
tier.

It moved them 12 points clear of their bottom-placed hosts and they will be 
reasonably confident they will not be overhauled by the Millers in the second 
half of the season.

It was a night of frustration for Paul Warne’s men, who could not add to Tom 
Adeyemi’s goal in first-half stoppage time, despite a host of fine chances and 
their good work against Wigan on Boxing Day was undone as they sit 10 points 
adrift of safety.

Just as was the case with their match against Wigan, the size of this 
encounter was not lost on Rotherham, who started with confidence and created 
some good chances in the opening 15 minutes. Joe Newell had a deflected shot 
after a neat passing move, Danny Ward thundered in a swerving free-kick, which 
Jon McLaughlin palmed away, and Izzy Brown did not connect properly from a 
decent position just inside the area.

Still Rotherham pressed and Richard Wood put a pair of headers wide before 
Newell missed another fine chance when he could only poke an effort at 
McLaughlin after a superb jinking run. Their failure to take the lead 
inevitably cost them dear and Burton hit them with a two-goal salvo in the 
space of five minutes before the break, which in effect decided the contest.

The first came in the 36th minute and was the result of some slapdash 
goalkeeping from Lewis Price, who could only spill the tamest of shots from 
Lucas Akins, and O’Grady tapped home to silence the boo-boys, who remain 
unhappy that their former striker refused a pay deferral during their 2007 
administration.

The crucial second came when John Brayford whipped in a delicious cross that 
Irvine converted with a flying header as it crashed in off the crossbar.

Rotherham gave themselves hope in first-half stoppage time, though, as Adeyemi 
poked home a rebound after Wood’s header had been saved from Newell’s 
free-kick. That set up the second half for an attack versus defence exercise as 
Rotherham threw everything at Burton in the hope of wiping out their deficit 
and chances were regular.

Anthony Forde shot weakly at McLaughlin, the Burton keeper made another save 
to deny Ward, and Brown fizzed an effort wide before the best opportunity of 
the lot came when a loose ball fell to the defender Darnell Fisher at the far 
post but he put his shot wide when the goal was gaping.

Still the efforts rained in on goal as Peter Odemwingie twice tested 
McLaughlin but it was just not Rotherham’s night.
 