
Bus companies must give wheelchair users priority on vehicles and drop “first 
come, first served” policies for passengers, an official human rights watchdog 
will tell the supreme court.

Supporting a test case on the rights of the disabled, the Equality and Human 
Rights Commission (EHRC) will on Wednesday call for clearer policies to ensure 
that those confined to wheelchairs can travel more easily.

The case has been brought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/dec/08/bus-parents-buggies-wheelchair-users-appeal-first-group>
 by Doug Paulley, a wheelchair user, who tried to board a FirstGroup bus from 
Wetherby to Leeds in February 2012. The wheelchair space was being used by a 
mother with a pushchair and a sleeping child. She rejected the driver’s request 
to move or fold the pushchair and so the driver told Paulley he could not board 
the bus.

Paulley sued the company for discrimination. In December 2014 the court of 
appeal decided that transport firms were not required to force one traveller to 
make way for another. Paulley is now challenging that decision at the UK’s 
highest court.


David Isaac, chair of the EHRC, said: “This is not about pushchairs versus 
wheelchairs but confusing policies from bus companies that cause problems. Bus 
companies have a duty to allow wheelchair users to travel given how vital this 
is to disabled people being able to live independent lives.”

Rebecca Hilsenrath, the EHRC chief executive, added: “We know the vast 
majority of people would move to another seat if a wheelchair user needed the 
space. We are saying that bus companies must uphold their responsibility and 
make it very clear to travellers that those spaces are intended for 
wheelchairs. Priority should mean priority and drivers should be able to have 
the discussion with passengers based on a clear formal policy.

“Public bus services are used by many people to get to work, go out, and get 
to local facilities. It can be hard enough for disabled people to use these 
services without extra barriers being in the way. It’s about doing the right 
thing and letting those that need the space use it.”

Wheelchair or pram: which more deserves space on the bus? | Joshua Rozenberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/09/wheelchair-pram-bus-space>
 Paulley said: “It’s not right that I, and other wheelchair users, should be 
nervously looking to see if anybody is in the wheelchair space and wondering 
what will happen. This can cause a great deal of distress.


“Wheelchair spaces are the only place on the bus that wheelchair users can 
travel in; if they aren’t available, wheelchair users can’t travel. This is the 
single biggest barrier experienced by wheelchair users when accessing 
transport, and most wheelchair users experience this. Bus companies need to 
have clear policies so that we can have a culture where non-disabled people 
automatically move to other areas.”

Paulley’s campaign has been supported by Justine Roberts, chief executive of 
the website Mumsnet, whose readers include many pushchair users. She said: “The 
general consensus on Mumsnet is that when it comes to the priority space, 
wheelchair users take precedence. A lack of space on crowded buses can cause 
problems for those travelling with pushchairs, shopping and babies; Mumsnet 
users would like to see more flexible space for storage, but certainly not at 
the expense of wheelchair users.”

At the court of appeal hearing Martin Chamberlain QC, for First Group, said 
the company needed to know “what they are legally required to do and how”. He 
added: “It will be obvious that [First Group] are much more concerned with the 
wider effect of [the lower court’s] judgment on its policies, customers and 
staff than on the relatively modest [damages] sum awarded in this case.”

Chris Fry, Paulley’s solicitor at at Unity Law, said: “It’s the first case 
concerning service provision that the supreme court has ever assessed. A panel 
of seven supreme court judges is unusual, and a reflection of the significance 
of the case, which both the president and deputy president of the supreme court 
are presiding over. We hope that the supreme court will finally make the 
correct legal and moral decision that supports the overriding objective of 
social inclusion for disabled people, and find in favour of Doug.”
 