
Caffeine may be the “nootropic” brain drug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/11/hack-yourself-nootropic-drugs-upgrade-mind>
 of choice in Silicon Valley, but an hour’s drive north in Solano County, 
California, the stimulant could get you charged with driving under the 
influence.

That is according to defense attorney Stacey Barrett, speaking on behalf of 
her client, Joseph Schwab.

After being pulled over on 5 August 2015, Schwab was charged by the Solano 
County district attorney with misdemeanor driving under the influence of a drug.

Almost 18 months later, Schwab is preparing to go to trial. The only evidence 
the DA has provided of his intoxication is a blood test showing the presence of 
caffeine.

Shcwab was driving home from work when he was pulled over by an agent from the 
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> department of 
alcoholic beverage control, who was driving an unmarked vehicle. The agent said 
Schwab had cut her off and was driving erratically.

The 36-year-old union glazier was given a breathalyzer test which showed a 
0.00% blood alcohol level, his attorney said. He was booked into county jail 
and had his blood drawn, but the resulting toxicology report came back negative 
for benzodiazepines, cocaine, opiates, THC, carisoprodol (a muscle relaxant), 
methamphetamine/MDMA, oxycodone, and zolpidem.

The sample was screened a second time by a laboratory in Pennsylvania, 
according to documents provided to the Guardian, where the sole positive result 
was for caffeine – a substance likely coursing through the veins of many 
drivers on the road at any given time.

Uber packs up failed self-driving car trial in California and moves to Arizona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/22/uber-self-driving-car-san-francisco-arizona>
“I’ve never seen this before,” said Barrett. “I’ve never even heard of it.” 

Barrett has filed a motion for the case to be dismissed because the charges 
were not brought until June 2016 – nearly 10 months after incident. If that 
motion is denied, Schwab will take his case to a jury on 11 January.

Sharon Henry, chief deputy district attorney for Solano County, said in a 
statement that her office was “conducting further investigation in this matter”.

“The charge of driving under the influence is not based upon the presence of 
caffeine in his system,” she added.

Barrett counters that if the prosecution has evidence of a different drug in 
her client’s system, it should have to provided that to her, based on the rules 
governing criminal procedings.

“I have not been provided with any evidence to support a theory of prosecution 
for a substance other than caffeine at this time,” she said. “Nor I have 
received any statements, reports, etc documenting any ongoing investigation 
since the [toxicology report] dated 18 November 2015.”

Henry declined to comment further, citing the right to a fair trial. 

“It’s really stupid,” said Jeffrey Zehnder, a forensic toxicologist who 
frequently testifies in court cases. Over 41 years, Zehnder said, he had never 
seen a prosecution for driving under the influence of caffeine.

“If that’s the case, then they better come and arrest me,” he joked. 

Zehnder was informed about the case by Barrett, but has not been contracted to 
testify on either side.

California vehicle code defines a “drug” as any substance besides alcohol that 
could affect a person in a manner that would “impair, to an appreciable degree” 
his ability to drive normally.

Making that case with caffeine would be difficult, Zehnder said, because the 
prosecutor would have to show that impaired driving was specifically caused by 
the caffeine and not any other circumstances.

“There are no studies that demonstrate that driving is impaired by caffeine, 
and they don’t do the studies, because no one cares about caffeine,” he said.

As for Schwab, he just wants this ordeal to be over. In a statement provided 
to the Guardian by his attorney, he said his reputation had been damaged.

“No one believed me that I only had caffeine in my system until I showed them 
the lab results,” he said. “I want the charges to be dismissed and my name to 
be cleared.”
 