
Ministers have been asked to investigate the police infiltration of a cell of 
animal rights activists responsible for a firebombing campaign after questions 
were raised about the ethics of an operation that, it was alleged, may have 
involved an undercover spy planting an incendiary device in a department store.

The MP who raised the case, which dates back to the 1980s but surfaced only 
after recent disclosures about the clandestine unit of police spies, suggested 
it may constitute a case in which "a police officer crossed the line into 
acting as an agent provocateur".

Caroline Lucas, parliament's only Green MP, used a Westminster Hall debate on 
the rules governing undercover policing to raise the case under parliamentary 
privilege, and add to calls for a public inquiry into the use of police spies.

Only limited details are known about the mysterious police operation to 
infiltrate a group of hardcore anti-fur protesters, and Lucas admitted no one 
could be sure about the precise role played by the undercover police officer, 
Bob Lambert, who spent years living among the activists having adopted a new 
identity.

Lambert infiltrated a cell of activists from the Animal Liberation Front 
(ALF), who detonated incendiary devices at two Debenhams branches in London and 
at one in Luton in July 1987 as part of a campaign against the sale of fur.

Two activists, Geoff Sheppard and Andrew Clarke, were caught red-handed months 
later as they prepared for a second wave of arson attacks. They were convicted 
over the attacks on the stores.

"Sheppard and Clarke were tried and found guilty – but the culprit who planted 
the incendiary device in the Harrow store was never caught," Lucas said. "Bob 
Lambert's exposure as an undercover police officer has prompted Geoff Sheppard 
to speak out about that Harrow attack. Sheppard alleges that Lambert was the 
one who planted the third device and was involved in the ALF's co-ordinated 
campaign."

The MP relayed comments from Sheppard in which the convicted activist said: 
"Obviously I was not there when he targeted that store because we all headed 
off in our separate directions but I was lying in bed that night, and the news 
came over on the World Service that three Debenhams stores had had arson 
attacks on them and that included the Harrow store as well.

"So obviously I straight away knew that Bob had carried out his part of the 
plan. There's absolutely no doubt in my mind whatsoever that Bob Lambert placed 
the incendiary device at the Debenhams store in Harrow. I specifically remember 
him giving an explanation to me about how he had been able to place one of the 
devices in that store, but how he had not been able to place the second device. 
So it would seem that planting the third incendiary device was perhaps a move 
designed to bolster Lambert's credibility and reinforce the impression of a 
genuine and dedicated activist. He did go on to successfully gain the precise 
intelligence that led to the arrest of Sheppard and Clarke – and without 
anybody suspecting that the tipoff came from him. But is that really the way we 
want our police officers to behave?"

Lambert, who has admitted having sexual relations with women while operating 
undercover, has previously spoken about his role in the police investigation of 
the ALF and his specific role in the operation against Sheppard and Clarke.

However, he firmly denies planting the incendiary device. He told the 
Guardian: "It was necessary to create the false impression that I was a 
committed animal rights extremist to gain intelligence so as to disrupt serious 
criminal conspiracies. However, I did not commit serious crime such as 
'planting an incendiary device at the [Debenhams] Harrow store'."

Lucas admitted "we just don't know" exactly how far Lambert may have taken his 
operation, but said: "Yet, if Sheppard's allegations are true, someone must 
have authorised Lambert to plant incendiary devices at the Harrow store. 
Presumably that same someone may also have given the officer guidance on just 
how far he needed to go to establish his credibility with the ALF."

She added: "There is no doubt in my mind that anyone planting an incendiary 
device in a department store is guilty of a very serious crime and should have 
charges brought against them. That means absolutely anyone – including, if the 
evidence is there, Bob Lambert or indeed the people who were supervising him."

Lucas raised the case of Mark Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mark-kennedy>, who was revealed last year to 
have spent seven years living undercover among environmental activists. He also 
had sexual relations with female activists. Kennedy's exposure led the court of 
appeal to quash the convictions of 20 environmental campaigners wrongly 
convicted of conspiring to break into a power station. The three judges said 
they had seen evidence that appeared to show Kennedy had been "arguably, a 
provocateur".

Lucas said: "The latest allegations concerning Bob Lambert and the planting of 
incendiary devices would beg the question: has another undercover police 
officer crossed the line into acting as an agent provocateur? And how many 
other police spies have been encouraging protesters to commit crimes?"

The MP voiced concerns about other aspects of a longstanding operation to 
plant spies in protest groups, including the evidence that most of those 
unmasked in public are suspected of having engaged in sexual relationships with 
activists. She raised the case of eight women who say they were duped into 
forming relationships with undercover officers, and who have begun a legal case 
against police.

She said senior police chiefs had said it was "never acceptable" for their 
spies to have sexual relations with activists, but the Met had told the women's 
lawyers that "forming of personal and other relationships" is permitted under 
Ripa, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000.

"So either rogue undercover officers have been breaking the rules set by 
senior officers, or senior officers have misled the public by saying that such 
relationships are forbidden," Lucas said.

The policing minister, Nick Herbert, acknowledged there were questions about 
the accountability of long-term spies and said the Home Office was considering 
how better to regulate the area.

He said ministers were considering proposals from a review of the Kennedy case 
by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary, which recommended that future 
deployments of undercover police officers should be "pre-authorised" by the 
Office of Surveillance Commissioners.

However, the minister rejected calls for a full public inquiry and conceded 
that Ripa statutory guidance for undercover police officers did not cover the 
vexed question of sexual relations. Herbert said he was "not persuaded" that 
specific guidance was needed on the subject of sexual relations. "To ban such 
[sexual] actions would provide a ready-made test for the criminal group 
targeted to find out whether there was an undercover officer deployed amongst 
them."

The Met said in a statement that, before Wednesday's allegations, it had set 
up an inquiry into covert work between 1968 and 2008. "This review was set up 
in October 2011 to review the deployment of undercover officers within the 
Special Demonstration Squad. Any matters arising from the review will be 
assessed and where appropriate will be referred to the IndependentPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission."

• This article was amended on 20 June 2012. The original referred to the 
detonation of three incendiary devices at three Debenhams branches in London in 
July 1987. This has been corrected.
 