
After wrestling for years with Beijing's appalling traffic and pollution 
problems, city planners have come up with a distinctly old-fashioned solution: 
bicycles.

Municipal officials want to boost the number of cyclists by 25% during the 
next five-year plan, state media reported today. Twenty years ago, four out of 
five residents in the Chinese capital pedalled to work through one of the 
world's best systems of bicycle lanes. But the modern passion for cars has made 
two-wheeled transport so treacherous, dirty and unfashionable that barely a 
fifth of the population dares to use lanes that are now routinely blocked by 
parked cars and invaded by vehicles attempting to escape from the jams on the 
main roads.

Last year, China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> overtook the United 
States to become the world's biggest car market. Increasing affluence brings 
about a million new vehicles on to the roads every month, choking the streets 
with traffic and the air with smog.

The capital is among the worst affected cities. Since the 2008 Olympics, car 
owners have been ordered not to drive on certain days each week, but these 
controls have failed to ease congestion, so the authorities are considering 
additional measures.

According to the Xinhua news agency, the government hopes to improve the 
infrastructure for cyclists, including restored bicycle lanes and new rental 
programmes providing 50,000 bikes for hire by 2015. The authorities plan more 
bike parks near bus and subway stations in the expectation that half the city's 
residents will travel to work by public transport in five years.

Residents welcomed any improvement on the current system, which is so bad that 
some businessmen keep a fold-up bike in the boot of their chauffeur-driven cars 
so they can escape bad snarl-ups.

But despite unhappiness about driving, there was scepticism about the 
likelihood of a return of Beijing's bicycle culture.

"Fewer and fewer of my friends ride bicycles, but the interesting thing is 
they don't drive cars either," said Jiamin Zhao, an internet entrepreneur who 
still cycles his child to school each morning. "Some people are tired of 
driving. More are taking the subway or taxis."

Others questioned Beijing's willingness to prioritise cheap bicycles over 
expensive cars given the city's emphasis on economic development and its 
relatively lax car ownership regulations.

"I don't think they are serious about promoting bicycles. It's much easier to 
buy and own a car in Beijing than Shanghai," said Chen Ying, a language teacher 
who owns two cars. "When I started driving 10 years ago, it was something 
special because not many people had cars then, but now everyone has one and the 
traffic is terrible. If they really want me to use a bicycle, they should build 
clean and safe bicycle lanes. At the moment, the roads are dangerous and too 
smelly."

This is not the first time Beijing has promised to regain its reputation as 
the "Kingdom of Bicycles". Four years ago, the construction ministry announced 
that any bike lanes that had been narrowed or destroyed to make way for cars 
must be returned to their original glory. Civil servants were also encouraged 
to cycle to work or take public transport. Since then, however, the number of 
cars in Beijing has increased by more than 25% to pass the 4m mark, while there 
has been no obvious improvement in conditions for cyclists.
 