
In Australia the acknowledgement of Indigenous land ownership, of custodians 
past and present, is now pretty much mandatory at official functions.

“This is Indigenous land,” you’ll often hear a non-Indigenous speaker say, 
sometimes after a prominent Aboriginal person or Torres Strait Islander has 
spoken a welcome to country. “Always was, always will be.”


Too often, however, the acknowledgement of original possession and ongoing 
custodianship amounts to little more than lip service when it translates to 
Indigenous access to – and use of – the land. This is especially so in the 
well-established cities and regional centres where land, which has long ago 
been stolen from Indigenous people, is now covered with the infrastructure – 
houses, roads, parks, civic buildings – of what many Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islanders rightly regard as the “settler state”.

Acknowledgement of Indigenous “ownership” (and therefore, implicitly, of 
colonial occupation and dispossession) is one thing. Granting Indigenous people 
some determination over the land upon which our cities and suburbs have been 
imposed, quite another.

The vexed question of coexistence between Indigenous people and culture, and 
the settler state, is central to a new book, Planning for Coexistence? 
Recognizing Indigenous Rights Through Land-use Planning in Canada and 
Australia, by the Australian academic Libby Porter and Canadian Janice Barry.

Given the increasingly polarising debate (not least within Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander communities) over how recognition might look, this is a 
prescient and timely book that considers coexistence in both the Australian and 
Canadian urban contexts.

It’s time to invest in carbon farming on Aboriginal lands | Rowan Foley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/16/its-time-to-invest-in-indigenous-carbon-farming-on-aboriginal-lands>
It considers the experiences of four Indigenous communities in British 
Columbia and Australia that are testing and renegotiating the use of 
traditional but now urbanised lands and how governments and planning 
authorities respond.

They write: “Our aim ... is to examine what actually happens when planning 
systems meet the claims and struggles ofIndigenous peoples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indigenous-peoples>, as well as when they 
interact with now well-established settler-state mechanisms that purportedly 
seek to redress these claims.”

In tackling the coexistence anomalies between Indigenous cultures and state 
bureaucracies, the authors’ starting point is an acknowledgment of the 
“contradiction that underlies the contemporary situation of every 
settler-colonial state: Indigenous people and non-Indigenous settlersco-occupy 
place, and yet they do so in a ways that are rarely common with each other and 
often fundamentally different”.

Chapter two – the aptly named “A Meditation of Discomfort” – sets the scene 
for the practical examples of how urban coexistence actually looks, at their 
best and for their faults, in Australia and Canada. And it is the uncomfortable 
question of what forms recognition of Indigenous presence might take in urban 
coexistence and land use that forms the framework for this examination.

They talk of a pervading deep inequity in power relationships between 
Indigenous interests and planning bodies, even though authorities do have ways 
of recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and Native Canadian 
interests.

“The asymmetry of these power relations runs deep, producing and reproducing 
colonial ways of being seeing and acting. Under these conditions the struggle 
for coexistence is reduced to a struggle for inclusion: something that can be 
recognized through a procedural or institutional fix and can accommodate an 
Indigenous Other within an existing legal or political order.”

Porter drills into the experience of Indigenous people in Melbourne, “built on 
the unceded and unrecognised country of Aboriginal nations, with Melbourne’s 
built-up area largely over the country of Wurundjeri people”.

She explains how these people, while dispossessed and marginalised, have, 
through their Wurundjeri Council, still somehow managed to assert their rights 
to access urban land and, where heritage is threatened, impede new development.

But, significantly, known or established places of Indigenous cultural 
importance are not recognised under state legislation and, therefore, are 
ineligible for protection if they have previously undergone “significant ground 
disturbance”.

“This means that any land that, since colonisation, has been mined, quarried 
or excavated is exempt ... It is important to note that the (2006, Aboriginal 
Heritage) Act provides significant powers to Wurundjeri Council where it is 
triggered. What is interesting though is ... where the act is not triggered.

“The exemption (of prior significant ground disturbance) appears to uphold a 
view that Aboriginal people have long contested: that Aboriginal culture is 
somehow in stasis, fundamentally unchanging and vulnerable to modernity”.

Indeed. This is where the moral authenticity of the official “always was, 
always will be” purported acknowledgment really comes into question.

Alongside the many flaws of the Native Title Act, it illustrates the 
incapacity of the modern state to formally acknowledge Indigeneity where a 
colonial or post-federation development footprint exists. The question of 
officially accepted Indigenous coexistence with modernity applies largely to 
unoccupied urban spaces.

I’ve focused here on the coexistence question as it relates to urban Australia 
in the book. But Barry addresses it no less compellingly in relation to the 
Canadian experience. Indeed Indigenous people the world over have long shared 
resistance and political tactics in the quest for recognition by those seeking 
to take or develop their land.

Business can do something about reducing inequality: pay workers more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/18/business-can-do-something-about-reducing-inequality-pay-workers-more>
In considering the interface between British Colombia’s small Coast Salish 
Nation, the Tsleil-Waututh, and local authorities, Barry explains how the 
Indigenous quest to engage in development partnerships led to a realisation of 
the need to better articulate historical connections to the land.

“They recognised that, while they had no intention of going anywhere, neither 
did the 2m people who now called metropolitan Vancouver home ... Mapping was 
recognised as an effective way to tell their story ... they began compiling a 
bioregional atlas that combined the biophysical (forest cover, geology, 
wildlife, plants) and cultural elements of Tsleil-Waututh Nation territory and 
that made use of extensive oral history work with elders and others in the 
community.”

This “dual process” mapping also included local government and regional 
district boundaries, forest and water management areas that made it easier to 
visualise and conceptualise how non-Indigenous bureaucracy and authority had 
been imposed on the First Nation presence.


It’s similar to methods used in Australia to help demonstrate continuous 
association with country (a prerequisite for the establishment of Native 
Title). And while that may help lead to forms of official non-Indigenous 
recognition, it does not necessarily of itself facilitate some sort of 
determination over land. In British Columbia, the mapping was just an early 
step on the long road to planning partnerships and a practical step to the 
imperative to consult First Nations.

In Australia, most of the academic and popular consideration of Indigenous 
land rights has related to remote and rural country and waters. There is a 
fallacious sense that traditional country is “bush” when, of course, it was all 
such until European occupation and development – the blink of an Indigenous eye 
given the 50,000 to 60,000 year history of Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander civilisation here.

I wanted to know why Porter had decided to focus on the urban question.

She responded: “I wanted to ask these kinds of questions because of the sense 
I have of living in a city of how all of this urban wealth and privilege is 
built off dispossession. Yet we don’t seem to consider the city as a place 
where land justice is just as important as anywhere else. I want to address 
that silence and prompt us to consider those important questions.”

And that’s worth thinking about next time someone at an official function 
says, “Always was, always will be.”
 