
This was the year of fake news duping people. Did it dupe you? Are you 
dupable, you dupe? Take the test with this selection of real fake headlines 
that confused people onFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and fake fake headlines that 
we’ve just made up.
Which is the real fake Trump story?  Donald Trump Announces He Will Make 
Singing National Anthem At Start Of Work Compulsory For All Government Employees
 Man Prohibited From Buying US Flag Because Store Owner Suspected He Would Burn 
It  Trump Buys Bald Eagle For Oval Office  Obama Signs Executive Order Banning 
National Anthem At All Sporting EventsIn the midst of a febrile election 
campaign, fake news publishers returned to a hoary old favourite Which of these 
would you have to be high to be fooled by?  Marijuana To Be Allowed At Work For 
California’s Air Traffic Controllers Provided It Is Below Legal Limit.  Uber’s 
New Driverless Cars in San Francisco Crashing Because Of In-Car Pot Smoking By 
Passengers.  Drugs In Colorado: Deadly New Strain Of Marijuana Turning Users Gay
The legitimate sounding newsexaminer.net published this story a few years after 
the state of Colorado legalised weed. (It does make you listen to too much 
Cypress Hill.)  Heroin Users Claim Marijuana Legalisation Is Discrimination; 
Taking Case To Supreme Court Can you spot the fake story that played a role in 
the Republican primaries?  Ben Carson Inaugurates 80-Year Monkey ­Breeding 
­Programme In Hopes Of ­Disproving Evolution  Floundering Jeb Bush ­Campaign 
Spends $50,000 On Creating A Perfect Working ­Animatronic Version Of Jeb No 
Bigger Than A Grain Of Rice  Ted Cruz Will Endorse Donald Trump For President 
If He Makes Masturbation IllegalIn the end, he did it for much less than this.  
RNC Hacks: New Emails Reveal John McCain And Mitt Romney Were Working For Obama 
All Along Which of these religious freedom stories is the genuine whopper?  
Target To Offer Free Holy Qur'an To Shoppers To Promote Religious Understanding 
 Target To Discontinue Sales Of Holy BibleThis one came from noted fake news 
site the National Report  First Piece Of Archeological Evidence Emerges In Utah 
Proving Truth Of Book Of Mormon  Pope Francis Says No To Women Priests Because 
They Would ‘Fall In Love And Cry When Criticised’  Which of these 
conspiracy-laced fake headlines caused a genuine stir?  Julian Assange Goes 
Missing; Government Now In Control Of wikileaks.comFans of Assange were 
panicked by a series of strange tweets by Wikileaks. He later assured them he 
was fine  Edward Snowden’s Email Hack Reveals Sexts Sent To Julian Assange Fans 
of Assange were panicked by a series of strange tweets by Wikileaks. He later 
assured them he was fine  CIA Claims Putin Had “Decisive” Influence On UK’s 
Richmond By-Election  The Tapes They’ll Never Let You See: James Corden Hits 
Elderly Woman During Solange Knowles’ Carpool Karaoke. Which of these lies 
really spread?  Alt.Right Leader Wins Right To Donate Blood On Condition It 
Isn’t Given To Black People  Donald Trump hires Clueless star Stacey Dash to 
lead his Black Outreach ProgramDash did endorse Trump, but hasn’t yet been 
given a role in his administration  Trump To Grant Presidential Pardon To 
Dylann Roof  Police Officer Excused From Patrolling Black Neighbourhoods 
Because Doctor Diagnosed Him With ‘Compulsive Racism Disorder’ Whose last words 
were really falsely reported?  Nancy Reagan’s Dying Words: “Don’t Vote For 
Trump”Another one from National Report. Reagan’s actual last words were “Go 
White Sox!”  David Bowie’s Final Words? “I’m Sorry For Tin Machine”  Bodyguard 
Recalls How Last Thing Prince Said Was “Does This Outfit Look A Bit Fruity To 
You?”  Muhammad Ali’s Home To Be Turned Into Brothel By Developers Which of 
these stories about fake news is the real fake news?  Man Who Re-Tweeted Hoax 
Story Jailed For 10 Years In Maine Under Controversial New Law  The Hoax News 
Kingpin: Macedonian Teenager’s Company Now Worth More Than Washington Post and 
USA Today combined  Amazing: NYC Cops Trace 90% Of Nation’s Twitter Trolls To 
Massive Centralised HQ Located under bridge  Facebook Tests Warning Labels For 
Fake News Abandon hope, all ye who turn on the internet  You got…  You can’t 
spot an obviously fake story. Why not go and share it on Facebook anyhow?  Not 
bad. You spotted some of the real fake news stories and some of the fake fake 
news. Consider yourself semi-fake-informed.  Congratulations! You can spot a 
genuine fake story a mile off. No one will believe you  Well done!  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  