
For years, the Welsh singer-songwriter Cate Le Bon 
<https://www.facebook.com/CateLeBon>, who has a dry and endearing sense of 
humour, celebrated her birthday on 3 March. "Then one day my mum came in to the 
living room – she'd been clearing out old drawers. She asked me when my 
birthday was and I told her. Mum went, 'Ah ... No.' " A document from the 
hospital had been unearthed. They were a day out. Le Bon, 30, says in her low 
Carmarthenshire accent: "Hell of a fuck-up, eh?"

Over a three-album career (her third, Mug Museum, came out last week), there 
have been a few idiosyncratic turns such as this, accidents and 
misunderstandings as curious and charming as Le Bon's "psych-folk" songs. Born 
Cate Timothy, she credits her stage name to "a joke that went too far". The 
specifics are forgotten but she thinks she was watching the Brit awards one 
year and Simon Le Bon was on. Her boyfriend and bandmate, Huw Evans, who 
records in his own right as H Hawkline, was helping her to make a poster for a 
show. He put on the surname as a tease "and it stuck".

By then, she'd been taken under the wing of Welsh musician Gruff Rhys, founder 
ofSuper Furry Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/music/super-furry-animals> 
and other outfits. Rhys wrote Le Bon's first press releases, working in a few 
facetious lines that were taken literally by some. "For a while people thought 
there was a French quarter – inWales – that I was from." Rhys also likened Le 
Bon's voice to that of 70s singer Nico and the comparison, spot on, has never 
gone away. "I don't think I'll ever hear the end of it. Nico… and dead animals."

Yes, the animals. Years ago, Le Bon mentioned she'd considered calling one of 
her albums "Pet Deaths" and this half-fact has lingered, putting her in some 
uncomfortable situations. "I did an interview on American radio and the guy 
broke down, talking about his dog that had died. We were live on air.

"When I started writing songs, it occurred to me that I should probably write 
them about something specific. You know, I had a lovely childhood, grew up in 
the country, great parents, lovely sister. So I guess the only [serious] thing 
that I could think to write about was the inevitability of these animals around 
me dying. But it wasn't as if… [she's laughing now] it wasn't as if this was a 
genre I was trying to invent. I didn't think, you know what people don't write 
about enough?"

On Le Bon's birthday this year – her real birthday – she was in a studio in 
Los Angeles, at work on the new album. She and Evans relocated to California 
from Cardiff to record it. After successfully applying for their American 
visas, Le Bon found she'd been given the rather brilliant designation "alien 
with extraordinary abilities". But poor Evans. A mere guitarist in the eyes of 
US immigration, he opened his passport to find he was "assisting an alien with 
extraordinary abilities".

"Horrible, isn't it?" says Le Bon, cackling anyway.
 