
The government’s austerity programme has led to a growing switch-off of CCTV 
cameras that risks misleading the public about their safety, the surveillance 
watchdog has warned.

In his annual report  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/surveillance-camera-commissioner-annual-report-2015-to-2016>
published on Wednesday, Tony Porter, the surveillance camera commissioner, 
points out that council budget constraints have led to “severe cuts” to town 
centre CCTV systems.

The report also reveals how ministers tried to brush off Porter’s concerns by 
urging him to take up the issue with councils rather than the government.

In many areas, the monitoring of cameras has been reduced and in others, 
systems have been switched off altogether, the report said. Areas include 
Anglesey in north Wales and central London, where Conservative-led Westminster 
city council switched off its 75 cameras in an attempt to save £1m. In 
Carmarthenshire, west Wales, 87 cameras will no longer be monitored.

Porter wrote: “I continue to see the impact of austerity bite at local 
authority level, impacting on the provision of surveillance cameras in 
principal local authorities and town and district councils as some authorities 
switch systems off or reduce monitoring.”

He added: “There is a real danger that … systems will age and become decrepit, 
operators will become deskilled and the public will be deceived into believing 
that surveillance is contributing to their safety when in fact it is not.”

The report includes correspondence with the government, which reveals that the 
local government minister, Marcus Jones, refused to meet Porter to discuss his 
concerns.

In a letter in August 2015, Porter said: “Local authority CCTV systems have 
been the bedrock of crime prevention and detection and reducing the fear of 
crime over the last 20 or so years. During the current period of austerity, as 
this is not a statutory service, it is and has been the subject of severe cuts 
… I am concerned about the impact of austerity.”

Porter called for a meeting with Jones and urged him to show “strategic 
leadership” by promoting innovative examples of the ways some councils have 
continued to fund CCTV.

Jones said he understood “concerns about competing calls on local authority 
budgets”, but refused to meet Porter and urged him to take up the issue with 
councils rather than his department. “I would suggest that you continue to 
reach out to local authorities, rather than through or with my department … I 
do not think a meeting is required.”

The report notes research showing a 46.4% decrease in council funding on 
maintenance and monitoring of CCTV. It also points to a number of local rows 
about who pays for CCTV. Porter writes: “This argument is being played out 
across the country resulting, in some cases, in a standoff over funding between 
police and local authorities and, in some cases, threats to completely withdraw 
the service.”

Porter said in one English region, only one out of 12 local authorities had a 
dedicated manager to monitor the CCTV operation room. He added: “I am seeing a 
reduction in hours where CCTV is monitored and ageing equipment whose value is 
becoming more and more questionable. I understand that much of the local 
authority CCTV system is still analogue and the necessity for updating with 
digital HD equipment is pressing if the advantages offered by modern technology 
are to be realised.”
 