
Leigh Griffiths has acknowledged that Celtic will be under pressure to win 
comfortably when they visit Stranraer in the Scottish Cup next Sunday.

The Hoops striker scored a last-gasp winner against Partick Thistle at Parkhead
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/celtic-partick-thistle-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 on Saturday after replacing the struggling Nadir Ciftci at the start of the 
second half following an insipid display from the home side in the first 45 
minutes.

The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> midfielder Nir Bitton 
was sent off by the referee, Stephen Finnie, in the 67th minute for picking up 
two yellow cards and while that seemed to spur on Ronny Deila’s side, it looked 
like the Jags would take a point amid growing frustration from the home support.

However, Griffiths, back after a calf injury kept him out for four games, 
struck with a drive in the 89th minute – his 20th goal of the season – for 
Celtic’s first home win since beating Aberdeen on Halloween, a victory that 
Griffiths said Deila “probably needed”.

The win took the champions three points clear of the Dons at the top of the 
Premiership with a game in hand over the Pittodrie men, whose match at St 
Johnstone was cancelled because of a waterlogged pitch.

“It was good to get back on,” said Griffiths, who then turned his attention to 
the fourth-round cup tie against the League One side, where Celtic will look to 
keep their treble dreams alive.

“There is going to be pressure on us to win the game, comfortably as well,” 
said Griffiths. “But we will go down there, Stranraer will make it difficult 
for us. We have to adapt to conditions and whatever team goes out we are 
confident of getting through.

“I think it will be the first time I will have been to Stair Park so hopefully 
it will be a good game, not too much trouble.

“We look forward to it, the gaffer will look forward to it, he will have a 
game plan and will try to get into the next round.”

It was Thistle’s first defeat in seven games but their defender Danny Seaborne 
said they had been undone by a striker enjoying a great run of form. “It was 
gutting to lose a goal so late in the game. Leigh is in great form, so it is 
one of those things you have to take,” Seaborne said.

Meanwhile, Kenny Miller said no one in the Rangers lineup can afford to think 
their place is safe, even after hittingDumbarton for six. The veteran striker 
bagged a hat-trick as the Ibrox men ran riot at the Cheaper Insurance Direct 
Stadium with a 6-0 win.

It was Rangers’ biggest win under Mark Warburton but, with the Championship 
race looking like it could go to the wire, the Englishman is set to add even 
more new faces to his squad this month.

He has already signed the winger Harry Forrester from Doncaster until the end 
of the season for an undisclosed fee, while the Polish goalkeeper Maciej 
Gostomski could follow this week.

A defender also remains high on Warburton’s wishlist but Miller issued a 
warning to his team-mates.

He said: “When you’re at a club and you get to a transfer window, you’re 
always looking to strengthen and the manager says if the right player becomes 
available, then we’ll be in for them.

“If we strengthen then that will benefit the team. The lads who have the 
jersey will be out to keep it, but it’s up to them to keep performing, keep 
scoring goals, keep defending. It will serve a purpose of keeping the lads on 
their toes.”

Miller scrambled home the opener against Dumbarton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dumbarton> three minutes from half-time 
before scoring with a precision header after an hour. He wrapped up his treble 
soon afterwards by slotting the ball past Mark Brown in the home goal. Martyn 
Waghorn fired home the fourth while Andy Halliday got in on the act with a 
deflected free-kick and James Tavernier also scored.
 