
Family court hearings are to be held in public for the first time, in a 
radical trial being pursued by the leading family judge for England and Wales, 
the Guardian understands.

Sir James Munby, the president of the family division of the high court, is to 
continue far-reaching reforms to bring more transparency to the system in 2017 
by launching a trial in which some types of hearings would be held in public.


It is expected appropriate orders will remain in place to protect the 
identities of the participants. A separate plan is being considered to allow 
the media access to documents from hearings that have previously been kept 
secret.

Shocking domestic abuse statistics don’t show the real picture: it’s even 
worse | Kate Moss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/domestic-abuse-statistics-ons-worse-education>
Women who have suffered domestic violence and experienced the family courts 
broke the ban on discussing their cases toreveal to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/revealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims>
 how they believe the secrecy of the system allows them to be further abused by 
ex-partners.

Claire Waxman, of Voice4Victims <http://www.voice4victims.co.uk/>, who 
campaigns to highlight abuse of process within the family and civil courts, 
welcomed moves to increase the openness of the court system. “We would support 
the increase of transparency in the family courts,” she said. “We are seeing 
far too many victims of stalking and domestic violence being exposed to 
unnecessary risk and harm in these court proceedings.”

But Munby’s changes are likely to be opposed by much of the legal profession 
working within the family division.

Joanne Edwards, former chair of Resolution, the national family law 
association, and head of family law at Forsters, said: “There is pretty 
widespread, if not universal, opposition to the public hearing pilot which is 
being suggested and to the release of court documents to members of the press.


“There is strong opposition to any further opening up of the court amongst the 
professions. For us it is about safeguarding the interests of children who, 
unlike in criminal proceedings, invariably become embroiled in family 
proceedings through no fault of their own. There is a real risk of jigsaw 
identification and once details of their private family life are out there, 
they can never be retrieved. The resulting harm to children can be profound.”

Family courts, which deal with issues such as divorce, financial provision for 
children, contact with children, adoption and local authority intervention to 
protect children, were opened to the media in 2009, but hearings largely remain 
secret. Judges can limit media attendance, there are tight restrictions on what 
– if anything – can be reported, the media have no access to documents and can 
be ordered to leave the court on the decision of the judge or magistrate.

Munby consulted closely with senior lawyers in Australia, where family courts 
have been held in open hearings for the last 30 years, before launching the 
reforms. He has said pursuing further transparency in family courts is a 
subject close to his heart.

He issued guidance in January 2014 aimed at encouraging judges to publish 
their judgments on the judicial websiteBailii <http://www.bailii.org/> in 
redacted and anonymised forms to protect the identities of children. But the 
guidance only applied to the top level of judges and in the vast majority of 
family cases heard by district judges and magistrates, judgments are not 
published.

According to Ministry of Justice figures, 225,590 cases were completed in the 
family court in 2015, almost half of which were divorce cases. In the same 
year, judges published 469 judgments on Bailii.

Prof Julie Doughty, lecturer in law at Cardiff University, who is being funded 
by Nuffield to research transparency in the family courts, said current 
measures did not go far enough. “The judicial guidance of 2014 hasn’t ended the 
perception and allegations of secrecy in the family courts,” she said. “I don’t 
think you get transparency through publishing judgments on Bailii. To get 
transparency you have to present it in a way people can understand and make 
sense of quickly. Bailii does not really help the system become more 
transparent at all.”

 In a consultation document issued to lawyers in 2014, called Transparency: 
the next steps, Munby acknowledged the profession’s “nervousness” about further 
moves to increase transparency. But he said there was a need for greater 
openness to improve public understanding of the court process and confidence in 
the court system. “The public has a legitimate interest in being able to read 
what is being done by the judges in its name,” he told lawyers.

He is likely to announce progress in the new year on the two key reforms in 
the consultation document: a pilot of family hearings being held in public, and 
the release of documents to the media. The latter will include case summaries, 
skeleton arguments of the case, documents which are issued during fact-finding 
hearings – for example where allegations of domestic violence have been made – 
and experts’ reports, to allow the media to perform their watchdog role in 
society, he said.

Munby has already canvassed initial views on the public hearings and if he 
gives the go-ahead for the trial, it will go out to further consultation with 
the profession.

But responses to his consultation were almost universally hostile. The 
proposals were rejected by the Association of Lawyers for Children, which has 
1,400 members, the Family Law Bar Association, Resolution, the national family 
lawyers’ association, and Family Justice Young People’s Board, a group of young 
people who have had direct experience of the family justice system.

Cris McCurley, a family lawyer who specialises in representing black and 
minority ethnic women in cases involving extreme domestic violence, said 
holding hearings in open court could stop vulnerable women taking part in 
hearings. “Family courts hear intimate personal details and even with anonymity 
imposed I think the particulars of cases would be identifiable certainly within 
their communities,” she said. “My worry is it would stop women coming forward 
to seek help to protect their children.”

Lucy Reed, a family law barrister, who runs the Transparency Project 
<http://www.transparencyproject.org.uk/>, which aims to increase understanding 
of the system, said opening up the courts further should be an issue for 
parliament to discuss.


A spokesman for the judicial communications office said Munby intended to 
issue further guidance on the issues raised in his August 2014 consultation on 
transparency in the new year.
 