
The denouement of this match will be remembered as one of the most dramatic in 
a competition that has seen more than its fair share of them but European 
Professional Club Rugby officials have admitted it should not have come to pass 
the way it did.Connacht won when they kicked a penalty to touch after the 80 
minutes was up and drove over the subsequent lineout for a try 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/connacht-wasps-european-champions-rugby-cup-match-report>
 whose touchline conversion clinched a famous win for the home team, leaving 
Pool 2 poised in a three-way tie with two rounds remaining.

Connacht’s Naulia Dawai and Jack Carty seize last-gasp win over Wasps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/connacht-wasps-european-champions-rugby-cup-match-report>
But Connacht <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht> should not have been 
allowed to take the lineout.

Jérôme Garcès, the referee, had withdrawn from the match in the 74th minute 
with a hamstring injury and was replaced by the assistant, Mathieu Raynal. The 
latter is a Test referee who sent offCJ Stander in Ireland’s first Test in 
South Africa this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/south-africa-ireland-first-test-match-report>
, Raynal’s first major international, which Ireland went on to win against the 
odds. He also blew the whistle in Chicago last month, whenIreland beat the All 
Blacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
, but he is not as experienced as Garcès.

He would, though, appear to be a lucky charm for the Irish. Here, with 
Connacht trailing by five points, he awarded the home team a penalty precisely 
on the 80th minute. When John Muldoon, Connacht’s captain, asked if they could 
go for the corner, Raynal said no, because time was up. Muldoon protested that 
the latest laws allow lineouts to be taken if a penalty is kicked to touch 
after time. Raynal then appeared to change his mind, agreeing that Connacht 
could kick for the corner after all.

He had been right the first time and should not have allowed the lineout to be 
taken. The new laws Muldoon referred to are to be trialled next year, coming 
into effect on 1 January in the southern hemisphere and on 1 August in the 
north.

In a statement EPCR confirmed that Raynal was wrong. “The assistant referee 
awarded a penalty to Connacht after time had elapsed. Connacht kicked the ball 
into touch and from the resultant lineout, scored a converted try to win the 
game 20-18. However, as time had elapsed, Connacht should not have been 
permitted to take a lineout throw-in once the ball had been kicked into touch, 
as stipulated in Law 5.7 (e) of World Rugby’s Laws of the Game.”

EPCR has also confirmed that the result will stand. Had Raynal stuck with his 
initial assessment, Connacht would have been able to tap the penalty or elect 
for a scrum and might have scored a converted try anyway, though the chances of 
success would have been slighter.

As it is, Connacht drove the subsequent lineout for a try, scored by Naulia 
Dawai, the Fijian back-row forward making his Connacht debut. That tied the 
score at 18-18, two tries apiece, in an enthralling contest, which had now 
graduated to the dramatic. Jack Carty, the only fly-half and goal-kicker 
Connacht have available in the midst of an injury crisis, landed the conversion 
from the touchline to complete the evening’s passage into legend.

The result keeps Pool 2 alive, but Wasps retain the advantage. They are tied 
on 13 points with Connacht and Toulouse, but cannot be overhauled by anyone if 
they take maximum points from their remaining matches, at home to Toulouse and 
away at Zebre. Connacht would have to take more points than Wasps from fixtures 
at home to Zebre and away at Toulouse to pip them to top spot. In the event of 
a tie, the first deciding criterion is match points in the games between the 
tied teams.Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> took bonus 
points from both Connacht matches, so lead 6-4 on that count. Toulouse are 
still in the hunt, too, but they have played their Zebre “jokers”.

But the fact will always remain that Wasps most likely would have won this 
match and thus be in pole position for a home quarter-final but for a referee 
being talked out of the correct decision by a player. This is a heavy cloud to 
hang over Raynal and the integrity of this year’s competition.

Connacht O’Halloran; Adeolokun, Parata, Aki, Healy; Carty, Marmion (Blade, 
74); Buckley, McCartney (Hefferman, 64), Bealham (Carey, 62; Bealham, 70), 
Dillane, Roux (Stevenson, 72), McKeon (O’Brien, 54), Fox-Matamua (Dawai, 74), 
Muldoon (capt).

Tries Poolman, Dawai Cons Carty 2 Pens Carty 2.

Sin-bin O’Halloran 24.

Wasps Miller; Wade, Macken (Leiua 66), Beale (Halai, 74), Bassett; Gopperth, 
Simpson (Robson, 54); Mullan, Taylor, Cooper‑Woolley (Moore, 59), Launchbury 
(capt), Myall, Johnson (Reider, 72), Young, Hughes (Thompson, 64).

Tries Simpson, Bassett Con Gopperth Pens Gopperth 2.

Referee J Garces (France; M Raynal, France 74). Attendance 8,090.
 