
Channel 4’s Dispatches sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/28/channel-4-dispatches-rifkind-and-straw-sting-ofcom>
 on former foreign secretaries Sir Malcolm Rifkind and Jack Straw did not 
unfairly represent the MPs as “politicians for hire”, the media regulator has 
said.

Ofcom opened an investigation into the programme, a joint operation with the 
Daily Telegraph, following criticism of its reporting of the allegations and 
after Rifkind and Straw were cleared by the parliamentary standards watchdog.

The programme used secret filming to allege that the MPs offered their 
political connections to earn money from commercial companies.

Ofcom said that there was a “significant public interest” in exploring the 
conduct of the MPs and that in the circumstances undercover filming was 
“proportionate and warranted”.

Kathryn Hudson, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, had said that 
the damage done to the former MPs could have been avoided if Dispatches and the 
Telegraph had accurately reported the exchanges they had filmed.

However, Ofcom said in its 38-page ruling that the filming was an “accurate 
representation” of the discussions the MPs held.

“We considered that the programme’s presentation of the statements made by Sir 
Malcolm Rifkind <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/malcolm-rifkind> and Mr 
Straw during the secretly filmed meetings did not give a misleading impression 
of their conduct in a way which was unfair to them,” said Ofcom in its ruling. 
“And the programme-makers took reasonable care to satisfy themselves that 
material facts were not presented, disregarded or omitted in a way that was 
unfair to them. The presentation of the secretly filmed footage was an accurate 
representation of the discussions.”

The programme alleged that Straw boasted to undercover journalists that he had 
operated “under the radar” to use his influence and change EU rules on behalf 
of a firm that paid him £60,000 a year. A recording obtained with a hidden 
camera shows Straw saying: “So normally, if I’m doing a speech or something, 
it’s £5,000 a day, that’s what I charge.”

Rifkind reportedly claimed to be able to gain “useful access” to every British 
ambassador in the world. Journalists recorded him describing himself as 
self-employed, even though he earned a salary of £67,000 as MP for Kensington: 
“I am self-employed – so nobody pays me a salary. I have to earn my income.”

Ofcom ruled that Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> had 
taken reasonable steps to avoid “unfair and unjust” treatment of the MPs, 
making sure their views were fairly aired.

“There was sufficient balance, by the inclusion of statements by the MPs that 
they were aware of the parliamentary rules and their responsibilities as MPs, 
in the programme such that it did not unfairly represent the MPs as 
‘politicians for hire’,” said Ofcom. “[The programme] allowed viewers to make 
their own minds up as to whether or not they thought the conduct shown fell 
short of public expectations for MPs’ conduct.”

The programme, which aired on 23 February, and Telegraph articles led Straw to 
suspend himself from the parliamentary Labour party and Rifkind to step down as 
the chairman of parliament’s intelligence and security committee and as an MP.

“We are delighted this important piece of public service journalism has been 
thoroughly vindicated by the independent regulator,” said Daniel Pearl, Channel 
4’s deputy head of news and current affairs and Dispatches editor. “This was a 
rigorously detailed investigation which paid scrupulous attention to fairness 
and accuracy at all times. We are pleased that Ofcom has recognised that the 
secretly filmed comments, ‘accurately represented the discussions that took 
place between the MPs and the undercover reporters’.”
 