
The start of the Scottish Football League was thrown into chaos tonight after 
Livingston refused to play tomorrow's Third Division fixture against East 
Stirlingshire. The SFL relegated debt-riddenLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> from the First Division on 
Wednesday for breaching the league's insolvency rules. The club have decided to 
appeal against that sanction and insist they will not play a Third Division 
fixture until their case is heard.

The appeal was lodged by the interim manager, Donald McGruther, who has been 
running Livingston for the past fortnight. McGruther, of administrators Mazars, 
was appointed by the Court of Session in Edinburgh after West Lothian Council 
took legal action to reclaim a £330,000 debt.

McGruther has been attempting to negotiate the sale of the club to a 
consortium led by former Cowdenbeath owner Gordon McDougall, ex-Dumbarton 
chairman Neil Rankine and ex-Livingston director Ged Nixon.

"We, the consortium, understand that the appeal submitted from the interim 
manager, Donald McGruther, has now been received and acknowledged by the 
Scottish Football League," McDougall told Livingston's official website.

"Accordingly, Livingston Football Club remains a First Division football club 
at this stage and therefore is unwilling to fulfil a fixture in the Third 
Division. Before the appeal was lodged, Livingston Football Club informed SFL 
chief executive, David Longmuir, that they were able to fulfil the First 
Division fixture at Ross County on Saturday 8 August."

The consortium added: "From the consortium's perspective, we regret the need 
to take this step and the implications it could have on football people 
throughout Scotland tomorrow but we feel strongly that this action is entirely 
justified.

"Additionally, the consortium are delighted to announce that we have today 
made substantial progress on finalising the purchase of the club and will be 
working over the weekend and hope to be in a position in the next few days to 
conclude the purchase."
 