
It may be a crisp winter’s afternoon in south London but the staff at Sparrows 
Lane have a spring in their step. TheCharlton Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> training ground has 
finished with its sessions for the day and lunch is being served. Players are 
exchanging tips on clothing and cologne. On one wall of the small reception 
hangs an inspirational quote from Vince Lombardi. Opposite are architectural 
plans for the club’s new “integrated training facility”.

Meanwhile, upstairs, squeezed between a dartboard and a babyfoot table, is 
Karl Robinson, the man charged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/charlton-athletic-karl-robinson-russell-slade>
 with making sure this good feeling extends beyond the training ground, on to 
the pitch and, just as importantly, into the stands of The Valley. “I don’t 
know what length of contract I’ve signed,” the new Charlton manager says with a 
broad smile. “I don’t need to know that because I need to win games. I need to 
make people believe in me, make the players believe in each other, make the 
fans believe in the team and the board. If we do all that …”

Pigs fly at the Valley as Charlton and Coventry fans stage joint protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
It’s certainly no small ambition. This week Robinson became the seventh 
Charlton manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
 since the Belgian Roland Duchâtelet bought the club in January 2014 and 
following the takeover The Valley has been a place of instability, insurrection 
and bad football results. After relegation from the Championship in the summer, 
Russell Slade was hired to help the club bounce back. He was sacked after 21 
games. There have been constant, often creative, protests from large sections 
of a dwindling crowd. Last week’s 1-1 draw with Sheffield United was briefly 
suspended after a hail of rubber taxis were thrown on the pitch. Charlton are 
perhaps the most discomfited club in English football.

You wouldn’t get that sense from the training ground though and you certainly 
wouldn’t get it from listening to Robinson. The scouser, 36, has filled out a 
bit since he joinedMK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> seven 
years ago to become the youngest manager in the Football League. But as well as 
a fashionable haircut he retains a youthful enthusiasm, and it comes out 
whenever he talks about the game.

“I love this game. When people hear that they’ll call it spin, but I think you 
can see it’s not. To get my pro licence when I did, to be coaching [with 
Blackburn Rovers] in the Premier League at 26 with some of the greatest players 
in the world. To be managing at 29. I count myself as very fortunate. I’ve 
learned an awful lot, I’ve worked hard. I’ve managed so many games for 36 and I 
want to get over 500 before a certain age.” What age is that? “I want to get 
there before I turn 39.”

Robinson left MK Dons, who his side face in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> second round on Saturday, last 
month, with his total at 346 games in management and 147 wins. Charlton might 
seem an odd bet to get to 500 but Robinson makes no bones about the fact he 
considers Charlton a big club (he turned down three other jobs before accepting 
this one) and he has been impressed by the Addicks’ controversial owner, 
Duchâtelet, and the club’s chief executive, Katrien Meire.

Robinson met Duchâtelet in Paris last week to seal his appointment. On 
returning to the UK he went straight to the training ground where, after 
midnight, he met Meire, too. “The owner was very, very good in what he said to 
me,” he says. “Katrien has been phenomenal in everything I’ve asked. All the 
things I’d heard about [before I came], haven’t been the case. I think if you 
asked them both they’d say maybe they underestimated how things worked in 
England and that’s where things fell down a little bit.”

Supporters might not be as understanding; distrust of the Duchâtelet empire 
runs deep at Charlton. But alongside a commitment to progressive football 
(“I’ve had a goalkeeper playing out from the back for the past seven years. Sam 
Allardyce said I should change my name to something continental”), Robinson has 
a flair for personal relations. One of the main challenges of his first week, 
he says, has been working out how each player best responds to information and 
adapting his message accordingly. As for the fans, Robinson states three times 
in our interview that he wants to meet them for a pint. “If we win some games 
then maybe I can get to sit down with the fans, talk to them, have a beer and a 
chat,” he says, explaining the hopeful next stage in his Charlton charm 
offensive. “I’ll ask honestly and they’ll answer honestly. Let’s talk. Let’s 
have an educated conversation. There’s a lot of very educated people round here 
who support this football club. As you can see I’m sort of in the middle a bit 
here. The owners have been fantastic to employ me but I want to do my job for 
the fans as well and I’ll do my damnedest to try and bring this football club 
to the next level and beyond, if we can.”
 