
Three animal charities are fighting to preserve almost £500,000 left to them 
by a woman, who cut her estranged daughter out of her will, in a test case 
being heard at the supreme court on Monday.

 The protracted dispute over Melita Jackson’s inheritance has made its way 
through the English courts since her death, at 70, in 2004.

 The final judgment, which is not expected until next year, will decide 
whether it is reasonable for parents to leave their wealth to charities if they 
fail to make adequate provision for their offspring.

Jackson’s only child, Heather Ilott, was rejected by her mother at 17 after 
she left home in 1978 to live with her boyfriend, Nicholas Ilott, whom she 
later married.


Attempts at reconciliation failed, and when Jackson died 12 years ago her will 
made no provision for her daughter, by then a mother of five, who has no 
pension and was on state benefits.

Most of the £486,000 estate was left to the Blue Cross, the Royal Society for 
the Protection of Birds and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals.


In 2007, the county court awarded Ilott £50,000 on the grounds that her mother 
had acted in an “unreasonable, capricious and harsh” way towards her.

Ilott, from Great Munden, Hertfordshire, challenged the award. In 2011, the 
court of appeal decided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/31/woman-appeal-mothers-will-animal-charities>
 that sum was insufficient. Judges then warned that further costly litigation 
would eat into the value of the estate.


Last year the court of appeal ruled that Ilott should receive £164,000.

Ilott, who is in her 50s, made an application under the Inheritance (Provision 
for Family and Dependants) Act 1975 for “reasonable financial provision” from 
her mother’s estate.

 The act confers the right on a child of a deceased parent to apply for an 
order if a will does not make reasonable provision for their maintenance.


The delays are reminiscent of the disputed will of Jarndyce v Jarndyce in 
Charles Dickens’ novel Bleak House.

In the latest hearing, the charities are seeking clarification of the rules 
under the 1975 act. It is being heard by a panel of seven supreme court 
justices, headed by Lord Neuberger. Judgment will be reserved.

The three charities said they had pursued their claim in order to “affirm the 
importance of testamentary freedom and secure crucial guidance for the future”.


In a statement they explained: “The charities have appealed this decision in 
order to obtain essential clarity from the Supreme Court regarding the scope of 
the court’s power to interfere with a person’s testamentary wishes using the 
1975 Act.”

Paula Myers, head of the will trust and estate disputes team at the law firm 
Irwin Mitchell, said of the court of appeal decision: “The ruling potentially 
made it easier for adult children who have been left out of wills to challenge 
them if they have not been left a reasonable provision and we have seen a rise 
in inquiries from people who feel that they have been unfairly disinherited.”

Geoffrey Kertesz, partner and head of will and trust disputes at Bircham Dyson 
Bell, said: “The court of appeal made its decision on narrow grounds and seemed 
principally concerned with providing Mrs Ilott, who is in straitened financial 
circumstances, with housing in a manner that preserved her state benefits.


“The larger, practical implication of the decision is that, irrespective of 
the relationship between a parent and estranged child, it has become 
significantly more difficult to disinherit a child.

 “The case seems to have created an ‘Ilott effect’, as we are seeing an 
increase in Inheritance Act claims brought by adult children and against 
charitable beneficiaries. Unless the supreme court overturns the decision, 
claims of this nature will only become more common.”
 