
Charles Green denied any wrongdoing on Friday after offering his resignation 
as the chief executive ofRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>
. Green informed the board of his intention to step down from the role 
following allegations by the former owner Craig Whyte that he was involved in 
Green's acquisition of the club last summer.

Green, whose consortium purchased the business and assets of Rangers for £5.5m 
after liquidation was confirmed, has denied the claims by Whyte, who was in 
charge when the club went into administration in February 2012.

The Rangers board last week commissioned an independent investigation into the 
running of the club by Green and the commercial director, Imran Ahmad, in light 
of the allegations.

A statement to the Stock Exchange said: "Charles Green has notified the board 
that he wishes to step down as chief executive with immediate effect. Recent 
weeks have seen media interest in the circumstances surrounding the period 
prior to the acquisition of the club by the consortium led by Mr Green.

"Whilst Mr Green strenuously denies any wrongdoing, he has recognised that 
this negative publicity is a distraction and is detracting from the 
achievements and reputation of the club.""

Green, who recently apologised after being charged by the Scottish Football 
Association for allegedly using "racist and offensive language" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/10/rangers-charles-green-charged-sfa>
, said: "Recent events have undoubtedly been a distraction for myself and all 
involved with Rangers and I feel that it is appropriate that I step down.

"I am very proud to have been associated with a club of the stature of Rangers 
and am proud of the achievements of the club during my tenure as chief 
executive. My thanks go to the Rangers fans, whose support has been tremendous."

Rangers raised more than £22m through a share issue in December, following 
Green's canvassing of investors and the chairman Malcolm Murray paid tribute to 
his time at the Ibrox helm. He said: "Charles Green was instrumental in helping 
to secure financial stability. The impact that he had in turning the club 
around from the dark days of last summer will never be forgotten by the fans."
 