
Charlton, seeking an eighth manager since March 2014, cruised to a 5-1 win at 
Bristol Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> to climb 
into the top half of the League One table. Kevin Nugent was put in caretaker 
charge following the sacking of Russell Slade and has won both of his games.

Nugent’s team, who had beaten Port Vale 2-0 on Saturday, were ahead after 26 
minutes on Tuesday through Ademola Lookman, with Josh Magennis doubling the 
lead just before half-time.

The points were wrapped up five minutes into the second half, when the 
central-defender Patrick Bauer headed in a third. Adam Chicksen, on his first 
league start, made it four and Nick Ajose slotted in the fifth with five 85 
minutes remaining.

Controversial Millwall FC development plans hearing postponed till January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/hearing-millwall-fc-development-plans-postponed-till-january>
Matty Taylor scored a consolation for Rovers, who had to play the final 30 
minutes with 10 men after Jake Clarke-Salter sustained an injury, from the 
penalty spot in stoppage time.

“We had a little bit of fortune with a couple of deflections, but I felt we 
certainly deserved it,” Nugent said afterwards. “Earlier in the season we were 
unfortunate and coming up against keepers who were putting in man-of-the-match 
performances and it just goes that way sometimes. A score like this was going 
to be coming.”

Scunthorpe and Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> both produced wins to 
remain in first and second place respectively, although the Blades left it 
until the third minute of injury time to confirm their superiority over 
nine-man Bury, when Ethan Ebanks-Landell sidefooted the only goal into the 
corner of the net.

The Bury midfielder Jacob Mellis was sent off at the end of the first half for 
a foul on Matt Done and their defender Greg Leigh joined him after collecting a 
second caution after 85 minutes.

Scunthorpe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe> got their win at 
Peterborough, goals from Kevin van Veen and Neal Bishop securing the points and 
they remain six points clear of the Bramall Lane club. “The players were 
superb,” said Graham Alexander, the Iron manager. “I thought we started the 
game really well, we pressed Peterborough at every opportunity and then when we 
got the ball, we passed it really well and crisply.”

Bolton stay in third place, behind Sheffield United on goals scored and 
courtesy of a 1-0 win over Coventry, Zach Clough getting the goal after 11 
minutes. Bradford’s 1-0 win over Northampton thanks to a second-half goal from 
James Hanson keeps them on their tail in fourth.

FC Wimbledon achieved a 0-0 draw at Millwall despite having their defender Jon 
Meades dismissed with 15 minutes to go, Fleetwood saw ofShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> – who slip to bottom – 3-0 
and thanks to two goals from David Ball. Southend were held 1-1 at home by 
Swindon.

Chesterfield moved off the bottom with a 3-2 win at MK Dons, Oxford beat 
Gillingham 1-0 and Oldham’s Carl Winchester came up with a last-minute 
equaliser at Port Vale, which took them within a point of the final safety 
position.

In League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, the 
leaders Plymouth crashed to a second consecutive home defeat as goals from 
Michael Nelson and John Akinde gave Barnet a surprise 2-0 win at Home Park. “If 
we had got a goal, we probably would’ve got another one,” said the Argyle 
manager Derek Adams, whose team lost to Grimsby on Saturday. “We haven’t scored 
in two games but we’ve plenty of good play in and around the box. It’s just 
hard to take because you’ve put yourselves in a good position, then we don’t 
defend well enough. We lose two goals, and you find it very difficult to come 
back from that.”

Carlisle failed to fully capitalise as they were held to a 2-2 draw at 
Grimsby, but the Cumbrian club cut the lead at the top to three points.

Carlisle twice led through Charlie Wyke and a Zac Mills own goal but an Omar 
Bogle penalty and a 78th-minute effort from Tom Bolarinwa salvaged a point for 
the Mariners.

Portsmouth hit back to leapfrog Luton and move into fourth place with a 3-1 
win at Kenilworth Road. Danny Hylton gave Town an early lead but Michael Smith 
hit a long-range equaliser then Gareth Evans and Kal Naismith completed an 
important win for the visitors.

Big wins at the bottom saw Colchester and Exeter move out of the relegation 
places while Newport fell back to the bottom after a 1-0 home defeat to Wycombe.

Sido Jombati’s late free-kick was enough to earn victory for Wycombe while 
Exeter, who had started the night in 24th place, jumped three places after 
Ollie Watkins hit the only goal of the game at Leyton Orient, who are now 22nd.

Colchester also moved up with a 3-0 win at Cheltenham, goals from Craig 
Slater, Brennan Dickenson and Tom Eastman sending the Robins – who had Harry 
Pell sent off late on – into the bottom two.

A last-minute goal from Danny Rose saw Mansfield steal a 1-0 home win over 
Blackpool, while James Jones hit the winner in Crewe’s 2-1 win over Morecambe – 
after Alex Kiwomya had cancelled out Rhys Turner’s early goal for the visitors.

Nicky Deverdics and Lewis Alessandra scored to give Hartlepool a 2-0 win over 
Accrington, who had Mark Hughes sent off on the hour, while Conor Newton scored 
the only goal as Cambridge beat Notts County at Meadow Lane.

Yeovil’s game against Crawley was postponed because of a waterlogged pitch at 
the Huish.
 