
What was your first festival experience as a punter?


I think it was Reading when I was 16. I saw Justice for the first time and I 
befriended this man who had one of those staffs, like the one Gandalf would 
have. It had a skull on the top of it and he had a really long beard. He was 
great. We raved to Justice together. I had plastic bags of cider strapped to me 
as well at that point.

What’s been your most exhilarating festival experience?


At Bonnaroo festival a couple of years ago, we had nothing to do the next day, 
so we partied really really hard. My ex-boyfriend took acid with Billy Idol, 
which was quite funny. We all watched the xx, and it was the most beautiful 
moment ever and we were all crying. It was only about 10pm.

Are you a keen camper?


Erm, you know, I’d pick a hotel over it, but I’m not saying no. What I used to 
be obsessed with was thosepop-up tents 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vEdSVmbkrj8>. I’m not good with logistics and 
instructions, so putting up a tent with pegs is kind of my nightmare, but the 
pop-up ones are great and so easy. You know what else I’m really good at? 
Getting the sleeping bag back into the tiny bag. You basically just spin it 
around and then just stuff it in.

What’s been your worst toilet experience at a festival?


I’m kind of weird because I find the toilets at festivals really interesting. 
I always take photos of them and send them to my friends who aren’t there.

That is disgusting.


I know, but it’s funny for me. But I’ve never fallen in one or been pushed 
down one, thank God, because I would have had a tantrum.

If you could do only one hygienic thing at a festival, what would you do?


I think I’d have to brush my teeth. That’s vital to start your day. Also, if 
you have some perfume, then you can just spritz everything else up a bit – I 
can’t believe this is going to be printed.

With that in mind, what’s been your worst drug experience at a festival?


Oh, gosh. I remember I was at the Secret Garden Party 
<http://secretgardenparty.com/> and I peaked, let’s say, very quickly and had 
to sit on the floor in the middle of this tent while the Whip were playing. 
Everyone was jumping around me and I just sat on the floor, passing out and 
vomiting. It wasn’t great. But then the next day I woke in a ball pit and two 
people were having sex next to me. The sun was shining and they seemed very 
happy, so it was kind of the perfect ending. I quickly left, I might add – I 
didn’t want to disturb them.

I’m happy with Kanye at ­Glastonbury, but to see Britney Spears in a festival 
envir­onment would be quite interesting

What’s on your festival rider?


Champagne, vodka, probably some form of rain mac but like a funky fresh one, 
bubbles and glitter. I want to bring loads of emoji balloonss everywhere this 
summer too.

What’s your preferred footwear for the stage these days?


I’ve got some really great stripper’s shoes from a strippers’ store in LA. 
They’re massive black platforms and they’ve got very wide heels, so you can do 
a lot in them. It’s a stripper heel over a comfortable slip-on any day.

Should babies and small children be allowed at festivals?


Yeah, as long as someone’s looking after them. I don’t want to hang out with 
them, other people might – their parents maybe.

At a festival, is it best to do the hits first or save them until the end to 
keep people there?


I think you should spread the hits throughout, you know. One at the beginning, 
one in the middle and one at the end.

Will you start or end with Boom Clap 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ek1f0Sb7v70>?


I’ve got to end with that, because we do this hand-wave thing in the middle 
eight, in a really classic, cheesy way. To open with that might be a bit 
self-righteous.

Who’s the most annoying type of person to be trapped in a tent with at a 
festival?


Someone who doesn’t want to do anything. Someone who’s like: “Oh, my God, it’s 
raining and I don’t want to get my hair wet. Maybe we should wait.” Also, 
someone who has their day planned out already.

Who’s your ultimate headliner?


I’m happy with Kanye at Glastonbury, but I’m also going to say Britney Spears. 
To see her in a festival environment would be quite interesting.

CV


(1) Pre-pop stardom, Charlotte Emma Aitchison was just your typical 
14-year-old, uploading vaguely embarrassing demos to Myspace (her debut album, 
14, never saw the light of day) and dragging her parents to illegal raves in 
east London.

(2) The moniker Charli XCX <https://www.theguardian.com/music/charli-xcx> was 
taken from her MSN Messenger screen name and stands for either Charli Kiss 
Charli Kiss or – children look away now – X-Rated Cunt X-Rated. Blimey.

(3) She’s written for the likes of Iggy Azalea and Icona Pop, and her biggest 
solo hit so far, Boom Clap, was originally offered toformer Disney prisoner 
Hilary Duff, whose label turned it down without consulting her.

(4) She burned her feet on a hot stage at T in the Park last year after taking 
her shoes off mid-performance. “Don’t wear uncomfortable shoes on stage, and if 
you do then wear them with socks,” is her practical advice to any naïve 
festival performer.

(5) Charli XCX will play the Wireless festival on 5 July, the Reading and 
Leeds festivals on 29 and 30 August and Bestival, 10-13 September.
 