
Asabe Kwambura is getting tired of waiting. Sitting under a young mango tree 
alongside the charred remains of her school, the headteacher looks around 
nervously. It's not safe to be out here in one of the most dangerous parts of 
north-easternNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, but the 
government has promised to send a team to investigate the kidnapping of more 
than 200 pupils from her school and she wants to greet them in person.

"These are our girls," she says. "They are from Chibok." She punctuates her 
words by pointing to the ground. "They are from here."

Around her are abandoned desks and burnt out classrooms destroyed when Boko 
Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> militants stormed the 
Chibok government girls secondary school a month ago, loading the girls into 
lorries and driving them away.

Kwambura's face is drawn and tired. The kidnapping has left its mark on 
everyone in this remote settlement, which has been living under a state of 
emergency since Boko Haram stepped up its attacks more than a year ago.
 Yerima Pudza, Asabe Kwambura and Bulama Modu sit under a tree at the campus 
of the government girls secondary school in Chibok where over 200 girls were 
kidnapped. Photograph: Chika Oduah 
Mohammed Dunoma, the chairman of the local parent-teachers association, says 
many villagers are now reluctant to allow their daughters to go to school. Boko 
Haram, whose name means "western education is sinful", is an ever-present 
threat, he says: "We don't know when they will come."

This is a close-knit community, and it is in mourning. Esther Yakubu's 
15-year-old daughter, Dorcas, is one of the missing girls. She is furious with 
the government for failing to come to her aid.

"What about us living in Chibok? Are we not people too?" she asks. "They 
abandoned us. Just because we live in the villages." Asked if she believes the 
rumours that the girls may have crossed the border into Cameroon and beenforced 
to marry their abductors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/kidnapped-nigerian-schoolgirls-marriage-claims>
, she shakes her head vehemently.

"No, no. They are in Nigeria," she says, holding a photo of Dorcas wearing a 
blue dress. The picture, taken the day before she was kidnapped, was supposed 
to be a gift to Dorcas for completing secondary school.
 A picture of Dorcas Yakubu taken a day before she was kidnapped. Photograph: 
Chika Oduah 
Dorcas's sister, Happy, says she is not afraid of Boko Haram. "I just want my 
sister to come back," she says.

Away from Chibok, the social media campaign to #bringbackourgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/07/twitter-hashtag-bringbackourgirls-nigeria-mass-kidnapping>
 has generated more than one million tweets and swelled into a global outcry, 
with famous figures including Angelina Jolie, Malala Yousafzai andMichelle 
Obama joining the calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/10/michelle-obama-nigeria-presidential-address>
 for Nigeria's government to recover the remaining girls.

But here there is no electricity or internet access, and little awareness that 
the world's attention is focused at its door.

The oldest man in the village, Bitrus Dawa, known locally as Badalu, has not 
heard about the global search effort for the girls he describes as "my 
daughters". Dawa, who says he was born in 1910 and can remember the first time 
he saw white men in 1923, shakes his head as he laments a government "fraught 
with corruption" that has not been able to eliminate Boko Haram.

Beyond the village, the wide trunks of baobab trees cast shadows across the 
Sahelian landscape where theSambisa game reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/nigeria-sambisa-forest-boko-haram-hideout-kidnapped-school-girls-believed-to-be-held>
 stretches ominously. Many Chibok residents believe their daughters are in one 
of Boko Haram's encampments in the Sambisa bush.

"We went inside the Sambisa to look for them," says Lawan Zanna. Hoping to 
find his 18-year-old daughter Aisha, the 45-year-old father of nine said he had 
joined more than 100 others three days after the abduction. Along the way, 
villagers from nearby areas told them they had seen Boko Haram militants with 
the girls.

Zanna said he wanted to continue following the abductors' tracks, "But they 
told us told us, 'don't follow them. They will kill you'."

Despite Boko Haram's threats, Zanna says he will keep his seven daughters in 
school. "Even the Qur'an tells us that knowledge is obligatory."

Since the abduction, Chibok's local government has introduced a curfew, 
outlawing all driving after 6pm.

The village has deployed its own civilian force of fighters to defend the 
area. Bulus Mungo Park, a 38-year-old civil servant who says two of his nieces 
are among the kidnapped, is one of them. A volunteer in the national vigilante 
association, Mungo Park says the local force is about 300 strong. "We must 
fight this Boko Haram and we will win," he says.
 Bulus Mungo Park is a volunteer vigilante fighter defending Chibok. 
Photograph: Chika Oduah 
With a hunting gun strapped around his tall shoulders, Mungo Park escorted a 
convoy ofgirls who escaped from Boko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/11/nigeria-student-abduction-escaping-boko-haram-missing-schoolgirls>
 to the state capital of Maiduguri on Tuesday. Local authorities had invited 
them to watch thelatest video released by the militants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/12/kidnapped-nigerian-girls-paraded-in-boko-haram-video>
 to help identify the girls shown.

The journey to Maiduguri from Chibok is an 80-mile (130km) stretch of 
abandoned villages razed by Boko Haram's insurgency. Drivers on this road are 
careful to avoid stopping between the regular military checkpoints inspecting 
all passers by. At the checkpoints, soldiers and civilian fighters call out 
suspicious-looking men and ask them to stand in a line. One by one they lift 
the men's fingers, looking for tell-tale signs of heavy gun usage.

"This is the situation we are in now because of the Boko Haram," says Mungo 
Park.

The road runs alongside the Sambisa bush, and locals say Boko Haram fighters 
often cross this way, shooting at cars as they go.

For 18-year-old Lydia Pogu, her brush with Boko Haram ended with a dramatic 
getaway. With a friend, Lydia managed to jump out one of the lorries after it 
succumbed to mechanical failures.

"I escaped. They didn't know I jumped," she says. She ran into the bushes, 
leaving behind Aisha Zanna, Dorcas Yakubu, Deborah Solomon and more than 200 
other classmates.

But now she's too afraid to go back to school. She says she wants to be a 
farmer and tend to a small plot of land with her mother, a sturdy woman who 
speaks little English and smiles often at her daughter.
 Lydia Pogu escaped Boko Haram abductors by jumping out of a truck. She said 
she does not want to go back to school but wants to be a farmer. Photograph: 
Chika Oduah 
Lydia says she will not be happy until her classmates return. She locks the 
doors of the small family home as Chibok settles for the night. Store fronts 
are closed. Chickens and goats retreat into wooden stalls.

Kwambura and her colleagues give up their wait for the day. Another day has 
gone by, the girls are still missing and the government delegation has not come 
to help.
 