
Over the years most backbench MPs come and go. They try to represent their 
constituents as best they can, but on the national stage they are largely 
invisible and the work they do is unrecognised. Their voting record is publicly 
available, but is generally ignored. When they give up or lose their seat they 
mostly return to the life they had before being elected and are then forgotten.

This is perhaps the only chance I will ever get to bring the actions of my 
wife, Linda Perham, who was the labour MP for Ilford North from 1997 t0 2005, 
to a wider audience and thank her for showing massive resilience in voting 
against the invasion ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> in 2003. 
She and 138 of her colleagues resisted intense pressure from the party whips 
and the most senior members of the cabinet to support the government, but she 
stood by her guns. In the light of the Chilcot inquiry report I would just like 
to say that, 13 years after the event: “Linda you were always right and the 
government was wrong.”
Ray Perham
Ilford, Essex

• Chilcot took seven years, much too long and it doesn’t indict Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> as a war criminal as it 
should, but it is a damning indictment of both Blair and Labour over the war. 
It’s clear that Blair had decided to go to war on Iraq with Bush, whatever 
happened, and that he then spent all the time making up the case to go to war 
including lies, deception, and exaggeration of the evidence on weapons of mass 
destruction.

What is also clear is that under Blair we didn’t have democracy but a form of 
elected dictatorship, where the key decisions were made by him with a few 
friends on his sofa. There was no effective planning on what happened after the 
war other than to ensure that the oil assets were protected. And the warnings 
of the intelligence services that foreign invasions lead to terrorism at home 
and abroad were ignored.

As recent bombings in Iraq show, things are much worse in Iraq than under 
Saddam and the rest of the region has been destabilised as a result of the war. 
As one of the family members of the dead British soldiers said at their press 
conference, “our sons died in vain”. Given the commitment of all the 
prospective Tory prime ministerial candidates to further warlike expeditions, 
the sooner Scotland cuts itself off from the British state the better.
Hugh Kerr 
(Labour MEP 1994-99), Edinburgh

• Mistaken decisions to go to war are more terrible than other mistakes (
Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/the-guardian-view-on-war-in-iraq-a-country-that-we-helped-to-ruin>
, 5 July); except perhaps mistaken decisions not to go to war: Rwanda, 1 
million dead; Syria unknown, but awful and not getting any better. Do we just 
stand and watch or do we intervene? It is by far the most difficult decision to 
make in politics. I would like to think that the Chilcot report will enable us 
to have a more rational debate about how and when the world intervenes, and how 
we handle the post-conflict situation, otherwise we will relive the horrors 
time after time.
Clive Soley
Labour, House of Lords

• While the Chilcot inquiry was not a judicial inquiry, as it should have 
been, Joshua Rozenberg (The Iraq war inquiry has left the door open for Tony 
Blair to be prosecuted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/iraq-war-inquiry-chilcot-tony-blair-prosecute>
, theguardian.com, 6 July) points out a way forward in relation to Blair (and 
others). The British public and the Iraqi people, especially those who lost 
sons, daughters, fathers and mothers, deserve no less. If our representatives, 
our government, are not held to account, where is the justice in that? The 
Bloody Sunday inquiry, Hillsborough, the ongoing investigation into the 
Birmingham pub bombings and the inquiries into child abuse, have all failed to 
give families of the deceased, the survivors and their families, a sense that 
justice has truly been served. Chilcot, though going further than many expected 
– and probably as far as its non judicial framework allowed – follows in that 
sad tradition of so far, but no further. The world is watching intently at the 
moment. Wrongdoing on a massive scale requires more than strong words and 
statements of regret. Where is the accountability, where is justice?
Mike Loveland
London

• The Chilcot report concluded that flawed intelligence for the Iraq war 
should have been challenged. Justification for the war was based on evidence 
obtained by torture. In February 2003, US secretary of state Colin Powell told 
the UN that Iraq was supporting al-Qaida. This was based onthe statement by Ibn 
al-Sheikh al-Libi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/may/13/ibn-al-sheikh-al-libi>
, imprisoned by the US in Afghanistan and Egypt, which was obtained under 
torture. Al Libi withdraw his evidence before his death in prison in Libya. He 
said he told his torturers what they wanted to hear to stop the torture.

In February 2003, the US defence intelligence agencies knew he was probably a 
liar. UK intelligence agencies must have known this. They must have told Tony 
Blair. Blair ignored this and lied that Iraq had WMD and was continuing to 
develop nuclear weapons that could have been transferred into the hands of 
terrorists, such as al-Qaida. We went to war on the basis of torture and lies. 
The Chilcot report should be followed by an independent judge-led inquiry to 
establish if the UK agencies were complicit in the use of torture by the US. We 
should learn from the Chilcot report that the UK and its intelligence services 
must not be supine in their support for the actions of the US.
Joy Hurcombe
Worthing, West Sussex

• We should have no truck with unpleasant talk of war a crimes trial for Tony 
Blair. It was a political decision, however misguided. If people are demanding 
justice, they should turn their wrath on Blair’s lieutenants in the 
parliamentary Labour party, who went along with everything he did for career 
reasons, only gradually distancing themselves from him when they ceased to 
perceive him as an election winner. These same people managed to keep control 
of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party until last 
summer, and at this moment they are trying desperately to wrest back that 
control before they see their future careers too damaged and lose all the rich 
rewards which once stretched before their eyes, all the way to their eventual 
peerages and lucrative consultancies.

I was never a supporter of the old left in their time, but better them than 
New Labour. The appropriate epitaph to Iraq should be the termination of the 
careers of those who made it possible. Only then should we start contemplating 
a more sensible alternative to the old left.
Roger Schafir
London

• In 1971, Richard Crossman described secrecy as the “real English disease and 
in particular the chronic ailment of the British government”. Since then, the 
country had to wait 39 years for a full investigation intoBloody Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bloodysunday> and 27 years for an honest 
account of events at Hillsborough. We need insights into the machinery of 
government, rather than the role of this or that individual. If Chilcot 
provides this, then real lessons might be learned: about leadership, cabinet 
government and accountability of the executive to parliament.
Mike Sheaff
Plymouth

• Days before the invasion of Iraq, Mohamed ElBaradei told the UN security 
council that the IAEA had “found no evidence or plausible indication of the 
revival of a nuclear weapons programme in Iraq”. Hans Blix, head of Unmovic 
(United Nations monitoring, verification and inspection commission), said there 
was “no evidence of prohibited weapons programmes”. George Bush and Tony Blair 
went ahead anyway “to disarm Iraq, to free its people and to defend the world 
from grave danger”.
Dr John Doherty
Vienna

• John Chilcot has said of his Iraq report that: “The main expectation I have 
is that it will not be possible in future to engage in a military or diplomatic 
endeavour on such a scale and of such gravity, without really careful 
challenge, analysis and assessment.” Just like Brexit then?
John Whitehead
London

• During the EU referendum campaign, many of right and left argued that 
leaving the EU would reduce British influence in the world. Now that Chilcot 
suggests that the Iraq adventure was not entirely benign, would they now like 
to reconsider whether a reduction of British influence might actually be a good 
thing?
John Bevan
London

• I am surprised that Steve Richards (Why did Tony Blair go to war in Iraq?, 5 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/tony-blair-iraq-war-chilcot>
) did not mention that the former PM could have followed the example set by 
Harold Wilson in the 1960s. While, from the left’s perspective, controversially 
refusing to condemn the US invasion of Vietnam, Wilson refused to join in by 
sending British troops. History proved Wilson made the right decision. Iraq was 
effectively destroyed and the region savagely and dangerously destabilised. 
Blair’s reputation has also been destroyed, sadly, as he did many good things 
in other areas.
Nigel de Gruchy
Orpington, Kent

• The War Remnants Museum in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, has a photograph of 
former US defence secretary Robert Macnamara with the following comment from 
his book, In Retrospect: “We were wrong, terribly wrong. We owe it to future 
generations to explain why.” Is it too much to hope for the same humility from 
Tony Blair in the coming days?
Simon Medaney
Bedford

• The similarities between the political and military leadership of the Iraq 
war and the Battle of the Somme beggar belief.
Frank Landamore
Lewes, East Sussex

• The Chilcot inquiry report has confirmed what the ordinary thinking person 
already knew both before and after the war in Iraq, but what we still don’t 
know is what exactly happened to Dr Kelly? Will we ever know?
Ted Prangnell
Ashford, Kent

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 