
A Chinese engineer and his driver have been injured in a bombing in Karachi 
that was claimed by a little-known separatist group vowing to sabotage China’s 
multibillion-dollar investment programme in the country.

The unusual targeting of a Chinese worker in the sprawling port city will 
alarm the government, which is betting heavily on the $46bn China-Pakistan 
economic corridor (CPEC) to transform Pakistan’s moribund economy.

The two men were injured when a roadside bomb exploded at about 8.30am on 
Monday as their minibus passed through one of Karachi’s industrial quarters.

A piece of paper left at the scene was signed by the Sindhudesh Revolutionary 
Army, an obscure group seeking the independence of Sindh, one of Pakistan’s 
four regions.


The note denounced the ruling establishment that is largely drawn from Punjab, 
Pakistan’s most populous region.

“As a rising imperialist power and supporter of Pakistan’s cause we consider 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> equivalent to Punjab,” the note 
written in Sindhi said. “We will oppose every anti-Sindh project including the 
China-Pakistan economic corridor.”

The security of Chinese nationals in Pakistan is a key concern to Beijing. In 
October, the country’s ambassador demanded that extra precaution be taken to 
protect those involved in CPEC, somethingPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> has repeatedly promised to do.

Although Karachi is a turbulent city plagued by Islamist militancy and 
criminal gangs, Chinese expatriates have not generally been considered targets.


Anwar Rao, a senior superintendent of police, said the wounded Chinese man did 
not have security with him because it was not considered necessary.

“We only provide security when there are tensions in the city and at their 
place of work,” he said. “We are trying our best to catch the culprits.”

The security of Chinese nationals has been much more of a headache for the 
Pakistani state in Balochistan, where a special military force has been raised 
just to protect CPEC projects from separatist forces.


The CPEC investment programme includes roads, railways and desperately needed 
power plants. It is part of an ambitious strategy that Beijing hopes will not 
only help stabilise a key ally but also give Chinese goods access to the 
Arabian Seathrough the deep sea port at Gwadar on the Balochistan coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/pakistan-new-shenzhen-poor-gwadar-fishing-town-china-plans>
.

Three Chinese engineers were killed by a car bomb in Gwadar in 2004, an event 
that preceded more than a decade of nationalist unrest.

Today visiting Chinese officials and workers only move around the small 
fishing town with heavy security provided by the army and police.
 