
On 2 August this year I noticed a small piece on the BBC news website about a 
gas attack in Syria <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-36951783>. 
Accounts of the appalling situation in Syria and new devastating attacks seem 
to be almost a daily feature in the news. What I found especially depressing 
about the short item that made the news that day, was the alleged use of 
chlorine gas. Allegations of chlorine gas attacks have appeared again in the 
news on 11 August, this time resulting in thedeaths of one woman and two 
children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/11/syria-suspected-chlorine-gas-attack-in-aleppo-kills-woman-and-two-children>
 as well as a formal investigation by the UN.

Chlorine <http://www.rsc.org/periodic-table/element/17/chlorine>, the 17th 
element in the periodic table, is an industrially important chemical. Among 
other applications it is used in the dying industry and forms the basis for 
many household bleaches. But chlorine is perhaps most well known as an addition 
to swimming pools where, in small quantities, it reacts with the water to form 
hypochlorous acid that kills bacteria and prevents the growth of algae, 
resulting in safe, sanitary conditions for swimming.

Chlorine also has a much darker history in conflicts stretching back to the 
first world war.Its use at Ypres on 22 April 1915 
<http://www.firstworldwar.com/weaponry/gas.htm> marked a new era in chemical 
warfare. The possible threat of gas attacks had resulted in a treaty signed in 
1899 prohibiting their use. The treaty did not stop the French from launching 
shells containing a primitive tear gas on German lines in 1914 but their aim 
had been disruption. The development of chlorine gas attacks were designed to 
kill. To avoid breaching the words of the treaty, though not the spirit, the 
pioneer of chemical warfare, Fritz Haber, planned the release of the gas from 
canisters – no projectiles would be involved.

The theory went that the pale green or yellow gas would be slowly pushed over 
no-mans-land towards the French lines by the wind. The heavier than air gas 
would then sink into the trenches. The hope was that the choking fumes would 
cause panic and chaos. French troops would simply run away and a gap would be 
left wide open for German troops, wearing gas masks, to advance and gain huge 
amounts of ground. Yes, there would be casualties, but reluctant German 
officials unsure of the technology were persuaded into trying Haber’s 
innovative plan as he claimed it would shorten the war and thereby save 
countless lives in the long run.

Canisters of chlorine were amassed along a fifteen mile stretch of German 
lines. When the wind eventually turned in the Germans’ favour (the prevailing 
wind was from the French trenches towards the German lines) the plan proceeded 
exactly as Haber had predicted. One hundred French troops died in the attack – 
a remarkably small number in a conflict that regularly saw the slaughter of 
thousands. But the Germans failed to capitalise on the gaping breach in French 
lines. As German troops tentatively advanced behind the gas, they were attacked 
by Canadian and British troops stationed alongside the French.

In the following months, the Allies also developed methods of deploying 
chlorine gas and both sides went on to develop even more toxic and devastating 
chemical agents to unleash on their enemies. Haber’s hopes for shortening the 
war were hopelessly off the mark. After the first chlorine attack at Ypres, the 
war would continue to grind on for another three and a half years, and 
estimates of over a million people are thought to have died as a result of the 
use of poison gas.

The horrific results of poison gas in warfare have spurred the drafting of 
various treaties signed since the end of the first world war. Progressive 
agreements in this area have resulted in thebanning of the use of chemical 
weapons in warfare <https://www.opcw.org/chemical-weapons-convention/> as well 
as the production, transportation and stockpiling of these compounds. Sadly 
this has not brought an end to their use in conflicts.

The use of any chemical weapon is appalling. The indiscriminate nature of 
poison gas and the harrowing effects produced in the human body seems 
especially callous and inhumane. Chlorine can attack the body in a number of 
ways producing devastating chemical burns. A complex series of chemical 
reactions is involved as chlorine reacts with fats, proteins and other material 
of the body. Most of the damage is thought to be caused by the reaction with 
moisture in the body to produce acids. The human body contains a lot of water 
(we are all between two thirds and three quarters water). Breathing the gas in 
through the moist areas of the mouth and nose to reach the throat and lungs 
damages these areas in particular. The eyes can also be corroded. There is no 
antidote. Only supportive care and treatment of symptoms – supporting 
breathing, clearing affected areas – is possible. Death can be relatively quick 
or agonisingly slow, depending on the extent of the damage.

The most recent gas attacks in Aleppo 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-37049555> are said to have come in 
the form of barrel bombs dropped from a helicopter. Medical workers on the 
ground claim the victims they have encountered show characteristic symptoms of 
chlorine poisoning. We will have to wait for the UN report for confirmation of 
what has happened and if chlorine, a relic of a historic and terrible war, 
really has made an unwelcome appearance in the current conflict in Syria. If 
the accounts are true then the perpetrators, whoever they may be, have 
committed a war crime.
 