
Thinking about studying law at university? Want to choose the right A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> to help you get a place? The 
good news is that almost any combination of subjects is acceptable to 
admissions tutors, providing your grades are high.

“It is anything goes to a large extent: we don’t specify any subjects students 
must have taken, and there’s nothing specific we say students must not have 
taken. The starting point is student choice,” says Professor Susan Millns, head 
of law at the University of Sussex.

This can include some surprising options. “If they do performing arts – drama 
in particular – they might want a career at the bar where there’s a lot of 
theatre. It would be good to see a combination such as drama, English and 
history; students often do well with those types of A-levels.

“We’re looking for good straight-A or AAB students, and we’d rather see 
strong, academically-able students than be very specific about what students 
should have done.

“I always say to parents on open days: do your kids like arguing? If they do 
it’s perfect, it’s arguing with a purpose. That type of student suits a career 
at the bar; a different type suits a career as a solicitor. But it’s one degree 
for both.”

It’s the grades that really count

As the Russell Group’s new Informed Choices guide 
<http://russellgroup.ac.uk/for-students/school-and-college-in-the-uk/subject-choices-at-school-and-college/>
 suggests, demanding good grades without specifying subjects is common. The 
guide stresses that you should take at least two “facilitating subjects” to 
keep your options open. This means opting for traditional academic subjects, 
rather than the newer alternatives.

At Queen Mary University of London, law lecturer Rupert Seal says: “We believe 
prospective students should study the subjects in which they are most 
interested; we are impressed with students who can reason explicitly why they 
see those subjects as relevant to the study of Law at QMUL.”

Balance and breadth of subject choice are considered, and the university 
“would be unlikely to consider a candidate strong if she offers more than one 
non-academic A-level. We are looking for an ability to write, theorise, reason 
and argue.” He stresses: “They are factors and do not dictate the outcome, but 
they are considerations to weigh up.”

The University of York’s law school also chooses to stress high standards 
“rather than limit access through subject choices”, says Dr Laurence 
Etherington. More than 1,000 applicants are interviewed because the university 
is keen to widen participation on its courses and ensure disadvantaged students 
get the chance of a place.

Do you have what it takes to switch to law?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/19/do-you-have-what-it-takes-to-switch-to-law>
David Wallace, careers manager at Stratford upon Avon School, advises 
teenagers to specialise in their area of interest at school. “Law firms are 
looking for the best of the best. If your strengths lie in the world of science 
and you can get 3A*, that will put you in a much better place than attempting 
to do the history and English you think you should do, but which won’t get you 
into uni because you’ll get poorer grades.

“One student did a chemistry degree and is now a successful patent lawyer 
working with chemical companies, because she understands what they are talking 
about. It’s about showing yourself as an exceptionally talented student and 
picking the subjects that are going to demonstrate that and get you top grades.”

Tutors and students agree that different subjects have their own advantages. 
Arts, humanities and social sciences ensure students are experienced at 
essay-writing and argument when they begin a course demanding both. Science and 
maths students may need to develop their writing, “but where they are strong is 
in logic, analysis and problem-solving, which is key to doing a law degree. Law 
is very suitable for that type of student,” says Millns.

Essays are good practice

Law students themselves stress the value of learning to write essays as early 
as possible. Nicole Ogunbamowo, a third-year law student at the University of 
York, took maths, biology, chemistry and history at A-level and she says: “I’ve 
always been inclined towards maths and I enjoy sciences. But I’m really glad I 
did history, which gave me transferable skills in terms of essay writing.”

English might have helped in reading case law and long judgments, she says, 
but she has noticed that her coursemates who concentrated on English at school 
often get nervous about anything involving numbers.

Zahida Manji, who graduated from Oxford in summer 2016, took A-levels in 
chemistry, biology, maths and English literature. “I was heading towards 
sciences: I hadn’t considered law. It worked out, but if I’d thought about it I 
might have done more essay-based subjects.”

Aspiring lawyers: your most common questions answered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/06/aspiring-lawyers-your-most-common-questions-answered>
Elsie Powers, a third-year law with politics student at Sussex, thinks English 
or history would have aided her essay writing, but is still happy she took 
physics, maths, French and general studies. Her language is an advantage as it 
would help her study abroad for a year, an option employers like, says Millns.

Emily Coneys, who graduated from Sussex in summer 2016 and is now doing 
paralegal work in Brighton, says her history and psychology A-levels were 
useful for analysis, developing arguments and looking at case histories, and 
helped her independent research skills. She also did the extended project 
qualification: “That was great because I’d never had the chance to do my own 
work and my own research. I found it really helpful.”

Summing up, Wallace points to the wide range of careers within law: “There are 
solicitors, barristers, patent lawyers – it is that breadth people are looking 
for. Choose a broad range of subjects you will do well in: that’s probably more 
important than any one particular subject.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 