
A recent international visitor to New Zealand's second largest city asked 
Coralie Winn why there were so many diggers in its centre tearing down 
buildings. It seemed they had little notion that less than three years earlier,
Christchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christchurch> had endured a 
series of earthquakes that destroyed the city's infrastructure, homes and 
communities.

The most violent quake, on 22 February 2011, killed 181 people. Thousands more 
were made homeless, and an area more than four times the size of London's Hyde 
Park was deemed uninhabitable. Less than three years on, the diggers that 
rattle about Christchurch's gridded streets are a constant reminder of how far 
there is to go to recreate what was once there. "People don't comprehend," Winn 
said. "Rebuilding a city is complicated."

In the wake of the earthquake, Winn helped found an organisation devoted to 
creatively inhabiting the vacant gaps where those buildings once stood. Gaps 
are expected to keep opening up for at least another five years, as 70%of the 
central business district's (CBD) buildings come down.

Many locals cannot remember what the central city used to look like. Gravel 
quadrants have replaced multi-storey buildings, creating lines of sight through 
the city that never existed before. Many of the buildings that still stand are 
boarded up, with steel fencing around them as they wait to be sold or 
demolished. The main strip of bars and restaurants that lined the river, and 
was the site of the city's main entertainment hub, is now an empty lot.
 A man rides past a destroyed church in Christchurch, after the quake, in 
2011. Photograph: Hannah Johnston/Getty Images 
Until recently, you could look through the dusty windows of a closed down cafe 
and still see an untouched 22 February 2011 edition of the local newspaper. And 
while creative novelties such as a retail mall made entirely out of steel 
shipping containers draw increasing numbers of visitors, the city's other main 
attraction is the battered and broken cathedral in the middle of the main 
square – a monument to what was endured.

The new Christchurch, which is being marketed as "greener, more compact, more 
accessible and safer", will cost in the region of NZ$40bn (£20.3bn) – almost 
20% of New Zealand's annual GDP. In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, 
central government moved to triage the most important parts of a functioning 
city. Infrastructure like roads and bridges had been shattered. Silt that had 
bubbled up from the earth clogged sewerage systems. Powerlines were down. Homes 
were without working toilets for weeks, sometimes months.

The government's response was to establish a single body, the Canterbury 
Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera). It was solely responsible  for managing 
the rebuild. "If you look around the world at cities which have experienced 
disasters, it is single-purpose organisations that are the most efficient," 
said Cera's chief executive, Roger Sutton. This one was tasked with managing 
the complete project – from the demolition of commercial buildings and 
residential homes to planning the next phase of rebuilding. In the early 
period, almost 8,000 of the area's 180,000 homes were "red zoned", meaning land 
was so badly damaged that it was unlikely it could ever be rebuilt on. A 
further 9,100 properties were reckoned to be uninhabitable because they 
required such major repairs. From June 2010 to June 2012, the population for 
the greater Christchurch area declined by 9,200 (2%).

Where do we go now?

In times of crisis, Sutton said, it is better to be 90% right and get a 
message out quickly than 99% right and issue it slowly. The risk to this 
strategy, however, is that the missing 9% comes back to bite you. In some 
instances, it has. There have been protests over the way Cera has handled the 
red zoning of residential areas. Last November, some homeowners living in the 
city's hills were told their properties were too dangerous to inhabit – after 
being told the contrary for more than a year. Many saw this as an example of 
top-down leadership gone wrong.
 A digger climbs the rubble of demolished buildings in downtown Christchurch, 
in 2013. Photograph: Rod Mcguirk/AP 
The city's newly installed mayor, Lianne Dalziel, hopes to usher in a new era 
of governance that focuses on empowering community organisations to do things 
for themselves. "Building a resilient city starts at the grassroots, so that 
bottom-up meets top-down halfway," she wrote recently.

The ability to plan for, absorb, recover from and adapt to events is surely 
key to becoming a more resilient city. At a conference on "resilient futures", 
which was held in the city soon after the earthquake, Massey University's Prof 
Bruce Glavovic, the country's top recovery expert, criticised the purely 
top-down approach. "How is [Cera] going to capitalise on local culture and 
knowledge? How is it going to mobilise local capacity to rebuild? How is it 
going to enable local communities to make choices that will build safer and 
more sustainable communities?" he asked.

Despite such sentiment, a division of Cera was tasked with developing the 
city's first urban blueprint plan. Taking in 106,000 ideas from across the 
community, it was launched in July 2012 after a 100-day deadline. "We want this 
city to be distinctive with an active urban edge," said the division's general 
manager, Don Miskell. A team of local and international architects and 
designers created the plan, which involved 70 projects being constructed over 
the next 20 years. It imagined a compact central business district dominated by 
low-rise buildings. A "green frame" around the CBD would blend in with the Avon 
river that was being developed as a corridor of parkland through the city. It 
also emphasised environmentally sensitive transport, including a new light rail 
network, pedestrian boardwalks and cycle lanes.
 The inventive shipping container shopping mall in Christchurch, in 2013. 
Photograph: John Bentley/Alamy 
Before the earthquakes, the centre's retail areas were not competing well 
against the rise of suburban malls: "It was clear," Miskell said, "the rebuild 
following the 2011 earthquake provided a great opportunity to make Christchurch 
better than it ever was." But some have questioned parts of that vision. While 
certain building codes had been changed to include height restrictions, there 
was no legislation to enforce building "greener". Sir Mark Solomon, the head of 
the local Maori tribe Ngai Tahu, recently remarked that the rebuild had not put 
enough emphasis on sustainability. "It was certainly one of my visions that we 
would adopt full green technology across the city," he told a televised panel 
discussion. "But if you go through the subdivisions – including our own – it's 
the same old, same old."

There is still debate about what Christchurch should become. The earthquake 
recovery minister, Gerry Brownlee, has suggested that the region's sporting 
heritage makes it a perfect location to become a world leading sports hub, with 
state-of-the-art facilities and stadia. But at grassroots level, some feel this 
idea is too narrow and does not represent the greater Christchurch.

Care of the community

"Unless people in communities understand what is happening and can relate that 
to their own situation, there can be a sense of anger and frustration," said 
community organiser Evan Smith, whose own house was red-zoned soon after the 
February quake. Smith advocates a return to "village values", with the city 
being made up of many smaller residential areas. "One thing the earthquake 
taught us is that you can't always rely on central services to survive," he 
said. "You have to rely on things within walking distance, without a car or a 
laptop. If you build with that in mind, you build in a lot of resilience."

With precisely this in mind, dozens of community organisations, manned by 
people like Smith, popped up after the earthquake. They became the voice of 
people on the ground while government attempted to gain an overall picture of 
the disaster (often the information that government had and the reality 
depicted by these organisations were vastly different).
 Christchurch's Catholic cathedral damaged after the earthquake, in 2011. 
Photograph: David Wethey/EPA 
These were the seeds of what Smith hoped would become more of a participatory 
democracy. Furthermore, he said, the opportunity to rebuild on the basis of the 
best modern urban planning (as opposed to the city's previous grid system, 
which evolved without a great deal of control) also throws up exciting 
possibilities. "Very few have the opportunity to do that retrospectively. It's 
the one shot and we have to get it right."

Smith is working on a proposal to turn the entire 11km (7 mile) red zone along 
the Avon river into an ecological and recreational reserve for the community. 
It will turn a "scar on the landscape" into a source of hope for the city, he 
said.

Coralie Winn's temporary projects have also helped spur that hope. Restaurant 
areas, innercity dancefloors and music sites, she said, have all encouraged a 
creative rethink about what makes up a vibrant and resilient city. "We'd really 
like to see more of an intersection between the blueprint style and the 
temporary," Winn added. "They both need to one another and work together."

In the meantime, tourists with high-powered digital cameras stop and stare at 
machinery continuously tearing down buildings. More recently, though, another 
trend has emerged: tourists are also watching with curiosity as more and more 
buildings slowly go up.
 