
Chris Martin is onstage at Shepherd’s Bush Empire. It’s Coldplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coldplay>’s biggest-ever headlining gig and 
he’s speechless. He can see Liam Gallagher standing at the side of the stage. 
Kylie and Natalie Imbruglia are here too. He looks at his best mates next to 
him – guitarist Jonny Buckland, drummer Will Champion and bassist Guy Berryman 
– and wonders if they’re feeling as weird as he is. Then he decides to say the 
first things that come into his head. He introduces their encore with: “OK 
then, we’ll do another hour of Travis covers.” Then: “This really is our last 
song ’cos we’ve got to go off and do coke.” Later, he regrets saying anything 
at all.

Within minutes of coming offstage, Coldplay’s dressing room is mobbed. A 
bodyguard appears and says Liam wants to see them. He lopes, in looking exactly 
like he does on TV, and says that hearing Yellow made him want to start writing 
songs again. And the room fills and fills with fans and celebrities until the 
only people not in it areColdplay <https://www.theguardian.com/music/coldplay> 
themselves. Outside in the corridor, they use the same words: “odd”, “weird”, 
“surreal”. As Chris Martin will say more than once, “It’s been a confusing 
year.”

Something odd definitely happened on 26 June this year. Travis had just taken 
the Saturday night Glastonbury headlining slot originally pencilled in for 
Oasis, much like The Man Who took the millions of sales originally pencilled in 
for Oasis. Badly Drawn Boy released his debut album, which won widespread 
acclaim and the Mercury Music Prize. Richard Ashcroft released his solo debut 
which didn’t. And Coldplay released Yellow.

Beautifully simple, hauntingly happy, Yellow was a perfect soundtrack to the 
year’s musical spring-clean; out with self-important posturing, in with good 
tunes and chummy patter. People liked it so much they made Coldplay’s debut 
album, Parachutes, No 1 and then kept it hovering around the top 10 for the 
rest of the year.

But with success came the backlash, headed by Alan McGee’s bullying rants 
about “music for bedwetters”. Others grumbled Coldplay have nothing to say and 
are nothing more than nth generation Radiohead or Travis trickledown. The 
criticisms chipped at Coldplay’s confidence. There have been rumours of 
illness, stress, arguments and members cracking up. Can they cope?

Chris Martin takes an enormous eye-rolling pause from which you fear he may 
never return. “I feel a bit like we’re human cannonballs,” he finally decides. 
“We’ve just been fired and while half the time you think, ‘This is great we’re 
flying through the air’, the other time you think, ‘Shit, when are we going to 
land?’ People who don’t like you talk about you like you’re the Third Reich. 
People who do like you will really defend you. So it’s a mixture of extreme 
excitement and extreme, er, panic.”

A week after the Shepherd’s Bush Empire show, as wind and rain wreak biblical 
havoc across Britain, Chris Martin sits in a warm pub minutes away from his 
north London home, a Remembrance Day poppy pinned to his denim jacket 12 days 
early. Concerned, he gives a woolly hat to a bare-headed Select. Chris Martin 
is A Good Person.

Conversely, anyone who tries to interview him feels like A Bad Person. After 
an awkward question he looks around as if searching for an escape hatch, 
twiddles with his hat, frowns, gives an answer, then immediately retracts it. 
He is perpetually saucer-eyed, as if everything fills him with either wonder or 
horror. He has a knack for sharp one-liners but his humour is so understated 
that it never translates in print. Halfway through the interview he sighs, 
“Sorry, this is a really shit interview. Do you want to start again?”

You hate talking about yourself, don’t you?

“Yeah, of course. I talk shit.”

Are you more comfortable with it these days?

“No. Less. Less. I hate it. You have two years to make a record and do what 
you like to it then you have 10 minutes to do an interview that could mess it 
all up. It’s theCrispian Mills 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1431064/kula-shakers-mills-explains-nazi-comments/> 
Syndrome.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKNxeF4KMsY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKNxeF4KMsY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKNxeF4KMsY&media=>
Born and brought up in Devon by a teacher mum and accountant dad, Chris is 
wary of going into detail about his background since McGee et al made it an 
issue: “What was I like as a kid? The same as I am now, just smaller with a 
higher voice.” His reticence is understandable given the distorted picture you 
get from a few oft-repeated facts: boarding school-educated, non-smoking, 
non-swearing former Christian teetotaler.

He’s only been drunk twice. The first time, he was 17 and kissing a girl at a 
party, but all he could think of was how he was too pissed to enjoy it. The 
second time was last year. It was self-punishment after doing something bad to 
a band member. He remembers lying in Guy and Will’s flat, “dribbling red stuff. 
I don’t feel like I’m missing out.”

His younger brother is “the anti-Chris, the cool one”, a drum’n’bass DJ who 
drinks and smokes and has “experienced all these things for me”. The eldest of 
five children, he has a supportive family.

“I always ring my dad when I want to quit,” he says. “And he goes, [in a 
plummy voice] ‘Well I wouldn’t give up yet. boy.’ So I think, ‘All right then. 
I won’t.’ He’d be a brilliant boxing trainer. He sprays me down, rinses out my 
mouth and tells me to get back in the ring and sock that McGee fella for six.”

Chris says he was a worrier long before Coldplay but fame hasn’t helped. For 
two or three months after Parachutes hit No 1 the band was a mess. Last time 
Select met them, at a Portuguese festival (”the most horrible gig we’ve ever 
played”, says Jonny), they were in a state of minor crisis: exhausted, 
paranoid, reeling from all the attention. While they were touring, Jonny was 
reading Das Boot, the classic novel about WWII German submariners losing it in 
a U-Boat, so the band took to calling their tour bus “Das Bus”. A few days 
later, Jonny contracted a virus and was out of action for a month. He couldn’t 
make it to the Mercury awards, where Coldplay were favourites to win. On the 
night, Chris says, he “felt extremely paranoid. I thought my hair was falling 
out.”

Why on earth did you think that?

“I dunno,” he frets, rubbing his head. “This year everything’s either amazing 
or crap. But you have this constant thought, ‘I’m stressed about whether 
anyone’s liking us but then the world’s destroying itself because of the ozone 
layer and all that.’ What keeps me going is that I could die tomorrow so I’m 
always trying to live every day …”

A perfectly timed comic pause.

“… so I just go around saying goodbye to everybody all the time.”

Chris’ cloud/silver-lining dynamic reflects his band’s sound. When Coldplay 
first appeared they were branded post-Radiohead miserablists. After Yellow, 
they were dismissed as inanely happy. The truth, and the secret of their 
appeal, is that the melancholy and optimism are equally powerful.

The anthemic Everything’s Not Lost has gospel’s hard-won uplift – Chris calls 
it “a chain-gang song”.

“People who write happy songs are often unhappy,” he reasons. “Bill Withers 
knew every day wasn’t a lovely day. But Everything’s Not Lost is the message of 
the album. I do exactly what that song does – think everything’s terrible, 
what’s the point, and then think the point is it’s not that terrible, you’ve 
got to keep going. The thing is, our lives are great,” he concedes. “We’ve had 
a funny old time but the four of us are closer than we’ve ever been. Nobody’s 
going to knock us down.”

Coldplay had their first rehearsal in Jonny’s bedroom on 6 January, 1998. 
They’d met 15 months earlier in their first week at University College London, 
but drifted in and out of contact. At first it was just Jonny and Chris, 
working on a handful of songs. Guy joined the following June, just before 
dropping out of his engineering course. Finally, Will – a guitarist – was 
persuaded to give the drums a shot. He blagged them a gig within a week. Their 
mates packed Camden’s Laurel Tree but Coldplay only had six songs, including 
Don’t Panic and High Speed. By April, they’d released 500 copies of the Safety 
EP and they signed to Parlophone a year later, just before their finals. A 
support slot with Catatonia, the acclaimed The Blue Room EP and the almost-hit 
Shiver showed promise but nobody, least of all Coldplay themselves, thought 
they would be 2000’s biggest new band.

This time last year, Coldplay were in Rockfield studios, ready to produce 
their debut album with engineer Ken Nelson. It wasn’t an easy six months.

“We sweated over it argued over it, went through a lot of unhappiness and 
pain,” says Chris. “We were reeling from it for quite a bit.”

Even Jonny Buckland, a man who would probably greet news of impending nuclear 
holocaust with a nonchalant shrug, admits, “The recording sessions were 
horribly tense. We thought it could be the last record we ever made so we might 
as well put everything into it. That’s why we got so fraught — no second 
chances.”

“If you’d spent six months with us in the studio you wouldn’t think we were 
nice boys,” adds Will. “Fucking fierce rows, big strops, smashing things …”

Does even Chris swear in private then?

“Yeah,” Will chuckles. “Fuck yeah. Absolutely.”

A bunker mentality developed, where the choice between making a song faster or 
slower became the most important thing in the world. They also insisted nothing 
would end up on the album unless all four members agreed it was good. “If one 
member left, we’d split up,” says Chris firmly. “I don’t have any doubt about 
that.”

On the same May morning Parachutes was completed, Will’s mother died. “I can’t 
say I had a harsh childhood, but I’ve had a lot of things to deal with, 
especially in the last year,” he says, pointedly. “People say ‘You haven’t 
suffered.’ It’s like, ‘Fuck you, you don’t know what I’ve been through’.”

The seductively minimal video for Yellow, with Chris walking alone down a 
rain-washed beach, came about because it was the day of Will’s mum’s funeral: 
there was no way the whole band could appear. If you watch it again, knowing 
what’s in the back of Chris’ mind as he joyously trills along, it puts a lump 
in your throat.

The following months were difficult. “Jonny was completely laid in bed, Chris 
was going through mad paranoia and everyone was fucking worried,” Will 
remembers. “It was just soul destroying. Guy was going mad and Chris was going 
mad and I was a one-man promotional machine. I think we realised our priorities 
were all wrong. This is not what we got into a band to do. We’re not orators. 
That’s why we play music. There’s something inherent in the music that can’t be 
said, something that exists outside of speech.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkcASPx3-HuI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkcASPx3-HuI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkcASPx3-HuI&media=>
How do Coldplay react to Yellow now?

Jonny: “I try to avoid hearing it. It was on in the background in the Queen 
Vic the other day while I was watching EastEnders. It was really quiet and I 
was thinking, ‘I recognise that …’”

Will: “It means a lot because it’s the thing that helped us get there. We were 
worried people would get sick of it, and I’m sure millions are ’cos it’s 
everywhere. It’s like, ‘Put a different record on!’”

Guy: “It’s becoming increasingly difficult to get away from. I’ll spend some 
time off with my parents in Canterbury and turn on the telly and see our video. 
It can be quite intense.”

Chris: “Somebody rang me up the other day and said Yellow was on a karaoke 
machine. That made me genuinely excited. It’s got a nice beat.”

Coldplay don’t want to meet Select as a group.

“You come away thinking it’s one loudmouth who doesn’t really know anything 
and three quiet boys who accept everything he says, which couldn’t be further 
from the truth,” explains Chris. The people who say less tend to be the wiser.”

If that’s the case, then Jonny Buckland must be Buddha and Solomon rolled into 
one. Chris claims, “The first person I’d go to with a problem is Jonny, because 
he’s that sort of person.” Jonny himself says he’s not shy, just happy to be 
quiet.

Born in London but relocated to north Wales when he was four, Jonny was raised 
on his dad’s Jimi Hendrix and Eric Clapton records and graduated to his older 
brother’s My Bloody Valentine and Sonic Youth albums when he was 13, not long 
after he started playing guitar.

“I’m not technically very good at all,” he concedes with a dry chuckle. “In 
fact I’m pretty shocking. I’ve got really awful technique but I think Joe 
Strummer said somebody struggling with their instrument was the best thing to 
see.”

Are you enjoying success as much as you thought you would?

“More, actually. I thought it’d be depressing.” Then, sounding like he’s found 
a pound down the back of the sofa, “It’s been the best year of my life.”

Will Champion, too, is starting to find that life in the Band of the Year is 
good after all. He’s a veritable juggernaut of enthusiasm, raving about fellow 
Mercury nominees from Leftfield to violinist Joshua Bell and steering the 
conversation onto the strange joys of Kid A.

“Everyone says Coldplay are doing nothing new and I thought that was fair 
enough, but then Radiohead come out and it’s like, ‘What are they doing? Where 
are the guitars?’ For fuck’s sake, you can’t have your cake and eat it.”

Well, at least nobody will say Coldplay sound like Radiohead now.

“Wait till our next album,” he grins. “Child B.”

Southampton boy Will was saturated in a wide variety of music by his teacher 
parents. He mucked about at primary school and ended up in a rough secondary 
school. The summer he left, one of the kids that used to bully him was sent 
down for kicking somebody to death – other classmates are inside for GBH, arson 
and rape.

“It was quite rough but there was nothing I’d have hated more than public 
school,” he says. “I’m not so blinkered and, ‘Oh wow, everything’s great, look 
at my middle-class existence,’ kind of thing. I had to be on my guard a lot 
more.”

Will radiates a calm reliability, which he worries seems dull. “There’s a fine 
line between keeping your private life private and coming across as a boring 
knob-end,” he astutely notes. On the other hand, he’s none too thrilled by 
fame: “I don’t feel famous at all. I like the way the name of the band is 
becoming more known but I can put my hat on after a gig and slip into 
anonymity.”

Guy finds celebrity equally unsettling. He spoke to Liam at the Empire gig 
just long enough to see if he was how he expected (he was) and said hello to 
Natalie Imbruglia (whom he quaintly calls “Beth from Neighbours”) but then 
left: “These are people we’ve never associated ourselves with because they’ve 
always been ‘famous people’. Now they’re in our dressing room. It was a bit 
unreal.”

In his teens in Canterbury, when everybody else got into indie, Guy became an 
obsessive collector of funk and soul: “I’d just buy records by looking at the 
covers – the bigger the Afro, the better the record.” He has the biggest gap in 
the band between his personal tastes and the music he plays. And he’s the only 
one who can talk about the trappings of success without wincing.

“I don’t think anyone’s going to shun these side effects,” he considers. “Ask 
us in a year’s time when we’re in our country houses, heh heh.”

Eight days after the Shepherd’s Bush gig. Chris Martin is onstage again, this 
time at the Q Awards. Collecting the award for Best Album, he waves it 
triumphantly and, in a smart parody of the ongoing Liam/Robbie feud, announces: 
“Badly Drawn Boy! Twenty pounds of your money. Twenty pounds of our money. 
Outside!”

Dumbly, the tabloids report this as a vicious war of words. In the past, this 
would have caused stress, but when Select phones the band on tour in Milan a 
week later, the mood seems buoyant. Selling out European venues, they’ve been 
playing their first new songs since Parachutes.

“As soon as we started playing everyone was beaming again,” says Will. “Within 
a week it went from utter depression to ‘Thank God, we’re back.”

Two of the new songs – In My Place and Animals – have already been aired live. 
The brooding Animals, in particular, is magnificent.

“Do you like it?” glows Chris. “It’s quite dark but not as dark as some of the 
other new stuff. I wonder what would happen if we all really got into Joy 
Division now, ’cos we’ve been getting into the Smiths, and Joy Division’s just 
the next step downwards into despair. After that it’s Fields of the Nephilim 
and we’re all going to dress in black.”

Coldplay have a lot of plans for next year. They’re off to America, inspired 
by Kid A going to No 1, but also want to debut new songs by playing under an 
alias in tiny venues. Most importantly, they intend to take alternate 
fortnights off to write the next album and allay the paranoia that they won’t 
be able to follow Parachutes. They seem happy.

“We’ve had enough stuff fired at us now to either get really aggressive or 
think, ‘We’re doing alright’,” reflects Chris. “People who buy our record in 
Dumfries don’t give a shit whether such and such hates us. They just care if 
they like our record, so we should just care about that too.” His frown 
uncreases, his eyes widen. “We’re learning to enjoy it.”
 