
This was ostensibly a showcase for current England and Wales internationals 
but, in unseasonably fine Coventry conditions, it was a man best known for his 
three-years-and-counting absence from the England team who caught the eye.

Christian Wade has just a solitary 2013 cap to his name but just 47 minutes 
had passed when he took Kurtley Beale’s fine pass – after Elliot Daly’s searing 
break had carvedBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> to shreds – to 
seal Wasps’ bonus point and complete his hat-trick with a record-breaking 18th 
try 2016. With a century of tries for the same time period also racked up, as 
well as going through it unbeaten at home, this was a record-breaking day for 
the Coventry club.

Chris Ashton makes try-scoring return as Saracens see off Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/saracens-newcastle-falcons-premiership-rugby-match-report>
The battle between second and third at times felt more like a gleeful 
celebration of rugby. This was a fine match, a treat for those of used to fare 
that can generously be described as attritional at this time of year.

Semesa Rokoduguni twice had the Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> defence gasping in the opening 
five minutes. First a step off the wing took Joe Simpson out of the game and 
only a desperate tackle from Rob Miller to dislodge the ball kept him from 
scoring. Then, two minutes later, it was a break down the blindside and a kick 
ahead that had Thomas Young scrambling brilliantly to win a turnover penalty 
after Jonathan Joseph had won the race to the ball.

So of course Wasps scored first. Young, moments after his defensive heroics, 
reminded us why Eddie Jones made enquiries as to his eligibility for England – 
in vain, as he has played for Wales under-20s – with an outside break and 
perfect one-handed offload for Wade to scamper home for his first try in eight 
matches.

Perhaps Wade felt overshadowed for his opening try, because his second 
bordered on showboating. Once again – for the 15th time this season, in fact – 
Wasps scored from a lineout. The wing drifted infield near his own 10-metre 
line and found the first two tacklers barely worthy of such a description. The 
next two ended up on their backsides trying to work out which direction Wade 
had stepped in. The two after that ... well, they probably already knew how 
quick the one-cap Wasp is but he gave them a reminder nonetheless.

Perhaps it was the fact there were so many unusually slight backs on display, 
perhaps it was a festive spirit of goodwill, but tackling felt like an optional 
extra in the first half and one that neither side was in the mood to take up at 
that. Ross Batty found himself at the end of a counterattack triggered by 
Rokoduguni’s turnover and outpaced Young and Miller to strike back from the 22. 
Then, after a Jimmy Gopperth penalty had extended Wasps’ lead to 10, George 
Ford delayed his pass perfectly to send Dave Attwood through a yawning gap, 
with Ford’s conversion making it 17-14.

Wasps hope to complete year of home wins but new laws cause anxiety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/wasps-chase-home-record-new-laws-tackles>
The talk around Wade will grow after his treble but Young was arguably the man 
of the match. After Ashley Johnson had brilliantly turned Joseph in a tackle on 
the Wasps’ 10-metre line, Young was almost inevitably there to rip the ball 
from the man on the ground and showed an eye as sharp as anyone’s to sprint 
through the defence and under the posts from 60 metres.

For an indication of how open this match was, look no further than the 
instruction that came down from Dai Young, the Wasps coach, around the 
55-minute mark. The four-try bonus point was in the bag; now they had to make 
sure of the win. Luckily for him, the scrum was on top and Young and Nathan 
Hughes were ubiquitous at the breakdown and the two penalties they won within 
Gopperth’s range were duly slotted to take the tally to 40.

Lesser sides would have been done but Bath played their part in ensuring this 
was a thriller rather than a thrashing. Shortly before Gopperth’s final penalty 
and six minutes after replacing Wales’s Taulupe Faletau in the back row, Tom 
Ellis found himself at the bottom of a rolling maul from a lineout, although 
Ford’s kick from the touchline fell short.

Then, with 13 minutes still to play, the Australian Ben Tapuai went on an 
arcing run to leave Dan Robson gasping in lungfulls of dust and mark his debut 
with a try.

That fourth try gave Bath one bonus point of their own and this time Ford 
nailed his kick from out wide to leave a second within reach. Todd Blackadder, 
their director of rugby, will be disappointed it was not to be, but for the 
rest of us asking for any more would just be greedy.
 