
A global deal to limit the use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in the battle to 
combat climate change is a “monumental step forward”,John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the US secretary of state, 
has said.

The agreement, announced on Saturday morning after all-night negotiations in 
Kigali, Rwanda, caps and reduces the use of HFCs – a key contributor to 
greenhouse gases – in a gradual process beginning in 2019, with action by 
developed countries including the US, the world’s second worst polluter.

More than 100 developing countries, including China, the world’s top carbon 
dioxide emitter, will start taking action in 2024, sparking concern from some 
groups that the action would be implemented too slowly to make a difference. A 
small group of countries, including India, Pakistan and some Gulf states, also 
pushed for and secured a later start in 2028, saying their economies need more 
time to grow. That is three years earlier thanIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, the world’s third worst polluter, 
had first proposed.

Worldwide use of HFCs has soared in the past decade as rapidly growing 
countries like China and India have widely adopted air conditioning in homes, 
offices and cars. But HFC gases are thousands of times more destructive to the 
climate than carbon dioxide, and scientists say their growing use threatens to 
underminethe Paris accord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
 by 195 countries, an agreement last year to reduce climate emissions.

President Barack Obama praised the deal on Saturday morning, calling the 
agreement “an ambitious and far reaching solution” to a “rapidly growing threat 
to the health of our planet”.

“In addition to today’s amendment, countries last week crossed the threshold 
for the Paris Agreement to enter into force and reached a deal to constrain 
international aviation emissions,” he said in a statement. “Together, these 
steps show that, while diplomacy is never easy, we can work together to leave 
our children a planet that is safer, more prosperous, more secure, and more 
free than the one that was left for us.”

100 countries push to phase out potentially disastrous greenhouse gas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/100-countries-phase-out-hydrofluorocarbons-greenhouse-gas>
Kerry said on Saturday: “It’s a monumental step forward that addresses the 
needs of individual nations but it will give us the opportunity to reduce the 
warming of the planet by an entire half a degree centigrade. Agreeing a deal to 
phase down the use of HFCs is the single most important step we can take to 
limit the warming of the planet. We all know that the window of time that we 
have to prevent the worst climate impacts from happening is in fact narrowing, 
and it is closing fast.”

Environmental groups had hoped the deal could reduce global warming by a half 
a degree celsius by the end of this century. This agreement gets about 90% of 
the way there, said Durwood Zaelke, president of the Institute for Governance 
and Sustainable Development. Zaelke’s group said this would mean the “largest 
temperature reduction ever achieved by a single agreement”.

The new agreement is “equal to stopping the entire world’s fossil-fuel CO2 
emissions for more than two years,” said David Doniger, climate and clean air 
programme director with theNatural Resources Defense Council 
<https://www.nrdc.org/>.

Experts said they hoped market forces would help speed up the limits agreed to 
in the deal. “Compromises had to be made, but 85% of developing countries have 
committed to the early schedule starting 2024, which is a very significant 
achievement,” Clare Perry of theEnvironmental Investigation Agency 
<https://eia-global.org/> said.

HFCs were introduced in the 1980s as a substitute for ozone-depleting gases 
but are now considered a uniquely dangerous threat to the climate. According to 
the Berkeley National Laboratory, about 1.6bn new air-conditioning units are 
expected to be switched on by 2050, with the potential of raising global 
temperatures significantly. Air conditioning is largest cause of HFC growth, 
but the gases are also used in fire suppressants, insulating foams, inhalers 
and data centre cooling systems.

Global coral bleaching event might become new normal, expert warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/global-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns>
Major economies have debated how fast to phase out HFCs. The US and other 
western countries want quick action. Nations such as India want to give their 
industries more time to adjust.

Small island states and many African countries had pushed for quick action, 
saying they face the biggest threat from climate change. “It may not be 
entirely what the islands wanted, but it is a good deal,” the 
minister-in-assistance to the president of theMarshall Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marshall-islands>, Mattlan Zackhras, said. 
“We all know we must go further, and we will go further.”

HFCs are less plentiful than CO2, but Kerry said last month that they 
currently emit as much pollution as 300 coal-fired power plants each year.

HFCs do not harm the ozone layer like chlorofluorocarbons and similar gases 
that were eliminated under the 1987 Montreal Protocol. The entire world 
ratified that agreement, helping to repair holes in the ozone that help shield 
the planet from the harmful rays of the sun. The aim of this meeting was to 
attach an amendment to that treaty dealing specifically with HFCs.
 