 As today's full Senate trial of President Clinton gets under way, he can at 
least feel relief that the case that originally led to his impeachment - the 
Paula Jones sexual harassment suit - has finally been laid to rest.
 Lawyers announced early yesterday morning that a cheque for $850,000, 
ironically much of which came out of the personal savings of Hillary Clinton, 
had been paid to Paula Jones to settle the case. Ms Jones had accused Mr 
Clinton, then governor of Arkansas, of indecently propositioning her in a 
Little Rock hotel room in 1991, when she was a junior civil servant. Mr Clinton 
denied the charges and the case was dismissed earlier this year, but the 
president agreed to settle to forestall an appeal.

 The settlement comes as concrete proceedings in the Senate trial begin. At 1 
pm Washington time today, the 13-strong team of congressional prosecutors will 
start presenting the case for the president's removal from office in front of 
the Senate and the US chief justice, William Rehnquist.

 Their case, which will be argued over the next three days, will focus on the 
president's sexual encounters with Monica Lewinsky and his subsequent attempts 
to cover it up.

 Ironically, if the president had settled the Paula Jones case earlier in its 
4 1/2 -year life, most lawyers believe he would never have been impeached. The 
Lewinsky affair was brought to light by Ms Jones's lawyers, who questioned the 
president about it under oath in January last year. He denied having had sex 
with Ms Lewinsky, triggering a perjury and obstruction of justice investigation 
by the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, which in turn led to his impeachment 
by the House of Representatives in December.

 Of the $850,000 cheque, $475,000 was paid by an insurance firm, but almost 
all the balance was drawn on a blind trust in Hillary Clinton's name and which 
contained the Clinton family investments. Most of the Clintons' savings were 
amassed by Ms Clinton, who worked as a high-powered lawyer for much of Bill's 
25-year political career.

 While Mr Clinton was earning about $40,000 as Arkansas governor in the 
1980's, his wife was earning about $180,000, and most family friends credit her 
investment abilities for generating a portfolio worth $470,000 when he became 
president in 1992. That portfolio is now valued at well over $1 million.

 Lawyers said the Clinton's were not able to use a legal defence fund set up 
by supporters as that was restricted to paying lawyers fees and expenses - a 
bill which may reach $10 million. The rest of the Paula Jones cheque was paid 
by the Chubb insurance group, who had insured Mr Clinton against 'nuisance' 
prosecutions brought by private citizens. The insurance lapses with the payment.

 In advance of today's Senate proceedings, the 13 House prosecutors, or 
'managers' sent thousands of pages comprising the public record to date on the 
impeachment case. The president's lawyers, meanwhile, submitted their trial 
brief, repeating earlier rebuttals of the prosecution charges of perjury and 
obstruction of justice and arguing that even if proved the charges do not rise 
to the standard of "high crimes and misdemeanours" stipulated in the 
constitution.

 President Clinton broke a long silence on the case yesterday but only to tell 
journalists: "I think the American people have heard about that quite 
extensively over the last year, and my instinct is they want someone to do 
their business... My opinion is that I should be doing my job for the country."

 When the trial arguments begin today, the House managers will have a total of 
24 hours to lay out their case, on the base of existing documentary evidence. 
Then next Tuesday, the president's lawyers will have their 24 hours, probably 
spread over three days to put the defence arguments.

 This stage in the trial should come to a close on January 21, and the next 
day the 100 Senators, acting as a jury, will be permitted to put written 
questions to the opposing counsels through the chief justice, William 
Rehnquist. Sixteen hours of Senate time will be set aside for those questions.

 They will set the scene for two crucial votes: one to be put forward by the 
president's supporters calling for an early adjournment, and a possible motion 
of censure. The other will be proposed by the Republicans, moving to call 
witnesses, including Monica Lewinsky.

 The White House warned yesterday that if that vote passes, with a simple 
Senate majority, the trial would drag on for weeks if not months, as the 
President's lawyers would need to be acquainted with all the evidence likely to 
come up in cross-examination and would require substantial preparation.

 In order to prevent witnesses being called, the president's lawyers would 
have to convince six Republican senators to cross the aisle, but even moderate 
Republicans have come out in recent days in support of calling witnesses.
 