
The Turnbull government is planning to charge competitors to the National 
Broadband Network a levy to help pay for rural broadband services.

The levy would ensure NBN rivals are unable to cherrypick the most profitable 
parts of the market, usually in the inner city, and leave NBN Co to wholly 
subsidise the cost of providing services to rural and remote areas, which is 
expected to cost about $10bn over the next 30 years.

The Coalition is calling for public feedback on the scheme 
<https://www.communications.gov.au/have-your-say/consultation-telecommunications-reform-package>
, which the communications minister, Mitch Fifield, said would strengthen the 
provision of broadband and make the system sustainable.

The unravelling NBN: how Turnbull failed to download the nation's network 
solution | Peter Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/the-unravelling-nbn-how-turnbull-failed-to-download-the-nations-network-solution>
In a joint statement from Fifield and the deputy Nationals leader, Fiona Nash, 
the government said it expected the regional broadband scheme (RBS) to raise 
$40m in the first year of operation, but only 10% of that would be provided by 
NBN’s competitors.


In the first financial year of 2017-18 – if it passes the parliament – owners 
of superfast broadband networks would be charged $7.09 per line a month.

“Regional and rural users of NBN’s fixed wireless and satellite services will 
benefit from the RBS, which will require all eligible fixed-line superfast 
broadband networks to make a proportionate contribution to the long-term cost 
of these services,” the government’s statement said.

The government estimates non-NBN fixed-line networks provide 10% of fixed-line 
services.

“NBN, as the largest network, will continue to be responsible for the 
overwhelming majority of funding for regional and rural services and will make 
around 90% of RBS contributions,” the Coalition statement said.

Fifield said the draft legislation would also formalise a commitment to ensure 
all Australian premises could access a fast broadband connection.

The draft legislation would set up a special account which could only be used 
to pay for fixed wireless, satellite services, administration costs and refunds 
to carriers.

Labor’s communications spokeswoman, Michelle Rowland, said Labor would examine 
the plan but said the minister received funding options for regional services 
in March. She questioned why the draft legislation had not been released until 
Monday.

“This process, as with everything this minister touches, has been a complete 
bungle,” Rowland said.


In April next year the Productivity Commission is due to release its final 
report into the telecommunications universal service obligation, which was 
originally designed to ensure all Australians had access to a fixed phone line.

The draft report 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/current/telecommunications/draft#glance> 
released last week proposed the obligation “be replaced with a universal 
service policy objective to provide a baseline or minimum broadband (including 
voice) service to all premises in Australia, having regard to its accessibility 
and affordability, once NBN infrastructure is fully rolled out”.

Reg Coutts, emeritus professor of telecommunications at Adelaide University, 
said the unexpected release of the RBS policy separate to the consideration of 
the universal service obligation was “bizarre”.

Coutts was a member of the NBN expert panel which evaluated the first round of 
bids for Australia’s broadband network.

“Releasing this prior to finalisation of the Productivity Commission report on 
USO is bizarre – it is totally disconnected to other policy, a case of the 
right hand not knowing what the left one is doing,” Coutts said.

“Why is the government coming out with this method of subsidising and not 
linking in with the consideration of USO?”

He said the change in technology creating the integration of fixed lines, 
mobiles and broadband was obvious to both consumers and industry.

“So the government is running behind what industry knows and what the consumer 
knows.”


A spokeswoman for the communications minister said in its draft USO report 
last week, the Productivity Commission supported the enactment of a statutory 
infrastructure provider (SIP) regime for the provision of high speed data like 
the one proposed.

NBN: the trouble with Coalition's plan for quicker and cheaper broadband
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/20/nbn-the-trouble-with-coalitions-plan-for-quicker-and-cheaper-broadband>
She said the introduction of a SIP regime would guarantee that all people in 
Australia, no matter where they live, would have access to high-speed 
broadband. Under the government’s plans, the NBN will be the default SIP for 
all of Australia.


“The SIP regime will provide certainty for the rollout of high-speed broadband 
infrastructure and the provision of wholesale services and envisages retail 
services being widely available as a result of competition at the retail 
layer,” the spokeswoman said.

“How the USO may interact with that underlying regime will depend on the 
Productivity Commission’s final report and the government’s response to it.”

Consultation on the draft legislation is open until 3 February.

 