
Bolivian authorities have suspended the license of a tiny charter airline 
whose planecrashed in Colombia this week after apparently running out of fuel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/colombia-plane-crash-brazil-declares-three-days-of-mourning-chapecoense>
, killing 71 people, including most of a Brazilian soccer team on its way to a 
regional cup final.

 Monday night’s disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia-plane-crash-2016> sent shockwaves 
across the global soccer community and plunged Brazil, Latin America’s largest 
nation, into mourning. The small Chapecoense team was traveling on a charter 
flight operated by airline LaMia Bolivia to the biggest game in its history, 
the final of the Copa Sudamericana.

Chapecoense plane crash: what we know so far about the flight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/chapecoense-plane-crash-what-we-know-so-far>
 Investigators combing the crash site on a wooded hillside outside of Medellin 
found no traces of fuel in the wreckage of the BAe 146, made by Britain’s BAE 
Systems Plc, signaling that the crash may have resulted from lack of fuel.

 International flight regulations require aircraft to carry enough reserve 
fuel to fly for 30 minutes after reaching their destination.

 “In this case, sadly, the aircraft did not have enough fuel to meet the 
regulations for contingency,” said Freddy Bonilla, secretary of airline 
security at Colombia’s aviation authority.

 Bolivian authorities said they were suspending LaMia’s operating license and 
replacing the management of its aviation authority to ensure a transparent 
investigation. It said that neither decision implied wrongdoing.

 Medellin air traffic controllers asked the LaMia pilot to wait while another 
flight made an emergency landing. Details on the length of the wait and 
problems with the other flight were not immediately available.

 Air traffic controller Yaneth Molina, who received the distress call, said in 
a letter written to colleagues that she had received death threats following 
the crash.

 “I did all that was humanly possible and technically necessary to preserve 
the lives of the passengers, but unfortunately my efforts weren’t enough,” 
Molina wrote in her letter, which was later released to the press.

 A crackling recording obtained by Colombian media of Bolivian pilot Miguel 
Quiroga’s final words showed he told the control tower at Medellin’s airport 
thatthe plane was “in total failure, total electrical failure, without fuel”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/colombia-plane-crash-pilot-out-of-fuel-chapecoense-brazil>

 He requested urgent permission to land, and then the audio went silent.

 LaMia chief executive officer Gustavo Vargas on Wednesday said the plane had 
been correctly inspected before departure and should have had enough fuel for 
about four and a half hours. In such situations, it is at the pilot’s 
discretion whether to refuel, Vargas said.

 Only 0.5% of accidents on record were blamed on low fuel, according to the 
US-based Flight Safety Foundation.

In the soccer club’s small farming hometown of Chapeco in southern Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, workers on Thursday erected 
temporary structures in the stadium to shelter the coffins of 51 victims – 
players, staff and journalists – expected to arrive back on Friday for an 
open-air wake.

Chapecoense plane crash: fans' anger after confirmation plane ran out of fuel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/chapecoense-air-crash-fans-plane-fuel-colombia>
Some 100,000 fans – about half the city’s population – were expected to 
attend, as were Brazilian president Michel Temer and Gianni Infantino, 
president of world soccer governing body Fifa.

 On Wednesday night, when the Copa Sudamericana final had been scheduled, tens 
of thousands of fans assembled in tribute at Chapecoense’s arena and the 
stadium in Medellin of rival team Atlético Nacional.

 “We Brazilians will never forget the way in which Colombians have felt as 
their own the pain of this terrible disaster that ended the historic dream of 
Chapecoense,” foreign minister Jose Serra told the crowds in Medellin.

 Fox Sports Brasil, which lost six of its journalists in the crash, broadcast 
90 minutes of a black screen in the time slot of Wednesday’s game.

 A spokesman for Britain’s Air Accidents Investigation Branch said an 
inspector for the agency and Colombian officials would transport the aircraft’s 
black boxes back to the UK, where the information will be downloaded.

 Only six on board the flight survived: three Chapecoense team members, a 
journalist and two Bolivian crew members.

 Some have wondered why Chapecoense used the charter company instead of a 
commercial airline. Club vice-president Luiz Antonio Palaoro said LaMia had a 
track record of transporting soccer teams around South America, and it had used 
the airline before.

'Our club represented Brazil': Chapecoense tragedy a crushing blow to nation 
in crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/chapecoense-soccer-team-chapeco-brazil-fans>
“We are dealing with the humanitarian aspect of the families and the victims,” 
Palaoro told reporters in Chapeco. “After that, we are going to have to think 
about restructuring the team and also the appropriate legal measures.”

 Among surviving players, goalkeeper Jackson Follmann’s right leg was 
amputated, while defender Helio Neto was in intensive care with severe trauma 
to his skull, thorax and lungs. Fellow defender Alan Ruschel had spinal surgery.

 Two of the Bolivian flight crew, Ximena Suarez and Erwin Tumiri, were bruised 
but not in critical condition, while journalist Rafael Valmorbida was treated 
in intensive care for multiple rib fractures that partly collapsed a lung.
 