
Pool 2 remains wide open. This wonderful ground, on the usually windswept 
coast of Galway Bay, has been the graveyard of more than a few star-laden sides 
over the years but it seemed as if a dominant final quarter byWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> had proved enough for them to 
avoid becoming the latest, Josh Bassett’s try in the last 10 minutes earning 
them a five-point lead.

Connacht these days, though, have the pedigree of champion status and with it 
the confidence to know a game is never lost until that final whistle goes. And 
go it was just about to when they won the crucial penalty with the clock red. 
The latest directives allow you to kick for touch and take the lineout in those 
circumstances, whichConnacht <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht> did 
to decisive effect, setting up Jack Carty for a dramatic winning conversion.

“My kicking has probably been one of my weaknesses over the last while,” said 
Carty, “but it’s something I’ve been working on. It was one of those, on the 
touchline, where you don’t get as much criticism if you miss it.”

With the pressure thus off, he struck the ball sweetly across the unusually 
gentle breeze off the Atlantic and the Sportsground rejoiced as if they hadwon 
the Pro12 all over again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/connacht-leinster-pro12-final>. 
They seem unlikely to defend their title successfully, suffering a touch from 
the dreaded second-season syndrome, and now Pat Lam,their inspirational coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/connacht-pat-lam-rugby-pro-12>, 
has announced he is leaving in the summer, but they raised their game just when 
it mattered to claim as prized a scalp as any.

Wasps are still top of the pool, on points difference, but it is a three-way 
split, with Toulouse – 54-15 winners against Zebre – and Connacht likewise on 
13. The visitors thought they had done enough to put the pool to bed, an 
extraordinary performance of industry by Joe Launchbury supplemented by a scrum 
transformed fromthe wobbly set piece of the week before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/wasps-connacht-european-rugby-union-champions-cup-match-report>
.

In Coventry, it had been Wasps’ scrum and Connacht’s lineout that had 
struggled. Poetically, Wasps seized control of the game as much as anything on 
the back of a dominant scrum, only for Connacht to score their winning try from 
a lineout.

They scored their first try from a lineout, too, that also with the clock red, 
this time at the end of the first half. That score earned them a 13-7 lead at 
the break. Wasps, despite a minority of possession, had scored the game’s first 
try in the first quarter, Thomas Young breaking the line to free Nathan Hughes 
for a gallop halted only by the heroic tackle of Kieran Marmion. Joe Simpson, 
however, was on hand to finish.

A yellow card for Tiernan O’Halloran, as Wasps pressed in the second quarter, 
looked to have tipped the balance in favour of the visitors, but they failed to 
convert the lineouts they set up from the penalties, and a breakout from Bundee 
Aki yielded Carty’s second penalty. When O’Halloran returned for the last five 
minutes of the half, so Connacht upped the intensity. Simpson managed to block 
the TMO’s sight lines from one lineout and drive, but from another lineout 
Carty’s cross-kick caught Christian Wade out of position. Danie Poolman, on 
temporarily for Matt Healy, had plenty of time to dot down.

Leicester in revenge win over Munster after Owen Williams holds nerve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/leicester-munster-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Connacht’s surfeit of possession continued into the second half but Wasps were 
stroppy in defence and disrupted them time and again, Launchbury’s work rate 
becoming inhuman. The rewards soon followed, the visitors seeming to take the 
game away when it mattered. Another Young mini-break was developed by the 
rampaging Ashley Johnson, which coaxed Marmion into conceding a penalty to pull 
Wasps to within three.

On the hour, Gopperth had the chance to draw Wasps level, when the visitors’ 
scrum reached new heights of dominance. Gopperth hit a post with that one, but 
Wasps were in the ascendant entering the final quarter and duly drew level with 
12 minutes remaining through Gopperth’s second penalty. Their scrum drove the 
home team off their own ball once again with a few minutes remaining, Guy 
Thompson fed Dan Robson, and the replacement scrum-half’s cut-out pass put 
Bassett away for what we thought was the decisive score.

Naturally, Connacht cranked up for a furious final five minutes but the 
visitors seemed to be weathering the storm. They stole Connacht ball in the 
last minute, only for Connacht to steal it back, Niyi Adeolokun forcing Guy 
Thompson to hold on for that penalty they sent to the corner. You could almost 
read the script. One last lineout secured and driven quite decisively, 
whereupon Naulia Dawai touched down to much euphoria. The Sportsground crowd 
were obliged to fall into silence one last time, as Carty lined up his kick 
from the touchline. The silence proved temporary.
 