
It is sadly appropriate that the re-election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader 
has coincided with a escalation of the appalling assault on the people of 
Aleppo by Assad’s regime and Russia, dropping a barrage of napalm, chlorine and 
barrel bombs, murdering citizens sheltering underground and destroying what 
remains of their hospitals and shattered medical facilities (Report, 1 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/syria-un-aid-convoys-more-than-four-fifths-blocked-delayed-september>
).

It is three years since Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, 
pressured by the Stop the War campaign (chaired by Corbyn), won a vote in 
parliament preventing the government from supporting President Obama’s proposal 
to use military action to stop Assad using chemical weapons. Obama then dropped 
his proposal, which clearly gave Assad’s regime and Russia confidence that they 
could do whatever they liked to the people of Syria, with the devastating 
consequences we are now seeing. The current bombing is to be followed, it 
seems, by a massive ground assault, which is likely to see a huge escalation in 
mass killing. The troops preparing for this murderous onslaught come in large 
part from those Corbyn has called his “friends” in Hezbollah. Hezbollah has in 
fact invaded Syria from Lebanon and is itself an agent of another foreign power 
– Iran.

Corbyn’s supporters like to tell us all that he is thoroughly decent, a man 
with principles. But these are principles that have enabled many on the left 
today to ignore and collude with what are not just war crimes (it is after all 
a war of the state against its own people), but also crimes against humanity, 
if not genocide. We now urgently need to reassert the core socialist values of 
solidarity with those suffering injustice, oppression and facing annihilation.
Philip Spencer
Emeritus professor in Holocaust and genocide studies, Kingston University

• Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> made his 
name as a peace campaigner. The children of Aleppo only know the peace of the 
grave. Corbyn looks for moral high ground to occupy rather than supporting an 
intervention that would have saved them. The devastating consequences of the 
commons vote in August 2013 still appear to be too sensitive a subject for any 
journalist to raise with him.
Brian Devlin
Galashiels, Scottish Borders

• David Owen’s suggestion (Opinion, 30 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/peace-syria-possible-turkish-forces-nato-russia>
) that “peace in Syria is possible” through a direct Turkish military assault 
upon Syrian government forces is Orwellian. The US, UK, Turkish and Saudi 
governments have already poured billions of dollars in cash, weapons and 
training into rebel forces since 2012. If David would like them to escalate, he 
can write that, but he shouldn’t insult readers by talking about paths to peace.
Daniel Green
Boston, USA
 