
In the quarter of a century since the artist Cornelia Parker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/cornelia-parker> came to public 
prominence she has been associated with an exceptionally wide variety of work. 
She was initially known for pieces in which she violently destroyed objects and 
then eerily suspended the resulting debris from gallery ceilings. ForThirty 
Pieces of Silver 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/parker-thirty-pieces-of-silver-t07461> 
(1989), she flattened a motley collection of silver-plated objects, including 
musical instruments, teapots, candlesticks and cutlery, under a steamroller, 
leaving them "robbed of their third dimension".Cold Dark Matter: An Exploded 
View 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/parker-cold-dark-matter-an-exploded-view-t06949>
 (1991) involved blowing up a garden shed. But later came work as diverse asThe 
Maybe 
<http://www.frithstreetgallery.com/artists/works/cornelia_parker/2/the_maybe> 
(1995) featuring the actor Tilda Swinton lying in a glass vitrine in the 
Serpentine Gallery, in London; a melted silver dollar drawn into wire so thin 
it was as long as the Empire State Building is tall; thewrapping of Rodin's The 
Kiss 
<http://www.frithstreetgallery.com/artists/works/cornelia_parker/3/the_maybe> 
in a mile of string; and a 40-minute video of Parker interviewing Noam Chomsky.

"Even though people think I am more of a conceptual artist," she says, "I am 
actually very intuitive. For me, it is still a matter of allowing things to 
naturally rise to the top of my mental pile and then I make them. So, in that 
sense, I'd always thought of my work as being a bit all over the place."

That was until she began her contribution to a lavishly comprehensive new book 
about her career for which she has written 20,000 words of commentary on 150 of 
her art works. The book also features a foreword by long-term admirerYoko Ono 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/yoko-ono> and a series of essays by 
Whitechapel Gallery directorIwona Blazwick 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2006/aug/19/art.art> probing the 
Parker-related themes of the found object, performance, abstraction, knowledge 
and power structures.

"I put much more into it than I was expecting to and feel I can drop dead 
now," Parker laughs. "I think I've covered it. But doing this exercise has made 
me realise that, in fact, I've been going round in spirals and keep coming back 
and meeting myself. There are a lot of threads that are reassuringly 
continuous. While you don't want to empty a work out by totally explaining it, 
there were these recurrent themes. There was an interest in the architectural. 
I seem to like killing things off and then resurrecting them; there is the 
ephemeral and things being held in suspension or in a kind of limbo, whether 
being hung on wires or having Tilda in a case."
 The Maybe, a collaboration between Cornelia Parker and Tilda Swinton. 
Photograph: Serpentine Gallery, London 
In the book, Parker talks about how sculpture has historically been linked to 
a sense of stability by being connected to the earth. But her work 
"is constantly unstable, in flux; leant against a wall, hovering, or so fragile 
it might collapse. Perhaps that's what I feel, about my own relationship to the 
world. It is a universal condition, that of vulnerability. We don't have solid, 
fixed lives; we're consistently dealing with what life throws at us."

This sense of fragility loaded with a hint of anxiety is captured well in one 
of her most recent projects. Walking her 11-year-old daughter to school, she 
began to notice the cracks in the pavement. "I passed these same bumps and 
divots every day and actually got to know them quite intimately. And cracks in 
the pavement are kind of worrying. Kids get obsessed about not stepping 
on them. I did. My mother was German and I was brought up with Struwwelpeter 
stories, which are invested with all sorts of horrors waiting for you if you do 
the wrong thing. There is a lot of anxiety that gets welded into your psyche 
early on and pavement cracks are one of those, so I quite liked the idea of 
making them into an actual obstacle."

She has cast the outlines of the cracks in bronze and then raised the thin 
metal grids, looking almost like 3D line drawings, on pins as if hovering 
"at ankle or shin height so you could give yourself a nasty bruise if you 
walked into them. Negotiating the cracks becomes a physical thing. Maybe I'm 
a little bit on the spectrum noticing the details of these things, but it's 
something I've always done."
 Cornelia Parker. Photograph: Eamonn Mccabe for the Guardian 
When she was a child living in a Tudor cottage in rural Cheshire, the walls 
were lumpy, and badly painted, wattle and daub. "And I could see about 100 
different faces in all the little cracks and dribbles, which I would have to 
identify before I could go to sleep." She says seeing things in that way wasn't 
a useful attribute at school as teachers would accuse her of daydreaming. "But 
I wasn't just staring out the window and being in my own head. I was really 
paying attention, but not to what was going on in the classroom. I was looking 
and thinking and honing something that I didn't discover would be useful until 
quite a long time later."

Parker was born in Cheshire in 1956, the middle sister of three girls. The 
family was from "many generations of peasant stock" and were tenants of 
a smallholding on the Duchy of Lancaster estate. Parker was identified by her 
father as "the surrogate son" and encouraged away from education and towards a 
life on the land. "Firstly, that made me want to get an education," she says. 
"But it also taught me that I had a capacity for hard graft that I knew I'd 
rather apply to something apart from growing vegetables."

There were a couple of Turner prints on the walls – "still among my 
favourites" – but few visits to museums or galleries. Her parents found it 
difficult to understand her work, "which, sadly, lasted until they died. At 
school I'd done this drawing of a lapwing that my mum thought was the best 
thing I ever did. When I was shortlisted for the Turner prize she wanted me to 
include it in my exhibition. They sort of heard about how my career was going 
via some Telegraph-reading neighbours who would report I'd been on the radio 
talking about Einstein or whatever, and I honestly think my father would have 
preferred it if I had worked in a factory because he could have understood that 
better. But I never really needed their approval. And, early on, it probably 
helped that they didn't like what I did."

In 1974, she did an art foundation course in Cheltenham before going on to 
Wolverhampton Poly "because I couldn't get into any of the better-known art 
schools. I think I was a late developer because I'd been stuck in the country 
and was a little bit shy and withdrawn. In Wolverhampton there was the National 
Front going on and it was all quite heavy. The course was also 70% guys, so 
things were a bit more robust. But I had a really good time and liked life 
having more bite to it."

There followed an artist-in-residence placement at a college where she 
contributed to hybrid arts courses – "dance and sculpture, painting and poetry" 
– that led her into working on theatre sets. She then took an MA, "which felt 
like a backward step as by that time I'd sort of gone out into the world and 
now felt I was returning to the classroom. But it was useful in that I realised 
I wasn't studio-oriented. I wanted to be outside, making work on the hop."

Things finally crystallised when she moved to east London in the early 1980s. 
"It was amazing to move into an area that was full of creative, like-minded 
people: composers, theatre people, as well as artists. It was a quantum leap 
for me and I felt part of a real world. But there was still no idea that I 
could make a living out of it."

In hindsight, there were plenty of pointers in Parker's early work as to how 
her practice would develop. In specific terms, her appropriation of some sticks 
of dynamite (theatrical props), and constructions of spiky "explosions" of wood 
– "cartoon-like visualisations of energy yet to find a place to go" – 
prefigured her later use of actual explosives. More subtly, she was abstracting 
architectural objects – starting with little metal souvenirs of the Empire 
State Building and the Sagrada Família – and playing with ideas of "not quite 
defying gravity" by suspending objects.

She began to teach part-time in the London art schools that had turned her 
down as a student. "I hadn't gone to a London college and was a little before 
the YBA movement, so was coming at things from my own angle. Teaching was, 
therefore, very good for me because I'd never really done things like critical 
theory, and through teaching I actually learned more about art myself."

There was an incremental sense of career progression. "But it always lagged a 
few years behind the work. I madeThirty Pieces of Silver for the Ikon Gallery 
<http://www.ikon-gallery.co.uk/> in Birmingham and it didn't get a single 
review. It wasn't until it was shown at the British Art Show at theHayward 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/venues/hayward-gallery> a year later that 
people noticed. My exploded shed was made in 1991, but it wasn't until it was 
shown at São Paulo Biennial in 1994 that it became well-known."
 Cold Dark Matter … An Exploded View. Photograph: Tate Collection London 
Parker was made several offers by private collectors to buy Cold Dark Matter: 
An Exploded View, but held out for the Tate, which eventually purchased it. "I 
knew I wanted it to go to a public collection. It wasn't about money. At the 
time I'd been offered a £10,000 commission to make a work for the atrium of JP 
Morgan's building. I didn't turn them down because I was anti-banks, it was 
just the idea that they wanted the aesthetic of the work, but none of the 
content. What they really wanted was a nice mobile."

There has always been a discernible social and political element to Parker's 
work, although, she says, in the early years she expressly shied away from 
being cast as a feminist artist. "In the 1970s, I heardGermaine Greer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/germainegreer> give a lecture about why 
there were no women artists and I suppose I did think I'd like to do something 
about that. But maybe because I was almost brought up as a boy, and at 
Wolverhampton my fellow students were overwhelmingly male, I was a bit more 
tomboyish and wanted to bat away the idea of gender coming into anything. After 
leaving college I was in a show called Sculpture by Women where I was asked to 
talk about my history of victimisation in art, and I genuinely didn't think I 
had been victimised. Although I obviously believe in a lot of the feminist 
aspirations, I was wary about being dragged down by the politics of it. 
I thought the best way to deal with it was to be a woman, and to be a good 
artist. When I was on theTurner prize 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibitionseries/turner-prize> 
shortlist, the fact that it was made up of four women was a big deal. What's 
wonderful is that there are so many great women artists today I just don't 
think that would be such an issue any more."

As to a wider engagement in politics, she says she has always wanted to 
express a sense of ambivalence, rather than her work being read in any one way. 
"I've always been happy to sleep with the enemy in terms of dealing with the 
British army to blow up my shed at a time when real bombs were going off in the 
country, or with the National Rifle Association in America for my work with 
guns. It gets you out of your comfort zone and challenges your own as well as 
others' prejudices. I prefer to keep the political space, if not exactly 
neutral, then kind of hovering."

She says, when starting out, she had the strong sense that being an artist was 
in itself "a political act. It is a decision you make, and although it is not 
exactly like joining the priesthood, it is something that may or may not be 
useful to society and is a philosophical path. I decided early on that's what 
I wanted and I feel very lucky to have been able to have continued until now. 
For me, it felt like a route to sanity and I feel that anything I want to do in 
life can fit under its umbrella."

In recent months, she has been in the Middle East where she made a film about 
two Palestinian Muslims who make crucifixes and crowns of thorns – unavoidably 
reminiscent of the razor-wire coils found on almost every street – to sell to 
pilgrims. "While there, I heard about this thing called the Jerusalem Syndrome 
where people begin to see religious meaning and significance in random images 
and objects. Although my Catholicism remains resolutely lapsed, it was 
something I could relate to in a wider sense, and I found myself photographing 
some spilt milk on a Jerusalem street and an oil stain I saw in Bethlehem. When 
I came home, with my pavement cracks, I seem to have transferred some of that 
spirit back on to a London street." She says considering the whole of her work 
for the new book has reassured her that these sort of nagging preoccupations 
form part of something longer and more coherent. "Working piece by piece, you 
get an idea and then commit to it without much thought as to what has gone 
before or what is coming next. But standing back a little, it's nice to see the 
patterns, not least those made by your own personal set of worry lines."

• Cornelia Parker by Iwona Blazwick is published by Thames & Hudson.
 