
The decision by the director of public prosecutions not to charge a former MI6 
official for the 2004 abduction and rendition of a Libyan dissident,Abdel Hakim 
Belhaj <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>, is to be 
challenged in court.

Lawyers for the human rights organisation Reprieve, which represents Belhaj 
and his family, have lodged a judicial review claim with the high court in 
London alleging that Alison Saunders “erred in law” in declining to prosecute 
Sir Mark Allen, who was previously head of counter-terrorism atMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>. 


The 23-page claim and its appendix of secret documents – which record joint 
CIA-MI6 plans to extract Belhaj from Malaysia and forcibly remove him to the 
torture cells of Muammar Gaddafi’s regime – are the latest twist in a 
protracted legal saga.

Reprieve alleges that Allen “did not obtain any proper or adequate political 
approval” for the rendition, which was arranged with the then Libyan 
intelligence chief, Moussa Koussa.


The judicial review challenge was drafted by barristers Clare Montgomery QC, 
Ben Jaffey and Helen Law. It argues that Saunders misdirected herself about 
whether rendition amounts to misconduct in public office. It is a “conduct 
crime” and not a “results crime”, the submission states. “The crime is 
constituted by the misconduct itself rather than the results that follow from 
it.”


 The submission also claims that Allen’s “admitted failure to properly 
disclose conduct and involvement to superiors and ministers may itself amount 
to misconduct in the context of a ‘rendition’ operation, even if the public 
officer was unaware of the operation before it took place”.

A lengthy police investigation into the rendition, codenamed Operation Lydd, 
was carried out by Metropolitan detectives.

Last month the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, seemed to suggest the police had 
recommended that Allen should be charged. Answering questions in the London 
assembly about the inquiry, he said: “The Metropolitan police submitted a 
comprehensive file of evidence (in excess of 28,000 pages) to theCrown 
Prosecution Service <https://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> 
seeking to demonstrate that the conduct of a British official amounted to 
misconduct in public office.”

Cori Crider, who is Belhaj’s lawyer, said: “Prosecutors should never bend over 
backwards to protect the powerful. But that is precisely what happened here. 
The CPS was so keen to excuse Sir Mark’s actions that they invented creative 
excuses for his conduct that aren’t a legal defence to the crimes he was 
accused of.

“They have treated Sir Mark’s victims appallingly, calling the family’s views 
‘irrelevant’ and refusing to address a single page of the reams of evidence 
[given] to police. They’ve even threatened to pursue the family for legal costs 
when the family have offered to drop all cases for just an official apology and 
pocket change. Should you ever find yourself on the wrong side of the law, it 
seems, it very much helps if you come from the top of MI6.”

MI6 involvement in the rendition was confirmed after the collapse of Gaddafi 
regime in 2011 when fax messages from Allen to Koussa were discovered in 
Tripoli that suggested a “joint penetration operations” be conducted against 
the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, of which the exiled Belhaj was a prominent 
member.


Barely two weeks after the abduction of Belhaj – along with his pregnant wife, 
Fatima Boudchar – Allen was present inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, it is claimed, when the then UK 
prime minister, Tony Blair, met Gaddafi in his tent.


The legal claim says that while Belhaj and another rendered suspect, Sami 
al-Saadi, were in Libyan detention, “the UK security and intelligence services 
sought and obtained access to them and interrogated them in circumstances where 
it was obvious they were being held incommunicado, without any judicial 
supervision, and were subject to mistreatment and torture”.

The then director of MI5, Eliza Manningham-Buller, was said to have thrown out 
a number of MI6’s staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/revealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5>
 from her headquarters in Thames House when she discovered their involvement in 
the extraordinary rendition.


When the CPS announced last June there would be no prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
, it explained: “Officials from the UK did not physically detain, transfer or 
ill-treat the alleged victims directly, nor did the suspect have any connection 
to the initial physical detention of either man [Belhaj and Saadi] or their 
families.”

But the statement added: “Following careful review, the CPS has concluded that 
there is sufficient evidence to support the contention that the suspect had 
been in communication with individuals from the foreign countries responsible 
for the detention and transfer of the Belhaj and Saadi families; disclosed 
aspects of what was occurring to others within this country; and sought 
political authority for some of his actions albeit not within a formal written 
process nor in detail which covered all his communications and conduct.”

Sue Hemming, the head of the CPS’s special crime and counter-terrorism 
division, said at the time: “Following a thorough investigation, the CPS has 
decided that there is insufficient evidence to charge the suspect with any 
criminal offence.”

Allen has always denied any wrongdoing. 


The CPS declined to comment on the legal challenge to its decision not to 
prosecute.

• This article was amended on 2 November 2016 to correct a misspelling of 
Abdel Hakim Belhaj’s lawyer, Cori Crider.



 