
The term “hardest working band in rock” is thrown around often, but Melvins 
are a viable contender. Since their 1987 debut, Gluey Porch Treatments, they 
have put out an average of nearly an album an year, as well as copious EPs, 
live albums, collaborations, solo ventures, side projects and other curios. 
Nearly 30 years later they show no signs of fading, and are now even 
functioning with several different concurrent lineups.

The core duo of Buzz Osborne (AKA King Buzzo; guitar and vocals) and Dale 
Crover (drums) have been through as many bassists as Spinal Tap have drummers, 
including Matt Lukin (who quit to join Mudhoney), Lori Black (the punk-rocking 
daughter of Shirley Temple), Mark Deutrom and Kevin Rutmanis. When the latter 
left in 2005, he was replaced by Jared Warren from sludge-rocking power duo Big 
Business. As if Crover’s drumming prowess wasn’t beastly enough already, he and 
Osborne also invited Big Business’s drummer, Coady Willis, into the fold, 
creating the most powerful Melvins sound to date, the double drum kits pounding 
listeners into submission like they’ve been caught between twin whirlwinds.

What Sabbath would sound like with Captain Beefheart as chief songwriter
Rough Guide to Rock 
Osborne and Crover see no need to postpone operations when Big Business have 
other commitments, however. In recent times they’ve hired members of Butthole 
Surfers (for 2014’s Hold it In) or performed as Melvins 1983, a lineup that 
includes their first-ever drummer Mike Dillard with the versatile Crover 
shifting to bass, and Melvins Lite, with Mr Bungle’s Trevor Dunn on double 
bass. The latter trio’s herculean task of performing in all 50 American states 
(plus Washington DC) in a record-breaking 51 days is captured in their 
hallucinatory new DVD.

 For such a prolific and unpredictable group, the standard of Melvins’ output 
has remained remarkably high. While avant-garde projects such as 2001’s 
Colossus of Destiny proved too perversely indulgent for some sensitive 
listeners, and despite the odd mid-LP wobble such as 2013’sscrewball cover of 
99 Bottles of Beer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=duk0kwct_9I>, they’ve 
recorded some of the heaviest and most rewarding rock of the last three 
decades. With dazzling, detuned riffs spilling from Osborne’s fingers like 
sparks from an angle grinder, most of their albums flaunt a supreme balance of 
crushing heaviness, rowdy melodies, bizarre lyrics and general sonic weirdness. 
It’s a distinctive sound that the 2003 edition of the Rough Guide to Rock 
fittingly described as “what Sabbath would sound like with Captain Beefheart as 
chief songwriter”.

It’s an acquired taste, perhaps, but they’ve inspired everything from cult 
grindcore groups such as Pig Destroyer to drone-metal pioneers Sunn O))), Earth 
and Boris (who are named after a track on Melvins’ 1991 masterpiece Bullhead), 
and just about every grunge, alternative and noise-rock band that ever formed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrFgzPojlwIE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrFgzPojlwIE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrFgzPojlwIE&media=>
With dadaist lyrics about “the golden talking equine god” and “selling bulge 
egg tourniquet”, Melvins’ love for the surreal extends to their record sleeves, 
many of which exhibit disarmingly cutesy illustrations designed by Osborne’s 
wife Mackie, somehow both appropriate and antithetic to the music within. Such 
eccentricity was never likely to secure mainstream glory. The 
Jacksonville/Dallas 7in features live recordings of the band berating hostile 
audiences, captured during two of the many miserable slots they played in the 
mid-90s supporting the likes of Nine Inch Nails.

This was Melvins’ brief major-label period – they had signed to Atlantic after 
the grunge explosion, when similarly unconventional groups such as Jesus 
Lizard, TAD and Butthole Surfers were scooped up by A&R folk hungry to 
capitalise on Nirvana’s success. Unlike many of their contemporaries’ efforts, 
Melvins’ three major-label albums are noteworthy for their apparent lack of 
record company interference. Scattered between its more “normal” rock tracks, 
the “Atlantic trilogy” includes an uncompromising 10-minute drum solo, a Kiss 
cover about intergenerational sex (at a time when Kiss couldn’t have been less 
cool), several ambient noisescapes and one particularly strange outro 
resembling the death rattle of an unfortunate chipmunk. Needless to say, the 
band was cast back into the independent ocean and at the turn of the millennium 
began a long and fruitful partnership with Mike Patton’s Ipecac label, a 
suitable home for perennial outsiders too heavy for many rock fans and too 
peculiar for metalheads.


Melvins clearly didn’t enter the music business to make friends and they’ve 
never been afraid of slaughtering sacred cows, Osborne’s relationship with Kurt 
Cobain being a case in point. Cobain idolised Melvins, roadied for them in his 
youth, and was so heavily influenced by them that Nirvana’sMilk It 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=in58wtVI9sI> (1993) was startlingly similar to 
Melvins’ lesser-knownIt’s Shoved <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-0lue7MTAvA>, 
released two years earlier. The Cobain association helped bring Melvins to the 
attention of a larger audience. And Cobain has a producer’s credit on Melvins’ 
1993 LP Houdini, even though he was fired from the project for being strung out 
on drugs.

But unlike Cobain’s other old pals, Osborne took to speaking about his dead 
friend in shockingly derogatory terms soon after his death. An album 
provisionally titled Kurt Kobain was changed to Prick, Kurt being “a prick” for 
dying and ruining Melvins’ plans. Their cartoonist friend Brian Walsby has 
created Melvins posters inscribed “We Killed Kurt” and a T-shirt bearing a 
caricature of Cobain with the slogan “The only good junkie is a dead junkie”. 
As then bassist Mark Deutrom put it in a fanzine interview shortly after 
Cobain’s death: “He died, that didn’t make any difference to us. We are still 
making fun of him!” Far from engaging in shock-tactic attention-seeking, 
Melvins made it their mission to prevent the tragic story of their friend from 
becoming a romanticised death cult of self-martyrdom. Most other voices became 
complicit in the reverse.


Cobain is not the only one to have been on the receiving end of Osborne’s 
wrath. He appears to hate most other musicians, repeatedly asserting that “rock 
people are whoremongering drug addicts, who can’t even make good music”. 
Specific targets have included Mötley Crüe, Courtney Love, Dave Grohl, Rob 
Zombie, Weezer, Miley Cyrus and “that little weasel in Green Day”. Osborne 
reserves particular bile for those in showbiz who weigh into political debate. 
“Any political leader that would spend time talking to Bono is fucking out of 
their mind,” he told the LA Record, a sentiment he also extends to Noam 
Chomsky: “Chomsky is a linguist. That’s what he does best. Why anybody listens 
to him on politics is beyond me.”

Osborne has confessed to harbouring conservative or “classic liberal” views 
himself, which might explain his formidable work ethic and disdain for 
“adolescent” rock-star behaviour. He provocatively mocked detractors of George 
Bush during the Iraq war, has ranted against the American Teamsters union and 
called the conservative economist and columnist Thomas Sowell “the greatest 
philosopher of all time”. What could be more punk rock, in the context of a 
scene populated by bohemian, lefty people, than paddling against the political 
tide?


Mind you, Osborne’s contrary conservatism should be taken with a pinch of 
salt. Melvins have released collaborative albums with fiercely leftwingJello 
Biafra <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jello-biafra>, and video evidence 
shows that the majority of Osborne’s interview statements, which in print might 
appear haughtily sincere, areconcluded with an infectious, chesty cackle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=thcuU-1SqwM>. Besides, who’s complaining when 
the guy continues to churn out such an astonishing, distinctly nonconformist 
discography? Like the novelist JG Ballard, Osborne appears to be following that 
famous maxim of Gustave Flaubert: “Be regular and orderly in your life, like a 
bourgeois, so that you may be violent and original in your work.” As Osborne 
put it in an interview with OC Weekly, “I live a very conservative life; any 
wildness comes out in the music.”

And at the end of the day, it’s better to Buzz on than Cobain away.
 