
Rival banks were handing out fliers to anxious Northern Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/northern-rock> customers today as they 
queued on the street outside some branches to withdraw money.

Northern Rock, which has confirmed it has received emergency funding from the 
Bank of England, has stressed that investors' money is safe and Downing Street 
said the Financial Services Authority had judged the bank was solvent.

But some customers were concerned at the bank's future and were withdrawing 
funds online and at branches, particularly in the north, where the majority of 
Northern Rock's customers are based.

The queue at the bank's Northumberland Street branch in Newcastle's city 
centre grew through the morning.

One customer who was patiently queuing told the Press Association: "I'm not 
sure about this, even though they say it is going to be all right. If they are 
short of funds, what happens to our funds?"

Another customer, a pensioner who did not wish to be named, said she was 
withdrawing all her savings.

She said: "I have shares, and I have a Tessa and I'll keep those here but I'm 
taking out my savings as I'm worried."

Another woman, who was with her husband, said she was worried and added: "I 
want to spend my money before someone else does."

People in the queue burst out laughing when one member of staff asked: "Does 
anyone want to pay money in?"

Staff from rival high street branches in Newcastle - whose football team is 
sponsored by Northern Rock - worked the queue handing out promotional material.

Some branches in the south also had queues of customers.

At the branch in Harrow, north west London, customers began queuing outside 
long before the 9am opening.

One woman, who did not wish to be named, told PA: "I have withdrawn all my 
money. I got here at about 8.40am and was about 12th in the queue. It took me 
well over an hour to be served and by the time I got outside there must have 
been at least 50 people queuing out into the street.

"I know everyone has been urged not to panic but I just felt safer moving the 
money somewhere else rather than worrying about Northern Rock's financial 
position over the next few days."

There were also reports that the Northern Rock website was jammed this morning 
as anxious customers tried to access their accounts. A spokeswoman for the bank 
said that as far as she knew, the online withdrawal facility was still working, 
although the website was running slowly. "We're looking into it," she said.

Earlier today, workers arriving at Northern Rock's HQ in Gosforth, Newcastle, 
declined to comment on their employers' financial crisis. Some said they did 
not wish to comment because they were unaware of the facts.

Clearly Northern Rock is keen to minimise any "run on the bank" and chief 
executive Adam Applegarth said: "My advice to customers is, with the Bank of 
England providing this liquidity, they should be greatly reassured. If I was a 
depositor I would be reassured if the Bank of England was behind me."

He added, however, that homeowners would face more expensive mortgages in 
future as the impact of the current crisis filters through to borrowers.

The firm, a big employer in the region, employs 6,300 people nationwide. Mr 
Applegarth played down the prospect of compulsory redundancies but said any 
reductions were likely to be achieved through a recruitment freeze and natural 
staff turnover.
 