
One of the west’s most intractable disputes has edged closer to resolution 
with the leaders of Cyprus’s Greek and Turkish communities discussing the 
critical issue of territorial realignment on the third day of peace talks in 
Geneva.


As the latest push to reunite the island reached a critical juncture, Nicos 
Anastasiades and Mustafa Akıncı moved to the make-or-break issue of territorial 
trade-offs in an envisioned two-state federation.

In a country where more than 200,000 people lost their homes, territory and 
the boundaries both states would have is key to a solution. For the first time, 
away fromCyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> in the 
psychologically less charged atmosphere of Switzerland, the two leaders pored 
over maps and tackled the thorny question of land swaps and percentages on the 
war-torn island.

“We have dealt with some of the most difficult issues,” said Espen Barth Eide, 
a former Norwegian foreign minister who is overseeing the negotiations at the 
United Nations headquarters in Geneva. “We have touched upon almost all of 
them, we have solved many of them and we are close to resolving some other 
issues.”

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
Earlier, Eide had described the discussions as “the moment of truth”. But he 
also warned there was still work to doamid growing signs of slippage in the 
timetables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/cyprus-reunification-talks-making-slow-progress>
the two leaders had originally agreed to keep.

As politicians, including the British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, 
prepared to fly in for a landmark conference that will see the UK, Greece and
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> – the island’s three 
post-colonial guarantor powers – also join talks on Thursday, the prospect of 
an immediate breakthrough dimmed.

Delegates instead spoke of an “open-ended” process, one in which the clock 
would stop if necessary. “We recognise that issues that have taken years to 
address cannot be solved in a day,” one said. “Negotiations may well extend 
into the weekend. We may adopt that age-old conference policy of stopping the 
clock.” Others admitted that, on account of the slow pace of progress, they had 
not booked return flights out of Geneva.

If the contours of a territorial plan are agreed, a deal could be reached that 
will be put to referendum later this year.

For Anastasiades, who heads the island’s internationally recognised 
Greek-controlled south, this is by far the most delicate stage of negotiations 
that are highly emotive among his own constituency.

Although Cypriots from both sides of the ethnic divide rallied in support of a 
solution on Tuesday – braving icy temperatures to sing in the name of peace 
near the UN-patrolled buffer zone that divides the capital Nicosia – the leader 
also faces considerable opposition from a cohort of rejectionist politicians.

Six of the eight parties represented in Cyprus’s parliament oppose a 
settlement, mostly on the grounds that no deal would ever properly compensate 
those who lost property and homes when Turkey invaded in 1974. Responding to a 
right-wing attempt to unite the island withGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, the Turkish army seized 37% of its 
territory before a breakaway state was unilaterally declared in 1983.

Anastasiades, who sees this as the last chance to reunite Cyprus, now has the 
daunting task of convincing the Turks to surrender enough territory to allow 
90,000 refugees to return to their homes – a feat that would permit him to not 
only sign up to a solution but ensure it was endorsed when put to referendum.

Talks to secure Cyprus reunification enter 'final stages'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/talks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages>
To do this he must meet his interlocutors half way. Under Akıncı, the Turkish 
Cypriots have signalled they would be prepared to give up territory under their 
control but only if granted more power-sharing rights, including a rotating 
presidency.

That is anathema to Greek nationalists who argue that as the majority 
population they should exercise more power. “The more Greek Cypriot refugees go 
back, the less financing a solution will need,” a senior Greek Cypriot diplomat 
told the Guardian. “A settlement could cost anywhere in the region of €25bn. If 
a solution is not viable and collapses, what happens then?”

Competing maps presented by the leaders are expected to be seen and studied by 
only a handful of aides working in the respective negotiating teams before 
being stored in a UN vault, Eide told reporters invoking the sensitivity of the 
diplomatic task ahead.

The framework of an agreement could be propelled, he said, if the foreign 
ministers of Cyprus’s three guarantor powers assented on Thursday to 
post-unification security arrangements. Turkey has maintained an estimated 
40,000 troops on the island since 1974. A far smaller contingent has also been 
stationed on the island by Athens, which now says the guarantor system should 
be dismantled – in sharp contrast to Ankara, which insists troops must stay.

“I really think, without over-dramatising what is happening in Geneva, that 
this is the very last chance to see the island being recomposed in a normal 
way,” said the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, who is also 
expected to participate in Thursday’s conference.
 