
What is the aim of the talks?

The purpose of the Geneva talks is to end the partition of the island between 
the predominantly Turkish north and Greek south, so that the whole island has a 
unified – if federated – political structure and can be recognised by the 
European Union. At present only the south is recognised by the EU, and UN 
troops oversee a buffer zone across the island. Any agreement would have to be 
sanctioned by the UN and put to a referendum on both sides of the island, 
probably in the late spring.

What is the background?

The island has suffered sporadic intercommunal violence since independence 
from the UK in 1960. Turkey sent in troops in 1974 to protect Turkish 
communities after a coup organised by the Greek military aimed at uniting the 
island withGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>. Nine years later, 
Turkish Cypriot leaders declared a breakaway state in the north, which is 
recognised only by Ankara.

Many on the island fled their homes during the violence that culminated in the 
Turkish invasion, and have remained displaced to this day. The impasse has been 
one block to Turkish membership of the EU.

Who is attending?

The precise list is, even at this late stage, unclear and dependent on how 
well the talks are going. But the leader of the Greek Cypriot community, 
President Nicos Anastasiades, and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, 
are already in Geneva along with the UN’s special adviser onCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>, Espen Barth Eide. Leaders of other 
Cypriot political parties are also in attendance.

The talks are due to develop into a multilateral format on 12 January attended 
by Cpyrus’s three “guarantor powers”: Greece,Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and the UK. The British foreign 
secretary, Boris Johnson, is due to attend, as is the president of the EU 
commission, Jean-Claude Juncker. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, 
is not expected to come.

What is being discussed?

Formally the talks cover property, governance – including a rotating 
presidency – the economy, territory and security guarantees. One issue blends 
into another, and neither side is likely to make a final compromise until they 
see the overall shape of the package.

It has always been agreed that some of the territory controlled by the Turkish 
Cypriots will be ceded to Greek Cypriot control in any peace deal. The debate 
over how much land should be handed over and its location has hampered previous 
talks.

The security issue focuses on the extent, size and terms of a continued 
Turkish army presence on the island. Akıncı also insists on a rotating 
presidency with a Turkish Cypriot elected every two years, a proposal unpopular 
among Greek Cypriots.

Britain has offered to give up half the territory of its sovereign bases as 
part of any deal.

Map of Cyprus 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/cyprus/giv-3902nr1RQbtWT3mg/>
Have we been here before?

Close to innumerable times. No UN secretary general has left the Cyprus 
problem untouched, but the effort that came closest to a solution was overseen 
by Kofi Annan in 2004. His solution was accepted by the Turks but heavily 
rejected by Greek Cypriots in a referendum. Efforts are being made to learn 
from the 2004 errors, including keeping as many island politicians engaged as 
possible.

How likely is success?

One observer has said the dispute never ends due to “the absence of a mutually 
harming status quo”, meaning neither side is equally motivated to take a risk. 
But the island’s two leaders are very keen to strike a deal, and the UN has 
pulled out all the stops.

Erdoğan’s unpredictability is a factor, and his authoritarianism has made some 
Greeks uneasy about the island’s security.

Efforts in the run-up to the Geneva summit did not make as much progress as 
hoped, and perhaps the best that can be expected is an outline political deal 
with more meetings to follow.

The test will be whether both sides still have faith in the process at the 
week’s close, or whether they feel they have reached a dead end.
 