
Investors were tucking into Dairy Crest, the company behind Utterly Butterly 
and theJohn Lydon advertised Country Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/feb/03/dairycrestgroup-sexpistols>, 
ahead of a trading update due tomorrow.

The reason was not the announcement that Dairy Crest had renewed a long term 
milk supply agreement with supermarket group Morrisons. Rather it was a spot of 
takeover speculation prompted by news late on Tuesday that the privately owned 
German group Theo Müller had just bought 200,000 shares to take its stake in 
the business to a disclosable 3.04%. Müller is Germany's largest private dairy 
company with sales in Europe of €2.3bn, and is best known in the UK for its 
yoghurt brand. Analyst James Bushnell at Exane BNP Paribas saidDairy Crest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> could be an interesting 
bid candidate, whether for Müller or another predator. The company would cost 
around £1bn with a takeover premium and including debt. Bushnell said:
 Dairy Crest previously distributed Yoplait's yoghurts in the UK (via a joint 
venture). Müller's move could be part of an ongoing negotiation strategy, but 
could also fuel bid speculation in some quarters. There is no direct UK product 
overlap, but both companies operate exclusively within the chilled arena. To an 
appropriate buyer (i.e. with scope for cost synergies) we believe Dairy Crest 
could be an interesting take-out candidate. Though we are not privy to Muller's 
balance sheet, it has not taken on any large acquisitions in recent years. 
Whether Muller would want a large UK liquid milk business (in addition to Dairy 
Crest's branded portfolio) is another question.
Dairy Crest closed 23.6p higher at 372.6p, the second biggest riser in the 
mid-cap index. The biggest was office rental group Regus, up 5.85p to 83.5p. 
That company was also subject to takeover gossip, with traders speculating on a 
possible 130p a share offer. MeanwhileRightmove added 7.5p to 740p as fund 
manager Richard Watts from the Old Mutual UK Select Mid Cap Fund tipped the 
online property group at Growth Company Investor's annual show in London.
All this helped the FTSE 250 climb 10.12 points to 10562.53. But investors 
were more cautious about the leading index, as global economic worries 
continued to weigh on sentiment. TheFTSE 100 finished 9.17 points lower at 
5569.27, with the heavyweight banking and mining sectors both losing ground as 
the third quarter drew to a close amid worries about European sovereign debt, 
notably in Ireland and Spain. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, 
said:
 Risk assets were not in favour today. As long as concerns over European 
countries' credit ratings circulate, gains for equity markets will be hard to 
come by. The usual suspects (Spain and Ireland) continue to be the most likely 
candidates for defaulting on their debt and now civil unrest in Europe is 
almost becoming the norm. Today's session has very much been dominated by 
investors balancing their books ahead of the end of the quarter. Too much of a 
negative end to September though will not set the best precedent for next month 
and memories of the big falls of the past during October are etched in the back 
of the mind.
Vedanta Resources fell 96p to £21.65 as an Indian court ordered the closure of 
a major copper smelter on environmental grounds, whileAnglo American dipped 
19.5p to 2531.5p andBHP Billiton fell 8p to £20.22. Among the banks, Barclays 
ended 3.8p lower at 305.25p andLloyds Banking Group was 0.95p lower at 74.3p. 
ElsewhereAstraZeneca lost 62.5p to 3237.5p after a downgrade from buy to hold 
by analysts at RBS. They said: We continue to expect a good performance from 
AstraZeneca in its quarterly results, although we are more cautious about the 
second half result, with tougher year-on-year comparisons owing to the absence 
of swine flu vaccine sales, generic erosion of Casodex, Pulmicort Respules and 
Toprol Xl, as well as erosion of US Arimidex sales following generics approval 
in the summer. Potential competition to Nexium in Europe remains a risk. 
But Wolseley climbed 96p to £15.91 as the company - which has a large 
proportion of its business across the Atlantic - benefited from US mortgage 
figures which came in better than expected.

Rolls-Royce rose 20.5p to 612p following an upgrade from Morgan Stanley. The 
bank has lifted its recommendation from equal-weight to overweight, and its 
target price from 580p to 720p. It said:
 We believe the market is missing the potential for improved profitability 
following the recovery in after-market revenues, progress in new programmes and 
the developed world replacement cycle kicking in. 
But Smiths Group, whose products range from airport scanners to medical 
equipment, lost 18p to £11.96 despite reporting a better than expected 17% 
increase in full year profits to £435m. The fall followed a cautious outlook 
statement thanks to the coalition government's planned spending cuts.
 