
Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup>, the 
producer of Cathedral City cheese, has taken an unusual step to protect its 
pension fund and further reduce its deficit, signing over its maturing cheddar 
inventory to the retirement scheme.

Taking moves among many UK companies struggling with pension deficits to 
another level, Dairy Crest said it had granted a floating charge over £60m 
worth of its cheddar cheese stock, valued at £150m at the end of March.

The milk processor, whose other brands include Country Life, Clover and 
flavoured milk drink Frijj, will also make a one-off £40m cash contribution to 
plug its pension fund deficit.

The company said the move meant that, if it became insolvent, the pension fund 
could sell the cheese stock to pay its pensioners an income.

"If a company has valuable assets that are not pledged to a bank, why not 
pledge them to their pension scheme if that means they don't have to put their 
hands in their pockets to put large amounts of cash into their retirement 
scheme," said Charles Cowling, managing director at JLT Pension Capital 
Strategies.

Dairy Crest's 3,000-member pension scheme had a deficit of £84m in September 
2012. The final salary scheme was closed to new members in 2006 and future 
accruals from existing members were ended in 2010.

Pension funds are struggling to cope with extra costs from people living 
longer in retirement and are also finding it tough to generate adequate returns 
in volatile markets since the financial crisis of 2008.

Dairy Crest will use some of the proceeds from the sale of its French branded 
spreads business, St Hubert, towards the cash payment to the pension fund. The 
sale fetched €430m last year when Montagu Private Equity SAS acquired the firm .

The company has been working to reduce its pension deficit over the last five 
years. It closed its final salary linked pension scheme to new members in 2010 
and completed a £300m bulk annuity deal in 2009, in which it exchanged UK gilts 
for an insurance policy to cover a portion of the pension liabilities.

It also makes annual contributions of £20m to its pension scheme to reduce the 
shortfall.

• This article was amended on 19 April 2013 to correct details of the 
transaction and the state of the pension deficit after the agency ran 
corrections.
 