
Dairy Crest insisted it was not for sale today after German yoghurt maker Theo 
Müller prompted takeover speculation by disclosing thatit had built a 
substantial stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2010/sep/29/dairy-crest-stake-economy-worries>
 in the UK cheese, butter and milk group.

Mark Allen, Dairy Crest's chief executive, said he planned to keep his company 
independent as he announced that strong sales of cheese had boosted the group's 
first-half sales in the face of a competitive milk market.

Speaking after the company behind Müllerlight and Müller Corner disclosed a 
3.04% stake inDairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup>
, Allen said: "Müller hasn't made an approach and we are not soliciting 
approaches from anyone. We've got a very good business and think we are doing a 
pretty good job by ourselves. We are happy where we are."

In a trading update, Dairy Crest said sales of its Cathedral City cheddar 
brand had shown "strong growth" in the first half. Furthermore, its four other 
biggest brands – Country Life butter, the Clover and St Hubert Omega 3 spreads 
and the Frijj milkshake – also recorded higher revenues this year than last, 
the company said.

However, Allen cautioned that the market for milk is "presently" very 
competitive as supermarkets engage in a price war. Suppliers are bearing the 
brunt of these price reductions, which are eroding their profit margins.

Earlier this week, Morrison extended Dairy Crest's milk supply contract until 
2015, although neither party would say whether the supermarket was paying it 
less than under the previous arrangement.

Morrison extended Dairy Crest's contract less than a fortnight after Robert 
Wiseman Dairies, supplier of nearly a third of the UK's fresh milk, warned that 
price competition among supermarketswould dent profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/16/wiseman-dairies-profit-warning>
.

At the time, Robert Wiseman declined to comment on speculation that it had 
been forced to lower its prices to match those of a competitor in order to keep 
a contract with Tesco, Britain's biggest retail chain.

The price war was kicked off by Asda when it started selling four-pint bottles 
for £1.25 – and two bottles for £2. This prompted Tesco to slash the price of a 
four-pint container from £1.43 to £1.25 earlier this month.

Shares in Dairy Crest, which increased by 7% on Wednesday amid hopes that 
Müller might bid for the group, fell by 1.80p, to close at 370.80p today.

Müller's spokesman didn't respond to a request for comment on any plans the 
company may have to raise its stake in Dairy Crest or bid for the company 
outright.
 