
Gloucester overcame their poor recent run of results to earn a well-merited 
27-27 draw with last season’sPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> runners-up Exeter at Sandy Park.

It could have been even better for Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>, who recorded their second 
draw of the season, had Damian Welch not finished off a driving lineout 30 
seconds from time to level. Gareth Steenson was wide with the touchline 
conversion attempt.

Ruthless Bath seize on Sale’s sloppy mistakes to breeze to victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bath-sale-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
The visitors had stunned an out-of-sorts Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> with a fiercely committed 
performance including strong defence that unsettled the hosts, who made a glut 
of errors to concede tries to Matt Scott, Charlie Sharples and Ben Morgan.

Greig Laidlaw converted all three and kicked a penalty. Billy Twelvetrees 
added a long-range penalty.

Aimless kicking from Steenson and Will Chudley, coupled with numerous handling 
errors, were responsible for a poor performance from Exeter. Ian Whitten scored 
two tries for them, Thomas Waldrom and Welch the others, with Steenson 
converting two and adding a penalty.

An already injury-hit Gloucester were forced to make two late changes to their 
starting lineup, with Billy Burns and Gareth Evans withdrawn to be replaced by 
Mark Atkinson and Morgan. However Sharples was fit to make his 200th 
competitive appearance for Gloucester and his team tackled strongly in the 
opening period to keep the home side in check.

Their efforts were rewarded in the 12th minute when Lachie Turner’s error gave 
the visitors a lineout and platform in the Chiefs’ 22 from which they 
capitalised when Scott broke through to score. Laidlaw’s conversion gave the 
visitors a 7-0 lead at the end of an error-ridden first quarter before Exeter 
deservedly drew level.

A succession of drives close to the visitors’ line saw Waldrom power past the 
attempted tackles of Paddy McAllister and Twelvetrees for a try which Steenson 
converted.

Pablo Matera: ‘If you’re a nervous flyer you can’t play for Argentina’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/07/pablo-matera-flyer-argentina-twickenham-australia-rugby-championship>
Within two minutes, Gloucester had regained the lead when Sharples celebrated 
his milestone by leaping higher than Steenson to gather a well-judged kick from 
Laidlaw and race away to score. Television replays seemed to indicate that 
James Hook had put a foot in touch just prior to Laidlaw’s kick but the score 
was allowed to stand.

Exeter soon responded with their second try when an excellent run from the 
impressive Sam Hill saw him evade an attempted tackle from Tom Savage to send 
Whitten over. Steenson converted before Twelvetrees fired over a penalty from 
inside his own half to give Gloucester a 17-14 interval lead.

After the restart, the hosts had wind advantage but continued to make basic 
errors to go further behind. Laidlaw fired wide with a penalty chance but 
another opportunity soon came his way and this time he made no mistake.

Worse was to follow for Exeter when the visitors scored their third try. Luke 
Cowan-Dickie was dispossessed by Morgan, who sent David Halaifonua away down 
the left touchline. The wing evaded Chudley’s tackle to create the try for the 
supporting Morgan with Laidlaw’s conversion giving his side a 27-14 lead with 
20 minutes remaining.

Exeter threw on the cavalry, with Henry Slade and Chudley both substituted 
before Whitten scored his second try with 10 minutes remaining. Steenson missed 
the conversion but kicked a penalty before Welch’s late effort saved the day 
for Exeter.
 