
Danny Cipriani was the golden boy once but, as he enters his 30th year next 
month, he is becoming more like the olden boy. Omitted fromthe latest England 
squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/england-nathan-hughes-eddie-jones-wasps-youngs>
, the Wasps’ fly-half is no longer a man in a hurry, content to play a waiting 
game even as the future is in danger of becoming the past.

A player who has won only 14 caps and not started for England for eight years 
commands media attention as no other, hisprivate life played out in public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/danny-cipriani-guilty-of-drink-driving>
. It is ironic that in the most settled phase of his career when he has 
embraced the team ethic –joining Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/danny-cipriani-back-in-love-with-game-sale-wasps-right-place-eddie-jones-england>
 after three seasons with Sale following a sojourn in Australia – Cipriani has 
become an optional extra for his country.

The England head coach, Eddie Jones, who named the Saracens’ fly-half Alex 
Lozowski in his wider squad with an eye on development, said Cipriani liked to 
be the name man but George Ford and Owen Farrell were ahead of him because they 
had shown they had the ability to run a Test match. “Danny has got to show he 
can be No1,” he said. “When he does, he will be in the squad.”

Danny Cipriani: I fell back in love with game at Sale but Wasps is right place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/danny-cipriani-back-in-love-with-game-sale-wasps-right-place-eddie-jones-england>
Jones also said he did not judge a player solely on ability but how they 
interacted with team-mates and coaches. “Some players can only be No1,” he went 
on, leaving the inference that he did not see Cipriani contentedly taking on a 
subordinate role.

“Eddie is a very seasoned rugby man who knows his stuff,” says Cipriani. “He 
is a big name in the game and England have won all their games under him. I 
respect his views and what he is saying. He really does try to get players to 
get better in his way. That’s what you’ve got to go out there and do.

“As for me needing to be No1, it’s a difficult one, isn’t it? I can’t sit here 
and disagree with what he’s saying. I pointed out to him that I was in the 
World Cup camp for a number of months and was clearly No3. I put my best foot 
forward and like to think I got some positive reviews out of that. But Eddie 
runs his team the way he does and you’ve got to respect that. I can see what 
he’s saying, especially if he doesn’t know me that well. I’ve just got to do 
whatever I can to be the fly-half he wants me to be or be that first-choice 10.

“He’s very good with his communication with all the players, not just me. I’ve 
just got to keep putting performances on the field and, if it takes a bit 
longer, it takes a bit longer. I am not going to ever give up. There will come 
a point when it is not going to happen, like when you are 34, but my best days 
are ahead of me for sure.”

Cipriani is finding it hard to live down his past which, as well as front-page 
headlines, contained confrontations with coaches, one of the reasons he put his 
international career on hold by moving to Melbourne. He has for the last four 
years regularly consulted Steve Black, Jonny Wilkinson’s mentor whose influence 
has made the outside-half more rounded and rational.

“I have really enjoyed working with Blackie,” says Cipriani. “I would advise 
young players to get someone on the outside like him. He has helped me evaluate 
things and not deal with them emotionally and I am really enjoying my rugby. I 
am in a different place now. I speak with Blackie a couple of times a week and 
after a chat with him you walk away feeling better about yourself without being 
able to pinpoint why. He’s been a father figure to me.

“There were times in my career when I felt the media did not help but I did 
not help myself in some ways. I’ve made mistakes, who hasn’t? Stuff gets blown 
out of proportion and you have to tread a slightly different line. It makes it 
hard for me to preach about certain things but when all that goes away it will 
be nice. I just want to helpWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> to get back to where they have 
been and should be. It’s about fitting in.”
 