
Steve McClaren praised Derby County’s impressive work-rate after they set a 
club record of seven consecutive home clean sheets with a 1-0 victory against
Birmingham City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/birminghamcityfc>.

Darren Bent hit the winner from the penalty spot in the 64th minute after 
Michael Morrison tugged Richard Keogh following a corner.

The goal secured Derby their eighth win in nine matches and was just reward 
for a dominant display. The visitors were unable to register a single shot on 
target.

Bent had an effort ruled out for offside after 35 minutes and nearly broke the 
deadlock 10 minutes after the break after latching on to a loose back pass. 
Johnny Russell wasted two good chances to make the game safe in the closing 
stages.

Gianfranco Zola in last chance saloon but relishing challenge at Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/gianfranco-zola-birmingham-city>
McClaren said: “The clean sheet is a team effort. You saw the work Russell and 
[Tom] Ince do. We are disciplined and the back four get good protection from 
the front. When they get through the back four or the goalkeeper deals with it. 
It’s the platform for our performances.

“We deserved that on our second-half display. It was hard in the first half 
and there was little space. We had to be patient, but we were too patient and a 
bit too deliberate. We got better and stronger in the second half and upped the 
tempo, we created chances, got the goal and then defended well at the end to 
get the points. Birmingham were waiting to be beaten and we took it to them.

“I did not expect to be in this position at this stage of the season when I 
took over. The boys have worked hard, reacted well and deserve all the credit.”

Gianfranco Zola, the Birmingham manager, was critical of the referee Graham 
Scott for awarding the penalty. “It’s the second time we have lost a game to 
fine margins,” he said. “It’s especially painful today because it came from a 
soft penalty. I did not think it was a penalty and the ref was in a bad 
position to see the incident.

“That sort of thing happens all the time in the box, players put hands on each 
other like that and it happens every week. Normally these penalties are not 
given.

“I believe the players played a good game against one of the most in-form 
teams in the league. They did not threaten us. We did not look threatening 
either and I think 0-0 would have been a fair result.

“We stood up defensively and weren’t given too much trouble, but we must do 
better as an attacking threat. The missing thing was the productivity in the 
final third. There were certain aspects I was pleased with.”
 