
The peak body for internet users in Australia has formally requested that a 
review of the attorney general’s data retention scheme be brought forward, 
calling the legislation a “monumental stuff-up” as the government seeks to 
expand access to include civil lawsuits.


Laurie Patton, the chief executive of Internet Australia (IA), has written to 
the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security to request that 
the review of the Data Retention Act be held sooner owing to “continuing 
disquiet” over its effectiveness and implementation.

The legislation was passed in 2015 with the stated aim of combating terrorism. 
The committee is due to review the data retention scheme in late 2018.

Patton said the review of the law was more urgent given the request from the 
Attorney General’s Department for submissions on a proposal to expand the 
scheme to grant access to litigants in civil lawsuits, which could include 
divorce cases or even copyright infringement.

Data retention black hole: no one knows how many ISPs Australia has, say 
experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/data-retention-isps-australia-counter-terrorism-laws-advocates>
As the law now stands, only specified security and intelligence agencies 
<https://www.ag.gov.au/NationalSecurity/DataRetention/Pages/Frequentlyaskedquestions.aspx#data>
 can request metadata collected under the scheme. The joint committee 
recommended in its report on the legislation that civil litigants be prohibited 
from being able to access the data.


But the AGD said in its consultation paper there was “the risk that 
restricting parties to civil proceedings’ access to such data could adversely 
impact the effective operation of the civil justice system”.

It appealed to “stakeholders with an interest in the civil justice system and 
privacy”to make submissions on the issue 
<https://www.ag.gov.au/Consultations/Pages/Access-to-telecommunications-data-in-civil-proceedings.aspx>
 in mid-December and it will receive them until 27 January.

Patton told Guardian Australia that the review needed to be brought forward 
because of the call for submissions and the encroaching deadline for industry 
compliance.

“What we’re saying is let’s not wait another year – firstly because it’s a 
debacle in its own right and secondly, if the government or the AGD has this 
idea of expanding it to include civil litigation, then that really should go 
back to the PJCIS.”

IA gave evidence to the committee’s original inquiry into the law in late 
2014, arguing that the proposed legislation was “fundamentally flawed” and 
drafted by lawyers who did not fully understand the internet.


“Our fears have already been proven prescient,” wrote Patton in his letter 
addressed to Michael Sukkar, the Liberal party MP and committee chair, on 
Tuesday. The committee and the AGD have been contacted for comment.

Under the act, specified telecommunications providers, primarily internet 
service providers, are required to have systems in place by April 2017 to 
retain all their customers’ metadata for two years.

But even then, Patton and IA believe it will be unlikely to achieve its 
purported purposes.

Discrepancies in how those providers are meeting their obligations, as well as 
questions over how compliance will be monitored, means the scheme is arguably 
“of dubious benefit for its stated purpose of combating terrorism”, according 
to Patton.

IA believes there to be more ISPs in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/data-retention-isps-australia-counter-terrorism-laws-advocates>
 than the 180 that were granted funding from the AGD to help meet their costs 
of compliance, and that there are therefore hundreds of providers not known to 
the department and who will not be collecting and storing data as required to 
under the law.

It has clearly failed to deliver what the law enforcement agencies had sought 
for so long
Laurie Patton 
“If we must have data retention, then surely we should aim to have legislation 
that will work?”

Patton reiterated IA’s concerns to Sukkar that the costs of the scheme will be 
passed on to consumers, with PricewaterhouseCoopers’ estimate of the $738m cost 
of compliance to the industry over 10 years thought to be based on incomplete 
data.

Security agencies had sought a data retention scheme for more than a decade 
but successive attorney generals had resisted, he said.

“This exercise has become a monumental stuff-up. Not only is it causing 
confusion amongst ISPs, it has clearly failed to deliver what the law 
enforcement agencies had sought for so long.”

A spokesman for the AGD told Guardian Australia that its 2015-16 annual report 
on the use of telecommunications interception and access was still being 
prepared.
 