
First the triumph, then the hubris. David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> may never have been quite at 
the delusional Liam Fox end of the spectrum but he was certainly one of the 
more gung-ho Eurosceptics and his early statements as minister for Brexit 
tended to be along the lines of “The EU are a bunch of thieving foreigners and 
the sooner we’re rid of them the better”. Now that he’s been in the job for a 
few months, he’s begun to show signs of realising it’s all going to be a bit 
trickier than he had imagined. The smile is still just about in place, but the 
face is more care-worn.

“Would you consider yourself one of the thoughtful politicians?” asked chair 
Hilary Benn, at the start of Davis’s first appearance before his Brexit select 
committee, echoing chancellor Philip Hammond’s remarks earlier in the week that 
all thoughtful politicians believed transitional arrangements would be required 
once the two-year negotiating period was up. Davis thought about this for a 
while, before coming to the conclusion that though he may not yet be thoughtful 
he had moved up the synaptic food chain to totally indecisive. Which was 
progress of a sort.

He couldn’t say when the government would have a plan other than it definitely 
wouldn’t be within the next month as he had 57 sectoral analyses to complete. 
Some of which were barely under way. Nor could he promise a white paper, nor 
how many pages the plan would be. It all depended on the font size. “We just 
want everything to run smoothly,” he said, hoping that platitudes might be 
mistaken for thoughtfulness.

“What if everything can’t be negotiated within 18 months?” Benn pressed on, 
more out of duty than from any expectation of enlightenment. “Will transitional 
arrangements be implemented then?”

“Transitional means a lot of things to different people,” Davis blustered.

“Are you opposed to transitional arrangements?” Benn said, only just resisting 
the urge to head-butt the table.

“That depends on what you mean by transitional.” Being this thoughtful was 
turning out to be hard work.

“It’s on record...”

“I never gossip,” insisted Davis. At which point even he realised he had gone 
too far, as the Brexit minister has a reputation for doing little but.

“Do you worry about going over a cliff edge?”

Davis closed his eyes. He wasn’t really sure if he was meant to be that 
bothered about going over a cliff edge or not. Obviously it wouldn’t be a great 
idea to rush headlong off the cliff but if everyone was to line up in an 
orderly fashion and then jump off the cliff, surely that couldn’t be too bad?

“I don’t know if we would have transitional plans as such but we might have 
some implementation plans that we would implement if we needed to implement 
them,” he said, pensively.

The longer the session went on, the vaguer Davis became. Something no one in 
the room had previously believed possible. On the customs union there weren’t 
just four general spectrums to think about, there were also a multitude of 
little-known side spectrums. On immigration he wasn’t prepared to commit to 
anything. If Britain needed some Nobel prize-winning fruit pickers then let 
them come. Now that he had come to think of it, taking back control could just 
mean taking back control to increase immigration. At the same time as reducing 
it, obviously.

Michael Gove started twitching, unable to believe that one of his fellow 
Brexiteers was showing every sign of going over to the Dark Side of the 
Remoaners. And when Davis started to talk about how the EU negotiation would be 
a two-way process and that Britain wouldn’t necessarily be able to dictate the 
terms on which it left, Gove could control himself no longer.

“We can do whatever we want,” he ranted. “The EU needs us far more than we 
need them.” Exterminate. Exterminate.

Benn summoned a nurse to administer Mikey with a sedative. It had been a long 
afternoon for everyone. Enough was enough.
 