
It began with an afternoon at the races with a pretty woman on his arm. But 
for Paul Malone, casual bookmaker, the racecourse entertainment at Haydock Park 
on that winter's day late in 1985 was to have more serious costs than a few 
busted bets.

Mr Malone, aged 49, a bricklayer from Liverpool, had already served two 
18-month prison sentences for cheque fraud.

Soon he was to go down for 15 years, found guilty in March 1987 on four counts 
of armed robbery in Cheshire and on Merseyside in April 1986.
The raids on three estate agents and a building society netted little more 
than 10,000 pounds. In one, only a 10p coin was taken from the petty cash box.
Mr Malone had never previously shown any penchant for violence. In two of the 
robberies female staff were assaulted by a masked assailant. After a jury at 
Mold crown court brought in 10-2 majority guilty verdicts, Judge Robin David, 
citing the nasty nature of the attacks, imposed a long sentence.

Mr Malone has denied the crimes. Friends and family have spent 40,000 pounds 
helping him amass a weighty dossier of forensic and expert evidence which 
appears to demolish the shaky foundations of the case against him.
Electrostatic deposition analysis (Esda), the technique which led to the 
collapse of the cases against the Birmingham Six and the Tottenham Three, 
indicate investigating officers from Cheshire police subsequently added to 
supposedly contemporaneously-recorded interviews at Ellesmere Port police 
station.

Linguistic and textual analysis indicates an ingenious recording of an 
interview with Mr Malone in the back of a police car.

Two experts backed his claims that police double-spaced the notes. He signed 
what he said was a series of innocuous notes, then, he claims, officers went 
back and inserted incriminating admissions between the blank lines.
Clothing, said by police to have been worn by the armed robber, is too small 
for Mr Malone, even though photographic evidence from one of the robberies 
indicates they fit the assailant perfectly. A handkerchief said by police to 
have been used as the mask is plain white, but the handkerchief in the 
photographs of the raid has two stripes on it.

Mr Malone maintains that a Merseyside drug dealer has admitted carrying out 
the crimes, but that he is a police informer and has been granted immunity from 
prosecution.

A fourth police inquiry into the affair is under way. As well as the original 
Cheshire investigation, West Yorkshire detectives spent three years looking at 
the case, at one stage taking over a floor in the Holiday Inn in Liverpool for 
the inquiry team. The inquiry concluded that the convictions were safe.
Mr Malone's 1,000-plus pages of evidence were handed to Kenneth Clarke, the 
Home Secretary, in June. Mr Clarke ordered Cheshire, the force against which Mr 
Malone was complaining, to re-investigate. Mervyn Jones, the deputy chief 
constable, asked the Metropolitan Police five weeks ago to take over.

Mr Malone says the seeds of what he sees as a police conspiracy against him 
were sown when he met his future girlfriend that winter's day at Haydock Park. 
She had previously gone out with a detective.

Mr Malone was later to blow the whistle on an insurance fraud they colluded 
in. The officer swore vengeance, but there are no known links between the 
policeman and the Cheshire detectives handling the case.

The prosecution relied on 13 interviews with Mr Malone. He maintains he said 
nothing after the first one because he realised he was being fitted up. The car 
notes, in which he apparently identifies some of the premises robbed, were an 
important plank.

Clothing, which he denied was his, was produced by police at his mother's 
home. A handkerchief mask was apparently found back at the police station in 
one of the pockets.

Tom Davis, of Birmingham University, carried out the Esda examination of the 
13 interviews. He has listed 17 inconsistences, which he believes undermines 
police claims they were recorded contemporaneously. Among his observations, he 
has found that parts of at least two of the interviews have been re-written.

Dr Malcolm Coulthard, a senior lecturer at Birmingham University, and Peter 
Rimmer, a former Home Office forensic scientist specialising in handwriting, 
back Mr Malone's claims that the car notes are bogus.
Dr Coulthard has pointed out significant differences in the allegedly added 
passages. He said the notes read perfectly sensibly 'if you take away the 
disputed material.'

Dr Rimmer said: 'I am satisfied that the body of this document was not written 
in the sequence in which it appears.'
Mr Malone, mounting his campaign from Frankland prison in Durham, said 
yesterday: 'I'm never going to give this up. If they can do this to me, how 
many other poor sods are there in my position?'
 