
In many ways this was a glimpse into the promised land of club rugby. A huge, 
enthralled crowd, a wonderful rollercoaster of a ball game, entertainment for 
all stylistic tastes and not a contentious high tackle in sight. It is hard to 
recall a more compelling Premiership advert for winter bladder-chasing even if 
Leicester,after an unsettling week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/mike-williams-leicester-tigers-wasps-england-eddie-jones>
, will not necessarily share that view on Monday.

James Haskell suffers head injury 35 seconds into Wasps comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
For Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>, though, this was 
another significant outcome. They are now three points clear at the top, with 
almost 28,000 witnesses to their ongoing rise since moving to Coventry. Some of 
their attacking rugby in the first half hour bore comparison with the 
freewheeling Bath side of the 80s and they could easily have been 30 points up 
by the interval. It said everything about Leicester’s enduring spirit in the 
post-Richard Cockerill era that they not only dug in but also could conceivably 
have salvaged the season’s most improbable victory.

No wonder Aaron Mauger sounded pretty cheerful afterwards, despite the 
potential loss of another key player in the shape of Owen Williams, who 
requires a scan on an elbow injury. Even withCockerill gone to Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/richard-cockerill-joins-toulon-leicester>
,Manu Tuilagi out for the rest of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/manu-tuilagi-miss-season-cruciate-knee-ligament-injury-england-leicester-rugby-union>
 and all manner of uncertainty swirling around Welford Road in terms of 
coaching-succession options, there is still plenty of old Tiger cussedness left 
in the tank.

They certainly needed it, with Wasps now unbeaten at home in 19 games. For the 
first time since 2008-09 Wasps have also done the double over their new 
Midlands neighbours and regardless of where they stage the games, have lost 
only once at home toLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> since 2007. Assuming 
injuries do not return to frustrate them, it is increasingly hard to see even 
Saracens catching them in the regular season.

The only consolation for Leicester was that Wasps, on this form, would have 
shredded anyone in those first 40 minutes. Wave after wave of black-and-yellow 
stripes poured forwards, at the kind of tempo only sure-footed, confident 
athletes can sustain. Initially it was smart stuff, too, with support runners 
consistently to hand and Jimmy Gopperth almost spoilt for choice in terms of 
running options.

Thomas Young and Guy Thompson, both uncapped by Wales and England 
respectively, had field days and Tommy Taylor, before he sustained a bang on 
the head in the third quarter, also had the kind of all-round game at hooker 
that will not have gone unnoticed by the watching national head coach, Eddie 
Jones.

Behind them Gopperth once again showed what a top quality operator he is but 
it was Kurtley Beale at full-back who gave Wasps another dimension. Had his 
team-mates managed to get the ball into his hands slightly more often, and 
remained slightly calmer in their opponents’ 22, it could have been a cakewalk. 
As it was, Wasps still had two tries on the board inside the first 10 minutes, 
Christian Wade reacting quickest to Elliot Daly’s chip for the first before 
Taylor finished off a textbook lineout drive.

Leicester were also looking to play with more freedom, with Peter Betham and 
Tom Brady both adding impressive energy and Mike Williams, on England’s Six 
Nations’ radar, refusing to accept the seemingly inevitable. You would have got 
long odds on it being Wasps’ final try of the afternoon, however, when Young 
broke clear down the left touchline, fed the supporting Josh Bassett and then 
hit the vital breakdown to allow Dan Robson to skip over unopposed.

Mauger’s gambit of playing two specialist opensides in his back row was not 
bearing obvious fruit but a greater emphasis on hitting the breakdown hard plus 
improved fortunes at the scrum and some unnecessary Wasps errors gradually 
began to turn the contest.

Betham grabbed a deserved try back in the 51st minute and had Matt Smith, a 
late starting-replacement for Jack Roberts, not been bundled into touch in the 
left corner by Beale it would have been tighter still. Freddie Burns, handed 
the goalkicking duties following Williams’ departure, cut the deficit to only 
three points with 20 minutes to go and Wasps still had to weather some nervy 
moments even after Dan Cole was sent to the sin-bin for a 66th-minute 
professional foul. Happily for England, too, James Haskell and Daly are both 
fine following second-half head knocks.

As far as the much-debated high-tackle interpretations went, even so, there 
was very little to worry about, perhaps because Leicester took a while to get 
vaguely within touching distance of Wasps’ cheekier steppers. At one stage Wade 
beat about six players inside what used to be known as a phone box, operating 
at approximately shin-height.

Judging by the public reaction around the stadium, everyone else would love to 
see more of it. They may not have long to wait: with Toulouse due to visit the 
Midlands this weekend in the European Cup there should be further treats in 
store. If Wasps can switch on the after-burners for the full 80 minutes there 
is barely a team on the continent who will live with them.

Wasps Beale; Wade, Daly (Miller, 80), Eastmond (Cipriani, 58), Bassett; 
Gopperth, Robson (Simpson, 61); Mullan (capt; McIntyre, 65), Taylor (Johnson, 
58), Moore (Swainston, 58), Symons, Myall, Young, Thompson, Hughes (Haskell, 
58; Gaskell, 59).

Tries Wade, Taylor, Robson. Cons Gopperth 2. Pen Gopperth.

Leicester Burns; Thompstone, Betham, Smith (Thacker, 63), Brady; O Williams 
(Worth, 47), B Youngs (Harrison, 80); Genge, T Youngs (capt; McGuigan, 68), 
Cole (Cilliers, 77), Slater, Fitzgerald (Kitchener, 61), Williams, Evans, 
O’Connor (McCaffrey, 45).

Try Betham. Con Burns. Pens O Williams 2, Burns.

Sin-bin Cole 66.

Referee C Maxwell-Keyes (RFU). Attendance 27,930.

Saracens survive loss of Richard Barrington to sneak draw against Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report> 