
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has said her 
offer to guarantee the rights of EU citizens in the UK has been snubbed by “one 
or two” European leaders.

She told European ambassadors in her keynote speech on Tuesday that she wanted 
to seal an early deal on the issue of the 3 million settled in the UK and the 
1.2 million Britons inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
but she did not have the backing of all 27 member states.

“We want to guarantee the rights of EU citizens who are already living in 
Britain and the rights of Britons in other member states as early as we can,” 
she said.

Related: EU citizens living in UK lobby for post-Brexit residency law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/eu-citizens-living-in-uk-lobby-for-post-brexit-residency-law>

“I have told EU leaders we could do that now,” she said. “Many of them favour 
such an agreement, one or two others do not,” she said.

Sky News reported on Tuesday night that Angela Merkel was one of those who did 
not agree, but this was not confirmed.

Campaigners on both sides of the channel said her words did not offer anything 
new, with some attacking her for failing to understand the anguish of families 
in Europe and Britain.

“I do not feel that she really grasps the fear and worry that so many British 
citizens in the EU have. The impression is that her thoughts were almost 
completely taken up with the economy and not the effect on ordinary citizens, 
either at home and certainly not those abroad,” said Brian Cave, one of the 
members of Expat Citizens Rights in EU (ECREU).

The 3 Million group which campaigns for the rights of EU citizens in the UK 
said it was “very disappointed” with her speech.

Founder Nicolas Hatton said May was “still in the reciprocity argument and 
refusing to unilaterally guarantee our rights”.

“EU citizens are living in limbo and Theresa May has done very little to 
reassure them today. I am very disappointed that the prime minister didn’t take 
this opportunity in front of an international audience to unilaterally 
guarantee our rights of residence and we will continue to campaign to obtain a 
firm guarantee beforearticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50>. We are not bargaining chips, 
we are human beings,” said Hatton.

An EU source disputed Theresa May’s claim that EU leaders wanted to reach a 
deal “now” on the rights of EU citizens. “I am sure all want a deal on this, 
but as part of the negotiations,” the source said, adding that while some 
member states might have been prepared to do an early deal on citizens, they 
had stepped back “when they realised the complexity of the issue”.

Related: Dutch woman with two British children told to leave UK after 24 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>

Monique Hawkins, a Dutch woman who made worldwide headlines when she received 
a letter from the Home Office inviting her to prepare to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>
 the UK and the home she created with her British husband and British children, 
said: “The prime minister can and should unilaterally offer certainty to all of 
the 3 million EU nationals currently living in the UK. She could have done this 
as soon as she became prime minister. She can still do this without waiting for 
article 50 to be triggered.”

Others predicted the anguish felt by British families abroad would now deepen. 
Jane Golding, the co-founder of UK citizen support groupBrits in Europe 
<http://britsineurope.org/>, who lives in Germany, said she welcomed the fact 
that both groups of people were seen as a priority. But she said May’s speech 
was likely to intensify the worry for Britons in Europe.

“She knows full well that it is within her gift to guarantee the right to 
remain to EU citizens now unilaterally – and she should do it because it is the 
right and fair thing to do. Holding this up is not a negotiating strategy and 
won’t improve the position for British citizens in other European countries – 
if anything, it may be likely to make it worse,” she said.

Dave Spokes, a Briton in France and a founding member of ECREU, said issues 
such as pension and healthcare rights of Britons were entirely within her power.


“This has nothing to do with EU leaders reciprocating. The UK pays them so 
there was nothing to stop her getting up and saying that healthcare and 
pensions were guaranteed and we will negotiate the rest separately. It would 
have taken a lot off people’s minds if she had done so,” he said.

He said only a few “financially secure UK citizens” would be able to grab a 
lifeboat and survive in Europe without the UK’s financial guarantees.

Under present agreements, retirees in Spain and elsewhere in the EU are 
guaranteed their British state pension will increase alongside inflation. This 
would fall away post Brexit, unless the government agrees otherwise.

Related: EU citizens in UK could face 'deliberate hostility' policy after 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/eu-citizens-in-uk-could-face-deliberate-hostility-policy-after-brexit>

Sue Wilson, from Remain in Spain, which campaigns for the rights of British 
people in Spain, said May had “blamed some other unspecified EU countries for 
her failure of guaranteeing the rights of EU citizens”.


Wilson pointed out she had the power to act unilaterally and could put 
“hundreds of thousands of minds to rest” in Europe by removing the anxiety over 
the future of healthcare and pensions.


Additional reporting by Jennifer Rankin in Brussels

“I feel desolate for the UK” - Britons in Berlin on May’s speech


There was little reassurance in Theresa May’s speech to make Carla Abel feel 
she should return to Britain.

The 18-year-old finished school last year and has been learning German in 
Berlin ahead of starting university. Born to a British mother and Canadian 
father in Spain, the remain voter is contemplating applying for a Spanish 
passport to maintain her EU status – “so that I’m not in limbo anymore”.

May, who said she wanted to reach a deal on the rights of EU nationals in 
Britain and Britons living inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as soon as possible but offered 
no specifics, left Abel unimpressed.

“She was clearly trying to be firm, but a lot of what she said was rather 
vague – using words like ‘optimistic’, and ‘strong global Britain’ – it didn’t 
convince me that I’d be happy in Britain or that I’d feel at home there,” she 
said.

Also watching the speech in Berlin, Daniel Tetlow said it did not do much to 
reassure Britons living in Europe that their situation was secure.

Married to a German with whom he has a little girl, Tetlow, 43, a documentary 
producer and musician who has lived in Berlin for two-and-a-half years, said: 
“It was a missed opportunity that she didn’t say that EU citizens in the UK 
will have the right to stay. That’s a big disappointment – in the spirit of her 
saying ‘this is not a fight’, she might have made that magnanimous move, saying 
[to the other members] ‘we’ll do it, and hope you follow’, but she didn’t.”

Tetlow, a member of a group representing UK citizens in the EU and EU citizens 
in the UK, said May’s unbending stance had made him more determined to fight 
for his rights as a Briton living in the union.

“I’m going to see it out. I don’t intend to rush for a German passport; 
instead I want to fight to be able to be a Briton in Germany and to be able to 
work here. But according to whatTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> said today, my position could 
still be threatened in terms of health insurance, the passporting of 
qualifications and other technicalities.” He said his fight would also be on 
behalf of his daughter, “to give her the same rights, or for my German wife to 
be able to work in the UK.”

But Bob Sleigh, 66, a semi-retired science and medical translator who has 
lived in Berlin since 1980, said he could understand why May had “kept her 
powder dry”.

However, Sleigh, who is from Manchester and voted leave, said he was concerned 
about his own future. “I’ll be a pensioner by the time Britain leaves the EU, 
and if ever anyone threatened to throw me out, I’d fall back on the Vienna 
convention under which people have the right to stay where they have made their 
lives.”

Cathy Skene, who has lived in Germany for 30 years – her entire adult life – 
and became a German citizen in the wake of the referendum, said listening to 
May’s speech had made her feel even more “desolate” than she had after the 
referendum.

“Personally I feel as safe as I can possibly be with my new German 
citizenship, but I feel desolate for the UK; all this talk of a new British 
empire – told to us in the tone of a teacher you don’t learn anything from – is 
delusional. And I feel a deep sense of anxiety and doom I haven’t felt since I 
was 16 and a member of Youth Against the Missiles.”

Michael Lawton, 68, who moved to Berlin 30 years ago and, anticipating Brexit, 
became a German citizen ahead of the vote (while also retaining his British 
passport) said he remained utterly unclear after the speech as to what the 
future status of Britons living in the EU or EU citizens living in Britain 
might be.

“There are many people who have made commitments to the countries they live in 
but who could potentially be thrown out. It is clear from now on that 
everything will become more restricted. That a German wanting to work in 
Britain, and a Briton wanting to work in Germany, will not be able to do so 
just like that. If, as it sounds, May wants to work on negotiating a deal where 
people can’t be thrown out, that’s good, but we’ll have to see.”

John Owen, 26, an Oxford University graduate of history and German who arrived 
in Berlin just after Christmas, said May’s speech had only reinforced his 
intention to try to stay living in the EU.

“I came here because I wanted to enjoy ‘freedom of movement’ while I still 
can,” he said. “I’m going to apply for German universities while I’m still 
eligible as an EU citizen. But it feels like a race against time. If May had 
said something today about ‘absolutely, definitely we’ll protect the rights of 
EU citizens in Britain’, I’d have felt more relaxed about my own situation. But 
she didn’t go very far on that.”
 