
Debenhams has apologised to a homeless man after his possessions were drenched 
as he slept in a doorway of its city-centrePortsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/portsmouth> store on Boxing Day.

Russell Lucas Allen alleged a security guard told him to “enjoy your water 
bed” after he woke up to find his belongings, and those of his dog Lexy, soaked 
with water. He wrote on Facebook that water poured from inside the store had 
“ruined clothing, food, dog bedding, public donations brought by the kind 
members of public”.

He wrote that he and some friends had complained, adding: “When confronting 
the guard I got told I deserve it.”

Debenhams said it was an “unfortunate accident” and replaced Allen’s bedding. 
The original Facebook post led to hundreds of comments on social media and 
offers of help. An onlinepetition calling for the guard to be disciplined 
<https://www.change.org/p/the-head-office-of-debenhams> gathered more than 
8,000 signatures within 24 hours.

Allen, a former assistant building site manager, told the Guardian the 
response was overwhelming. “I didn’t think such a small incident would escalate 
into such a big situation,” he said.

“I just want to tell everyone I appreciate the love that everyone has shown me 
… if anything, it will make people think differently towards homeless people 
and those less fortunate.”

Paul Godier, an independent who chairs Portsmouth city council’s homelessness 
taskforce and spent 10 years homeless himself, said he and Allen had held 
“constructive” meetings withDebenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> representatives and expected 
the store to offer training to its employees.

But a lack of empathy towards the homeless is not unusual, he added: “A church 
up the road evicted a load of homeless from their grounds a few months ago.”

The incident raised broader questions about homelessness in the port city, and 
why anybody was sleeping in a doorway on Christmas Day, when overnight 
temperatures fell as low as -3C.

Homelessness in England is soaring. It’s a scandal – but we can fix it | Dawn 
Foster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/homelessness-england-rising-scandal-rough-sleeping>
A count earlier this year identified 37 rough sleepers in Portsmouth, and 
others are known to sleep in their cars, but getting firm numbers for 
homelessness is notoriously difficult. A winter shelter opened a couple of 
months ago catering for 36 people, but Godier said Allen had told him he was 
turned away because it was full.

Godier said he and the council’s head of housing had been working to address 
the situation on Wednesday. “It highlighted a situation that shouldn’t have 
arisen and we have solved that problem or we had better have,” he said. “I have 
worked with Russell for a long time. He’s a good guy in a terrible situation.”

A spokeswoman for Debenhams said the retailer took the matter seriously and 
had investigated. “We have established that this was an unfortunate accident in 
which the routine cleaning of the fire exit from the inside of the store 
resulted in some of the gentleman’s property on the other side of the fire exit 
becoming wet.”


She added: “Debenhams has now supplied the gentleman with new bedding and 
clothing, and a member of our team has met him to offer our sincere apologies 
for any distress caused.”
 