
Like his older contemporary Alan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/25/alan-sillitoe-obituary>, and 
many other gifted and intelligent children, my friend Derrick Buttress, who has 
died aged 84, was born into a working-class Nottingham family. Derrick failed 
the 11-plus and, like Sillitoe, he spent a lengthy spell in hospital when he 
contracted tuberculosis.

Derrick was born to Ada (nee Radford), a machinist, and Ted Buttress, a bus 
conductor. On leaving the Player school he began work in one of the city’s Lace 
Market factories, then took a job on the assembly line at the Raleigh bicycle 
factory. Exempt from national service because of a foot injury sustained in a 
childhood accident, he set himself on a course of self-education, reading by 
night in the city’s public library and attending evening classes.

Marriage in 1952 to Joan Walker, a machinist, whom he had met through work, 
and the birth of two daughters, Kathryn and Rachel, interrupted but did not end 
his studies. Reading soon led to writing. One evening, watching a TV play, he 
announced to Joan: “I could do better than that.”

Before long a play for television had been accepted by the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, another followed soon after, and 
Derrick then switched to radio drama, a medium well-suited to his acute ear for 
dialogue and his wry, though never cynical, understanding of human ambitions 
and follies.

But determined to acquire a formal education, at the age of 40, and with 
Joan’s willing support, he began a degree in English literature at York 
University. “I couldn’t believe it,” he later recalled. “Three years with 
nothing to do except read books and write essays about them. I thought I’d died 
and gone to heaven.”

After graduation he was offered work with the script team of Coronation 
Street, but characteristically opted for family life back inNottingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham>, where, as a teacher of English at 
Fairham comprehensive school, he proved as popular with staff as with pupils.

He began to publish verse in a number of reputable magazines. Then came 
Broxtowe Boy, a memoir of his boyhood years. A sequel, Music While You Work, 
followed, and soon after, Waiting for the Invasion, the first of five verse 
collections, the last of which,The Great Orthopaedic Hospital Escape 
<http://www.shoestring-press.com/2016/11/the-orthopaedic-hospital-great-escape/>
, was published last year. All made effective use of Derrick’s encyclopedic 
knowledge of films (he once credited Nottingham’s Forum Cinema with his early 
education), of his love of jazz, especially the period 1930-60, of the singers 
of the great American songbook, and of his omnivorous reading.

A modest man, Derrick enjoyed praise for good work, but he found almost as 
much pleasure in the success of others, especially those who, like him, had 
begun life with few expectations.

He is survived by Joan, Kathryn and Rachel.
 