
A Scottish government minister has accused opposition politicians of treating 
the devolution of welfare powers to Holyrood as a “political football” 
following a row over whether the Scottish government is seeking to delay the 
process because it prefers “moaning rather than governing”.

Social security, not benefits: Scotland to ponder words of welfare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/29/social-security-not-benefits-scotland-to-ponder-words-of-welfare>
Describing the new powers – which account for around £2.7bn, or 15% of the 
total Scottish benefits bill, and will affect 1.4 million people – as “the 
biggest transfer of powers since devolution began”, the minister for social 
security, Jeane Freeman, told the Holyrood chamber on Tuesday afternoon: “It is 
deeply disappointing that in recent days both Tory and Labour have tried to 
score political points on the basis of unfounded assertions with an utterly 
careless disregard for the impact their words have on the people they claim to 
represent.”

The row began after it emerged from the publicly available minutes of the 
joint ministerial working group on welfare that the Scottish and Westminster 
governments had discussed a previously untested approach of “split competence”, 
with the intention of legislative control over the 11 benefits involved passing 
to Holyrood by June 2017 and executive responsibility passing by April 2020.

This would involve the UK government continuing to oversee the delivery of 
some of the benefits until 2020 to “minimise risk”. But opposition parties 
claim that the proposal is an unnecessary delay, prompted by SNP incompetence 
and unwillingness to take responsibility.

Questioned in the chamber on Tuesday afternoon, Freeman mounted a robust 
defence of the timetabling, insisting that the suggestion was meant to ensure 
that nobody slips through any gaps during the transfer between the two systems, 
as well as allowing the Scottish parliament time to scrutinise the legislation.

Using the example of universal credit, which passed into statute in 2012 but 
is not expected to be fully rolled out until 2022, Freeman said: “We will not 
be bullied into false timescales and deadline dates, and within the lifetime of 
this parliament we will deliver a social security system forScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> that everyone can be proud of.”

The new powers require Holyrood to shape the country’s first social security 
system, allowing the Scottish government to legislate on disability and carers’ 
benefits, among others, and giving it the opportunity to top up existing 
payments or create new ones.

The SNP government has already committed in its manifesto to increasing 
carer’s allowance to the level of jobseeker’s allowance, replacing the “sure 
start” maternity grant with an expanded maternity and early years allowance 
called the “best start” grant and introducing a new grant for young people at 
risk of long-term unemployment.

Scottish Labour’s social security spokesperson, Mark Griffin MSP, asked 
Freeman why her government had “chosen to delay and continue with a system that 
its own backbenchers describes as a system of ‘conscious cruelty’?”

Freeman replied that “to call this ‘delay’ is to completely misunderstand the 
process of how you go about building a new public service. First you need the 
legislative competence in order to bring before this parliament the draft bill 
that you will be entitled to scrutinise, which itself forms the framework on 
which we can then begin to deliver on executive competence.”

The Scottish Conservatives’ welfare spokesman, Adam Tomkins, who previously 
argued that the SNP government would “rather complain about the DWP than get on 
with the day job of making social security devolution work as smoothly and as 
quickly as possible,” suggested that the confusion has been caused because 
ministers failed to share information with parliament.

He told the chamber that it was only after the DWP minister, Damian Green, had 
given evidence to Holyrood’s social security committee, on which Tomkins sits, 
were members of the committee given minutes of a meeting at which the “split 
competence approach” was discussed with UK ministers.

John Dickie, director of the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG) in Scotland, 
said that it was inevitable that a tension existed between the speed and 
success of transferring powers. “There is, of course, a tension between 
ensuring that benefits continue to be administered smoothly and handing over 
powers quickly. And it’s vital that the transfer of powers ensures that 
claimants continue to get the financial support they are entitled to without 
interruption.”

He added that the earlier transfer of legislative competence, planned for next 
year, gives the Scottish government options. “But not everything needs to wait 
until a Scottish social security agency is in place. If legislative 
responsibility is devolved then I’d assume the Scottish parliament can still be 
making changes to improve devolved benefits even if the DWP continues to 
deliver them in the short term. For example, action could be taken to stop 
repeat assessments for disability benefits for those with chronic ill-health, 
or to use top-up powers to top up UK benefits.”
 