
Charles Dickens was outraged by child labour and for good reason: he had first 
hand experience of working long hours for little pay in bad conditions.

By the time Dickens came to chronicle his childhood experiences during the 
1820s in David Copperfield, the first steps had been taken to end the 
exploitation of children by unscrupulous employers. There was a parliamentary 
inquiry in 1832 followed by legislation the following year so that a child 
working in a textile mill could work no more than an eight-hour day.

That was almost two centuries ago, yet in parts of the world child labour is 
still rife. There has been much discussion during 2016 about the effects of
globalisation, <https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation> almost all of 
it focused on problems it has caused for those struggling in developed 
countries.

But globalisation is a two-way street. At one end there’s the factory worker 
thrown on the scrapheap because it is cheaper to outsource production to a 
low-wage country. At the other there are workers making the trainers and the 
T-shirts. And many of them are children who should be playing with toys rather 
than making them. In the west, a company would never survive the public 
opprobrium following revelations that children as young as 10 were working 
45-hour weeks.

Multinational corporations know that consumers are not especially keen on 
child exploitation in developing countries either, so many of them have signed 
codes of practice designed to ensure that children are not going through the 
sort of experiences suffered by Dickens in the 1820s.

That, though, is the reality according to a new report that looks at the link 
between child labour and education in the slums of one city – Dhaka, the 
capital ofBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>. The 
findings are worrying.

Bangladesh has a good record on human development. Poverty levels have fallen 
and it is close to getting every child in primary school. It has taken steps to 
achieve gender equity. Put simply, plenty of countries could learn some lessons 
from Bangladesh.


But the report written by Maria Quattri and Kevin Watkins for the UK 
thinktank, the Overseas Development Institute 
<https://www.odi.org/publications/10654-child-labour-and-education-survey-slum-settlements-dhaka>
, found that child labour was rife in the slums, in part because families were 
desperate for the extra income their children were bringing in and in part 
because the poor quality of education meant dropout rates were high.


Dhaka is one of the world’s fastest growing mega cities. Migration from rural 
areas to the cities has been a big part of Bangladesh’s economic development, 
but urbanisation has been accompanied by rapid growth in slums.


The ODI study looked at slums in eight of Dhaka’s administrative units drawing 
on a large sample of 2,700 households in which children as well as adults took 
part.

It found a high incidence of children working from the ages of six to 14, with 
an average rate of 15% from across the eight survey sites. Another 15% were 
neither in school nor working. The overwhelming majority of working children 
were out of the school.

There are globally agreed rules drawn up by a UN body, the International 
Labour Organisation <http://www.ilo.org/global/lang--en/index.htm>, governing 
the employment of children, and these make a distinction between child work and 
child labour.

Convention 138 allows children from the age of 13 (12 in the poorest 
countries) to do light work provided it doesn’t affect their attendance at 
school. Light work means work that is not hazardous – such as working down a 
mine, on a construction site or operating a machine in a factory – up to a 
maximum of 14 hours a week.

Writing in the Observer, a group of academics voiced opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/child-labour-un-ban-damaging-mistake>
 to calls from the UN for tougher action to stop children working, saying that 
the focus should instead be to avoid dangerous occupations and exploitation.

But the ODI study revealed that almost all the working children in the Dhaka 
slums were involved in what the ILO would classify as child labour, with 
hazardous work featuring prominently. Almost all were working more than 42 
hours a week, with child labour levels rising steadily from 8% at the age of 10 
to 45% by 14. Two-thirds of girl child labourers were employed making clothes, 
a big export earner for Bangladesh, which has an estimated 7,000 garment 
factories, employing about 5 million workers.


Some of these are direct suppliers for foreign brands. They tend to be the 
bigger operations, but they sub-contract work to a large – less well policed – 
informal sector.


“We do not state outright that named foreign brands can be linked to factories 
employing child labour,” the ODI report says. “However, it stretches 
credibility to assume that the supply chains for these brands do not include 
significant employment of child labourers.

“First, with over 60% of working girls and 13% of working boys reporting 
employment in the garment sector, this is the single largest source of 
employment in our sample. Second, the operations of direct and indirect 
exporters, and formal and informal suppliers, are deeply integrated. Widespread 
sub-contracting renders it highly probable that children are producing clothing 
destined for international supply chains.”

Children are driven into work by necessity. Poor families send their sons and 
daughters out to work to make ends meet: the survey found that the wages earned 
by children equalise the average incomes of households with and without working 
children.

The ODI report found that children are entering the labour market having had 
on average four years of schooling, typically of a poor quality. Basic literacy 
and numeracy skills are low, meaning that the children who drop out of school 
are on course for a life in lowly-paid jobs.

There are obvious ways of tackling child labour in Dhaka’s slums. The 
government could provide more effective enforcement to ensure compulsory 
primary education. It could raise its spending on education from 3% of national 
output, a level well below that in sub-Saharan Africa. It could raise the 
school leaving age. It could introduce a system of cash transfers that would 
compensate households for the foregone wages of their children, which average 
$47 a month for those aged six to 14.

One thing is certain: Bangladesh will pay a price if it fails to crack down on 
child labour. It is recognised that having a well-educated workforce is vital 
for economic development, which is why the UN has made universal secondary 
education one of itssustainable development goals  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals>
to be achieved by 2030. This won’t happen in Bangladesh (and plenty of other 
countries) without a stronger commitment to eradicating child labour, which in 
turn means free, compulsory education for those aged six to 14.

It might also be time for western companies, governments and consumers to ask 
themselves a simple question: if child labour was wrong in the London of the 
1820s, what makes it right in the Dhaka of the 2010s?

 