
The New England Patriots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-england-patriots> are headed back to a 
familiar spot: the AFC championship game.

NFL divisional round: Houston Texans 16-34 New England Patriots – as it 
happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/14/nfl-divisional-round-houston-texans-new-england-patriots-live>
Dion Lewis had a 13-yard touchdown reception , a 98-yard kickoff return for a 
score, and a late one-yard touchdown to help the Patriots hold off theHouston 
Texans <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/houston-texans> 34-16 on Saturday 
night and advance to an NFL-record sixth straight conference title game.

Lewis became the fifth Patriots player to score three touchdowns in a playoff 
game. He’s also the first player in the Super Bowl era to score on a rush, a 
catch and a kick return in a postseason game.

The Patriots (15-2) survived a gritty effort by the Texans’ top-ranked 
defense, which intercepted Brady twice. Houston’s special teams also forced a 
third turnover.

But the Texans (10-8) couldn’t find enough traction on offense to take full 
advantage of the Patriots’ mistakes, settling for field goals on both of 
Brady’s picks.

New England led just 17-13 at the half, but pushed its lead to 24-13 early in 
the third quarter on a 19-yard touchdown pass from Brady to James White.

Houston’s Brock Osweiler was intercepted three times after that, and the 
Texans managed only a field goal the rest of game.

It was the first breakout game of the season for Lewis, who spent the first 
eight games of the season on injured reserve recovering from offseason surgery 
on his left knee.

Brady finished 18 of 38 for 287 yards and two touchdowns and was showered with 
chants of “MVP! MVP!” and “Brady! Brady!” late in the game. Julian Edelman was 
Brady’s most dependable target, catching eight passes for 137 yards.

Osweiler was just 23 of 40 for 198 yards with the two turnovers.

When New England did have the ball in the first half, it gave Houston a steady 
diet of Lewis early with LeGarrette Blount coming off an illness that limited 
him during practice this week.

Without Blount to contend with, the Texans applied pressure to Brady.

AJ Bouye intercepted a slightly overthrown ball by Brady late in the first 
quarter on a pass that bounced out of the hands of receiver Michael Floyd. That 
led to a 27-yard field goal that cut New England’s lead to 14-6.

On the ensuing kickoff, Lewis coughed up the ball on a hit from Akeem Dent. 
Eddie Pleasant fell on it at the Patriots 12, and two plays later, Brock 
Osweiler hit CJ Fiedorowicz from eight yards out to cut the deficit to 14-13.

Brady only threw two interceptions during the regular season. With his 28 
touchdown passes, that was the lowest touchdown to interception ratio inNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> history.
 