
The UK-based diplomats invited to Theresa May’s speech on Britain and the EU 
are probably the greatest students of Brexitology inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. It is what they are paid to be.

Many left Lancaster House on Tuesday relieved that, after a frustrating period 
of inscrutability, the prime minister had provided more clarity than they had 
expected on the single market. But they quickly pointed to the small print for 
the still-unanswered questions.

“I had been expecting a statement of principles,” said one. “It was closer to 
an open negotiating bid.”

They were listening for tone as much as content, seeking clues as to how the 
UK will approach the Brexit talks. In that spirit, one of them welcomed May’s 
promise to work with Europe as a friend and her guarantee that she did not see 
Britain’s departure from the EU as the start of “a great unravelling” for the 
bloc.

Related: Prime minister vows to put final Brexit deal before parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>

The clear distancing of herself from Donald Trump’s recent remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/angela-merkel-refugees-policy-donald-trump>
 will have pleased Germany. In aninterview with the Times and Bild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
, the US president-elect said he thought Brexit might prompt other states to 
leave the EU, but Berlin has urged Britain not to suggest the move could be a 
catalyst for the breakup of the EU. Alienating Germany at this stage would have 
been truly self-destructive.

Not all May’s speech went down as well. The diplomats bridled over a 
threatening passage toward the end in which May said the UK could abandon the 
European social model and undercut the EU if it failed to get what it wanted.

“If you are willing to sell your soul, make sure that you have something to 
sell,” one diplomat said.

Another said the speech was bit of a mixed bag. “The prime minister said she 
shared our values, but then there was a not-very-implied threat to be a tax 
haven, trying to drive down conditions across Europe”, they said.

A third said: “If you want to give a positive message you give a positive 
message. There was a contradiction. She says there is a convergence in our 
values, but if she does not get her way, there will be this fiscal and 
commercial dumping.”

One northern European diplomat described the overall content of May’s demands 
as “hard on the outside, but softer on the inside”.

“Yes, she has said she wishes to leave the single market,” they said, “but she 
has also said she wants some form of customs union arrangement and agreements 
to access the single market for favoured sectors, such as cars and the City. It 
raises questions.

“How many other sectors will wish to join this cherry-picking party and have 
access to the single market? Who is to oversee these agreements? The European 
court of justice is said by the UK to be blasphemous, but in these sectors, 
because they are important to the UK, the ECJ is OK. And who is to pay for this 
access? British businesses or the taxpayer? It is not clear.”

May said a transitional deal that dragged would be akin to “political 
purgatory”, and that she only wanted a phased process for implementation of the 
agreement. The diplomats, however, said hard negotiations lay ahead on interim 
arrangements, and that the ECJ would have to remain the arbiter during any 
interim deal.

A diplomat from a southern European country said: “I fear the speech was 
wishful thinking about becoming a global player and signing free trade deals, 
and punching above its weight. But this is all at a time when globalisation is 
at its lowest ebb.”
 