
TRACK OF THE WEEK

Dirty Projectors 
Little Bubble

Fresh from becoming an unlikely member of Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>’s writing camp, Afro-indie 
brainiac Dave Longstreth has reinvented himself as a handsomely coiffured 
crooner of sad bangers. The video for Little Bubble even has him staring 
forlornly from a rocky crag, although the song itself is full of unexpected 
tangents and exquisite tensions. Plus, unlike your average whingy alt-R&B 
bloke, Dave sounds genuinely inconsolable here: “I want to sleep with no 
dreams/ I want to be dead.” Certainly puts your grumbles about the train strike 
into perspective.

Ed Sheeran 
Castle On The Hill

Like that other evil ginger populist Trump, Sheeran is a formidable foe, 
deflecting even the most stinging criticism of his glorified gap-year busking 
with a goofy, disarming grin. Castle On The Hill might be his most fiendish 
work yet, a relentless barrage of emotionally manipulative John Lewis-ad 
imagery – childhood friends, sunsets, country roads leading back home – 
building to a chorus that evenMumford & Sons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mumford-and-sons> would reject for a being a 
bit too rousing. The resistance starts now!

Playboy Manbaby 
You Can Be A Fascist Too

Comedians have been quick to complain that the events of 2016 were “beyond 
satire”. But try telling that to Arizona circus punks Playboy Manbaby, who have 
successfully skewered the rise of the alt-right with two-and-a-half minutes of 
faux-livid hollering – “I am right! I am correct! If you disagree with me I’ll 
get really upset!” – and a comedy trumpet solo. We await Half Man Half 
Biscuit’s take on Brexit with interest.

Jens Lekman 
What’s That Perfume That You Wear?

There’s still no happy ending in sight for Sweden’s official heartbreak tsar, 
but Jens’s pain continues to be our gain. Beginning as a typical indie mope, 
his new single soon explodes into a gawky Latin disco groover, with Jens 
listing the bittersweet aromas – sandalwood, lavender, jasmine – that prompt 
instant tearful recollection of his lost love. A few squirts of Febreze and a 
mist of Lynx Africa – that should neutralise it.

Banana 
Banana C

When all your favourite pop stars are releasing overwrought visual albums 
freighted with political subtexts, sometimes all you want is music that doesn’t 
mean anything at all. Banana C is a jaunty, jazzy instrumental excursion from
Cate Le Bon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/17/cate-le-bon-mug-museum-interview>
 and friends that gently tickles your receptors without forcing you to adopt 
any kind of stance vis-a-vis its cultural relevance. Have a Banana, as the 
music hall comic said to the tennis player.
 