
Doug Paulley has won almost all the 40 disability discrimination cases he has 
launched over the last decade. Paulley, who lives in a care home and uses a 
wheelchair, is an activist, not a lawyer. He has represented himself in all but 
three actions, challenging equality and accessibility barriers in organisations 
from pub chains to supermarkets and theatre firms. He has won around £10,000 in 
compensation over 10 years, he estimates, by bringing complaints under the
equality legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/a-guide-to-the-new-equality-act>
 in the small claims court.

The self-taught rights expert is a controversial figure. To fellow activists, 
he fights David and Goliath-style battles for the greater good. To detractors 
(largely, he says, the corporations he challenges) he is an antagonistic 
claims-chaser. He says he is uncomfortable about making a personal profit from 
the lack of parity experienced by disabled people. “I’m not doing this for fun 
... people have said it in court and elsewhere that I do it for the money or 
because I’m a bully. People think I go out of my way to find cases, as if I get 
a perverse enjoyment out of taking on stuff,” he says.

Paulley, 38, is best known for his case against transport company First Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/dec/08/bus-parents-buggies-wheelchair-users-appeal-first-group>
, hinging on whether bus firms are required to oblige people with pushchairs to 
vacate wheelchair spaces. His initial win was overturned on appeal and isdue to 
be heard in the supreme court in June 
<http://www.unity-law.co.uk/news.htm?id=2206> in a move that could set a legal 
precedent for enforceable priority over wheelchair space. The Equality and 
Human Rights Commission (EHRC) supports Paulley’s case, and his 
awareness-raising helped win him last year’s Sheila McKechnie Foundation award 
for campaigner of the year .

Bus firms not required to force parents with buggies to move for wheelchairs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/dec/08/bus-parents-buggies-wheelchair-users-appeal-first-group>
Despite his successes and the introduction of equality laws 20 years ago – the 
1995Disability <https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Discrimination 
Act (superseded by the 2010 Equality Act) – he says progress is slow. Disabled 
people, for example, rarely make spontaneous train journeys: “If you want to 
travel and you’ve got access problems, you’ve got to phone the transport 
company 24 or 48 hours ahead [to request assistance] – you can’t just turn up 
and go.”

Bringing discrimination cases would be easier, says Paulley, if the EHRC took 
a stronger role. “The EHRC has the power to take cases but only ever intervenes 
in existing cases when they get to appeal level, which is what happened with me 
[in the bus case],” he explains.

He welcome’s last weeks damning Lords select committee report on the Equality 
Act 2010 and disability 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201516/ldselect/ldeqact/117/11702.htm>
, which chastises the government for failing disabled people in its duty of 
care. Paulley, quoted in the report, backs its conclusions highlighting how 
inequality persists and how difficult the system of challenging it is. The 
committee calls on the government to enact long-standing Equality Act 
provisions, such as obliging taxi drivers to take wheelchair-using passengers 
and to make fighting discrimination easier.

Why is the system flawed? After all, the Equality Act supports people with a 
“protected characteristic” (such as disability, race, gender or age) from 
discrimination, obliging service providers to make “reasonable adjustments” and 
offering a legal framework to hold organisations to account.

For Paulley, the problem is that the onus for enforcing equality rests on the 
person discriminated against taking the service provider to court. “Disabled 
people don’t have access to justice,” he says, adding that they are forced into 
“fighting to enforce legal rights”.Legal aid cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/16/legal-aid-review-lack-of-access-to-justice>
 have made access to justice unaffordable for many, and few no win, no fee 
solicitors take on specialist cases. Being a litigant in person, Paulley says, 
is not within the reach of most disabled people.There is no data on how many 
cases for disability discrimination 
<http://www.kingqueen.org.uk/number-of-disability-discrimination-act-goods-and-services-cases-not-recorded/>
 have been brought under the Equality Act relating to provision of services. 
The Lord’s report found that “tribunal fees, less access to legal aid, and 
procedural changes have combined to create barriers to the effective 
enforcement of disabled people’s rights”.

Every time there’s a personal cost in time and headspace as well as 
interpersonal conflict, which I don’t like

Cuts, such as the closure of the independent living fund  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-30374254>which provided additional support for 
disabled people, make it harder to fight discrimination. He says: “There is 
this culture of identifying deserving and underserving poor, instead of [a 
focus on] the core problem … the most disadvantaged people in society being 
further disadvantaged.”Paulley suggests the disability element of the Equality 
Act be separated out into a specific Disability Access Act and disabled 
people’s organisations be given permission to take representative cases.

He has several claims under way, and is appealing against a recently lost case 
involving lack of access in a pub. Some of his claims concluded with 
non-disclosure agreements. He has evensued the court service over access issues 
 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/campaigner-celebrates-second-victory-in-battle-over-court-discrimination/>
that have arisen when he has attended court for a hearing – including 
misinformation about the provision of accessible parking spaces, the failure to 
provide a working accessible toilet, and the lack of a hearing loop in court – 
reaching out-of-court settlements in two cases, and winning a third. “A lot of 
the frontline staff in the court service are really good, but they just don’t 
have disabled people bringing cases … they advertise things like blue-badge 
parking and hearing loops, but no one very much uses them, so it comes as a 
shock [when you ask for adjustments],” he explains.

He recently published a free guide to help other disabled people take legal 
action <http://www.kingqueen.org.uk/dart/>using the Equality Act without legal 
representation. It includes document templates and information based on his own 
experiences. He is pragmatic about its impact. “For a small number of other 
disabled people who are in a similar situation – who have had the luck of 
having an education and aptitude for it – it may have some benefit,” he says.

What, then, is his aptitude? Paulley jokes that he is by nature “a bolshie 
git”, and his upbringing led to his determined, rights-based approach – his 
father was a local trade union leader and education campaigner. “My family has 
a bee in their bonnet about behaving correctly and about justice.”

Despite support from activist peers, he prefers to act alone. “I’m not a 
spokesperson, but what I say seems to be in line with other disabled activists.”

Paulley, who has lived in a care home for 15 years, since his nervous 
system-related condition (autonomic dysregulation) meant he had to use a 
wheelchair full-time, is alsoa vocal critic of large disability charities 
<http://www.kingqueen.org.uk/the-great-north-run-for-the-calvert-trust-kielder/>
 – including Leonard Cheshire Disability, which runs his home. He has written 
of non-user led charities on his blog: “The big disability charities 
institutionalise us, take our voice, consume our resources and use our language 
whilst oppressing us.” Such criticism, he says, is not aimed at frontline 
carers. “The staff are generally really good, despite poor wages 
and conditions, lots of people do the job as they want to make difference,” 
he says.

Paulley also has hearing loss and receives 10 hours of one-to-one personal 
assistant support each week. He concedes that he does not share the experience 
of disabled people adversely affected by austerity measures and welfare reform. 
“I’m sheltered from the worst of the cuts. I don’t have to find money for 
heating and food, and I don’t have this kind of sanctioned hand to mouth 
existence … I’m supported by this accidental income from the Equality Act 
cases, and I do feel bad about it … That [money or bullying organisations] is 
not what motivates me.”

The stress has led him to seek mental health support. And while he says he 
doesn’t want to present himself as a martyr, he adds: “Every time there’s a 
personal cost in time and headspace, but also in interpersonal conflict, which 
I don’t like or deal with well … I’ve had a number of mental health and 
confidence crises, but people don’t see that, they see this hard, unyielding 
person. But, in reality, it does affect me.”

He often donates his damages money to activist groups, and stresses that the 
compensation amounts are “dwarfed by legal fees” – a reference to high-earning 
lawyers who represent service providers (discrimination-related claims 
generally fall between £600 and £6,000).

Says Paulley: “What I’m doing is not intended to be for my benefit alone. It’s 
challenging injustice.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 38.

Lives Wetherby, West Yorkshire.

Family Single.

Education Oldham Hulme grammar school; Shena Simon College, Manchester; Open 
University, Bsc Hons in Earth sciences and IT.

Career 1996-97: groundwater technician, groundwater department, Environment 
Agency.

Public life disability activist, shop volunteer, Oxfam, Wetherby; 2015 Sheila 
McKechnie Foundation campaigner of the year award.

Interests Information rights and governance, railways, film.
 