
He was a logical suspect. Raymond Gilmour, then aged 19, was arrested soon 
after the rape and murder of Pamela Hastie, aged 16, in Rannoch Woods, 
Johnstone, near Paisley. He was, after all, a flasher.

Mr Gilmour, pleading not guilty, was to be convicted of the November 1981 
killing at Glasgow High Court the following June. The evidence against him: two 
unsigned confessions which even some police officers admit were incompatible 
with the evidence.

Tomorrow a Trial and Error investigation for Channel 4 presents evidence which 
Mr Gilmour's lawyer, Gordon Ritchie, says blows apart the case against his 
client. A knife was used on Pamela, but this was never realised because of the 
jargon of the pathologist's report.

The police interviewing Mr Gilmour never knew about it, and the jury was never 
told. Mr Gilmour's confessions, already shown to be at odds with the facts, 
failed to mention a knife.

There can be no conviction on a confession alone unless the statement contains 
information which could only be known to whoever committed the crime. Mr 
Gilmour said he had strangled Pamela. That she was strangled was already local 
gossip when he was arrested, so such a statement was hardly incriminating. 
Legal campaigners in Scotland say self-corroboration has become alarmingly easy 
since such confessions were deemed admissible in 1958.

In any case, he said he strangled Pamela with her tie or the belt of her 
schoolbag. Yet the weapon was a length of twine - one of a dozen 
inconsistencies in the two statements. There was never any evidence to support 
Mr Gilmour's assertion he had hit Pamela over the head with a piece of wood. 
Nor was the body found near a 'fat tree', as he suggested.
There is no reference to the killer's attempts to cover the body with leaves.
Detective Chief Inspector Jimmy Brown, leading the investigation, decided the 
confession was insufficient.

The circumstances of the second confession were more bizarre. Mr Gilmour, due 
to appear at Paisley sheriff court on the flashing offences he had admitted 
when arrested, should have gone in the prison van. Instead, he was driven from 
Longriggend to Paisley.

It should have taken 40 minutes, but took more than three hours. The officers 
who drove him subsequently argued that Mr Gilmour had confessed spontaneously, 
and they had then taken him to the police station rather than to court. There 
was no forensic evidence.

The Channel 4 programme also tracks down two young women, schoolgirls at the 
time. They testify they were attacked by a man with a knife in Rannoch Woods 
several weeks before Pamela was murdered. He had long red hair.
Several lorry drivers stayed regularly at a bed and breakfast nearby. One who 
fitted an initial description of Pamela's assailant turned up the following 
week with his shoulder-length ginger hair shorn. He had acted erratically on 
the day of Pamela's death, had tried to entice another schoolgirl into his 
lorry, and was subsequently jailed for sexual offences on his daughter and 
niece. He is thought now to live in the north of Scotland.

Gordon McMaster, Mr Gilmour's MP, yesterday called on Ian Lang, the Scottish 
Secretary, to refer the case back to the appeal court. Mr Lang this year 
refused to do so, but that was before the evidence of the knife and the further 
doubts about Mr Gilmour's confessions.
 