
Nurses work on the frontline and are in an ideal position to innovate

“Since I appeared on Dragons’ Den last year, the business has surged and there 
is more support,” says Neomi Bennett.

Bennett is the inventor of Neo-slip <http://www.neo-slip.com/>, a pouch-like 
contraption that makes it easier for patients to wear their anti-embolism 
stockings, known to reduce the risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) clots. 
Although it was rejected on Dragons’ Den, Bennett considers being able to 
highlight the problem of DVT with millions of viewers as her biggest 
achievement.

Bennett came up with the idea in 2011 while working as a student nurse at 
Kingston University. She says: “In my final year, I was asked to look at 
problems faced by patients and find a solution [as part of risk assessment 
essay]. I noticed many people, especially the elderly, were finding it 
difficult to apply anti-embolism stockings because they are tight and often 
uncomfortable. Some would eventually give up and stop using them.

“Twenty-five thousand people die every year in the UK from preventable deep 
vein thrombosis, so I knew we needed a product that encourages people to use 
those stockings and this is how Neo-slip came about.”

With help from UnLtd <https://unltd.org.uk/>, which supports social 
entrepreneurs in the UK, and a government loan, she set up her own enterprise 
in 2012 and has not looked back. Neo-slip is currently supplied to 34 hospitals 
and various independent pharmacies across the UK. The product has also won 
Royal College of Nursing and Smarta 100 innovation awards.

A single mother of three, who left school at the age of 16, Bennett says her 
entrepreneurial journey hasn’t been easy. “In addition to studying nursing, I 
had to learn how to run a business – its structure, processes and logistics – 
as I didn’t have any business background. There were also financial challenges 
as [is the case] with start-ups.”

She says the health service is better at signposting than at practical support.

A future of mobile-centric healthcare could save lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/aug/05/future-mobile-centric-healthcare-save-lives>
My children inspired me to invent a tool to prevent dehydration in older 
patients

Naomi Campbell first thought of a drinking aid while watching her children use 
a toy to sip their drink. A community nurse at the time, she wondered if 
something similar could be used to prevent dehydration inolder people. “It may 
sound corny but it really was a light bulb moment,” she says.


With the help of a £15,000 grant by NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Innovations South West, she designed 
a device called a micro straw that allows patients to drink their fluids 
independently, reducing their dependence on nursing staff.

The next problem was monitoring their intake, so Campbell came up with another 
creation: a cup with a scale on the side to make it easier for staff and carers 
to check the amount of fluid consumed. The micro straw was granted a UK patent 
in 2013, while the simple measures cup was trialled in Falmouth hospital and is 
now used in all Cornish community hospitals.

Campbell is now working on a complete education package, combining her 
innovations with practical risk assessment and monitoring tools, to raise 
awareness among carers and healthcare organisations.

“Dehydration is long-term problem … elderly patients need to be supported, 
encouraged and helped to drink. Sometimes older people avoid drinking water 
because they are concerned about going to the bathroom or too hesitant to ask 
for help,” she says.

“There is a need to improve basic hydration care in the NHS and wider health 
and social care system. There are many issues around elderly care hydration 
that nursing hasn’t addressed – poor chart-keeping, monitoring of drink 
consumed and identification of patients who are at risk.”

Nurses understand problems and have solutions but we’re not good at putting 
ourselves forward

Bernadette Porter, creator of NeuroResponse, a nurse-led telehealth service 
for MS patients, says there needs to be a culture change in the NHS. “To 
encourage more nurses to innovate, we have to give them permission to fail,” 
she says.

How digital technology will make people powered health a reality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/07/digital-technology-people-powered-health>
With a career spanning more than 25 years, Porter understands the health 
service and its complexities. In 2003 she was the first nurse in the NHS to be 
appointed a multiple sclerosis nurse consultantand was was awarded an MBE in 
2013.

The idea of NeuroResponse <http://youngfoundation.org/projects/neuroresponse/> 
came to her at a social entrepreneurship course. “We were challenged to think 
about care from a user’s perspective … and we use technology in all spheres of 
life such as banking and shopping, so why not use it to bring expert care 
nearer to patient’s home?”

She was selected as one of the 17 innovators for the NHS Innovation 
Accelerators (NIA) programme last year to scale up the project across England. 
It is already being expanded to other parts of London and Essex.

Porter says it was a good experience to network with other NIA innovators: 
“All of them had a ‘can do’ attitude, which is what we need in the NHS.”

She adds that there should be more community forums for innovators where they 
can share their ideas, support each other and learn more about 
entrepreneurship, information technology and co-designing services. “Nurses 
work with patients directly, understand their problems and have a good idea 
about the solutions. However, we are not good at putting ourselves forward. We 
need to be more confident.”

Shreshtha Trivedi is a freelance journalist

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.






 