
Ospreys’ head coach, Steve Tandy, accepts his team’s European Champions Cup 
ambitions are on the line against high-flyingNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> on Sunday.

The Saints will arrive in Swansea buoyed by the return of their captain, Dylan 
Hartley, from suspension and aiming to remain firmly on a quarter-final course. 
Victory for Northampton – and a Racing Metro success against Treviso – would 
set up a winner-takes-all Pool Five encounter between Saints and Racing at 
Franklin’s Gardens next Saturday. TheOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, meanwhile, could progress, but it 
is not guaranteed even if they win their last two games.

“When you have the Aviva Premiership champions and current leaders coming to 
town, then you know it’s going to be a big occasion,” said Tandy “It’s 
do-or-die for us this weekend as far as Europe is concerned, so we know that 
we’ve got to go out there and give it everything.”

“If we can get the performance right, then who knows what can happen?

“All we can do is look after the areas that we can control, and hopefully take 
it down to the final weekend for us out in Treviso.

“One thing we have seen with this group is that they will never give up on 
anything. It’s going to be a great contest between two good teams - something 
to get excited about.”

Northampton are again without their England lock Courtney Lawes because of an 
ankle injury – Sam Dickinson and Christian Day pack down in the second-row – 
but their hooker Hartley is back after his ban.

“We are top of the pool and are in control of our destiny. We know that two 
wins will see us qualify,” said Jim Mallinder, the Saints rugby director.

Northampton’s fellow Premiership heavyweights Bath, who will be without their 
former rugby league star Sam Burgess as he recovers from a knock, must beat the 
four-time European championsToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> at Stade Ernest-Wallon to retain 
any hope of winning Pool Four. Bath lost 21-19 when the teams met in the west 
country three months ago, and their head coach, Mike Ford, expects a different 
type of challenge this time around.

“They (Toulouse) have changed the way they play since last time,” Ford said. 
“They had gone through a few defeats when they played us at home. They were 
very cautious and quite easy to read.

“They are running the ball from their in-goal area now, turning penalties down 
at goal which are kickable, taking quick lineouts, quick taps and quick 22 
restarts.

“But they have got a lot to lose at the weekend. They are at home and they’re 
the favourites to go through.

“We are excited about playing Toulouse at their place - we want to see how 
good we are.””

The Wales international prop Paul James will captain Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> in an injured Stuart Hooper’s absence, 
while injury also sidelines the wing Semesa Rokoduguni, so Horacio Agulla wears 
the No14 shirt and Kyle Eastmond replaces Burgess in midfield.

Glasgow, meanwhile, are also in Pool Four action, hosting Montpellier and 
chasing a win to keep them in the quarter-final race heading to Bath next 
weekend.

In the second-tier European Challenge Cup on Sunday, victory for the Pool Two 
leaders,Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter>, against Connacht in 
Galway would effectively secure a last-eight place. 
 