
One crude swinging arm is in danger of costing Dylan Hartley his immediate 
future as the England captain and any chance he had ofleading the British & 
Irish Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/warren-gatland-dylan-hartley-possible-lions-captain>
 to New Zealand next summer. Hartley could hardly have chosen a worse evening 
to revert from Saint to sinner, his deserved 58th-minute red card which was 
witnessed by Eddie Jones and his predecessor Stuart Lancaster, now a member of 
Leinster’s management,

The hooker, widely hailed as a key influence in England’s unbeaten calendar 
year, had been on the field for six minutes when he was dismissed by the French 
referee Jérôme Garcès, having stiff-armed the Ireland back-row Sean O’Brien 
from behind. With a bonus-point defeat leavingNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> rooted to the foot of 
their European pool, Hartley’s latest indiscretion not only left his club in 
the lurch but instantly shredded his growing reputation as a reformed character.

Jim Mallinder, the Northampton director of rugby, made scant attempt to defend 
the indefensible, having seen his side concede five tries. “It’s a strike to 
the head, we’ve seen enough of them over the last few weeks,” he said. “I think 
it was a red card. He’s been playing really well and leading England by example 
so it was disappointing that on returning from England after doing such a good 
job that that happens. I’m also disappointed for the team. When you play a team 
likeLeinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster>, you want all your 
best players playing and you need 15 players on the field.”

Todd Blackadder: ‘The day you think you are the complete article, you’re 
finished’ | Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/todd-blackadder-bath-new-zealand-roots-tough>
Mallinder expects Hartley to receive a hefty ban, with the top-end sanction 
for striking being eight weeks. With England kicking off the Six Nations 
against France in eight weeks’ time a lengthy suspension would leave Hartley 
extremely short of rugby even if a stern-faced Jones is merciful and opts not 
to relieve him of the armband.

It is all too reminiscent of Hartley’s dark days, with his sending off in the 
2013 Premiership final having cost him a place on that year’s Lions tour. A 
subsequent citing and ban forbutting Saracens’ Jamie George  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/02/dylan-hartley-quit-international-rugby-england-world-cup>
also scuppered his 2015 World Cup prospects but that seemed ancient history as 
he helped guide England to 13 Test wins this year, including a grand slam. One 
moment of madness has propelled him back into the doghouse once more.

The trigger for this latest career implosion may or may not have been 
Northampton’s decision to start Hartley on the bench. Tom Wood, the Saints’ 
captain, was among those who felt it might have been a factor. “I can only 
assume he is trying to make an impact and be positive,” Wood said. “I can’t 
speak for him but my impression is that he’s on the bench, he’s eager, it’s a 
big European night and he wants to make an impact. Contact to the head is such 
a big directive at the minute there was only ever going to be one decision. I 
don’t want to talk too much about Dylan himself but as a club the discipline is 
becoming an issue.”

Wood was also scathing about his side’s performance, with Leinster almost 
embarrassingly dominant in the first quarter. “We’re lacking some belief, some 
togetherness and some identity. We don’t feel like we’re together at the 
minute. We spoke all week about having a big start and coming out of the blocks 
but we were just flat. We stood and watched them for 20 minutes.”

It rounded off a truly gruesome week for Northampton, still under fire for 
their handling ofGeorge North’s latest head knock  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/northampton-george-north-concussion-leicester-premiership-rugby>
against Leicester last week. The furore refuses to go away, with Mallinder now 
conceding the Wales wing, who has been told to rest for two weeks, may have 
been concussed after all: “At the time of the incident our medics, from the 
views that they could see and speaking to George, believed George was not 
concussed. On reviewing the other views they recognised that he was, or 
probably was, and therefore would have probably done things differently.”

The findings of the specially convened three-man panel will be fascinating and 
there could soon be calls for a wide-ranging inquest into Northampton’s 
underwhelming season. The game had barely started when a slick sequence of 
Leinster phases ended with Garry Ringrose racing in unopposed under the posts 
and, despite the premature loss of Joey Carbery, the luminous-shirted visitors 
made the black-clad Saints look horribly sluggish.

With Devin Toner, Tadhg Furlong, Jack McGrath, Sean O’Brien and Jamie Heaslip 
also lending a formidable edge up front and Rob Kearney imperious at the back, 
Northampton were thankful to be only 10-3 down at half-time and could hardly 
believe it when a nice long ball from J J Hanrahan released Ahsee Tuala to 
score wide on the right.

They reckoned without further Leinster tries from O’Brien, Rory O’Loughlin, 
Jamison Gibson-Park and Isa Nacewa, the last three following Hartley’s 
dismissal. In addition to letting down club and country, the hooker was also 
guilty of overshadowing Lancaster’s triumphant return to English rugby soil.

Northampton Foden; K Pisi, Burrell, Hanrahan (G Pisi, 65), Elliott (Tuala, 25; 
Kessell 65); Myler, Groom; A Waller (E Waller, 65), Haywood (Hartley, 52), Hill 
(Denman, 62), Paterson (Harrison, 57), Lawes, Gibson, Wood (capt; Haywood, 59), 
Picamoles (Ratuniyarawa, 57).

Try Tuala Con Myler Pen Myler.

Sent-off Hartley, 58 Sin-bin G Pisi, 78.

Leinster Kearney (O’Loughlin, 42); Byrne, Ringrose, Henshaw, Nacewa (capt); 
Carbery (Byrne, 15), L McGrath (Gibson-Park, 70); J McGrath (Healy, 58), Cronin 
(J Tracy, 58), Furlong, Toner, Triggs (Ruddock, 52), O’Brien, Van der Flier, 
Heaslip.

Tries Ringrose, O’Brien, O’Loughlin, Gibson-Park, Nacewa. Cons Nacewa 3 Pens 
Nacewa 2.

Referee J Garcès (Fr).
 