
Switzerland has won a case at the European court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> over its 
insistence that Muslim parents send their children to mixed-sex school swimming 
lessons.

The Strasbourg-based court ruled that Swiss authorities had not violated the 
right to freedom of religion by insisting that two Muslim parents send their 
daughters to mixed-sex swimming lessons.


In a unanimous ruling, seven ECHR judges decided that the children’s 
integration into “local customs and mores” took precedence over the parents’ 
desire to exempt their children from mixed-sex swimming lessons.


Two Swiss citizens of Turkish origin brought the case to the ECHR in 2012 
after a long-running dispute with national authorities.

The parents, who lived in Basel, had been fined €1,300 in 2010 (£1,130 at 2017 
rates) for “breach of their parental duty” over their refusal to send their 
young daughters to mixed-sex swimming classes. In their submission to the 
court, the parents argued their beliefs did not allow their children to take 
part in mixed-sex lessons.

Under Swiss law, children going through puberty may be granted an exemption 
from swimming lessons, but education officials told the parents at the time 
that their daughters did not yet qualify.


On Tuesday the ECHR upheld the decision of Switzerland’s federal court, noting 
that authorities had tried to make the lessons acceptable for the parents. The 
girls would have been allowed to wear burkinis during swimming lessons and get 
changed without any boys being present.


As a result the ECHR ruled that Swiss authorities had not broken article 9 of 
the European convention on human rights, which safeguards religious freedom.


In a written statement on the ruling 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng-press?i=003-5592122-7062572>, the ECHR said 
school played “a special role in the process of social integration, 
particularly where children of foreign origin were concerned”.


It added: “The children’s interest in attending swimming lessons was not just 
to learn to swim, but above all to take part in that activity with all the 
other pupils, with no exception on account of the children’s origin or their 
parents’ religious or philosophical convictions.”
 