
History shows it is almost impossible to fashion a successful international 
team from one club side. Warren Gatland began by picking the Ospreys en masse 
as his first Wales team and they won at Twickenham but in the long run the 
dynamic at Test level is so different and the demands on individuals and 
combinations so contrasting that one-club togetherness can be divisive on the 
grand stage.

That said, Saracens in general and seven of their number in particular – there 
are eight altogether in Eddie Jones’s England squad but Alex Goode was nursing 
a bump – played so well in the dispatch of Ulster that the case they presented 
before the national coach may prove irresistible. Saracens recovered from their
first defeat of the season against Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/harlequins-saracens-premiership-match-report>
 in the Premiership to lay Ulster low in Europe, score four tries and qualify 
for the quarter- finals with a game to spare.

For a team still chastised for being a little lacking in beauty, Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> are scoring for fun and are in 
credit to the tune of 136 points between their tally and what their wolf-pack 
defence leaks. To be abundant and stingy; Jones could not ask for much more.

Of the seven on view here, perhaps Chris Ashton on the wing may miss the 
England matchday team. His judgment of where the ball might be going remains as 
sound as ever and he is unselfish in possession. He gave a sweet pass in the 
buildup to the gliding break by Owen Farrell, who played with huge authority 
everywhere but off the tee, and the try for Duncan Taylor. It is just that when 
Ashton is caught in possession, his composure falters and England will not want 
to be going to Scotland with a question mark over their willingness to give 
everything to hang on to the ball.

Saracens maintain winning record with crushing defeat of Ulster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/saracens-ulster-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Maro Itoje is one of the newcomers to the England squad. It is easy to see 
what he does well: he eats up the ground with a loping gait, one that still 
leaves tacklers sprawling. He also played his part in a fully functioning 
lineout, the set piece that led to many driving mauls and tries for Billy 
Vunipola and himself, and the spectacular breakout by the replacement hooker 
Schalk Brits for the bonus-point fourth try.

The Vunipola brothers had fine outings too. Billy charged head down but also 
lifted it to see opportunities for neat little passes. Mako drove willingly 
too, in the loose and on the left side of the scrum. He used to play as a 
natural impact player off the bench; now he looks full of menace from kick-off 
to beyond the hour mark.

George Kruis does not look quite so natural as a ball-carrying second-row, but 
he was excellent at the lineout and elsewhere in the loose. Michael Rhodes, 
also raised in South Africa, was another who sold himself to the unspectacular 
– pinching ball at the lineout, hitting rucks and simply being a large presence 
in Ulster’s face.

Ulster had much to play for and in Stuart McCloskey they had the most 
forthright runner on the field. Not everything the centre tried by hand came 
off but on his legs he is proving hugely difficult to bring down. Just when the 
European game has to look beyond the bosh of Jamie Roberts and Mathieu 
Bastareaud, along comes a big beast from Bangor to remind us of the 
effectiveness of midfield power. McCloskey is not without deft touches either. 
When he sorts out his decision-making he will surely hear Ireland calling.

It was McCloskey’s run that set up the first try for Luke Marshall from a 
threaded kick by Jared Payne. Ulster scored the last try as well from an 
interception and gallop by Ian Humphreys but the hour in between belonged 
exclusively to Saracens, neat, compact, forceful and fleet of foot and tempo. 
One club in cracking form. There are less solid bases on which to build a 
national team.

Saracens Ransom (Hodgson, 61); Ashton, Bosch (Tompkins, 61), Taylor, Wyles; 
Farrell, Wigglesworth (De Kock, 61); M Vunipola (Barrington, 63), George (capt; 
Brits, 56), Du Plessis (Figallo, 56), Itoje, Kruis, Rhodes, Fraser (Wray, 63), 
B Vunipola.

Tries B Vunipola, Taylor, Itoje, Brits. Con Farrell. Pens Farrell 3.

Ulster Payne; Trimble, L Marshall (Scholes, 71), McCloskey, Gilroy; Jackson 
(Humphreys, 61), Pienaar (P Marshall, 75); McCall (Black, 75), Best (capt; 
Herring, 61), Herbst (Lutton, 35), O’Connor (Stevenson, 75), Van der Merwe 
(Ross, 66), Diack, Reidy, Wilson.

Tries L Marshall, Humphreys. Cons Jackson, Pienaar. Pens Jackson.

Referee J Garcès (Fr).  Attendance 9,642
 