
Sir Edward Elgar, president of the Musical League, speaking at a luncheon 
given by the Lord Mayor of Liverpool, said it was a curious paradox that the 
teaching of music was treated not as an art of sound, but as an art of sight.

For example, they were taught that consecutive fifths were wrong - they looked 
wrong (laughter); that was an art of sight. But they had grown through that.

Still a great deal had to be done. A great many people still went to concerts 
to look at the conductors when they ought to be listening. (Laughter.) That 
was, they treated music as out of sight. (Laughter.)

Some also went to look at the vocalists (renewed laughter).

The commercial side of music had always been a difficulty. They saw vast sums 
spent on worthless musical certificates, but until that sort of thing was 
cleared away, he did not think they could say that the art of music had been 
fairly treated, even by professors of music. He would like to see music treated 
purely as an art of sound.

They had to consider, in reviewing the commercial side, how far it was 
possible for serious music to remunerate the composer. They had only to 
consider the difficulty of getting any return for a serious orchestral work. It 
was almost impossible for a composer to get a return which would even keep him 
in bread and cheese. It was imperative from the composer's point of view that 
the people should be educated up to the point of appreciating their British 
composers (cheers).

He was not saying that everything that was produced deserved to be 
appreciated. There was a great deal of poverty in compositions as well as in 
English composers. Amongst English composers there had been very legitimate 
discontent.

There were hopes that a school of British music would be formedand that the 
British people would flock to hear the works of their own countrymen. 
(Applause.)

Curiously enough that had not always been the case. Recognition of some 
Englishmen had come from abroad first. The object of the Musical League was to 
give British composers as far as possible a dignified introduction to a large 
public. They had endeavoured in the League to produce what the committee 
thought the best work that had been sent in for the first festival. In choosing 
Liverpool it must not be supposed the League imagined that the city was in any 
need of musical regeneration.
 