
Elgin have promised a full investigation into the postponement of their Third 
Division game againstRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
following a board meeting on Saturday morning. The televised match, which was 
set to be played on Sunday lunchtime, was called off after too many tickets 
were sold.

Moray council, Grampian police and the Scottish Football League took the joint 
decision to postpone the fixture at Borough Briggs on safety grounds after it 
emerged that at least 1,100 extra tickets had been sold. Fans have been assured 
they will be given a refund but tickets issued for the game will not be valid 
for the rearranged date, which has yet to be announced.

A club statement read: "Following a meeting of the Elgin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/elgin> City board this morning, we can 
confirm that a full investigation into the over-sale of tickets for the 
postponed match against Rangers is ongoing. The club officials are working 
closely with Grampian police, the local authority and the Scottish Football 
League to establish the full facts in this matter.

"We would ask all fans to note that tickets issued for the game due to be 
played on Sunday 25 November will not be valid for the rescheduled date. The 
club advises that those holding tickets issued by Elgin City return these to 
the club for a full refund. Tickets purchased via Rangers FC for this match 
should contact the Rangers ticket office.

"Elgin City FC office will be open to refund tickets on Monday 26th and 
Tuesday 27th November during the hours of 12.30pm to 2.30pm and 6.30pm to 
8.30pm.

"The club are aware that not all fans will be able to attend at these times 
but would assure all ticket holders that the process will be ongoing during 
normal office hours until all monies have been refunded.

"New ticketing arrangements will be announced in due course once a rescheduled 
date has been announced by the Scottish Football League.

"Once again Elgin City Football Club wishes to apologise sincerely to all fans 
and the local community for the postponement of this game."
 