
The King is dead and there will be no replacement. Elvis Presley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley>, the founder, the greatest 
exponent, and the most passionate figure in rock and roll, died last night in 
the emergency ward of Memphis Baptist Hospital of "acute respiratory distress."

A hospital spokesman said Presley was found unconscious at his home by his 
road manager, Joe Esposito, who called the fire department ambulance. Ambulance 
personnel tried to resuscitate the singer as he was being rushed to hospital 
but Presley's personal physician, Dr George Nichopoulos, pronounced him dead.

Thus ended at the age of 42 the career of the man who recorded more than 400 
songs, who sold more than 260 million records and who will always embody not 
only rock and roll but the sudden explosion of young white affluence which 
created it. He received dozens of offers to perform in Britain but turned them 
all down.

Elvis Aaron Presley was born on January 8, 1935 in East Tupelo, Mississippi. 
His twin brother Jesse died at birth and his parents, Vernon and Gladys 
Presley, raised him in the kind of loving and religious poor white home which 
was the very essence of the deep south.

After winning several talent competitions as a child, working as a cinema 
usher and a truck driver, the job he always said he liked best. Elvis Presley 
met his first inspiration, Mr Sam Phillips, the owner of the Sun Record Company.

It was the early recordings of songs by black musicians that attracted the 
attention of Colonel Tom Parker, who was to become Presley's svengali, guiding 
his career and personal life with the object of making as much money as 
possible. Within a year of Col. Parker becoming his manager in November 1955, 
the young Presley had won his first six gold discs and an international 
reputation as the most dangerous thing to hit civilisation since the atom bomb.

US churchmen, politicians and Senate leaders railed against "Elvis the Pelvis" 
whose bucking hips and passionate rhythms on stage were sending shudders of 
sexual excitement through a whole continent of American girlhood via the new 
medium of television.

Worse than that, Presley had taken black songs, and a black style of 
aggressive presentation and sold this passionate music as a neat package 
wrapped in his acceptably white skin. Years before civil rights legislation, 
and while the Deep South was still segregated, Presley brought the black man's 
blues to the hearts and minds of a young America.

The songs that Presley spread around the world were hard driving, 
uncompromising celebrations of toughness or maudlin despair. Just as in his 
private life the young Presley regularly flattened the many men who challenged 
him to fight, and yet publicised his almost sickening devotion to his mother, 
so his songs were either masculine and hard like Jailhouse Rock or appallingly 
sentimental, like Heartbreak Hotel and Love Me Tender.

By 1958, Elvis Presley had achieved the kind of international fame which only 
John Kennedy and The Beatles were to rival. And then it all changed. On March 
24, 1958, he was conscripted into the US army.

His hair was cut, his back was straightened and the surly curl to his lip was 
replaced by a bright eye and a strong chin. The teenage monster had become a 
doughty defender of mom's apple pie.

He married Priscilla Beaulieu, the daughter of a US Air Force colonel in 1957 
after meeting her in West Germany while he was doing his military service. They 
had one daughter, Lisa Marie born in February 1968, but were divorced in 1973.

When Presley put on uniform and after his return, the guts and defiance went 
out of his music. He had many hit records with medium paced ballads like His 
Latest Flame and She's Not You and with very slow numbers like Are You Lonesome 
Tonight.

To the despair of his old fans, Elvis stopped rocking and started to make 
bland, commercial films which celebrated the wholesome girl-loving, patriotic 
decency of young America..

He was taken to hospital several times because of weight problems, and as his 
weight increased, his public appearances became more infrequent. Sources close 
to the Presley routine said he has recently been a heavy cocaine user.

As if to show he could still do it, his records still crept into the charts 
and in 1969, one of them, In the Ghetto, seemed to echo his old passions and to 
pay a debt to the black roots of his music.
 