
Don't call it a comeback. Mainly because most of them never went away, partly 
because it would be trite, but mostly because it would imply a desperation 
absent from the new albums from the one-time queens of the electroclash scene: 
DJ Hell, Fischerspooner, Peaches, Tiga, Miss Kittin & The Hacker.

Oft-derided, even in its 2002 heyday, no one expected electroclash to last. 
But, just as sonic heirs such as La Roux or Little Boots capitalise on their 
groundwork, the old electro guard return with works of real solidity and depth. 
Hell's Teufelswerk and Fischerspooner's Entertainment are two of the finest 
electronic records you will hear this year.

For Fischerspooner's Casey Spooner, there is a simple explanation for this 
late flowering of the duo's potential. What had started in the late-90s as a 
part-time art project - a reaction to the millennial paranoia gripping New York 
("If I was going to die," recalls Casey, "I wanted to go down in a jockstrap 
and glitter") - was still as sketchy four years later when Ministry Of Sound 
signed them for £1m. "There was no strategy," he says. "I was doing everything 
from my bedroom."

Their first album, #1, was hastily cobbled together, while their second, 
Odyssey, was a major-label funded whirlwind that saw them working with everyone 
from Susan Sontag to that lamentable hit machine, Linda Perry (Pink, James 
Blunt etc). Entertainment is their first album recorded in one studio, with one 
producer. It shows.

Likewise, Tiga's Ciao! is a huge improvement on his last patchy effort, Sexor. 
"When I did my first album, I had a few big club tracks, like Pleasure From The 
Bass, and I was like, 'OK, I'm gonna make an album,'" says the Canadian. "What 
that actually meant I didn't even know."

Electroclash was deemed to have failed because it didn't produce crossover 
stars, but its influence - what Bugged Out! promoter John Burgess has described 
as "the most important thing to happen to clubs since acid house" - was 
profound. It transformed everything from the way Topshop looked to the way 
mainstream dance music sounded, and paved the way for artists and scenes as 
diverse as MIA and MGMT, new rave and minimal techno.

Electroclash veterans should be hailed as pioneers, but the whole concept 
remains a hard, contradictory sell. On the one hand it was a radical scene: 
feminist, sexually provocative, well-read, left-leaning (there's a political 
subtext to Entertainment) and DIY. On the other, it was a superficial movement, 
obsessed with fashion and glamour.

In new tracks, Shoes and Luxury, Tiga hands his critics a loaded gun. "Yes, I 
obsess over shoes, but, importantly, I don't think that, and being a 
functional, emotional, thoughtful artist, are mutually exclusive."

It's an opinion. And music needs those. The scene is dead but electroclash's 
stars still twinkle mischievously.

• Fischerspooner play the Coronet Theatre, SE1, Fri; Entertainment is out on 4 
May; Ciao! is out 11 May
 