
Lines of people from women holding babies to school age children, with a hand 
held up to show they’re for hire, are a ubiquitous sight on the Indonesian 
capital’s busiest roads during rush hour.

But not this week. Traffic-clogged Jakarta plans to suspend its peak-time rule 
of three people to one car from Tuesday. And the passengers for hire, known as 
jockeys, who helped drivers cheat the traffic controls, will be out of a job.

Indonesian government threatens to deport Leonardo DiCaprio for palm oil 
criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/01/indonesian-government-threatens-to-deport-leonardo-dicaprio-palm-oil-industry-criticism>
By lifting the 3-in-1 rule, city authorities will be testing what happens to 
congestion. If there’s no difference to the number of cars on the road, they’ll 
know that a system in place for more than a decade is broken.

Abandoning the policy will be bad news for the poor in a city where maddening 
traffic produces numerous novel ways to eke out a living. Apart from jockeys, 
there are self-appointed U-turn police and parking wardens who are tipped by 
drivers despite sometimes hindering more than helping.

“I want the authorities to extend the 3-in-1,” said Muhammad Asmin, a 
27-year-old who dropped out of school to become a jockey more than a decade ago 
to earn money for his family. “It is good for us, the poor, even if it’s not 
working,” said Asmin, who earns up to $15 a day by hopping in and out of cars.

Jakarta is the world’s most congested city, according to a study of how often 
vehicles brake during a commute. Officials estimate Jakarta’s traffic jams 
cause economic losses of about $3bn a year.

The 3-in-1 rule was introduced in 2003 and the jockeys appeared soon after. 
Since then, the traffic has only worsened, mainly because more Indonesians can 
afford cars, which has overwhelmed a road network that has hardly grown. The 
car-pooling policy has a particularly bad image since it’s widely regarded as 
ineffective and also involves children, who take huge risks by getting into the 
vehicles of strangers.

“We have been blamed for worsening the gridlock but the government didn’t 
provide sufficient jobs for us,” said Alfa Wahyudi, a 21-year-old who came to 
Jakarta from Borneo six months ago. “Don’t blame our presence if the government 
is unable to provide us jobs.”

The convenience of travelling on a 3-in-1 road is such that some drivers have 
arrangements with two or three regular jockeys.

Repeated crackdowns on the jockeys, who quickly scatter into side streets at 
the sight of police, failed to wipe out the profession. If caught, they are 
taken to a detention center for a couple of weeks and asked to sign a letter 
promising not to work as a jockey again. But many say they return to the 
roadside as soon as they can.

Wulandri, who was twice caught and sent to a detention centre, said it was no 
deterrent compared with the $10 she could easily make in a day.

As the mother of a one-year old boy, she was popular with drivers because it 
meant they could get two passengers for the price of one.

“I purposely brought my child because usually a single driver does not have to 
pay for two jockeys and they are often sorry for the woman who was carrying a 
baby,” she said.
 