
The England Women’s head coach, Simon Middleton, has included four new caps in 
his 33-player squad for the Six Nations, which begins on 4 February.

Bianca Blackburn, Lark Davies, Heather Kerr and Leanne Riley have all been 
called up for the series as Middleton aims to fill holes caused by the injury 
absences of Claire Allan, Emily Braund and Abbie Scott while the hooker Emma 
Croker retired at the end of last season.

Related: Rochelle Clark: ‘It’s still burning strong. I eat, sleep and breathe 
rugby’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/08/rochelle-clark-jason-leonard-england-france-record>

The second row Tamara Taylor will be hoping for her 100th cap during the 
tournament and goes into the Six Nations two shy of the landmark, while Amber 
Reed and Sarah McKenna return to the squad after injury absences.

Middleton said: “There is strength and depth in this squad and, while we will 
be taking one week at a time and working to build through the tournament, our 
ambition is to win the Six Nations trophy.

“This is a huge year and we now have a squad training full-time. Our 
preparation is based around a world-class programme and the Six Nations forms a 
key milestone ahead of the Women’s Rugby World Cup in August.”

England will open their campaign against France at Twickenham following the 
men’s first Six Nations Championship match, before taking on Cardiff in Wales 
on 11 February. They will play twice at Twickenham Stoop, against Italy on 
25 February and then Scotland on 11 March, before finishing off their campaign 
against the 2017 Women’s World Cup hosts Ireland on 17 March.

For the first time all five England Women’s Six Nations games will be 
broadcast on Sky Sports as part of a move by the Six Nations council to ensure 
each country’s women’s matches are available live either on television or 
streamed online.

Ian Ritchie, the RFU’s chief executive, said: “This commitment from Sky Sports 
reflects what an exciting time it is for women’s rugby and the ongoing growth 
of the game.”

England women’s squad

Forwards Z Aldcroft (Darlington), S Bern (Bristol), R Clark (Worcester), P 
Cleall (Bristol), A Cokayne (Lichfield), V Cornborough (Aylesford), L Davies 
(Worcester), V Fleetwood (Saracens), S Hunter (Bristol), L Keates (Worcester), 
H Kerr (Darlington) J Lucas (Lichfield), A Matthews (Richmond), H Millar-Mills 
(Lichfield), I Noel-Smith (Bristol), M Packer (Bristol), T Taylor (Darlington).
BacksB Blackburn (Worcester), R Burford (Aylesford), N Hunt (Lichfield), M 
Jones (Bristol), LT Mason (Darlington), S McKenna (Saracens), K Mclean 
(Darlington), F Pocock (Aylesford), A Reed (Bristol), L Riley (Aylesford), E 
Scarratt (Lichfield), E Scott (Saracens), L Thompson (Worcester), D Waterman 
(Bristol), K Wilson (Richmond), A Wilson Hardy (Bristol).
 