
England moved beyond the pale of criticism for the moment and into the annals 
of history by winning the Grand Slam with a ruthlessly methodical victory over 
France at rainswept Twickenham. At a stroke Will Carling's men not only 
banished the bitter disappointment of previous championships but blasted out a 
warning that they are ready to take on all comers in the World Cup next autumn.

No England side surely have pursued the Holy Grail of a Slam with such 
ambition, and almost certainly no English pack has swept aside the opposition 
with such a potent sense of collective rigour. Despite scoring three tries to 
one the French rightly insisted that England were worthy champions if only 
because their forwards exerted awesome pressure throughout 83 minutes.

If England supplied the consistent power that wins matches, France displayed 
the breathtaking audacity, the sheer brio that prompts spectators to leap out 
of their seats in acclamation. While this absorbing contest was not quite a 
classic, France 's skilful backs reminded us time and again that no coaching 
strategy can legislate for moments of outrageous genius.

The immediate question raised by England 's hard-won success is whether they 
have the resources to establish a lengthy period of ascendancy such as France 
have achieved in Europe, and New Zealand across the world. Carling's side may 
indeed go far in the World Cup, but it remains to be seen to what extent the 
structure and depth of the English game will stand up to the international 
demands of the 1990s. The going can only get harder.

Certainly England 's recent disturbing defeats by both Ireland and France at B 
level indicate that props, locks, half-backs and wings of true international 
calibre are not falling out of the trees. Ironically England have developed a 
highly responsive management and coaching set-up tailored to produce consistent 
success but they must find the raw material to make the system work. For the 
moment Geoff Cooke, the manager, can contemplate England 's forthcoming summer 
tour of Australia and Fiji with solid confidence, even a hint of arrogance, 
after winning six successive matches within the past six months. During that 
period the England squad have done well to keep their minds focused squarely on 
rugby in face of the turmoil and confusion created by the revised amateur 
regulations a matter due to be discussed by the International Board this week.

The pressures on Carling, on and off the field, have been without precedent, 
but the England captain, still only 25, has acquired a mantle of practical 
wisdom that comes only from tough and at times painful experience. Equally 
pleasingly, Simon Hodgkinson who unaccountably missed two penalties in front of 
the posts on Saturday has enhanced his reputation as one of the world's leading 
goalkickers, overhauling Jean-Patrick Lescarboura's 54 points and creating a 
championship record of 60.

England 's impressive esprit de corps has created a positive context within 
which other talented personalities have flourished. Rory Underwood demonstrated 
that he is probably the greatest finisher in the modern game with his 27th try 
in a record-equalling 43 matches for his country. Rob Andrew gave further 
evidence that he has few rivals in the art of tactical kicking designed to fray 
the nerves of France 's wings and their full-back Serge Blanco.

Blanco it was who marked his last championship match by initiating the most 
daring try many old hands could recall ever having seen in the competition. Not 
even Gareth Edwards's legendary score for the Barbarians against the All Blacks 
in 1973 had the breathtaking quality that enabled Saint-Andre to touch down 
between the posts after Lafond, Sella and Camberabero had brilliantly 
outmanoeuvred the English defence in an 80-yard sortie down the right flank.

As it happened Blanco's creative influence waned perceptively as the afternoon 
wore on and rain made conditions more treacherous though the French captain did 
muster sufficient pace and vision to inspire another unnerving try by Mesnel in 
the last minute of normal time. A smooth shimmy, a crisp pass to his old 
confrere Sella, and suddenly Mesnel was ghosting past Hill on the left flank to 
score at the flag. Midway through the second half Camberabero who proved he is 
a great deal more than a kicking fly-half had revived French hopes with a 
cleverly timed chip-and-chase that caught both Carling and Richards on the hop 
in the right corner, pulling the score back to 18-13. England had failed to get 
a single point on the board since before the break, and it was starting to look 
as though France 's magical counter-attacks might yet prevail.

However, France 's fatal inability to force set pieces inside the England 22 
condemned their play-makers to the task of making bricks with virtually no 
straw. In contrast England regularly hammered France into acts of indiscipline 
in ruck and maul which accounted for Hodgkinson's haul of four penalty goals. 
Andrew also weighed in with an early dropped goal that levelled the scores at 
6-6.

In effect England took the match beyond France 's reach late in the first 
half, scoring nine points in a four-minute period that exposed the game's 
superficial veneer of parity. From a maul in front of the posts Hill swept the 
ball through three pairs of hands to the eager Underwood, who left Lafond for 
dead and scored in the left corner. Hodgkinson, who gave the scoring pass, 
kicked a magnificent conversion and then landed a penalty goal from the right 
touchline to put his side 18-9 in front.

One could only admire France 's tenacity, in addition to their flair, in 
outscoring England 10-3 after the break despite having virtually no good 
possession to work with. They were unfortunate that Camberabero missed a series 
of penalties, just one of which would have clinched victory. England 's relief 
at the final whistle was like the dead weight of a decade suddenly lifting.

SCORERS: England : Try: Underwood. Conversion: Hodgkinson. Penalties: 
Hodgkinson 4. Drop goal: Andrew.

France : Tries: Saint-Andre, Camberabero, Mesnel. Conversions: Camberabero 2. 
Penalty: Camberabero.

ENGLAND : S Hodgkinson (Nottingham) N Heslop (Orrell), W Carling (Harlequins, 
capt), J Guscott (Bath), R Underwood (Leicester) R Andrew (Wasps), R Hill 
(Bath) J Leonard (Harlequins), B Moore (Harlequins), J Probyn (Wasps), W Dooley 
(Preston Grasshoppers), P Ackford (Harlequins), M Teague (Gloucester), D 
Richards (Leicester), P Winterbottom (Harlequins).

FRANCE : S Blanco (Biarritz, capt) J-B Lafond (Racing), P Sella (Agen), F 
Mesnel (Racing), P Saint-Andre (Montferrand) D Camberabero (Beziers), P 
Berbizier (Agen) G Lascube (Agen), P Marocco (Montferrand), P Ondarts 
(Biarritz), M Tachdjian (Racing M Cecillon, Bourgoin, 54min), O Roumat (Dax), X 
Blond (Racing), A Benazzi (Agen), L Cabannes (Racing).

Referee: L Peard (Wales).
 