
England beat South Africa 19-17 in Cape Town to win the second round of the 
2016-17 World Rugby Sevens Series after Justin Geduld missed a conversion for 
the hosts with the last kick of the final.

Chris Dry got the Blitzboks off to a flyer, finishing off a fine move from 
halfway to touch down in the corner. Branco du Preez missed the conversion. 
England hit back through Richard de Carpentier, who covered half the pitch to 
score under the posts. Tom Mitchell’s conversion gave England a 7-5 lead.

Dan Norton then touched down out wide for his 225th career try as Simon Amor’s 
men extended their lead before Rosko Specman put the hosts back on level terms 
early in the second period. England replied through Ruaridh McConnochie’s try 
after pressure had helped to free up space on the left. Mitchell extended his 
side’s lead with the extras.

But a yellow card for Norton for a high tackle gave South Africa a one-man 
advantage with 15 seconds remaining and Werner Kok took full advantage with a 
late try. But Geduld failed to level things up with the kick, which would have 
forced extra time.

Mitchell, the England captain, said: “It’s been a hell of a tough tournament. 
I am so proud of the boys. It was an amazing effort, . We trained so hard over 
the summer and this moment makes it all worth it.”

England had beaten Fiji 31-26 in the quarter-finals and Scotland 33-14 in the 
semi-finals; South Africa earned a 14-7 victory over New Zealand to reach the 
final.

Global contract negotiator Michael Cheika remains key to Wallabies recovery | 
Rajiv Maharaj
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/global-contract-negotiator-michael-cheika-remains-key-to-wallabies-recovery>
Australia completed a disappointing tournament by losing 21-17 to Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> in the consolation semi-finals.

Australia started the day with a 42-12 win over Uganda but failed to apply 
critical pressure against the South Americans when they had the advantage.

Andy Friend, the coach, said “We made too many simple errors in our game 
against Argentina. When we should be showing composure, we’re not. We are not 
working together as a unit at the moment which is disappointing.

“We said at the start of this year that we wanted to make the quarter-finals 
of every tournament. We didn’t make this one, therefore it is unacceptable.” 
Australia’s suffered big defeats to the US and South Africa on the first day of 
the tournament.
 