
England can open the bubbly to wash away the bitter taste of slam pain. For 
the first time since 2003, they secured a clean sweep of the Six Nations, 
eventually subduing a fired-up but flawed France six months after enduring the 
ignominy of becoming the first World Cup hoststo fall before the knockout stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
.

England’s Eddie Jones hails ‘fantastic’ grand slam winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-eddie-jones-fantastic-grand-slam-winners>
The transformation said something about the mediocrity of the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations>, but England were, by some way, 
the stand-out team in the tournament. Areas of weakness in the World Cup, not 
least the set pieces, the breakdown and composure under pressure, have become 
strengths this year, together with nous. The way they disarmed Ireland and 
Wales, the two teams who had condemned them to second place in the Stuart 
Lancaster era, highlighted a difference made by the head coach Eddie Jones and 
here they minimised their stress in the second half by destroying France’s 
lineout and plundering the home side’s ruck ball.

France started strongly, mauling powerfully and stretching England’s defence, 
not least when the wing Virimi Vakatawa was in possession, which was too often 
for the comfort of his opposite number Jack Nowell, who came to realise what it 
must have been like to confront Jonah Lomu, but at the point when they looked 
to test England’s nerve in the second half when they trailed by less than a 
converted try, George Kruis would steal a lineout, Maro Itoje would force a 
turnover and George Ford would sendLes Bleus deep back into their own half.

There were periods during the World Cup when England looked leaderless, not 
least the points in the matches against Wales and Australia, briefly in the 
case of the latter, when the game was in the balance. Heads went, but here, 
even when Dylan Hartley was taken off on a stretcher 12 minutes from the end 
after his head took the force of the 24st prop Uini Atonio, leaders abounded. 
The international arena is more sterile in the professional era, far less prone 
to emotional oscillations, but England’s was a victory for inexperience, with 
most of the players on the field at the end in junior school when the grand 
slam was last secured.

France did their utmost to thwart England, who had been denied on four of the 
five previous occasions in the Six Nations they had gone into the final round 
in search of the slam, but they trailed for the most part after taking an early 
lead through the boot of Maxime Machenaud when he kicked the first of his seven 
penalties. They created openings, largely through the rampaging Vakatawa, and 
their handling, if not their passing, was more sure than it had been in 
Scotland the previous week, but when they did put it together they found 
England’s defence impregnable.

France 21-31 England: how the Six Nations players in Paris rated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/france-england-player-ratings-six-nations>
Two minutes into the second half, when England led 17-12, Vakatawa was bound 
for the line when Nowell, who had earlier been trampled over, hauled down the 
wing, who slipped an inside pass to the flanker Bernard Le Roux. As he sighted 
the line, he was hauled down by Chris Robshaw and the return for their most 
threatening attack of the match was another Machenaud penalty.

France could not find a weak spot but England detected several. They settled 
themselves in a six-minute spell in the first half when they scored two tries. 
The first was a solo Danny Care effort after France had wasted a period of 
pressure by sealing off at the breakdown: Billy Vunipola won the lineout from 
the resulting penalty and when Care spotted that one side of the breakdown was 
being poorly policed by the prop Jefferson Poirot, he accelerated through the 
gap and carried on for 40 metres to the line.

Six minutes later, after Vunipola had been heavily involved in a multi-phase 
movement, Dan Cole, who the previous week at Twickenham had denied himself a 
try when he touched the ball down on his arm, rolled out of Scott Spedding’s 
tackle and over the line. France had had more of the ball but there is a 
simplicity to England’s game under Jones, an uncomplicated approach that allows 
of them to offset a lack of a gain line breaker in midfield by creating the 
space to pass the ball quickly and slickly across the back line.

The game became a reversal of stereotypes, England threatening with the ball 
in hand and France staying in touch with penalties. It was not that long ago 
that Owen Farrell having one of his more wasteful games from the tee, missing 
two kicks, would have hurt England, but he has come this year to add to the 
winning margin.

Eddie Jones’ revolution: how he led England to Six Nations grand slam | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/19/eddie-jones-revolution-england-six-nations-grand-slam>
England’s third try highlighted a difference between the sides, the 
replacement scrum-half Ben Youngs replicating the opportunism of Care by 
spotting space at the side of a ruck, splitting the defence and weighting his 
chip to the line perfectly for Anthony Watson, who along with Nowell had been 
liberally supplied withy the ball all night, to pick up and score.

At that point, with 25 minutes to go, England led 25-18 and France looked set 
to topple, having been mugged for a third time. The crowd kept them going and 
England needed the lineout craft of Kruis and Itoje together with a collective 
desire at the breakdown that saw Mike Brown and Farrell make key turnovers to 
keep the French out of England’s 22.

England enjoyed moments of fortune: Farrell’s third penalty, which took his 
side to 28-21 with nine minutes to go, came after a blatantly forward pass had 
been missed; there seemed to be some obstruction in the buildup to Cole’s try 
and when Xavier Chiocci was sent to the sin-bin four minutes from time for 
collapsing a maul, the penalty count was 16-8 against England, who had avoided 
a yellow card despite some wilful slowing down of possession.

That itself showed how much smarter they have become under Jones. They may 
have wobbled a bit in the opening period but they never looked like falling 
down. They will mature with age when the bigger tests will come. Winning the 
championship is not what it used to be but it is better than failure.

France 21-31 England: England win the Six Nations grand slam – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/19/france-v-england-six-nations-live>
France Spedding; Fofana, Fickou, Mermoz (Médard 69), Vakatawa; Trinh-Duc 
(Plisson 13), Machenaud (Bézy 75); Poirot (Atonio 58), Guirado (Chat 66), 
Slimani (Chiocci 57), Flanquart (Jedrasiak 57), Maestri, Chouly, Le Roux, 
Goujon (Lauret 69).Pens Machenaud 7. Sin-bin Chiocci (76).

England Brown; Watson, Joseph, Farrell, Nowell; Ford, Care (Youngs 44); M 
Vunipola (Marler 41), Hartley (Cowan-Dickie 67), Cole, Itoje, Kruis, Robshaw 
(Clifford 75), Haskell, B Vunipola.Tries Care, Cole, Watson. Cons Farrell 2. 
PensFarrell 4.

Referee Nigel Owens (Wales). Attendance 80,000.
 