
Chris Robshaw is confident he will get onside with the referee, Jérôme Garcès, 
at the Millennium Stadium on Friday night, two years after he failed to 
establish any sort of rapport with Steve Walsh as England were penalised time 
and again at the scrum and breakdown on their wayto a record defeat against 
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/16/wales-england-six-nations>.

The Wales head coach, Warren Gatland, who was then on sabbatical as he 
prepared for the Lions tour to Australia, cited the relationshipSam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> struck up with the New 
Zealander Walsh that evening as a reason behind the decision to give him the 
armband for the Lions series against the Wallabies, even though he was not 
leading the men in red having just returned from injury. Robshaw did not even 
make the Lions squad.

Walsh, who had previous with England, barely allowed Robshaw to get a word in 
but Warburton, in contrast, was able to get an explanation from the referee 
after being penalised at a ruck and was not waved away when he laboured the 
point. “Sam has the ability to speak to referees and there are only two or 
three players in the world they would allow to talk to them like that,” said 
Gatland after naming his Lions squad.

Robshaw appreciates that, if England are to get their Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> campaign off to a successful 
start having fallen at the first hurdle in Paris a year ago, he will need to 
establish a relationship with Garcès on a night when the crowd will be noisily 
behind the home side and putting pressure on the referee.

“How you get on as a captain with the referee is a factor but I do not think 
it is the main one in terms of what happened two years ago,” said the England 
captain.

“Our scrum that day was perceived not to have gone as well as we would have 
liked and when you have been pinged four times for not rolling away and you are 
appealing about something they have done, the referee is probably not going to 
listen to you.

“Jérôme Garcès is a great referee who communicates clearly in fluent English 
and gives honest feedback. If you approach him, he will allow you to speak to 
him at the right moment. He refereed our last international, against Australia, 
and we have had him a few times at Harlequins. I always analyse my interaction 
with referees and it’s about doing things at the right time.”

Warburton will be leading Wales, a post he has held for nearly four years 
despite relinquishing it briefly to Gethin Jenkins after coming back from 
injury in 2013, on an occasion when he will win his 50th cap. When England 
speak about what happened in Cardiff two years ago – and it is not a subject 
they appreciate being brought up – they all refer to the atmosphere at the 
ground that night, which even for those who had been there before was something 
they had never encountered.

“The Millennium Stadium is one of the loudest places I have been to, up there 
with Ellis Park,” said Robshaw. “If the crowd is up, 50-50 calls might go 
against you. The coaches put us under duress and fatigue last week to make sure 
we can handle the pressure, intensity and hostility we will face on Friday. We 
must go down there and not be shocked by anything. It will be about having 
clarity and shape from the first minute to the last and being able to take 
opportunities when they arise.”

The two sides will meet in the pool stages of the World Cup at Twickenham 
later in the year, but no one from either camp is dwelling on that. England and 
Wales form one of the oldest rivalries in the game and, if victory tends to be 
celebrated more raucously west of the Severn Bridge, Robshaw’s men are resolved 
to make up for what happened in 2013.

“Having the biggest loss to Wales on your CV is never a nice one to have,” 
said the 28-year-old. “When you suffer a defeat like that, it is about how you 
bounce back. It was a bad time but we did not dip, continuing to move forward. 
We are in a better place now, having come a long way, and, even with a few guys 
missing, every time we meet up we seem to be better than we were before.

“The guys definitely know the structures better, the lineout moves, the plays, 
the patterns, the cohesion between different parts. The understanding is there 
under adversity. I do not know for sure if we were naive or off our guard last 
time in Cardiff but we have to do our basics well on Friday because it will be 
about who thinks the clearest in the heat of the moment.”
 