
Welcome to the month of November when half the world’s planes seem to be 
stuffed with rugby players. Most have no choice if they wish to pursue their 
chosen trade. Ireland and New Zealand are in Chicago this week while Australia 
and South Africa are in London. Fiji are training in Toulouse, with England 
opting for a short warm-weather break in Portugal. There are almost as many 
gumshields passing through departure lounges as giant Toblerones.

There is good reason for this hyperactivity. The game is increasingly global 
and spreading the gospel can be lucrative. The All Blacks are not in the States 
purely for the fresh Illinois air and Argentina did not stage their Rugby 
Championship Testagainst Australia at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/argentina-australia-rugby-championship-match-report>
 last month because of the local tango-dancing scene. Beyond the financial 
inducements, though, there are additional benefits: a change of scene can 
eradicate staleness and complacency and create unexpected new friendships.

Eddie Jones warns George Ford that Toulon move would end England career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/eddie-jones-george-ford-toulon-england>
Last season’s Top 14 final in Barcelona was a case in point. It was shifted to 
Catalonia only because French stadiums were being used for the European 
football championship but the staggering attendance and vivid atmosphere made 
every continental administrator sit up and take notice. Spain also performed 
creditably at theOlympic sevens tournament in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/the-olympic-games-and-rugby-sevens-a-match-made-in-heaven>
: could there be a whole new Iberian audience out there waiting to be enticed, 
if only occasionally, from their round-ball obsession?

Which brings us back, not for the first time, to the Rugby Football Union’s 
narrower horizons. Bumping into English squad players on red-eye flights to a 
Portugal training camp on Monday morning was a culture shock simply because it 
happens so rarely. Aside from one short hop across the Irish Sea to Dublin next 
March, this is the only time the majority of England’s senior squad will have 
to board a flight on international business between now and next June. With 
just about everything the RFU organises occurring in the home counties, a valid 
driving licence and an Oyster card are pretty much the only requirements.

Once again all four internationals in this autumn’s Old Mutual Wealth series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/29/autumn-internationals-home-nations-england-wales-ireland-scotland>
 will take place at Twickenham on successive Saturdays. Only a few hundred 
unsold tickets remain so, financially, the schedule stacks up nicely. Four 
80,000-plus attendances, in addition to all the associated corporate 
hospitality benefits and huge bar profits, will clearly swell the coffers more 
than taking the odd home Test fixture out on the road.

But hang on. This is a union which has just posted revenues of £407.1m, with 
record profits for rugby investment of £102.3m. Admittedly a large chunk of 
that was a consequence of staging the 2015 World Cup but the RFU is far 
wealthier than any other union. Where it has been less obviously successful is 
in raising the profile of rugby union in the north of England,a recurring issue 
that does little to promote the 15-a-side code as a truly national sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/06/rugby-union-twickenham-manchester-world-cup-2015>
.

It can be easy, and somewhat misleading, to dismiss English rugby league as a 
game played in just a few northern counties. But what about the latest England 
senior rugby union team? BeforeJosh Beaumont was called in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/courtney-lawes-injury-england-south-africa>
 as an injury replacement, only one member of the 33-strong training squad 
currently plays for a northern club. Sale’s Mike Haley is that rarest of 
comets, a northern resident who has caught Twickenham’s attention. None of the 
other 32 live north of Leicestershire. Before last autumn’s dead rubber against 
Uruguay, England had hosted one full international in Manchester since 1897.

With Ian Ritchie as chief executive and another northerner, Andy Cosslett, 
recently sworn in as the RFU’s new chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/mar/21/rfu-appoint-andrew-cosslett-chairman>
, it is not as if there is a lack of appreciation inside Twickenham that the 
world does not stop at Watford Gap services. When the Guardian made discreet 
inquiries last week it was told there remains a continuing desire for 
representative teams to play at northern venues but, crucially, not the senior 
XV.

It is not good enough. Where would English football be without strong northern 
clubs? How insular would English cricket look if it did not stage a single Test 
or one-day international north of the River Trent? How does English rugby union 
plan to enthuse youngsters and their families from Lancashire, Yorkshire and 
Cumbria if it gives league a largely unopposed head start? Is it entirely a 
coincidence that northern lads – Chris Ashton, Sam Burgess, David Strettle – 
seem increasingly more comfortable with the idea of playing abroad than 
sticking around in English union. Or that the two main northern cogs in 
England’s backline – Owen Farrell and George Ford – gravitated towards union 
largely because their fathers took coaching jobs down south? Tommy Taylor and 
Danny Care bring the total number of northern-born players currently in 
Portugal to a measly half dozen.

Sam Warburton: ‘You watch Sky with everyone else to see if you’re in Lions 
squad’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/sam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand>
Maybe it is idealistic to think that playing a Test match against Fiji – or 
Australia come to that – in Leeds or Manchester would directly assist England 
in winning the 2023 and 2027 World Cups. Maybe the RFU’s profits would be 
affected. Maybe it would be less convenient for Eddie Jones to train his 
players beside the seaside in Blackpool or Bridlington than in Brighton or 
Brown’s sporting academy in Portugal. But New Zealand train and play at venues 
all around their country and it does not hinder their national team – the 
opposite, in fact. Sticking to convention and doing what you always do is no 
way to run or grow a sport, let alone deliver a truly national side. England do 
not even have to board a plane to locate fresh new frontiers.

Get shirty

The 2017 British and Irish Lions jersey is being unveiled this week, still a 
must-have garment for all professional players in the four home unions. Not 
every strip seen this season falls into that category: will many players 
reminisce nostalgically about the days they wore the dull grey away strip of 
Bath or the hi-vis green stewards’ outfits currently sported by Leicester on 
their travels? Or those shorts with a sponsor’s name plastered across the 
players’ backsides? It was a marketing wheeze but New Zealand’s deliberately 
blacker-than-black kit – with accompanying socks and dark boots to match – was 
at least more visually striking and aesthetically appealing. Compare and 
contrast with the latest blue change kit set to be worn by England against Fiji 
a fortnight on Saturday. Both are manufactured by Canterbury but only one will 
stand the test of time.

And another thing …

Congratulations are due to Zebre for achieving their first victory in six 
attempts in this season’s Pro12 last Friday night in Edinburgh. It is not 
always easy to discern shafts of optimism in Italian provincial rugby and this 
year’s European Champions’ Cup results to date have been grim. Good luck, then, 
to Conor O’Shea, Italy’s new national coach, and his assistant Mike Catt as 
they prepare to face New Zealand, South Africa and Tonga in their first home 
Tests in charge of theAzzurri. If the Italian patient can be resuscitated on 
their watch, it will be a colossal achievement worthy of worldwide acclaim.
 