
Billy Vunipola is in danger of missing England’s entire Six Nations campaign 
after undergoing an operation to repair a torn knee cartilage he suffered 
during histeam’s eventful 27-14 win against A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
rgentina. The Saracens No8 faces three to four months on the sidelines and will 
be conspicuous by his absence against Australia this weekend.

Autumn internationals: five talking points after England’s win over Argentina 
| Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/autumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina>
Vunipola was hurt in the first half of the game on Saturday and, according to 
an England statement, will be out for “at least 12 weeks”. The 24-year-old has 
been England’s dominant forward this season and will be a significant loss to 
both club and country. “He’s a very influential player and there’s no doubt 
he’ll be missed for the game against Australia,” the head coach, Eddie Jones, 
said.

There will now be pressure on Vunipola to demonstrate his return to full 
fitness before the announcement of the British and Irish Lions squad in 
mid-April. Jones, in the shorter term, must now reshuffle his pack to tackle 
the Wallabies as England chase a record-equalling 14th successive Test victory.

Sale’s Josh Beaumont has been called up along with Harlequins’ Jack Clifford, 
though the latter is doubtful after being knocked out in a club game yesterday.

With Elliot Daly also facing a disciplinary hearing on Monday following his 
red card against the Pumas, a wing recall awaits either Bath’s Semesa 
Rokoduguni or Quins’ Marland Yarde.

Jones has reopened old wounds by requesting a meeting with South African 
referee Jaco Peyper to discuss Australia’s “illegal” scrummaging before the 
Test against the Wallabies.

“We want the referee to know they do things illegally,” Jones said. “I’m not 
going to tell you what’s wrong with them but they are a heavily penalised 
scrum. They need to sort that out before the game.”

With England’s scrum showing signs of improvement there is obvious mileage in 
inviting Peyper to focus on Australia’s set‑piece work. Jones has also 
reiterated his belief that insufficient respect was shown to England by his 
compatriots during the June tour of Australia. “The game’s built around 
traditions of respect and I think you should be respectful,” Jones said. 
“That’s why the game of rugby continues to grow and when you’re disrespectful 
to the game the game falters. You can’t afford to do that. We’ve all got a part 
to play: players, coaches, fans, media, sponsors. I’m serious about it.”

The Australia lock forward Dean Mumm, however, says his side will be taking 
Jones’s words with a hefty pinch of salt. “I’m sure Eddie’s up to his regular 
tricks but it’s kind of irrelevant to what we want to do,” Mumm said. “We’re 
not going out there and playing Eddie Jones we’re going out there and playing 
England.”

A home win would not just equal England’s previous longest sequence of 
successive wins but allow England to complete a calendar year unbeaten for the 
first time in 24 years. Jones, though, is only concerned about his side 
enhancing their 2019 World Cup prospects: “We don’t need to talk about records. 
All we need to think about is playing well.”

A home win would allow England to complete a calendar year unbeaten for the 
first time in 24 years.
 