
England were knocked out of the World Cup yesterday morning in a manner that 
mystified those connected with the team. They will arrive home tonight perhaps 
still dazed as they appeared to be during this quarter-final defeat.

However, victory for Wales in this uninspiring match paves the way for a 
semi-final meeting with the awesome All Blacks on Sunday, and two serious 
injury doubts will not add to the chances of the last British team in the 
tournament making the final. Robert Norster's recurring thigh injury makes him 
extremely doubtful for the New Zealand game, while Gareth Roberts sustained a 
broken nose yesterday.

England's abysmal drop in form was utterly perplexing. If, at Ballymore, 
Brisbane, yesterday, they had shown anything like the forward drive, the 
slickness of pass, the sense of purpose and of direction they had demonstrated 
in the Calcutta Cup match at Twickenham and in their opening World Cup game 
against the Wallabies two weeks before, they would have had little difficulty 
in beating a very ordinary-looking Welsh side.

As it was, they were hesitant, faltering and lacking in efficiency.

"I have no doubt why we lost," said England's captain Mike Harrison. 
"Beforehand we were very confident and the most disappointing thing is we did 
not produce it on the field. All the Welsh points were given to them - they did 
not create the tries, they seized on our mistakes."

Brisbane, as usual, was warm and humid, and a prolonged shower of rain came 
down from broken clouds in the first half. This undoubtedly made handling more 
difficult. But, as Green said, "we play on heavy pitches and in the wet for 
much of the time at home".

England were almost nonchalant at times, as when Webb and Harrison had a 
marvellous opportunity to counterattack but each left the ball to the other and 
a Welsh boot pragmatically hoofed it downfield.

That incident epitomised Welsh realism. Robert Jones, the one man on either 
side who played football really well, would feed Jonathan Davies, and Davies 
would try one of the many kicks in his varied repertoire.

Yet credit must go to Wales for the way they overcame their problems. They 
kicked and kicked and waited for England to make mistakes, which England did. 
The Welsh were lucky, however, with their first try because England at that 
moment were reduced to seven forwards, Paul Rendall, to use Green's phrase, 
having had "an eye gouged". In these circumstances England all but conceded a 
pushover try, the ball squirted out widely, and Roberts pounced for a try, 
which Thorburn converted.

The second Welsh try was well made. Bowen broke through the centre and, 
although he was tackled by Webb, Collins took possession and finally Jones 
kicked the ball on and won the race with Harding for the touchdown. In injury 
time, Williams, the England stand-off half tried to float a long pass across 
England's midfield. Unfortunately for him, the ball landed in the arms of 
Devereux, who ran on to the posts for a try, which Thorburn converted.

The only English points came near the end when Webb kicked a penalty goal.
 