
Eric Christiansen, who has died aged 79, was an original, if daunting and 
eccentric, history fellow at New College, Oxford for nearly 40 years and an 
urbane and occasionally sardonic reviewer for academic journals and for 
magazines such as the Spectator and the New York Review of Books.

Generations of students will recall not only his unruly shock of dark hair, 
his round-rimmed spectacles and the old-fashioned bicycle he rode round the 
city, but also the courtly notes, penned with a flourish in sepia copperplate 
as if direct from the 18th century, written with a quill in ink that he mixed 
himself from powder.

But they will also remember inspirational tutorials spontaneously illustrated 
by artefacts plucked from his chaotic desk in his cluttered study: “French 
Second Empire, thousands of small workshops, producing things … like this!” or 
even, as the college’s current warden Miles Young, an undergraduate in the 
1970s, recollects, a cassoulet of baked beans and chipolatas cooked up during 
the lesson, on what appeared to be a Bunsen burner, to stave off peckishness. 
At my college interview for a place to read history I was not aware he was even 
in the room until he suddenly loomed from behind a curtain where he had 
apparently been taking a nap in a window seat.

Christiansen’s historical range was prodigious and eclectic, from the Spanish 
army in the early 19th century to the little-known medieval military campaigns 
by the Teutonic knights forcibly to convert the pagan tribes of Prussia and the 
Baltic region to Christianity, which formed the subject of his major book, The 
Northern Crusades (1980). The college records show that his tutors considered 
him daunting and formidable even as an undergraduate.

He was born in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, the son of Danish parents: Christian 
Christiansen, a farmer, and his wife, Greta (nee Neilson). At Charterhouse, 
Godalming, Eric edited the school magazine and won an open scholarship to New 
College, where he would spend his entire academic career following national 
service in the ranks with the Northamptonshire Regiment.

After obtaining first class honours in 1961, he embarked on a doctoral thesis 
on the place of the army in Spanish politics between 1830 and 1854, which was 
abandoned after the university modern history board objected that he had 
substantially departed from the original proposed scope of 1830 to 1868 and 
thus declined to examine it. He did not take a doctorate but was appointed to a 
lecturership and college fellowship in 1965, renewed every seven years until 
his retirement in 2002. He subsequently became an emeritus fellow.

Christiansen is survived by his wife, Sukey Hardie (nee Chamberlain), whom he 
met when they were both students, and whom he married in 1981, and by four 
stepchildren.
 