
Simon Zebo and Andrew Conway both crossed twice as Munster dominated their 
Champions Cup dead-rubber against a youngSale side at Thomond Park. Both sides 
were out of the running in pool one but the Irish province salvaged some pride 
with a runaway 65‑10 bonus-point victory that included eight second-half tries. 
An early Zebo effort launchedMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster>
 towards a 10-0 lead before the stubborn Sharks rallied with a tremendous Tom 
Arscott score and just three points separated the sides at the interval – 13-10.

However, after Keith Earls crowned his first start of the season with an 
excellent individual try and a penalty try was added, the floodgates were well 
and truly opened as Pat Howard, Zebo, Andrew Conway (two), Tommy O’Donnell and 
Duncan Williams all touched down between the 65th and 80th minutes.

Toulouse passed up the chance to finish top of pool four by squandering a 20-9 
lead in a 27‑26 defeat atMontpellier. The visitors appeared in a comfortable 
position after Toby Flood’s converted try increased their lead to 11 points at 
the beginning of the second half. ButMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier> came roaring back and two tries 
from Lucas Dupont kick-started their recovery before they sealed victory by the 
narrowest of margins to give them their only win in the group.

Suffering the mixed emotions of Harlequins’ vain seven-try triumph over Castres
 he may have been, but Nick Evans was in no doubt of the benefits of playing 
alongside Danny Care, nor of those that England might enjoy if they would use 
him as he sees fit. “England will benefit from Danny’s tempo,” he said, “if 
they let him play that way. I felt that in the autumn they asked him to do a 
job that’s not Danny Care. He’s not a box-kicker. He will do it, but he’s all 
about bringing that spark to the game.

“He’s a game-changer. He has always been able to do that for us and we react 
to what he does. Last week [in the home defeat to Wasps], yeah, there were a 
few times when in hindsight you could say he didn’t make the right decision. 
Today he did, and the result put us in a position to score a few tries. We 
could have kicked a goal before half-time, because we knew winning the game was 
also important, but he said: ‘Let’s have a go.’ He tapped and away we went, and 
we scored. As long as England allow him to do his job, they’ll get the best out 
of him. Put the shackles on him and tell him he needs to kick more, then they 
probably won’t.”

That try broke the back of Castres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> 
just before half-time, and Quins put the game to bed with three further tries 
in the third quarter. They fulfilled to the point their directive of winning by 
28 points, which would have meant Saracens would have needed more than a losing 
bonus point atClermont to overhaul them. But Quins had to finish second in 
their pool, and Wasps’ draw againstLeinster pushed them into third. “A few of 
us senior guys knew the magic number we had to get to. I don’t know what the 
odds were on Leinster and Wasps drawing and us winning by exactly 28 points, 
but if you’d put money on it you’d be happy. We gave ourselves a chance. 
Unfortunately luck was not on our side.”
 