
The last time Wasps won in Castres they went on to be the champions of Europe 
in 2007. That may not happen again this season but Dai Young’s side at least 
gave themselves a chance by picking up a bonus-point win in the south of France.

Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> were ahead for all but 
two minutes but the 32-17 win was far from comfortable. It hinged on a penalty 
try given by the Irish referee George Clancy 10 minutes from time and two 
minutes after a penalty from Andy Goode had restored a one-point lead.

The wing Tom Varndell looked to have got over in the left corner only for the 
TMO to rule that he had been high-tackled by the former All Black Sitiveni 
Sivivatu.

Instead of a difficult touch-line kick, Andy Goode converted from in front of 
the posts and when Wasps’ other wing, Sailosi Tagicakibau, got over four 
minutes later the side which got into the competition by surprising Stade 
Français in the play-offs were home and dry in Pool Two.

Castres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres>, riven by rumours of 
defections and departures – both captain and coach are said to be on their way 
– and bottom of the Top 14 had their backs to the wall once the fullback, Rob 
Miller, opened the scoring for Wasps after five minutes. Nathan Hughes, the 
No8, barged his way over eight minutes later.

Castres scored two tries before half-time in a display that will do no harm 
for ticket sales for Sunday’s return and Wasps’ last game at Adams Park before 
the move to Coventry.

“If I was a coach I would be frustrated,” said the Wasps captain, James 
Haskell. “We like to self-destruct a couple of times but once we got it 
together we were very dangerous.”

“This pool is very difficult,” said Young. “We’ve got a long way to go before 
we worry about qualifying. We’ve got to play Castres next week at home which 
will be a very difficult game.”

Glasgow’s run came to an end at Toulouse, the four-times champions, who jumped 
ahead of Gregor Townsend’s side in Pool Four and set up a potential decider at 
Scotstoun on Saturday.

The 19-11 home win hinged on the yellow card handed down to the Scotland 
fly-half Finn Russell for a tip tackle on his opposite number Sébastien Bézy. 
During Russell’s 10-minute absenceToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> picked up 10 points.

That created the cushion which denied Glasgow a losing bonus point when Duncan 
Weir failed to convert the late try by the replacement scrum-half, Niko 
Matawalu.

Bath, who need a five-point win at the Rec next Friday to make Pool Four a 
three-way issue, are likely to be up againstMontpellier minus coach Fabien 
Galthié. Confirmation of Galthié’s departure following Friday’s 30-5 home 
defeat, which leaves Montpellier bottom, is likely on Monday.
 