
It has been 18 years coming but the dreaded moment is finally nigh. Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> and Munster are already out and 
unless Ulster can surprise everyone in their final two pool games there will be 
no Irish representatives in Europe’s knockout stages for the first time since 
1997-98.

“I have the simplest tastes. I am always satisfied with the best,” wrote Oscar 
Wilde. For the Irish provinces it is suddenly more a case of much ado about 
nothing.

In the case of Munster, the downward spiral is beginning to cause disquiet 
beyond the lanes of Limerick and the cafes of Cork. “I worry about Munster,” 
says the former Ireland and Ulster centre Mark McCall, now at the heart of 
Saracens’ quest to become thefirst English champions of Europe since 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/may/21/rugbyunion.heinekencup200607>. 
“If you look at their starting XV it doesn’t grab you. Leinster and Ulster are 
significantly ahead of them, which is remarkable considering how strong Munster 
were four or five years ago.”

Several Munster legends feel similarly. A once indomitable howling force has 
petered out, to the point where their former flanker Alan Quinlan describedlast 
Sunday’s second-half display against a 14-man Stade Français 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/stade-francais-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 as “embarrassing”. Ronan O’Gara, writing in his Irish Examiner column, said he 
had never seen his old mate-turned-coach Anthony Foley look as uncomfortable as 
during his recent post-match interviews. “All I could think of was a Premier 
League manager ...you can see Axel is in a horrible place emotionally 
<http://www.irishexaminer.com/rwc15/rwc15-analysis/new-year-but-no-point-sugar-coating-munster-malaise-373987.html>
.”

The bigger picture is not quite so bleak. Ireland will shortly begin their 
quest to win a third Six Nations crown in succession. No country has managed to 
achieve three outright titles in the championship’s history.

Below the surface, even so, there are increasingly strong currents. Lucrative 
TV windfalls in France and England are making it harder for the Celtic nations 
to attract the best talent. Good playmakers such as Ian Madigan are opting to 
sign for overseas clubs, some good coaches have moved on. Two of the greatest 
names in Irish rugby history – Paul O’Connell and Brian O’Driscoll – have 
pulled on the green jersey for the last time.

As with any golden generation, replacing them was never going to be as simple 
as wandering down the main street of Killaloe and whistling up the new Keith 
Wood. The traditionalMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> supply 
line, though, appears to have dried up. Last season’s Ireland U20 team 
contained barely any Munster representatives; Conor Murray may also find 
himself heavily outnumbered when Joe Schmidt names his side to face Wales in 
next month’s Six Nations opener.

Crowds in Limerick are down and, to an experienced coach like McCall, the 
alarm bells are ringing loud and clear. “The Leinster and Ulster academy 
systems seem to throw up more quality homegrown players than Munster,” he says. 
“You’ve also got to be brilliant with your overseas signings. I’m not so sure 
Munster have got it right in that department either … there have been some 
questionable overseas signings.”

The words of Munster’s chief executive, Garrett Fitzgerald, before last June’s 
AGM – a deficit of €400,000 was announced following a loss of €600,000 the 
previous year – now feel prescient: “The whole house of cards falls if you 
don’t put your money into your players.”

Small wonder he is now calling on all and sundry “to do everything we possibly 
can” to avoid the nightmare of failing to qualify for next season’s Champions’ 
Cup. Munster sit uneasily in fifth place with Ulster, Ospreys and Glasgow on 
their heels and the disruptive Six Nations period looming.

Hence the reason why Andy Farrell has been invited to take up a consultant’s 
role prior to becomingIreland’s new defence coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/andy-farrell-ireland-defence-coach>
. McCall, whose Saracens side face Ulster on Saturday, is a good friend of 
Farrell’s and knew a while ago that an approach had been made. Despite all the 
despondency, he reckons the former Great Britain rugby league captain will 
notice one major difference between England and Ireland. “He’s going to find 
the national assistant coaches are welcomed when they come to the provinces. 
They’re not seen as a threat, it’s a very unified, joined-up system with 
central contracts. Over here when the England coaches arrive at the clubs 
there’s not quite the same inclusivity.”

But what if that same centralised structure is undermining the teams 
it is trying to bolster? The argument that the Irish Rugby Football Union needs 
to seek private investment to help their sides compete with the bigger French 
and English sides continues to simmer.

Rumours that Rory McIlroy has helped his native Ulster’s recruitment efforts 
have been dismissed by the province but the capture of the All Black wing 
Charles Piutau, who will reportedly be paid around £1m for two seasons’ work in 
Belfast, suggests poverty is not entirely at the root of Irish rugby’s European 
issues.

McCall, for that reason, retains a healthy respect for Ulster and Leinster – 
“Ulster are a good side and Leinster still look strong to me … they’ll be OK” – 
but he is not entirely convinced the national team will conquer all again. 
“They don’t have the same strength in depth in some positions that, say, 
England would have. If there’s an injury crisis they’ll struggle. They need 
their best players to be fit. Their best 23 is as good as any but the injuries 
they got inthe Argentina World Cup game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 showed it’s not quite the same when some of those players aren’t there.”

Maybe he is about to be confounded. Ulster’s remarkable comeback against 
Oyonnax has at least enabled them to fight another day, even if Leinster and 
Munster – who jointly claimed five European titles between 2006 and 2012 – are 
already out of quarter-final contention. Spare a thought, though, for the 
long-serving Foley as he seeks to drag a defiant final roar from his struggling 
team in Saturday’s dead rubber against Stade at Thomond Park (set to be 
retitled soon as Munster look to flog off the naming rights). “We’ll come back 
with some answers but those answers need to be physical and ones we can see out 
on the pitch,” said the former No8. “Sport has no memory, no conscience. It 
doesn’t care. You have got to make sure you get results.”

It is a brutal business and the Irish provinces are currently receiving an 
old-school kicking.
 