
European human rights judges have confirmed the right of British courts to 
impose “life must mean life” sentences in the most heinous cases of murder.


The ruling by the European court of human rights (ECHR) resolves the issue of 
whole-life sentences, which was cited by the former justice secretary Chris 
Grayling as one of the key reasons he had proposeda new British bill of rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/uk-bill-of-rights> to give the UK courts and 
parliament the final say in such matters.

The ruling by 17 judges in the grand chamber of the Strasbourg court dismissed 
an appeal brought by the triple murderer Arthur Hutchinson, 75. He had been 
sentenced to spend the rest of his natural life behind bars for the 1983 murder 
of three members of a Sheffield family and the rape of a young woman who was 
staying in the house at the time.

Hutchinson claimed his whole-life sentence amounted to inhuman and degrading 
treatment as he had no hope of release. But the judges rejected his appeal, 
saying the European convention on human rights did not ban the imposition of a 
life sentence on convicted murderers as long as there was a prospect of release 
for the prisoner and a possibility of a review of their sentence.

Related: Human rights are under threat – just when we need them most | Charles 
Falconer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/european-convention-human-rights-threat>

Whole-life terms are currently being served by 65 of Britain’s most notorious 
criminals, including the Moors murderer, Ian Brady, the Yorkshire Ripper, Peter 
Sutcliffe, and the serial killer Rosemary West.

The issue of the legality of whole-life sentences triggered a political storm 
in Britain in 2013 when the ECHR ruled in a separate case – involving the 
convicted killers Jeremy Bamber, Douglas Vinter and Peter Moore – that there 
was a lack of clarity in British law over whether the justice secretary could 
release such prisoners.

The original confusion stemmed from the 2003 Criminal Justice Act, which 
scrapped an automatic 25-year ministerial review of a whole-life sentences 
without putting anything in its place.

Grayling cited the 2013 ruling as a key reason why he had proposed that the 
Conservative party pledge to introduce a British bill of rights. It also led to 
the UK court of appeal explicitly addressing the doubt expressed by the ECHR.

The British judges made clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/feb/18/whole-life-sentences-can-continue-appeal-court-rules>
 that the justice secretary was obliged under UK law to release someone 
detained on a whole-life order where “exceptional grounds” for release, such as 
only having a few weeks to live, were shown to exist. This power of release, 
which is not confined to end-of-life situations, could also be reviewed in the 
British courts.

The ruling on Tuesday by the European court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> confirmed that 
this clarification meant the British courts had “dispelled the lack of clarity 
in the domestic law on the review of life sentences”.

The judges therefore concluded that the UK’s whole-life sentences could now be 
regarded as compatible with article three of the rights convention and did not 
amount to inhumane or degrading treatment. The grand chamber ruling backs an
initial ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/feb/03/european-human-rights-whole-life-tariff-hutchinson>
 by the lower chamber of the human rights court in February 2015.

The ruling means that the whole-life sentence imposed on Hutchinson by the 
then lord chief justice in 1984 will continue to stand.

Hutchinson was imprisoned for stabbing to death Basil and Avril Laitner and 
their son, Richard, on the wedding day of one of their daughters. He repeatedly 
raped a young woman after dragging her into the wedding marquee and handcuffing 
her. He later broke into the family home and stole a watch and money.

The trial judge in the case sentenced Hutchinson to life imprisonment with a 
recommendation that he serve at least 18 years. The lord chief justice, 
however, recommended he serve a whole-life sentence and not be released. This 
was confirmed by the then home secretary, Michael Howard, in 1994.
 