
The man formerly in charge of overseeing the Libor benchmark lending rate took 
banks at “face value” when they said it could not be rigged, a jury has heard.

Testifying at the trial of five former Barclays employees accused of 
conspiring to manipulate Libor, the former British Bankers’ Association (BBA) 
director John Ewan said he had not been concerned that banks were trying to 
influence the rate.

The Serious Fraud Office has charged Jonathan Mathew, a former Barclays rate 
submitter, and his former colleagues at the bank – derivatives traders 
Stylianos Contogoulas, Jay Merchant, Alex Pabon and Ryan Reich – each with one 
count of conspiracy to defraud by manipulating US dollar Libor rates between 
June 2005 and September 2007. The five men have pleaded not guilty.

Ewan was asked about a meeting with senior Barclays employee Miles Storey at 
which the banker told him that it would “not be feasible” for banks to conspire 
to change the Libor rate.

According to minutes taken at the meeting, and submitted as evidence to the 
trial at Southwark crown court, this was partly a reaction to “rumblings” from 
other banks about the Libor rates that Barclays was submitting to the BBA.

Ewan said: “It’s very difficult to un-know what we now know. But at the time I 
didn’t think about it very much and I took it at face value when Barclays told 
me it wouldn’t be possible for them to get together and try to manipulate Libor 
rates.”

Asked whether he had received complaints from banks that they believed that 
rivals were submitting false Libor rates in order to make money, Ewan said: “I 
really don’t remember.”

The BBA oversaw Libor, a key financial benchmark underpinning contracts worth 
trillions of pounds worldwide, from the mid-1980s until it wasstripped of 
responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/25/bba-libor-setting-role-stripped-banks>
 for setting the rate in 2013. During the financial crisis, Ewan was in charge 
of producing a report on reforming Libor following allegations of abuse.

The jurors were told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/libor-trial-barclays-bonuses> 
by the prosecution earlier in the trial that the defendants conspired to 
manipulate the Libor rate for US dollars. The court heard that the group were 
paid big bonuses and offered each other wine and coffee in return for 
favourable rates.

However, defence lawyers for the accused have told the court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/08/libor-trial-ex-barclays-banker-says-he-only-did-what-his-boss-told-him>
 that they only did what they were told to by their Barclays bosses, without 
realising it was wrong, and that they did not benefit financially.

The trial is expected to last three months.

 