
Rob Baxter reserved special praise for Henry Slade and his fellow England 
international Luke Cowan-Dickie after they starred in Exeter’s Champions Cup 
victory in France.

The hooker Cowan-Dickie scored an important second-half try and the fly-half 
Slade was named man of the match as the Chiefs made amends for theirdefeat at 
Sandy Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/exeter-bordeaux-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
last Sunday.

Thomas Waldrom scored the visitors’ other try as a red card for the Bordeaux 
wing Nans Ducuing proved to be the crucial moment.

“Some of Henry’s passing was wayward at times and his performance was like 
ours as a team,” Baxter said. “But the important bits were there and that’s the 
most pleasing thing.

“Hopefully, Henry will keep driving forwards now. He hasn’t played at fly-half 
for a long time and he hasn’t had a lot of game time, and this was Luke 
Cowan-Dickie’s first game back, so it was always going to be a bit fractured 
but this is a win we’ll celebrate.

“Then there’s Jack Nowell, who has a lot more in the tank. We should see some 
pretty special things from these players moving forwards.”

Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> were always kept in the game 
by the boot of Slade, who kicked two penalties and a conversion, with 
Bordeaux’s points coming via three penalties from Lionel Beauxis and one from 
replacement Baptiste Serin.

The home side were always up against it once Ducuing was sent off for clashing 
with Olly Woodburn. Ducuing went up for a high ball with Woodburn, the Exeter 
wing landing in worrying fashion as his neck took the brunt of the fall.

The players only had eyes for the ball but after sending the incident to the 
TMO, the referee, John Lacey, deemed Ducuing’s tackle dangerous and showed him 
a red card.

Baxter said: “It’s a really difficult one. The referee made the right 
decision, but as a rugby man I don’t like it.

“Both players were committed to the ball, a collision happened but the 
directives these days make it that you can be red-carded for quite an 
innocent act.”

Exeter remain outsiders to reach the latter stages despite achieving their 
first win in Europe this season.

Baxter said: “From a coaching perspective we have to keep challenging the 
players but ultimately, when you sit here and look at the changes we made and 
the fact we won, it’s pretty pleasing.

“Some of our players like Henry and Jack will only get better from this. It 
looks like Dave Ewers has tweaked his knee but we’ll assess that and see where 
we are.

“Overall, though, it’s an excellent result and I was pleased with the attitude 
we showed in defence. That played a big part in us winning the game.”
 