
Exeter’s Rob Baxter is the latest Premiership head coach to hit out at 
England’s controversial training camp last week after confirming Jack Nowell 
has also reported back injured.

Nowell, who will be out for a number of weeks with a torn quadricep, joins the 
Bath winger Anthony Watson (broken jaw) and the Wasps flanker Sam Jones (broken 
leg) as casualties from Eddie Jones’s three-day camp in Brighton. Nowell made 
his first appearance of the season following a thumb injury two days before the 
camp began and Baxter believes the 23-year-old wing was pushed too hard.

Damian Welch snatches Exeter a draw at home to impressive Gloucester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/exeter-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
“England seemed to have loaded him more than we would have done,” Baxter said, 
after his side’s 27-27 draw against Gloucester on Saturday. “More 
disappointingly, he was sent back to us with a report that they couldn’t find 
any significant damage. When we scanned him, he had a 9-10 centimetre tear in 
his quad which will put him out for weeks.”

Last week the Saracens director of rugby, Mark McCall, said he was 
“flabbergasted” that the camp had been arranged less than two weeks before the 
start of the Champions Cup, before Premiership Rugby issued a statement 
questioning the format of the camp, that also featured a judo session where Sam 
Jones sustained his injury. “In the interests of player welfare, Premiership 
Rugby believes that England should not be doing full training sessions straight 
after a Premiership weekend,” read the statement.

Richard Cockerill, Leicester’s director of rugby, was more phlegmatic however, 
pointing to the compensation the Premiership clubs receive in the new £200m EPS 
deal which gives England greater access to players. “If you’re Eddie you’ve got 
to get ready for the Springboks. The agendas are different. There’s no point 
moaning about it. Players come back injured and we look after them.”

Cockerill also said he did not know how long Mike Williams would be sidelined 
for after picking up an arm injury just before the start of Leicester’s 34-13 
win against Worcester. With Sam Jones, James Haskell and Jack Clifford all 
unavailable the uncapped Williams was in contention to start England’s autumn 
campaign at openside. “We’ll have it scanned and see where he’s at,” said 
Cockerill. “Hopefully it’s just a bit of nerve irritation and he’ll be fine but 
it is unfortunately the same arm [he broke twice last season].”
 