
Ulster kept their Champions Cup hopes alive by the narrowest of margins with a 
vital win to see offExeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter>, whose 
own European ambitions look all but over in Pool Five.

In a tense and scrappy encounter in which there was only one try, scored by 
Ulster’s Sean Reidy in the first half, the game ended with a dramatic drop goal 
shootout between Paddy Jackson and Exeter’s Ulsterman Gareth Steenson in the 
closing minutes.

Munster honour Anthony Foley with emotional victory over Glasgow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Steenson first put Exeter two points in front with four minutes to go only for 
Jackson to hit back immediately with a drop goal of his own.

The game then finished with Steenson going for another drop to snatch the win 
but his effort went wide and Exeter were left with their losing bonus point.

Les Kiss’s men made off with four points, though, thanks to Reidy’s try, three 
penalties, a conversion and that late drop goal from Jackson. The home side had 
led 10-6 at the break – and 16-12 with only 10 minutes remaining – with Charles 
Piutau having created the touchdown with a rare moment of creativity in the 
game.

All Exeter’s points came from the boot of their fly-half, Steenson, thanks to 
his drop goal and five earlier penalties, although the result leaves them 
bottom of Pool Five with only one point. Ulster are in third on four points, 
six points behind the leaders Clermont Auvergne.

Exeter kicked off after a minute’s silence was observed in memory of Anthony 
Foley, with the supporters’ own tribute then being followed by a rendition of 
the Fields of Athenry.

And it was Ulster who struck first when the Chiefs strayed offside, although 
Jackson’s fourth-minute penalty was equalised two minutes later by Steenson 
after Reidy had been caught offside.

But Ulster came again with a great attack which swung right, left and right 
again only for the Chiefs to be nailed for offside again just as Franco van der 
Merwe lost the ball on the line.

Maro Itoje adds to injury worries for England coach Eddie Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/maro-itoje-injury-england-eddie-jones-saracens>
Jackson hit the corner and then opted to do so again after the Chiefs were 
offside at the lineout. The home side secured another penalty after Jackson’s 
chip for Luke Marshall was called back.

Yet again, Ulster went for the corner and the lineout maul only for Rodney Ah 
You to knock on and the Chiefs relieved the pressure.

Exeter then spent some time in Ulster territory which yielded them two scrum 
penalties and a third when the home side were punished for being offside at a 
ruck, which let to Steenson slotting a great penalty from out on the right 
after 28 minutes.

Then out of nothing, Piutau’s hitch-kick out on the right saw him beat three 
defenders before Reidy followed up to drive over the line. Jackson’s conversion 
made it 10-6 to Ulster, which is how the half finished despite Exeter ending 
the stronger.

Piutau helped win Ulster an early penalty after the restart but after going 
for the corner, the home side’s maul was driven into touch. However, from their 
next kickable effort, Jackson put the ball between the posts from long range to 
extend their lead to 13-6.

That was cut to 13-9 on 51 minutes from Steenson’s third penalty of the night, 
before Jackson missed with a 62nd-minute effort from out on the right.

The Chiefs then made it a one-point game in the 66th minute after a great 
break from Olly Woodburn into Ulster’s 22 resulted in Steenson’s fourth penalty.

Thomas Waldrom: Exeter cannot pitch themselves as underdogs any more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/thomas-waldrom-exeter-chiefs-champions-cup-rugby-union>
The scrappy nature of the game continued but when the Chiefs were pinged at a 
ruck Jackson gladly took the points in the 70th minute to put Ulster 16-12 in 
front.

But back came Exeter and when sub Rob Herring went off his feet, Steenson 
closed the gap again with his 73rd-minute strike, and then he nudged the Chiefs 
in front with a well-taken drop goal in the 76th minute.

Stung into action, Ulster surged upfield and Jackson then put them a point in 
front with his own drop goal.

With two minutes on the clock, Steenson tried again but this time his drop 
sailed just wide and Ulster held on.
 