
Exeter have, in their seven seasons in the top flight, tended to reserve their 
worst for Bath, the onlyPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> club they had not travelled to 
and won. For 70 minutes here, they never threatened to erase that blot only to 
end a year when they have achieved two firsts, the knock-out stage of the 
European Cup and the play-off final at Twickenham, on a high that was all the 
more elevated because even Nostradamus would not have seen it coming.

Bath were leading 11-0 going into the final quarter, comfortable in their 
superiority.Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> were dogged in 
defence but laboured in attack, unable to create space through passing. Even 
when Gareth Steenson scored their first points with a 45-metre penalty after 
Nick Auterac had been ruled to have taken down a scrum, it looked a sure home 
victory. Then the Chiefs, like some volcano long declared extinct, erupted, 
sealing their first league victory with two tries in the last 10 minutes by 
their replacement wing James Short.

Semesa Rokoduguni: ‘I like working with Eddie. When he’s not happy, he tells 
you’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/semesa-rokoduguni-bath-england-exeter>
Despite Short’s contribution, it was a victory based on defence. Just after 
Steenson’s penalty,Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> threatened to 
extend their lead when a slick bout of passing from George Ford, Ben Tapuai and 
Jonathan Joseph put Anthony Watson, making his first appearance since the 
beginning of October, away on the left wing only for Phil Dollman to tackle him 
into touch a metre out.

Bath were by then down to one prop, the replacement Shaun Knight. Nathan Catt, 
on the day he was called into the England squad, and Matt Lahiff had failed 
head injury assessments in the first half and Auterac did not return after he 
collided with Dave Dennis. They went to uncontested scrums, but as soon as 
Auterac was ruled unfit to return, they had to sacrifice a player and go down 
to 14 men.

They were 11-10 down then after Luke Cowan-Dickie’s break, juggle and off-load 
created the space for Short’s first try, although Semesa Rokoduguni fell off 
the tackle on his opposite number having been drawn inside, and for the first 
time in the match Exeter had the force with them. Jack Nowell got behind the 
defence and although he was tackled by Tom Homer the Chiefs moved the ball left 
and when the ball squirted loose after Homer thumped into Steenson, Short only 
had to pick it up to score.

The try ended Bath’s unbeaten home record this season in a match watched by 
three of England’s coaches, including Eddie Jones, who took their seats less 
than an hour after announcing the squad. They saw two players they had 
overlooked, the second row Dave Attwood altogether, and Rokoduguni, from the 
group of 33, who will assemble in Brighton on Sunday evening for a two-day 
training camp, stand out in the opening hour.

Joe Launchbury set to miss the start of Six Nations with calf injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/england-eddie-jones-squad-six-nations-preparation>
Rokoduguni, whose demotion was in part caused by the return of his clubmate 
Watson to full fitness, scored the opening try and was denied another by 
Nowell, another England wing recalled by Jones. It was Rokoduguni’s 16th 
Premiership try of 2016, a figure exceeded only by Christian Wade. Defence is 
the reason why he is unlikely to add to his two caps in the near future, but in 
a tight match in damp conditions when opportunities are at a premium, he is a 
match-winner.

Nowell came off his wing regularly in search of a pass and the one moment when 
there appeared to be space in front of him, Kahn Fotuiali’i filled it and 
hauled him to the ground.

Fotuali’i has been a significant recruit for Bath this season, quick to reach 
breakdowns and alert around the fringes with and without the ball. They play at 
a higher tempo with him and Ford had the time to work out ways of penetrating 
Exeter’s defensive wall. The Chiefs looked like coming up short, but they had 
Short and the rule that penalises a team that goes to uncontested scrums.

“I think it is harsh when you have three props who have to go off on head 
safety grounds,” said the Bath director of rugby, Todd Blackadder. “It is 
something that needs to be looked at as I reflect on one of our best 
performances of the season ending in defeat.”
 