
He wore tattered trousers, muddy wellington boots, a grubby anorak and avoided 
eye contact. The voice was soft. "Sometimes one blow is enough. You have to 
make sure the skull is crushed and the brains come out."

He was 17, still dressed in what passed for his Lord's Resistance Army uniform 
and still getting used to the idea he was no longer Ambush, his nom-de-guerre, 
but Patrick Ocaya.

For five years he had served as a corporal in Joseph Kony's ranks, tasked with 
leading groups of 11-year-olds in attacks on vehicles and, on occasion, 
clubbing prisoners to death.

Asked if he had felt sorry for those he abducted and killed, Ocaya's eyes 
flicked from the azure sky to the red, baked earth of a ramshackle 
rehabilitation centre. He shrugged. "I didn't have pity. They were my orders."

It was June 2003 and I was reporting for the Guardian from Kitgum, a 
beleaguered town of dirt roads and one-storey buildings in northernUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> in the midst of a new LRA offensive.

On the walls of the Kitgum's Concerned Parents' Association, which counselled 
ex-combatants, were their drawings: a woman suspended by her ankle from a tree 
while a figure beat her with a cane and another lit a fire beneath her head; 
severed limbs and a prostrate man bleeding from the mouth. Richard Kinyera, the 
association's chairman, said those incidents actually happened. New escapees 
arrived daily with more stories.

It was disorientating to interview a child such as Wanok Constant, a scrawny 
13-year-old with round, brown eyes, who was both perpetrator and victim. He had 
been abducted, like thousands of others in surrounding villages, and forced to 
take part in beating to death another boy who had tried to escape. He whispered 
the details and at the end, relieved, gave a shy smile.

There were documented cases of recruits forced to kill relatives, march over 
spilled brains and cook and eat human flesh. The savagery had purpose: once 
implicated, many children considered themselves outcasts who could never return 
home.

"They become too afraid to flee because they've been made to commit 
atrocities," says Pietro Galli of the Italian charity AVSI. Younger children 
were the most trigger-happy. "To impress their peers they become very efficient 
killers."

The terror made for a macabre hide-and-seek in Kitgum, which was under the 
Ugandan army's nominal, queasy protection: at bedtime thousands of small 
figures emerged from grass huts and tramped into town to sleep outside the 
locked doors of the general hospital. It was cold, and in the dark easy to 
tread on a sleeping body, but nobody complained. Out in the bush, unseen, the 
seekers were armed with AK-47s, clubs and knives.

A swaggering army lieutenant promised to crush the guerrillas with recently 
acquired helicopter gunships. The parents of Kitgum and nearby villages, 
destitute and unable to till their fields, craved peace and security but balked 
at a military solution. They said it was a euphemism for killing their abducted 
children.
 