
This is supposed to be the season of wise men but rugby union, just at the 
moment, has lost its marbles. How else to explain the decision not to issue any 
sanction against anyone connected with George North’s recent botched 
head‑injury saga? At a time when player welfare is meant to be twinkling at the 
top of everyone’s tree, the game is in danger of sliding back into the 
self-policing dark ages.

The only good news is that North himself is apparently OK and cleared to 
resume playing for Northampton this Friday. Good luck to him – goodness knows, 
he needs a dollop of it. But when a player with a well-chronicled history of 
concussion is mistakenly allowed back on to the field at such a sensitive stage 
in the sport’s history, it would seem inevitable some kind of official 
admonishment would follow.The lack of meaningful action by Premiership Rugby 
and the Rugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/northampton-saints-escape-sanction-george-north-concussion-rugby-union>
 does not reflect well on either body.

Northampton escape sanction over handling of George North’s concussion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/northampton-saints-escape-sanction-george-north-concussion-rugby-union>
The most obvious explanation is that, legally, the guardians of the English 
game were worried about creating a dangerous precedent. That tricky junction 
where sport, medicine and business collides is notoriously hard to navigate, as 
the frequent delays in releasing the panel’s verdict underlined. Telling a 
pitchside member of the medical staff he or she was at fault is not as easy as 
showing a player a yellow card. The potentially far‑reaching professional 
implications of doing so would appear to have saved individuals, andNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, from any punishment.

This despite the fact that, in the key sections, the report could scarcely 
have painted a more uncomfortable picture. There was, the panel found, already 
enough video evidence to raise suspicions that North had lost consciousness, 
even without the additional clips taken from behind the incident which “confirm 
beyond any doubt that the player was likely to have been unconscious”.

Nor did anyone in the Northampton set-up, having had time to reflect and catch 
up with the tell-tale replays being widely shown on the big screen, think it 
prudent to withdraw North even after he had returned to the field. The eight 
minutes he spent off the pitch was also shorter than the recommended period. 
Those in charge of monitoring players for concussion, meanwhile, seem to be 
still getting acquainted with the system.

This was only the fifth game in which Northampton’s pitchside video reviewer 
had been in the role; along with the lead physio, they were unaware of replays 
of the incident being broadcast to all and sundry. The Wi-Fi link providing 
pictures to the match doctor, furthermore, was working fine.

So much for no one being able to see the right clips, which was the club’s 
initial defence.

The conclusion, in short, was that unfortunate human error rather than 
negligence was to blame. No one disputes the medical staff were at least 
attempting to do their best for North. A cock-up, m’lud, rather than a 
conspiracy. Premiership Rugby made the point that no similar enquiry has ever 
taken place anywhere else in the world, stressing the nine recommendations will 
help make the game safer in the long run. Maybe, particularly the directive 
requiring doctors in future to review video footage a second time even after a 
head injury assessment has been passed to make 100% sure there was no fleeting 
loss of consciousness. But what if North had ended up with something worse than 
a stiff neck? And what if something similar happens this weekend? A suspended 
fine or perhaps the threat of a points deduction would have sent a rather 
stronger message about the importance of recognising and removing players 
suspected of a possible brain injury which, after all, is what concussion is.

Instead the playing field grows ever more uneven. At a time when there is an 
increasing crackdown on the slightest on-field indiscretions, intentional or 
otherwise, no one is ever at fault behind the scenes. The inconsistency of 
rugby’s punishments is maddening to those within the game and baffling to those 
outside. What is the more heinous crime: fractionally mistiming a tackle or 
failing to show the necessary duty of care to a professional athlete under your 
club’s supervision?

While players are being judged on outcome rather than intent, others are being 
given the benefit of the doubt. It should be absurdly simple: players lying 
prone on the grass with their eyes shut are not having a pre-Christmas snooze. 
Of course North is going to leap back up and say he is fine. That is what all 
rugby players of character do. Never mind the state of the game or how much 
their club need to win. What matters is protecting the player from himself.

It is a crying shame some within rugby still cannot see the wood for the 
Christmas trees.
 