
The former Saracens captain Alistair Hargreaves views the failure to sanction 
Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/northampton-saints-escape-sanction-george-north-concussion-rugby-union>
 for their handling of George North’s latest head injury as a “cop-out” that 
“reeks of bureaucracy”.

George North not included in Northampton’s squad to face Sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/george-north-northampton-sale> 
A joint Rugby Football Union and Premiership Rugby investigation opted against 
charging Saints or their medical staff with misconduct for allowing North to 
resume playing, despite appearing to have been knocked unconscious in a league 
match on 3 December.

Two months ago Hargreaves, Saracens’ 2015 Premiership-winning captain, was 
forced to retire from the game at the age of 30 having suffered five 
concussions in two years, and he had described the joint review’s findings as a 
“disgrace” that signalled a “depressing day for rugby”.

He said: “When I first heard about the review, I was angry. The fact North was 
allowed to go back on to the field is really disappointing and the fact there 
hasn’t been some sort of repercussion is bit of a cop-out. It’s a step 
backwards. We have to hold each other accountable and when we do get things 
wrong, we need to voice our opinions. There needs to be accountability.

“In the review there wasn’t any hint of condemnation of the fact North was 
allowed to go back on to the field. There needed to be a statement that showed 
the public and players how seriously matters like this will be taken if the 
protocols aren’t followed. We’ve lost a chance to do that.

“When the review panel came out with their nine guidelines for the future when 
this was a clear-cut case about a player with a history of concussion, it reeks 
of bureaucracy.”

Replays appeared to show that North had been knocked out following an aerial 
collision with Leicester’s Adam Thompstone at Welford Road, yet he passed a 
head injury assessment and resumed playing.

Saints’ defence is that not all replay angles of the incident were available 
at the time of assessment and that the Wales wing denied any loss of 
consciousness, had immediate recall of events and stayed motionless due to 
concerns for his neck pain.

The Concussion Management Review Group found that, while North should have 
been removed from play, medical staff were not wilfully negligent.

Hargreaves added: “My frustration with it is that we should be protecting the 
health of the players, and also the reputation of the game. Concussion is such 
a pressing issue that it’s one thing to beat the drum of player welfare by 
saying, ’We look after our people, they’re our priority’, it’s another to 
actually put that into action.

“A lot of positive steps have been taken in this area and there have been some 
really good examples of when concussion has been well managed this season. But 
this is an example of a very poorly-managed situation. I understand that there 
might not have been the right technical equipment in place for medical staff to 
review the incident, but it was an on-the-ball incident at the focal point of 
where the game was.

“It wasn’t like it was 50 metres away from where the ball was. Everyone was 
watching it and North is a player with a history of concussion.

“The question has to be asked, while being aware of the player’s concussion 
history, that if there is any doubt or slight hint of concussion, then did we 
really have his best interests at heart?”

Northampton have opted against picking North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/george-north-northampton-sale> 
for Friday’s Aviva Premiership clash with Sale at Franklin’s Gardens.

A statement released by Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> read: “George North has 
both trained with the squad and undergone a specialist review this week. All 
parties have agreed that North continue with a full training schedule with the 
rest of the club’s players to ensure he is fully prepared for first team 
action.”
 