
Victoria’s Falls Festival will not be shut down despite a terrifying crowd 
crush that injured up to 80 people and left some bystanders covered in blood, 
but changes have been made to prevent it from happening again.

At least 19 young people have been taken to hospital with serious injuries 
following the crowd crush incident.



A spokesman from Ambulance Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> said paramedics assessed 
about 80 people, of which 19 were taken to hospital with injuries ranging from 
lower leg injuries to pelvic injuries. One person was reported to have spinal 
injuries.

Fifteen of the injured were taken to Geelong Hospital, and four to Lorne. The 
spokesman said it was the first incident of this kind at the festival.

Ambulance Victoria state health commander Paul Holman said paramedics and 
ambulances were on site, and worked with first aid providers to triage and 
assess more than 60 people injured in the crush.


“We transported 13 women and six men to hospital, mostly with lower limb 
fractures. Injuries included leg, rib, hip and pelvic fractures, possible 
spinal injuries, head and facial injuries, cuts and abrasions. Patients’ ages 
ranged from late teens to late 20s,” Holman said in a statement.

“It was quite a chaotic scene and required a major response. While the 
injuries are significant, this could have been quite a tragedy and we are 
grateful that the outcome was not worse.”

In a statement, festival organisers said the crush happened when part of the 
crowd left the Grand Theatre stage, where DMA’s had been playing, to watch 
London Grammar in the Arena. Further events in the Grand Theatre were cancelled 
for the night but all normal programming was due to resume on Saturday.

Witness accounts reported the crush as a “stampede” with bones broken, shoes 
torn off and mobile phones crushed.


A Victorian woman says she was left covered in blood. Sophie Baldock said 
people were screaming for their lives. “I thought people next to me were dead,” 
she wrote in a Facebook post.

“My shoes were torn off, covered in other people’s blood. Truly horrific.”

Adam Dean, of Ringwood, was in the crowd and told Fairfax Media one of his 
friends was injured. “After DMA’s there was a huge rush of people coming out 
and he got trampled, everyone was pushing people out – it was bad.”


Dean said his friend was “alright, legs got scratched up massively, reckons he 
basically got dragged like 10 metres over gravel from everyone trampling him. 
But he’s all good.”

Fans posting on the festival’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/fallsfestival/posts/> said the incident could have 
been even worse. “It was extremely serious ,” Lucy Spry wrote. “So many of us 
thought we weren’t going to make it out of that. Not enough exits for such a 
large crowd!”

Tom Jewell posted: “My girlfriend got caught up and we were so lucky that she 
got out after we got split up in the crush. Seriously traumatic for her and 
many many more.”


Splendour in the Grass and Falls festival owner bought by Live Nation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/05/splendour-in-the-grass-and-falls-festival-owner-bought-by-live-nation>
Bee Armstrong wrote: “My friend has to help another friend up three times and 
was beginning to get crushed by the crowd. She said as she was CRAWLING under 
the side of the tent to escape there were bodies lying down.”

 Police said a large number of people were injured after those at the front of 
a crowd leaving a performance by the band DMA’s lost their footing at about 
9.50pm on Friday.

None of the injuries was life-threatening, police said in a statement.

Mobile phone reception at the site was poor, and anyone with inquiries was 
asked to email patroninfo@fallsfestival.com.

Meanwhile, extra security is in place at Tasmania’s Falls Festival in Marion 
Bay after three young girls were sexually assaulted during performances and at 
a campground.


One girl was assaulted on Thursday in the front right section of the moshpit 
during a performance by DJ Hot Tub Time Machine about 11pm, Tasmania Police 
said on Saturday.


Another girl reported being assaulted in the campgrounds about 9pm on 
Thursday, while a third girl was assaulted about 2pm on Friday during Illy’s 
performance.

All are receiving counselling and support.


“Extra security measures have been put in place for the moshpit area as a 
result of these incidents,” police said in a statement.


“If you become isolated and feel unsafe at any time, go straight to the 
nearest police officer, security guard and talk to them”.


Detectives are appealing for any witnesses who may have seen the incidents to 
come forward.
 