 The inquiry into the death of Stephen Lawrence and the failure of the justice 
system to call his killers to account will deliver its report soon. But the 
inquiry will have failed miserably if it does not offer an answer to a 
fundamental flaw in the English system of criminal justice.
 Police, prosecution and courts had no formal, recognisable and enforceable 
duty under law to take on board the right of the Lawrences to justice for their 
dead son. In the English system there is no one who is formally entitled, with 
a right enshrined in law, to keep an eye on the interests of victims and their 
families.

 Compare this with the position under French law, which recognises a clearly 
defined role for the victim, dead or alive. Under French criminal procedure, 
victims or their families have a right to be joined as civil parties to 
criminal proceedings. Indeed, a civil party has the power to trigger criminal 
proceedings and the right to be represented by a lawyer in that context. Acting 
through a lawyer, the victim or family has the right to be kept informed of 
major steps in the criminal investigation. They may also make suggestions as to 
the investigative process, subpoena witnesses for the trial, and make 
representations at the trial placing on record the emotional, social and 
economic costs of the accused's violence.

 Why have French citizens been endowed with such a right while we in Britain 
have not? One explanation is that British constitutional principles subscribe 
to the myth of the Crown as the source and origin of justice. The French 
Revolution saw ordinary citizens appropriating to themselves the justice which 
a ruling class thought it their right to bestow. It established the crucial 
philosophical point that the right to justice belongs to the individual from 
whom the state holds it on trust.

 It has taken a huge struggle by Neville and Doreen Lawrence to achieve some 
semblance of recognition by the state of the injustice done, not only to 
Stephen and his family, but to their whole community. The English criminal 
justice system does not recognise that the ordinary citizen has a stake in it. 
The system which was supposed to defend the family's interests deliberately 
marginalised it from the outset.

 There are formidable obstacles in the way of introducing something akin to 
the French civil party here. After all, had it been available at the time of 
the BSE crisis, ministers and civil servants might well have ended up at the 
Old Bailey. The families of victims of contaminated blood in France used their 
status as civil parties to bring ministers and high officials before the 
criminal courts.

 But a practical remedy must be found to address the gross betrayal of the 
Lawrence family by our justice system. The rights of victims and their families 
to engage in the criminal justice system must be taken on board. Florence Rey 
recently appeared in a French criminal court for her part in a Bonnie and 
Clyde-style shootout in Paris, when her boyfriend killed three policemen and an 
immigrant taxi driver before he was shot dead. The French state paid for the 
wife of the dead taxi driver, who had no right to live in France herself, to 
attend court as a civil party and have her lawyer put to Rey the cost the 
driver's family had to suffer for her violence. The French have their own 
problems with racist police, not least those who shoot suspects dead. But those 
police immediately enter the criminal justice system because the victims' 
families have a right in law to trigger that process if the state is slow to 
act.

 Recently friends asked me to give informal legal advice to a young man 
bottled in the face in an unprovoked attack by two thugs while he was out with 
his girlfriend. The scars are all too visible and he will probably lose his 
sight in one eye. Yet he will not get the chance to confront his attackers in 
court through a lawyer of his choice and, at the very least, ask them why.

 Why should his lawyer not be able to say: On your behalf I will require the 
police to provide a full account of their investigations; ask for certain 
investigative avenues to be explored and if I am not satisfied ask a judge to 
intervene and order those enquiries; require certain witnesses to be 
interviewed; attend at court and make sure that the accused and the court are 
fully aware of what you and your family have suffered; and make representations 
on the level of compensation to be awarded to you? This would seem to amount to 
only a basic duty to a victim.

 This cannot now be done for this young man as of right under English law. 
This lack of concern for victims of crime is the real scandal highlighted by 
the cases of Stephen Lawrence, Michael Menson, Ricky Reel and countless others. 
Making victims and their families civil parties to criminal proceedings 
provides an obvious answer to this glaring gap in our criminal justice system.



 * Jean-Gilles Raymond is a barrister and head of John Street Chambers.  