
Fatbikes – so named because of their comically thick tyres – are the latest 
trend in cycling. They look like the monster trucks of the biking world and are 
designed for riding on surfaces you’d think would be impossible to cycle on, 
such as sand and, in particular, snow.

Which is not to say they make the whole thing effortless – as I found to my 
cost during a weekend at Tahoe Donner, a downhill and cross-country ski resort 
in California which, in response to increased demand, recently opened some of 
its trails to fatbiking.
 See the full visual 
Sally Jones, manager of the Cross Country ski area, has overseen the 
introduction of the bikes, including a half-dozen to rent. “It could eventually 
be as popular as snowboarding,” she says.

Fatbiking as a sport is booming across the US, especially in states such as 
Alaska and Colorado, where cycling wouldn’t otherwise be possible in winter. 
And in Europe, the inauguralSnow Bike Festival 
<http://www.snowbikefestival.com/> – the first of its kind – runs from 19-22 
January in Gstaad, Switzerland.

So these days, where there’s snow and sports, there are likely to be fatbikes. 

“We saw other ski areas in different regions embracing fatbiking,” says Sally, 
“and we figured we wouldn’t really know if we could make it work unless we 
tried it.”
 Merope Mills on her fatbike in Tahoe Donner. 
We set off for the easiest trails – named, surprisingly perhaps for 
California, Cup of Tea and Piece of Cake

Their introduction was not without obstacles. Hikers and mountain bikers 
aren’t always the best of bedfellows, and the same applies in the snow – where 
the two are allowed to coexist, there is tension between fatbikers and 
cross-country skiers. To solve that problem at Tahoe Donner, fatbikers are 
confined to 3km of flat, wide multi-purpose trails (where anything goes, and 
skiers and walkers are allowed to bring their dogs) and to 12km of single-track 
snow-shoeing routes.

We set off in the direction of two of the easiest multi-purpose trails – 
named, surprisingly perhaps for California, Cup of Tea and Piece of Cake. Flat 
and wide, with firm compacted snow that is groomed by snowmobiles, these trails 
were true to their name, and I found myself gently bobbing up and down, 
marvelling at how it felt no more difficult than cycling on a street. At this 
point, as we slipped between freshly snow-dusted white pines, it all seemed 
beautiful and effortless. My husband – never a skilled downhill skier – even 
declared that it suited him much better as a sport as he always loved being out 
in the snow but had never fallen in love with careering down a mountain at top 
speed.
 Tahoe Donner fatbiking Photograph: Daphne Hougard 
We spoke too soon. Sally sent us off on the Tiny Tim Trail, a sloping, 
twisting, turning snowshoe path that had me panting and out of breath in less 
than five minutes. This route is designed for keen mountain-bikers, and I found 
it almost impossible to navigate the part-slush, part-powder path: I confess 
that at this point I got off and pushed, causing one passerby to call out 
cheerily, “It’s called fatbiking not fatwalking” as they sped past on 
crosscountry skis.

People say fatbiking attracts a slightly older enthusiast than mountain biking 
(entrants in a recent race in nearby Tahoe City were mostly in their 40s). I 
was rather surprised and shamefaced when, as I was still pushing my bike, we 
met a 75-year-old snowshoer who told me she’d been on a fatbike, and found it 
fine. Very Californian.
 The adventure centre at Tahoe Donner. Photograph: Bill Stevenson 
It’s all great fun, and Tahoe Donner is stunning. Plus, when you’re hopelessly 
out of shape and unable to quite complete the trail on your fatbike, you can 
always blame it on the altitude.

• The trip was provided by Tahoe Donner <http://tahoedonner.com/> resort. Its 
Bikeworks <http://www.tahoedonner.com/bikeworks/rates/>division hires out 
fatbikes for $16 an hour, and a trail pass costs from $19 a day. Accommodation 
was provided byHampton Inn & Suites <http://hamptoninntruckee.com/> in Truckee, 
which has doubles from $149 B&B
 