


They started out in Ukraine, established a thriving headquarters in Paris and 
last yearsucceeded in ambushing a startled Vladimir Putin 
<http://www.theweek.co.uk/world-news/52396/topless-group-femen-vladimir-putin-stupid-protest>
 during a visit to a German trade fair. Now the controversial activists ofFemen 
<http://femen.org/en/about>, notorious for their topless protests on issues 
such as prostitution, abortion and the wearing of the hijab, are planning to 
target Britain.

In London to promote a documentary on the group's activities, founder member 
and spokesperson Alexandra Shevchenko saidFemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen> UK would focus on issues such as 
female genital mutilation (FGM), forced marriage and the sex industry. "No one 
is talking about FGM in England," she said. "People assume it is too violent 
and extreme to exist here, that it only happens in Africa and the Middle East, 
but the UK has some of the highest levels in the west."

The setting up of a new British arm of Femen's operations is likely to 
generate mixed feelings among indigenous feminist groups. A succession of 
high-profile topless protests since the group's formation in 2009 was greeted 
with bafflement and amusement by many observers, although given the 
heavy-handed treatment often meted out by bodyguards and police there is no 
doubting its members' courage.

According to the 25-year-old Shevchenko, Femen has no formal leadership, but 
hopes to establish a "homegrown" UK branch, built up from a base of British 
feminist activists, with whom she is in discussions this weekend.

Many Femen members have been exiled from Ukraine. From their base in Paris, 
where they made headlines recently by invading the catwalk at Paris fashion week
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/model-punches-femen-protesters-who-storm-catwalk-during-paris-fashion-week-8844816.html>
, they hope to visit London to help train recruits for membership, which is 
about more than signing a form.

"Becoming a member of Femen takes more than just a few days," said Shevchenko. 
"You must be physically and psychologically prepared. Of course, you have to 
support our ideology as a starting point, but it is also a question of being 
fit in your body and mind to fight – to be arrested, struggle with police and 
jump fences. Our main enemy is patriarchy and its three manifestations – 
dictatorship, religion and the sex industry. These issues are universal."

Shevchenko attributes Femen's success in France, where it has its largest 
membership, to the long francophone tradition of protest and organised 
resistance. Can the same rebellious potential be tapped this side of the 
Channel?

"Britain is separate from the rest of the European Union and has its own 
social and historical character," said Shevchenko. "Unlike in Ukraine, there 
has already been a sexual revolution here and people know what feminism is. But 
I don't think our campaigns will be very different. Femen UK will be about 
action. Of course, there is no obvious dictatorship here, but rightwing 
extremists are on the rise in the form of nationalism all over Europe. 
Likewise, we have the conservative influence of Christianity and Islamism, and 
of course the sex industry is everywhere."

In the summer of 2012, the group staged a protest at London's City Hall 
against the participation of Islamist regimes in the Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/aug/02/topless-feminists-protest-olympic-london-video>
, before being apprehended by police.

"Of course, it is not the Ukraine or Russia – the secret service will not try 
to kill you here," she said. "But there is not a big difference ultimately, 
because if you are trying to do sextremist actions that target important 
people, you will be arrested, recorded, tracked and banned from future 
protests."

Femen's campaigns against Islamism have incited hostility from Muslim and 
non-Muslim women, alongside charges of xenophobia and cultural imperialism.

Femen UK would, according to Shevchenko, be an addition to, not a substitute 
for, other forms of feminist campaigning in Britain. She claimed that there is 
an appetite among young women all over Europe for a new, more dynamic form of 
resistance.

"There is real feminist pride in the UK, which is why Femen appeals to women. 
But many are becoming disappointed with classical feminism, which is like 
library feminism," she said. "Of course, we still need those who make theory, 
but feminism should be like an army, with different departments. Femen is like 
the commanders taking the frontline to remove the mask and show the ugly sexist 
face of society."

The UK premiere of an acclaimed documentary entitled Ukraine is Not a Brothel, 
by Australian director Kitty Green, was screened as part of the 2013 BFI film 
festival. The film madeinternational headlines in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/05/victory-svyatski-femen-man>
 following its world premiere at the Venice film festival, where it revealed 
the role of a Ukrainian man, Victor Svyatski, as the alleged leader of Femen.
 