
A member of the militant feminist group Femen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen>, known for its provocative topless 
protests, on Wednesday staged a mock suicide in Notre Dame cathedral in the 
French capital, less than 24 hours after a far-right historian killed himself 
there in front of visitors and church-goers.

Posing with a pistol in her mouth the woman, who had "May fascism rest in 
hell" written in black letters across her naked torso, was detained by security 
guards. She was then arrested by police outside the cathedral and taken to the 
nearby police station.

Femen claimed responsibility for the protest on its Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=199168370234405&set=a.124533624364547.27799.121629674654942&type=1>
 page writing: "Femen appealed for the death of facism at the exact same place 
extreme-right activist Dominique Venner committed suicide yesterday afternoon. 
Our activist was arrested by the police."

Inna Schevchenko, leader of the Femen movement, told journalists the protester 
was a French woman named Marguerite. "It is a message addressed to all those 
who support facism and those who have expressed sympathy for the extreme-right 
militant who killed himself in Notre Dame – namelyMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>."

Dominique Venner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/21/french-historian-kills-himself-notre-dame-gay-marriage>
, 78, a far-right essayist and historian took his life in front of the altar at 
Notre Dame on Tuesday after writing a blog condemning France's recently passed 
law allowing same-sex marriage and adoption.

The cathedral was evacuated after Venner walked into the building with 
tourists at about 4pm, placed a letter on the altar, then shot himself through 
the mouth. Hundreds of visitors were evacuated.

Afterwards, Le Pen, head of the far-right Front National, tweeted her 
"respect" for Venner and said his death was an "eminently political" gesture.

Before killing himself Venner sent a letter to friends saying he was in good 
health in body and in mind, was filled with love for his wife and children, and 
loved life.

He had written: "I expect nothing more from life except the continuation of my 
race and my spirit. However, at this, in the evening of that life and in the 
face of immense dangers for my French and European heritage, I feel the need to 
act, while I still have the force. I believe it is necessary to sacrifice 
myself to break the lethargy that oppresses us. I offer what remains of my life 
in an act of protest."

Venner said he chose Notre-Dame as a "symbolic place … which recalls our 
immortal origins"; the reason for his suicide would be evident from his recent 
writings.

The historian had described France's same-sex marriage bill, known as the 
"marriage for all" law, as vile. It passed into the statute books on Saturday 
after months of furious and often ferocious debate, protest and violence.

Venner was a former member of the Secret Army Organisation, which opposed 
Algerian independence in the early 1960s and waged a terror campaign against 
Charles de Gaulle's government.

Hours before killing himself, Venner wrote on his blog of his anger at the law 
allowing homosexual couples to marry.

Referring to a rally against the law, planned for Sunday, he said the 
demonstrators were "right to shout their impatience and anger".

He also wrote of what he described as the risk of France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> "fallen to the power of Islamists", 
saying that for 40 years all governments and parties, except the Front 
National, businesses and the church, had accelerated north African immigration.

He claimed there needed to be "new gestures, spectacular and symbolic" to 
"reawaken the memory of our origins". He said: "We're entering a time where 
words should be authenticated by actions."
 