
Three Femen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen> activists disrobed in 
front of the ministry of justice in the Tunisian capital on Wednesday to 
protest against the jailing of a Tunisian member of the Ukrainian feminist 
group, quickly attracting an angry crowd.

The trio, one German and two French, were hustled away by police in Tunis 
after revealing naked torsos scrawled with "Breasts Feed Revolution". Wearing 
just jean shorts, the women chanted in English "Free Amina" and "Women's spring 
is coming" as onlookers tried to cover them.

Tunisian woman Amina Tyler scandalised society by posting topless pictures 
online in March in a Femen-inspired protest in which she scrawled "my body is 
my own and not your honour," on herself. She was later taken into hiding by her 
family after conservative preachers issued death threats against her.

The 19-year-old said last month she wanted to do one last topless protest 
before she left the country to study journalism in France and was arrested on 
19 May in the religious centre of Kairouan where an ultraconservative Muslim 
group had hoped to hold a conference before it was banned by police.

Tyler was charged with carrying a dangerous object, apparently a canister of 
pepper spray, and is due to appear before a judge on Thursday.

The women in Wednesday's protest climbed up on the gates of the justice 
ministry until police pulled them down and hustled them shouting into the 
building as an angry crowd gathered, many of them lawyers there for work.

"This is against our religion," said Fatima Zahaouadi, a young woman wearing 
the black robes of a lawyer but without a conservative headscarf. "For these 
women to take off their clothes as part of freedom of expression is against our 
religion and the traditions of Arab-Muslim Tunisian society."

The crowd surrounded the area where the women were being held and when the 
activists were transferred to a nearby building the crowed surged forward 
before being fended off by police.

"The ministry of justice is not a house of ill repute," said Fawzia Dridi, an 
angry bystander.

The crowd also attacked journalists attempting to cover the event as well as 
lawyers who tried to protect the reporters. Police took several journalists 
into custody to take statements from them as witnesses before releasing them.

Tunisia's prosecutor's office later announced the women had been questioned at 
Tunis's main police station before being charged and their embassies have been 
informed. The French consul visited the women and said they were in good 
spirits.

Lawyers said they could be charged with an attack on public morals or 
threatening public order, offences that could carry up to a year in prison.
 