
In an old parable, some people gather in a dark room in which there’s an 
elephant. They’re asked to describe it. One, who can touch only the elephant’s 
trunk, argues the elephant is like a tree branch. The one who can only feel its 
tail claims the elephant is like a rope. The people begin to argue amongst 
themselves about what is correct, and the parable reveals its wisdom when 
someone lights a candle and all see the elephant – and their incomplete 
perception – for what it really was.


A gloriously crude topless 'jihad' from a Femen activist | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/05/femen-topless-protest-gloriously-crude>
Such judgements, that are as adamant as they are ignorant, are nothing new to 
humanity. But they play out with startling frequency when discussing Muslim 
women.

The latest antics of Femen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/20/femen-activists-uk-branch-feminism>
 at a French Muslimconference 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20150914-femen-topless-protest-french-islam-conference>
 allegedly discussing wife-beating and proper womanly pursuits are a case in 
point. Running on stage in front of the two shocked male speakers after tearing 
off the abayas they had worn as a disguise, they stripped to the waist with 
slogans such as “I am my own prophet” and “no one subjugates me” scrawled 
across their naked torsos. They then shouted at the crowd until they were 
forcibly removed by security.

What is most troubling about this event is not the outrageously condescending 
attitude of Femen, nor the reported appalling sexism of the some of the Muslims 
involved: it is that these two voices are once again propped up as the only two 
in the conversation. It is as if one can only be either a Muslim who loves 
misogyny as a religious duty, or an orientalist feminist who hatesIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>. There is no other option.

Forcing the discourse into such a binary is not only myopic, but factually 
incorrect. I’ve researched the way Muslim women fight sexism within the Muslim 
community, and to the shock of many non-Muslims, my research showed that far 
from being a recent practice borrowed from the west, Muslim women had been 
standing up for themselves since the advent of Islam.

Aisha, the prophet’s wife, lacerated her male contemporaries with, “You make 
women worse than animals?!” for believing (wrongly) their prayers were 
nullified if a woman walked in front of them during worship. It was a woman who 
challenged, and beat, the second Caliph in a debate in the mosque about women’s 
financial rights in marriage. And today, lawyers like Asifa Qureshi use 
blisteringly strong sharia arguments to fight against rulings that punish rape 
victims in Pakistan and call for the stoning of women in Nigeria.

Far from seeing Islam as a barrier to liberation, a majority of the women in 
my investigations use Islam to help them in their fight against sexism and 
shockingly, many named Muslim men (husbands, fathers, teachers) as some of the 
biggest supporters of their endeavours.

When I’ve told non-Muslims about my findings, they were often baffled, even 
infuriated. The belief that women can pursue advancement and emancipation as 
Muslims will be dismissed by many as a kind of “false consciousness”, so 
certain are they that there is only one way to understand the issue.

But this is simply a function of people’s own fumbling in the dark over a 
small piece of elephant, all the while trumpeting their grasp of absolute truth.

Of course the scourge of sexism exists within Muslim communities and 
societies, just as it does in every community. The very fact that there are 
Muslim women fighting against it proves that we are not in denial. YetFemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen>, for all its self-righteous stripping 
and screaming about women’s rights, is actually in the same ideological camp as 
the misogynist Muslims they rail against.

Both reinforce the idea of a “real” sexist Islam, an idea to which the broader 
public conversation so often unquestioningly gives support.

But the stories of Muslim women, in my research and beyond, show there is a 
third way, and there always has been. It’s a belief in an Islam that is 
egalitarian and empowering to women, and is strongly rooted in authentic, 
classical interpretations of the faith.

If Femen was set up by a man, where does that leave its topless protests? | 
Bim Adewunmi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/04/femen-man-topless-protests-victor-vyatski>
It isn’t just the Islam of a lucky few women who grew up in the west in the 
last 50 years, but women and men through Islamic history in countless Muslim 
communities across the planet who firmly believed that gender justice was a 
divine mandate. And if people actually spoke to Muslim women, instead of about 
them, as the incident at the conference in France perfectly encapsulates, this 
would be known.

And so while the fable about the elephant raises an important point about 
opinions based on limited information, I have to wonder: what if instead of 
someone lighting a candle but still ultimately relying on their own opinions, 
the people asked the elephant: tell me who you are?
 