
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> can be a gloomy beat: 
most news stories focus on eviction rates, homelessness, rising house prices 
and rent rates locking people out of stable homes, while council housing is 
forcibly sold thanks to short-sighted government policies.

Obviously, bad news needs to be reported; often the people most subject to 
discrimination and homelessness are precisely those people the political class 
view as voiceless. But amid the doom, small symbols of hope appear in housing.

One such example, in a corner of Haringey in north London, is the St Ann’s 
redevelopment trustStart <http://www.startharingey.co.uk/>: a disparate team of 
local residents working together to try to work out what housing the local area 
needs and then deliver it. The St Ann’s hospital site in the borough is being 
partially sold off – two thirds of it has been earmarked for private 
development. In itself, that is not unusual. The NHS has a lot of land that’s 
undeveloped or hasn’t been in use, and with services changing, empty sites 
often pop up.

Originally the plan was for the site to be sold for private housing 
development, with only 14% of the homes being classed as “affordable” (itself a 
loaded term). But Start Haringey had different ideas. It wanted to use the land 
for a genuinely community-led development and asked locals what they wanted to 
see in the area. The organisation held consultation events with hundreds of 
attendees, circulated a survey completed by more than 300 locals, and 
collaborated with architects, who were asked how the community’s desires could 
be realised.

The clear winners were truly affordable housing, and a development that 
considers health in the built environment and the need to be environmentally 
friendly. St Ann’s already has areas of great natural beauty that the community 
wants to retain, but locals also pressed the importance of green space that is 
accessible to all, not fenced off.

'I can't believe how I've flowered as a tenant on a housing board'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/24/tenant-housing-association-board-lewisham-homes>
With mental health services continuing to run from the remainder of the site, 
the community was keen to integrate the development into the existing NHS 
services. The provision of affordable housing would not only be sympathetic to 
the needs of patients and staff at the hospital, but could also provide 
valuable accommodation for people who wish to live independently with support. 
At the same time, local outreach work could be carried out, so early 
intervention and preventative health work could seamlessly integrate into the 
development if done properly.


Community land trusts are growing in numbers throughout the UK, but perhaps 
key to this group’s success so far is how easy it is to get involved: meetings 
on the progress of the plan are held weekly at a local school, with a housing 
sub-group looking particularly at the type of buildings St Ann’s could benefit 
from. They’re open to all those in the area over the age of 16, and, while
membership is £1 <http://www.startharingey.co.uk/#membership>, anyone can 
contribute without becoming a member. Costs are covered by a crowdfunding 
campaign, which is aquarter of the way to its target with over 100 backers. 
<https://www.spacehive.com/st-anns-redevelopment> The funds will allow the 
group to finish the architect’s plans and put together a bid for the site.



Starting with a bottom-up approach, Start Haringey has developed a genuinely 
costed and doable plan for a development that meets local needs and helps 
mitigate the housing crisis locally.


Too often, locals are completely locked out of public consultations on the 
very land they live on, and neighbourhoods they have called home for decades: 
the assumption that locals don’t care about development simply isn’t true. You 
only need to see the strength of feeling involved in the many housing protests 
around the country. But in many cases, residents are patronised, offered a 
so-called choice between very similar models of development, and are never 
asked what they want their local area to look like – or, more importantly, why. 
Start Haringey shows that the appetite for proper consultation is there, and 
the political will to devote time to doing so is rising.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>.
 