
Mobile homes offer lower-income families respite from California’s housing 
crisis but a fatal fire has underscored their potential as death traps.

A suspected candle or Christmas tree lights ignited a conflagration whose 
speed and ferocity claimed the life of a five-year-old girl and injured eight 
relatives in Escondido, in San Diego county, on Thursday.

The fire erupted shortly after midnight in the home of the Flores family at 
the Greencrest mobile home park, trapping some members inside while others 
escaped through windows, their pyjamas aflame.

“Mobile homes just burn faster than regular homes,” said Escondido fire 
battalion chief Russ Knowles. “In a regular home you have … framing and dry 
wall that can provide some protection and slow down the fire. But in mobile 
homes there is typically just panel sheeting. So it’s very common that we see 
them burn a lot faster. That reduces residents’ time to get out.”

The tragedy came amid further signs of a febrile property market which has 
driven up rents and homelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/24/california-homelessness-santa-cruz-housing-affordability>
 across California. The value of homes in San Diego county reached $596bn in 
2016, up 6% from the year before, according to a study by real estate database 
Zillow 
<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/business/real-estate/sd-fi-values-up-20161229-story.html>
. Renters spent $9.6bn this year, up 8%.

Many lower-income families find refuge in mobile homes and recreational 
vehicles – avoiding the fate of the 78,000 people who live outdoors in 
California. Another 40,000 live in shelters and other transitional 
accommodation, according to the department of housing and urban development. 
Over athird of students in the school district which includes East Palo Alto, 
in the heart of Silicon Valley, are defined as homeless. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/silicon-valley-homeless-east-palo-alto-california-schools>

Three generations of the Flores family – six adults and four children – lived 
in the mobile home. Nine were at home when the blaze erupted.

“The cause is undetermined but we’re pretty sure it was electrical in nature, 
or a candle,” said Knowles, the fire chief. The cable or extension cord of 
Christmas tree lights were possible candidates. The absence of smoke detectors 
meant the family slept while toxic fumes and superheated air spread through the 
confined space, he said.

Neighbours woke to the sound of the family screaming.

“People were coming out of the windows in bare feet and in their pyjamas and 
smelling like burned plastic,” a neighbour, Cristina Zazueta,told the San Diego 
Union Tribune. 
<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/public-safety/sd-me-crime-child-fire-20161229-story.html>
 “It was awful, just awful.” The house kept “bursting” with popping noises, she 
said.

Sandra Flores, 25, the mother of the dead girl, who has not been officially 
named, was distraught and screaming “get them out”, referring to children 
trapped inside. “I asked her where the baby was and she said she had no idea. I 
asked where her brother was and she said it was too dark to see,” said Zazueta.

Sandra’s father emerged with “smoke puffing off his body”, said the neighbour. 
She held back those who wanted to enter the inferno. “It just kept popping and 
I was nervous that there would be some bigger gas burst. You could feel heat 
popping out of the house. Everybody was standing so close so I kept grabbing 
them to keep them away.”

The house “lit up”, with fire coming from every window, said Zazueta. “I 
didn’t know what to do. All I could do was retreat them away from the house as 
best I could.”

Firefighters risked their lives to suppress the flames and try to save those 
inside, said Knowles. “We see a lot of different things throughout our careers 
but nothing is more dramatic than putting out a structure fire and have people 
yell and tell us there are people trapped inside. We have to set aside emotions 
and focus on the job.”

The eight survivors were treated for smoke inhalation and other injuries. 

A Gofundme.com page <https://www.gofundme.com/yr-flores-family> set up by a 
friend to help pay for funeral and medical costs swiftly exceeded its $30,000 
target. Donors called the family sweet, kind and hard-working.
 