
Leeona Dorrian has become the most senior woman in Scottish legal history 
following her appointment as lord justice clerk.

Lady Dorrian QC, who has presided over recent fraud cases against Rangers 
football club, is the first woman to hold Scotland’s second highest judicial 
post.

Christine McLintock, president of the Law Society of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, said the appointment was “a 
significant step forward for equality and diversity within the judiciary” and 
provided “a wonderful role model for women in the legal profession”.

Dorrian, a graduate of Aberdeen University, was admitted to the Faculty of 
Advocates in 1981 and became a QC in 1994. Between 1997 and 2001 she was a 
member of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. She was appointed a judge 
of the supreme courts in 2005, and appointed to the inner house in November 
2012.

James Wolffe, QC, dean of the Faculty of Advocates, said: “Her broad 
experience as an advocate and as a judge equip her to serve Scotland well in 
this office at this time – when the legal system must continue to deliver 
justice while responding effectively to technological and social change.” 

The Scottish legal system continues to struggle with equality of 
representation. There are only 125 women working as advocates (who represent 
clients in the higher courts) out of 462 people who are members of the Faculty 
of Advocates. Of Scotland’s 113 QCs, the most senior and highest-paid rank of 
advocate, only 21 are female.

There are nine female judges in Scotland, out of 31 judges in post, and until 
Thursday’s appointment no woman had served in the most senior posts of lord 
president or lord justice clerk.

The law blogger Andrew Tickell noted 
<http://lallandspeatworrier.blogspot.co.uk/2016/04/a-first-for-women-lady-dorrian.html>
 the exclusion of women from the Scottish legal field until relatively 
recently, noting that by 1981 the Faculty of Advocates had only 10 female 
advocates, and the first appointment of a woman to the Court of Session bench 
was not until 1996.

Tickell recounted an incident from the early 90s in which Dorrian was told off 
by a judge for being “improperly dressed” because she was wearing a red ribbon 
around her neck.

Tickell concluded: “Let’s not overlook the understated symbolism … Although 
the law has hardly been an early adopter, Lady Dorrian’s appointment shows that 
even the Scottish legal establishment cannot evade the gender revolution 
forever.”
 