
Just days after authorities mooted suspending the ocean search for missing 
flight MH370, researchers suggested the debris zone may stretch a further 500km 
(310 miles) north.


A team of Italian scientists used computer modelling, into which they fed data 
on ocean currents and winds over the past two years, to try and pinpoint the 
Malaysia Airlines plane’s likely underwater grave.

They also added information on the location of five confirmed pieces of debris 
found to date – two in Mozambique and one each in Reunion, South Africa, and 
Mauritius.

“One of the most important findings is that everything that has been 
discovered so far is indeed compatible with the area where the authorities are 
searching,” lead researcher Eric Jansen of the Euro-Mediterranean Center on 
Climate Change in Italy told AFP.

Missing flight MH370: hunt for debris likely to be suspended
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
“The most likely (crash) area we found in our simulations overlaps with the 
official search area,” he said. But it also stretches a further 500 km north.

“If nothing is found in the current search area, it may be worth extending the 
search in this direction,” said Jansen, while conceding “the area is very 
large.”

Last week, Malaysia, Australia and China said hopes of finding the doomed 
plane were fading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
 and the search would be suspended if nothing is found in the current search 
zone.

The Boeing 777 vanished on 8 March, 2014 en route from Kuala Lumpur to 
Beijing, with 239 people aboard. It remains one of the greatest mysteries in 
aviation history.

The Australian-led search operation is scanning the seafloor at forbidding 
depths within a 120,000 sq km (46,000 sq mile) area – nearly the size of Greece.

“I don’t expect really that the authorities will change their opinion based on 
this” new data, said Jansen.

“The search is incredibly expensive and has being going on for two years,” he 
said, adding: “It is, of course, a question of money.”

Jansen described the disappearance of the plane as “bizarre”.

“It is important to understand what happened, not only for all the people 
directly involved, but also for the safety of aviation in general,” he said in 
a statement issued by the European Geosciences Union, which publishes the 
Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences journal in which the study was 
carried.

“We hope that we can contribute to this, even if our study is just a small 
piece of a very complicated puzzle.”
 