
Passengers travelling from England’s main airports have escaped delays and 
cancellations after a blanket of fog over southern and central parts of the 
country began to lift.

There were fears that flights might be badly hit after the Met Office issued a 
severe weather warning for fog for a large swath of land stretching from the 
south coast to the Vale of York and East Anglia.

Forecasters said the fog had eased overnight to a lighter mist in some areas 
and would continue to break up throughout the day.

Both Heathrow and Gatwick airports warned passengers on their websites of 
delays and cancellations overnight, but by Monday morning Gatwick said 
“reasonable” visibility meant flights would not be affected, while Heathrow was 
a little misty with just a few knock-on effects from delays at the weekend.

Airport workers' strike could disrupt Christmas flights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/airport-staff-strike-christmas-flights-stansted-luton-gatwick-ba>
A Heathrow spokesman said: “Our advice to passengers is to check with airlines 
before coming to the airport. We will be reviewing the fog warning in the next 
few hours.”

Met Office forecaster Chris Page said visibility at both airports was above 
1,000 metres – below which is regarded as foggy - and that it was overcast and 
cloudy in both areas. But he warned that drivers on the M4 could experience 
dense fog patches, as visibility at weather stations near the motorway was down 
to 200-300 metres.

Page said: “There is quite a lot of fog in the southern counties of England, 
in East Anglia and the Midlands. The weather warning is valid until 10 o’clock 
this morning. The majority of the fog will be clear by then but it may linger 
in places maybe until midday, and will be patchy.

“It will lift and break up through the day but some places may hold on to the 
fog until this afternoon. There will also be a little bit of rain this morning, 
pushing its way up from the continent, along with another band coming from the 
north-west, squeezing into the middle of the UK and helping to break and lift 
the fog.”
 