
Championship

• With Newcastle United losing to Sheffield Wednesday and Brighton not playing 
until Tuesday night, their three closest pursuers at the top – Reading, 
Huddersfield Town and Leeds United – all made ground on them with impressive 
victories. Third-placedReading moved to within five points of second place with 
a 3-1 win overNorwich City.

Yann Kermorgant put them ahead in the first half with a near-post header 
before Nelson Oliveira equalised after the break following a fluent passing 
move. But the dismissal of Norwich’s Jonny Howson on 67 minutes for a handball 
on the line helped turn the game back in Reading’s favour. Kermorgant’s 
subsequent spot-kick was chipped against the bar but Garath McCleary headed in 
the rebound to make it 2-1, before a firm drive into the roof of the net from 
Callum Harriott made sure of victory in injury-time. In the evening kick-off
Sheffield Wednesday made it a very good day for the chasing pack by shocking 
Newcastle at St James’ Park, Glenn Loovens scoring the only goal. Brighton host 
QPR on Tuesday.

• Huddersfield came from behind to beat Nottingham Forest, who were a goal up 
at the break through Hildeberto Pereira. David Wagner’s team raised their game 
in the second half and deservedly drew level through Kasey Palmer’s header on 
53 minutes and were soon in front when Michael Mancienne sliced an attempted 
diving clearance into his own net six minutes later. Mancienne’s afternoon got 
even worse when he was sent off with a minute remaining.

Glenn Loovens shocks Newcastle in Sheffield Wednesday bruising
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/newcastle-united-sheffield-wednesday-championship-match-report>
The Leeds revival continued when they overwhelmed Preston North End 4-1 at 
Deepdale. Goals from Kemar Roofe and Hadi Secko inside the first 25 minutes set 
the tone, before Marnick Vermijl swiftly pulled a goal back. Souleymane Doukara 
made it 3-1 after 31 minutes but Preston’s hopes of a second-half recovery were 
effectively ended with Jermaine Beckford’s 69th-minute dismissal for foul play, 
hissecond dismissal in successive appearances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/preston-pair-sent-off-fighting-each-other-sheffield-wednesday>
, and against his old club too. Pablo Hernández duly wrapped up the win in the 
88th minute.

• Ross McCormack prodded in a second-half winner for Aston Villa to see off 
Burton Albion in a 2-1 success, whileFulham won 2-0 at Ipswich Town to stay in 
the play-off hunt.Wolverhampton Wanderers overturned a 2-1 half-time deficit to 
beatBristol City 3-2. A fine volley from Helder Costa brought Wolves level and 
Ivan Caveleiro converted the winner from the spot with six minutes remaining.
Cardiff City were left cursing the concession of a late goal for the second 
match in succession after they drew 2-2 amid a flurry of late action atBrentford
, having been beaten by an injury-time goal in their 4-3 home defeat by 
Barnsley nine days earlier. Their match at Brentford came to life in the final 
seven minutes, in which the on-loan Crystal Palace striker Sullay Kaikai struck 
twice late on to cancel out Peter Whittingham’s first-half penalty and an 
89th-minute Kenneth Zohore goal that looked like being the winner.

• The bottom club Rotherham United face an almighty task to avoid the drop but 
they managed to close the gap on the side immediately above them,Wigan Athletic
, to five points by beating them 3-2 at the New York Stadium. The Millers had 
to withstand a sustained second-half revival from the visitors, having romped 
to a 3-0 half-time lead through goals from Aymen Belaid, Danny Ward and Dan 
Burn’s own-goal. Yanic Wildschut’s smart curling finish began Wigan’s revival 
and Jordi Gómez added another 11 minutes from time but Rotherham held on.
Blackburn Roverscontinue to keep them company in the bottom three after they 
were beaten 2-0 atBarnsley. They also had Darragh Lenihan sent off for serious 
foul play after 86 minutes shortly before Barnsley sealed it with a Marley 
Watkins goal on the break in injury time. Sam Winnall had opened the scoring 
after 14 minutes.

League One


• Oldham Athletic’s Boxing Day misery continued, at Sheffield United, who 
closed the gap on the leaders, Scunthorpe United, to one point with a 2-0 win. 
The Latics have lost on 26 Decembermore than any other league club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/24/oldham-boxing-day-blues-sheffield-united>
 – and they suffered festive defeat No36 in a 2-0 defeat at Bramall Lane. Billy 
Sharp’s two second-half goals were enough to inflict more Christmas pain on the 
division’s bottom club.Scunthorpe could only draw 0-0 at Bradford City though, 
given that their opponents are fifth and are the only team in the division 
other than the leaders themselves who are unbeaten at home, they will have 
cause for satisfaction with the draw.

• Bolton Wanderers remain only a point off the top two after their ninth 
consecutive home win, 2-1 over strugglingShrewsbury Town. David Wheater struck 
twice inside five minutes in the middle of the first half and, though Junior 
Brown pulled one back for the visitors with six minutes remaining, Bolton held 
on to keep Shrewsbury in the bottom four. Also enjoying a ninth home victory on 
the spin wereRochdale, who moved up to fourth with a 3-0 win over Chesterfield 
at Spotland. Iain Henderson’s seventh and eighth goals of the season sandwiched 
one by Calvin Andrew in a comfortable victory.

• Simon Cox scored twice as in-form Southend United moved into the play-off 
places with a 3-0 win overAFC Wimbledon. Phil Brown’s side, unbeaten in the 
league since early October, were in control against Wimbledon throughout. They 
took the lead after 10 minutes through Cox and were 2-0 ahead by half-time 
after Will Atkinson struck. The visitors’ hopes of recovery ended with the 
sending-off of Lyle Taylor after 71 minutes and Cox’s fine lob sealed the 
victory with seven minutes remaining.

• Peterborough United were denied a fourth straight win when Gillingham’s 
Baily Cargill struck in injury time to secure a 1-1 draw for the visitors at 
London Road. Lee Angol had given Grant McCann’s side the lead 12 minutes from 
time.Coventry City may have a new manager in Russell Slade but their woes 
continued with a 4-1 defeat atBristol Rovers, for whom Billy Bodin scored a 
hat-trick. Slade’s former team, the similarly troubledCharlton Athletic, won 
1-0 atMK Dons, giving the south London side’s new manager, Karl Robinson, 
victory over his former club.

League Two

• Crowd congestion delayed the start of Plymouth Argyle’s top-of-the-table 
meeting withWycombe Wanderers but the 12,210 fans at Home Park were treated to 
an enthralling match, though most will have left unhappy that the visitors 
fought back from 1-3 to secure a 3-3 draw in the final minute. Scott Kashket’s 
12th goal for Wycombe had put the visitors ahead in the first half, before 
Plymouth hit back with goals from Jordan Slew and Jake Jervis to lead at the 
break. Yann Songo’o extended Plymouth’s lead but Adebayo Akinfenwa swiftly 
pulled one back before Weston claimed a point to keep in-form Wycombe in sixth 
place. That late drama meantDoncaster Rovers are the new leaders, with Andy 
Williams’s 60th-minute goal enough to give Darren Ferguson’s side victory over
Notts County at Meadow Lane.

• Third-placed Carlisle United could only draw, 1-1 at out-of-form Crewe 
Alexandra, who have won only once since the end of October. Carlisle’s draw 
enabledPortsmouth to close the gap on the top three after they came from two 
goals down to beat the bottom club,Newport County, 3-2 at Rodney Parade. Behind 
to goals from Josh Sheehan, after 25 minutes, and Rhys Healey, on 51, 
Portsmouth’s revival began when Danny Rose scored against his former club 
before Enda Stevens equalised with 10 minutes to go. Kai Naismith then atoned 
for belting a 61st-minute penalty over the bar with the winner three minutes 
from time.

• Cambridge United’s fifth consecutive victory, 2-1 at Stevenage, kept them in 
seventh while things continue to look up forBlackpool, on the pitch at least. 
Mark Cullen’s second-half goal gave them victory at strugglingHartlepool United
. Having suffered eight home defeats in a row during the autumn,Leyton Orient 
have now won twice at Brisbane Road in succession but they made it hard for 
themselves against Crawley Town. Having raced into a 3-0 half-time lead with 
goals from the teenage debutant Sam Dalby and two from Paul McCallum, they 
wobbled in the second half and let Crawley back in it through a Teddy Mezague 
own-goal and Enzio Boldewijn’s effort 12 minutes from time. But Andy Edwards’s 
side held out for a victory that takes them out of the bottom four.
 