
If we are going to be generous, it is fair to assume Diego Lemos must have a 
few stories that have been passed down through the family. His father, Luisinho 
Tombo, was the leading scorer in the Rio State League of Brazil on two separate 
occasions, the most prolific striker in the history of his first club, America, 
with 311 goals, and played alongside Zico at Flamengo. One uncle, Caio 
Cambalhota, was at Flamengo and another, César Maluco, was part of Brazil’s 
1974 World Cup squad because of his performances for Palmeiras.

Whether that makes Lemos someone you would want at your football club is 
another matter. Lemos, having been working as a football agent in Qatar, took 
over atMorecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> in September, 
talking about climbing the leagues and arriving to a fanfare that included 
the chairman, Peter McGuigan, acclaiming the deal as one that will “secure the 
long-term financial viability of the club”.

The alarm bells started ringing when the players and staff did not get their 
wages in October and the club were bailed out by the Professional Footballers’ 
Association. Lemos, 35, left the country on 17 November and has not been back 
since. Two directors have subsequently resigned and in a statement on the club 
website – the club, lest it be forgotten, Lemos owns – one talked about 
Morecambe and himself being “seriously misled”. As family trees go, it turns 
out Lemos was the sap. It is still not clear where he is, or what his 
intentions are, other than the club confirming that communication has 
“continued to be difficult”. Lemos, a bit like the town’s piers, has 
disappeared.

It is the kind of imbroglio that would have had a lot more publicity had it 
been a bigger club but the story of English football’s first Brazilian owner 
still deserves to be told when, more and more, the people running our clubs 
seem to operate by the theory of chaos.

The north-west appears to have suffered in particular given the financial 
meltdowns that have threatened to bring Bolton Wanderers to their knees over 
recent years, the winding-up orders Bury have dodged and, for anyone who 
remembers better times at Stockport County, the fact the most recent game at 
Edgeley Park came against Harrogate Town in the Conference North. Blackpool, 
under the Oyston regime, have been a basket case for longer than they will care 
to remember and, likewise, it is difficult to know where to start with the 
tragicomedy of Blackburn Rovers.

Not that it is confined to just one part of the country when Coventry City, 
Charlton Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
 and various others have their own horror stories and it did compel me to get 
in touch with the Football League recently to explore whether it was fully 
satisfied with its owners and directors’ test or if more could be done to beef 
it up.

It is a common complaint but, equally, it does feel sometimes as if it is too 
easy to blame the authorities. Anyone wishing to buy a 30% stake, or higher, in 
a football club has to provide financial guarantees, as well as evidence about 
where the money comes from. Nobody is allowed to take a directorial position if 
he or she has criminal convictions for fraud, or is serving a suspension from 
another profession. Beyond that, however, it is not entirely easy to know what 
more the league can do – especially, as in the Morecambe case, when the 
directors, the local media and the supporters all seem happy with the new 
arrangement.

Andrea Radrizzani buys 50% of Leeds to be co-owner with Massimo Cellino
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/andrea-radrizzani-leeds-united-co-owner-massimo-cellino-garry-monk>
All that can really be said is that just because someone appears to have 
wealth does not automatically make them competent and that it is a relief, 
finally, that two of the clubs who have suffered from dysfunctional owners in 
recent years might now be returning to a position where they can hope the worst 
is behind them.

Leeds United are never going to be a club that attract universal sympathy and 
it is probably futile expecting everyone to wish them well when so many 
opinions have been shaped by the kind of infamy that once led Stuart Maconie, 
the broadcaster and writer, to recall his formative years watching Don Revie’s 
team as like being in the trance of “11 JR Ewings – duplicitous, untrustworthy, 
conniving and, as in when they taunted a beaten Southampton with those 32 
passes onMatch of the Day, heartlessly smug”. Massimo Cellino, serving an 
18-month ban for flouting the rules about agent payments, ticks a few of those 
boxes himself but hopefullyAndrea Radrizzani, with his newly acquired 50% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/andrea-radrizzani-leeds-united-co-owner-massimo-cellino-garry-monk>
, will actually mean what he says about being a “fitting custodian” in a way 
his new business partner rarely has.

Nottingham Forest also deserve a break now John Jay Moores, the former owner 
of the Major League Baseball franchise San Diego Padres, and his business 
partner, Charles Noell,are about to take control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/nottingham-forest-takeover-fawaz-al-hasawi>
 at a club where, to sum up the level of expertise, questions were asked 
internally at one stage about why they were spending so much on footballs – the 
argument being that you could get one for a fiver at the local Asda.

Fawaz al-Hasawi’s bewildering reign has been accompanied by a series of 
winding-up orders, wages and debts repeatedly being paid late, a transfer 
embargo for breaching financial fair-play regulations, all sorts of eccentric 
decision-making and the embarrassment of starting the season with a reduced 
capacity because the ground did not have a safety-certificate holder. He did at 
least apologise a few months back, acknowledging that the next owner would be 
“more professional” and should probably be grateful Forest no longer attract 
the publicity of old, sparing him too much scrutiny. Suffice to say, however, 
it will be a blessed relief when the end credits ofCarry on Kuwait roll.

This, however, is actually a good example about where the league’s checks – 
formerly known as the fit-and-proper-person test – can be vulnerablegiven that 
Hasawi employed Jim Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/30/nottingham-forest-jim-price-billy-davies>
, the cousin of the manager, Billy Davies, to help run the club even though he 
would not have passed the relevant regulations for a directorial role.

Price, previously a solicitor, had been suspended by the Law Society of 
Scotland because of an investigation, still continuing, into alleged financial 
irregularities at the Glasgow law firm Ross Harper, which was shut down in 
April 2012, owing £2.6m to clients and creditors. He was able to start a new 
career in football with the title of general manager, rather than as a director.

In August 2013, during an era of drastic over-spending for which the club is 
still suffering, Price dismissed financial fair-play as “illegal and 
unworkable”. Then, in December 2014, eight months after Price andDavies were 
removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/24/billy-davies-nippy-sweetie-nottingham-forest>
, Forest were given a transfer embargo, lasting a year and a half, because of 
their accounts from the 2013-14 season, when he had been prominently involved.

It is just a pity so many owners do not take better care and, back in 
Morecambe, seven places off the bottom ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> with the lowest 
attendances of any club in the top four divisions, the supporters probably 
deserve a full explanation about what checks the people who ushered in Lemos 
made themselves. One of the club’s directors, Abdulrahman al-Hashemi, resigned 
in November, eight days after Lemos’s disappearing act, and only a few weeks 
after joining the board. Another, Nigel Adams, followed him out just before 
Christmas and cannot be feeling any better now Lemos’s company, PMG Holdings, 
formerly owned by McGuigan, has gone into administration.

“What is saddest about this sorry saga is that Morecambe FC has always prided 
itself on doing things the right way, and had a deserved reputation for doing 
so,” Greg Lambert, of theVisitor newspaper, has written. “Morecambe was a 
small-town family club built on traditional values. Now it’s beset by 
problems.” It all feels depressingly familiar and, as a raft of other clubs can 
testify, it might get worse before it gets better.

Payet finds it too easy to stand out

Dimitri Payet has risked offending West Ham supporters recently because of the 
impression he has given in various interviews that he would be open to the idea 
of moving to a club where he can be part of a constellation rather than a 
solitary star.

Unfortunately for his current employers, the FA Cup defeat against Manchester 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-ham-united-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
 was just another demonstration that West Ham are not a club that can meet the 
ambitions of the category-A players. Not yet anyway.

Manchester City cruise past West Ham thanks to David Silva masterclass
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-ham-united-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
Slaven Bilic’s team were four goals down, with the stadium already being 
deserted, when Payet was introduced and even in his short time on the pitch the 
France international still constituted his team’s outstanding moment with one 
piece of skill to deceive Nicolás Otamendi.

West Ham have spent all season grubbing around for points at the lower end of 
the Premier League.They conceded four to go out of the EFL Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-west-ham-united-efl-cup-match-report>
 at Manchester United and, with four months still to go, their season is 
drifting in a way that makes Bilic vulnerable.

Payet turns 30 in a couple of months. Nobody should be surprised at this stage 
of his career if a player of his ability has a roving eye.
 