
The most notable thing that Radamel Falcao did during his season at Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> was get a haircut but now the 
Colombian could be about to have a big impact on the Londoners’ title bid. 
Because word is that he’s the subject of a cashalicious offer fromTianjin 
Quanjian, the club who recently spurred Diego Costa’s sudden interest in 
Chinese culture. So far Monaco have rejected Tianjin’s advances but if that 
offer were to be increased and Falcao were to accept, then Chelsea’s life could 
be made a little easier and Costa would have to perform the most embarrassing 
climb-down since Peter Odemwingie went back to West Brom claiming he’d only 
gone to Loftus Road to find out why there’s a dental practice near the stadium 
called Batman.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Meanwhile in Manchester, Pep Guardiola is preparing to confound his 
doubters by staging a public spoon-bending show before next weekend’s 
defeat by Spurs. He has already wowed his employers by describing in 
meticulous detail how he intends to restore Manchester City to the position of 
dominance that they fleetingly occupied. All he needs to implement it is 
time, understanding, and another £250m, give or take the world record 
signing of Lionel Messi. 

Manchester United, meanwhile, continue to ready themselves for the arrival 
of Antoine Griezmann, though the deal won’t be done until the summer. 
Atletico Madrid will try to replace the Frenchman with their old mucker 
Diego Costa, who by then could be sporting a new Premier League winner’s 
medal around his necks or imprints of several boots on his arse. Michy 
Batshuayi, meanwhile, will be jumping up and down trying to remind everyone 
at Stamford Bridge of his presence, although someone at Chelsea does appear 
to be aware that he is there because they rejected inquiries about him from 
Paris Saint-Germain. 

United are also keen to buy the left-back Kieran Tierney from Celtic. 
Brendan Rodgers is eager to hold on to the player at least until the 
Scottish Premier League title is secured. So a deal could be done at any 
moment. It may take United longer to secure 16-year-old Vinicius Junior, 
the Flamengo forward who has been dubbed ‘the new Neymar’, possibly by his 
agent, or possibly by his mates in the playground. 

West Ham want Dimitri Payet to apologise after they reject £20m Marseille bid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/west-ham-reject-bid-dimitri-payet-marseille>
United are also keen to duke it out with Arsenal for the services of the 
Greek defender Kostas Manolas, who’s currently at Roma. 
James McCarthy could be set to revive his career at Sunderland, or just 
move there. Ronald Koeman has let the midfielder know his future lies away 
from Goodison Park and is hopeful that if the Republic of Ireland 
international goes to Sunderland, then that could facilitate Everton’s 
attempt to prise Lamine Koné away from the Stadium of Light. Sunderland and 
West Ham are also pursuing after the Leeds United striker Chris Wood but so far 
neither has offered anywhere near enough to persuade the promotion-chasing club 
to let him go.

Middlesbrough are close to bringing Patrick Bamford back to their place for 
good. Swansea City fancy a bit of Gaël Kakuta, who’s been a hot prospect for 
the best part of a decade.

And here’s a game to play with your friends: see who can name every player to 
have played for Watford this season. If you wait until after next weekend 
you may have to include Mauro Zárate, because the Hornets are said to be on 
his case.
 