
Championship

• Reading and Brighton both failed to capitalise on Newcastle United’s defeat 
on Friday night as the Royals were thumped 5-0 byFulham and Albion held to a 
goalless draw atCardiff City. Second-placed Brighton missed the chance to go 
top – after Newcastle were beaten at Nottingham Forest – and while they did 
extend their unbeaten run to 11 matches, the defender Gaëtan Bong was sent off 
in injury time after receiving a second yellow card.

• Reading meanwhile, were roundly beaten at Craven Cottage as Chris Martin 
scored twice to end the Royals’ five-match winning streak. Chris Gunter’s own 
goal put the home side on their way before Martin fired in his first from 
outside the area and Reading’s Danny Williams was sent off for kicking out at 
Stefan Johansen. Sone Aluko and Johansen were on target in quick succession 
before Martin completed the rout by curling home a free-kick.

• Elsewhere, Norwich City also hit five, putting Brentford to the sword to end 
a run of five defeats on the bounce. Early goals from Jacob Murphy and Graham 
Dorrans got the Canaries up and running – Dorrans knocking in the rebound after 
his penalty was saved. Robbie Brady, Nélson Oliveira and Alex Pritchard were 
all on target in the second half.

Preston pair sent off for fighting each other in loss at Sheffield Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/preston-pair-sent-off-fighting-each-other-sheffield-wednesday>
• Derby County’s winning steak continues apace – their 1-0 victory over Wigan 
Athletic is a fifth in a row and came courtesy of Bradley Johnson’s first-half 
header at the DW Stadium while Danny Graham’s penalty forBlackburn cancelled 
out Kasey Palmer’s headed opener forHuddersfield in a 1-1 draw.

• Rotherham’s woes continued as a 2-1 loss at Burton Albion condemned the 
Millers to 15 matches without a win and 11 defeats from their last 12
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> matches. 
Jackson Irvine and Matt Palmer put the Brewers into a 2-0 lead before Tom 
Adeyemi pulled a late goal back for managerless Rotherham late on.

• Birmingham City, fourth at the started of the day, were convincingly beaten 
3-0 at home byBarnsley with Marc Roberts and Sam Winnall (2) doing the damage 
whileBristol City ended a run of three straight defeats with a 2-0 win over 
Ipswich Town at Ashton Gate thanks to Lee Tomlin’s penalty and Luke Freeman’s 
effort. AndSheffield Wednesday defeated Preston 2-1 in an ill-tempered affair 
in which Fernando Forestieri was sent off for the Owls and bothEoin Doyle and 
Jermaine Beckford saw red for North End for fighting each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/preston-pair-sent-off-fighting-each-other-sheffield-wednesday>
.

League Two

• Just two matches but 12 goals in the fourth tier as Doncaster Rovers went 
top of the table after a 4-3 away victory atStevenage. Three goals in the space 
of 13 first-half minutes put Rovers in control – Andy Butler, Liam Mandeville 
and Matty Blair the scorers. Stevenage rallied through Tom Pett and Fraser 
Franks but Jamie Jones’s own goal put Doncaster 4-2 up before Rowan Liburd hit 
a third for the hosts.

• Yeovil Town moved into the play-off places thanks to a 5-0 win over Crawley 
Town, Otis Khan scoring twice with Tom Eaves, Ryan Hedges and François Zoko 
also finding the net.
 