
The government will damage British justice if it inflicts further cuts on 
forensic science, the official regulator has said.


Dr Gillian Tully warned in her annual report that financial pressures were 
compromising quality, including potentially in serious criminal cases involving 
murder and sexual assault.

Techniques such as DNA analysis and hi-tech examination of samples underpin 
the criminal justice system and are vital to proving guilt and innocence in the 
courts.

The government abolished the Forensic Science Service in 2012, which was the 
main provider to the police, andthe system has been beset by problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/aug/03/forensic-science-service-closure-police>
.

Numerous forensic providers have struggled to agree standards of dealing with 
samples and how they are reported to courts, especially to juries.

Tully told the Guardian she wanted the power to ban substandard providers, 
which the regulator currently lacks.

She also warned the government that the budget for forensic science could not 
be reduced further.

She said: “Spending on forensic science has gone down. We are approaching the 
stage where we are at the very limit of these cuts, and it cannot be cut 
further as quality will be compromised.”

Tully said the cuts had been met through savings and by fewer samples being 
submitted for examination.

She warned further cuts would increase the risk of miscarriages of justice and 
cases where victims of serious crime failed to get justice. “We’ll end up with 
more failures,” Tully said.

Tully revealed that she would be examining an alleged police error in the case 
of the convicted serial killer Stephen Port, who was jailed last year for 
murdering four men.

The regulator will investigate why the Metropolitan police did not carry out 
forensic tests onPort’s third victim when told to do so by a pathologist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/stephen-port-murders-police-failed-to-follow-up-on-coroners-concerns>
.

Port tried to make the man’s death look like suicide, and failings in the case 
are under investigation by the police watchdog.

Tully said there was too little legal aid being provided for defendants to 
challenge the forensic evidence being used against them in criminal cases.

In her report, the regulator said: “Funding for forensic science across the 
board and, particularly perhaps, for defence provision via legal aid, must be 
at a level that enables the standards to be met.

“Otherwise we will face the costs, both in criminal justice terms and 
financially, of quality failures and loss of confidence in forensic science.”

Tully said forensic services were generally of high quality and the public 
could by and large have confidence in them. But she said there were areas of 
concern.

In a rape case a sample from a victim became contaminated and could not be 
used. The incident raised concerns about other cases.

In her report the regulator said: “DNA recovered from one complainant examined 
at a sexual assault referral centre (Sarc) [was] detected on the intimate swabs 
from another complainant examined in the same facility, in circumstances where 
the DNA could not have been present on the second complainant.”

“A number of concerning contamination-related issues in both Sarcs and police 
custody were raised to the regulator, including the same medical practitioner 
being asked to examine multiple suspects within a case, or even both the victim 
and the suspect within the same case.”

There were concerns also about standards in the increasingly important area of 
digital forensics – extracting evidence from phones and electronic devices. 
This is crucial in cases where social media is involved and in instances of 
digital hate crimes and blackmail.

Tully said: “Police forces must not treat quality standards for forensic 
science as an optional extra – and neither must others delivering forensic 
science in the criminal justice system.”

Debbie Simpson, the National Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Chiefs Council lead for forensic science, said: “The police service is 
committed to achieving accreditation and improving standards of forensic 
science.

“This latest report of the forensic regulator has highlighted key priority 
areas for us to continue to enhance our response and prevent quality failures.”
 