
Tenerife is a party island for hedonistic nights and lazy days. But it has 
another, more secret, identity: as a training destination for elite athletes. 
British cyclist Bradley Wiggins is the latest sports star to benefit from a 
stint on the island. After an extreme training programme there, he has won 
three major races this season and is the favourite to win the Tour de France.

Other top cyclists, from Eddy Merckx to Lance Armstrong, chose Tenerife for 
their warm weather training – and they are not the only sportspeople to be in 
on the secret. Ahead of London 2012, Olympic triathlon, swimming and volleyball 
players have sweated and strained at T3 Tenerife Top Training (
tenerifetoptraining.com <http://www.tenerifetoptraining.com/en/home>), an 
international-standard venue in La Caleta. The rest of us can get fit there too 
– packages start from around £45 a day for swimming training in an 
Olympic-sized outdoor pool, including accommodation, or you can choose from 
football, rugby, triathlon, beach volleyball, tennis and squash packages.

The Olympic sport that drew me to Tenerife, though, was boxing. I had been 
training in London with the Times Amateur Boxing Club (timesabc.org.uk 
<http://www.timesabc.org.uk/>) and was invited on their annual trip abroad. The 
club's training/holiday destination since 2005 has been the TKO Gym in hilly 
Chayofa, in the south of the island, owned and run by Jim Yellop, a former East 
End wheeler dealer (about whom the BBC made a documentary, Eastenders Abroad) 
with a passion for boxing. TKO is his labour of love: a large villa complex set 
around a pool, with a basement boxing gym.

TKO Gym has been used by professionals, including David Haye, Amir Khan, Nicky 
Cook and James DeGale, but Jim also welcomes amateur boxers, fitness fans and 
groups that simply want to rent a large villa with on-site fitness facilities – 
it sleeps up to 20. You can go with a crowd and take your own coaches, as we 
did, or book a room and hire a personal trainer for around £20 a session.

The beauty of training in Tenerife is that it is warm year-round and, wherever 
you are, it's not far from the mountains or the sea. My seven days there 
followed a pattern: early‑morning run/cycle; late‑afternoon boxing training. On 
the first day we also squeezed in a lunchtime circuits session around the pool, 
but the heat was so intense in September that serious exercise in the middle of 
the day was almost impossible. We tended to stick to sunbathing, swimming and 
the odd game of water polo.

The morning runs were challenging. Sometimes we would run along the seafront 
in nearby Los Cristianos and Playa de las Américas, deserted at 7am – a totally 
different way to experience the party capital of Tenerife. These runs might end 
with agonising beach sprints or a cooling swim across the bay. Other days we 
would run straight from the gym, around village streets so steep that it was 
quicker to walk than to jog – but walking wasn't allowed. That particular 
route, the "Jungle Run" (up to the Las Aguilas Jungle Park, a zoo), ended with 
several Rocky-style flights of strength-sapping steps.
 Rachel Dixon gets ready to tackle Mount Teide. Photograph: Brooke Streatfield 
Mount Teide is the really big draw for athletes. Forget the Pyrenees; at 3,718 
metres this volcano is Spain's highest peak. It is perfect for altitude 
training, which is most effective over 2,400 metres. I tackled it on a bike. 
The start was cold, grey, a slog. Soon I was all alone in a strange lunar 
landscape; the others were on foot behind me. As I climbed higher the sun rose 
above the peak, flooding the mountainside with golden light. I had a few 
minutes to enjoy the view before the altitude and the gradient kicked in.

By the end, I was cycling for the count of 20 breaths, stopping for air, then 
cycling for 20 more. At this snail-like pace I reached the cable car, my 
target. It felt good – but not as good as the terrifyingly fast plummet back 
down to the runners, which was probably the best stretch of cycling of my life.

The afternoon boxing sessions were the usual mix of skipping, shadow boxing, 
punchbags, pad work, sparring and circuits. The difference was the heat, which 
was draining, but also satisfying in a sweat-dripping, Bikram yoga kind of way. 
I felt that if I could keep going in those sweltering conditions, nothing could 
stop me back home.

One day we went to train at Boxeo Povedano in Las Américas (boxingtenerife.com 
<http://boxingtenerife.com/>), better known among British expats as "The 
Spanish Gym". It's something of a rival to Jim's place, and there's no denying 
that the facilities are top-notch, with a well-equipped gym and a running 
track. Visitors can use the facilities from around £5 a day, and the staff 
can arrange deals at local hotels. I enjoyed whacking the water bag, a piece of 
kit I'd never used before.

It can be difficult to find healthy food in Tenerife's resort areas. We 
discovered a tapas restaurant in Chayofa called La Tasca Del Arte 
(Calle Centro, +34 922 729181,fincadelarte.com 
<http://www.fincadelarte.com/?cat=4>) that served the best food we had all week 
– lentil and chickpea stews, pimientos de Padrón and garlicky scrambled eggs 
with jamón and tomatoes – so it can be found if you look for it. But TKO is 
well set up for self-caterers, which is probably the best bet for those on a 
strict training diet.

There is lots to do on the island. We went on a boat trip that included a 
blissful period at anchor when everyone dived off the back and swam around a 
cool blue cove – a real balm for aching muscles.

At the end of seven full days of training, I expected to feel fitter than I 
ever had before. Instead, I felt more tired than I ever had before. Though my 
fitness levelshad definitely improved – the final run along the seafront was 
almost a pleasure, whereas the first was a punishment.

Tenerife is definitely not just for partygoers, but it's not just for 
elite athletes either – anyone can benefit from a workout week on the island 
of Olympians.

• A week at TKO Gym (+34 922 729767, tkogymtenerife.com 
<http://www.tkogymtenerife.com/>), including training facilities and 
accommodation but excluding meals and flights, costs around £250pp. Individual 
training sessions are extra – email for details. The flights were provided by 
Monarch (monarch.co.uk <http://www.monarch.co.uk>), which flies to Tenerife 
from Birmingham, Gatwick, Luton and Manchester from £110 return
 