
Scotland's football authorities are to enter a desperate race against time to 
oversee a league reconstruction model aimed at preventingRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> from starting next season in the 
Third Division.

At a meeting of Scottish Football League clubs at Hampden Park on Friday – at 
which representations were made by the Rangers manager, Ally McCoist, and the 
chief executive, Charles Green – 25 out of 30 votes rejected the possibility of 
the team entering Division One. The upshot of that was an announcement that 
Rangers must enter Scotland's league set-up in the fourth tier; where they are 
due to face the likes of Peterhead and Annan Athletic.

That would represent a catastrophic fall from grace for a club historically 
regarded as part of Scotland's establishment and which only recently featured 
regularly in the Champions League.

Those overseeing the game in Scotland have been vocal – and controversially so 
– about the need for Rangers to compete more prominently in the professional 
game than at the bottom rung. Such comments have roused anger amongst 
supporters; Rangers entered administration in February and are now in the 
process of being liquidated, hence a "newco" business has been formed.

Stewart Regan, the Scottish Football Association's chief executive, said last 
week: "There's really only one decision for the game now – that Rangers come 
into football in the First Division."

Regan had estimated a potential loss of £16m and impending disaster for 
Scottish football if Rangers competed in Division Three. Nonetheless, his 
organisation is yet to grant Rangers membership of the association.

Neil Doncaster, the chief executive of the Scottish Premier League, even made 
several public pitches aimed at readmitting Rangers into the top-flight. That 
notion was rejected by member clubs, much to the general delight of supporters.

The SPL is due to meet on Monday, when the concept of an "SPL2" is set to be 
discussed. Under that plan, Rangers would be invited to join with other clubs 
offered financial incentives to leave the SFL and take part in a new setup. The 
rejection by SFL chairmen of the First Division proposal, nonetheless, 
highlights the scale of such a task.

SPL clubs have a serious fear about the potential loss of commercial contracts 
– notably key broadcast agreements – if Rangers are not part of their setup. A 
four-year television deal between the league and both Sky and ESPN, due to 
start at the beginning of next season, remains unsigned. Sky is yet to clarify 
its position but a critical component of earlier arrangements has been its 
screening of four Old Firm matches per season.

One SPL club, Inverness, spoke out about its fears. "There will now inevitably 
be serious consequences for the game in Scotland," said their chairman, Kenny 
Cameron. "We have all, as clubs, accepted the views of our stakeholders in 
making the initial judgement to uphold sporting integrity.

"All clubs will now have to live with the repercussions of this decision. 
Scottish football was at a crossroads today in terms of what was on the table 
for all clubs regarding reorganisation, financial distribution and a road map 
that would have taken the game forward.

"But this has now been thrown into disarray by this decision. This is a sad 
day for all clubs in Scotland. We will be convening an emergency board meeting 
over the weekend to discuss the very serious financial implications for us as a 
club going forward."

A Rangers statement, issued in the immediate aftermath of the SFL 
announcement, claimed Regan and Doncaster "will introduce a plan for SPL 2 – 
which would include Rangers – and invite existing Division One members to join."

Intriguingly, the club swiftly amended those words to state an SPL2 "was 
mooted last week" when it was suggested that it could "swing into action in the 
event of today's outcome but it is not known if this will be the case".

Given that Rangers are perfectly aware of the precarious financial position of 
so many SPL clubs, their public utterances must be placed in context. Green 
said: "From the outset, we made clear we would play where we were told to play 
and we just want to get back to playing football.

"This decision maintains the sporting integrity that clubs and fans across 
Scotland have been calling for but it also impacts massively on Scottish 
football as a whole and only time will tell what the consequences will be.

"Rangers have been handed the ultimate punishment of starting again from the 
bottom of the leagues but there is an overwhelming feeling among fans and 
within the club of 'wiping the slate clean' as a club free of sanctions."

McCoist added: "I fully accept the decision of the SFL today and thank them 
for allowing us into the SFL. Clearly, starting again from the bottom league is 
not ideal and makes the task of rebuilding Rangers a longer one but the SFL was 
placed in an impossible situation and I respect its decision."

David Longmuir, the chief executive of the SFL, said: "I'm comfortable today 
that the Scottish Football League made a very, very decisive decision that was 
based on sporting fairness and I think the Scottish Football League were in the 
right place to make that decision.

"Today's decision has been one of the most difficult for all concerned but it 
has been taken in the best interest of sporting fairness which is the 
fundamental principle of the Scottish Football League."
 