
"We decided to tire out the England forwards by making them chase about the 
field," Andy Irvine, captaining Scotland for the first time, said after the 
30-18 defeat at Murrayfield on Saturday.

"We did this but we had given them too much of a lead," he said.

The strength, technique, experience and control of their forwards brought 
England a lead of 19-3 at half-time and eventually won them the Calcutta Cup, 
the championship, the triple crown and the grand slam for the first time since 
1957. But the refusal of the Scots to lie down meant that the second half was 
more lively and challenging than anyone had any right to expect.

Well before half-time England's pack were in such command at the scrums and in 
the loose that many opponents would have resigned themselves to their fate. But 
Scotland decided to run everything and were rewarded with two stirring tries 
and 15 points in the second half.

England's triumph was not due entirely to their forwards. In this match the 
halfbacks kicked well and the elusive running of Woodward fashioned the first 
two tries for Carleton and Slemen. Hare's conversion of both these tries, the 
second from near the left touchline, had an important psychological value, and 
Carleton ended up with a hat-trick of tries. The England three-quarters were 
brought into the game and they did not let the side down.

The basis of England's victory on Saturday - as indeed of their hearteningly 
successful season - was their thorough organisation, given life and purpose by 
the inspiration of Billy Beaumont. The richly experienced players around him 
knew what to do, and Beaumont, like Eric Evans before him in 1957, led them 
into action with zest and relish.

Another important factor in the current England revival has been the presence, 
behind Beaumont, of two intelligent optimists, Mike Davis and Budge Rodgers. 
Davis, as coach, has seen to it that England's preparations at squad sessions 
have been thorough and apposite.

Rogers, as chairman of selectors, has seen the value of experience and a 
settled team, and his enthusiasm and planning have given momentum to the whole 
campaign.

It seems an age ago that Davis conducted his first England training session on 
an echoing, grassless suburban pitch in Tokyo. Yet it was on that tour last May 
and June that Davis laid the foundations of Saturday's triumph and Beaumont 
grew up as captain.

England's third try at Murrayfield showed them at their best. At a scrum in 
the right-hand corner they drove the Scots backwards with perfectly timed and 
controlled shoves until a pushover try seemed on the cards. Instead, they let 
the ball out on the blind side, and Scott and Smith put Carleton over, giving 
England a lead of 16-0 after 31 minutes.

Two penalty goals by Irvine and one by Hare made the score 19-6 and then, 
eight minutes after the interval the England forwards struck again, retaining 
possession through ruck after consecutive ruck until Smith was able to get over 
for a try, making it 23-6.

From the stand it never looked as if Scotland would make up that deficit, but 
their daring running brought them a combined try by Tomes and an individual one 
by Rutherford, both converted by Irvine.

There was point in the remark after the match of Scotland's coach Nairn 
MacEwen: "If we could do all that running without forward strength, what can 
not be achieved with forward strength?" For England, Hare kicked another 
penalty goal, and Carleton got his third try, from a kick ahead by Dodge.

Rutherford's individual try was a gem, but it is difficult to believe that 
Saturday's game will force the Lions selectors, who will today announce the 
team for the tour of South Africa, to alter their opinions. Slemen and Carleton 
were always likely to be on tour, and all four of Saturday's centres have been 
on the fringes of selection. At least Woodward proved on Saturday that he now 
has the confidence to show his true form on the big occasion.

Apart from an even further strengthening of Beaumont's claim to the Lions 
captaincy, the forwards who probably did most for their cause were Colclough 
and Blakeway. Colclough, in particular, played a most effective all-round game. 
In the Scotland pack Beattie was already more or less assured of a place in the 
Lions party, while Tomes had one of his most impressive games for Scotland.

Something like eight or nine of Saturday's England team should be in the tour 
party, together with four or five Scots. But all of Saturday's 31 players - Jim 
Gossman (West of Scotland) came on in the second half for Hay who had a rib 
injury - deserve credit for providing a memorable match, played in a spirit 
almost of chivalry.

Beaumont said afterwards: "Ireland, the first match, was make or break for us. 
Then, when we won in Paris, everything became possible. Wales was the hardest 
game physically, ignoring the aggro. On Saturday we played some of the best 
rugby seen on an international field."

"I am a bit resentful that some people have labelled us a poor side," Beaumont 
said. "It seems like sour grapes to me. Any team that wins both away matches by 
scoring heavily must deserve the sort of rewards we earned."
 