
Fourteen garden villages are to be built across England on sites including a 
former airfield and green belt land, ministers have said.

The villages, totalling 48,000 homes, will not be extensions of existing small 
towns or villages, but “distinct new places with their own community 
facilities”, the government said.

Sites from Cornwall to Cumbria have been identified in the first round of 
approved locations, making them eligible for a share of a £6m government 
technical and financial support fund. After completion, the villages may vary 
in size from 1,500 homes up to 10,000.

Missed opportunities of garden villages plan | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/missed-opportunities-of-garden-villages-plan>
The housing minister, Gavin Barwell, said the development of the villages 
would be locally led by communities rather than central government. “New 
communities not only deliver homes, they also bring new jobs and facilities and 
a big boost to local economies,” he said.
A map of proposed garden towns in England 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/garden_villages_web/giv-3902px2zYU8VA46T/>
The 600-acre former Deenethorpe airfield near Corby, Northamptonshire, is one 
of the sites that has been approved for a village. The plans include a village 
green, shops and community hall, as well asmore than 1,000 homes 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-northamptonshire-31061639>. 

Dunton Hills, a garden village set to be built near Brentwood, Essex, will 
have at least 2,500 homes, as well as new Gypsy and Traveller pitches.

West Carclaze in Cornwall is set to be an ecovillage 
<http://www.westcarclaze.co.uk/> with 1,500 new energy-efficient homes, space 
for self-build and custom-built housing, and a new primary school for more than 
400 pupils.

Developers say it will have a solar farm and 350 hectares of green space in a 
new china clay heritage park incorporating the Sky Tip, a local landmark. Bike 
trails and pubs are also planned.

However, local councillors have raised concerns 
<http://www.cornwalllive.com/will-st-austell-eco-town-happen-as-councillors-make-last-ditch-attempt-to-keep-it-from-local-plan/story-29625028-detail/story.html#OLJgRAhAdbyslkvi.99>
 about the small percentage of affordable housing and change in character of 
the historical mining area.

Cllr Dick Cole, leader of the Cornish devolution party Mebyon Kernow, who said 
he had objected to proposals for an ecotown for a decade, said the garden 
village announcement was no more than window dressing for a controversial 
project.

“The government talks about it being a locally led development, but the 
reality is that this is only happening because it was a government top-down 
initiative,” he told the Guardian.

“They say it is a brownfield site, but many of the houses are on fields. It 
has been one of those projects that seems to have a momentum of its own, 
despite what local people say.”


North Cheshire garden village, which will sit on the eastern edge of 
Handforth, has development plans that include 2,000 homes, a nursery and a care 
home, as well as architect-designed “one-off” homes.

However, locals are worried that a new village of several thousand homes may 
put pressure on infrastructure such as the congested A34.

Other planned villages include Long Marston in Warwickshire, Spitalgate Heath 
in Lincolnshire, Bailrigg in Lancaster and the Infinity garden village in 
Derbyshire.

The final six are Oxfordshire Cotswold, Culm in Devon, Welborne in Hampshire, 
Halsnead in Merseyside, Longcross in Surrey and St Cuthberts near Carlisle.

The garden village initiative was announced by the then chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-at-a-glance-key-points>
 George Osborne last year. Conditions for building villages or market towns 
stated that the developments must be “a new discrete settlement and not an 
extension of an existing town or village”.

Shaun Spiers, the chief executive of the Campaign to Protect Rural England 
(CPRE), said it would carefully examine the proposals to see whether they were 
locally led and respected the green belt.

“Done well with genuine local consent, garden villages and towns can help 
tackle the housing crisis,” he said. “They can certainly be preferable to what 
is currently happening in too many parts of the country: poor quality 
developments plonked on the countryside, in the teeth of local opposition and 
in defiance of good planning principles.”

But areas that absorbed the new garden villages should have guarantees that 
they would be “protected from speculative planning applications for a long time 
to come”, he added.

The Department for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government said 
there had been high levels of interest in building more villages in the coming 
years and it would make an additional £1m available this year to further 
development other proposals.

Three new garden towns have also been announced near Aylesbury in 
Buckinghamshire, Taunton in Somerset and Harlow and Gilston in Hertfordshire, 
with £1.4m of funding to support the delivery of about 50,000 homes.

Local CPRE members strongly object to the Hertfordshire plans, under which the 
village of Gilston and neighbouring hamlet of Eastwick would disappear.

Kevin FitzGerald, the honorary director of CPRE Hertfordshire, said: “These 
plans herald the death knell of the rural character of whole swaths of 
Hertfordshire. Beautiful villages, supposedly protected by green belt 
[designation], look set to be swallowed up by the urban sprawl of neighbouring 
towns.

“Housing targets are putting immense pressure on our area and marginalising 
the basic purposes of the green belt, which the government has pledged to 
protect.”

 