 Devastating floods that inundated the Indonesian capital after rivers and 
canals that cross Jakarta burst their banks pushed the death toll to 29 today 
and drove at least 340,000 people from their homes.
The surges of muddy polluted water, which rose to a depth of four metres 
(13ft) in places, stranded many other residents in the upper floors of their 
houses with no access to fresh water and electricity after supplies were cut 
off.

Officials said the deluge, the worst since 2002 when 40 people were killed, 
had affected as much as 40% of the city. It came after days of torrential rain, 
and weathermen offer little hope of respite from the downpours for another two 
weeks.

Rescuers used everything from rubber dinghies to horse-drawn carts in an 
effort to get those stranded by the rising waters to safety, though some 
refused to leave in order to protect their belongings.

In some neighbourhoods army helicopters dropped supplies, while medical teams 
in boats were dispatched to the worst effected areas to treat the ill and 
injured. Two hospitals had to move patients to the safety of upper floors.

But angry residents criticised the city's lack of preparation for the 
flooding, which - though not on such a huge scale - occurs nearly every year.

Many families were forced to find their own way to safety using any means at 
their disposal. Some used makeshift rafts while others had no choice but to 
wade through the filthy chest-high waters leading to fears of infection in the 
city already suffering a dengue fever outbreak.

Police said that those killed since the torrential rains began falling last 
Wednesday had either been sucked under by powerful currents, electrocuted when 
they came in contact with live electricity lines or had fallen ill.

Jakarta's wealthier residents from effected suburbs checked into hotels across 
the city of 10m people, but in one area those less well-off were forced to seek 
refuge in a cemetery.

The floodwaters forced the closure of a number of key roads running through 
the city, which was built on a swamp and is low-lying, while rail services were 
cancelled or delayed making it impossible for many to get to work.
 