
If you’re in western Ireland scanning posters for nights out on New Year’s 
Eve, one name will almost certainly jump out at you with jazz hands: DJ 
Seinfeld. No, it’s not Jerry himself who’s ringing in 2017 with slap-bass jams 
in Galway, but rather a Malmö producer who, along with a likeminded bunch of 
contemporaries, is telling a joke that never gets old: giving yourself a stupid 
DJ name.

DJ Seinfeld is part of a new wave of so-called lo-fi producers whose monikers 
mash the nostalgia buttons of millennials with the crude effectiveness of a 
chimp in a lunar module and make music that sounds like a poorly soundproofed 
apartment between a Chicago house club and a tantric healing workshop, in 1986. 
This potentially excellent style has been championed by respected labels such 
as L.I.E.S., The Trilogy Tapes and Mood Hut in recent years but Seinfeld’s 
version is as basic as his name.

Nineties pop culture is rife for a callback in this circle, too. Also in this 
loose collective is Georgia’s DJ Boring with well over half a million YouTube 
listens for his track Winona, complete with Winona Ryder artwork and sample. Or 
there’s Ross From Friends (hailing from London), whose tracks Durum Wheat and 
Talk To Me Me, You’ll Understand are funkily water-damaged.

It’s a simple ploy: these artists jump out from a flyer or SoundCloud page 
more vividly than, say, a Function or a Ryan Elliott. The Instagram account 
Real DJ Names shows just how far you can go down this road: DJ Osama 
Spin-Laden, DJ Breadmaker and DJ Rainbow Ejaculation are a few of the names 
featured. The trouble is that dance music, after all, can be a deeply 
humourless enterprise and one that requires a highly calibrated irony radar.

DJ Yoda Q&A
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/19/dj-yoda-q-and-a> 
DJ Paypal’s name works because it is a bit of absurdist culture-jamming that 
dovetails with his energetic footwork tracks, while DJ Scotch Egg encapsulates 
gabba’s bug-eyed nonsense. But “proper” dance music heads can be terrible 
snobs. To them, DJs such as Totally Enormous Extinct Dinosaurs, DJ Yoda and 
their ilk will always have the whiff of the student night about them.

Clearly, in the eyes of musos, you can only pull off a daft name if you’re a 
genius. Take Joy Orbison, for example, who, via a series of superb productions, 
has become the Arctic Monkeys of underground dance, tricking you into 
forgetting that his name is terrible. But if you’re happy playing uni balls, a 
stupid name remains a good call. Hold tight Loughborough Uni: we’re off to set 
up a SoundCloud for DJ Sabrina The Teenage Witch.

DJ Seinfeld plays Electric Garden & Theatre, Galway, New Year’s Eve; Ross From 
Friends plays Underdog, Aberdeen, Friday 3 March
 