
With controversy still raging over Britain’s treatment of the islanders of 
Diego Garcia when the atoll was handed over to the United States Navy 10 years 
ago, Whitehall is negotiating compensation terms for another group of Indian 
Ocean islanders - the Maldivian and Pakistani inhabitants ofGan 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gan_%28Addu_Atoll%29> - which could prove just 
as politically explosive in another 10 years.

This time there is no question of evacuation, except by the RAF, which is 
scheduled to pull out on April 1 next year. And nobody else has been invited to 
move in. On the contrary, the strategic object of the negotiations is to make 
sure of keeping the Soviet Navy out of what could be an exact counterpart of 
the base facilities the US Navy wants to provide for itself in Diego Garcia.


But the human problem of compensating local people for the arbitrary whims of 
imperialist policy - albeit in Britain’s case a decidedly faded imperialism - 
is the same.


Gan is an airfield staging post on the military supply route linking the UK 
with Hong Kong. It also has a deep water lagoon, ideal for naval refuelling. 
About 900 Maldivians and 100 Pakistanis are employed there, but not housed, 
they come over each morning from neighbouring islands in support of RAF 
personnel.Military <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> flights will 
continue to call there until the end of the year after which the base will be 
rapidly run down.


Negotiations with the Maldivian Government 500 miles away are being handled 
partly by the Foreign Office and partly by the Ministry of Defence, which 
actually employs the islanders. This morning a defence official just returned 
from the archipelago will report on what he evidently regards as a satisfactory 
settlement of redundancy terms for the 1,000 workers on Gan.


These will be based on length of service, as they would be elsewhere in the 
Civil Service, but how generous they seem to the Maldivians has not been 
disclosed.


Far more important in the long term is the extent and form of the aid yet to 
be negotiated by the Foreign Office, which has so far conducted only 
preliminary talks last March.


What matters next year is whether some alternative employment can be provided 
for the islanders whose standard of living was suddenly raised by the RAF’s 
arrival, whether anything useful - particularly the island’s small hospital - 
can be left behind in working order, and whether the central Malidivian 
Government feels it is getting a fair deal.

Fishing development sounds an obvious possibility, but it is probably easier 
said than done. It has been estimated that the British military presence 
contributes something like £1 million to £2 millions a year to a total national 
income of only £3 millions.


In 1973 Britain pledged £1 million to £2 millions in aid, about half of which 
has so far been allocated. In the new situation caused by the Government’s 
defence review, he said, “we are prepared substantially to increase this aid.”


It must be enough, defence officials have warned their diplomatic colleagues, 
to prevent the Maldivians turning to the Russians for an alternative source of 
income. But the Foreign Office is relying here on the terms of the 
21-year-agreement concluded with the island government in 1965.


This apparently stipulated that until the agreement runs out, in 1986, 
Maldivian territory and air space shall be denied to the armed forces of any 
other Power - and that would include the Americans as well as the Russians - 
whether or not Britain takes up its option to develop a staging post on Gan.

 