
Herbert Ponting does not sound an easy man. He rejected the term 
"photographer", preferring to style himself a "camera artist"; despite the fact 
that photographic film had been invented a generation earlier, he preferred to 
use glass-plate negatives because of their higher quality; he had little heed 
for safety when it came to pursuing the perfect picture; and he made his 
subjects on Captain Robert Scott's ill-fated expedition to the south pole in 
1910-13 pose for so long they coined a new (and not entirely complimentary) 
word - "ponting".

"These were men on a mission and they probably wanted to get on with the job," 
says Lucy Martin, picture library manager at the Cambridge-based Scott Polar 
Research Institute, which bought Ponting's archive in 2004, has digitised the 
collection, and will put it online next month. "The exposures would have taken 
a long time, but he was determined to get the best possible results and make a 
full record of the day-to-day life of the expedition."

The memorable - and, in the light of the deaths of Scott and the other four 
explorers who had joined him on the final journey to the pole, affecting - 
images Ponting took while attached to the expedition from 1911-12 amply justify 
his fastidiousness, though the expedition's cook, Thomas Clissold, might 
disagree. Clissold was injured when he fell off an iceberg on which he was 
ponting.

Ponting, who was in his early 40s and established as a landscape photographer 
when he joined Scott, realised that the assignment would define his life. He 
returned from the Antarctic with more than a thousand photographs capturing the 
grandeur and stillness of the continent, as well as the drudgery of life for 
the 65-strong expedition as they prepared for the assault on the pole.

He stayed mainly at base camp, where he built his own darkroom, and returned 
to the UK in February 1912. Scott and his colleagues died the following month, 
but their bodies were not discovered until November, and Ponting did not 
receive news of their deaths until February 1913. He devoted his last 20 years 
to curating the photographs and primitive films he had brought back, creating a 
powerful memorial to his fellow expeditionaries.

Ponting's photographs are among a collection of 20,000 images that the Scott 
Polar Research Institute will put online as part of a project called Freeze 
Frame.

www.freezeframe.ac.uk <http://www.freezeframe.ac.uk> goes live on March 4
 