
With markets attempting a rebound after Monday’s rout and despite an overnight 
slump in Asia,Legal and General is leading the way.

In the wake of the current market turmoil and “following a number of enquiries 
from....analysts and investors” the group has clarified its exposure on its 
bond portfolio, which seems to have reassured investors. Its shares are up 8.5p 
or 4% at 211.5p as it said only 1.2% of the portfolio was in basic resources 
and 5.2% in oil and gas. Investors have been concerned about the exposure of 
investment groups and banks to the commodities sector after the tumbling oil 
price and falling mining shares.

Analyst Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital issued a buy note, saying:

In a move to allay fears in the market over its bond portfolio, Legals has set 
out an up-to-date split of its book as at the end of December 2015. The 
portfolio amounted to around £39bn at the end of the year, down from £40.7bn at 
the end of 2014. By credit rating, around 4% was AAA, 28% was AA, 33% was A, 
BBB accounted for 31% and the balance was BB or below – to us, this is a sign 
of the level of security within the portfolio and the conservative approach 
taken by the fund managers.

These figures do not vary greatly compared to the end of 2014, with the extra 
detail offered being the breakdown of the ‘industrials’ line to separate ‘oil & 
gas’ and ‘basic resources’. Not only are these figures low, around 5% and 1% 
respectively, we believe them to be of strong quality. This disclosure should 
nail concerns in the market over this exposure.

Barrie Cornes at Panmure Gordon said:

We welcome the clarity, which should reassure, but are surprised that L&G felt 
the need to respond to analyst calls in this way so close to the prelim 
announcement.

The positive news from Legal has helped the FTSE 100 regain some ground, up 
33.49 points at 5722.85. But the index is still close to three year lows, and 
the mood remains fragile as investors fret over the global economy, and in 
particular the outlook for the stressed banking sector, especially with 
interest rates in negative territory in some cases.


After Monday’s slide in the banking sector, things are a little calmer. Lloyds 
Banking Group is up 0.5p at 59.86p but Barclays has edged down 0.75p at 163.15p.

Mining shares are the big losers despite a 1.7% rise in crude oil prices. 
Antofagastahas fallen 24.5p to 428.9p and Anglo American is down 13.85p at 
362.25p.

Tui Group has lost 19p to £10.79 as the travel group said summer holiday 
bookings to Turkey were down 40% due to security worries.


Mike McCudden at stockbroker Interactive Investor said:

Thanks to the valiant late recovery on Wall St, investors are largely ignoring 
Asian market falls and pushing the share indices higher this morning. However, 
while the banks remain under pressure the next panic sell off could just be 
around the corner. Janet Yellen?s testimony this week will be under even more 
scrutiny than usual and those without the stomach for some extreme volatility 
may well be advised to take a back seat.
 