
Rupert Soames may be looking enviously at his previous employer Aggreko, given 
the problems he is facing at outsourcer Serco which he joined earlier this year.

While Serco this week issued its fourth profit warning in a year and unveiled 
plans to tap shareholders for £550m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/10/serco-profits-warning-shares-crash>
, Aggreko seems to be chugging along nicely.

The temporary power supply business is currently at the top of a weak FTSE 
100, its shares climbing 49p or 3% to £15.91 after it said trading was in line 
with expectations. The shares have however lost around 20% between August and 
October before recovery in November, and traders said part of the day’s rise 
could be short sellers needing to cover their positions. According to Markit 
6.5% of the company’s outstanding shares are out on loan.

In its update, the company said underlying revenue in the third quarter was up 
6% although after currency movements, it fell 3%. Overall, despite an uncertain 
market environment, it said it expected underlying full year trading profits to 
be similar to 2013.

Analysts mainly stuck with their hold recommendations. John Lawson at Investec 
said:

Aggreko <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aggreko> has delivered an in 
line statement that... highlights the issue that the group seems to have now, 
i.e. how to grow underlying earnings in a meaningful way. Of course, the cause 
of the subdued results is the ending of some large contracts (such the military 
work in the Middle East) and currency headwinds. That said, customers in Power 
Projects remain unwilling to commit to much new work (despite strong market 
demand drivers).

Andrew Nussey at Peel Hunt said:

Aggreko’s statement confirms trading in line. However, we are mindful that the 
outlook for 2015 remains uncertain, given geopolitical risks and customer 
hesitancy. Aggreko continues to be a high quality proposition, but the shares, 
trading on 18 times December 2015, continue to reflect recovery potential.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 15.10 points at 6620.35, as the latest data from 
the eurozone showed a mixed picture for growth, with Italy falling into 
recession but Germany avoiding that ignominy.

With metal prices falling again and oil still weak, commodity company shares 
are among the fallers.Fresnillo is down 16.5p at 709.5p and Anglo American is 
25p lower at £13.36.

Tullow Oil has slipped 10.5p to 453.5p while BP has lost 5p to 424.95p.

Among the mid-caps Premier Farnell has fallen 15.7p to 164.2p after the 
electronic component distributor said full year operating margins would be 
below previous levels after weaker trading conditions in Asia and Europe.

But Dairy Crest has climbed 7.8p to 489.8p as Credit Suisse raised its 
recommendation from underperform to neutral and its target price from 390p to 
485p after the company’s plan to sell its dairies business. The bank said:

The decision to sell the dairies business to Muller looks very sensible and 
offers a far more focused business on cheese and spreads. The only question is 
whether the anti-trust authorities will allow such a concentration in milk 
processing.

The previous Monopolies and Mergers Commission reports make clear supermarkets 
can look after themselves, and concentration thus far certainly hasn’t led to 
milk price inflation for the consumer - quite the opposite. The farmers too 
seem in favour of the deal. The recent Arla acquisition of Milk Link was 
allowed to proceed. On balance we think the deal will likely be cleared.

Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> has had a 
pretty active M&A history - it has been in-and-out of yoghurt, French spreads, 
and now milk. This latest deal could, we believe, leave the more focused group 
itself vulnerable. There are active consolidators out there in both cheese and 
spreads (Lactalis and Kerry leap to mind).

Based on a combination of likely PE, yield and EBITDA multiples we would 
expect the new company to trade at round 485p, which we set as our price 
target. There remains also the possibility that third parties will take a close 
look at the new enterprise.
 