
As Greece edged closer to default after weekend talks with its creditors 
collapsed almost as soon as they began, leading shares hit a new three month 
low.

The FTSE 100 fell 74 points or 1.1% to 6710.52 - its lowest level since 10 
March - as investors fretted that both sides were becoming more intransigent in 
their positions, even as time for Greece to reach a deal comes closer to 
running out. London fared slightly better than some of its European peers, with 
German and French markets both down around 1.6%. In Greece, the Athens market 
dropped 4.68%, ahead of what is seen as a key Eurogroup meeting on Thursday. On 
Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down around 100 points or 
0.6% by the time London closed.

David Madden, market analyst at IG, said:

The London market has lost a lot of ground today, but it is doing better than 
its continental counterparts. The eurozone equity markets are feeling the most 
pain over the Greek situation, and without an agreement a bounce back is not 
likely. The five-year debt saga for Greece has left traders feeling that 
something drastic needs to happen, and a default seems as if it is just around 
the corner. Athens needs to shape up or ship out, and every day that goes by 
with no resolution makes a default all the more possible. Traders are fixated 
on Greece at the moment and that won’t change until a deal has been reached, 
and even then traders will be mentally preparing themselves for the next round 
of Greek negations as the indebted country has several more sizeable payments 
to make over the summer.

Among the few risers in London, Randgold Resources added 19p to £46.26, with 
traders suggesting it was benefiting from the prospect of gold being a haven 
among the market storms.


Tesco edged up 0.3p to 214p as snack maker Orion Corporation said it was 
considering a bid for the UK supermarket’s South Korean business Homeplus, 
which is valued at around $6bn.

But easyJet fell 36p to £15.50 after RBC downgraded from outperform to 
underperform and cut its target price from £20 to £15.

Housebuilders were under pressure, with Taylor Wimpey down 5.4p to 183.4p and 
Barratt Developments losing 15p to 596p.

Standard Chartered dropped 26p to £10.38 after Jefferies cut its price target 
from 722p to 656p with an underperform rating, with the bank’s new chief 
executive expected to cut its dividend.

ITV lost 2.6p to 267.1p despite Liberum saying that a possible privatisation 
of Channel 4, as suggested at the weekend, could benefit the broadcaster:

[In an] interview with Channel 4 chief executive David Abraham in the Sunday 
Telegraph [it is clear that] C4 thinks its privatisation is very much on the 
agenda (with a possible sale price of up to £1bn) as the government looks to 
dispose of assets. If C4 is privatised, then introducing retransmission fees 
for the main commercial channels (including Channel 4) would see a maximisation 
of value...which would also benefitITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> - a double-digit increase on our 
2017 forecasts and we are around 20% ahead of consensus.

Royal Mail edged down 2p to 505p, even though analysts at Berenberg said last 
week’s share sale by the UK government - and the expected disposal of a third 
tranche in 90 days - could be a boost for the business.


British American Tobacco, down 6p at 3411.5p, failed to benefit as Berenberg 
issued a buy note and raised its target price from £38.50 to £40, in the wake 
of associate Reynolds American’s purchase of Lorillard:

On our estimates, this suggests around 5% upside to BAT from current Bloomberg 
2016 consensus of 226p, with Reynolds’ contribution as an associate at constant 
exchange rates rising from £449m in 2014 to over £810m in 2016 on our 
estimates. The deal raises Reynolds’ contribution from around 11% in 2014 on a 
reported basis to around 19% in 2016, using current Reynolds consensus 
forecasts. We expect consensus figures to adjust in the next few weeks. We also 
think Altria’s investor day (23 June) will reinforce positive sentiment around 
the US tobacco market.

We also expect that in the second half, BAT will buy out the minority 
investors in its Brazilian subsidiary, Souza Cruz. This deal will be about 
0.5-1% earnings per share accretive in the 12 months after closing, depending 
on Souza’s results and the Brazilian real. The timing of this deal closing is 
uncertain, but it is likely to benefit 2016, in our view.

 Among the mid-caps Dairy Crest dipped 4.5p to 525p after Friday’s news after 
the market closed that the Competition and Markets Authority had referred the 
sale of the company’s dairy operations to Muller UK, an investigation which 
will take a minimum of 24 weeks. Shore Capital analysts Clive Black and Darren 
Shirley said:

Not surprisingly, to our minds, the Competition & Markets Authority (CMA) has 
decided to take the proposed acquisition ofDairy Crest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> Dairies by 
Muller-Wiseman to a phase II review. However, when trying to make sense of the 
process we believe that CMA has bottled it, so unnecessarily prolonging a 
process that is, by common thinking, necessary for the challenge and 
over-supplied British liquid milk industry to progress; a view implied in the 
CMA’s own narrative to our minds.

... the CMA is potentially in a pickle here because if this merger does not go 
through then there will be further economic consequences because the viability 
of liquid production is under serious threat. The discounting of a highly 
expensive product to produce, care for and move is a frustration for everyone 
involved in milk production. Rationalisation and concentration needs to take 
place because the retail trade is picking off the processor leading to depleted 
margins. Such margins are a chronic issue with respect to future investment and 
innovation in the trade. The farming lobby will justifiably go nuts with the 
CMA if common sense does not prevail. That though, when it comes to common 
sense, there is now encyclopaedic evidence that the CMA lives on another planet.

Shore Capital believes that this apparently finely tuned decision creates a 
path for Muller-Wiseman to explore reasonable remedies with the CMA albeit we 
struggle to see why change is necessary in the first place, particularly if big 
supermarkets are behind the decision. In due course though, admittedly at 
inordinate cost, we believe that there are greater chances than not that 
approval can come through. Accordingly, whilst we sense that the management and 
shareholders of both parties and their suppliers will be frustrated, we 
reiterate our buy stance on Dairy Crest Group shares, noting that a cash 
generative group with a strong portfolio of proprietary brands remains for 
investors to harvest.
 