
Leading shares are slipping back after hitting a near 12 month high this week, 
amid hints from the Federal Reserve overnight that it might yet raise interest 
rates this year and a spate of company news.

Smith & Nephew, the maker of artificial hips, is the biggest faller, down 5% 
to £12.35 after it said it was suffering weak demand for its products in China. 
It also reported a poor performance from the Gulf states, leading to a 3% fall 
in second quarter operating profit. While it expected an improvement from China 
to begin in the second half, difficult trading conditions in the Gulf were 
likely to continue in the near term.

In a hold note Brian White at Cantor Fitzgerald said:

Although slightly light of our forecasts and consensus estimate, S&N’s interim 
results reflect management’s assiduous efforts to diversify S&N’s portfolio 
away from its traditional markets. We like the fast growing sports medicine 
portfolio and note strong revenue growth in Knees. China and the Gulf States 
have continued to offer challenges during the period although management 
expects partial improvements in China in the second half. We maintain our hold 
recommendation for S&N with a target price of 1200p based on a sector multiple 
of 16 times on our 2017 estimated earnings per share forecast of 98c (75p). 
Risks to the S&N investment case include commoditisation in the orthopaedic and 
reconstructive surgery markets, medical device regulation and M&A risk.

S&N has been and will continue to we believe a highly acquisitive company. 
Consequently, it is possible that S&N could overpay for assets that is sees as 
desirable or may face challenges in integration.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 6.07 points at 6744.36, with the biggest 
influence beingRoyal Dutch Shell which has knocked 23 points off the index. 
Shell B shares are down 85p at £20.20 and its A shares 68p lower at 1975.5p as 
the oil company said net profit fell 70% to $1bn, well below expectations of 
$2.2bn.

Lloyds Banking Group has lost 1.9p to 53.85p as it increased cost cutting with 
the loss of 3,000 more jobs. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>

SSE is down 66p at £15.60 as the energy company’s shares went ex-dividend.

Amid a host of company results Rolls-Royce pleased the market, up 12% at 
818.5p, as didSky, 61p better at 948.5p.

Thomas Cook has climbed 5.05p to 65.05p as its third quarter earnings were in 
line with expectations, despite falling 93% to £2m. The company also cut its 
full year expectations from £310m-£335m to £300m but this is in line with 
analyst forecasts, and investors were comforted by the company saying it would 
still pay a full year dividend.

The travel group has been hit by the falling pound in the wake of the Brexit 
vote, terrorist attacks in Europe and the failed coup in Turkey.

After the Fed meeting overnight which left rates on hold but suggested 
economic conditions were improving, the Bank of Japan unveils its latest 
decision later. Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, said:

Markets have seen a relatively choppy start today’s trading, as traders 
attempt to simultaneously straddle the effects of yesterday’s [Federal Reserve] 
meeting while also preparing for tonight’s Bank of Japan meeting. Given the 
uncertainty and wealth of central bank influence, it is likely that today’s 
trading will be characterised by substantial volatility and choppiness.

Yesterday saw the [Fed] stand still once more, with the decision over whether 
to raise rates now pushed into the September meeting. There is clearly a 
willingness to act at the Fed, yet each time around another problem rears its 
head to put the committee off acting. China, stock market weakness, jobs market 
weakness, disinflation, Brexit, the list goes on. Unfortunately we expect this 
hunt for a goldilocks scenario to continue and despite talk of two 2016 rate 
hikes, it is likely we will remain at 0.5% until 2017.

The Bank of Japan is the last of the major central banks to decide upon their 
monetary policy stance in the wake of the EU referendum result. With the Bank 
of England and ECB both disappointing, tonight’s announcement brings about a 
significant possibility of a hat-trick of disappointing central bank meetings. 
This week’s fiscal stimulus announcement [from the Japanese government] will 
have taken the heat off the Bank of Japan, who have thrown everything but the 
kitchen sink at the economy, only to find those old foes disinflation and 
feeble growth come back to haunt them. Given that [Bank of Japan governor 
Haruhiko] Kuroda has now ruled out so called ‘helicopter money’ and rates 
already in negative territory, there is arguably little the Bank can do to that 
will make a difference now.
 