
Despite continuing global concerns - the fallout from Brexit, the attempted 
coup in Turkey - theproposed £24bn takeover  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
of technology groupARM by Japan’s Softbank has sent leading shares higher.

The FTSE 100 is currently up 24.10 points at 6693.34, with Arm accounting for 
all that and more (nearly 28 points).

The Japanese move has put the spotlight on other possible acquisitions, with 
analysts pointing out that the recent fall in the pound following the Brexit 
vote has left UK company valuations looking attractive. Peel Hunt said:

Despite the recent economic and political uncertainty, we note that an 
all-cash deal has been agreed. We continue to believe that UK technology 
companies could be acquisition targets for large global companies looking to 
add intellectual property or customers (the deal rationale for Softbank in our 
view) and expect to see further M&A activity in the sector.

We could see near-term investor interest in other semiconductor names (eg IQE 
and Imagination Technologies); global leaders (eg GBGroup, NCC, Accesso); 
Internet of Things/virtual/augmented reality plays (eg Telit, Bango); or larger 
UK tech names with strong free cash flow and dividend (eg Micro Focus).

ARM’s smaller rival Imagination Technologies is benefitting from the 
speculation, up 19.25p at 205.5p.

But it is not just technology companies which could be snapped up, according 
to Neil Wilson, markets analyst at ETX Capital:

Firstly, we can see in this deal the effect of Brexit and the collapse in the 
pound as British companies become ripe takeover targets. The pound is down 
around 10% since the referendum and this makes British firms a lot more 
attractive.

Poundland was recently snapped up by Steinhoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/13/poundland-agrees-steinhoff-takeover>
 and if this ARM deal is anything to go by, we can expect a torrent of deals to 
flow. Fears that Brexit would kill off deals in the UK seems to have been 
overblown – Britain is very much open for business and the weak pound is key. A 
lot more British firms could become foreign-owned quite soon.

Secondly, ARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> is without 
question an appealing prize. It has grown thanks to booming smartphone sales in 
recent years, but it is reducing its dependency here.

Elsewhere mining shares are slipping back ahead of the sector results, with 
BHP Billiton down 21.3p at 975.2p. Credit Suisse has also issued a downbeat 
note:

The mining sector has rebounded strongly this year. Credit concerns have 
diminished and prices have rallied, particularly steel inputs. Post Brexit we 
raise target prices by around 10% to reflect a weaker pound, but most share 
prices are now close to our target prices and the sector is no longer cheap 
against the underlying commodities. Earnings risk is positive, but looking out 
to 2017 we continue to see supply headwinds in the two most important earnings 
drivers - iron ore and copper. [At the results] we expect more optimistic 
outlook statements with more focus on medium-term growth options, but this will 
be an important balancing act.

Tui is down 25p at 936.5p, the biggest faller in the leading index, after the 
Turkish unrest. Tour operators have been suffering recently in the wake of a 
number of terrorist attacks. RivalThomas Cook is down 1.9p at 61.9p.

Lower down the market Aim-listed Transense Technologies has jumped 50% to 1.5p 
after it unveiled a licensing deal with GE for its surface acoustic wave 
technology, sensors which measure the torque, temperature and pressure of tyres 
in industrial environments. Analysts at finnCap said:

The group has achieved a notable licence agreement with GE for use of its SAW 
technology; GE is the second major manufacturer to sign a commercial licence on 
this technology, the other being Emerson, and together these deals signal the 
potential commercial value of the SAW technology. The group has also announced 
a year-end trading update, with revenues in line with previous guidance, albeit 
still held back by the deferred investment decisions by mining sector 
customers. No change to our 2016 trading forecasts. The shares should react 
well to this positive and encouraging licence agreement.
 