
Leading shares fell to a two month low as the brinkmanship over Greece 
continued despite another round of late night meetings.


With clear differences between the proposals put forward by the Greek 
government and the country’s creditors, the prospect of an imminent deal is 
looking slim. Greece is expected to make a €305m payment to the International 
Monetary Fund on Friday, but time is tight for an agreement before the cash 
runs out.

Rising bond yields, in Germany in particular, continue to unsettle investors, 
with the movement partly attributed to comments from ECB president Mario Draghi 
suggesting it would not interfere even if bond market volatility continued.

European markets were a sea of red, although off their worst levels as a surge 
in the euro prompted some profit taking. There was also some nervousness ahead 
of Friday’s US non-farm payroll numbers. The IMF seemed to go against the 
Federal Reserve’s view by saying that the central bank should not raise 
interest rates until early 2016. The Fed has maintained that recent 
disappointing economic data may well be due to temporary factors - such as poor 
weather - and that a rate rise before the end of the year could be on the 
cards. Caught up in the global declines, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 
down around 120 points by the time London closed.

With all that, a broad based sell-off saw the FTSE 100 finish down 91.22 
points or 1.31% to 6859.24, its lowest level since 2 April.

The biggest loser in the leading index was Johnson Matthey, down 185p at 
£33.31 as the specialist chemicals group’s results disappointed investors, who 
were concerned about rising debt levels and weaker precious metals prices.

Miners were under pressure on worries about China, a key consumer of 
commodities. David Madden, market analyst at IG, said:

[The falls follow] news that one Chinese broker is cutting back on margin 
trading, and this signals the strain the second-largest economy in the world is 
under. China’s economy is too dependent on credit and it feels like the 
pressure cooker is about to blow.

BHP Billiton lost 43.5p to 1323.5p as Goldman Sachs cut its price target from 
£14 to £12.75 with a neutral rating, whileAnglo American fell 43p to £10.05.


Meanwhile PwC’s annual survey of the sector said mining companies had cut 
costs to cope with falling prices, while their stock market values dropped to a 
10 yaer low. But PwC said demand for copper and other metails was likel to rise 
over the longer term as Chinas economy grew. “We believe that he reforms being 
undertaken will place China in a good position to continue to grow oer the long 
term, albeit at a slower pace,” it said.

A number of companies saw their shares go ex-dividend including National Grid, 
down 46.5p at 869p, andWPP, 54p lower at £15.05.

Royal Mail fell 26p to 500p as the UK government confirmed plans to start 
selling its remaining 30% stake in the postal group

But B&Q owner Kingfisher climbed 9.8p to 3779.9p after Bank of America Merrill 
Lynch moved from underperform to neutral and raised its target price from 330p 
to 390p.

And easyJet rose 10p to £15.92 as the budget airline announced a 7.2% rise in 
passenger numbers in May.

Dairy Crest added 16p to 543p after Investec moved from hold to buy on the 
basis that its dairy sale would go ahead, perhaps leaving it as a takeover 
target. Analyst Nicola Mallard said:

Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> sounds 
confident that its dairy sale to Muller will be cleared by the Competitions and 
Markets Authority, which will pave the way to it becoming a largely branded, UK 
food company. We feel there is some upside potential in the stock price if all 
goes to plan, without assuming any bid speculation, which could arise once the 
group sheds what has been a very effective “poison pill”. We move to a buy with 
a new target price of 554p.

Ladbrokes was lifted 3.2p to 125.5p on bid speculation and news that Peel Hunt 
had moved from hold to buy ahead of a strategy review by new chief executive 
Jim Mullen.


But Tullow Oil slipped 14.7p to 381p after a sell note from Cantor Fitzgerald. 
Analyst Sam Wahab said:


The last 12 months have been challenging for the oil and gas sector and in 
particular for Tullow. In order to withstand the current subdued macro 
environment, the company has increased and diversified its sources of debt 
capital, reduced its exploration expenditure, implemented significant cost 
saving initiatives, and suspended its dividend. We believe however that an 
overreliance on debt to fund risky ventures could prove costly. We initiate 
coverage with a sell recommendation and target price of 342p.

Lower down the market Scicys slumped 24.5p to 58p after the IT group issued a 
profit warning and said it may breach certain banking covenants when these are 
tested in August. But it added its bank was supportive at this time.


The profit warning followed problems at a major fixed price development 
contract, where the size and complexity had been underestimated and provisions 
would need to be made for the addition cost to complete it. On top of that the 
strength of the pound against the euro has also hit its figures. In all this 
means a “substantial shortfall in profits compared to the guidance issued in 
March.” Analysts at finnCap said:

Following a detailed and aggressive review, the senior management team has 
decided to take a major provision against a fixed price contract in the 
enterprise solutions and defence division, which appears to have been 
substantially underestimated. This provision, together with the forex impact of 
continuing sterling strength, is likely to virtually eliminate the expected 
profit this year.

We therefore reduce our 2015 forecast adjusted pretax profit from £3.3m to 
£0.3m. There is likely to be a spill over into 2016 as staff are reallocated to 
complete the contract – set for delivery in February – and we reduce next 
year’s pretax profit forecast from £3.8m to £2.4m. Cash balances will be low 
and the company risks breaching banking covenants; however, the banks remain 
supportive and Scicys is underpinned by a strong balance sheet with £9m of 
property, including a £5m headquarters near Chippenham. We anticipate the 
dividend strategy will be unchanged. Overall, this is disappointing but it is a 
ring-fenced one-off issue and procedures have been amended to ensure no 
recurrence.
 