
“When the fans here are not happy with you, they have a way of letting you 
know,”Gary Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> had said 
and on the night that turned out to be his last as coach of Valencia they did 
just that. It was 11 days ago now, his side were losing to Celta de Vigo, on 
course for a third league defeat in a row to go with the Europa League 
elimination suffered three days earlier, and a chant went round Mestalla. 
“Gary, vete ya!” it ran. Gary, go now!

They did not yet realise it but he was about to. Valencia announced that they 
had sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-leaves-valencia-immediate-effect>
 Neville early on Wednesday evening; they had actually done so soon after that 
defeat. The Valencia coach had delayed joining the England squad because, he 
said, it was “the right thing to do”, but by the time he got there he knew he 
was the former Valencia coach. No one else did; Roy Hodgson was informed later.

Neville did not tell the England players and he did not tell the Valencia 
players either. Silence allowed for the international break to pass peacefully 
and for his club players to return before the news was broken to them. 
Valencia’s squad found out on Wednesday when he returned to the city that he 
said he had “come to love”. He has left the club, but he will stay inValencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> for the next few days. In six 
weeks the Euros begin. There is much to do but he had hoped to be busier until 
then.

Gary Neville sacked by Valencia after less than four months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-leaves-valencia-immediate-effect>
Neville joined Valencia on a five-month contract and, while a formal meeting 
had been pencilled in for April, over the last fortnight everyone knew that it 
would not be extended. Yet Neville had repeatedly insisted he would not resign 
and did not expect to be sacked. He had hoped to end the season in a dignified 
manner, to recover some of the credibility he claimed had led him to take on 
this challenge in the first place.

Others had doubted that there was a dignified way out. Worse, they feared that 
the way out was downwards. When Neville took over Valencia, they were in 
“crisis”, sitting in ninth place, five points off the final Champions League 
spot. As it turned out, that was not a crisis;this was a crisis. Out of the 
Champions League, out of the Europa League, out of the Copa del Rey, Valencia 
are now 14th inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, 
only six points clear of the bottom three.

Under Neville, Valencia won just three of 16 league games; they did not manage 
a single clean sheet. With Sevilla, Barcelona, Villarreal and Real Madrid still 
to play in their final eight games, the risk of relegation was real. That they 
had come to fear the final weeks was revealed in Valencia’s statement. “After 
analysing carefully the sporting situation, the club decided to make this 
change in the best interests of Valencia Club de Fútbol with a view to the end 
of the current season,” it read.

The sporting director, Suso García Pitarch, who arrived after Neville, had 
suggested alternatives after the 7-0 hammering against Barcelona in the cup. He 
pushed for a change only to encounter resistance but the fear for their future, 
and the reaction of the fans at the end of the Celta game, had ended that. It 
also ended his spell in Spain. “I understand that we are in a results business 
and they have not been to my standards or to those which are required by this 
club,” Neville’s statement said.

Nobody said this would be easy but nobody thought it would be this hard. “I 
believe in myself and I believe that I can deliver or I would not have taken 
this on,” Neville said on the day he was presented. He did not come into this 
blind – his brother Phil was already at the club as assistant coach and will 
remain there too – but it turned out that he had taken on even more than he 
realised: a young, divided, disconnected and unfit squad, an unstable club in a 
foreign country, where he does not speak the language and midway through the 
season, too.

“Are you ready for this?” he was asked. “Well, we’ll find out,” he said.

Nothing went right and nothing seemed to remedy it. Neville might not have 
been the problem but nor was he the cure. He sought solutions, over and over, 
but did not find them. Perhaps the search was part of the problem. He used 
three different goalkeepers and tried endless combinations. He brought in a new 
assistant coach, who has now replaced him as first team coach, and changed his 
captain. He defended his players, until the day of the derby when he said he 
could defend them no more. And it just did not happen.

There was bad luck, sure, but mostly there were bad performances. 
“Unacceptable” was a word he ended up using too often. It took 10 games for 
Valencia to win in the league under him; they lost a La Liga game at Mestalla 
for the first time in over a year; and against Barcelona in the cup they 
suffered what the sporting director described as one of the worst nights in the 
club’s history. Neville announced that they “absolutely must” win at Betis – 
and they lost.

He kept going, refusing to resign. They did finally win in the league, somehow 
defeating Espanyol, but he said it was not cause for celebration. There, at 
least, he was proved right. Three wins in four seemed to change everything, but 
not for long. It was still slipping from him; remedying this was not possible 
and with each passing game the supporters’ patience wore thinner.

When Valencia beat Athletic in the Europa League only to get knocked out on 
away goals anyway, suddenly playing with energy, commitment and talent, Neville 
said that it was simple: he had to get the same performance from them again 
three days later. But, deep down, he knew he would not; he knew he could not. 
And the fans knew too. Three days later Valencia were beaten 2-0 by Celta and 
Mestalla told Neville to go.
 