
GCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>, Britain’s national security 
surveillance agency, has been ordered to destroy legally privileged 
communications it unlawfully collected from a Libyan rendition victim.


The ruling marks the first time in its 15-year history that the investigatory 
powers tribunal has upheld a specific complaint against the intelligence 
services, lawyers have said. It is also the first time the tribunal has ordered 
a security service to give up surveillance material.

The IPT says GCHQ must destroy two documents which are legally privileged 
communications belonging to a former opponent of the Gaddafi regime, Sami 
al-Saadi, who was sent back toLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> 
in 2004 in a joint MI6-CIA “rendition” operation with his wife and four 
children under 12.

The tribunal, chaired by Mr Justice Burton, ruled that GCHQ must give an 
undertaking that parts of those documents must be “destroyed or deleted so as 
to render such information inaccessible to the agency in the future”. The 
agency has to submit a secret report within 14 days confirming that the 
destruction has been carried out.

GCHQ has also been ordered to hand over a hard copy of the papers to the 
interception of communications commissioner within seven days. They will be 
kept safe for five years in case there are further legal proceedings or an 
inquiry.

The tribunal says that although the two documents contain information covered 
by legal privilege they did not disclose or refer to any legal advice: “The 
tribunal, after careful consideration, is [also] satisfied that there was no 
use or disclosure of the privileged information for the purpose of defending 
the civil claim brought by [Saadi] and others.”

This is a compensation claim against Jack Straw, the then foreign secretary, 
and the Foreign Office, being brought by Saadi along with another prominent 
opponent of Gaddafi,Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and his family, for 
their role in their rendition and subsequent torture in Libya in 2004.

The tribunal said that it would not order compensation in this case as the 
material involved had not been disclosed to any lawyer or policy officials 
working on the main case and was of no significant value.

The tribunal made a “no determination” ruling in eight other claims brought by 
Belhaj and other members of the Saadi family that legally privileged material 
had been unlawfully accessed by GCHQ involving their rendition cases.

In February, the government, anticipating this ruling, admitted that the 
policies and procedures governing the handling of legally privileged material 
had been unlawful for the past five years because they had not made public 
safeguards necessary to make them compliant with human rights legislation. 
Exchanges between lawyers and their clients enjoy a special level of legal 
protection.

The judges declined to award compensation to Saadi, saying the declaration in 
February and the determination was sufficient satisfaction for those who 
brought the case.

They also rejected a request that the material be handed over to them rather 
than destroyed, saying such a move might give an indication of how GCHQ 
obtained the information in the first place or enable those who were legitimate 
surveillance targets to take counter-measures.

Cori Crider, of the campaign group Reprieve and counsel to the Saadi and 
Belhaj families, said: “GCHQ spied on privileged legal communications in a case 
where they were being sued by a rendition and torture victim. We are pleased 
that one man has finally beaten the security services in this secretive 
tribunal. But this kind of illegal snooping makes phone hacking look like 
child’s play, because it rigs the whole justice game in the government’s favour.


“It’s also inconceivable that Mr al-Saadi was spied on while Mr Belhaj was 
not. I confess I find this part of the IPT’s decision very difficult to make 
sense of.”

Saadi said: “I am glad to be the first person to win against the spies in this 
tribunal. I had always been told I had a right to communicate with my lawyers 
about this torture case in private, but that clearly wasn’t the case. This was 
illegal behavior and I hope now that the right to take legal advice in private 
will never be ignored again.”

A government spokesman said: “The government welcomes the tribunal’s 
confirmation today that the intelligence agencies did not seek or gain any 
advantage in legal proceedings, nor held information referring to any legal 
advice relating to the claimants.

“The government published a revised code of practice in February 2015 to 
provide increased safeguards for handling legally privileged material. The 
agencies are working with the interception of communications commissioner to 
ensure that their policies meet the required standard.”

Crider said the decision represented a further encroachment on the security 
services’ secrecy doctrine of “neither confirming, nor denying” their 
activities: “It blows the government’s ‘neither confirm nor deny’ position out 
of the water,” she said.

“The tribunal have told Mr Al-Saadi that he was subject to spying, and it was 
illegal, in public. It adopts the sensible approach that whilst some spying 
operations may need to be kept secret, there is no good reason to hide unlawful 
conduct, which must be exposed.”



 