
All the talk beforehand was about this being the first Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> match since World Rugby’s 
zero-tolerance clampdown on dangerous tackles came into force as part of its 
policy to reduce head injuries. By the end of a tumultuous encounter the only 
thing on everybody’s lips was a fraught and famous victory for Dean Richards’s 
dashing men in black.

When Semesa Rokoduguni finished off excellent work from Anthony Watson to 
score his second try and put Bath 22-10 up in the 62nd minute,Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> could easily have buckled. 
They did not. Instead, they roused themselves in spectacular fashion to score 
two late tries and claim a success which lifted them to sixth.

It was no more than they deserved, such was the spirit with which they 
attacked their visitors in the closing stages amid scenes of mounting euphoria.

“Even at 12 points down, we never lost our belief and the boys just went for 
it,” Richards reflected. “We don’t get the decisions because we’re not a vogue 
sideand the boys have to work hard for everything we get. But they have this 
belief now that they can go out and win every game. They’ll have a bit of a 
party tonight.”

World Rugby’s stance is an important step in the struggle against concussion 
and there were encouraging early signs that teams will have more freedom to 
attack and display their skills. Certainly Richards’s side threw the ball about 
with abandon in the opening 40 minutes, orchestrating a number of deft handling 
sequences with Joel Hodgson particularly prominent.

The Geordie fly-half, once tipped to be the next Jonny Wilkinson, beavered 
frenziedly throughout and Vereniki Goneva’s third-minute try was just reward 
for Newcastle’s early enterprise. It stemmed from Hodgson’s break into Bath’s 
22-metre line and, although his progress was halted, Goneva galloped past 
several statuesque defenders before scoring under the posts.

Hodgson’s excellent kicking out of hand also had Bath on the back foot, while 
the first penalty of the match came in the eighth minute for Opeti Fonua’s 
challenge on Tom Ellis. That saw theBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> flanker forced off for a head injury 
assessment and led to a rare foray into home territory which Todd Blackadder’s 
men could not make pay.

The off-colour George Ford finally found his range with a penalty to make it 
7-3 at the interval, prompting a pithy “third time lucky” remark from 
Newcastle’s stadium announcer.

Three minutes after the restart, Bath struck when, after twice being denied 
close to the Falcons’ line, Ford collected Darren Allinson’s quick short pass 
and darted over. Jonathan Joseph also went close with a searing break from 
inside his own half which threatened to take him all the way before Hodgson 
made an outstanding tackle.

It summed up Hodgson’s night and Richards added: “Joel is a local boy who 
spent a couple of years away and has come back, having matured massively. He 
understands the game incredibly well, is a leader in his own right, and when he 
speaks the boys listen to him.”

Bath began to move through the gears in the second half, though, and Watson 
then did superbly well to send Rokoduguni over the line in the 52nd minute. The 
pair combined again nine minutes later when Watson broke superbly and ushered 
Rokoduguni over for his second.

It appeared game over for Newcastle but the hosts’ collective desire saw them 
respond when flanker Mark Wilson was driven over the line in the 72nd minute 
and Hodgson converted. With three minutes remaining, the replacement prop Ben 
Harris barrelled over to level the scores and Hodgson’s boot, fittingly, did 
the rest.

After a third straight defeat, Blackadder was forced to concede: “We were 
terrible in the first half and need to be more clinical.”

Newcastle Falcons Tait; Agulla, Waldouck, Socino, Goneva; Hodgson, Takulua 
(Young, 64); Vickers (Harris, 69), Lawson (Sowrey, 64), Welsh (Ryan, 64), 
Green, Olmstead (Witty, 64), Wilson, Welch (capt), Fonua (Robinson, 44)

Tries Goneva, Wilson, Harris Cons Hodgson 3 Pens Hodgson 1

Bath Watson; Rokoduguni, Joseph, Tapuai (Fruean, 54, Priestland, 65), Brew; 
Ford (capt), Allinson (Cook, 61); Catt (Obano, 65), Dunn, Lahiff, Stooke, 
Charteris, Ellis (Garvey, 8), Louw (Grant, 69), Mercer.

Tries Ford, Rokoduguni 2 Cons Ford 2 Pens Ford

Referee Greg Garner. Attendance 6,042
 