


George North will not feature for Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> in the Premiership match 
against Sale at Franklin’s Gardens on Friday.

Failure to punish anyone over George North injury sends wrong message | Robert 
Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/george-north-concussion-northampton-premiership-rugby-rfu>
The Wales wing was signed off for an indefinite period after appearing to be 
knocked out in Northampton’s match against Leicester on 3 December. Saints
escaped without punishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/northampton-saints-escape-sanction-george-north-concussion-rugby-union>
 on Wednesday after a review found the club wrongly allowed North to return to 
the pitch, with the head coach, Jim Mallinder,hinting on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/northampton-expect-george-north-to-be-cleared-specialists-sale>
 the 24-year-old could return to action this week.

However, a statement from Northampton on Thursday confirmed the player will 
not feature against Sale: “George North has both trained with the squad and 
undergone a specialist review this week. All parties have agreed that North 
continue with a full training schedule with the rest of the club’s players to 
ensure he is fully prepared for first-team action.”

Replays appeared to show that North had lost consciousness after an aerial 
collision with Leicester’s Adam Thompstone at Welford Road, yet he passed a 
head injury assessment (HIA) and resumed playing. Saints’ defence is that not 
all replay angles of the incident were available at the time of assessment and 
that the Wales international denied any loss of consciousness, had immediate 
recall of events and stayed motionless because of concerns for his neck pain.

The Rugby Players’ Association reacted to the verdict of the investigation by 
describing the “breakdown in procedure” that enabled North’s return to play as 
a “significant failing”, adding that it would have preferred disciplinary 
action to have been taken.

“While we feel that sanctions would have sent a clear message about the 
gravity of concussion mismanagement, we welcome the recommendations outlined in 
the report,” an RPA statement read.

The brain injury charity Headway has expressed its alarm at the Concussion 
Management Review Group’s findings by questioning whether there needs to be an 
overhaul of the system in place to assess concussion.

“We are concerned with these findings,” the Headway chief executive, Peter 
McCabe, said. “Serious questions have to be asked regarding the protocols: are 
they fit for purpose and are they being properly enforced? This incident sends 
out a confusing message around the issue of concussion, particularly for 
children who follow the example of famous players and favourite clubs.”

Ian Christian, an expert sports injury lawyer at Irwin Mitchell, who worked 
with the Rugby Players’ Association in developing its concussion protocols, is 
also dismayed by the outcome of the review.

“It’s hugely disappointing to see that Northampton have not been held to 
account for the handling of George North’s injury as it was a chance to make a 
statement and remind clubs, players and fans how serious an issue it is,” 
Christian said.

“The findings and lack of punishment feel like a backwards step with the 
experts stating that Northampton could and should have done more to prevent 
North returning to the playing field.”

North had a six-month spell out of the game in 2015 after a spate of four 
blows to the head in five months, two of which were incurred in a Six Nations 
match against England.
 