
Girls Rock graduate and bassist Ivy Dement is teaching her bandmates how to 
breakdance in the corridors of the prestigious Berklee College of Music in 
Boston. “I am going to come here every year until I die,” says the 15-year-old 
intern in a deadpan voice. “Without this I don’t think I’d be who I am. I’m a 
punk rock cheerleader.” Dement is among many graduates ofGirls Rock Campaign 
<http://girlsrockcampalliance.org/> Boston – just one strand of a burgeoning 
movement.

“You can just be whoever you want here,” says Annie Tremblay, 16, who is 
piggy-backing her sister Lucie. “Plus you don’t have to shave your legs!” 
replies guitarist Sid Hammond, 17.

The all-girls rock camp is now in its 16th year, having originated in the 
Pacific Northwest of the US; home ofriot grrrl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/28/riot-grrrl-10-of-the-best>
, grunge and all things right-on. The first camp took place in Portland, 
Oregon, in 2001, and there are now 44 branches in the US, with artists such as 
Tegan and Sara, Kathleen Hanna and Beth Ditto on the advisory board of theGirls 
Rock Foundation <http://www.girlsrockcampfoundation.org/>, which raises funds 
for the camps.

It is now also a global phenomenon. There are camps everywhere from Lima to 
Brisbane to Tokyo; London hosted its first camp in 2016 and this year will see 
several new offshoots in the UK and Ireland.

The Girls Rock Alliance, the global umbrella organisation that unites camp 
leaders, says the ethos is simple: all camps believe that gender and culture 
should not dictate whether a person can play music.

Telling a girl she should be confident feels abstract. Teaching her to play 
guitar as loud as she wants sends a message
Nora Allen-Wiles, camp organiser 
The camps can vary but their principles and format are the same: girls aged 
eight to 18 learn an instrument, form a band, write an original song and 
perform it at a live music venue. They usually take place over a week during 
the summer holidays, though many cities now offer after-school programmes all 
year round.

As well as music lessons, there are also workshops, ranging from lyric writing 
to learning solder pedals and instrument maintenance to silk-screening band 
T-shirts and magazine making. The schools aim to be inclusive regarding race, 
disability and socio-economic background. There are varying fees but but nearly 
all camps include free or subsidised places for children from disadvantaged 
backgrounds.

Boston camp founders Nora Allen-Wiles and Hilken Mancini met while 
volunteering at the Portland camp in 2007, before setting up their own in 2010. 
“At our first session we only had space for 40 kids and there was such a long 
waiting list that in 2011 we tripled our capacity and expanded to two sessions 
with 60 girls each,” says Mancini.

The movement has grown largely through word of mouth, with many camps having 
been established by people who joined the organisation as volunteers.

Related: Can female-focused events forge the future of the music industry? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/13/can-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry>

Karla Schickele, co-founder of the Willie-Mae Rock Camp 
<http://williemaerockcamp.org/> for Girls, the movement’s New York branch, says 
she first heard about the original camp on the radio and felt an overwhelming 
compulsion to visit. “I had a day job at the time and used all my vacation to 
fly across the country to be part of it because it just sounded awesome. Like 
many people, you go and see this incredible week and think, ‘Hey, we absolutely 
need one of these’.”

Allen-Wiles thinks raising girls’ confidence is a big reason the camps have 
been so successful. “I think the popularity is growing because disguising a 
self-esteem camp as a rock’n’roll camp is genius. Telling a group of girls that 
they should be confident can feel like an abstract concept, but giving a girl 
an electric guitar and telling her to turn it up as loud she wants sends a 
message.”


Geraldine Smith, one of the founders of the London branch 
<http://www.girlsrocklondon.com/>, which had its first successful camp in 
August, agrees. “I think it is a very positive and creative response to sexism 
in the music industry. It draws in people who maybe wouldn’t get involved in 
direct political campaigning.”
 Founders and volunteers at the London camp including Geraldine Smith (back 
row, second from left), Vicky O’Neon (back row, third from right) and Ellie 
Roswell of Wolf Alice (front row, third from right) Photograph: Gem Hall/The 
Girls Are 
London co-founder and drummer Vicky O’Neon helped set up a camp in her native 
Finland, and wishes similar opportunities had been around when she was growing 
up. “When I started out I didn’t feel very confident in a male industry,” she 
says. “Most female musicians have felt this way. I think if we can in some way 
help the next generation not to feel that, that’s amazing.”

O’Neon believes the internet is helping the movement catch on in the UK. “We 
Skype with people in America and Europe to talk about things that come up. I’ve 
never found a platform like this before, where it feels like I have friends I 
haven’t met,” she says.


Smith adds: “The internet now means people can give each other their expertise 
for free. It is quite a moving thing.”

“It is about so much more than music. There is something overwhelming about 
being in this space, seeing women being so wonderful to each other. It sends a 
powerful message to young girls.”

Rossella Bottone visited the London camp as a volunteer this summer and is 
co-founding a camp in Dublin to be held in July. “I know first-hand the 
challenges facing girls in our industry,” she says. “Earlier this year I quit 
the corporate job I’d had for nine years and decided do something meaningful. 
LaunchingGirls Rock Dublin <http://www.girlsrockdublin.com/> seemed the obvious 
thing to do.”

Related: Sexism on repeat: how the music industry can break the cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/11/music-industry-sexism-kesha-dr-luke-miles-kane>

Now established in London, Glasgow and Dublin, Smith says there are also plans 
underway for Sunderland, Bristol and Edinburgh. “It has exploded. I think at 
the last conference there were 200 organisers there from all over the world,” 
says Schickele.

With the Boston camp in its sixth year, Allen-Wiles says the eagerness of 
former campers to return as volunteers shows that the camps are doing their job 
building confidence in the next generation.

The camp’s two co-founders couldn’t be held in higher esteem among the young 
rockers. “I want to be like Hilken when I’m older,” says 17-year-old Sid 
Hammond. “I want them to pass the camp on to me.” Liana Glennan, also 17, adds: 
“I’m gonna be Nora. If I am just Nora then I’ll die happy.”

“It blows me away that there are youth who believe so strongly in the mission 
of this organisation and have been involved for so long”, says Allen-Wiles. “To 
see them move into a leadership role was really exciting. They are the future 
of this world – and it is bright.”
 