
Glasgow secured a European Champions Cup double over Racing 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92> with an impressive 23-7 
victory over last year’s runners-up at Scotstoun.

Tries from Josh Strauss, Fraser Brown and Ali Price sent Glasgow top of Pool 1 
with their third win in four matches, although they knew Munster would return 
to the summit on Saturday if they maintain their perfect record against 
Leicester.

The French champions could not live with the tempo and variety of Glasgow’s 
attacking play and were 23 points behind after 46 minutes before they began to 
have any kind of forward momentum.

Even then Warriors withstood the serious physical challenge and some desperate 
defending maintained their clean sheet until the 79th minute.

Leicester Tigers and Northampton Saints lose their way in new world order | 
The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/leicester-tigers-and-northampton-saints-rugby-breakdown>
The Glasgow head coach, Gregor Townsend, said: “It’s a huge achievement, says 
a lot about our players and their ability, and not just in attack and defence, 
the set-piece and the intelligence of their decisions. It’s a great statement 
to say to our players, to say to people in Scottish rugby, that we can take on 
the best and beat them.

“We just have to take that on in the next two games. We looked at four or five 
wins as a necessity to get out the group. We have got three now, we have two 
games to go, which will be very tough.”

The visitors, who were stunned by the shock retirement of their 24-year-old 
full-back Johan Goosen earlier on Friday, were much changed followingtheir 
23-14 defeat by Glasgow in Paris last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/european-champions-cup-rugby-roundup-glasgow-warriors-racing-92-ulster-clermont-auvergne>
 while the Warriors made only one enforced switch. Simone Favaro dropped out 
with a shoulder injury and Strauss came in at No8 for his 100th Warriors 
appearance.

Racing saw a good early opening foiled by a forward pass but it proved the 
last time they had the ball in the Glasgow 22 for almost 40 minutes.

Warriors quickly got on top and Finn Russell’s kick sparked an attack that the 
visitors could not stop. Tommy Seymour took the ball on and fed Stuart Hogg 
whose inside pass allowed Strauss to cross in the fifth minute.

Russell soon burst through several players but did not play the pass when he 
had his chance. However, Glasgow did not have to wait long for their second try 
and it was Russell who was the creator again, releasing Brown to force himself 
over inside 13 minutes. Russell this time added the conversion and Glasgow 
continued their onslaught.

Racing held out against some sustained pressure close to the try line, with 
Hogg stopped a metre out, but Glasgow had a penalty waiting for them and 
Russell extended the lead to 15 points.

Russell notched another easy penalty after the visiting scrum collapsed while 
Racing were denied a stoppage-time try when Seymour held up Brice Dulin right 
in the corner after Dan Carter’s kick threatened to give the visitors a 
scarcely deserved score.

Warriors continued their domination after the interval and Price crossed after 
a clever dummy gave the scrum-half the chance to squeeze between two opponents. 
Racing finally found their attacking game and the Warriors conceded with 60 
seconds left when Xavier Chauveau went over near the corner.

It leaves last season’s runners-up in effect out of the competition on a 
desperate day when Goosen, voted the Top 14’s player of the year last season 
after helping Racing to the title, revealed a change of career.

A statement from the Racing president Jacky Lorenzetti read: “Johan Goosen, 
whose contract was largely re-evaluated less than a year ago, now claims to be 
able to get rid of it in a fantastic manner.

“We would like to add that Racing 92 have always largely supported Johan 
Goosen both morally and financially, even though he has unfortunately 
demonstrated lately a certain lack of responsibility towards his partners, his 
coaches and more broadly of all the members of his club and his supporters.

“Hopefully he will quickly realise that respect for a contract, like that of 
the given word, is the basis of all human and professional relationships.”

The statement suggested legal action would follow, concluding: “Of course, the 
club reserve the right to give such conduct all appropriate judicial follow-up, 
both with regard to Johan Goosen and those who advise him.”
 