
Glasgow secured top spot in the Guinness Pro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> table and home advantage for next 
week’s play-offs with a stirring second half against Ulster in a 32-10 victory.

The visitors were good value for their 10-6 half-time lead but two tries from 
Finn Russell and one each by Stuart Hogg and Richie Vernon sealed an impressive 
comeback. With both sides having already qualified for the play-offs, the 
outcome means the two teams meet again in Scotland.

Munster also made sure of a home semi-final with a resounding 50-27 home win 
against Newport Gwent Dragons. Among their eight tries, Conor Murray scored a 
hat-trick asMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> made sure of a 
bonus point.

Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> will be off to Thomond 
Park having missed out on home advantage as they failed to score in the second 
half of their 24-20 win over Connacht. A bonus‑point try would have been enough 
for the Welsh side to finish in second spot above Munster but they were unable 
to add to their three-try first-half performance. Instead, a last-minute 
seven-pointer from Denis Buckley earned the Irish province a deserved losing 
bonus point and a best-ever finish of seventh, which sets up a Champions Cup 
qualification play-off away to Gloucester next Sunday.

Scarlets fought back from a 10-point deficit at half-time to beat Treviso 
17-13 as both sides secured a place in next season’s European showpiece.

Second-half tries from Liam Williams and Steffan Evans helped to complete a 
remarkable turnaround for the Welsh side as they held on to clinch sixth place.

Edinburgh’s hopes of playing in the European competition next season were 
snuffed out when they lost 36-23 to a workmanlike Leinster side at Murrayfield. 
Zebre also missed their slim chance at a Champions Cup slot following a 29-5 
defeat to Cardiff Blues in Wales. Tries from Alex Cuthbert (two), Gethin 
Jenkins, Rhys Patchell and Garyn Smith were enough to see off the men from 
Parma.
 