
Glasgow Warriors marked their 100th game in the European Cup by doing the 
double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/glasgow-warriors-scarlets-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 over their Guinness Pro12 rivals Scarlets to stay in the hunt for a 
quarter-final place in the European Champions Cup.

In appalling conditions at Parc y Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>, Gregor Townsend’s team celebrated 
their century with four points and also made it back-to-back victories in the 
middle of the pool stages for the first time in 15 seasons as they triumphed 
9-6.

But they were forced to dig deep in the second half when they were reduced to 
13 men for seven minutes after the former Scarlets player Sean Lamont and 
back-row man Chris Fusaro were both sent to the sin-bin by the French official 
Pascal Gaüzère in the space of three minutes.

Lamont got his marching orders for playing the ball on the floor after a 
tackle and then Fusaro followed him into the bin for a late charge on Aled 
Thomas after he had kicked ahead.

The win means the reigning Pro12 champions are back in the hunt for a 
quarter-final place afterlosing their opening game at home against Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/glasgow-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
.

They now sit in third place in Pool Three, one point behind Saints, with a 
game in hand, and three behind Racing 92, who they still have to play home and 
away.

The torrential rain meant there was never any likelihood of a repeat of the 
try-fest at Scotstoun the previous weekend and the first half turned into a 
battle of the kickers.

Finn Russell hit the mark with two out of three of his penalty attempts, while 
Thomas was wide with his one shot.

The Scarlets lost Thomas to the sin-bin after 28 minutes for cynically 
knocking the ball out of the hands of his opposite number Russell in a tackle, 
but the home side conceded only three points while he was off the field.

The game was still finely balanced at the break with the visitors 6-0 to the 
good and Russell extended the lead to nine points with his third success five 
minutes after the restart.

Then came the yellow cards and Thomas got the Scarlets off the mark with a 
penalty shortly after Lamont went off and then added a second moments before 
Fusaro returned.

That left the home side with 13 minutes to try to find a way to win the game 
and add to their one point from three games.

Thomas had a 45-metre kick at goal six minutes from the end, but pushed his 
kick wide.
 