
Talks between the major rugby unions about a global season have stalled, 
raising fears that there will be no international calendar after the 2019 World 
Cup outside official tournaments, such as the Six Nations and the Rugby 
Championship.

The major southern hemisphere nations have long argued for a global season 
which would separate club and international fixtures to synchronise the playing 
calendar. The New Zealand head coach, Steve Hansen, has described the current 
schedule as “bordering on the ludicrous” and detrimental to player welfare, but 
three years of talks have yielded little.

A global season would mean changing the timing of events and ending the June 
and November international windows when countries fly out at the end of 
nine- or 10-month seasons. The four home unions are split about starting the 
Six Nations later in the year – England and Ireland are opposed while Scotland 
and Wales, whose chief executives were hired from the business world, are in 
favour.

Warren Gatland set to be named as Lions coach for New Zealand tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/warren-gatland-lions-coach-new-zealand>
If the Six Nations remains anchored in the calendar, there will be no global 
season. New Zealand have said that unless changes are made they will not sign 
up to a new international fixture schedule after 2019 and will negotiate Test 
fixtures individually. The current system arranges tours years in advance, 
allowing countries to plan financially. Among this year’s autumn 
internationals, Ireland host the All Blacks and Australia in November, while 
England and Wales welcome the Australians and South Africa, but without a 
schedule drawn up by World Rugby and signed off by all the countries involved a 
bidding war would break out and threaten poorer unions’ finances.

Countries on tour receive none of the income generated by the matches they are 
involved in and only have their expenses, such as flights and hotels, paid. New 
Zealand made little more from this summer’s three-Test tour against Wales than 
the Welsh Rugby Union bank from one match against the All Blacks in Cardiff.

That has led the southern hemisphere nations to propose that income from Tests 
is pooled and divided equally among the tier one nations. There is little 
appetite for that in Europe and that attitude has hardened New Zealand’s 
resolve to go it alone, although Wales and Scotland are open to a debate. The 
All Blacks, along with Australia and South Africa, believe Europe’s greater 
financial muscle has allowed clubs, especially in France, to plunder leading 
players from the southern hemisphere and threaten their game’s income driver, 
Test rugby.

A consequence of no international calendar would mean that Lions tours would 
have to be negotiated. The current deal between the home unions and New 
Zealand, Australia and South Africa ends after the 2017 series with the All 
Blacks, with talks to extend it jammed in the global season debate.

More talks are scheduled for the autumn before World Rugby’s council meeting, 
but clubs have yet to be given a formal role in the negotiations, despite the 
impact any change would have on their fixtures. Officials at this week’s 
Guinness Pro12 launch spoke of their frustration and they want to be given a 
voice, along with Premiership Rugby and the Top 14, to help break the impasse.

The Rugby Football Union chief executive, Ian Ritchie, is trying to mediate 
but his union’s entrenched position on the Six Nations and income distribution 
has meant he has not got far. Its former chairman Bill Beaumontmade a global 
season a priority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/10/bill-beaumont-world-rugby-global-calendar>
 when he took over as World Rugby’s chairman last month, even saying that the 
Six Nations had to be flexible, but as time passes with nothing being achieved, 
the world leaders New Zealand are making plans for a very different future.

Meanwhile the Australia centre Kurtley Beale has arrived at Wasps but does not 
know when he will be fit to make his debut three months after suffering a 
patella tendon injury. Bath have appointed the flanker Guy Mercer as their new 
captain, although he will have to vie for his place after the Rugby 
Championship with the South Africa breakaway Francois Louw. George Ford, the 
England outside-half who was reported to want to leave the club after his 
father, Mike, was sacked as director of rugby three months ago, has been named 
vice-captain.
 