
The billionaire Mohed Altrad will have to wait until the new year before 
learning whether his bid to take overGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> has succeeded.

Altrad, who owns Montpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier>, 
the European Challenge Cup holders, said the English and French unions had 
approved his move to become the majority shareholder at Kingsholm but European 
Professional Club Rugby has deferred making a decision on whether there would 
be a conflict of interest should one person own two clubs that competed in its 
tournaments.

“We hope soon to receive the European body’s response in order to build for 
next season,” said Altrad, although the next EPCR board meeting is not until 
February. “The English have no problem with the owner of a French club 
investing in the development of a city and its rugby club.

Gloucester chief calls for freeze on Premiership rugby’s salary cap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/18/gloucester-premiership-rugby-union-salary-cap-frezze-stephen-vaughan>
“In my letter to EPCR I proposed an ethical charter which guarantees the 
independence and autonomy of each club. Gloucester is an historic club, with a 
strong identity. My company, the Altrad Group, realises €600m in sales in 
Britain but there is not sufficient awareness about it.

“Rugby has become a passion. If I invest in Gloucester, it is to win the 
English league. The economic aspect is important and the club has good 
management. Rugby excites me, even if the passion is costing me dear.”

EPCR has received an application for consent for the acquisition of a majority 
stake (54%) in Gloucester by Altrad Participations, although the Syria-born 
French businessman said it was he, not his company, who would be investing.

In a statement the company said: “To have a controlling influence in two clubs 
participating in European club competition would require the consent of the 
unions concerned as well as World Rugby and EPCR itself. We have written to the 
three organisations in question asking for their clarified positions on the 
matter.”

The Gloucester chief executive, Stephen Vaughan, said: “We have pledged to 
remain as frank and open as we possibly can on this matter. Last week we 
confirmed discussions had begun with Mr Altrad but that any progress was 
dependent on receiving approval from a number of relevant bodies.”

Bath are celebrating a court decision that takes them a step closer to 
developing the Rec and increasing capacity to 18,000. The site’s owner, Bath 
Recreation Ground Trust, has been told it has the authority to lease the club 
extra land to enhance the stadium. The club’s managing director, Tarquin 
McDonald, said: “We remain committed to creating something very special in the 
heart of Bath.”
 