
Stephen Curry and the Golden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> certainly looked 
ready to trade some more blows with LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers 
come June.

The two-time reigning MVP hit five 3-pointers and had 20 points while matching 
his season best with 11 assists in Golden State’s 126-91 rout of the defending 
champs Monday.

Cleveland Cavaliers 91-126 Golden State Warriors: NBA – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/16/cleveland-cavaliers-golden-state-warriors-nba-live-score>
Klay Thompson scored 26 points with five 3s, and Draymond Green produced his 
third triple-double of the season with 11 points, 13 rebounds and 11 assists. 
He also equaled his career best with five blocks – and had another dustup with 
King James in the process.

James had 20 points on 6-of-18 shooting and eight rebounds, and he and Green 
became the talk once more as their relationship turned even more testy.

Kevin Durant added 21 points, six rebounds, five assists and three blocks for 
the Warriors in a much-hyped matchup merely weeks after Golden State lost 
109-108 in Cleveland on Christmas.

The Warriors squandered a 14-point lead that day in a loss that fueled them 
going into Monday. They relinquished a 3-1 advantage in theNBA finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba-finals> last year, a failure that 
motivates them to return to the big stage. And the rivals’ latest holiday game 
marked the Cavs’ first trip back to Oracle Arena since capturing the title here 
seven months ago.

Kyrie Irving – who hit game-winners against Golden State in the past two 
matchups, including the championship clincher – scored 17 points on an 
uncharacteristic day for the Cavs when they committed 15 turnovers to 11 
assists.

Cleveland shot just 35.2% (31 for 88) overall. Beyond embarrassed, Cavs 
players made for the tunnel before the final buzzer even sounded.

The latest altercation between Green and James came with 6:55 left in the 
first half. Golden State led 52-35 when James collided with Green near 
midcourt, resulting in a flagrant 1 foul on Golden State’s emotional All-Star. 
Green’s arm extended across the upper body of James, who went down hard and lay 
on the court. Green reacted by appearing to mock James for flopping – and he 
wasn’t the only one to sense some embellishment from LeBron.

“Flagrant 1 on Draymond?? What has happened to my league??” former 
player-turned-analyst Reggie Miller posted on Twitter.

After a long replay review, a double technical was called on Green and Richard 
Jefferson.

This tension goes back a while: Green was suspended for Game 5 of last season’s
NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> finals after swiping at James’ 
groin the previous game. The absence of Green helped swing the series.

After Curry’s pull-up 3 moments before halftime Monday sent his team into the 
break with a 78-49 lead, the star guard did what looked like a little 
celebratory breakdancing move on his behind at the sideline.

You bet this one meant a lot to the Warriors to regain some swagger in this 
rivalry after Cleveland had won the past four meetings.

A day after the Christmas loss at Cleveland last month, the NBA said James 
should have received a technical for hanging on the rim with 1:43 to play and 
that Jefferson fouled Durant on the game’s final play. That prompted Durant to 
call on the league to ditch the Last Two Minute Report altogether.

On Monday, Durant appeared downright possessed. KD’s driving, emphatic 
tomahawk jam 1:43 before halftime sent Oracle Arena’s sellout crowd into a 
frenzy.

Zaza Pachulia pulled down 13 rebounds as Golden State had a 58-35 edge on the 
boards. Andre Iguodala came off the bench to make all five of his field goal 
attempts for a season-high 14 points, and Shaun Livingston added 13.

Cavs new addition Kyle Korver, acquired from Atlanta on 7 January, scored 11 
points off the bench.
 