
The government is attempting to keep secret the extent of the intelligence 
services’ unlawful behaviour, a tribunal has heard.

An application for a confidential judgment that would never be published has 
been made by lawyers for MI5, MI6 andGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> 
in a highly sensitive case about the interception of legally privileged 
conversations between lawyers and their clients.

The request was made during a claim before the investigatory powers tribunal 
(IPT) brought by the Libyan dissidentAbdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and his family who were 
abducted in a UK-US rendition operation and returned to Muammar Gaddafi’s 
regime in Tripoli. The IPT deals with complaints about the conduct of the 
intelligence services.

Belhaj is suing the government over his treatment. Following revelations by 
the US National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden about widespread 
online and phone surveillance by GCHQ and other agencies, Belhaj launched a 
claim in the IPT alleging that his legally protected exchanges with his lawyers 
had been intercepted – possibly giving the government an unfair advantage in 
the compensation case.

Belhaj is supported by Amnesty International, Reprieve and other human rights 
groups.

Lawyers for MI5 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5>, MI6 and GCHQ have 
already admitted that the policies and procedures they had in place to deal 
with legally privileged material were unlawful.

No “Chinese walls” were in place to prevent those involved in litigation 
seeing sensitive intelligence material. Conversations between lawyers and their 
clients have a protected status under English law.

Ben Jaffey, counsel for Belhaj and his family, told the tribunal: “There has 
been a failure of legal oversight that has allowed this to happen.

“We know these policies have had a real-world effect. In at least one case 
there has been tainting and there’s a risk that it could have given them an 
unfair advantage.”

Jaffey said the government was asking the tribunal to keep secret whether 
Belhaj had been the victim of “serious interference with his lawyers” and how 
that might have occurred.

“The proposal of [the government] is to deal with this case behind secret 
curtains. The public exposure of unlawfulness is very painful for the agencies. 
It may make it more difficult for them to do their job but such is the rule of 
law.”

Hugh Tomlinson QC, for Amnesty, said: “If the tribunal says nothing or says it 
may have happened, the public will be left thinking: ‘What has happened? Is 
this a can of worms? Is this an iceberg under the water?’

“There’s nothing more likely to undermine confidence in the security services 
than the impression that there’s dirty dealing behind the curtains and nothing 
has been revealed.”

The IPT, which conducts many of its hearings in secret, is empowered to 
consider claims on a hypothetical basis.

James Eadie QC, for the intelligence agencies, told the tribunal that making a 
public determination at the end of the case could endanger public safety.

Confirming to any claimant that they were being monitored would undermine the 
well-established government’s principle of “neither confirm nor deny” (NCND), 
he said.

In other cases, Eadie suggested, it might involve someone contemplating 
bombing the London Underground. “It’s not good enough to say [to the 
intelligence services] you have brought it on yourself. It’s the public who 
will suffer.”

He told the tribunal: “Although in a case in which the agencies have acted 
unlawfully, the starting point is that a successful complaint should be 
entitled to a statement that that has occurred, if that statement or its 
logical consequences … would cause real damage to national security then 
different considerations will be in play.”

He added: “In circumstances where to depart from the NCND approach would cause 
damage to national security … the tribunal should adopt an approach which does 
not reveal the fact that interception has occurred.”
 