
The government should address the core allegations of 12 claimants who say 
they were kidnapped, tortured, subject to control orders or tricked into 
travelling toLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> where they were 
detained or mistreated, a high court judge has said.

In a move welcomed by lawyers for the claimants, Mr Justice Lord Irwin said 
the government should outline its reasons for striking out the claims.

Until now, the highly complex case arising from documents recovered from 
Libyan government archives after the fall of Muammar Gaddafi, as revealed by 
the Guardian, has been bogged down in procedural manoeuvring without the 
government actually having to address the key allegations.

Wednesday’s hearing nudged the case further along.

Cooperation between British spies and Gaddafi’s Libya revealed in official 
papers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/22/cooperation-british-spies-gaddafi-libya-revealed-official-papers>
Irwin said he was was not suggesting that government lawyers set out a full 
defence, but added: “I raise the question as to whether the basis for the 
[strike out] application should be set out in outline.” Lawyers for the 
government agreed.

The development came as Irwin agreed to a government request  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/uk-government-tries-to-move-libya-rendition-claims-behind-closed-doors>
to move consideration of the application to strike down the claims behind 
closed doors. They said the closed session would allow the government to 
present sensitive information to support their case.

Irwin rejected an earlier attempt to have the claims struck down in January, 
when he ruled that the allegations “are of real potential public concern” and 
should be heard and dealt with by the courts.

Initially, the government argued the claims were an abuse of process on the 
grounds that the claimants should have sought to reopen earlier proceedings 
against them in the special immigration appeal court (SIAC) and control order 
proceedings in the administrative court.

Control orders can include home curfews and restrictions on whom a suspect can 
meet. Lawyers for the claimants have in turn accused the government of abuse of 
process by foot-dragging and in wasting taxpayers’ money.

The documents retrieved after Gaddafi’s fall include secret correspondence from
MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>, MI5 reports on Libyans living in the 
UK, a British intelligence assessment marked “UK/Libya Eyes Only – Secret” and 
official Libyan minutes of meetings between the two countries’ intelligence 
agencies.

UK government tries to move Libya rendition claims behind closed doors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/uk-government-tries-to-move-libya-rendition-claims-behind-closed-doors>
Cooperation between UK and Libyan security services burgeoned after the 
September 11 attacks in 2001. At one point, Libyan intelligence agents were 
invited to operate on British soil, where they worked alongsideMI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> and allegedly intimidated a number of 
Gaddafi opponents who had been granted asylum in the UK.


A team of London-based lawyers assembled the documents into an archive that 
has formed the basis of a claim for damages against the British government 
alleging false imprisonment, blackmail, misfeasance in public office and 
conspiracy to assault.

According to the documents, five men were subjected to control orders on the 
basis of intelligence assessments that are now alleged to have been based in 
part on information extracted during Libyan interrogation of the two opposition 
leaders, Sami al-Saadi and Abdel Hakim Belhaj, following UK-Libyan rendition 
operations.

Lawyers who represented the men subjected to control orders say that both the 
high court and the SIAC were kept in the dark about the UK’s role in the kidnap 
of the two men who were providing the information about their clients.

“There has been delay and frustration,” said Irène Nembhard, a solicitor with 
Birnberg Peirce – the law firm representing the 12 claimants. “It has been 
frustrating getting to the truth behind collusion between British and Libyan 
security services and the hiding of this collusion from the courts when the 
decisions were made to detain them in prison or under control orders for years, 
all of which combined to have terrible effects on their families.”

Six Libyan men, the widow of a seventh, and five British citizens of Libyan 
and Somali origin have brought claims. They began their case formally in 
January 2013.

Irwin said the decision to move proceedings behind closed doors, under Section 
6 of the Official Secrets Act, would be kept under review and that the 
application for a strike out should follow a rapid timetable.

Both sides are now trying to work out a schedule that will allow time for the 
court to consider requests by the home secretary to withhold sensitive 
information from litigants under public interest immunity considerations.

A hearing to consider the government’s application to strike out the claims is 
expected in December.
 