
They went to Kigali to eliminate hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and take 0.5C out 
of future global warming, and the 170 countries who successfully negotiated an 
amendment to the Montreal Protocol agreed to get rid of 90% of them. Job done. 
Not bad for four days and three long nights’ work.

In fact, the Kigali deal on HFCs, announced on Saturday morning, is fiendishly 
complicated and has taken years to negotiate in different technical and 
political forums. It was only struck by an ambitious agreement to give 
countries different timescales to phase them out, alongside major chemical and 
big food companies accepting change, the personal determination of the US 
secretary of state, John Kerry, to get a deal before the election and 
developing countries agreeing to invest heavily in new technologies.

Climate change: global deal reached to limit use of hydrofluorocarbons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/climate-change-environmentalists-hail-deal-to-limit-use-of-hydrofluorocarbons>
Rich countries, including the US, Japan and nations in Europe, will now start 
phasing out synthetic HFCs in 2019, whereas China agreed to peak emissions in 
2024, whileIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and less ambitious 
countries chose 2028.

As such, the deal reflects countries’ differing levels of development. Because 
nearly all HFCs are made by a handful of giant northern chemical companies and 
are used in air-conditioning units and cooling systems made and sold in rich 
countries, it was relatively easy for their governments to put pressure on a 
single global industry. Besides, the alternatives, like hydrocarbons, ammonia 
and CO2, are widely available, safe, have been approved and are on the market.

The deal will make little difference to rich countries. The EU had already 
started to phase out HFCs and since 2011 had banned them being used in cars. 
Many global food and drink companies, like Coca-Cola, Pepsico and Unilever, 
have already started to switch fluorinated greenhouse gases with 
climate-friendly and other natural refrigerants that are more energy-efficient 
and can save money. The new agreement is welcomed by many chemical and 
manufacturing companies because it gives them market advantage over inferior 
products made in poor countries, as well as green kudos.

But a deal proved much harder for India, China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and other developing countries to 
strike. Their companies have relied on old refrigeration and coolant 
technologies, and they will now have to invest heavily in R&D and upgrade or 
replace their factories and equipment. Just as in the wider climate 
negotiations, they accepted that they were part of the problem and possibly on 
track to become the main HFC users, but they insisted that, like climate change 
itself, this was primarily a western problem foisted on them.

The deal has been widely welcomed because it keeps the Paris agreement on 
track and is an important step towards reducing global emissions. Coming on the 
heels of a new deal to cap aviation emissions, and just weeks before the 
shipping industry tries to clean up its act and the UN climate talks resume, it 
is overwhelmingly positive.

In fact, the Kigali meeting need never have happened. HFCs were widely 
recognised as powerful climate-warming gases many years ago and governments 
deliberately missed the chance to eliminate them in 1987 when they agreed the 
Montreal Protocol to phase out CFC gases and save the ozone layer.

The ozone hole is at last slowly recovering and HFCs are now seen as just a 
small but important part of the growing climate-change problem. If only it took 
just a few long nights of negotiations to eliminate fossil fuels too.

 