
My overwhelming memory of my childhood is the constant busyness in the house. 
I am seventh out of eight kids – five boys and three girls – plus my mom, Ruth. 
Getting ready for school in the morning was a major production with queues for 
the bathroom, bickering and people forgetting stuff.

Mom did a great job of taking care of us all, single-handedly. We were a very 
tight-knit family, but we all had to pull our weight. My sisters started to 
cook at nine and, being one of the youngest, I wanted in on it, too, so I began 
at six on potato-peeling duty as french fries were my thing.

Dad was largely absent. I only saw him a few days in my life. He didn’t seem 
interested in us at all.

I was quite shy as a child. My sisters were the gang leaders, my brothers were 
the enforcers and I was a tag-a-long. I liked staying safe, so I was always 
trying to keep my older brother Lloyd out of trouble, telling him off for being 
too risky and adventurous.

The underlying value Mom taught us was respect, everyone from winos on the 
street to our elders. Being from such a large family, she wanted to drill these 
basic values of compassion, empathy and mutual respect into us from a young age 
so she didn’t have to micromanage us. It is an easy, simple message, but often 
difficult to achieve.

We tried not to fight, or at least get caught fighting, because Mom would make 
us go through an embarrassing ritual where she would get us to hug and then 
kiss each other. By the end, everybody would be laughing because we would be 
hamming it up.

It was always quite a squeeze wherever we lived. At one place, the laundry 
room was converted into a bedroom for us boys, but the hardest was when all 
eight of us and Mom were in a one-bed apartment in Los Angeles. One of us got 
chickenpox and then we all did.Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> mealtimes were always very 
sociable with us sitting as a group on the floor.

Mom had an incredible work ethic. She held down three jobs for much of her 
life to help support us, as overnight nurse, a realtor [estate agent] and a 
pastor. She never complained, she just got on with it. Oddly, I never remember 
her gone – she was always there when we needed her. I never felt neglected. 
I don’t know how she managed it all with eight kids. Our washing machine was 
always breaking down. Even being on the road 300 days a year, doing 250 shows, 
I don’t think I’m working anywhere near as hard as my mother.

We moved to an all-white neighbourhood when I was seven, in Bakersfield, 
California. It was the first time I encountered racism first-hand, from ugly 
name-calling to burning crosses in our yard, my brother Brian being shot [he 
survived] and the house being pelted with faeces and garbage. My mother handled 
it with stoicism and dignity, reinforcing that we kids should rise above it and 
treat those around us with respect. The night my brother was shot, us kids 
cleaned his room spotless for him for when he came home and shared happy 
memories of him.

My mother gave me the courage to pursue music as a career on her deathbed. She 
became very ill when I was 21. I didn’t want her to worry about my future. I 
wanted her to know I’d finish my degree. But she pushed me to follow my dream, 
even if it wasn’t the safe option.

I’m now a dad myself (to three-year-old Demyan with my wife, Victoria) and I 
want to be the opposite of my dad. I love being involved with him and letting 
him know I’m rooting for him and will support him in whatever he does. 
Shouldn’t every parent?

• Gregory Porter’s latest album, Take Me to the Alley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/05/gregory-porter-take-me-to-the-alley-review-genre-straddling-true-grit>
, is out now on Decca Records.
 