
So where does the sport of rugby sevens go next? The easy answer is Wellington 
next week for the men, and Sydney the following weekend for the women: the HSBC 
Sevens World Series is truly a global merry-go-round. Las Vegas, Vancouver, 
Hong Kong, Singapore, Paris, London: all are keenly awaiting the chance to host 
the unexpected star of the show at the Rio Olympics last year.

Online research conducted last year by Nielsen Sports in the key markets of 
Australia, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States 
suggested nearly 17 million new fans worldwide, particularly among women and 
the 18-24 age group, were attracted by what they saw at the Games. Within five 
years China hope to have a million rugby players enjoying a sport which, in 
Mandarin, apparently translates as “English-style olive ball”. Australia’s 
exciting gold medal-winning women’s sevens team are even gracing the pages of 
this month’s Australian Vogue.

Related: The Olympic Games and rugby sevens: a match made in heaven | Matt 
Cleary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/the-olympic-games-and-rugby-sevens-a-match-made-in-heaven>

There comes a point, though, when what matters more than global expansion and 
a few glossy pictures is greater respect and, on the back of that, long-term 
profitability. In Britain, for example, some still regard sevens as a 
knockabout luxury for 15s rejects. Never mind that Fiji’s men and Australia’s 
women enchanted the world in Rio, where are the cauliflower ears? Someone like 
Tom Mitchell, the captain of the GB and England teams, can continue to walk 
down Twickenham High Street without a flicker of recognition.

Mitchell is far too modest to complain and counts himself lucky to be 
travelling the world playing sport at someone else’s expense. His personal 
ambition for 2017, though, is anything but a shy, retiring one. “I’d like to be 
recognised as the best playmaker in the world,” he states, matter-of-factly. As 
a medal-winning Olympian he and his team-mates deserve much wider appreciation 
in their homeland than they are currently receiving.

Maybe attitudes would shift if more people knew what their training entailed. 
Once a week, for example, the England and GB coach, Simon Amor, requires his 
squad to undergo a “death zone” session designed to replicate how climbers feel 
when they reach a certain rarified altitude. “It’s based on the principle of 
getting yourself to an advanced level of fatigue and then trying to perform 
your skills at that level,” reports Mitchell, nominated for the Sevens World 
Player of the Year award in 2013-14. “It’s a strange sadistic enjoyment we get 
from it... this morning a lot of the boys were out on their feet.”

He is too polite to add that the average Premiership player would find the 
multi-layered demands of sevens intolerable; perhaps only a decathlete can 
fully empathise with the stop-start mix of sprinting, endurance, touch and 
power required. Even gifted athletes such as Sonny Bill Williams, Quade Cooper 
and Jarryd Hayne found the transformation hard last year. “Generally speaking 
integrating those guys wasn’t that successful,” confirms Mitchell, who made his 
own transition after playing in the 2011 Varsity Match for Oxford University. 
“It made a few people recognise that the big name 15s players who came in 
didn’t absolutely run riot. That’s good for the sevens game. It not only takes 
a certain type of physical athlete but you also need skills across the board. 
You can’t just attack, you also have to defend and have the desire to go again 
when you really don’t want to. Jumping between the two is very difficult now.”

Which makes it all the more important sevens finds better ways of selling 
itself than simply bussing in a big star or two from 15s. Dove-tailing all the 
women’s and the men’s legs of the World Sevens Series would surely be a start. 
“For me that’s the ideal scenario and the ultimate aim,” agrees Mitchell. What 
about creating domestic summer competitions or some kind of oval-shaped “Big 
Bash” league? And would England, Wales and Scottish players be better advised 
to operate more consistently under the GB banner in sevens, rather than joining 
up a handful of weeks before the Olympics? “There are certainly a lot of issues 
that need sorting out, whichever way the powers-that-be decide to take it,” 
says Mitchell diplomatically.

In the short term, whatever happens, there is a Commonwealth Games in 
Australia and a Rugby Sevens World Cup in San Francisco in 2018 to keep 
everyone focused. Having hung out in the coffee queue in the Olympic village 
with Mo Farah and shared the gym with Justin Rose – “I think he was quite 
impressed” – Mitchell is motivated both by the multi-sport experience and the 
challenge of bettering himself as an athlete. “To be at the top level at sevens 
now you can’t rest on your laurels. There’s a devil that creeps on to your 
shoulder sometimes that says: ‘You’re 27 now, Tom, it’s probably time to take 
it a bit easier. Take a bit of weight off the bar or don’t run that extra 
couple of metres.’ But our careers are quite short and I’ve always gone out 
with the philosophy that I want to maximise every opportunity... you want to 
put everything into it you can.”

In Mitchell’s case that means sharpening his kicking game and getting every 
single attacking decisions spot on. It also remains his firm view that sevens 
and 15s can operate in tandem, for the benefit of both parties: “Part of our 
programme is to develop players who could potentially go back into the 
15-a-side game. I’m sure you’ll get more going back to fifteens who have built 
up their skills playing sevens. Equally, there will be people who rebuild 
careers on the sevens circuit.”

From the post-Rio comments the 27-year-old has received from his 15-a-side 
contemporaries, he also senses perceptions of sevens are slowly changing: 
“There were definitely a lot of people who had their heads turned and looked at 
sevens in a different way. They maybe had a new-found respect for the guys who 
play it and everything that goes with it.” There is a brave new world out there 
for those sufficiently fit and motivated to grasp it.

Spin doctor


All of us concerned for George North’s well-being following a succession of 
high-profile knocks received a mild rebuke from the man himself over the 
weekend. “Well, you boys have to get paid somehow don’t you? So you boys can 
make stories up. I’m all right,” he told BBC Radio Northampton. Whoever is 
advising him might care to remind the Welsh international winger that rugby 
players suffering multiple concussions continues to be a multi-layered problem 
for the global game, not some facile media conspiracy. Hopefully North, as well 
as enjoying a long, successful career, will see the bigger picture sooner 
rather than later.

 And another thing...

It is less than ideal for the organisers that, with one round to go, four 
sides have already qualified for the last eight of the European Champions’ Cup 
with another two from Connacht, Wasps and Toulouse certain to join them. That 
leaves just a couple of other slots available and relatively little in the way 
of Sunday afternoon mathematical drama. It will require a major late twist for 
Clermont Auvergne, Saracens, Munster and Leinster not to be hosting 
quarter-finals in the spring.
 