
A woman who was suspended by a council-owned organisation dealing with 
homelessness after she was found to be sleeping rough in a council garage has 
said Guardian readers who helped her and her son after reading about their 
plight had “made our Christmas”.

Readers offered to donate money and one had already paid a lump sum to clear 
Arleen Matthews’ debts. A company had offered her 18-year-old son an 
internship, a supporter had set up anonline donations page 
<http://bit.ly/2hPXgG8> and another had started a petition 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/reinstate-arleen-matthews-and-drop-and-disciplanary-action-against-her>
 calling for Matthews’ reinstatement.

Until her suspension, Matthews, 48, was working for Homes for Haringey, an 
arms-length management organisation owned by Haringey council in north London 
that looks after the local authority’s housing stock and manages itsassessment 
of homelessness applications <http://www.homesforharingey.org/about-us>. The 
organisation’s website states 
<http://www.homesforharingey.org/looking-home/homelessness>: “We want to 
prevent homelessness whenever possible.”


Matthews’ job is to ensure that the council’s estates, which house 16,000 
tenants in 4,500 leasehold properties, are properly maintained. She had been 
living in private rented accommodation with her son, Kishur, but fell behind 
with rent and was evicted.

Matthews said she was amazed to no longer have debt hanging over her.

“I’m overwhelmed by the support I have received,” she said. “People still have 
hearts and still have compassion. I woke up this morning with so much strength. 
Someone has granted me my dearest wish: to pay off my outstanding debts. That 
alone has made our Christmas.”

She said when she and her son had nowhere else to go, they started sleeping in 
a garage on one of the estates she managed. When her employers discovered what 
she was doing, they suspended her while theyinvestigated possible breaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/woman-working-for-homelessness-group-suspended-for-sleeping-rough>
 of health and safety codes for sleeping and storing personal belongings in the 
garage, and misusing Homes for Haringey property.


Matthews had been due to face an investigatory meeting on Friday as part of 
Homes For Haringey’s disciplinary process, but it did not go ahead.

Her situation came to light when she and her son presented themselves as 
homeless to the council’s housing officials.

“I ran up rent arrears of £5,000,” she said. “I offered to pay off £3,000, but 
the landlord said I had to pay off everything in one go. I tried to do 
everything I could to resolve the situation, but in the end we were evicted on 
1 November and my son and I had nowhere to go. My husband died five years ago, 
but I’m still paying off the cost of that and other debts he left.”

She said the offers of assistance had included an internship for Kishur with a 
Haringey employer.


A Homes for Haringey spokesperson said: “When Matthews presented as homeless 
to us, we placed her and her son in emergency, temporary accommodation, where 
she is still living. We are continuing to try and help Matthews resolve her 
homeless situation.”
 