
It goes like this: the fourth, the fifth, the minor chord, the major lift. By 
the end of this Christmas season, you will doubtless be familiar with the rise 
and fall of Leonard Cohen's Hallelujah; you will have heard it spilling out of 
radio speakers, crooned by X-Factor winners and indie heartthrobs. You will be 
aware of how, in one great ribbon of C major, he bound together music, religion 
and mankind, King David, Bathsheba and kitchen chairs.

Its composition famously reduced Cohen to sitting in his underwear on the 
carpeted floor of his room at the Royalton Hotel in New York, filling 
notebooks, banging his head against the floor. "To find that song, that urgent 
song, takes a lot of versions and a lot of work and a lot of sweat," he told 
Paul Zollo in an interview for SongTalk magazine. There were some 80 verses 
drafted for Hallelujah, and later there would be another version still, 
somewhat bleaker in its conclusion: "Maybe there's a God above/ But all I ever 
learned from love/ Was how to shoot at someone who outdrew ya/ It's not a cry 
that you hear at night/ It's not somebody who's seen the light/ It's a cold and 
it's a broken hallelujah." 

It was always the John Cale version that did it for me; his voice seemed to 
bring a more ecclesiastical quality to those lines. For a long while I clung to 
that and resisted the prettiness of Jeff Buckley's version, but Buckley's is 
undoubtedly the most sensual interpretation, breathing life into the song with 
a short exhalation even before he plays, bringing out the texture of Cohen's 
lyrics, the feel of lips and hair and coldness. He takes its holiness and 
renders it physical, earthly. "Whoever listens closely to Hallelujah will 
discover that it is a song about sex, about love, about life on earth," Buckley 
once explained. "The hallelujah is not a homage to a worshipped person, idol or 
god, but the hallelujah of the orgasm. It's an ode to life and love." After 
all, what is a minor fall if not a petite mort?

Hallelujah appeared on Various Positions, an album that prompted Dylan to note 
that Cohen's songs were becoming more like prayers. In fact, a few songs along 
on the track listing, you'll find If It Be Your Will, a kind of prayer-like 
companion to Hallelujah:"If it be your will/ that a voice be true,/ from this 
broken hill/ I will sing to you./ From this broken hill/ all your praises they 
shall ring/ if it be your will/ to let me sing ..."

Dylan covered Hallelujah, too, but he chose the first version, the one that 
ended with the chirrup of:"And even though/ It all went wrong/ I'll stand 
before the Lord of Song/ With nothing on my tongue but hallelujah." He chose a 
kind of defiance over a defeat. But it is the brokenness of the later version 
of Hallelujah that has always seemed to me the song's most essential quality.

Because brokenness has always been a constant in the work of Cohen - the 
broken Jesus of Suzanne, the fallen robin of Chelsea Hotel No 2, the broken 
hill of If It Be Your Will, the cold and broken hallelujah. And this brokenness 
brings to his lyrics not only the pain and disappointment of being a flawed 
human being, and the perpetual effort to be better, but also the sensual 
quality of being mere flesh and bone.

Some years later, Cohen was discussing with Zollo the song Anthem from his 
1992 album The Future, a song that begins with birds singing at the break of 
day, encouraging us to "start again". Zollo asks him about a line from its 
chorus:"Forget your perfect offering/ There is a crack in everything/ That's 
how the light gets in." To which Cohen replies: "That has been the background 
of much of my work ... All human activity is flawed ... it is by intimacy with 
the flaw that we discern our real humanity and our real connection with divine 
inspiration." And it is in that redrafted version of Hallelujah, where he ends 
loveless, maybe Godless, cracked and cold and broken, that the light truly gets 
in.
 