
Is the freedom of information commission taking to heart the evidence it is 
hearing? And is it, most importantly, also engaging its head?

Witnesses to the review have been doing their best to convince the 
commissioners about the virtue of expanding the remit of the freedom of 
information act (FoIa) as a way of countering attempts to water it down.

Consider first the comments by Bob Satchwell, executive director of the 
Society of Editors, who said:

“It’s a matter of trying to get the default switch into a different place.” 
Instead of releasing information only when you’ve got to “the assumption should 
be [to] release it unless there is a very good reason for not doing so.”

Quite so. Even routine information and data that is widely available in other 
countries, notably the US, is too often withheld from the British public.

Back to Satchwell. Local authorities and the police increase their own burden 
by failing to answer a journalist’s query through the press office. Instead, 
they respond by saying: “‘Put in a freedom of information request’ when it 
could actually be easily dealt with just answering the question.”

Yes again. Official failure to communicate with reporters making relatively 
trivial inquiries, often through mindless jobs-worth “no comment” responses by 
PRs, has the effect of creating unnecessary FoI requests.

Now here’s Peter Clifton, editor-in-chief of the Press Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/press-association> (PA), who told the 
commission about his agency’s regular use of FoI in order to reveal public 
interest stories.

He dealt head on with complaints about how much it costs public bodies to 
service FoI requests. He said:

“Close examination of the numbers will suggest they are microscopic amounts of 
money compared to overall budgets; fractions of 1% for government and councils.

This does not seem like a high price to pay. This is, after all, public money 
that is being spent to give the public greater transparency around the 
institutions they are paying for...

The amounts spent on FoI requests are significantly less than government and 
councils spend on their own PR and official communication channels.”

That’s another winning point. Public bodies are willing to spend untold sums 
on their propaganda arms but bellyache about the cost of providing information 
that could, and should, be available.

Clifton gave an interesting example. PA decided to discover whether police 
forces had lost trace of registered sex offenders. A simple factual question, 
you might think, that every police PR outfit could answer after a single phone 
call.

Instead, it led to PA having to make FoI requests to the UK’s 45 police forces 
to discover that the total was, to quote Clifton, “a startling 396.” Had a 
charge of, say, £25 per request been imposed at the time, the exercise would 
have cost more than £1,000.*

Aware that the commission is considering the idea of instituting charges for 
FoI requests, Clifton said it would “strangle” investigative journalism.

In his view, the FoIa “should be extended to include private contractors like 
G4S, Serco and Capita, who receive billions of pounds of public money every 
year and should surely be subject to greater scrutiny.”

And he reiterated Satchwell’s point. “If we are genuinely striving to have the 
most transparent government in the world,” he said, “our institutions should be 
readily making more data available.”

Clifton was also asked by one of the commissioners, Lord Carlile, about one of 
the most common and contentious areas of complaint about the journalistic use 
of FoI requests: fishing expeditions.

PA’s editor pointed out that his reporters take up issues stemming from court 
cases or news stories that suggests a need for further inquiry. He conceded 
that there might be odd examples of silly requests because “ crazy stuff 
happens” but the vast majority of requests were “legitimate” and “responsible”.

Clifton’s call for the act’s remit to be extended to contractors hired by 
public bodies has been addressed by the director of the Campaign for Freedom of 
Information, Maurice Frankel, who also gave evidence to the commission.

He regards the omission of contractors, be they commercial bodies or 
charities, as a loophole in the act, closing off from public scrutiny vast 
areas of information that people have the right to know.

Although this kind of extension of the act is, oddly, not part of the 
commission’s remit, its chair,Lord Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lord-burns>, has indicated that such 
proposals are being considered.


Meanwhile, it’s important to underline the significance of the 
Satchwell-Clifton message because they properly reflect the views of the 
overwhelming majority of journalists.

The FoI act is deeply unpopular with local and central government, with police 
forces and the NHS. Officials in those bodies jealousy guard information and 
regard journalism and all its works with suspicion.


In many ways that reflects a failure of FoI because its existence, far from 
helping to change the UK’s culture of bureaucratic secrecy, has reinforced it.

We should not, in 2016, be facing a situation in which an act designed to 
provide citizens with more knowledge is under threat. FoI is a vital tool of 
democracy. It must be protected and enhanced.

*This sentence was amended because it originally said it had cost £1,000

Sources: Gov.uk transcript 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/494934/ICFOI-oral-evidence-transcript-25-January16.pdf>
/PA Media Lawyer <http://medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=10993841>

 