
Where Slough's most famous office manager leads, eminent economists follow. 
David Brent's declaration that he wanted to be remembered as "the man who put a 
smile on the face of all who he met" may once have been dismissed as management 
mumbo jumbo.

But it appears the Brentmeister General may have been on to something. A team 
of economists has now produced research that suggests there are clear links 
between workers' happiness and their productivity.

The team, led by Andrew Oswald, a professor of economics at Warwick Business 
School and a leading authority on the relationship between economics and mental 
health, said its research has important implications for the worlds of politics 
and business.

"We find that human happiness has large and positive causal effects on 
productivity," the team said. "Positive emotions appear to invigorate human 
beings, while negative emotions have the opposite effect."

The team conducted a range of exercises in their research. In one, students 
were asked to add a series of five two-digit numbers in 10 minutes. The 
subjects were paid an attendance fee, and a performance fee based on the number 
of correct answers.

Some were then shown a 10-minute film based on comedy routines performed by a 
well-known British comedian. The film succeeded in raising the reported 
happiness levels of those who saw it, compared to those who did not see it, or 
who watched a "placebo" film – a clip depicting patterns of coloured sticks.

Among the subjects who reported higher happiness levels after seeing the 
comedy film, productivity was significantly higher than for the other subjects, 
for both men and women. The Warwick economists noted: "Happier workers, our 
research found, were 12% more productive. Unhappier workers were 10% less 
productive." Significantly, subjects who watched the comedy film but did not 
report higher levels of happiness were unable to demonstrate higher levels of 
productivity.

The findings led the economists to claim: "The increase in productivity seems 
to be linked to the increase in happiness, not merely to the watching of the 
comedy movie per se." The team also found that those who had experienced a 
death or illness in their families within the past two years performed 10% 
worse than others.

"Given the extraordinarily homogeneous sample of our subjects, the difference 
in productivity was unexpectedly striking," it wrote in the latest issue of the 
University of Warwick's Economic Research Institute journal.

Questioning the students about their family backgrounds also led to 
interesting results. The researchers, for example, found that subjects whose 
parents had recently divorced did not appear less happy or less productive. 
They noted: "One exception to our findings concerns the subject of parental 
divorce. Students whose parents have recently divorced did not report being 
less happy than others in the study, and they did not demonstrate reduced 
productivity.

"Though we do not know why this was the case, we surmise that divorce may well 
be harder to classify as a 'negative life event', in the sense that it might 
have been perceived by our subjects as a release from a more difficult 
situation and may also have been a longer-term issue granting additional time 
for the subjects to get used to the situation."

Economists have long debated how productivity can be raised through improved 
skills and the education of workers, or the introduction of new technology. But 
the Warwick team suggested that their work has opened up a new line of inquiry: 
"Our recent research investigates an important but often overlooked ingredient 
– that of human emotion."

The team suggested that their findings should "provoke thought among scholars 
in psychology and economics and in the business community".

They concluded: "If happiness in the workplace brings increased returns to 
productivity, then human resource departments, business managers and the 
architects of promotion policies will want to consider the implications."
 