
They did their level best to throw it away – and if the referee had been more 
beady-eyed, Gloucester may have nicked it – but Harlequins just about held out 
in the sort of climax we could hardly have expected for most of this bitty 
match. It had been notable for forceful performances from a few of the several 
Englishmen in Quins ranks, but one of them, Jack Clifford, spent the last 10 
minutes in the sin-bin, allowingGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> back into the match. Quins 
were lucky he was not joined by another in the final minutes.

As Gloucester chased the game, having reduced an 18-point deficit to four with 
10 minutes remaining, Ruaridh Jackson kicked the ball out of Willi Heinz’s 
hands in front of the posts, and Danny Care was well offside for one crucial 
interception. David Humphreys, Gloucester’s director of rugby, spoke with 
JP Doyle at the end of the match and the referee confessed he had missed 
Jackson’s indiscretion.

Tom Varndell hat-trick sinks Worcester and infuses Bristol with hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/bristol-worcester-premiership-match-report-rugby>
“It’s one of those decisions – I certainly saw it and you hope the referee 
sees it as well,” Humphreys said. “No matter what anybody says, you need a 
little luck in the game. We just haven’t had it in those big games away from 
home.”

A relieved Clifford was made the man of the match, notwithstanding his role in 
Gloucester’s comeback, but he was far from the only one of Quins’ 12 starting 
Englishmen to impress. Joe Marchant claimed a brace of tries in the 
outside-centre channel, and Joe Marler was to the fore throughout. Despite 
requiring repairs throughout, he played 80 minutes and, barring injury, looks 
set to fill the No1 jersey for England in the absence of Mako Vunipola. “He’s 
got fitter in the summer than I’ve ever seen him,” said John Kingston, the 
Quins’ director of rugby.

“He decided not to tour with England but he’s just had one annoying injury 
after another. He was in the wars today, with a calf injury in the first half 
and a bang on the other ankle in the second.”

If Marler made it to the end, Chris Robshaw failed to make the start but the 
former England captain is not considered a concern. He should be available for 
Quins’ trip to Worcester on New Year’s Day. England will not be too upset to 
see him miss his umpteenth assignment at Twickenham.

This is the ninth edition of what they call the Big Game, one of those 
conceits dreamt up by marketing teams as much as by fixture secretaries. After 
last season’s high-scoring draw between these two, the first half was every 
marketing team’s nightmare. Not too many floating voters among the 77,576 would 
have been swayed by the scoreless first 25 minutes, for all the close-quarter 
work of the likes of Clifford, Marler et al.

We had to wait till the 25th minute for the first properly coherent passage. 
Tim Visser came in off his wing to burst through the Gloucester midfield in a 
move developed by a further rumble through the middle by Marler. Gloucester 
managed to hold Quins up over the line but from the scrum, a set piece Quins 
had edged, Clifford and Danny Care sent Jackson on a looping run behind Jamie 
Roberts. Marchant cut a fine line off Jackson for the try.

Greig Laidlaw pulled back three points a few minutes later but Quins finished 
with two Jackson penalties in the three minutes to half-time, the second of 
which came with the twist of a yellow card for Jonny May, who played the ball 
from the floor, just as Jackson would in the final moments. While May was away, 
Quins capitalised with a second try. Gloucester’s other wing, Charlie Sharples, 
spilled a high ball, Mike Brown went blind, and Clifford gathered his chip 
ahead to break through the tackle of the despairing Sharples.

At 18-3, Quins seemed comfortable, particularly with a further eight minutes a 
man up, but it was Gloucester who scored next, registering their first try 
before May returned. Marland Yarde spilled Billy Burns’s cross-kick, allowing 
James Hook to touch down. A video review demonstrated Hook to have been offside 
but from the next play Gloucester bundled Gareth Evans over.

At the restart, Billy Twelvetrees infringed, allowing Quins to move back into 
a double-figure lead, further enhanced when Marchant scored his second, 
straight from a lineout, simple hands and a powerful fendoff all that was 
required for Quins’ 28-10 lead on the hour.

They were worth it but they are nothing if not unreliable. Gloucester, 
likewise inconsistent, chose then to find some form. Hook scored the try he was 
earlier denied, dummying over after a Matt Kvesic-inspired breakout. And when 
Clifford intercepted from the wrong side of the ruck to see yellow, Motu Matu’u 
was driven over from the penalty to the corner.

Billy Burns’s touchline conversion brought Gloucester within range of an 
unconverted try, and so began those torturous final minutes. A place in the top 
six was on offer to the winner. Lucky though they were, Quins just about 
deserved to be that.

Harlequins Brown; Yarde, Marchant, Roberts, Visser (Alofa ,67); Jackson, Care 
(capt); Marler, Buchanan (Ward, 70), Sinckler, Merrick, Matthews, Chisholm 
(Naoupu, 75), Wallace, Clifford.

Tries Marchant 2, Clifford. Cons Jackson 2. Pens Jackson 3.

Sin-bin Clifford 70

Gloucester Hook; Sharples (Purdy, 66), Scott, Twelvetrees (Symons, 57), May; 
Burns, Laidlaw (capt; Heinz, 64); McAllister (Thomas, 54), Hibbard (Matu’u, 
57), Hohneck (Ma’afu ,67), Savage (Thrush, 54), Galarza, Moriarty, Rowan, Evans 
(Kvesic, 54).

Tries Evans, Hook, Motu’u. Cons Laidlaw 2, Burns. Pen Laidlaw.

Sin-bin May 40.

Referee JP Doyle. Attendance 77,567.
 