
Rangers issued another warning of intent as they cruised into the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> semi-finals with this stroll 
over top-flight Dundee.

The Scottish Championship leaders look destined to reclaim their Premiership 
place next season after storming 14 points ahead in the race for promotion.

They gave another slick display of their progress as they made light work of 
Paul Hartley’s team to book their place in Sunday’s draw for the last four.

Harry Forrester struck for the third game running to give Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> immediate momentum after just 13 
seconds and from there Mark Warburton’s men never looked back.

A close-range header from Jason Holt two minutes after half-time, Andy 
Halliday’s free-kick and a late solo effort from the Rangers captain Lee 
Wallace sealed a stunning victory.

Without the cup-tied pair Michael O’Halloran and Billy King and the injured 
top scorer Martyn Waghorn, Rangers hoped their front three of Kenny Miller, 
Barrie McKay and Forrester would be strong enough to shoot-down Premiership 
opposition for the second round running.

Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> also went with a bold 
attacking triumvirate as Kane Hemmings, Greg Stewart and Gary Harkins returned 
after Hartley started them on the bench for Wednesday’s goalless draw at Celtic 
Park.

Controversial comments made by both Harkins and Darren O’Dea on the Light 
Blues in recent months ensured both were booed roundly by the Ibrox faithful.

The former Celtic player O’Dea reckoned Rangers should have been stripped of 
the trophies won during the Employee Benefit Trust era, while Harkins sparked 
an outcry after joking that the post-liquidation Rangers were a new club.

But it was the home support who had the last laugh as their side struck early. 
Rangers conceded possession from the kick-off. However, the Dundee left-back 
Kevin Holt dallied on the ball and was robbed by Forrester, who darted straight 
for goal before slamming past Scott Bain at his near post.

Ibrox roared with delight and there was almost more to celebrate soon after as 
Bain denied Tavernier’s shot, while Kevin Holt headed against his own post 
before it bounced clear.

Harkins was jeered as he tugged Dundee’s first effort wide but Rangers were 
soon flooding forward again, with O’Dea well placed to cut out Miller’s 
dangerous cross.

Bain pushed away Tavernier’s free-kick but for all that Rangers’ one-touch 
passing was a joy to watch, Warburton would have been concerned their half-time 
lead was not bigger.

As in the first period, though, his team came out flying and got the goal 
their dominance deserved just 90 seconds after the restart.

Forrester this time turned creator, dinking a lofted pass into the chest of 
McKay, who knocked it down first-time into Miller’s path. The former Scotland 
striker’s angle was too tight to shoot so he calmly steered it back across goal 
for the onrushing Holt to nod home.

Rangers were then out of sight after 55 minutes. Paul McGinn’s foul on Miller 
was punished with a free-kick just outside Dundee’s box and Halliday made it 
count, sweeping swept a low strike past Bain.

Wallace then underlined Rangers’ emphatic victory with seven minutes left as 
he danced past three challenges before stroking beyond the exposed keeper. .
 