
A tough subject this one but here is a biggish question: what kind of sport 
does rugby union aspire to be? In 20 years time, when little Jonny and Jenny 
graduate from mini-rugby, what type of game will they want to play as young 
adults? What sort of product do coaches, parents and schoolteachers want to 
support and promote? Are the laws, as they stand, suitable for both 
professionals and amateurs alike, or as forward-thinking as they might be?

All this sprang to mind over the weekend while watching the worst game of 
rugby union imaginable. To protect the innocent let’s just say it was a 
Ruckshire Under-15 Cup tie between Team X and Team Y, refereed by an individual 
who had apparently just swallowed the law book whole. Or, by the look of his 
straining, taut jersey, a whole box of law books.

We have all been there: an exposed, wet, muddy field, two rusty post-Christmas 
teams, low skill levels and the pedantic ref from hell. By the end the result 
was an irrelevance. Pretty much everybody had lost the will to live.

European Rugby Champions Cup: talking points from this weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/18/european-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points>
The old joke – better a bad game of rugby than a morning spent shopping or 
doing DIY – normally kicks in at this point. That clearly still applies for 
Vets fixtures but these were all enthusiastic teenagers, eager to get out there 
after a few rained-off cancellations. Yes, there is always the chance of a 
stinker in January when conditions do not encourage the beautiful game. 
Refereeing interpretations are notoriously inconsistent. Rugby’s diverse range 
of options – and having the wit to identify them – is one of its main 
attractions. But may we be reaching the point where the whizzy, offloading, 
dynamic, increasingly technical sport played at elite level is virtually 
unattainable, particularly with a greasy ball, for mere mortals attempting to 
play it at grass-roots level? Is it, in the end, the fault of the 
aforementioned zealot with the over-active whistle or, actually, the game 
itself?

Take the tackle area. At Premiership level you are liable to get pinged if you 
are tackled, go to ground and do not release the ball pronto. This relies on 
support players getting the cleanout right, the ball carrier falling the right 
way and the scrum-half being in close proximity. Back in Ruckshire those 
essentials were happening only rarely. The pitch was so muddy it made life 
harder still, causing the ball to stick that little bit longer. And yet “peep! 
peep! peep!” went the whistle – endlessly so – if the gangly 14-year-olds got 
it even fractionally wrong.

Teach good habits early, you might say. Letter of the law, and all that. The 
referee is always right (and, once or twice, he was). But how is it helping 
develop anyone or capture imaginations if the game stops every 15 seconds, if 
invisible knock-ons, fractional forward passes and slightly wonky throw-ins are 
blown up, if the only tactic worth pursuing is to get your biggest player to 
welly the ball as far as possible upfield on the basis it’s the best way of not 
being penalised for the next 15 seconds?

Furthermore, what sort of attacking spectacle are we encouraging if 
up-and-coming young fly-halves and centres keep getting man and ball 
simultaneously and barely have time to catch the ball, never mind pass or run? 
When youth teams are kicking penalties as a first resort rather than being 
encouraged to move the ball?

One solution, as is increasingly prevalent in age-group representative trials, 
is to cut to the number of players, either to 13 or 12 per side. Suddenly there 
is more space, the selectors can get an idea of who can play and who cannot and 
everyone except the tight forwards enjoys themselves far more. Which leads us 
back to the heart of the original question: do we basically want a game that, 
when stripped to its bare essentials, favours forwards or backs?

This is no longer just an idle discussion topic around the pub table. The 
issue of concussion awareness and player safety, quite rightly, is not going to 
go away. Interestingly, the latest trials in South Africa’s university rugby 
competition, the Varsity Cup, include a new set of scrum commandments, 
replacing the current ‘crouch, bind, set’ with ‘crouch, bind, slide’ to remove 
any trace of a hit. If a maul stops, teams will have only five seconds to 
restart it; if they fail the scrum-half will have three seconds to get the ball 
away or the opposition will be awarded the scrum.

These same trials also include a sliding scale of points awarded depending 
where a try originates from. While a basic close-range score is still worth 
five points, it will be boosted to seven if the movement begins between the 
halfway line and the opponent’s 22 and possession is maintained from start to 
finish. If a team scores from inside their own half and retains possession 
throughout they will be awarded a whopping nine points.

As previously stressed in these columns, the higher the value placed on a try 
the more the defending team will try to cheat to avoid conceding one. But it 
adds further fuel to an already smouldering debate: even to think about 
awarding more points for tries scored from long range suggests some influential 
people fear the game is in danger of becoming constipated.

On wet, soft surfaces – and particularly with a referee lacking in empathy – 
they are unquestionably right. Northampton’s three tries against Glasgow on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/17/northampton-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 came from two driven lineouts and a cross-kick; the Warriors, who moved the 
ball far more effectively, did not score any. Again, just a snapshot. But from 
Ruckshire to Franklin’s Gardens the feeling persists that midfields are too 
congested, the litany of possible offences too extensive, the balance between 
power and skill too skewed.

Making all pitches bigger is not a realistic option. Personally, I would 
favour reducing the number of on-field players in games involving participants 
below the age of 18 – and maybe older – rather than introducing nine-point 
tries. You can still scrummage and maul with six forwards but, with increased 
space elsewhere, there is more incentive to spread the ball and keep everyone 
happy. My guess is that, in 20 years, little Jonny and Jenny will not be 
playing rugby union the way the law book currently demands it.

Old Testament

A casual glance at this week’s charge sheet would suggest European club rugby 
is heading back to the dark ages. One player cited for pushing the referee,
another for eye-gouging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/chris-ashton-cited-saracens-england>
, a third for squeezing an opponent’s testicles and a fourth for biting. The 
charge against Glasgow’s Tim Swinson for an old-fashioned retaliatory punch 
feels positively tame.

This Wednesday’s rash of disciplinary hearings in London threaten to test 
everyone’s stamina, as well as generate no shortage of unsavoury publicity if 
all the cases are upheld. In law, for those interested, there is no offence 
worse than physically abusing the referee; you can bite, squeeze and gouge with 
maximum intent and still not pick up the life ban that top-end referee bashers 
can receive. The Clermont flanker Viktor Kolelishvili faces a minimum lower-end 
entry point of 24 weeks if he is found guilty of deliberately shoving England’s 
Wayne Barnes out of the way in Swansea. What could save him is Barnes’s 
reluctance to make a major issue of it on the field. Either way, peace, love 
and understanding in European rugby appears to have been temporarily lost in 
translation.

Worth watching

Exeter v Ospreys  Wales have only had one representative in the last eight of 
Europe’s premier club competition in the last five years and no one in the 
semi-finals since 2009. It makes Sunday’s trip to Exeter a huge one for the 
Ospreys, just one final push away from a significant achievement. To watch the
relentlessly competitive Alun Wyn Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/alun-wyn-jones-resigns-dual-contract-ospreys-wales-rugby-union>
 trying to drag his side over the line will be worth the admission alone.
 