
I arrive at Alan Dolan's house in the village of Oasis de Nazaret, in the 
north of Lanzarote, in time for lunch. I've been up since 4.30am for an 
uncomfortably early flight from Gatwick. Alan steers me to my room: it's 
spacious, furnished with quiet taste, with patio doors giving onto a pool area. 
After showering off some of my torpor, I sit on the bed and wonder what I'm 
letting myself in for. I'm starving, but I'm travelling light so haven't been 
able to smuggle in a hock of ham (this is a vegetarian house). My sole 
emergency provision is a small packet of chocolate-covered raisins. I unpack – 
a few light clothes, a bikini, a sweater for the cooler evenings, walking 
boots, and two misgivings, size Large.

First, Lanzarote exists in my imagination as "Lanzagrotty", the island of 
Little Britain at play, a bordello of fish and chip shops and cavernous pubs. 
Second, I can't unpack the phrase "transformational breath guru" – which is how 
my host describes himself – without, well, hyperventilating. This is why I'm 
here, to learn from Alan how to flood my body with oxygen by harnessing the 
whole range of my breathing apparatus (apparently most of us only use a paltry 
25% of it). I'm cynical – advocates of "conscious medicine" make some pretty 
wild claims – but then so was Diogenes the Cynic, who wasso cynical he 
reportedly held his breath until he died.

This thought propels me off the bed and into the kitchen, where Alan greets me 
with lunch: beetroot and carrot salad and coleslaw, the perfect accompaniment 
to that ham hock I haven't got. Actually, the meal is cold, delicious, and the 
beginning of a new infatuation with the Lanzarote vegetable. (I soon discover 
that all the island's produce is packed with flavour, thanks to the pulverised 
lava rock,picón, that is thinly spread across the rocky topsoil. Rainfall is 
scarce – this black gravel traps the morning dew and reduces evaporation.)

After lunch, Alan sprawls barefoot in shorts and frayed T-shirt on a sofa, and 
briefs me on transformational breath. Unlike many yogic techniques, which use 
the nose, it's an open-mouth breath that draws a greater volume of air in and 
encourages the lower levels of the lungs, where blood cells absorb the most 
oxygen, to inflate. This involves enlisting the primary respiratory muscles – 
lower abdomen, abdomen and diaphragm – instead of the intercostal and back 
muscles that we tend to rely on. Clinical evidence and anecdotal reports (I've 
checked) demonstrate the positive impact of diaphragmatic breath on immune 
response and stress, which presents as a shallower breath in the upper chest.

The other significant feature of transformational breath, Alan says, is that 
it's "connected", meaning there are no pauses between inhaling and exhaling. 
This is how animals breathe, and Alan's enthusiastic Spanish water dog is on 
hand to demonstrate. It's also how we breathe as babies, but somehow life 
imposes its freight of demands and bad habits, and we forget what once came so 
naturally.
 The pool at Oasis de Nazaret. Photograph: Jonathan Perugia 
The first session starts with me lying on my back as Alan instructs me to 
breathe normally through the nose. He sits next to me in the lotus position and 
starts to murmur a brief invocation. I have a finely tuned bullshit detector, 
the result of a Catholic schooling which proposed, among other things, that I 
inhale the Holy Ghost on a regular basis. But Alan is simply welcoming me, 
inviting me to trust in the healing power of my own body, and it's easy to 
settle on this bandwidth.

He then shows me how to take a "conscious breath" – my first – by opening my 
mouth and inflating my abdomen. It's not a huge breath, more one on top of the 
other, and the release, which Alan signals by clicking his fingers, is quick 
and short – just enough to mist a mirror – before the next intake.

It doesn't feel right. I can't do it without pauses, I'm exhaling like a 
bellows and my mouth is dry. Alan adjusts my position. I'm now lying on my 
front, with my head to one side. He pushes gently on my lower back so I can 
better feel my abdomen as it rises. Ah, now I'm doing it, though not very 
consistently. He changes my position again, this time to sitting with my knees 
drawn up. Click, go his fingers, drop the breath, pick it up, keep it going. 
Meanwhile he's doing acupressure, probing my meridian lines (lymphatic system, 
if you prefer western) for stress points, most of which occur at the 
cross-sections of muscles.

My eyes are shut but I'm not asleep – keep it going, I hear Alan saying when I 
start to drift. I have no idea how long we've been doing this, or of the moment 
at which my mind ceases its agitational whirr and just folds into the contours 
of my breathing. At the end of the one-hour session, Alan leaves me lying 
wrapped in a blanket, breathing normally. I feel a great stillness, aware only 
of a gentle vibration in my chest, as if my capillaries are opening up like a 
network of sluice gates. (They are: this is the effect of the blood receiving a 
richer oxygen supply.)

Over the next two days I have four more sessions, and each time it's the same: 
shifting and stalling until a rhythm is established, followed by an enveloping 
calmness and the light effervescence of oxygen finding its way into newly 
mapped routes in my body. I have also booked a couple of slots with Isabel 
Salzmann, who is trained in massage, reflexology and osteopathy. Isabel, with 
an unerring sense for physiological imbalance or misalignment, works wonders on 
my hips (now unskewed) and lower back.

Between sessions, I eat my way through the island's vegetables, variously 
prepared by Alan's excellent cook, Rebecca Mason, who runs a local restaurant 
called Blooming Cactus. I drink a lot of water. I practise the breathing 
technique (Alan recommends 10 minutes a day).
 Famara beach, Lanzarote. Photograph: Nick Ayliffe/Alamy 
And I walk. A short distance away is Famara beach, a 7km stretch of broiling 
Atlantic surf, at one end of which is the massif that dominates this part of 
the island. Sheer, wind-corrugated, it boasts every colour in the Lanzarote 
palette: black, brown, saffron, ochre, yellow, purple, green.

Further away, in the south of the island, I find a track that carves through 
the vast lava fields of the Timanfaya national park, an area of 32 volcanoes 
that appeared after six years of explosions in the 1730s. (A few feet below 
ground the temperature is 40C, and Timanfaya's El Diablo restaurant barbecues 
food using a grill placed over a hole in the ground.) Wherever Lanzagrotty is, 
it's not here in the volcanoes and their lichen-covered craters where kestrels 
and hoopoes fly, or in the canyons, drifts and oases of date palms, or the 
near-empty beaches with white or red or black sand. Misgivings abandoned, I 
leave Lanzarote carrying what I arrived with, including the chocolate raisins. 
But I bring something back that I can honestly say is up there as my personal 
moon-walk. I've discovered something amazing, and it's right under my nose.

• Three-night full board Breathing Intensive breaks cost from £530pp (+34 690 
162426,breathguru.com/breath-retreat.html) 
<http://www.breathguru.com/breath-retreat.html>. Yoga, massage, personal 
fitness training, walks and volcano climbs are also offered from £75 a session.
EasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com> flies to Lanzarote from Gatwick from £88 
return. Car hire (arranged through the villa) costs from £110 a week
 