
Heavy fog, which has disrupted travel across the UK, is expected to shroud 
parts of the country again on Thursday, forecasters have said.

Dozens of flights were delayed or cancelled due to poor visibility at London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> City airport on Wednesday morning, 
while a string of arrivals were diverted elsewhere.

A major crash on the A40, in which a woman was killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/several-injured-in-multiple-car-pile-up-on-a40-in-oxfordshire>
 and about a dozen others were injured, happened after foggy conditions made 
driving “really dangerous”, a witness said.

The Met Office said it was expecting to reissue a weather warning that had 
first been put out on Tuesday.

The original yellow fog warning for England and Wales said: “Patches of fog 
are expected to form overnight and while not all areas will see them, where fog 
patches do form, visibility could be less than 100 metres.

“The fog patches are expected to slowly thin during Wednesday, although some 
patches may persist throughout the day.”

The forecast showed much of southern England blanketed by fog. At London City 
airport, visibility on the airfield dipped as low as 50 metres (164ft), a 
spokesman said. “We have had several delays and cancellations, and some 
arrivals diverted as well,” he said.

“We were able to to operate seven departures successfully, but the airlines 
have had to cancel about 22 departures. On arrivals, we have had about 14 
cancelled.”

The spokesman said the airport expected the fog to affect flights until about 
2pm, with disruption continuing throughout the day as a result. Passengers were 
advised to check in advance with their airlines to see if they were likely to 
be delayed, visit the airport’s website or speak to staff on the ground.

A severe weather alert has also been issued by the Met Office warning of 
plummeting temperatures across much of England.


A level three weather warning has been put in place until 11am on Friday after 
temperatures dipped below 2C in parts of northern, eastern and south-eastern 
England.


Public Health England (PHE) issued advice for the over 65s, those with 
long-term illness or who are not mobile.


Dr Thomas Waite, consultant in extreme events and health protection at PHE, 
said: “The effects of cold can be severe, in particular for those who are over 
65, have a long-term illness, or are not mobile. Our advice to these groups is 
when indoors, have plenty of warm food and drinks and try to maintain indoor 
temperatures to at least 18C.


“If mobility isn’t an issue, keep active as best you can. If you need to go 
out wear lots of thin layers and shoes with a good, slip-resistant grip to 
prevent any accidental falls. It is particularly cold at night this week, so 
drawing the curtains at dusk will keep the heat in.”


He also stressed the importance of checking on potentially vulnerable family 
and friends during the cold period.
 