
We just ended the worst year. Now starts, well: the worst worst year. Those of 
us appalled and terrified by the election of Donald Trump and the open rise of 
white supremacy in America ended 2016 exhausted and disillusioned. Now we enter 
2017 in full knowledge that this year will probably be no better.

No matter how much we’d like to hide in our homes for the next four years, we 
know that we cannot do that. We must fight for equality and justice. But the 
question is: how? What action can we take in the aftermath of such a 
heartbreaking defeat?


As we start this new year, here are some resolutions for resistance.

Check your sources

Yes, we are really living in a dystopian future where we can’t be sure of what 
is true and what isn’t. A sensational story cross your eye? Yes, it may well be 
accurate. But it could also be made up by a teenager in a basement in 
Milwaukee, because we apparently live in a horrible world these days.

Check the links on all articles to verify that those links actually back up 
what the original article is saying with source material. No links? Try to find 
a more reliable source to back up the story. No luck? Then do not share that 
story. Write down the name of that publication and avoid them in the future.

Check the “about us” page of unfamiliar sites: is there actual staff? A lot of 
fake news sites will try to avoid criticism by calling themselves “satire” 
(note: the Onion is satire; fake news sites are really trying to trick you). 
Other red flags: website names that are close but not quite the same as 
established and reputable news sites, lack of dates on articles, lack of author 
name on articles, anonymous sources that can’t be verified (ex: “a friend 
said”, “someone at the scene said”, “our sources say”).

Diversify your news

The internet gives us a plethora of potential news sources. But we can still 
find ourselves consuming a dozen versions of the exact same viewpoint and 
convincing ourselves that we are well-informed.

When I was an undergrad political science student, I had an international 
relations professor who not only required that we read three separate and very 
different papers each day, but that we read the local, national, international 
and economic sections of each.

Then she would discuss a topic that had appeared in the papers and would test 
our ability to separate facts from the multiple interpretations given across 
the papers. This exercise taught me how widely the truth can be shaped and 
stretched, and how there can indeed be multiple truths for very important 
issues, depending on viewpoint.

It’s a lesson I try not to forget. Try to diversify not only the subject 
matter you read, but the ideology of the publishers and the identities of the 
writers.

Put your money where your mouth is

Make this the year that your money does the talking. Upset about the housing 
crisis in your area? Donate to a shelter. Believe in abortion rights? Donate to 
Planned Parenthood. Believe in small business? Shop local. Believe in equal 
opportunity? Support minority-owned businesses.


And don’t put your money into the businesses and banks that profit off the 
oppression of others or the destruction of the environment.

Pay attention to local politics

Guess what? There will be an election in 2017, and in 2018, and, well – you 
get the point. Local elections are where your vote counts the most and local 
votes are some of the most important votes you can make.

What happens in your town can affect what happens in your county, then your 
state, your region and, ultimately, in the nation. School levies, minimum 
wages, city council elections – these votes have a real and almost immediate 
impact on your life and the lives of your community. Don’t give that power 
away. Stay informed about what is happening locally. And vote.

Decentralize whiteness

Just about every aspect of western culture centralizes whiteness. Our history, 
infrastructure, medical system, justice system, education system, entertainment 
industry – and yes, our social justice organizations – all do this. Whiteness 
is default, it’s ubiquitous and it’s insidious.

We don’t have to purposefully center whiteness. When we neglect to 
decentralize it, it will be automatically centered. So work to decentralize 
whiteness: in your children’s school lessons, in your PTA meetings, in your 
office meetings, in your city council meetings, in the film and TV you watch, 
in the music you listen to, in the leaders you support. If you do not 
decentralize whiteness in your movements for progress, you will leave people of 
color behind. And what kind of progress is that?

Understand your privilege

Just about all of us have some privilege, and it is very important for us to 
be aware and to be willing to name that privilege.

Your privilege is where you have the most power. Your privilege is the little 
piece of an oppressive system that you own and can therefore change. For 
example, I am not disabled – this is a major area of privilege for me. I’m very 
glad that I know this, because, when I am asked to speak on diversity panels, I 
can ask if there will also be disabled speakers, ramps and sign language 
interpreters.

My privilege means that I’m asked to speak at more panels than disabled people 
are. My voice is in the room while disabled voices are not: being aware of that 
keeps me aware of my power to help change that. If I refused to recognize that 
privilege (and there was a time where I would have let guilt or just fear of 
confrontation keep me from doing so) I would simply remain a part of an 
oppressive system, even while claiming to work for liberation.

Remember what you’re fighting for

It is very easy to become hyper-focused on what we’re fighting against – 
neo-Nazis, Islamophobia, racism, sexism. But nothing is a better and more 
important motivator than what we are fightingfor. We are fighting for our 
communities, for our families, for our future.

What keeps you in the battle? Keep that close to your heart and let it be the 
light that guides your way.
 