
A heroin addict who bludgeoned her elderly neighbour to death with a rolling 
pin has been jailed for at least 21 years.

Sandra Weir attacked Mary Logie in her home in Leven, Fife, last January. 

The 82-year-old grandmother, also known as Rae, suffered 31 injuries to her 
head and neck – including multiple skull fractures – and sustained defensive 
wounds as she tried to fend off her attacker.

Weir then left her victim lying seriously injured for hours before returning 
to deliver the fatal blows, prosecutors believe.

In the months before the killing, Weir, 41, had befriended the pensioner but 
was in fact siphoning off cash from her account to fund her drug habit.

Weir was convicted of murder by a jury at the high court in Edinburgh last 
month.

The judge, Michael O’Grady QC, who previously described the manner of Mrs 
Logie’s death as “breathtakingly wicked”, handed the killer an automatic life 
term when she returned to the court for sentencing on Thursday.

He ordered her to spend a minimum of 21 years behind bars before she can be 
considered for release.

Mrs Logie, a regular churchgoer, was found battered to death in the living 
room of her first-floor flat in Green Gates on 5 January last year.

She had planned to visit a friend in hospital that day but never turned up. 
She had spent Christmas with one of her sons in England.

Weir denied murder and pleaded alibi, claiming she was elsewhere at the time. 
Weir became close to Mrs Logie and acted as her unofficial carer, but she had 
been a drug addict since her 20s and had racked up debts.


Described by detectives as a “callous and uncaring individual”, Weir regularly 
exploited Mrs Logie for financial gain.

The motive for the murder may never be fully known but police suspect it was 
fuelled by Weir’s greed.

Mrs Logie’s death had a profound impact on the local community where she had 
lived an active life, with lots of friends.

DCI Keith Hardie, of Police Scotland’s major investigation team, said after 
the verdict: “The level of violence inflicted upon Mary, coupled with the 
prolonged period of bullying and intimidation, demonstrated Weir’s complete 
disregard for the wellbeing of her victim.

“This was a very, very brutal and horrific attack committed by a despicable 
individual.”
 