
Kelly Airey, a 32-year-old west London man, was jailed for six years at the 
Old Bailey in June 1991 for robbery. It was a case that attracted little 
attention at the time or since. On the face of it, it is a run-of-the-mill tale 
of inner city violence.

The case against Mr Airey, who has a long criminal record, was that he had met 
a woman he knew, called Tracey Owuodzie, in the Black Lion pub in Bayswater 
Road, west London, in February 1991. They left the pub with a woman friend of 
Mrs Owuodzie to go to another pub, the Frankfurt in Harrow Road. On the way, 
according to Mrs Owuodzie, Mr Airey produced a large knife from his sleeve.

At the pub, according to the prosecution case, Mr Airey forced Mrs Owuodzie 
into the doorway and made her hand over her jewellery by threatening to cut off 
her fingers if she resisted. She also claimed he stole £40 and had punched her 
in the face.

She had tried to fight back, she said, but he had punched her again and she 
had fallen. She had suffered a split lip, bruised face, pain to the ear and a 
bruised back, she said.

The evidence against Mr Airey was given by his alleged victim, who has 24 
previous convictions, mainly for soliciting, and her then boyfriend, Lyndon 
Plummer, who has 22 previous convictions, mainly for pickpocketing.
Mrs Owuodzie told the court that Mr Airey had threatened her with a knife and 
had made her take off two ringsand her bracelet.

While Mr Plummer described the assailant as clean shaven, the arresting 
officers described him as having a goatee beard. What was also odd was that Mrs 
Owuodzie made no mention in her original statement of her boyfriend being a 
witness to the events.

At his trial, in June last year, Mr Airey was found guilty of the robbery but 
not guilty of the assault. This in itself seemed odd as the evidence in both 
cases was dependent on the two supposed witnesses. The people who might seem 
the likeliest witnesses, such as Ms Owuodzie's woman friend and the man who had 
assisted in the pub, were not called.

The judge, Mr Recorder Gray, pointed out to the jury in summing up that Mr 
Airey had not given evidence, saying 'from this defendant there is no denial at 
all there is no justification there is no explanation. But again I say that 
does not mean you take against him the fact that he has not given evidence.'
Following the jury's verdict, the judge told Mr Airey: 'The evidence proves 
beyond doubt that you are a man of evil reputation, immense menace and threat 
and if ever anybody thought it curious that other witnesses had not come 
forward to testify against you, it is quite apparent why that is likely to be 
so in this case.'

An application for leave to appeal against conviction and sentence was turned 
down in July 1992.

While this trial may have attracted little interest, Mr Airey, who is black, 
had previously been in the news for a very different affair.

In 1984 he was arrested under the Misuse of Drugs Act but fought the case and 
proved he was an innocent bystander by chance, a local photographer had taken 
pictures of his arrest and was able to help substantiate Mr Airey's defence, in 
which he claimed he had been 'fitted up' by police officers.
Nearly four years later he accepted £2,000 in compensation for the arrest. Mr 
Airey claims that this has made him a target in the area.

He claims that the attack never took place and that he did not give evidence 
in his own defence on legal advice he has many previous convictions which would 
have been brought into the open had he challenged the police case.
Now he is seeking to have his case reopened. His was one of the cases featured 
by Liberty, the National Association of Probation Officers and Conviction as 
causes for concern last year. He is currently in Wandsworth prison, having been 
moved there from Highpoint in Suffolk, after causing a disruption.
 