
For Antonio Arce, owner of a stall selling trinkets such as children's 
flamenco dresses, toy bulls and Barcelona football club replica shirts near the 
Prado museum in Madrid, there is good news and bad.

The number of tourists coming to Spain so far this year is rising, albeit 
slowly, after a two-year slump sparked by the global financial crisis. The 
recent turmoil in north Africa, where Egypt and Tunisia are prime holiday 
destinations, has also provided an unexpected boost for Spanish tourism. The 
industry is forecasting that hotel occupancy rates will rise by 12% this summer 
compared with last year, based on bookings made so far. Ramón Estalella, 
secretary-general of the Spanish hoteliers' confederation, la Confederación 
Española de Hoteles y Alojamientos Turísticos (CEHAT), told the Guardian he 
believes about two-thirds of this increase is down to holidaymakers cancelling 
their trips to north Africa and opting for safer – and familiar – Spain.

The problem for Arce's souvenir business is that tourists are not returning to 
places like Madrid but to the country's coastal resorts, primarily the Canary 
Islands. "Cultural tourism is different. People can live without the Prado but 
not the beach," he says. Trade started to nosedive in August and although it 
has picked up a little this year, things are still bad, he says.

A stone's throw from his stall, on the busy Plaza de Cánovas del Castillo, 
José María Sánchez, director of the Objetos de Arte Toledano, a large arts and 
craft store, tells a different story. He's much more optimistic about business, 
which he says has been boosted recently by many more Spanish people visiting 
Madrid on day trips or for the weekend, thanks to new high-speed rail links 
connecting the capital, the latest being the Madrid-Valencia line, which opened 
in December.

The tourism industry generates nearly 11% of Spain's GDP and employs 2 million 
people, 11.3% of the workforce in a country where the official unemployment 
rate is 20%. A record 58 million tourists came to Spain in 2007 but slumped by 
almost 10% the following year and numbers have yet to recover.

Tourism is even more vital to the economy of Spain's islands. In 2006, tourism 
accounted for 31.8% of the economy of the Canary Islands – which include 
Tenerife, Fuerteventura, Gran Canaria and Lanzarote – and 34% of all jobs, 
according to umbrella trade association Exceltur. But by 2009 the industry had 
shrunk by a tenth. Almost 50,000 people – a sixth of those employed by the 
tourism industry there – lost their jobs, contributing to an unemployment rate 
on the islands of almost 28%, the highest in Spain. The number of British 
tourists – who make up 37% of all foreign visitors to the islands – slumped by 
15% in 2009 as the economic squeeze at home, the stronger euro and more 
expensive air travel put them off. Ricardo Fernández de la Puente, 
vice-minister of tourism of the Canary Islands, admits: "The downturn ruined 
our economy. It is dependent on tourists. It has been very difficult for our 
businesses and companies. But we began to see a recovery in the second half of 
last year."

In February, foreign tourist numbers rose by 13.5% compared to last year, and 
accounted for almost a third of all trips to Spain. But the type of tourism is 
also changing. More tourists are now travelling independently, and not on 
package holidays. It's a change that Gonzalo Ceballos Watling, a director of 
development and sustainability at the government's TourSpain agency, welcomes. 
The agency is promoting activity holidays like horse riding in Spain, 
particularly at its coastal resorts and islands. "No one is ever going to 
reject package tourism but we believe we have to go onto a higher segment of 
tourist. Not only in the economic capacity of tourists but also the tourist 
experience. We are trying to offer a different type of tourism – not just lying 
on a beach."

The tourism industry is not expecting a return to the boom times soon. Between 
2006 and 2008 the number of hotel beds in Spain increased by a quarter from an 
ill-timed construction boom. It left the industry with an average occupancy 
rate last year of only 60%. As a result, Ramón Estalella from CEHAT says that 
many hotels will not be able to raise prices even as numbers pick up. "So there 
is a lot of cannibalism on prices and benefits offered for customers," he says.

Nevertheless, Spain's tourism industry looks to be over the worst. TourSpain 
says it is no thanks to the EU, which offered to bail out stricken carmakers 
like General Motors Europe during the economic crisis but were less ready to 
help Spain's tourism industry. As Watling says: "They [Brussels] still 
guarantee financial aid to building cars and why not more to us? Tourism is not 
seen as a first-class industry or sector." His colleague, Álvaro Blanco Volmer, 
a director of planning and co-ordination, notes: "Many people think tourism 
develops by itself only because the sun shines."
 