
A woman working for a council-owned organisation helping to alleviate 
homelessness has been suspended for sleeping rough in a council garage.

 Arleen Matthews, 48, has worked for almost a decade for Homes for Haringey – 
an arms-length management organisation that looks after the council’s housing 
stock and manages itsassessment of homelessness applications 
<http://www.homesforharingey.org/about-us>. Its website states 
<http://www.homesforharingey.org/looking-home/homelessness>: “We want to 
prevent homelessness whenever possible.”

Matthews’s job is to ensure that the council’s housing estates, where there 
are 16,000 tenants and 4,500 leasehold properties, are properly maintained. She 
had been living in private rented accommodation with her son, Kishur Williams, 
18, but she fell behind with the rent and was evicted.

Britain’s shame: the people who are homeless, even though they’re in work | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours>
In desperation and with nowhere else to go she and Kishur started sleeping in 
a garage on one of the estates she managed. When Homes for Haringey discovered 
what she was doing, it suspended her and she is facing a disciplinary hearing 
for sleeping in the garage on Friday. She has received a letter from her 
employers stating that she has breached health and safety rules by sleeping and 
storing her belongings in the garage. She has also been accused of misusing a 
Homes for Haringey property for personal use.

 Her appalling living conditions came to light when Matthews and her son 
presented themselves as homeless to the council’s housing officials.

 “We were just using the garage as a stopgap,” she said. “I kept looking for 
alternative, cheaper accommodation. But every door we knocked on to try to get 
a place to stay they refused us. They told us that they only wanted tenants who 
were earning at least £30,000. There’s nothing out there for the helpless.”

 In desperation Matthews and her son presented themselves to Haringey 
council’s homelessness team. “The housing official who interviewed me wanted to 
know absolutely everything about me. She even asked me: ‘Where do you wee?’ I 
said ‘I’m not going to answer that’.”

 Matthews has a family history of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and says her 
health has deteriorated as a result of becoming homeless and being suspended 
from her job.

“I have had five DVTs in my right leg,” she said. “My mum died of thrombosis 
at 48. I’m now 48 and I’m under so much stress because of all this that I’m 
terrified I’m going to die at the same age my mum did. My blood pressure has 
gone sky high because of everything I’m going through.”

She said her take home pay was £1,352 a month, supplemented by £320 working 
tax credit and £82.50 child benefit for Kishur because he is still in full-time 
education. The rent in the place she was evicted from was £1,200 a month, 
leaving her with little money left for essentials.

 “I ran up rent arrears of £5,000,” she said. “I offered to pay off £3,000 but 
the landlord said I had to pay off everything in one go. I tried to do 
everything I could to resolve the situation but in the end we were evicted on 1 
November and my son and I had nowhere to go. My husband died five years ago but 
I’m still paying off the cost of the funeral and the other debts he left.”

A few days before she and her son were due to be evicted Matthews spoke to a 
woman who rented out garages on one of the housing estates Matthews looked 
after. She asked if she could rent one of the garages and the woman agreed. The 
rent was £15 a week. She said the woman handed her a key and told her that they 
could sort out the paperwork later.

‘Shocking’ rise in number of homeless children in B&Bs at Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/17/homeless-children-christmas-shocking-rise>
“We slept on a sofa and a mattress from our previous accommodation. It was 
horrible. Water came in when it rained and we found mouse droppings. There was 
no heating or water.”

Matthews and her son stayed in the garage until the beginning of December. She 
had a plastic bowl that she carried with her and washed wherever she could.

“All the time we were living in the garage we continued to look for 
alternative cheap accommodation. It was a terrible experience living there, 
something I wouldn’t wish on my worst enemy. We would get up between 5 and 6am 
to avoid being seen by anyone on the estate.”

“When I went to the council and declared myself homeless I was made to feel so 
worthless by the member of staff who dealt with me. She forced me to tell her 
where we were sleeping. A couple of days later I was called in to see my 
manager and was told I was being suspended because I was sleeping in a council 
estate garage.

“The whole thing has made me really ill. I have been getting terrible 
headaches. I came back to work in March of this year, although my doctor felt I 
wasn’t really fit to work. We have been treated worse than animals.”

Matthews and her son are currently living together in a tiny room in a hostel 
in Tottenham, which is infested by cockroaches. Matthews is paying £159 a week 
for this.

“I just don’t know what’s going to happen to us,” she said.

Her son is at college studying sport and accountancy and hopes to pursue these 
studies at university but says it is a struggle to study because he and his 
mother are homeless. “I’m so depressed,” he said. “I feel like I’m living in a 
prison.”

A Homes for Haringey spokesperson said: “All our staff are paid at least the 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> living wage and our most junior 
positions offer salaries of £18,324 to £19,374, depending on length of service.

“We at Homes for Haringey know as well as anyone the challenges of the private 
rental market in London. We will help anyone who comes to us with applying for 
housing benefit or other financial assistance should they need it – for 
example, those on lower incomes. We cannot comment on the details of any 
ongoing internal investigations.”

• This article was amended on 23 December 2016 to clarify some references that 
suggested Arleen Matthews is a Haringey council employee. She was not directly 
employed by the council; as stated elsewhere in the article, she works for 
Homes for Haringey, which is owned by the council.
 