
Hundreds of asylum seekers who are detained in UK immigration centres could be 
released after a high court judge ordered the government to review its policy 
on incarcerated torture survivors.

Learning to give
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/21/learning-to-give-to-charity>
Justice Duncan Ouseley ruled on Monday that the Home Office must immediately 
provide “relief” to detainees at an interim hearing, releasing survivors of 
torture from countries such as Afghanistan, Nigeria and Sri Lanka.

Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> lawyers, 
representing an initial 20 cases, had launched a legal challenge against the 
Home Office’s new definition of “torture” introduced in September, arguing that 
an unreasonably strict interpretation of the word meant that “potentially 
hundreds” of people have been illegally detained after claiming asylum in the 
UK.


The Home Office accepts that asylum seekers who have survived torture should 
only be detained in exceptional circumstances. Its definition had previously 
included any act of torture by any individual or group – but it was redefined 
to refer to torture carried out by official state agents only.

It is believed several hundred asylum seekers from the Middle East and Africa 
said they had been been tortured but are unable to prove their suffering was 
sanctioned by their country of origin, and have therefore been detained while 
claiming asylum in the UK.

Examples of detained asylum seekers referenced in court on Monday include an 
Afghan man in his early 20s who was reportedly kidnapped and tortured by the 
Taliban because he refused to be groomed into joining them. The Afghan man was 
beaten with knives, sticks and a gun, and the court heard his injuries are 
consistent with his account. Last month the Home Office told him his case did 
not meet the new definition of torture.

In another case, a Nepalese man said he was beaten, cut and and shot by a 
terrorist group in his home country. His ordeal is said to have lasted 15 days 
and he has scars consistent with his account but, again, his case was not held 
to meet the new definition.

In his conclusion, Mr Justice Ouseley expressed concern that under the new 
policy a number of decisions had been reached unlawfully, concluding that “I 
should grant interim relief in the form [requested by lawyers for the 
claimants]”. Ousely went on to confirm the Home Office would revert back to its 
previous broader definition of torture while the legal challenge continues.

A full hearing on the Home Office policy is scheduled for early next year but 
legal experts said that in the interim hundreds of asylum seekers would have to 
be released from immigration centres.

Ouseley ruled that pending trial, references to “torture” should be taken to 
mean “any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is 
intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or 
a third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a 
third person has committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, 
or for any reason based upon discrimination of any kind”.

During the hearing, the Home Office also said independently of the legal 
challenge that it is reviewing 340 cases identified between 12 September and 18 
November, where people who claim to have been tortured may have been wrongly 
detained.


If they are deemed to be survivors of torture under the old definition, they 
will be released. Human rights lawyers say they have also identified other 
cases of detainees who they say have been tortured and who should be 
immediately released.


Toufique Hossain, director of public law at Duncan Lewis which brought 
Monday’s challenge, welcomed the ruling. “We know from NGO groups and other 
firms that there are others – given that non-state torture is a common feature 
in those who are traumatised. Today’s decision could potentially affect 
hundreds of people.


“We are asked for a suspension of the policy until the final outcome of the 
hearing. We want the current policy to be quashed and requested the immediate 
release of anyone currently detained [under it]. This decision will potentially 
protect hundreds of detainees. It really shouldn’t matter when assessing 
whether a person should be detained, if the perpetrators are state officials or 
not.”

Rory Dunlop, the Home Office’s representative in court, said that to overturn 
a policy that had only been in place for two months was “a radical thing to do”.

Theresa Schleicher, acting director of Medical Justice, a charity that works 
to improve the health of immigration detainees and is involved in this legal 
challenge, said: “We welcome today’s decision to suspend the narrower 
definition of torture and to revert to the previous, wider definition. It will 
mean that more vulnerable torture survivors will be protected from being 
detained and being harmed by detention.”

The Home Office said: “We have noted the decision to grant interim relief at 
the procedural hearing. Given this is an ongoing legal case, for which there 
has yet to be a substantive hearing, we are unable to comment further.”

• The subheading on this article was amended on 22 November 2016 to change a 
reference to prisons to detention centres.


 