
The fans in Belo Horizonte who taunted Hope Solo during this game could only 
admire the US goalkeeper by the end as she made several fine saves to ensure 
the Americans won their second match of the tournament.

After coasting to a 2-0 win over New Zealand in their opening fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/carli-lloyd-usa-womens-football-soccer-olympics-rio-new-zealand>
 on Wednesday, this was a tougher challenge for last year’s World Cup winners 
as they seek a fourth successive Olympic gold. France had the bulk of the 
chances - but, as usual, the Americans found a way to win.

Rio 2016 women's football: USA 1-0 France – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/06/usa-france-womens-soccer-rio-2016-olympics-live-score>
Billed as potentially one of the best matches of the tournament, the 
competition will have underwhelmed if that proves to be the case.

Though competitive, close and exciting in patches, there was a degree of 
reserve, of holding back, that percolated through the sides’ performances. That 
is not surprising given that both nations entered the night knowing they were 
already all but through to the quarter-finals - eight of the 12 teams progress 
from the group stage - and the concertinaed format and small roster size means 
the conservation of energy and the avoidance of injury are vital.

The pre-match anticipation was heightened because France entered Saturday’s 
match top of the group after beating Colombia 4-0 in their opening game, and 
they are ranked third in the world by Fifa.

Yet despite their individual talent - headlined by midfielder Amandine Henry, 
who plays her club football for the National Women’s Soccer League’s Portland 
Thorns - their best tournament outcomes have been fourth place at the 2011 
World Cup and fourth at the London 2012 Olympics. Even at the European 
Championships they have not gone beyond the quarter-finals.

The speedy 18-year-old attacking midfielder Mallory Pugh, who came off in the 
second half against New Zealand with an ankle injury, was on the bench for the 
US. Crystal Dunn came in while Whitney Engen replaced the injured Julie 
Johnston in defense, resulting in a back line that had not started together 
this year. At times, it showed.

Jill Ellis’ side were indebted to Solo on her 200th cap - an international 
goalkeeping record - especially with 41 minutes gone when she made a sharp low 
stop from Marie-Laure Delie, who was clear on the right seven yards out.

As against New Zealand in the same venue, Solo was booed in Belo Horizonte and 
subjected to chants of “Zika!”following a tweet 
<http://www.goal.com/en-us/news/66/united-states/2016/07/22/25837902/hope-solo-guarding-against-mosquito-bites-amid-zika-concerns>
 that pictured her in a mosquito head net and holding a jumbo-sized bottle of 
insect repellent.

USA make do with silver in men's team archery as South Koreans clinch gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/rio-2016-south-koreans-archery-gold>
Earlier, Solo got a faint and perhaps vital touch as Wendie Renard, the France 
captain, hit the bar with a header. At the other end, the Americans were 
missing Pugh’s energy and sense of adventure. With Renard commanding at the 
back, the best it got for the US in the first period was a Tobin Heath free 
kick saved by Sarah Bouhaddi.

The US were far better after the break, though, and grabbed the winner after 
63 minutes thanks to some derelict defending from the French. Heath was 
inexplicably free on the left as she ran into the box, collected a pass and 
unfurled a low shot that Bouhaddi could only touch on to her near post.

The rebound fell to Carli Lloyd - a player who should not be left unmarked at 
the halfway line, let alone inside the six-yard box - who had an easy finish 
for her second goal of the tournament.

Lofting some dangerous high crosses into the area, France pushed for an 
equaliser late on and Solo was required to make a simple save from a Delie 
header inside the last 15 minutes. Then the US substitute, Ali Krieger, almost 
contributed a dramatic volleyed own goal that would have made for a nightmarish 
Olympic debut at the age of 32.

The Americans conclude their group play in Manaus on Tuesday against Colombia: 
a five-hour flight that takes them farther away from Rio. But, geography apart, 
they look to be on the right path to the Maracaña, where the gold medal match 
takes place on 19 August.
 