
How to choose the best 20 female footballers ever? Ask the experts. We 
contacted a panel of 13 leading voices on women’s soccer from all over the 
world, and invited them to name their 10 best players in history. Our 13 
experts gave us 29 names in response, and we whittled that down to come up with 
a list of 20.

Our question was open to interpretation. Experts could select their players on 
any number of criteria, from silverware, to club exploits, to success with the 
national team. There were no hard and fast rules about which players were 
eligible: just choose your best 10 players, we told our experts, and we’ll 
crunch the numbers to come up with 20.

The panel

Michael Lewis, football historian and Guardian contributor

Beau Dure, football writer and Guardian contributor, covered 2008 Olympics and 
2011 Women’s World Cup. Author ofEnduring Spirit 
<https://www.amazon.com/Enduring-Spirit-Restoring-Professional-Washington-ebook/dp/B00FW93SWQ#navbar>
, a book about the first season of the Washington Spirit in the new NWSL

Carrie Dunn, football writer and author of The Roar of the Lionesses 
<https://www.amazon.com/Roar-Lionesses-Womens-Football-England/dp/1785311514>: 
Women’s Football in England

Tony DiCicco, former USA international. Coached USA to victory at the 1996 
Olympics and 1999 Women’s World Cup

Jack Bell, senior media specialist, North American Soccer League

Cheryl Salisbury, former captain of Australia (151 caps and 38 goals)

Grahame Jones, covered 12 men’s and women’s World Cups, the NASL, Major League 
Soccer, two European Championships, one Copa America and four Olympic 
tournaments

Kim Wyant, former USA international goalkeeper 

Brenda Elsey, Latin American soccer expert and author of Futbolera: Women, 
Gender, and Sexuality in Latin American Sport

Tom Sermanni, coach of Orlando Pride. Previously coached Australia and USA

Caitlin Murray, football writer, covered 2015 Women’s World Cup for the 
Guardian

Tony Leighton, women’s football writer for the Guardian

Kieran Theivam, women’s football writer

How our judges made their choices

 * Our judges were asked to select their 10 best players of all time 
 * They were free to choose whichever female players they wished, from any era.
 * Our judges chose 10 names each, and ranked their selection in order from 
1-10, No 1 being the best, No 2 second, and so on. 
How the voting worked

 * The No 1 choice of each judge was awarded 10pts, No 2 given 9pts, down to 
1pt for their No 10 choice. 
 * All the votes were added together to give a final score. 
Voting disclosure

 * We are hugely grateful to our judges for taking part. 
 * To allow our judges the freedom to express their opinions without fear or 
favour, all votes were anonymous.  