
While St Helens stumble towards the League Leaders Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/05/warrington-st-helens-match-report-simon-grix-injury>
 and the next seven jostle over play-off positions, next Saturday, I will be at 
The Hive to witness the last stand of this dismal season for the condemned men, 
London Broncos and Bradford Bulls. Both relegated long ago, the pitch will be 
littered with players bidding farewell.


As a winnable game for London, it offers them the chance to avoid joining a 
pretty unattractive club: The One Win Brigade. Honorary Presidents are Halifax 
– the 2003 vintage – who got thatSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> season off to a decent start 
with victory in London and then promptly lost every other game, even suffering 
the indignity of having those two points deducted to finish withnil points. 
Also among its humbled members are Barrow 1989-90, who lost 25 of their 26 top 
flight games, all three cup ties and all 15 home games. Crowds at Craven Park 
rarely topped 2000 in a miserable season on Furness that rivals London’s 
shambles this year.

A victory over Bradford, or indeed at Salford this Sunday, will see Joey 
Grima’s young team avoid the One Win club and draw level with the hapless 
Huddersfield Giants of 1998 (who managed four points from only 23 games). Also 
within sight in the Super League’s Worst Teams table are Leigh, who gathered 
just five points in 2005, Workington who only won twice in 22 attempts in 1996, 
and Crusaders, whose six-point showing for the 2009 campaign is the 
fourth-worst points performance ever.

Bradford’s post-mortal rally will see them become the second best Super League 
team to be relegated.Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> 
retain the crown as the most unfortunate team to go down, when their 19 points 
from 28 games in 2006 was not enough to save them, thanks to bottom club 
Catalans being exempt from the drop. But with seven victories already, the 
Bulls have as many wins as any other team to have finished 13th in Super League.

With both Bradford and London already signing players that could make them 
stronger in 2015, they are likely to stop the rot. Contrary to some views about 
relegation, that is the usual scenario. Of all the clubs officially relegated 
from Super League most are in Super League now, with three in the Championship. 
Oldham (who folded soon after being relegated), Sheffield, Gateshead and 
Crusaders - who all left Super League in other circumstances - have all 
reformed and reached that level recently. Only Paris are still nowhere to be 
seen.

Having suffered through the majority of London’s home games this season, 
inevitably I missed the win over Leeds’ youngsters. Feel more sorry though for 
the likes Jane and Chris Appleton, who rarely miss a game of league in London, 
let alone a Broncos home match, but were absent at a Christening that Sunday. 
They even made their annual trip to southern France last weekend to see London 
roll over at the feet of the hungry Dragons. I am sure thevin rouge made up for 
it.

I also spent a post-Wembley break in France, where at breakfast on the first 
morning in a Reims hotel we were stunned to see rugby league on the front page 
of our complimentary copy of the International New York Times. Astonishingly, 
inside was almost a whole page about the Broncos’ battles in the capital, 
centred on the Leeds win and the hat-trick by teenage half-back Joe Keyes. A 
few days earlier, Keyes was paying his way in to his local Enfield ground to 
see Skolars get blown away in the first half of another successful Friday Night 
Lights by Hunslet.


Back home in Hertford, I finally met the new-ish neighbours in the big house 
out the back. Turns out the owner is from near Halifax, was at theChallenge Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/challengecup> final – one of the few in Club 
Wembley’s Ring of Indifference – and his dad and uncle used to play for 
Hunslet! Our game is everywhere if you look closely enough.

Clubcall: Castleford Tigers


So Cas couldn’t turn it on one more time to lift the Challenge Cup, but at 
least they were there. My Lancastrian father, who used to alternate between 
watching Featherstone Rovers and Castleford in the early 1960s when he was 
teaching in Pontefract, was with three generations of the family in the Cas end 
at Wembley.

Dad recalled the repercussions of Wakefield winning the cup in 1963. Two days 
later he was due to referee Moorthorpe Recs v Castleford Town in the Pontefract 
Football League Cup semi-final at Fitzwilliam: “I was ‘persuaded’ to delay the 
kick-off. I had no choice as no players were present! Memory plays tricks but I 
seem to remember seeing the cup brought from a train to loud cheers.”


Wakey were parading the cup and the game could wait. Cas had their own party 
last week but the mood among their well-oiled and magnificently attired masses 
seemed sombre leaving Wembley. Perhaps this is the start of a thrilling new era 
for the Tigers, with another new stadium scheme slipped quietly on to Wakefield 
Council’s table (a 10,000-capacity ground at Five Towns Park). Let’s hope it 
happens this time. We have at least two more seasons to enjoy the crumbling 
funfair that is the Jungle. Might even get Dad back there.

Foreign quota 


A few items caught my eye scanning the French rugby paper Midi-Olympique in 
Metz last week. Former Kangaroo Luke Rooney has joined in pre-season training 
with AS Carcassonne at Stade Benausse. After experiencing highs with Toulon and 
lows with Carcassonne in his French rugby union sojourn, Rooney asked to train 
with the Canaries, now coached by Laurent Garnier, who has spent the last eight 
seasons in theBrisbane Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brisbane-broncos> system. Only 31, Rooney 
may well return to big-time league next season. After all, “Il est treiziste”, 
as his coach said.

Another cross-coder from Down Under appearing in Midi-Olympique’s yellow pages 
under the headline “Le Joker” was former Newtown Jets second-rower Chris 
Tuatara-Morrison. A Kiwi who grew up playing both codes in Sydney, Morrison 
spent the first half of his career trying to crack the NRL, having time with 
most of Sydney’s top clubs. He turned down an offer fromCatalan Dragons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/catalans> in 2012 to give pro union a shot. 
That looks a good decision now: an established centre with Super Rugby’s 
Western Force, the 27-year-old has just joined Castres on loan. Lucky lad. 
There was also talk of Toulon being after Israel Folau. Where’s the Doctor’s 
Marquee Player rule when you need it?

Goal-line drop-out


Watching the last three months of the season knowing that several of the 
players have already signed to play for someone else next year just doesn’t 
feel right. The anti-tampering deadline is there to leave contract negotiations 
until a player is in his last six months of his contract – most end on 31 
October – but surely it is vital to the credibility of the sport that all 
parties remain silent about where a transferring player’s future lies until the 
end of the season?


While I’m glad we don’t have the lunacy of football’s transfer deadline day, 
surely we could make more of imminent deals instead of leaking them one by one 
over the climax of the season. As has been suggested before, announcing them en 
masse straight after the Grand Final could have a huge impact. Moving Monday 
anyone?


That would at least remove the uncomfortable situation of players facing clubs 
they have signed a pre-contract agreement with for 2015 and even worse, posing 
for photos in their new employer’s colours. There werepublicity shots of 
Salford flier Jake Mullaney in a Bradford 
<http://www1.skysports.com/rugby-league/news/12196/9397502/super-league-bradford-bulls-sign-full-back-jake-mullaney-for-2015-season>
 shirt at Odsal in July! Would he have done that if they were still relegation 
rivals?

Fifth and last


There is a reshuffle going on in the backroom staff at Wigan Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wiganwarriors>. Expect the appointment of a 
well-known figure to their coaching team in a senior role in the next week or 
two. No names, but he is a successful international coach who has led teams at 
Super League, Championship and Championship One level and has ties to the 
Warriors. He is also currently working at one of Wigan’s biggest and nearest 
rivals.


• Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> 
andFacebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 