
It was an extraordinary hour of courtroom drama. The UK's most secretive court 
had behaved unjustifiably in refusing to hear one of the parties to a complaint 
– and its members knew it. The only person who could get the court off the hook 
it had fashioned for itself was the very advocate who, even now, was laying 
into its decisions.

At the heart of the case is a Libyan opponent of the former Gaddafi regime, 
Abdel Hakim Belhaj <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>. In 
2004, he and his pregnant Moroccan wife, Fatima Boudchar, were living in China.

The pair, fearing they were under surveillance, decided to seek asylum in the 
UK. But they were detained and sent to Tripoli, where they were treated 
brutally. Belhaj was tortured and held for six years before being released in 
2010.

Crucially, documents discovered during the Libyan revolution in 2011 are said 
to establish that the British intelligence service, MI6, was responsible for 
delivering Belhaj (also known as Belhadj) and his wife into the hands of the 
Gaddafi regime.

In 2012 the couple launched legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/28/libyan-dissidents-action-government-rendition>
 against the UK government and its intelligence agencies, accusing British 
ministers and officials of participating in their unlawful abduction, 
kidnapping and illicit removal to Libya. There was a preliminary hearing in 
October 2013.

Following the Guardian's revelation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/gchq-cables-secret-world-communications-nsa>
 last June that GCHQ could monitor communications between citizens under a 
programme code-named Tempora, Belhaj's lawyers became concerned that the UK's 
security and intelligence agencies might have obtained information from calls 
and emails between them and their clients.

Lawyer-client communications are protected by legal professional privilege. 
The courts have made it clear that the confidentiality of such communications 
is a human right fundamental to the administration of justice.

So the law firm Leigh Day, acting for Belhaj and his wife, lodged a complaint 
in October with the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT), a special court 
established in 2000 to hear cases against the intelligence services.

After three months government lawyers told the IPT, on 4 December, that the 
intelligence services were "in the process of undertaking searches", presumably 
for privileged communications. The outcome of this, the government lawyers 
continued, was that a "closed" issue had arisen.

Leigh Day said, due to this admission, it appeared their clients' privileged 
messages had been intercepted. The firm asked for undertakings to ensure that 
intercepted communications would not be used to give government lawyers an 
unfair advantage in court.

The government's position has always been that it neither confirms nor denies 
being in possession of specific intelligence.

Leigh Day's request did not lead to the undertakings, so, on 16 December, the 
firm applied for an urgent injunction to ensure any privileged material was not 
misused by the government.

The IPT insisted on 16 December that Leigh Day's application could not be 
heard before the new legal term began in January.

But on 18 December the tribunal told Leigh Day that it had held a closed 
hearing five days earlier, at which it had allowed the intelligence services 
until the end of February 2014 to complete their searches and respond finally 
to the complaint. A hearing could be arranged in March to decide whether an 
injunction should be granted – probably too late for the clients' purposes.

The IPT did not seem to think there was anything wrong in hearing from the 
government on 13 December when it had not told the other side that a hearing 
was taking place.

Closed hearings like this are presumably standard practice: since they are not 
announced, we have no way of knowing.

But Leigh Day and their counsel, Dinah Rose QC, hit the roof. They told the 
tribunal on 20 December that they needed to have privileged communications with 
their client inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> in the coming 
days.

A high court judge had just thrown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/20/libyan-rendition-claim-uk-interests>
 out large parts of their claim against the government. They had to give Belhaj 
and his wifetheir advice 
<http://ukhumanrightsblog.com/2014/01/14/rendition-to-libya-an-act-of-state-and-therefore-non-justiciable/#more-21612>
 on the judgment.

In the circumstances, the tribunal's refusal to consider the injunction 
application until March was arguably unlawful. They would have explained all 
this to the IPT if they had been given a chance.

But what were Belhaj's lawyers to do? On the cover of its first published 
report, undated but released some time over the past couple of years, the 
tribunal proclaims confidently that "there is currently no avenue to appeal the 
decision of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal in the UK".

This rule is presumably based on section 67(8) of the Regulation of 
Investigatory Powers Act 2000 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/23/section/67>, which says that its 
decisions "shall not be subject to appeal or liable to be questioned in any 
court".

But the lawyers were not going to be put off by that. A case known as Anisminic
 <http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1968/6.html>, decided by the law lords in 
1968, seemed to have established that decisions such as this were subject to 
judicial review, which meant they could be quashed by the high court.

Proceedings were issued on 30 December and the high court ordered a hearing on 
30 January.

Now it was the IPT's turn to hit the roof. The high court, it claimed, had no 
jurisdiction to review its decisions. Closed hearing were not only permitted 
but required: it had to conduct its proceedings in a way that would not damage 
national security.

And if the IPT successfully defeated the application for judicial review, the 
special court would seek an order that Leigh Day paid its costs on an indemnity 
basis, a higher level of costs that can be ordered after a party has behaved 
unreasonably.

Leigh Day replied by turning up the pressure, telling the IPT it was 
inappropriate for it to take an adversarial stance when it had still to hear 
the Belhaj claim.

Then wiser heads prevailed. By 6 January the IPT was saying that there had 
been a serious misunderstanding which the tribunal was anxious to resolve. It 
ordered an open hearing on 14 January.

Reprieve, the campaign group supporting Belhaj and his wife, made sure that 
reporters were alerted to this rare event.

The hearing was a test of counsel's nerve. It opened with some robust comments 
from Mr Justice Burton, president of the IPT, warning Rose not to grandstand. 
That was followed by some signs of dissatisfaction from James Eadie QC, acting 
for the government, who seemed unhappy that the hearing was taking place in 
public.

But the last thing the IPT must have wanted was a decision from the high court 
that its decisions were liable to judicial review.

So Rose offered the IPT a deal: if it agreed to hear the application for an 
injunction on 30 January, the clients or their representatives "would not be 
able to get to the high court that day" to pursue the application for judicial 
review. And that is what was agreed on Tuesday.

The intelligence services promised to stop searching their records for more 
privileged communications with Belhaj's lawyers. And the tribunal agreed to 
look again at the fundamental question raised by this episode – the need to sit 
in open court except where a closed hearing is truly necessary.

As Rose argued, the IPT should sit in public when its hearings pose no damage 
to national security, as was the case on Tuesday. If there has to be a closed 
hearing then claimants should normally be told in advance so that they can make 
written submissions – even submitting that at least part of the hearing should 
be open.

If the IPT had recognised this fundamental principle, it would never have 
agreed to a timetable that made it impossible for Belhaj to talk to his lawyers 
with any confidence that his communications would remain confidential.

Burton, who recently took over as president of the tribunal, has shown a 
welcome commitment <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03gbs6n> to greater 
openness, where possible. That openness is in everyone's interests, including 
his own.
 