
Although they are ubiquitous, Japanese people rarely notice the grooved lines 
on their pavements. Every footpath that is wide enough seems to have these 
extruding lines. They inhibit the smooth movement of prams, wheelchairs and 
trolleys. In the rain or snow, they can be a hazard for the cyclists who share 
pavements with pedestrians. They are expensive to maintain.

But these lines serve a purpose. With their prominently raised grooves they 
provide a means for blind people to traverse the city. They can feel these 
footpath guides with their feet or follow them with walking canes.

These pavement guides are symbols of a polite society – material evidence of a 
culture that accepts small inconveniences to the majority to help a few. What 
other material manifestations of these values exist inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>?

A polite society is a caring society

The Oxford Dictionary defines politeness as “having or showing behaviour that 
is respectful or considerate of other people 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/polite>”.

Where to place your handbag is a small dilemma for women in restaurants. Do 
you put it on a seat? On the floor? In Japan, baskets are provided to hold 
handbags and shopping bags.

Restaurants, cafes, ATMs and some apartment blocks provide shelves on which to 
rest handbags or wallets when conducting a transaction or searching for keys.

Swipe right? 'Toilet paper' for smartphones trialled in Japanese airport 
bathrooms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/swipe-right-toilet-paper-for-smartphones-tested-out-in-japanese-airport-bathrooms>
In day-to-day transactions, a small tray is used to transfer money. This is 
more convenient than passing coins and notes from hand to hand. It is easier to 
see what money is proffered, so there is less chance of confusion. Usually a 
small bin is provided for unwanted receipts.

Occasionally park benches have small tables included in their design.

Public telephone booths are wheelchair-friendly. The equipment is placed at a 
height that makes it easy for people in wheelchairs to access. Public lockers 
still exist.

A polite society is an orderly society

The word polite comes from the Latin politus 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/polite>, to polish or make 
smooth. Creating order by ensuring predictable behaviours is one way of making 
life smooth.

Subway stations have arrows to indicate where people should line up, on either 
side of the train door, so those alighting are not inconvenienced.

The train stops at a pre-determined point, so the doors line up with the 
platform openings. The platform is fenced so people cannot fall on to the 
tracks.

On the shinkansen long-distance train, there is an arrow to indicate which 
side of the train to alight. This prevents confusion and smooths people’s exit 
from the train.

A polite society is a safe society

It is polite to care for the safety of strangers.


A toddler highchair can be found in many public toilets. It keeps a child safe 
while the adult is occupied.

As in Australia, flag holders shepherd children across major crossings before 
and after school. In Japan, small yellow flags are placed near crossings 
outside these times. Children can carry a flag as they cross the street – if 
they wish.

Sometimes handrails on stairs are designed to provide support at each step.

A polite society is a clean society

It is polite to protect others from illness. Cleanliness is one way of 
ensuring this. Bus drivers demonstrate their care and cleanliness by wearing 
white gloves. The seats of taxis are covered in white cloth.

Shelves to hold outdoor shoes are part of the design of most houses and 
apartments. Shoe cupboards also can be found in restaurants, shrines and 
temples. Taking your shoes off when you enter someone else’s space shows 
respect for the property of others.

Often Japanese toilet seats are warmed. Functions on their control panels can 
include spray and bidet options, a deodoriser and music to provide privacy.

Archaeology of the contemporary world

Disciplines such as linguistics and cultural studies help us understand human 
behaviours. But archaeology is the only discipline that focuses purely on 
material culture. We live in a material world. Our behaviours are shaped by the 
materials around us.

Archaeology can help identify the core values of a society – those things that 
are so normalised that people don’t notice them. One comment from a Japanese 
woman on the handbag baskets and footpath guides was:

It is normal, so I didn’t notice. I can see it now.

The absence of objects can tell a story. Handbag baskets are missing in cafes 
such as Starbucks, Mr Donut, Aux Bacchanales and Cafe Barbara. These cafes 
provide a European or American atmosphere. Japanese-style handbag baskets would 
be an anomaly.

Not everything described above is unique to Japan. South Korea has similarly 
styled toilets. The grooved pavement guides for the blind have appeared in 
Australia. Plastic sheaths to hold dripping umbrellas are now in high-end New 
York restaurants. But the constellation of material objects relating to 
politeness is peculiarly Japanese.

What is politeness in Japan? It is caring for the safety and convenience of 
others, guiding people to avoid unpleasant surprises and helping others to keep 
themselves, their loved ones and their possessions clean. The material world of 
Japan reflects and reinforces these values.

Some Japanese may find the degree of care and politeness embodied by the 
material culture surrounding them suffocating. Some may fear that it could 
cause antagonism against those who are the subject of care, like the backlash 
against political correctness being witnessed across the world.

Does Australia have anything that Japan doesn’t? Yes! The new $5 note, 
designed with a raised bump so blind people can identify it.

Can Australia learn from Japan? Certainly. Material culture in Japan is 
designed to smooth people’s lives. More subtly, it acts as a reminder to be 
aware of the needs of others. The material culture we adopt can help our 
society be more orderly, safe, clean and caring.

• Claire Smith is a professor of archaeology at Flinders University, Gary 
Jackson is a research associate in archaeology there and Koji Mizoguchi is a 
professor of archaeology at Kyushu University.This article was originally 
published onthe Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/how-to-pick-an-ethically-raised-ham-this-christmas-69640>
, part of theGuardian Comment Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/guardian-comment-network>
 