Primal Scream picked up the award in 1992 for their album Screamadelica. Which 
of the following albums was not on the shortlist that year?  Simply Red - Stars 
 Shakespears Sister - Hormonally Yours  Young Disciples – Road to Freedom How 
many times have Radiohead lost the Mercury prize?  8  4  5 The xx won the 
Mercury prize in 2010. Which of the below was said during their acceptance 
speech?  “Thank you so much we've had the most incredible year. It's just felt 
like every day we've woken up to something incredible”  “Hello, wow. It’s so 
loud in here! See you soon.”  “Come on you reds!” Which of the below is a song 
title from At Least for Now, Benjamin Clementine's 2015 Mercury prize-winning 
album?  Quiver a Little  Walk Like a Man (Without Hate)  The Economy of a Lost 
Tradition Which is a song from Myths of the Near Future, the Mercury-winning 
album in 2007?  Four Horsemen of 2012  Apocalypse How  We Are the Tectonic 
Saber Boys In 2001, the band Gorillaz requested that their eponymous debut 
album be withdrawn from the shortlist. For what reason did the cartoon bassist 
Murdoc Niccals give?  Winning the award would be "like carrying a dead 
albatross round your neck for eternity"  Winning the award would be “like 
carrying a living lizard inside your pants for four months”  Winning the award 
would “like carrying a dead albatross around in a Waitrose bag for life. For 
eternity” Aged 18, who was the youngest Mercury Prize winner?  Dizzee Rascal  
Speech Debelle  Bassist Paul Blackburn of Gomez Which of the following brands 
has not sponsored the Mercury prize?  Nationwide Building Society  Panasonic  
Danone In 2006, Isobel Campbell's collaboration with Mark Lanegan, Ballad of 
the Broken Seas, was shortlisted. Why did this ruffle some people’s feathers?  
Lanegan is American and the Mercury is a British award for British and Irish 
citizens  Lanegan famously stated in 2005 that he hated the Mercury prize and 
the thought of Jools Holland alone made him furious  Lanegan briefly gave up 
his musical career in 2006 to become a scenic painter and withdrew Ballad of 
the Broken Seas from Mercury contention In 2001 PJ Harvey became the first 
female artist to win the Mercury. Who presented the award to her?  Edith Bowman 
and Jools Holland  Zoë Ball and Jo Whiley  Joe Wiley and Mark Riley  You got…  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  