
Hull prison is on the brink of riot and has been put on lockdown after CCTV 
cameras were allegedly set alight by 15 inmates who took part in the 
large-scale disorder at HMP Birmingham, the chair of the Prison Officers’ 
Association has said.


Mike Rolfe said trouble flared after the prisoners arrived at the category B 
jail from the Midlands. “We understand 15 prisoners were transferred to Hull 
and one of those prisoners, thought to be involved in inciting the riots along 
with others at Birmingham, assaulted a senior officer yesterday,” Rolfe told 
the Guardian.

The Prison Officers’ Association claimed that inmates at HMP Hull were under 
lockdown, with only a few allowed out of their cells at a time. The union said 
CCTV cameras were set on fire and that some inmates had refused to return to 
their cells after the arrival of the 15 men.

Rob Nicholson, chairman of the Hull branch of the Prison Officers’ 
Association, toldthe Hull Daily Mail 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/hull-prison-on-brink-of-riot-after-inmates-from-hmp-birmingham-riot-transferred/story-29991994-detail/story.html#D0fVxDH5ULyIUlxf.99>
: “It is a powder keg and it’s waiting to go off. They are trying to incite 
riots and we’ve had a really bad couple of days here. I’ve spoken to very 
experienced prison officers this morning and they tell me they fear for their 
safety.”

Nicholson added: “They were put in one unit, which beggars belief. We wouldn’t 
have expected the majority of people who have come from a disturbance to be put 
in the one room, but that was the decision that was taken.

“For me and my members, it was a ludicrous decision. They set fire to the 
cameras just after they got here and a senior officer was assaulted by, we 
believe, one of the main instigators of what happened in Birmingham.”


A Ministry of Justice source disputed claims that the prison was on lockdown. 
He said one prisoner had tried to damage a CCTV camera, but denied that several 
had been set alight. “A few prisoners were unhappy about being moved and there 
was a minor altercation, but this was dealt with well by the staff,” the source 
said.

A Ministry of Justice spokesman said: “HMP Hull, like all prisons across the 
estate, is being closely monitored for signs of potential unrest. That includes 
managing the transfer of prisoners in the interests of maintaining safe, calm 
and normal regimes. We have specially trained prison staff available to respond 
to any disturbances.”


The disturbance at Hull follows the 12-hour riots at HMP Birmingham on Friday, 
described as the worst prison riot since Strangeways 25 years ago.


Karl Turner, the Labour MP for Hull East, said: “I have it on good authority 
that Hull prison is on the brink of a riot. And clearly, this chaos has been 
caused by the government, no one else. Since 2010, they’ve slashed the numbers 
of prison officers by 7,000 and, clearly, the prison system cannot cope. 
They’re replaced highly experienced prison officers with people who are 
inexperienced in order to save cash.

“This chaos has been caused by the government and Liz Truss needs to do more 
to resolve the issue. They need to put money into the prison system urgently 
and they need to recruit … It’s not good enough for the coalition to sack 7,000 
experienced officers and then announce the recruitment of 2,500 between now and 
2020. This chaos is entirely made by the government. It’s the government policy 
– cut now and think later – that’s failed prison officers and prisons.”
 