
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> will restore hundreds of 
coffins dating back thousands of years to the time of the pharaohs as part of 
an American-Egyptian project to preserve and document one of the world’s oldest 
civilisations, a director of the project said.

The conservation effort, funded by a US grant, will restore more than 600 
wooden coffins that date to various eras of ancient Egypt and which are 
currently stored at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.


“There has been no other project like this worldwide, with this number of 
coffins being documented or restored,” said head of the museum’s restoration 
department, Moamen Othman.

Egypt was awarded the conservation grant worth $130,000 (£105,000), in 
December 2015. That project is part of a larger US-Egypt treaty signed in 2016 
to curtail illicit trafficking of the country’s rich cultural heritage.

Antiquities theft flourished in Egypt in the chaotic years that immediately 
followed its 2011 uprising, with an indeterminate amount of heritage stolen 
from museums, mosques, storage facilities and illegal excavations.


Global interest in Egypt’s pharaonic era remains high. The hunt for the 
resting place of the lost queen Nefertiti grabbed international headlines in 
2015, though the search has yet to bear fruit.


The gilded ancient relics and resting sites of the pharaohs were once the 
cornerstone of athriving tourism sector, a vital source of foreign currency, 
that has suffered setbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/oct/21/egypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors>
 since the uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak in 2011.
 The Egyptian Museum in Cairo. The country’s ancient relics were once a 
cornerstone of a thriving tourism sector. Photograph: Khaled Elfiqi/EPA 
The Ambassador’s Fund for Cultural Preservation (AFCP), a US programme founded 
in 2001, has been responsible for the conservation and restoration of countless 
ancient sites, museums and artefacts around the world.

The fund previously helped Egypt to conserve a mausoleum in historic Cairo and 
an ancient temple in upper Egypt.

“One of the main goals of the project is to ensure that the [Egyptian] Museum 
has a full inventory of the objects and understands their conservation needs so 
that the coffins can be made available for research by scholars but also for 
the public,” AFCP programme director Martin Perschler said.

“It means that in the long run more people here in Egypt and people from 
around the world will have the opportunity to discover and appreciate the full 
range of heritage and of history within this single collection of coffins.”
 