
Hungary’s populist rightwing government has offered a robust defence of its 
plans to curtail foreign-backed civil society groups and suggested the change 
in the US administration means a new era is at hand.

In comments that will alarm many non-government organisations, an official 
spokesman for Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, confirmed there would be 
changes to the rules governing civil activists, many of whom he accused of 
behaving like de facto politicians.

Several groups have voiced fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/fears-new-crackdown-civil-society-groups-hungary-george-soros>
 that Orbán – who has previously declared plans to create an “illiberal state” 
– will launch a crackdown in the coming months, emboldened by the forthcoming 
inauguration of Donald Trump as US president.

Civil activists fear new crackdown in Hungary after Trump election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/fears-new-crackdown-civil-society-groups-hungary-george-soros>
In a telephone interview, Orbán’s spokesman Zoltán Kovács did little to allay 
those concerns and appeared to suggest the end of Barack Obama’s presidency 
would usher in a climate more favourable to marginalising NGOs.

“Visibly there is going to be a new era and very obviously, even from 
Washington, you will have a different kind of opinion, a different kind of 
attention regarding these issues,” he said, adding that the Obama 
administration’s criticism of Hungary’s policy towards civil society groups had 
put “an unnecessary strain” on relations.

Orbán’s increasingly authoritarian behaviour has sparked fears of an erosion 
of democracy inHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary>, which 
joined the European Union in 2004. He has already faced widespread condemnation 
over moves allegedly designed to muzzle press freedom and curtail judiciary 
independence since his Fidesz party took power in 2010.

Kovács said Hungary had been subjected to “unfounded accusations about 
transparency and corruption”. “We believe that by getting rid of these elements 
of the political argumentation, it is going to be easier. A more pragmatic era 
is going to come,” he added. “Hungary is not going to be measured by the double 
standards or relativism that has been suggested by many of these accusations.”

Hungary’s future looks worryingly like Europe’s past | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/hungary-future-europe-far-right-viktor-orban>
Both Orbán and Trump are staunch opponents of George Soros, the billionaire 
philanthropist whose Open Society Foundation gives grants to dozens of 
Hungarian civil organisations and funds liberal causes in the US and elsewhere.

This week Szilárd Németh, a Fidesz MP and deputy chair of parliament’s 
national security committee, further dismayed activists by declaring that 
Hungary would “use all the tools at its disposal” to “sweep out” Soros-funded 
NGOs. “I think they should get out of here [and] I feel that there is an 
opportunity for this, internationally,” Nemeth said.

Soros, who was born in Hungary, has been repeatedly criticised by Orbán and 
his allies, who have branded him as a force for “political correctness”. Kovács 
claimed Soros had “very obviously” sought to interfere in Hungarian politics, 
for example by pushing for the acceptance of migrants and refugees in European 
countries.

He declined to give details of the government’s proposed reforms, but a 
provisional legislative programme suggests NGO leaders could be forced to 
declare their assets in the same way as elected politicians and officials.

Activists have described the plan as intimidation but Kovács said it was 
justified by the NGOs’ “political activism”.

“We believe that transparency of NGOs has the same requirement as in the case 
of politics and politicians, especially if those societies or associations deal 
with politics or policy-related issues,” he said. “The moment you step on the 
soil of political decision-making and responsibility, you are not a civilian 
any more. You have to act and behave like a politician.”

Asked about Hungary’s objection to civil groups receiving funds from abroad, 
Kovács replied: “Think in terms of national sovereignty. You hardly see central 
European countries financing, say, civil groups in Britain to influence 
politicians. What would be your opinion if you encountered that in your 
country?”

Some activists fear that Hungary may eventually follow Russia, where 
foreign-funded NGOs must declare themselves as “foreign agents”, or Israel, 
whose parliament recently passed a law forcing groups receiving more than half 
their funds from abroad to display the fact prominently on reports.

Kovács said Hungary was unlikely to imitate other countries, but added: 
“What’s wrong with Israel? Israel is a democracy. Very obviously they do bump 
into the same problems about politics [and] policymaking.”

A leading member of a Budapest-based thinktank, who declined to be named, said 
Orbán was unlikely to launch a full-scale assault on NGOs to avoid a clash with 
the European Union.

“This government has become paranoid and it’s really not the politics of 
self-confidence,” he said. “They see Soros-backed institutions as part of some 
international conspiracy but they are far from that. They’re made up of people 
who want to do some good but instead they are depicted as an arch-enemy, when 
in fact they aren’t that important or powerful.”
 