
A few weeks ago, as I prepared for my honeymoon in Turkey, the usual concerns 
of a Muslim traveller went through my mind. Will I be the one singled out? Will 
I get checked more than someone else just for being who I am?

What to do when the book police arrive: read on | AL Kennedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/07/woman-reading-book-about-syria>
Although I wasn’t aware of this at the time, a cabin crew member on my 
outbound flight reported to the authorities that I wasreading a book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/04/british-woman-held-after-being-seen-reading-book-about-syria-on-plane>
 called Syria Speaks: Art and Culture from the Frontline, a collection of
literature, poems, photos, songs and cartoons 
<http://www.saqibooks.co.uk/book/syria-speaks/> from Syrian artists and 
writers. The first clue I had that something was wrong was when I landed in 
Turkey and was stopped while leaving the plane. I was told this was a “random 
check” but I was the only passenger to be stopped. Our trip was off to a 
horrible start. Further tensions occurred as our stay was disrupted due to the 
military coup and as a result, we had to cancel our flight to Istanbul and were 
stranded in Marmaris, our resort. We salvaged the remainder of our honeymoon as 
best we could.

On our return to the UK, two police officers were waiting for me as soon as I 
arrived through passport control. My husband and I were taken to a room for 
questioning under schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act for approximately 30 minutes. 
Among questions about my reasons for travelling to Turkey, my work and the 
number of languages I speak, they asked me to show them the book I had been 
reading and explain what it was about. The whole experience left me feeling 
disappointed and angry.

Incidents like this seem to be happening to Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/14/the-guardian-view-on-anti-muslim-discrimination-a-terrible-social-injustice>
 frequently. We are all well aware that radicalisation of the most vulnerable 
is growing and is of great concern. We recognise that there is some good work 
being carried out by organisations, tackling issues around radicalisation. 
However, my experience raises several questions. Is the Terrorism Act being 
misused? And why are a growing number of Muslims being victimised?

It is important that we have policies and procedures in place to tackle 
radicalisation. It is equally important that the Terrorism Act is not misused 
and we keep a sense of proportion. There is a gap, perhaps, between the 
implementation of the act and the levels of training of different agencies. And 
so the way forward would be to re-evaluate the act and reassess the 
implementation to determine where the legislation has been used appropriately 
and where it has not.

I have always felt cautious making judgments on cases around radicalisation, 
but this experience has made me more aware of the regrettable scar it can leave 
on people when a misjudgment is made. Singling out people in this way could 
cause, for certain individuals, quite a detrimental effect to their overall 
wellbeing.

It is becoming increasingly apparent that a high number of those who become 
radicalised suffer from mental health problems. I work as a mental health 
practitioner for the NHS, and have worked with a variety of client groups 
including vulnerable young people from all backgrounds who are at potential 
risk of radicalisation. Within mental health services we provide interventions 
around challenging ideologies, and we monitor risk. Early identification, 
intervention and prevention can tackle potential radicalisation.

In my field of work, I recognise that some individuals have been made 
vulnerable due to factors such as a sense of injustice, peer pressure, negative 
media and a lack of a sense of belonging.

As a multicultural society, we must be proactive in finding solutions to 
tackle radicalisation

Being victimised due to a mistake can have such a negative impact that it 
could lead to higher potential risk of radicalisation. Such events may lead to 
someone feeling a lack of social acceptance and to experiencing increased 
vulnerabilities.

My experience has stopped me from reminiscing about our honeymoon positively. 
It has also introduced a new element of paranoia into my life, which sadly 
joins a back catalogue of turbulent feelings I already possess as a western 
Muslim woman. The book that prompted all this, Syria Speaks, was an inspiring 
read, and it is good to hear thatsales have soared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/11/sales-of-syrian-culture-anthology-soar-after-woman-held-for-reading-it-on-plane>
 since my story was reported by the press. This means that the Syrian authors 
in the collection will be more widely read and I truly hope more people get a 
chance to discover its nuance and depth. Istand in solidarity 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/FaizahShaheen? utm_medium=> with the 
innocent citizens of Syria and will continue to strive for and anticipate an 
end to the worst humanitarian crisis of the 21st century.

Even though it has been an overwhelming few weeks for me, I’m pleased that 
sharing my story has raised a number of issues that need to be urgently 
addressed. I feel I can help to give a voice to victims who have experienced 
something similar but face various barriers to speaking out.

Now, more than ever, as a multicultural society, we must stop simply talking 
about tackling radicalism and instead be proactive in finding solutions to 
manage it.
 