
The grieving father of a man who was fatally shot by police in West Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> has said his family are 
heartbroken and questioned whether armed officers planned to “assassinate” his 
son.

In an interview with the Guardian, Mohammed Yaqub said he had “run out of 
tears” sincepolice shot his son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/04/bradford-mp-naz-shah-calls-calm-m62-police-shooting-protests-yassar-yaqub>
 Yassar Yaqub, 28, through his windscreen on the M62 near Huddersfield.

Bradford MP calls for calm after M62 police shooting sparks protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/04/bradford-mp-naz-shah-calls-calm-m62-police-shooting-protests-yassar-yaqub>
He said: “I want answers from the police, from all the relevant bodies that 
can give me answers. That’s why we’ve got a solicitor involved. The truth will 
be revealed.”

He took exception to West Yorkshire police’s description of the operation as 
“pre-planned” and demanded to know: “How can it be pre-planned? Pre-planned 
means that they have intentions of doing that.

“Pre-planned means that you’ve got intentions to assassinate someone and 
murder someone. That’s what you mean by pre-planned.

“Was that the case in this case? If it was pre-planned, pre-planned for what?”

The Independent Police Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc> said a suspected illegal firearm was 
found in the white Audi sports car in which the father of two was travelling.

Mohammed Yaqub, a well-known and respected businessman in Huddersfield, said 
he did not know why there was allegedly a gun in the car but that the truth 
would eventually come out.

“I can’t say [whether he had a gun] because I don’t know, I wasn’t there,” he 
said. “Obviously there was another person in the car. There’s no evidence of a 
firearm being used from his side. There should be images from the helicopter 
that show what happened.”


His son died at the scene when a police marksman opened fire after boxing his 
car in on the junction 24 slip road of the M62 at Ainley Top, north of 
Huddersfield, shortly after 6pm on Monday.

Speaking from the family home in Huddersfield, a 15-minute drive from the 
shooting scene, Mohammed Yaqub questioned what led armed police to box in the 
vehicles on the slip road after following them on the motorway.

“If they’ve gone all the way to Bradford and come back, would they not have 
stopped them when they thought the public were in danger or would they stop 
them when they were almost home?” he asked.


“So what happened between getting on the motorway and getting off? Nothing’s 
happened in between has it? These are all the answers they need. And his mother 
needs all these answers. She gave birth to him, he’s her boy, she’s entitled to 
all these answers of who took his life?”

Yassar Yaqub, who was acquitted of attempted murder in 2010 when the case 
against him fell apart at court, was two years ago treated for shotgun wounds 
when a gunman targeted him outside his family home. Neighbours and former 
associates painted him as a drugs kingpin who bought high-powered sports cars 
with the proceeds of crime, and his friends described him following his death 
as “no angel”.

But his father insisted that his son had “never been convicted of any drugs or 
firearms offence” and suggested that he attracted interest from the police due 
to the people he associated with.

He said the family were heartbroken as they awaited the outcome of a 
postmortem expected to take place on Wednesday. “We’re all heartbroken,” he 
said. “We were so close to our son, very very close and it’s something very 
inconceivable at the moment. It can’t be believed. We can’t sleep, we can’t 
eat. We’ve run out of tears.”

He added: “The terrible thing is that if it was a fight you could understand 
it but this – somebody in the car just bang, finished – that’s what is killing 
me more.”

Mohammed Yaqub, who owns a number of properties and a textile shop near the 
family home, said he had not read any newspapers but had been told about the 
protest in Bradford by his son’s supporters on Tuesday night.

He said: “Look at the case in London, [Mark] Duggan – look how many protests 
they had to take to get answers. If it’s a peaceful protest there’s nothing 
wrong with that, as long as it’s peaceful.”

West Yorkshire police have been approached for comment.
 