
Ian Madigan kicked Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> to 
victory in a tense Champions Cup match at Castres. The Ireland international, 
playing at inside-centre after starting at full-back against Wasps in 
Leinster’s previous match, kicked all the Pro12 side’s points as they came from 
behind at Stade Pierre-Antoine to maintain their perfect start to the European 
campaign.

The win also ensured that Madigan’s midfield partner Gordon D’Arcy could 
celebrate a successful 100th game in Europe.

It was the French side, though, who had made the early running, just as they 
had in last season’s Heineken Cup encounter between the sides whenCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> had led 14-0 before losing 29-22.

They scored with a classic catch-and-drive move, Saimone Taumoepeau touching 
down after the pack had forced their way through a splintered Leinster defence, 
and Geoffrey Palis added the conversion.

From then, though, the first half belonged to the visitors as they hammered at 
the Castres defence, in much the same way as Harlequins had at the Stoop on 17 
October in a 25-9 win. But the this time the Castres rearguard was more 
resolute.

The returning prop Ramiro Herrera brought extra scrummaging power, and where 
Castres had struggled against Quins in their opening game, here they were in 
the ascendancy. Their pack dominated the scrum, controlled the lineouts and 
were brutal at the breakdown.

For all their first-half pressure, Leinster only had three Madigan penalties 
and a 9-7 lead to show for their efforts at the break.

The second half opened in similar style to the first, Palis kicking two early 
penalties as Castres regained the lead. He extended their advantage after 56 
minutes with a third penalty to take the score to 16-9.

Herrera, who had just returned to the side after playing for Argentina in the 
Rugby Championship, then left the pitch to a standing ovation.

Neither side could maintain the high intensity and with both sets of players 
beginning to make mistakes it was Leinster and Madigan who benefited most. With 
five minutes remaining, the home side were a single point ahead, and seemed to 
have the measure of Leinster. But they conceded two late penalties, which 
Madigan, with jeers and boos ringing around the stadium, landed to win the game.
 