
The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> midfielder Ian 
Black has warned his team needs to improve their away performances quickly if 
they are to win the Third Division.

Rangers followed draws at Peterhead and Berwick with a goalless encounter at 
Annan Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/annan-athletic> on 
Saturday to drop to fourth in the table. Elgin, who lost 6-1 at Ibrox, are top, 
and Black was unable to explain the disparity between Rangers' home displays 
and those on the road.

"We are just not starting well away from home," he said. "I don't know what it 
is and we can't put our finger on it. It's really disappointing to come to 
Annan and give that kind of performance for the manager, and we need to improve 
on it.

"It's difficult when you come to venues like this but we have to be good 
enough to deal with it. We have to stand up, be counted and win the battle 
because if we do that we are more than capable of getting the ball down and 
making passes and playing teams off the park.

"However, in these away matches we don't seem to be able to do so and we have 
to get it sorted. We know that teams are going to try that bit harder when they 
play us, and fair play to their keeper as he had a good game, but we had the 
chances to win the game. We have to get our finger out and improve quickly if 
we want to win this league."

The Rangers manager, Ally McCoist, admitted his team lacked creativity and 
width, a situation not helped by the ankle problem picked up by David Templeton 
and the foot injury that ruled out the top goalscorer Andrew Little.

But he also stressed his respect for their opponents and reminded his players 
that four SPL teams had lost to SFL opposition in the second round of the 
Scottish Communities League Cup.

Despite Rangers' previous draws, the result still came as a shock to the 
record crowd of 2,571 at Galabank. Annan were only granted admission to the 
league in 2008 but there was little between the teams in the first half in 
terms of chances and possession. The home team's midfield made up for what they 
lacked in physical presence with hard work, determination and no little skill 
while their defence also produced a solid display.

The centre-back Steven Swinglehurst, who was released by Carlisle in the 
summer, summed up what the result meant.He said: "As soon as we found out they 
would be in the same division as us, we never thought we would be drawing with 
them. They are a massive club with a massive fan base and this is a dream. It's 
unbelievable for the club, the fans and the players. All we can do is take 
confidence from it. We were up against players like Lee McCulloch, who He's an 
unbelievable player, has played in the Premiership and is an international, and 
it shows. He's clever and strong but it was a great performance by the lads to 
stop him and Rangers."
 