
Cold weather warnings have been issued as an icy front moves down from the 
north of England, with plunging temperatures potentially set to cause hazardous 
driving conditions.

Much of the UK saw New Year’s Day downpours, but the rain will give way to a 
frosty start to the year as temperatures fall below zero as far south as the 
Chiltern Hills, where sleet and snow are possible.

Temperatures are set to drop to their lowest point so far this winter, with 
forecasters predicting a possible -7C (19.4F) in Wales and the Scottish 
Highlands.

Sophie Yeomans, a meteorologist at the Met Office, said: “We’ve got a cold 
front across the south of the country. The rain should clear, but moving in 
behind that we have a lot of cold air coming from the north. It’s going to be 
very frosty at night and temperatures will drop below zero.”

A level two warning has been issued, which lasts until 3pm on Tuesday. Yeomans 
said: “Cold weather alerts are given to let people know it’s going to be quite 
cold and they should put the heating on.

“There is also a yellow warning for across the north, Scotland and parts of 
Northern Ireland, which is to warn people about ice that could cause hazardous 
conditions on the roads.”

The lowest temperature for the UK at this time of year was -18.5C, recorded in 
Braemar, Aberdeenshire, in 1962.

The weather is set to warm up slightly later in the week, but Yeomans said 
temperatures were only likely to rise by a couple of degrees.

Public Health England also issued warnings about the upcoming cold spell. 
People were advised to turn their heating on, keep an eye on elderly neighbours 
and stay tuned to weather forecasts.

Dr Thomas Waite of PHE’s extreme events team said: “Every winter thousands of 
people die because of their exposure to cold weather, and doctors’ surgeries, 
hospitals and other parts of the NHS are kept busy as people fall ill.

“That’s why it’s really important that we all do everything we can to ensure 
everyone stays well this winter. The elderly, very young and those with 
pre-existing health conditions are most at risk during cold weather.

“Keeping homes heated to at least 18C is a great way to avoid the health 
problems from cold, as is stocking up on food and medicine before cold weather 
sets in and wearing lots of thin layers, instead of fewer thick ones.”
 