
Only those whose lives have been disfigured by gross injustice will know that 
the shame and hurt are not diminished by time. That is why mature, enlightened 
and liberal democracies will sometimes reach out to groups who have been 
wronged in another age. It also sends out a message to those who would still 
cling to medievalism. The pursuit to restore justice denied can never be 
time-barred – unless you are a miner in the UK.

More than 30 years after the miners’ strike in 1984-85, thousands are still 
waiting for justice for their treatment. Governments north and south of the 
border have resisted all entreaties because each knows that to accede would be 
to invite proper scrutiny of the vindictive and sinister behaviour of the 
police. During the 12 months of the dispute, police forces were deployed in the 
manner of a private army by a government of the hard-right that used every 
means at its disposal to destroy the miners and their communities.

Amber Rudd’s announcement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/absent-amber-rudd-accused-of-bitter-betrayal-over-orgreave>
that there would be no inquiry into police conduct at Orgreave during the 
strike was surprising only because she and her officials had previously dropped 
broad hints that one would be forthcoming. In the interim, it seems that she 
was reminded that this was not behaviour expected of a home secretary in a 
hard-right Tory administration.

This was an opportunity for the SNP government to underpin the truth of one of 
their favourite mantras: that Scotland is a much fairer and more socially 
democratic country than England. For several years, Neil Findlay, the Labour 
MSP for Lothian, has been pressing the Scottish government to initiate an 
inquiry into the conduct of the Scottish police during the miners’ strike and 
the deeply questionable convictions of more than 500 miners.Last Monday, at the 
National Mining Museum in Newtongrange, he asked them again 
<http://stv.tv/news/politics/1372281-justice-secretary-sidesteps-call-for-a-miners-strike-inquiry/>
.

In particular, Findlay is seeking scrutiny of major flashpoints between police 
and miners at Hunterston power station in North Ayrshire and the Ravenscraig 
plant in Lanarkshire, which resulted in 292 arrests. A report compiled by 
Findlay, which argues for an inquiry, includes case studies of several miners 
who were brutalised by police before being branded by the courts. George 
Purcell, then an engineer at Bilston Glen colliery, remembers being pushed 
forward on a surging picket line on to a fence that gave way, resulting in a 
number of people falling over. He explains what happened next: “The police 
grabbed me off the ground and took me into custody.” He believes it was not bad 
luck that led to his arrest: “I was chairman of the Loanhead strike committee; 
on that day, nearly every chairman of each strike committee was arrested. We 
were informed the police had photos of us and specific targets for arrest.” He 
was subsequently dismissed and the NCB refused to reinstate him despite a 
tribunal ruling that he was unfairly dismissed.

He also lost entitlement to any redundancy payment he would have been due. 
Hundreds of other miners and their families suffered similarly and discovered 
that they had been blacklisted, rendering futile their searches for alternative 
employment.

In Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, which provided 10% of 
the overall UK number of striking miners, the conviction rate was three times 
higher than in England. The levels of vindictiveness in the law’s treatment of 
Scottish miners were unprecedented. On picket lines, the police heavily 
outnumbered strikers and regularly prevented busloads of striking miners from 
getting to their destinations many miles away.

In the Guardian last week, Simon Jenkins was dismissive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/amber-rudd-right-orgreave-public-inquiries>
 of attempts to hold an inquiry into police conduct and endorsed Amber Rudd’s 
stance. “Orgreave was miserable for those involved,” he wrote, “but pit 
closures are history. The miners were victims of that history, as were workers 
at the same time in dockyards, steel foundries and newspapers. Protest was 
understandable and probably inevitable. But does [Andy] Burnham really want to 
go back to subsidising dirty coal?”

Jenkins, one of my favourite political commentators, misses the point 
entirely. The conduct of the police raises questions about the extent to which 
a UK government, acting without the consent of parliament or the people, can 
suddenly suspend the normal checks and balances on the forces of law and order. 
These are principally to ensure that they are governed by the law we ask them 
to uphold. During the strike, there is clear evidence that, for a year or so, 
they were a private army of the Tories, enforcing martial law on workers who 
were fighting for their livelihoods, their way of life and their communities.

In the midst of the dispute, the Labour leader, Neil Kinnock, asked Gordon 
Brown, then MP for Kirkcaldy and Dunfermline East, and Merlyn Rees, home 
secretary in the Jim Callaghan government, to compile a report into aspects of 
the strike.

Kinnock wanted to see if there were grounds for an inquiry into “questions 
raised about relations between the police and the public as a result of 
experiences in the course of the mining dispute”. The report is required 
reading for anyone concerned about how the police can be used by the state to 
turn on the people they are sworn to protect.

Early on, the report raises alarms: “The dispute saw the deployment of large 
numbers of policemen from one force to another organised in police units. All 
43 police forces in England and Wales were on the move to provide mutual aid 
and on a massive scale, with convoys on the motorway reminiscent of the war 
years. There was a similar if smaller movement in Scotland. This mutual aid was 
on a scale undreamed of in 1960; it undoubtedly raises constitutional issues.”

Thatcher called the miners “the enemy within”, a vile slur on families and 
neighbourhoods who had sacrificed hundreds of thousands of their own and whose 
industry had kept the lights on in Britain’s darkest hour. The Scottish 
government has a chance to grant justice for our wronged miners, instead of 
merely talking about it.
 