
His hands tucked tightly in the pockets of his jeans, Gilbert Sark nodded at 
the ice-covered bay stretched out before him.


Decades ago, his grandfather – at the time one of the few in this First 
Nations community to own a truck – would spend winters ferrying people across 
the frozen bay to Prince Edward Island. One wintry day, the truck hit a patch 
of soft ice, sending it plunging into the frigid waters below.
 See the full visual 
His grandfather didn’t make it out of the truck in time. “That bay has claimed 
a lot of people,” said Sark. “Now it’s claiming land.”

For as long as anyone can remember, life on Lennox Island – a community of 
some 450 people on the east coast ofCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> – has been set to the rhythm of the 
waters that lap its shores of red sand. But climate change is drastically 
altering this relationship, sending sea levels rising, pelting the small island 
with fiercer and more frequent storms and bringing warmer winters that eat away 
at the ice cover that traditionally protected the shores for months at a time.

The result is impossible to ignore. “We’re losing our island,” said Sark. A 
survey of the island carried out in 1880 counted 1,520 acres of land. In 2015, 
surveyors mapped out 1,100 acres of land on Lennox Island – suggesting more 
than 300 football fields worth of land have been swallowed by the sea within 
the span of a few generations.

Sark pointed to the shoreline next to the cemetery where his mother and many 
other members of his family are buried. “There used to be a field right there. 
We used to play football in that area.”

The community recently spent tens of thousands of dollars to save the 
graveyard from the encroaching waters, building a wall made up of three layers 
of rock. “They had to fix it or there would be caskets going out into our bay,” 
said Sark. “It was that close.”

The scars of the island’s battle against climate change are visible across 
this low-lying island. Local people recall playing baseball where boats now bob 
in the water; homes that once sat 20ft from the shore now teeter precariously 
close to the sea. The shoreline has crept up to the edges of the community’s 
decade-old sewage lagoon, sparking concerns that a storm surge could send waste 
into Malpeque Bay, a world-renowned site for harvesting oysters.
 Gilbert Sark, whose grandfather drowned in the water off Lennox Island: ‘That 
bay has claimed a lot of people. Now it’s claiming land.’ Photograph: Ashifa 
Kassam for the Guardian 
The community’s sacred burial grounds, located on an adjacent island, have 
also started washing away, revealing arrowheads, ceramic bowls and the skeletal 
remains of the community’s ancestors. Each time, the exposed sites have been 
moved inland, said Sark. “But it’s only a Band-Aid solution, because they’re 
just going to wash out again after.”

In his role as community planner, Sark is among those tasked with guiding a 
community scrambling to respond to the rapidly changing island – a 
confrontation that pits thousands of years of history and identity against the 
effects of climate change. “This is our home,” said Sark. “It just isn’t that 
everybody’s got individual houses here. There’s carbon dating on a lot of our 
artefacts that are here – we’ve been here for over 10,000 years.”

Related: Dear corporate Canada: it's time to pay for your part in climate 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/28/canada-emissions-climate-change-justin-trudeau-corporate-business>

At one recent meeting Sark asked residents where they saw the community in 25 
to 50 years. “One of them said underwater,” said Sark. “Their energies and 
thoughts now are more geared towards where are we going to live, how are we 
going to get housing out there for our community members, are we going to be 
more one community – or are we going to be stretched out over different plots 
of land?” The community has yet to come up with concrete answers to these 
questions, he said.

Over the past three decades, Danny Tuplin has watched the island’s shoreline 
inch closer to his two-storey house. Only a few years ago, his home sat 10ft 
from the water. Then in 2004, a hurricane-strength nor’easter blizzard brought 
the ocean to his doorstep.

“I went out the back door, I took five steps and I was in salt water,” said 
the 58-year-old. He has since reinforced the nearby shoreline, pouring 40 
truckloads of filler and raising it higher. “It’s not going to stop it, 
inevitably it will come, I’m thinking. But hopefully I’ll be dead and gone by 
then.”
 The community spent tens of thousands of dollars to build a rock wall to 
shore up Lennox Island’s cemetery against the rising waters. Photograph: Ashifa 
Kassam for the Guardian 
Lennox Island – an area roughly 1.5 times the size of New York’s Central Park 
– is losing about a hectare (2.47 acres) a year, offering a microcosm of what 
climate change could do around the world, said Adam Fenech, who leads the 
Climate Lab at the University of Prince Edward Island.

Fenech has been working closely with local residents to map out what the 
future of Lennox Island could look like. So far, the suggestions of what’s to 
come are dire, with the worst-case scenario forecasting a rise in sea levels of 
as much as three metres in the next 50 years – which would leave about half of 
Lennox Island underwater. “But you never really know,” said Fenech. “Our 
estimates of sea level rise keep changing year to year and it’s going in the 
bad direction.”

The community is taking few chances. While Canadians were debating the need 
for climate change action – the previous Conservative government pulled out of 
the Kyoto protocol in 2011 – the community commissioned a series of computer 
simulations aimed at understanding the full impact of climate change on their 
land.

“It’s been always on the radar,” said Chief Matilda Ramjattan. “My biggest 
concern is not so much of a quick fix as much as long-term sustainable, because 
I have to think about generations in the future.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Justin Trudeau on climate change, the economy and Canada’s future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-video>
Consultations are under way to determine how best to save the island. 
Something like the rock wall built to shore up the cemetery would be ideal but 
it is simply too pricey to implement all the way around the island.

The community is also exploring the possibility of developing a few pieces of 
property on Prince Edward Island that the First Nation bought in recent years. 
But Ramjattan stressed that this didn’t mean the community would abandon the 
island to the effects of climate change. “We’re not going anywhere. We’re 
resilient. We’re going to do what we can to protect our little island.”

As he looked out at the partially frozen bay that claimed the life of his 
grandfather, Sark wondered how his own battle with the sea would pan out. “All 
you can do is slow it down. We lost hundreds of acres in that one little span, 
but if we can slow it down to a crawl then maybe we can keep what we have for a 
little while longer.”

The 37-year-old pointed to his mobile phone. “Humans can do these incredible 
things, we can make all these advancements, no problem,” he said. “But a lot of 
the stuff we take for granted – what you see once you look out the window – 
those are the things that we need to fix. And nobody’s lifting a finger to do 
it.”
 