
Indonesian police have arrested eight people for alleged treason including 
Rachmawati Soekarnoputri, the daughter of Indonesia’s founding father, hours 
before a200,000-strong protest in Jakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/jakarta-protests-muslims-against-christian-governor-ahok>
 against its Christian governor on Friday.

Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, known as Ahok, has incensed conservative Muslims over 
allegedly blasphemous comments he made about the Qur’an in an election 
campaign. Protesters have demanded that the governor, who is to face trial for 
the remarks, is sent to jail.

Police said those arrested had intended to use the protest to stir an uprising 
against the government. “They had the intention to ask and incite people to 
overthrow the legitimate government by mobilising the masses,” police spokesman 
Boy Rafli Amar told reporters.

Jakarta protests: Muslims turn out in force against Christian governor Ahok
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/jakarta-protests-muslims-against-christian-governor-ahok>
The case of Ahok, who is a member of the country’s ethnic Chinese Indonesian 
minority, has opened up a political Pandora’s box

said “Jail Ahok, the law must be fair”, demonstrators marched through the 
streets for the second time in a month.

Rachmawati reportedly held a press conference on Thursday in which she called 
upon those joining Friday’s protest to occupy the parliament building. Ahmad 
Dhani, a rock star and political hopeful who accompanied Rachmawati on 
Thursday, was arrested on the same charges.


Hours before the anti-Ahok protest, police announced that eight people had 
been arrested for suspected treason.

“Eight people have been arrested and are undergoing interrogation by the 
Jakarta police. We will wait for the interrogation results,” national police 
spokesman Insp Gen Boy Rafli Amar said on Friday. Two others were arrested for 
alleged crimes under Indonesia’s electronic information law.

Police did not immediately release the full names of those arrested but a 
lawyer for Rachmawati, the daughter of Indonesia’s first president, confirmed 
she was among them. She is the younger sister of Megawati Soekarnoputri – a 
former president herself, and the political patron of the current president, 
Joko Widodo.

“Yes, she has been arrested. Police officers arrived at her home at 5am and 
took her at 6am,” said lawyer Aldwin Rahardian.

It is believed that two former generals, Kivlan Zein and Adityawarman, and 
activist Sri Bintang Pamungkas, were also among those arrested for alleged 
treason.


Under the Indonesian criminal code, treason carries a maximum life sentence. 

Ahok supporters say that in the world’s largest Muslim-majority nation, his 
case is a test of the country’s commitment to pluralism and tolerance.


Others have suggested the protests point to rising religious conservatism, or 
nefarious political moves to undermine the president.

But Aleksius Jemadu, a professor from Pelita Harapan University in Jakarta, 
said Friday’s arrests should not be a great cause for concern.

“It’s good the government has been firm in establishing the rule of law so 
those accused of bad intentions to change the government, or to topple the 
government, should be held responsible for what they planned to do,” he said. 
“In the eyes of the public it’s good the government has been firm in order to 
ensure the supremacy of law.”

Crowds had started to thin by the afternoon after the peaceful protest on 
Friday, but a demonstration against the governor turned violent after dark last 
month, with protesters burning several police trucks and officers using teargas 
to disperse the crowd. Demonstrators had called on the president to come and 
meet them, a demand that was ignored.

In an apparent move to appease the crowd on Friday, Widodo joined prayers at 
the national monument, commending the peaceful gathering and encouraging people 
to go home safely.
 