
When Exeter Chiefs give it a real lash at home there is a hint of classic 
Munster about them. From Leicester’s perspective there were certainly echoes of
their 38-0 drubbing at Thomond Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/munster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 a fortnight ago as they slumped to the latest bleak away defeat of a season 
that is in danger of going nowhere fast.

Richard Cockerill remained defiant afterwards, predicting his side would still 
finish in the top four in May. “We’re fifth at the halfway stage of the season 
and I’d back ourselves to be in the play-offs,” insisted the Tigers’ director 
of rugby, having watched his side leapfrogged by a Chiefs team who have won six 
of their past seven games in all competitions. “I’m not sure it’s all doom and 
gloom.”

Chris Ashton makes try-scoring return as Saracens see off Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/saracens-newcastle-falcons-premiership-rugby-match-report>
With their next two opponents, Saracens and Wasps, occupying the top two 
positions, however, the new year outlook is uncertain for both coach and club. 
Mike Williams, just back from his latest arm fracture, departed early with 
concussion, Logovi’i Mulipola looks set to be sidelined with a twisted knee and 
Manu Tuilagi is still feeling his way back. Cockerill was also unhappy with the 
officiating of Tom Foley – “I thought the referee had a really poor game” – and 
he plans to complain to the Rugby Football Union referee’s manager, Tony 
Spreadbury.

The Chiefs’ forwards, by contrast, are purring once more and eagerly awaiting 
their next two away fixtures, at Bath and Saracens. The home side scored 21 
points without reply in the first half, with Don Armand, Thomas Waldrom, Jack 
Nowell and Will Chudley all influential, and also defended well. While Waldrom 
was initially credited with two rolling maul tries before Jack Yeandle claimed 
the first of them, the ‘Tank Engine’ still managed to boost his tally to 44 
tries in 68 games since moving to Devon from Welford Road. He has finished as 
English rugby’s top try-scorer for the past two campaigns and is co-leading 
this year’sPremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> race 
with seven.

As was the case at Glasgow and Munster in the European Champions’ Cup, 
Leicester’s forwards found themselves under the cosh from the outset – “Not at 
the races” was Waldrom’s verdict – and a slight second-half improvement brought 
only modest reward in the form of consolation scores for the replacements Harry 
Thacker and Jonno Kitto. Otherwise this festive outing from the east Midlands 
yielded little in the way of westward ho-ho-ho.

Even when Ed Slater, their captain, broke the defensive line and looked 
certain to touch down, a swooping Nowell dislodged the ball at the last minute 
and Owen Williams had a straightforward conversion attempt charged down by Phil 
Dollman. There was a certain inevitability about Ollie Devoto’s 66th-minute 
bonus point try, with a slight doubt over the fitness of Henry Slade the only 
seasonal headache for Rob Baxter.

The England three-quarter, who had been looking in good nick, took a bang to 
his shoulder and neck but an initial scan was promising and Baxter reckons his 
squad are otherwise in promising shape: “This means our destiny is back in our 
own hands. It’s up to other teams to take it off us now.”

Exeter Dollman; Nowell, Devoto, Slade (Hill, 29), Woodburn (Short, 72); 
Steenson (capt), Chudley (Maunder, 69); Moon (Rimmer, 63), Yeandle 
(Cowan-Dickie, 55), Francis (Holmes, 55), Lees, Hill (Atkins, 63), Dennis 
(Hortsmann, 61), Armand, Waldrom.

Tries Waldrom, Yeandle, penalty, Devoto. Cons Steenson 4. Pen Steenson.

Leicester Burns (Worth, 69); Thompstone, Roberts, Tuilagi, Betham; O Williams, 
Harrison (Kitto, 64); Genge (Mulipola, 66-72), McGuigan (Thacker, 55), Cilliers 
(Cole, 45), Slater (capt), Fitzgerald, M Williams (Kitchener, 23), O’Connor, 
Hamilton (Evans, 66).

Tries Thacker, Kitto.

Sin-bin Kitchener 34.

Referee T Foley (RFU). Attendance 12,420.

Christian Wade scores hat-trick and breaks records as Wasps beat Bath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/wasps-bath-premiership-rugby-match-report> 