
An Indonesian court will proceed with a controversial blasphemy trial against 
Jakarta’s Christian governor, who is accused of insulting the Qur’an, a judge 
said on Tuesday.

The case is seen as a test of religious freedom in the Muslim-majority nation.


 A panel of judges rejected a call by lawyers defending governor Basuki 
Tjahaja Purnama, who is known by his nickname Ahok, to strike down the case 
because it had violated the ethnic Chinese politician’s human rights and 
breached procedures.

Jakarta governor Ahok's blasphemy trial: all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/jakarta-governor-ahoks-blasphemy-trial-all-you-need-to-know>
 “The exception by the defendant will be considered and decided by the court 
after examination of all evidence. The defendant’s exception is not accepted,” 
said judge Abdul Rosyad.

 A tearful Ahok denied at his first hearing on 13 December that he had 
intended to insult the Qur’an 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/jakarta-christian-governor-to-face-blasphemy-trial-over-islam-insult-claim>
while he was campaigning ahead of elections in February for the governorship of 
Jakarta, capital of the world’s largest Muslim-majority nation.

Ahok angered religious conservatives after he referenced a verse from the 
Islamic holy book, Al-Maidah 51 of the Qur’an, rather boldly telling voters 
they should not be duped by religious leaders using the verse to justify the 
claim that Muslims should not be led by non-Muslims.

On Tuesday hundreds of white-clad Muslim protesters chanted “Allahu Akbar” 
(God is greatest) outside the court in north Jakarta and called for the jailing 
of the governor.

 A smaller group of his supporters were also present outside the courthouse, 
which was flanked by lines of police.

 The presiding judge on the panel, Dwiyarso Budi Santiarto, said the defence 
could appeal to a higher court if they did not agree with the decision to 
proceed with the case.

 Ahok, after consulting his lawyers, told the court he would consider doing so.

 The governor was named a suspect after hundreds of thousands of people, led 
by Muslim hardliners, attended rallies in recent months calling for his arrest.

Blasphemy convictions in Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> can carry a jail term of up to 
five years and nearly always result in conviction.

 Amnesty International has criticised the law for hurting freedom of 
expression and for targeting religious minorities.

 President Joko Widodo, seen as an Ahok ally, has blamed “political actors” 
for fuelling the protests, but declined to elaborate.

 As governor, Ahok has won credit for cutting red tape and improving the 
performance of Jakarta’s bloated bureaucracy. However, his abrasive language 
and insistence on clearing city slums has alienated many voters.

 After suffering a slide in support in opinion polls, Ahok has rebounded to 
become the frontrunner again in the election race to lead Jakarta, according to 
a poll by the Indonesian Survey Institute earlier this month.

 The next court hearing is scheduled for 3 January and will be moved to an 
auditorium in the agriculture ministry in the south of the city for security 
reasons, authorities said.
 