
Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> has suspended all 
military cooperation with Australia, reportedly over offensive materials 
displayed at an Australian military base where its troops were training.

The offensive “laminated material” shown at a base was insulting towards 
Indonesia’s five founding principles –Pancasila 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancasila_(politics)> – Indonesian newspaper 
Kompas has reported. The Kompas report says a cable dated 29 December, sent by 
Indonesian military commander General Gatot Nurmantyo, instructed that all 
military cooperation, including training with the Australian defence force, be 
suspended.

The Indonesian military spokesman, Major General Wuryanto has confirmed the 
split, but would not specifically confirm the reason, saying cooperation 
between the Australian and Indonesian militaries had been suspended for 
“technical reasons”, effective immediately. “All forms of cooperation have been 
suspended,” he said.

But Wuryanto suggested the suspension would not be long term, saying 
cooperation could resume once the “technical matters” were resolved.

Australia's spy agencies targeted Indonesian president's mobile phone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/australia-tried-to-monitor-indonesian-presidents-phone>
“There are technical matters that need to be discussed,” Wuryanto said, 
including the offensive training material seen at an Australian military base. 
It was “highly likely” cooperation would resume once those issues were 
resolved, he said.

Guardian Australian understands an instructor from Indonesia’s special forces 
group Kopassus felt insulted by material on display at a training base.

It’s believed the Kopassus officer was initially offended by propaganda 
material about West Papua, a province of Indonesia in which a long-running 
campaign for independence, and allegations of systemic human rights abuses by 
the military, are of extreme sensitivity. Senior former military leaders were 
also insulted as murderers and criminals.

Subsequently, the officer also reportedly saw a laminated piece of paper that 
ridiculed Indonesia’s founding ideology “pancasila” – which translates as “five 
principles” – as “panca-gila”. Gila, in Bahasa Indonesia, means crazy.

Kopassus has trained for several years with Australia’s Special Air Service 
troops at the SAS base at Campbell barracks, Perth. No time limit has been put 
on the suspension, and it is unclear whether future planned joint training 
exercises between the two countries will be affected.

Australia’s defence minister, Marise Payne, said the Australian military hoped 
to restore full cooperation with the Indonesian armed forces as soon as 
possible.

She confirmed that late last year an Indonesian officer had raised concerns 
“about some teaching materials and remarks at an army language training 
facility in Australia”.

“The Australian Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin, 
wrote to his Indonesian counterpart, General Gatot Nurmantyo, giving an 
undertaking that this matter would be addressed seriously and we would inquire 
into issues raised.


“The Australian Army has looked into the serious concerns that were raised and 
the investigation into the incident is being finalised.”

Payne said while some elements of joint training had been suspended, other 
areas of military cooperation had continued.

“Australia is committed to building a strong defence relationship with 
Indonesia, including through cooperation in training. We will work with 
Indonesia to restore full cooperation as soon as possible.”

Indonesia and Australia’s military relationship has improved in recent years, 
after an at-times troubled history.


The Lombok treaty commits both countries to cooperation in the fields of 
defence, combating transnational crime, counter-terrorism and 
intelligence-sharing. Australia has sold military hardware to Indonesia and 
defence and foreign ministers meet regularly.

But relations were shaken in 2013 - and military co-operation suspended - when 
it was revealedthe Australian Signals Directorate attempted to monitor the 
phone calls of then president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/australia-tried-to-monitor-indonesian-presidents-phone>
, his wife and senior officials.

News agencies contributed to this report
 