
It has been acknowledged for some time that poverty can be a trigger for poor 
mental health, but a new study published today by the World Health Organisation 
(WHO) argues that it is inequality that has the most profound and far-reaching 
consequences for individuals and wider society. The study, which draws on 
research from throughout Europe, concludes that mental health difficulties are 
most pronounced in countries such as Britain, which, although rich, have high 
levels of income and social inequality.

The report's author, Lynne Friedli, warns that governments need to sit up and 
take notice, and that policy-makers need to "face up to the fact" that marked 
improvements in mental health and wellbeing will depend on first tackling the 
gap between rich and poor.

The report, carried out by the WHO for the Mental Health Foundation, looked at 
recent research across a range of disciplines. It argues that only radical and 
broad policy changes will counter directly the trend of growing inequality. It 
goes so far as to say that the social and economic prosperity of Europe will 
depend on improving mental health and wellbeing.

"There is overwhelming evidence that inequality is a key cause of stress, and 
also exacerbates the stress of coping with material deprivation," the report 
says.

"The adverse impact of stress is greater in societies where greater inequality 
exists and where some people feel worse off than others. We will have to face 
up to the fact that individual and collective mental health and wellbeing will 
depend on reducing the gap between rich and poor."

So-called happiness league tables frequently show that people who live in 
countries without gaping income inequalities between rich and poor - Sweden 
tends to be at the top of such surveys, with the UK hovering towards the bottom 
- are generally more content, but Friedli is keen to point out that the WHO 
research goes "much deeper" than many of the surveys that make the news.

Commissioned to look at how mental health affects a range of health, social 
and economic outcomes, the study concludes that international research shows 
"beyond doubt" that mental health needs to be taken as seriously as physical 
health. Looking at the trends on physical health outcomes when a country 
becomes richer - which point to a positive impact on factors such as mortality 
rates - it found the opposite to be true of mental health. "As countries get 
richer, rates of mental illness increase." It argues that the level of mental 
distress among communities "needs to be understood less in terms of individual 
pathology and more as a response to inequalities involving relative deprivation 
across society".

Social status

The report concludes that high levels of inequality when it comes to "social 
status" can have a serious impact on how individuals within a society see 
themselves, and how this manifests itself in their overall mental health. 
Echoing some of the conclusions reached by the academic Richard Wilkinson in 
his latest book on inequality, The Spirit Level, the report also concludes that 
"greater inequality heightens status competition and status insecurity across 
all income groups and among both adults and children".

Bearing in mind the report's conclusions - and the fact that Britain's stark 
income inequalities are dominating news coverage of the recession - there is 
every chance the policy-makers will be forced to take note. The WHO study is 
part of a growing lexicon of work examining the relationship between health, 
economics and wellbeing which, in addition to Wilkinson's latest book, includes 
Lord [Richard] Layard's book, Happiness.

Layard examined the costs to the economy of a failure to foster better mental 
health, and his analysis has directly influenced policy in the UK - most 
notably in the recruitment of thousands of extra therapists to make "talking 
therapies" readily available on the NHS.

But while Layard's work placed mental health squarely in an economic context, 
Friedli, who wrote the report on behalf of the WHO's regional office for 
Europe, says this latest analysis sheds light on why mental health is 
"absolutely fundamental" to how whole societies function. According to Friedli, 
the WHO looked at international studies on "mental health, inequality and 
resilience", and the conclusion to be drawn is that "injustice and inequality 
are deeply toxic to us".

She contends that, to date, there has been an "undue focus on individual 
solutions" to mental health difficulties such as depression, when what is 
called for is a "social solution". While cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) - 
the therapy recommended by Layard and others - works "for many individuals", 
she says, the urgent need is to address the fact that "our mental health is 
incredibly sensitive to inequalities".

What is needed, Friedli says, is "a radical rethink" of the kind of society we 
want to live in. "For all kinds of complex reasons, we cannot adapt to 
inequality. [Research shows] that our response to injustice is written on our 
bodies. Those countries in Europe that have huge inequalities have to deal with 
this at a society-wide level. I'm an advocate of CBT, but no amount of CBT will 
address this. If we look at the population as a whole, mental health reflects 
the kind of society we live in."

In a salvo aimed directly at government, Friedli argues that the cost of 
"going for economic growth" has been "a social recession".

Andrew McCullough, chief executive of the Mental Health Foundation, says the 
research adds to a wider discussion about the relationship between physical and 
mental health, and that a "tipping point" may be being reached on how much of a 
priority mental health gets in government. In terms of what the research 
suggests about inequality and mental health, McCullough says it is likely to 
feed in to the policies of all the major political parties. "It's not just 
Labour talking about this," he points out. "Inequality is something the Tories 
appear to be interested in too."

McCullough says there is a danger that, in a recession, political attention 
will be focused elsewhere, but he hopes the WHO research will lead to "serious 
reflection" on the impact of inequality on mental health. "This is a complex 
issue," he says. "It's not about simple cause and effect. We hope the report 
will help explain why inequalities result in the outcomes they do."

Targeting poverty 

The report highlights a number of areas where policy could be altered to 
address inequalities, and therefore mental health. It recommends that "social, 
cultural and economic conditions that support family life" are followed 
through, such as "systematically" targeting child poverty and encouraging 
family-friendly working. An emphasis in the workplace on improving 
opportunities and conditions, in particular for people with diagnosed 
conditions, would also help, it says. Broad policy responses that challenge the 
stigmatisation of people living in poverty are also necessary, it concludes.

The current economic climate and the public questioning of the huge financial 
rewards that have gone to the very rich could be the beginning of a national 
discussion around the impact of inequality on mental health, according to 
Friedli. "What is happening could be the start of a national debate about the 
damage such glaring inequalities does - and it can't come too soon," she says.

mentalhealth.org.uk/publications <http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/publications>
 