
On 7 July this year, Raffaello Bucci’s body was found at the bottom of the 
so-called “viaduct of suicides”. Just a day before, he had been interviewed by 
police investigating links between football and organised crime. The viaduct is 
an impressive structure connecting Turin to Cuneo, a city 100km to the south, 
and south-eastern France. The arches carrying the dual-carriageway over the 
Stura di Demonte river are 45 metres high. It was on this same spot that
Edoardo, only son of Gianni Agnelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer/comment/story/0,6903,399692,00.html> (the 
late owner of Fiat andJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/jul/22/juventus-serie-a-alternative-club-guide-fans-trezeguet>
), ended his life in 2000.

Bucci’s life, as well as his death, linked him to the Agnelli family. Although 
he grew up in San Severo, a town 850km to the south of Turin, Bucci was – like 
many southerners who move to the north – a hardcore Juventus supporter. He had 
grown up watching the greats of the “old lady” of Italian football: Platini, 
Baggio, Ravanelli, Vialli, Del Piero.Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> was, according to one of his 
oldest friends, “an obsession”.

Bucci was christened Raffaello but everyone knew him as Ciccio. His roots were 
humble: his father was a school caretaker, his mother a housewife. They were 
very Catholic and – according to friends – indulgent. By all accounts Bucci was 
a lovable rogue: cheerful, fun and a “trascinatore”, a natural leader. He went 
to a technical secondary school to study book-keeping, where he had a wide 
groups of friends – he was elected student representative, but also hung out 
with teachers playing football pools in the bar.

Inside Italy’s ultras: the dangerous fans who control the game – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/dec/16/inside-italys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game-podcast>
As soon as he left school he moved, in the mid-1990s, to Turin, in the 
north-western region of Piedmont, the home of his beloved Juventus. With its 
perfectly parallel grid of streets framed by two sedate rivers and the Alps to 
the north, the city is august and grand. It is also a place of bon-viveurs, 
renowned for its fine wines, chocolates and aromatic drinks (Campari, Martini 
and Cinzano).

Bucci didn’t find a job as an accountant, but he had energy and imagination, 
and soon found an opening in the lucrative world of match ticket sales. He 
began sourcing and selling tickets to his friends, and friends of friends. He 
saw himself as a reliable fixer for his fellow, fanaticalJuventini. In 
photographs from those years, he does not have the tough-nut look of many 
touts: he had a long, thinnish face, a cheeky smile and ever-present shades.

Football fans in Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> are notorious 
for their feverish support: the Italian word for fan, “tifoso”, translates as 
those who have typhoid. But Bucci was drawn into the even more ardent world of 
the “ultras” – tight-knit firms of fanatics, created not just to support a team 
but to promote the group’s own brand and business interests.

The first ultra groups were formed in the late 1960s, when supporters from 
Milan, Inter, Sampdoria, Torino and Verona formed vociferous and sometimes 
violent gangs. The original groups were often from the far right, or were 
influenced by the romance of leftwing guerrilla and partisan insurgencies 
(hence names such as “Brigades”, “Fedayeen” and “Commando”). Over time, as 
hooliganism increased, the names of ultra groups became anglicised (“Fighters”, 
“Old Lions”, “Boys”) or wilder (“Deranged”, “Out of Our Heads”).

By the mid-1970s, every major club in Italy had its own ultra group and a 
decade later, most had dozens. The firms had spent the intervening years 
splintering, regrouping, renaming and reinventing themselves – all in order to 
take possession of the centre of thecurva. This area, behind the goal, has 
traditionally been the place where a club’s poorest, but most devoted, fans 
assemble. Thecurva is every bit as territorial as a drug dealer’s corner, and 
ultras stake out their turf in similar ways: fights, stabbings, shootings and, 
sometimes, by making alliances and business deals.

There are 382 ultra groups in Italy, of which some are still explicitly 
political (40 far-right and 20 far-left). Because Juventus draw their support 
from all over the country, their ultras are more eclectic than those of most 
other teams. Bucci became involved in a group called the Drughi. The name is 
taken from the Droogs of A Clockwork Orange – young men, known for their louche 
and stylish violence. The firm’s logo, displayed on flags, banners, badges and 
hats, consists of four silhouettes with batons and bowlers, set against a white 
or orange background. A poster of Benito Mussolini forms the centrepiece of 
their private members’ club in Mirafiori, three bus-stops beyond the end of 
Turin’s metro.

In a sport characterised by the perceived disloyalty of players and owners, 
the ultras see themselves as the only faithful elements of a club. In a 
rootless world, they offer a sense of belonging. That, certainly, was part of 
the attraction for Bucci.

But there has always been a dark side to the ultras. They have been at the 
centre of most violence on the terraces in the last 50 years and are involved 
in illicit businesses: ticket-touting and counterfeit merchandise, even drug 
dealing.

By the mid-90s, the ultras were so powerful they could block the purchase of 
players by threatening boycotts

To begin with, Ciccio Bucci didn’t see that dark side. He was living a charmed 
life, making money and friends on the semi-legal periphery ofSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. He even saw his 
ticket-touting as a way to realise his dream of one day working for the great 
club. Like so much in Italian life, the relationship between Juventus and its 
ultras was not one of open confrontation but of secretive compromise. In return 
for a safe and supportive stadium, Juventus helped the ultras make millions of 
euros a season from touting. As Michele Galasso, a lawyer who has represented 
both Juventus and ultra leaders, says: “The compromise between Juventus and the 
ultras was simply the compromise between the rules and the realities.”

Although the ultras are, in some ways, comparable to old‑style English 
hooligans, they take their planning to quasi-military levels. They ambush 
rivals to capture their banner, like an enemy flag. They also announce their 
presence in the stadium by executing drills and salutes, through flags and 
chants, by banging drums and setting off flares. Each firm has its own uniform 
and meeting place – normally a bar or private members’ club, filled with logos, 
slogans and memorabilia. Before a big match, these clubs look like the back 
room of a bank: stacks of tickets and banknotes surrounding middle-aged men, 
with half-moon glasses on the ends of their noses and calculators out.

When Ciccio first moved to Turin, in the mid-1990s, it had seemed as if the 
ultras were becoming ever more powerful. They could block the purchase of 
players they didn’t like (a small, antisemitic faction of ultras attached to 
the north-eastern club Udinese objected to the club’s attempts to acquire the 
Israeli forward Ronnie Rosenthal), or the sale of those they did – like the 
mooted transfer of Beppe Signori from Lazio to Parma – by threatening 
whole-stadium boycotts that would cost clubs millions in lost revenue.

As the ultras grew in influence, the number of people injured inside and 
outside football stadiums increased from 400 in the 1995-96 season to 1,200 in 
1999-2000. The names of “martyrs” of ultra-related violence could often be seen 
spray-painted on the walls of cities across Italy. There were tributes to both 
ultra members and regular fans: Claudio Spagnolo (knifed on his way to a 
match); Vincenzo Paparelli (who died when a nautical rocket fired by an ultra 
flew the length of the pitch and hit him in the head); Antonio De Falchi (a 
Roma fan murdered outside the stadium); Antonio Currò (killed when a Catania 
fan threw a homemade bomb into a group of Messina fans); Sergio Ercolano (who 
fell to his death in 2003).

At times the ultra label has been little more than a fig leaf for neo-fascism. 
When the Dutch player Aron Winter – the son of a Muslim father and a Jewish 
mother – signed for Lazio in 1992, graffiti was sprayed outside the club’s 
training ground that read “Winter Raus” – an echo of the words “Juden Raus” 
from Nazi-era Germany. In 1997, ultras from Juventus’s local rivals, Torino, 
threw a Moroccan man, Abdellah Doumi, into the Po river. One of the men owned a 
dog named Adolf. Bottles and a vacuum cleaner were thrown at Doumi, who could 
not swim. “Dirty black shit,” the attackers shouted as he drowned.

In 2004, a group of Roma ultras caused the cancellation of a derby match 
against Lazio four minutes into the second half, after a rumour spread around 
the stands that a boy had been killed outside by a police car. Fans from both 
sides protested furiously against the police, even after several statements 
were made over the stadium tannoy that nothing of the kind had happened. The 
images of the Roma captain, Francesco Totti, surrounded by ultra leaders 
telling him not to play, became symbolic of the power of the firms over Italian 
football. As he walked back to the players, Totti called out to the manager: 
“If we play on, they’re going to kill us.”

Some of those drawn into the world of the ultras are not fans, but simply 
petty criminals hoping to make easy money. In a recent phone call recorded by 
police as part of the investigation into links between ultras and organised 
crime, one ultra was asked by a friend if he was going to the stadium on 
Sunday. “If we’re making money, yes,” came the reply. “Why [else] should I give 
a shit?” There are even occasional stories of ultras switching teams, not as 
fans but as investors.

But no one could accuse Bucci of anything other than loyalty to Juventus and 
the Drughi. He was so good at selling tickets that he earned a gold star on the 
wooden beam in the Drughi’s private club: “R Bucci” it said. He was at the 
stadium for every game. It was often Bucci who led the supporters’ chants with 
a megaphone.

In 2004, Bucci met Gabriella, a woman from Cuneo. They married and had a baby 
boy together. The couple lived in Beinette, a village just outside Cuneo. The 
area is a strange combination of the rustic and the industrial. Cows graze 
between the houses, and in the distance you can see the first of the mighty 
mountains of the Alps. Opposite Bucci’s house, however, is a metal-recycling 
depot and at several road junctions nearby prostitutes in miniskirts sit next 
to fields filled with eight-foot-tall stalks of corn.

Bucci commuted back and forth between Beinette and Turin, an hour north-east, 
where he had a little flat above a bar near the Juventus stadium. He was always 
on his phone. He had a terror, his wife later said, of losing it. It would ring 
all hours of day and night with people begging for tickets.

Bucci may have been the go-to man for tickets, but he was never The Man. That 
was Dino Mocciola, leader of the Drughis, who spent 20 years in prison for 
armed robbery and murder of a policeman. Few people get close to the notorious 
Mocciola: after his release from prison in February 2005, he was banned from 
matches, so unlike other ultra leaders, there are no photos of him on the 
terraces – only the mugshot taken when he was arrested in 1989. One source in 
the Turin flying squad describes Mocciola as a Scarlet Pimpernel: he hasn’t 
used a phone for years. Not even his lawyers, they say, know how to reach him. 
But such is his notoriety that soon after he had served his time, opposing fans 
from one of Roma’s ultra groups held up a banner at Juventus’s stadium saying: “
Ciao Dino. Bentornato” (“Hi Dino. Welcome Back”).

The Drughi had become sidelined whilst Mocciola was in prison, shunted from 
the centre to the fringes of the curva, with all that implied for their 
prestige and their business interests. “Predominance in thecurva is worth 
gold,” one journalist wrote at the time. “It means being the intermediary of 
the club. It brings free tickets, favours and travel allowances.” 

With Mocciola out of prison, they began to reassert themselves. In April 2005, 
an ultra from a rival Juventus group, the Fighters, was stabbed – by a Drugo, 
it was assumed. The resulting feud lasted more than a year: in the summer of 
2006, two Drughi (including Mocciola) were stabbed and 50 fans arrested in 
clashes between different Juventus ultras. But by then, under the leadership of 
Mocciola, the balance of power had shifted: the Drughi were the top dogs. The 
Fighters split and merged into other groups and Mocciola claimed his position 
as the undisputed king of thecurva.

Because he was banned from matches, Mocciola needed a lieutenant near the 
turnstiles, bossing the terraces and liaising with the club. Bucci seemed to 
know everyone and, with his accountancy training, had a good head for numbers. 
He was close to Juventus staff, sometimes even sleeping over at the flat of 
Stefano Merulla, the head of the club’s ticket sales division. He was the 
perfect candidate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e78362b9f1701009c3fc4c75aace66affce2811%2F2_35_10295_6180%2F10295.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20ultras%3A%20the%20dangerous%20fans%20who%20control%20the%20game%20%7C%20Tobias%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20ultras%3A%20the%20dangerous%20fans%20who%20control%20the%20game%20%7C%20Tobias%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e78362b9f1701009c3fc4c75aace66affce2811%2F2_35_10295_6180%2F10295.jpg>
 Ciccio Bucci’s body was found at the bottom of the so-called ‘viaduct of 
suicides’ Composite: Facebook 
Bucci had arrived. He was close to his beloved club and to its fans. He had an 
income, and a family. “When Ciccio came back south,” a friend of Bucci’s told 
me, “he would always talk about Gabriella and his son, and show us photographs.”

But it could not last. After years of her husband’s frenetic wheeling and 
dealing, and late-night dashes back to Turin, Bucci’s wife had had enough. He 
was rarely at home and, according to Gabriella’s sister, they argued about how 
he spoiled their son. Gabriella didn’t like it when Bucci took their young son 
into the city and kept him overnight. In 2011, the couple separated, but 
remained on good terms. Bucci bought a small flat in Margarita, a neighbouring 
village with a small castle and rust-coloured brick church.

His position as the middle man between the legitimate and criminal worlds was 
also about to become harder. In 2007, a young policeman, Filippo Raciti, was 
killed during clashes between police and Catania fans.

The killing of Raciti finally persuaded Italian politicians to confront the 
menace of violent football fans. All matches were suspended for a week. Strict 
measures against ultras included banning flares, megaphones and drums. Banners 
now had to be preapproved by clubs. Armoured vehicles and security cameras were 
present at all grounds.

Juventus had particular reasons for wanting to stop the violence. The club had 
recently acquired the Stadio delle Alpi from the city council. The club was 
planning to build a new, 41,000-seater stadium on the site, meaning that it 
would be one of only three clubs in Serie A to own its own sporting venue (all 
the others are owned by town or city councils). The income would be immense, 
and the security state-of-the-art. There was so much money at stake, the last 
thing the club hierarchy wanted was for the club to be fined, or even docked 
points, as a result of their ultras’ behaviour.

The upper echelons of Juventus needed to reach a compromise with their 
hardcore fans. It was a compromise that would later become the subject of a 
police investigation: when interviewed in July this year, the head of 
Juventus’s ticket sales, Stefano Merulla, admitted that the club would supply 
hundreds of match-day tickets, on credit, to the leader of each ultra group, 
through a ticket agency called Akena, in return for good behaviour. This was in 
clear contravention of the rules, which stated that no more than four tickets 
could be sold to any individual.

Juventus has strenuously denied any wrongdoing. In a statement to the 
Guardian, the club said: “No manager or employee of Juventus is under 
investigation, and those that were heard by the judicial authority were called 
as witnesses. It should be noted also that Juventus, as emerged from the 
investigations, has always fully cooperated with law enforcement agencies.”

Match-day tickets were just the bread and butter of the compromise. The real 
meat was in season tickets. At the beginning of each season, a foot-soldier 
from one of the ultra firms would go all over the city renting identity cards 
from people so they could be duplicated. He would then photocopy hundreds of ID 
cards or passports and use them to buy a stack of season tickets from Juventus. 
Since the named ticket-holder had no interest in attending the matches, the 
gangs could rent the season ticket, game by game, to the highest bidder. (All 
it required was that the security detail on the turnstiles did not notice the 
discrepancy between the season-ticket holder’s name and that of the entrant. As 
there were vans filled with ultras parked outside the Curva Sud, of course, 
they never did.)

In a startling admission to police years later, Merulla stated that he knew 
the ultras were “doing business” with those tickets: “The compromise,” he said, 
“was a good solution for everyone.” Juventus had a vibrant but safe stadium and 
won five consecutive championships between 2011 and 2016. The Agnelli family – 
due in part to their ownership of the city’s newspaper, La Stampa – continued 
to be revered as Turin’s quasi royal family. Meanwhile each of the handful of 
most powerful ultra firms was making serious, hassle-free profits.

With as many as 300 match-day tickets, and 300 season-tickets, each paying an 
average of €50 a game, and with 30-plus games a season (depending on cup runs), 
each ultra gang could make close to €1m a year. It was good money for minimal 
risk (ticket touting is not a criminal offence under Italian law, only an “
illecito amministrativo” – administrative fraud, punishable with a fine). 
Little wonder Bucci always had ready money. Little wonder that various mafia 
families were beginning to cast an envious eye on the Juventus ultras.

In the postwar period, it was decided that the best way to diminish the power 
of the mafia in southern Italy was to banish its worst elements from their home 
territory and relocate them to the more law-abiding north, far from their 
criminal associates. Begun in 1956, the policy was called “soggiorno obbligato” 
– a “compulsory stay”. Of course, instead of removing the mafia from the south, 
these measures simply exported it to the north.

The Calabrian mafia – known as the ’Ndrangheta – from the region that forms 
the toe of Italy’s boot, proved itself more adept than any other at insinuating 
itself into northern Italy. Beginning with the sale of counterfeit bergamot 
orange oil (the original is grown in Calabria and used as a flavouring in Earl 
Grey tea), the ’Ndrangheta exported its businesses to the north: moneylending, 
extortion, illegal gambling, construction cartels and drug trafficking. 
Piedmont, which borders France and Switzerland, was one of the industrial hubs 
of Italy, and a magnet for the Calabrian mafia.

By 2013, two particular Calabrians were of interest to anti-mafia 
investigators: Saverio Dominello and his son, Rocco. They were suspected of 
being part of the powerful Rosarno clan, involved in extortion in small towns 
between Turin and Milan. Investigators believed that the Dominellos were also 
mixed up in nightclubs and narcotics. The father, Saverio, was an old-school, 
surly type, but Rocco was often described asgarbato – “smooth” or “graceful”.

From recorded conversations in the spring of that year, investigators deduced 
that the Dominello family were planning to move in on the ticket touting 
business in Turin and wanted to form their own ultra group, called the “Gobbi” 
(or “hunchbacks”, a nickname for Juventus supporters). Saverio and Rocco 
Dominello knew they had to tread carefully and obtain the approval of the other 
ultra groups. “If the plate is round,” Saverio Dominello was recorded as 
saying, “it’ll be cut five ways.” This was old-fashionedspartizione: slicing up 
the profits between different cartels.

Slowly other interested parties were sounded out about the new ultra group. 
The head of the Viking ultras, a poker player known to have Sicilian 
connections, gave his assent. ’Ndrangheta strongholds in the south also agreed. 
The man who was fronting the new ultra group was under police surveillance, and 
boasted over the phone about having the support of mafia clans: “We’ve got our 
backs covered, we’ve got the guys who count. What the fuck more do you want?”

On 20 April 2013, the Drughis’ top man, Dino Mocciola met with the Dominellos 
and their associates. The Dominellos arrived with ostentatious humility in a 
Fiat 500, while Mocciola rolled up in a Series 1 BMW. They went into a cafe in 
the village of Montanaro for a meeting that lasted almost two hours. A police 
listening device hidden in one of the Dominello group’s cars caught the men 
boasting about the power of the new Gobbi ultra firm: “You’ve had the honour to 
sit at table with Dino … no one can touch you. You’re the number one … you can 
lay down the law if anyone behaves badly.” The next day, in a crunch match 
against Milan on 21 April 2013, the new group announced itself with a huge 
banner in the stadium: “Gobbi”.

All over Italy, the ultras were reasserting themselves. The popularity of the 
firms was on the rise among fans, and a lack of political will meant that their 
influence went unchallenged by the authorities. In 2012, a relegation run-in 
against Siena was halted for 45 minutes when Genoa ultras threw fireworks on 
the pitch andscreamed at players to take off their red and blue home shirts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3sM9ENdd9cw> in shame after they went 4-0 
down. All but one of the players sheepishly put on their away shirts. Other 
matches were abandoned because of fan revolts. In 2013, in the Lega-Pro, the 
Italian third division, a match between Salernitana and Nocerina was stopped 
when five players from Nocerina, whose ultras had been banned from attending 
matches, feigned injury in protest. The game had to be abandoned.

Rocco Dominello quickly became influential among both Juventus officials and 
different ultra groups. He was introduced to Stefano Merulla. He also became a 
close friend of Juventus’s security manager, Alessandro D’Angelo, and by June 
2013 was giving him orders. When D’Angelo told Dominello that the rival 
Vikings’ allocation of tickets had been reduced, Dominello said: “Like I told 
you to”. He also bragged that people “are scared of me”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd99e9ca026f99b3d93fe973e186d9069e836146%2F0_39_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20ultras%3A%20the%20dangerous%20fans%20who%20control%20the%20game%20%7C%20Tobias%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20ultras%3A%20the%20dangerous%20fans%20who%20control%20the%20game%20%7C%20Tobias%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd99e9ca026f99b3d93fe973e186d9069e836146%2F0_39_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Napoli and Juventus ultras clash at Naples’ ground, during a Serie A match on 
January 9, 2011. Photograph: Claudio Villa/Getty Images 
Juventus did nothing to halt Dominello’s rise. In January 2014, a Swiss 
citizen complained to the club that he had paid €620 for a ticket officially 
worth €140. Internal checks by the club proved that the ticket had initially 
been supplied to Dominello by D’Angelo. Merulla was beginning to have 
suspicions about Dominello. “I don’t know what job he has, I don’t know what 
influence he has,” Merulla said in a phone call to another ultra member, 
intercepted by police. Dominello was, he said, “mysteriously powerful” – code 
for mafioso. And yet, despite all those fears, just a week after the Swiss 
fan’s complaint, D’Angelo told Dominello they would find a way to get him 
tickets using “a different code”.

As you read police transcripts of D’Angelo’s sweary telephone conversations, 
it becomes clear that he was way out of his depth. He relished being matey with 
the ultras and was seemingly blase about their darker dealings. A source within 
the Turin flying squad told me “there was an error of judgment [by Juventus 
management]. They thought they could handle it.” One judge later wrote that 
D’Angelo and Juventus appeared to behave with “subjection and submission” with 
regard to Rocco Dominello. Part of the problem, as always in Italy, was a 
nepotistic system that promoted friends instead of professionals. D’Angelo’s 
father had been Umberto Agnelli’s chauffeur, and Andrea Agnelli (now Juventus’s 
president), had been a childhood friend.

Ultras organised a pogrom, setting fire to a travellers' camp next to the 
stadium, and forcing the families out

Through 2014, the ultras became even more troublesome. For the Juventus-Torino 
derby that spring, Mocciola called a fan strike in a show of power to the 
club’s hierarchy: he wanted the Drughi to receive more tickets, at cheaper 
prices. For years, D’Angelo had looked to Bucci as the go-between to shore up 
the Juventus-ultra compromise, but now he called the Calabrian, Rocco 
Dominello, instead: “I want you [ultras] to be calm, and us [Juventus] to be 
calm, and we’ll travel together.” It was clear that Bucci’s influence was on 
the wane.

The final of the Coppa Italia, on 3 May that year, between Napoli and 
Fiorentina, was marred by violence before the match. A fascist ex-AS Roma ultra 
shot three Napoli fans, one of whom later died. Napoli ultras were so incensed 
that they prevented the match kicking off for half an hour. The Napoli ultra 
leader, Genny ’a Carogna (Genny the Swine), proudly wore a black T-shirt urging 
the release of the man jailed for murdering the policeman Ispettore Raciti back 
in 2007.

On 25 November 2014, investigators made a breakthrough in their search for 
links between the ultras and organised crime. Andrea Puntorno, a 39-year-old 
Sicilian living in Turin, was arrested for importing heroin and cocaine from 
Sicily and Albania. Puntorno was the head of another Juventus ultra clan, the 
Bravi Ragazzi (“The Goodfellas”). Between 2004 and 2011 Puntorno had declared 
an income of just €2,600 per year, but he owned a house, a car and a motorbike. 
The Bravi Ragazzi already had a bad reputation: on 19 December 2011 various 
members had organised a violent pogrom, setting fire to a travellers’ 
encampment in Continassa, on the edge of the new Juventus stadium, forcing 20 
families to leave the area and clearing it for developers to move in.

Puntorno’s arrest was, a judge later wrote, the first evidence of “a dangerous 
and worrying business link between members of the ultras and individuals 
belonging to mafia clans”.

After his arrest, Puntorno’s wife was threatened and intimidated by her 
husband’s business partners. She decided to become a witness for the 
prosecution. She described the processes by which her husband would sometimes 
make €30,000 from a single Juventus game, much of the money being distributed 
to the relatives of members of the firm who were serving time in prison. 
Profits from tickets sales were invested in wholesale drugs purchases, and vice 
versa. “This business went on for many years,” she said. “Season tickets were 
supplied to Andrea … by Juventus at the beginning of every season, whilst every 
match Andrea managed to get more tickets.” She said that the profit margin on 
each ticket was between €30 and €100. The Bravi Ragazzi also had a monopoly on 
counterfeit merchandising, or what are called in Italian “gadget”: badges, 
shirts, keyrings, bumper stickers, scarves and so on. Investigators were now in 
no doubt that there was not just one, but many criminal gangs circling around 
the profitable business of ticket touting.

Meanwhile, the Drughi had turned against Ciccio Bucci. There was a whispering 
campaign against him, suggesting that he had touted tickets online and that he 
was a police informant. When the short-lived Gobbi merged with the Drughi, 
Bucci found himself sidelined by Rocco Dominello. Bucci’s former champion Dino 
Mocciola turned on him, and gave him a beating. Bucci, in fear for his life, 
retreated back to his home town for the whole of the 2014-15 season. Always a 
thin man, he lost 8kg and told Gabriella that people were trying to “take him 
out”.

From San Severo, Ciccio tried to plot his comeback. He called Alessandro 
D’Angelo in November 2014 and alluded, albeit in veiled terms, to Rocco 
Dominello’s mafia links: he called Dominello “that type of person”. “Ah, OK,” 
said D’Angelo. “Only at that point,” commented the public prosecutor in a later 
document, “does D’Angelo seem to understand.”

By now, Juventus were aware that they had allowed wolves into the barn, and 
that more were trying to get in. The club was under pressure from racketeers to 
give building work at the new stadium to a particular construction company, in 
order to avoid vandalism and stop the intimidation of workers. The club felt 
that Bucci was one of the few ultras with whom they could still do business. He 
had been a fixture at the club for a long time and was well liked. The 
commercial director of the club, Francesco Calvo, said that Bucci was a man who 
“inspired empathy”. The club’s elderly lawyer, Andrea Galasso, called him “a 
simple, sunny, enthusiastic, clean guy”.

So, a plan was hatched to give Bucci an official role within the club. He 
would work as a consultant alongside the club’s supporter liaison officer. 
Bucci’s employer was Telecontrol, a Turin security firm. From down south, Bucci 
phoned D’Angelo to pitch how he would work with the ultras: “It wasn’t my 
intention to sink this ship,” he said, “but a bit of water needs to get in.” It 
is unclear whether he meant the club would be allocating fewer tickets to the 
ultra gangs, but he did seem to realise that when, as he put it, “people got 
their feet wet”, they would turn on him. “They’ll be calling me shitface,” he 
said.

By the start of the 2015-16 season, Bucci was back in Turin. It seemed that 
his childhood dream had come true: he was working for the club he had 
worshipped since he was a boy. The last time the club’s lawyer saw Bucci, on 
the occasion of the Torino-Juventus derby in March this year, he received an 
enthusiastic hug: “I’m an official figure,” Bucci said, smiling happily.

The trouble was that Bucci had, in his words, “a foot in both rivers”. He was 
“double-dealing”: aiming to satisfy the demands of Juventus, ordinary fans, 
various ultra groups and even the police (“they call me every day” to confirm 
tip-offs, he once complained). As he did at school, he was trying to be friends 
with everyone. But the ultras would not accept any reduction in their ticket 
allowance, and Bucci was ostracised and branded a traitor to the Drughi’s 
cause. While his dream of working for Juventus had come true, after a year the 
position was no longer quite as attractive as he had imagined. In the spring of 
2016, Bucci’s mother died. He was isolated and, despite all those incessant 
phone calls, alone.

On 1 July this year, Rocco and Saverio Dominello, and 13 others, were arrested 
for a variety of mafia-related crimes. They have denied all wrongdoing. 
Dominello and son are in prison, awaiting trial for mafia association and 
attempted murder. Andrea Puntorno was convicted of drug dealing at trial, and 
was later released on probation with a fine of €500,000. On 6 July, Bucci was 
questioned as “a witness to the facts”. The transcript of his interview the day 
before his death gives no hint of despair or terror. One of the investigators 
told me that Bucci appeared “calm and good humoured”. He made no startling 
revelations, only confirming what investigators already knew: “I don’t deny 
having received tickets. It’s not as if Juventus gave them to us. We called and 
asked for up to 300 tickets. We bought them on credit and paid the balance 
afterwards.”

That night, though, he phoned his ex-wife and apologised to her and their son 
for any “lack of respect”. She didn’t understand and Bucci could only say he 
was “totally paranoid”. He was “100%” convinced that he would be arrested and 
that Juventus would sack him. His lifelong ambition was over before it had 
really begun, and he feared he would have to sell his house. He phoned her 
again at 11.30 the following morning, saying he was going to work. Half an hour 
later, he jumped from the famous viaduct. Two workmen witnessed his fall, and 
were able to assure investigators that Ciccio had not been, as the saying goes, 
“suicided”.

It is not, clearly, a story that reflects well on Italy’s biggest club. 
Juventus was complicit in large-scale ticket-touting and conducted business, 
albeit unwittingly, with criminal elements. Ciccio Bucci, a man who had always 
been passionate about the club, was compromised and even scapegoated. He found 
himself caught between not just Juventus and its ultras, but between police and 
the Calabrian mafia. In the end he could see no way out other than ending his 
life.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 