
On 4 February, 1974, an army coach was blown up on the M62 in Yorkshire and 
nine soldiers, a woman and two children were killed. Ten days later, a stable 
girl and former soldier, Judith Ward, then aged 25, was arrested in Liverpool 
waiting for the ferry to Ireland.

She had already been noted by the authorities as an attender of Sinn Fein 
marches on the mainland and had a notebook on her with IRA slogans in it. 
Forensic tests for explosives were carried out by Frank Skuse, who did the 
tests on the Birmingham Six. They proved positive.

After 2 1/2 days of questioning, she confessed. Her statement read: 'I walked 
over to the bus station. I was shaking like a leaf. The boot was open.'
But further investigations showed she could not have planted the bomb. She was 
found to have been drinking with half a dozen people in the Blue Boar, Chipping 
Norton, Oxfordshire, 100 miles from the bus station at the time.
The police then took a further statement in which she said she had only 
'sussed out' the bus station for the bombers and had gone to Derby to collect 
the bomb. She was convicted of murder on this confession and forensic evidence 
on traces of explosives on her hand. She never accused the police of violence 
but said she made the confession out of exhaustion and the wish to be left 
alone.

She also confessed to two other bombings on February 12, 1974 two days before 
her arrest at Euston station in London and Latimer Defence College. The main 
case against her was her confessions.

At her trial at Wakefield crown court, her defence suggested the explosives 
tests were unreliable, but forensic evidence was regarded at that time as 
virtually infallible. She was convicted and sentenced to 12 concurrent life 
sentences.

Born in Stockport in 1949, Miss Ward loved horses and on leaving school and a 
broken home got a job as a stable girl on the Isle of Man. When that proved 
unsatisfactory, she found a similar job in County Louth, just south of the 
Irish border. In 1970, she returned to Stockport and joined the Women's Royal 
Army Corps, in which her mother had also served. She did her basic training at 
Guildford and Catterick and was posted to Aldershot as a communications centre 
operator in the signals section. Within eight months she had gone absent 
without leave and returned to the Irish stables.
According to friends, she became something of a 'republican groupie' who liked 
to hang around and drink in Dundalk pubs with IRA men. She was regarded by them 
as unreliable but eventually joined Sinn Fein in London and would be seen in a 
black beret at marches.

Over the next few years she liked to tell people of her IRA links. She once 
scratched the initials IRA on her arm. When she gave herself up to the army 
after going absent, she told them she had been approached by the IRA for 
information.

Later, in 1972, she told the Royal Ulster Constabulary she had drawn a map of 
Aldershot for the IRA before the 1972 barracks bombing. In 1973, when arrested 
while sleeping rough in London, she told the police she was an IRA activist.

Each time she was released. Intelligence sources have since said she was 
released only so she could be watched.

She also claimed at her trial to have been married to a dead IRA man, Michael 
McVerry, shot by troops in 1973. This appears to be fantasy and is denied by Mr 
McVerry's family and his then girlfriend, who was with him on the day of the 
supposed marriage. There is no record of the marriage. She also claimed to have 
a child by another IRA man but no one had ever seen her pregnant.

A medical report on her mental state while at Risley Remand Centre before her 
trial said: 'She cannot be described as a very truthful person in that she has 
changed her story to me several times.'
Her barrister, Andrew Rankin QC, suggested she was a 'female Walter Mitty' who 
was hoping to 'achieve a place in Irish folklore'. The IRA has always denied 
her involvement in the bombing. She is not treated as a republican prisoner.

Agnes O'Hare, with whom Miss Ward stayed as a teenager in Dundalk and who 
still corresponds with her, recalls her as having a 'very free imagination. She 
was inclined to be extravagant in what she said to people'. Mrs O'Hare, who 
runs an antiques shop in Ravensdale, County Louth, said this week that she sees 
Miss Ward's fantasy life as the likeliest explanation for the confessions.

Michael Farrell, the Irish journalist-turned-lawyer and author of The Orange 
State, investigated the case for the magazine, Magill, in 1988 and spoke to an 
IRA woman who claimed to have planted the M62 bomb.
'She gave convincing detail about it and said Judith Ward had no connection 
whatsoever with it,' he said. Mr Farrell said he remained convinced of Miss 
Ward's innocence.

However, no campaign has been launched to clear Miss Ward's name. In the hope 
of early parole, she and her legal advisers have eschewed a high profile 
although she has always maintained her innocence. She refused to see the Labour 
MP, Jeremy Corbyn, this week, prompting her solicitor, Alastair Logan, to say: 
'Miss Ward is grateful for the interest currently being taken in her case. She 
does not wish and would not encourage a public campaign which does not reflect 
her views and aspirations.'
Miss Ward is now a category B prisoner in Holloway. She is not due to be 
released until 2004 but could be eligible for parole within three years.
 