
Unesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> has named Iraqi marshlands 
once ravaged by dictator Saddam Hussein as a world heritage site, a bright spot 
for a country where jihadists have repeatedly sought to wipe out history.


The area named “is made up of seven sites: three archaeological sites and four 
wetland marsh areas in southernIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>,” 
Unesco said.

“The archaeological cities of Uruk and Ur and the Tell Eridu archaeological 
site form part of the remains of the Sumerian cities and settlements that 
developed in southern Mesopotamia between the 4th and the 3rd millennium BCE,” 
it said.

Azzam Alwash wins Goldman prize: 'Saddam's marsh drainage project was war by 
other means'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/15/azzam-alwash-goldman-prize>
“The Ahwar of southern Iraq – also known as the Iraqi marshlands – are unique, 
as one of the world’s largest inland delta systems, in an extremely hot and 
arid environment,” Unesco said.

Iraq has been seeking world heritage status for the marshes since 2003, and 
its government hailed the move.

Prime minister Haider al-Abadi congratulated the Iraqi people on Unesco’s 
decision, and thanked “all those who contributed to this success.”

Abadi also said that culture in the country will continue “despite the 
destruction and demolition of Iraqi heritage and antiquities by barbaric 
terrorist gangs.”

He was referring to Islamic State group’s destruction of artefacts at the 
Mosul museum and the ancient cities of Nimrud and Hatra, the latter of which is 
a world heritage site.

Isis has sought to couch the destruction in religious terms, saying it was 
targeting idols, but that has not stopped it from selling artefacts to fund its 
operations.

The marshlands once stretched across some 20,000 square kilometres (7,700 
square miles), but they were devastated after Saddam ordered them drained in 
the 1990s to stop them being used as hideouts by Shia guerrillas opposed to his 
regime.

Many dams and canals ordered built by the dictator have now been demolished, 
allowing waters from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers to flood back, fish and 
fowl to return and humans to settle once again.

But dams farther upriver in Syria and Turkey still limit the flow of water 
into the marshes, and high levels of salinity have also been a problem in the 
south, killing fish and making the water undrinkable.
 