
As expected the Wallabies ultimately earned the right to a semi-final against 
New Zealand at the same ground next Sunday, but hardly anyone except the Irish 
team believed they would come so close to elimination yesterday.

 Australia and Ireland put on an enthralling exhibition of ambitious, 
freewheeling football in their quarter-final to leave Lansdowne Road in a state 
of high emotion. It was a classic demonstration of how fiercely committed 
underdogs can compel a favoured team to sweat every inch of the way for 
survival.

 Ireland were never in front until the 73rd minute when the flanker Gordon 
Hamilton scored what looked like the winning try. But Australia showed immense 
self-belief, bouncing back within three minutes to turn an 18-15 deficit into a 
one-point win with an opportunist try by Lynagh. It was suspense of the highest 
order.

 Australia outscored the Irish by three tries to one but their 
self-destructive tendency to give away kickable penalties - which Keyes 
accepted on three occasions - almost produced the tournament's major upset.

 Irish disappointment was palpable, though coach Ciaran Fitzgerald reflected 
that 'we showed courage and character that promise a great future for a young 
side'.

 The Irish clearly relished every tackle, every surging drive. At times the 
Wallabies looked introverted, perhaps from the shock of containing Ireland's 
mobile stormtroopers.

 Australia also had to cope with the loss of their captain, Nick Farr-Jones, 
with a recurrence of his knee ligament injury after only 18 minutes. He must be 
doubtful for the semi-final, despite his optimism.

 Once again the genius of David Campese proved to be the catalyst of an 
Australian victory. Twice he ripped open a well-organised Irish defence to 
score quality tries, and when his side were on the brink of a dramatic exit the 
right-winger came to the rescue with a bustling run that paved the way for 
Lynagh's score.

 Campese now has 45 Test tries. He will undergo a bone scan on his right ankle 
today after suffering a possible stress fracture. 'He'll play on, whatever it 
is,' a team spokesman said.

 In the line-out the young Queenslander John Eales was largely responsible for 
the 22-12 count which enhanced the territorial advantage.

 What really set the Wallabies apart from Ireland was the extraordinary 
cohesion of their back division, where the ball was moved with almost 
technological precision.

 The Irish must be kicking themselves for having neglected the 30-year-old 
Keyes for so many seasons. The Munster fly-half, who finished with 68 World Cup 
points, should make a substantial impact on Five Nations matches with his 
shrewd tactical kicking and willingness to release his backs. Yesterday his 
haul of 14 points included a fine dropped goal that glanced off the inside of a 
post.

 Certainly Ireland are not short of positive players - Geoghegan, Saunders, 
Francis, Robertson and Hamilton - who are capable of long-term achievement once 
they get that elusive big win under their belts.

 For the moment, the Irish will perhaps regret the lapses of concentration 
that allowed Campese to scorch 40 metres through the middle for a try at the 
posts in the 17th minute and a 51st minute touchdown. And muddle ruled when 
Lynagh was permitted to dive over towards the end.

 Incredibly, though, Ireland wore the mantle of potential semi-finalists for 
three marvellous minutes after Hamilton made a heart-thumping break to score 
his side's only try in the left corner. The recollection of what might have 
been could still motivate this talented Irish side towards tangible success 
before the end of the season.
 