
It’s easy to mock that motley band of politicians and public figures who at 
this time of the year seek a cause that wraps them in the warm glow of 
redemption. I’ve discovered that these causes are cyclical in nature. For a few 
years, they would descend on some predetermined hostel for the homeless and 
dispense festive cheer and presents while lately the leaders of the main 
political parties inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> have 
gathered for a happy picture opportunity as they did last week clad in 
Christmas jumpers for Save the Children.

In recent seasons, the favoured redemptive act is to “sleep rough” to 
publicise the plight of homeless people. Thus, sporting personalities will take 
their place among elected representatives and choose a place to sleep out in 
the open for a night to show that they really do care about those who have been 
forced to find fellowship in a cardboard city 365 nights of the year. These may 
be dismissed as mere gestures but they are important gestures and we ought to 
stay our cynicism about their small sacrifices.

If it all helps to raise awareness about the plight of our stricken fellows, 
then surely they are due a degree of appreciation. The problem is that when 
Christmas Day dawns each year in this very affluent country there is no 
reduction in the number of those who experience severe deprivation.

Indeed, during this period, their pain and sense of isolation is increased. 
Children whose parents can’t afford to clothe them, let alone buy them books 
and toys for birthdays, can grow accustomed to going without when it becomes 
the norm for them year after year. At Christmas time though, the UK turns into 
a vast themed funfair reserved exclusively for the enjoyment of people with 
money or access to money. At no other time of the year does a person who is 
experiencing real deprivation feel more alienated or deprived.

At this time of the year, no one sees more festive decorations and Christmas 
tree lights than those without a home to go to. Around every corner where 
usually there is just another line of shop doorways now there are giant Santas 
and twinkling cherubs. To the rest of us, these might convey a sense of 
wellbeing and carry the memories of enchanted childhood Christmases. To the 
homeless and those forced to sleep rough, they may spark sadder recollections 
and remind them once more of the special pain reserved for those who were born 
poor in a rich country.

The entertainment and retail industries work closely together at this time of 
the year, each one receiving a lucrative spin-off from the other. Our favourite 
television programmes produce Christmas specials devised by affluent people 
with affluent special guests. Invariably, a well-behaved and well-dressed 
children’s choir is invited to sing a carol about the privations of a refugee 
child born in a stable in the Middle East.

At Christmas the UK turns into a themed funfair which is reserved exclusively 
for the enjoyment of people with money

The adverts that follow will suggest that Christmas is only for those with a 
festive budget of about £20,000. They also suggest that Britain is home to the 
most stable family life in the world where four generations gather to exchange 
gifts and eat like royalty. That year’sMasterChef champion has obviously cooked 
the Christmas dinner. No poor people appear in these adverts or Christmas 
specials. There is no sadness and no one is sick, vulnerable or elderly. There 
are certainly no lonely people.

All of our favourite Christmas films have happy endings following a little bit 
in the middle where there is some mild jeopardy to be endured. Christmas film 
directors and television producers seem to have colluded in constructing a 
world of ice-cream and jelly that reinforces medieval models of authority, 
privilege and class. It is Christmas seen through the eyes of a lower sixth 
former at Eton. There are no social challenges and little that is allowed to 
question why more than 200,000 Scottish children will have no Christmas this 
year; why almost 35,000 homeless applications were made in Scotland and why 
more than one million three-day emergency food supplies were given to people in 
crisis in 2015/16.

So, in a spirit of Yuletide warmth and benevolence, I’ve re-calibrated one of 
my favourite Christmas films to reflect more accurately the world in which we 
live: It’s Not a Wonderful Life.

In this modern reworking of the old Frank Capra classic we find George, a 
former Tory minister who’s fallen on hard times. Just as he’s about to take a 
header off Westminster Bridge his guardian angel, Arthur appears. Arthur tells 
him what Britain would be like if George and his chums had never been born.

George is first taken to a giant retail warehouse full of smiling faces and 
red-coated managers handing out wee treats to their happy workers. There is a 
well-stocked canteen full of fruit and fibre where staff can buy heavily 
discounted products. They are all well paid and healthy and paying more into 
the economy by buying British-made products.

Next, he takes him to Ravenscraig steelworks in Motherwell, where thousands of 
workers are manufacturing the steel to make Britain’s next generation of battle 
cruisers and fancy new office blocks and apartments. The orders from overseas, 
especially from Africa and the Middle East, which have enjoyed two decades of 
stability, are especially pleasing.

Next, Angel Arthur takes him to a Glasgow tenement flat where three young 
children, who have never previously had a visit from Santa, are opening their 
first ever Christmas gifts. For the first time, their single mother was able to 
access her benefits and didn’t have to spend them all on gas and electricity 
following the nationalisation of the energy companies.

Now it’s on to Wormwood Scrubs, where George sees cells full of former bankers 
and FTSE 100 directors who were found guilty of corruption and tax evasion in 
the years that followed the 2008 banking crisis.

“All of this would have happened, George, if you hadn’t been born,” said 
kindly old Arthur with a twinkle in his eye. “So, instead of throwing yourself 
off the bridge, why not spend the rest of your life trying to make it happen?”

So now, boys and girls, every time you hear a bell ring you’ll know a Tory has 
found redemption.

God bless us, every one.
 