
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> fighters appear to have 
reconquered the historic city of Palmyra after days of intense fighting on its 
outskirts prompted a withdrawal by the Syrian military.

“The catastrophe has happened, I am in absolute shock,” said Maamoun 
Abdulkarim, Syria’s director of antiquities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/they-are-barbarians-meet-the-man-maamoun-abdulkarim-defending-syrias-heritage-from-isis>
, in a phone interview. “I am losing hope, it looks like we have lost the city.”

An Isis-affiliated news channel claimed victory in the battle on Sunday, 
saying its soldiers had reclaimed control of the entirety ofPalmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palmyra>, once a Silk Road oasis that 
boasted some of the best-preserved ruins of antiquity.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a war monitoring group, confirmed the 
takeover.

It was the second time Isis has seized Palmyra. In May last year, jihadi 
militants stormed the city after a week-long siege that ended with the mass 
retreat of the Syrian military. Militants rampaged through the city’s museums 
and ruins, blowing up the 2,000-year-old towering Temple of Bel and the Arch of 
Victory, along with other priceless artefacts, and killed Khaled al-Asaad, 
Palmyra’s long-serving leading archaeologist.

Today we will watch that same film again, that horror movie, if they stay in 
the city
Maamoun Abdulkarim, Syria’s director of antiquities 
The group also carried out mass executions in the historic amphitheatre.

The Syrian army, backed by Russian fighter jets, reclaimed the city in March 
this year in a well-publicised campaign. Moscow organised a musical concert at 
the amphitheatre shortly afterwards.

The loss of the city will come as a shock, particularly with Isis in retreat 
throughoutSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Iraq with the 
killing of its top lieutenants and facing increasing pressure in its two 
largest cities, Mosul and Raqqa.

Abdulkarim said the vast majority of the artefacts that were in Palmyra had 
already been moved to Damascus for safekeeping, a prescient move that may help 
preserve something of the city’s heritage, one of the few aspects that unite 
many Syrians after nearly six years of civil war.

But the remaining buildings in the old city, a Unesco world heritage site, 
including the amphitheatre and the ancient citadel, remain at risk. There were 
few people left in the city; under 1,000 by government estimates.

“We can only pray to God to protect Palmyra and we appeal to the international 
community to protect Palmyra, because it is a bridge truly between east and 
west,” said Abdulkarim. “Otherwise we will weep for more destruction of Syria’s 
heritage.”

The loss of Palmyra a second time raises questions about the ability of the 
Syrian military, worn down after years of fighting, to hold territory even with 
the backing of its Russian allies. The battles on the outskirts of Palmyra have 
been ongoing for four days and Islamic State’s takeover was preceded by a night 
ofintense bombardment by Russian warplanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/russian-bombardment-forces-islamic-state-out-of-palmyra>
, which carried out more than 60 airstrikes.

It will also come as a shock to observers as Isis is in retreat on multiple 
fronts. Drone strikes have claimed the lives of most of the group’s leading 
officials, including its spokesman, Abu Mohammad al-Adnani. Iraqi troops are 
inching their way through the eastern half of Mosul, the most populous city 
under the self-proclaimed caliphate’s control, and Kurdish paramilitaries as 
well as Turkish-backed rebels have been steadily gaining ground against the 
militants in northern Syria.


The latest conquest also shows Isis still has the ability to rally sufficient 
troops to its cause to conquer territory.


“It’s a repeat of the same scenario,” said Abdulkarim. “Today we will watch 
that same film again, that horror movie, if they stay in the city. It will be 
an insult to the entire international community and to civilisation as a whole. 
I hope the international community unites on this again. It must not be 
politicised. Palmyra is an international treasure.”
 