
The Turkish government says it has established the identity of the gunman who 
killed 39 people inan attack on an Istanbul nightclub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/turkey-nightclub-shooting-reina-nightclub-istanbul-victims-search-continues>
 in the early hours of New Year’s Day, as further arrests were made in 
connection with the atrocity.

The foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, said in a televised interview that the 
attacker had been identified, though he did not provide further details. The 
suspect has yet to be publicly named, although police have released a grainy 
image.

The gunman killed a police officer and another person in order to enter the 
Reina nightclub, which overlooks the Bosphorus in the wealthy Ortaköy 
neighbourhood of Turkey’s largest city. Nearly two-thirds of those killed in 
the club, which is frequented by celebrities, were foreigners and many were 
from the Middle East. Sixty-nine people were injured.

Several people have been arrested in relation to the shooting, including at 
least five suspected Islamic State group militants during an operation on 
Wednesday in the Aegean port city of Izmir, the state-run Anadolu news agency 
said.

The operation targeted three families who had arrived in Izmir about 20 days 
ago from Konya, a city in centralTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> where the gunman is thought to have 
been based before carrying out the nightclub attack, reports said.

Isis claimed responsibility for the attack, hailing the gunman as a “heroic 
soldier of the caliphate” who attacked the nightclub “where Christians were 
celebrating their pagan feast”.

Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said the attack was designed to split 
the country. “The aim was clear – to create a fissure and polarise society,” he 
said in a speech at his presidential palace. “We will stand tall and keep our 
sangfroid.”

“No-one’s lifestyle in Turkey is under a systematic threat. We would never let 
this happen. In 14 years in power, we have never given this a chance.”

Erdoğan, who first came to power in 2003 as prime minister, has been accused 
of presiding over a creeping Islamisation in Turkey and accentuating splits in 
society.


Eleven of those killed were Turkish nationals and one was a Turkish-Belgian 
dual citizen, reports said. Seven victims were from Saudi Arabia; there were 
three each from Lebanon and Iraq; two each from Tunisia, India, Morocco and 
Jordan, and one each from Kuwait, Canada, Israel, Syria and Russia.

The German foreign ministry said two residents of Bavaria, one a Turkish 
national and one a dual Turkish-German citizen, had died in the attack.


It remains unclear how the attacker managed to escape from the club, which is 
across the street from a police station. One report suggested he had abandoned 
his weapon and mingled with the crowd outside, pretending to be an injured 
civilian.


Turkish media reports said police had established similarities with a suicide 
bomb and gun attack atAtatürk airport in Istanbul in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/istanbul-ataturk-airport-attack-turkey-declares-day-of-mourning>
 and were investigating whether the same Isis cell could have carried out both 
atrocities.


There were more than 30 violent acts last year in Turkey, which is a Nato 
member and a partner in the US-led coalition fighting Isis in Syria and Iraq. 
There were a number of bombings, including three in Istanbul that authorities 
blamed on Isis, a failed coup attempt in July and renewed conflict with Kurdish 
rebels in the south-east.

Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report
 