
As our new year begins, what in the world should we be hoping for?

A better tomorrow.
R De Braganza, Kilifi, Kenya

• Hope.
Jennifer Horat, Lengwil, Switzerland

• The best.
Jim Dewar, Gosford, NSW, Australia

• A large asteroid strike.
Greg McCarry, Sydney, Australia

• Miracles at home and abroad.
Tom O’Brien, Liverpool, UK

• The avoidance of outright war at any level: social, political or otherwise.
Philip Stigger, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada

• The will to make it better.
Richard Orlando, Westmount, Quebec, Canada

More pleasant company?


What are men without their dignity?

They are just men. With it, they are gentlemen.
Avril Taylor, Dundas, Ontario, Canada

• Politicians.
Noel Bird, Boreen Point, Queensland, Australia

• Mere exhibits in the menagerie.
David Tucker, Halle, Germany

• Forget it, I don’t want to look.
Margaret Wyeth, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada

• Talking to other men about cars and sport.
Campbell Duncan, Melbourne, Australia

• Henpecked.
Richard Orlando, Westmount, Quebec, Canada

• More aggressive. Or more amenable. The choice is theirs.
Stephen Saunders, Canberra, Australia

• They are much more pleasant company than pompous self-important bores who 
are conversational terrorists.
Ursula Nixon, Bodalla, NSW, Australia

• Too often, I’m afraid, blissfully unaware of its absence.
Lawrie Bradly, Surrey Hills, Victoria, Australia

• Malleable.
Philip Stigger, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada

Fighting gravity is a toughie


What is your most arduous chore?

The fires, wood box, horse stalls, snow shovelling, dog walk. In practice 
these chores resolve themselves into a comfortable routine. The hard part is 
making that first move out of my warm bed on these cold mornings.
Gerald Garnett, Kaslo, British Columbia, Canada

• As a nonagenarian I find that all chores have become arduous, but fighting 
gravity is the most unremitting.
Daan Zwick, Rochester, New York, US

• Preventing the squirrels from eating the birdseed. They bungee-jump the 
dispenser until it spills out.

Anthony Walter, Surrey, British Columbia, Canada 

• Getting out of bed after foolishly listening to the news on the radio.
Paul Broady, Christchurch, New Zealand

Antlers at the front door


What was your personal highlight of the Christmas season?

Taking my 85-year-old wheelchair bound mother-in-law for a long walk on an icy 
afternoon. On returning her face radiated with happiness.
Kees van Aert, Hilvarenbeek, The Netherlands

• It was midnight, Christmas Eve, when the front light flicked on. From the 
bathroom window I saw a movement of antlers. Creeping downstairs, I witnessed 
two stags standing in deep snow and grazing the rose hips from the corsage on 
my front door.
Mary Garnett, Kaslo, British Columbia, Canada

Any answers?

Which cartoon characters from childhood still resonate with you?
RM Fransson, Wheat Ridge, Colorado, US

Best advice for a new US president?
John Benseman, Auckland, New Zealand

Send answers to weekly.nandq@theguardian.com 
<mailto:weekly.nandq@theguardian.com> or Guardian Weekly, Kings Place, 90 York 
Way, London N1 9GU, UK
 