
Jack White has launched a countermotion in court in response to the 
restraining order taken out by his former wife Karen Elson, asreported last week
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/02/jack-white-stripes-restraining-order>
.

According to the Nashville City Paper 
<http://nashvillecitypaper.com/content/city-news/judge-slaps-jack-white-restraining-order-bars-contact-estranged-wife>
, Elson's order read that she has "fears for her and the children's safety" as 
a result of the singer's alleged harassment via text and emails. The couple 
have been battling over parenting rights, with Elson claiming that the White 
Stripes founder is not fit to be a father despite his attempts to help raise 
the children, and is now barred from having "any contact with wife whatsoever 
except if it relates to parenting time with the parties' minor children".

However, according to Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/jack-white-fires-back-at-karen-elson-in-court-20130802>
, the singer has contested this with a motion filed by his lawyer in Davidson 
County Court in Nashville on 2 August. "The reason for filing this response is 
that Mr White does not want to be portrayed as something he is not, violent 
towards his wife and children," it reads. In addition to this, the filing cites 
a series of emails from his former wife to White in which she praises his 
parenting abilities. One in particular, dating from 19 May 2013, allegedly 
reads: "You're an amazing father, I'm so glad we had these kids together."

Despite previously co-parenting their children amicably, it appears that the 
current rift partly stems from a European trip that Elson took with the 
children two months ago, during which she kept them overseas for 10 days longer 
than White had allegedly given written consent for. In response to claims by 
Elson that she fears the 38-year-old White Stripes founder, the countermotion 
states that Elson had left their two children in his care the day after signing 
her restraining order affidavit while she took the 10-day "work/pleasure trip" 
to New York.

As well as White's attorney Cathy Speers Johnson calling Elson's previous 
motion for a psychiatric exam "inflammatory … disingenuous, fraudulent and 
retaliatory and simply designed to malign him in the public record or to gain 
an upper hand in this litigation," White claims that Elson had last month 
declared her love for him, telling Dean Fertita, a mutual friend and White's 
bandmate in the Dead Weather: "I'm completely in love with Jack and I'd move 
back in tomorrow if he asked me." "This is not the statement of a woman who is 
concerned about the emotional stability of the father of their children or 
their safety when they are with him," White's motion states.

Elson's order also reports that White wanted Elson to contact their children's 
private school to remove their kids from a class in which another entertainer's 
child was present, who he said had "ripped off" his music. This weekend US
gossip website TMZ 
<http://www.tmz.com/2013/08/02/jack-white-wife-karen-elson-black-keys-singer-dan-auerbach-divorce-restraining-order-email/>
 claimed to have obtained the emails containing these qualms from White, one of 
which allegedly finds White concerned about their two children, seven-year-old 
Scarlett and six-year-old Henry, being enrolled into the same school as 
five-year-old Sadie, who is the daughter of Dan Auerbach of the Black Keys.

"My concern with Auerbach is because I don't want the kids involved in any of 
that crap … That's a possible 12 fucking years I'm going to have to be sitting 
in kids' chairs next to that asshole with other people trying to lump us in 
together. He gets yet another free rein to follow me around and copy me and 
push himself into my world," the email allegedly sent by White on 16 July reads.

Elson and White have a hearing on 29 August to discuss care of their children.
 