
There was no shortage of advice for the watching Eddie Jones from the home 
supporters in the first half as theBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>
 wing Semesa Rokoduguni, who had been left out of this week’s England training 
camp in Brighton only to get a reprieve late last night, ran rampant.

He scored one try and was denied another by a wing Jones selected ahead of 
him, Jack Nowell. “It was like Harry Potter had given him his cloak of 
invisibility,” said theExeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> head 
coach, Rob Baxter. “We couldn’t lay a hand on him.”

It was Nowell, though, who collected the man-of-the-match award after the 
Chiefs, 11-0 down and looking out of it after an hour,staged a remarkable 
comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/bath-exeter-premiership-match-report>
, winning at the Rec in the league for the first time through the replacement 
wing James Short’s two tries in the final seven minutes.

Manu Tuilagi ruled out of England training camp with knee injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/manu-tuilagi-ruled-out-england-training-camp-knee-injury>
Nowell was involved in the second, looking as if he would make it to the line 
before being tackled by Tom Homer. When Exeter moved the ball left, Gareth 
Steenson defied another Homer challenge to pass the ball through his legs and 
it bounced kindly for Short to cross unopposed and condemn Bath to their first 
home defeat of the season.

The performances of Rokoduguni and Nowell explained England’s initial 
selection. For all his menace with the ball in hand and his ability to confound 
defenders by stepping round them as well as going through them, the Bath wing 
was less polished in defence and was caught out for Exeter’s first try. As Luke 
Cowan-Dickie juggled with the ball after George Ford had tried to dislodge it 
after the hooker had got through two tackles, Rokoduguni was drawn towards him 
and out of position when the ball was slipped to Short, who shrugged off the 
wing’s challenge to score.

Nowell, in contrast, made his tackles count in an all-round display of 
excellence. Rokoduguni looked certain to score after catching his own chip from 
60 metres and getting close to the line before the Exeter wing brought him down 
and turned him on his back to prevent the ball being grounded. After the 
interval, he thwarted another move sparked by George Ford, who from Sunday is 
free to talk to other clubs as he ponders a move away from Bath, and brought 
Jonathan Joseph to ground as the centre anticipated breaking into space.

“I am finally getting back into my stride,” said Nowell, who missed the autumn 
internationals through an injury sustained in England’s October camp in 
Brighton. “Rob Baxter had a few words to say to us at half-time because we had 
slipped off tackles and in the second half we took it to them.

“Rob has put a lot of pressure on us in the last couple of weeks because in 
past seasons we have tended to drop off around the Christmas period, but we
followed our victory over Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/exeter-chiefs-leicester-tigers-premiership-rugby-match-report>
with success at Bath and we can look forward to going to Saracens next weekend.”

Bath’s director of rugby, Todd Blackadder, was left to reflect on an 
impressive attacking display that yielded a mere bonus point after the loss of 
three props with head injuries, including Nathan Catt who had little more than 
an hour before been named in England’s squad, left them a player short in the 
final minutes as they were forced to go to uncontested scrums under rules 
designed to stop teams getting battered up front feigning injuries.

Bath are struggling to find four fit props for Friday’s trip to Newcastle and 
will be without their No8 Taulupe Faletau, who has suffered the recurrence of a 
knee-ligament injury, for a month after which he will join up with Wales for 
the Six Nations. Zach Mercer deputised against Worcester and the 19-year-old 
stood out with his footwork, off-loading and anticipation.

“All three props stayed off the field through the safety protocols in place 
and it is something that needs to be looked at down the line,” said Blackadder. 
“We were really clinical up to the hour mark [when Nick Auterac became the 
third prop to leave with a head injury] and while Exeter hung in there and all 
credit to them, it was a frustrating defeat.”

Ford had been at his impish best in that hour, helping Bath outwit opponents 
who ended the afternoon leapfrogging them into third place in the table. Asked 
if he had lined up a replacement outside-half, Blackadder said: “We have a few 
irons in the fire but it depends what George’s decision is. It would have to be 
someone of high quality if George is to leave us.”

Bath T Homer; Rokoduguni, Joseph, Tapuai (Clark, 78), Brew (Watson, 52); Ford, 
Fotiuali’i; Catt (Auterac, 19; Van Vuuren, 61), Dunn, Lahiff (Knight, 32), 
Garvey (Stooke, 62), Attwood, Ellis, Louw (Grant, 65), Z Mercer.

Try Rokoduguni. Pens Ford 2.

Exeter Dollman; Nowell, Devoto, Hill, Woodburn (Short, 52); Steenson (capt), 
Chudley (Maunder, 61); Moon (Rimmer, 50), Yeandle (Cowan-Dickie, 50), Francis 
(Holmes, 50), Lees, Hill (Atkins, 63), Dennis (Horstmann, 59), Armand, Waldrom.

Tries Short 2. Cons Steenson 2. Pen Steenson.

Referee C Maxwell-Keys. Attendance 14,509.
 