
The former foreign secretary Jack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw> and Sir Mark Allen, a former 
senior MI6 officer, could avoid prosecution over complicity in the rendition 
and torture of two Libyan dissidents by claiming immunity, the supreme court 
has been told.


The extraordinary prospect of senior figures dodging their alleged liability 
for abductions and torture by deploying the “foreign act of state doctrine” in 
criminal proceedings emerged during a civil claim brought by Libyan and 
Pakistani former detainees.


The Crown Prosecution Service is examining files submitted by the Metropolitan 
police following its investigation into the rendition of Abdel Hakim Belhaj, a 
Libyan, and his wife, Fatima Bouchar, from the far east to Muammar Gaddafi’s 
interrogation and torture cells in Tripoli in 2004.


Proof of their ordeal emerged in correspondence with Allen discovered inside 
the abandoned office of Moussa Koussa, Gaddafi’s foreign minister and former 
intelligence chief, after the regime fell.


The issue before the supreme court is whether the claims should be allowed to 
proceed or be struck out on the grounds of the foreign act of state doctrine, 
which the government says grants immunity to foreign states in UK courts.


The government argues that civil claims by Belhaj and a Pakistani man, Yunus 
Rahmatullah, should be thrown out on the grounds that the case will involve the 
acts of other countries.


The supreme court justice Lord Clarke raised the question of whether the same 
principle would also arise in criminal cases. “Is that true in a criminal case? 
If the conspiracy was charged as a crime and all the events took place in 
Afghanistan, but the agreement had been made in this jurisdiction, then this 
whole doctrine wouldn’t apply? Or would it?”


James Eadie QC, for the government, did not answer immediately. However, after 
consultations over lunch, he told the court: “The reason I’m particularly 
cautious about getting sucked into any position on behalf of government or 
generally is because there’s already an ongoing criminal investigation in 
relation to some of the matters that are the subject matter of the Belhaj 
litigation.


“So the ducking is not to avoid a difficult point of principle but for good 
and sensible reasons I don’t want to commit them to any position or predict 
what arguments might be deployed in that context.”


He added: “There are different statutory rules in some situations … [where] 
you prosecute certain criminal offences, including torture. Statute trumps any 
common law principle anyway.”


Eadie’s reference may have been to another specific way government lawyers 
could claim immunity for those responsible for the abduction of Belhaj, his 
pregnant wife and their children.


Section 7 of the 1994 Intelligence Services Act, sometimes described as the 
“James Bond clause”, protects MI6 officers from prosecution for actions 
anywhere in the world that would otherwise be illegal. They would be protected 
as long as their actions were authorised in writing by the secretary of state.


Under the act, an individual would not be liable “if the act is one which is 
authorised to be done by virtue of an authorisation given by the secretary of 
state under this section.” It says that liability in the UK “means liable under 
the criminal or civil law of any part of the United Kingdom”.

As foreign secretary at the time, Jack Straw was responsible for MI6. He has 
always denied wrongdoing, as has Allen. After the Libyan renditions came to 
light, Straw said: “No foreign secretary can know all the details of what its 
intelligence agencies are doing at any one time.”

However, government officials, insisting on anonymity, said MI6 was following 
“ministerially authorised government policy”. Tony Blair, who was prime 
minister for the duration of Straw’s tenure as foreign secretary, said he did 
not have “any recollection at all” of the Belhaj rendition.


In December 2005, when the first evidence emerged that Britain was colluding 
in CIA rendition operations, Straw told MPs: “There is simply no truth in the 
claims that the United Kingdom has been involved in rendition full stop.”

Phillippa Kaufmann QC, counsel for Rahmatullah, challenged the government’s 
claim that neither Straw nor Allen could not be liable even in a civil case 
over the compensation claims.

Rahmatullah was seized by British special forces in Iraq in 2004 and says he 
was tortured before being handed over to the US and rendered to Bagram prison 
in Afghanistan.

Challenging the government’s deployment of the foreign act of state doctrine, 
Kaufmann said the conduct of both British and foreign states was routinely used 
as evidence in both asylum and extradition cases both in the UK and overseas.

• This article was amended on 16 November 2015 to correct an editing error. An 
earlier version said the CPS had argued that civil claims should be thrown out; 
it was the government that made that argument.
 