
Jack McGrath's first Heineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> try lifted Leinster to their 
second pool win as they beat a bruising Castres Olympique side 19-7 at the RDS.

Traditionally poor travellers in this tournament, the reigning French Top 14 
champions leaked three penalties to Jimmy Gopperth before a converted try from 
Rory Kockott gave them a shot in the arm before the interval.

But Castres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> crucially failed to 
turn pressure into points in the third quarter and with centre Rémi Lamerat in 
the sin-bin, McGrath wrestled free to grab the game's decisive score in the 
62nd minute.

Gopperth converted and tagged on a fourth penalty and frustrated Castres 
suffered a second sin-binning in the closing stages – replacement scrum half 
Julien Tomas saw yellow for a succession of crooked feeds.

Led out by Fergus McFadden and Kevin McLaughlin on their 100th appearances, 
Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> quickly set about testing 
the French side's defence.

There was a welcome blast of sunshine for the kick-off, replacing the earlier 
heavy rain, and Gopperth capped off a similarly bright opening for his side 
with a third-minute penalty.

Rob Kearney did well to hack on a Gopperth cross-field kick before Castres 
broke from deep, Kockott and centres Lamerat and Romain Cabannes all featuring 
in a rare free-flowing attack from the French outfit.

But, for the most part, Leinster controlled the opening half-hour's play and 
an offside decision allowed Gopperth to make it 6-0 in the 12th minute.

The New Zealander's third successful penalty rewarded a solid home scrum, 
which included young tighthead Martin Moore, and Kockott snatched badly at his 
first chance to respond.

However, the hosts were unable to make the most of a typically thunderous 
burst from Sean O'Brien, and a couple of midfield turnovers that followed.

Castres made them pay with an opportunist try from Kockott in the 33rd minute, 
the scrum-half streaking away down the blindside after a wheeling scrum and a 
well-timed feed from Antonie Claassen.

McFadden was left isolated as the visitors executed a two-on-one break and 
Kockott confidently knocked over the 40-metre conversion to close the gap to 
9-7.

Gopperth missed a penalty effort before half-time and Castres, with 
replacement prop Saimone Taumoepeau making an impact up front, restarted in 
fine fettle.

Full-back Brice Dulin gathered his own chip and had to be hauled down in the 
Leinster 22, and Tales's dinked kick just went over the end line as Geoffrey 
Palis chased it down.

The addition of Karena Wihongi further boosted the Castres scrum and their 
dominance of the third quarter should have led to points, but Kockott sent a 
long-range penalty wide.

Leinster relieved the pressure as Luke Fitzgerald and David Kearney got ball 
in hand, the latter being the victim of a "no arms" tackle from Lamerat that 
saw the Castres centre sent to the sin-binn.

Fourteen-man Castres showed no signs of wilting, but a tenacious turnover from 
replacement Eoin Reddan launched Leinster forward and they needed no second 
invitation.

McFadden drew a defender to release David Kearney on the left and his brother 
Rob got involved in the Castres 22, before McGrath broke Wihongi's initial 
tackle and crashed over beside the right-hand post.

Gopperth's conversion gave Leinster some much-needed breathing space at nine 
points up and the man-of-the-match completed his 14-point tally as Matt 
O'Connor's men remained workmanlike – if unspectacular – until the end.

They needed to be resolute in defence late on as, despite losing Tomas in the 
70th minute, Castres almost landed a losing bonus point with TMO Graham Hughes 
ruling out a lunge at the line from Pedrie Wannenburg, who was adjudged to be 
inches short.
 