
What is happening?

Jakarta’s governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, better known by his nickname Ahok, 
willface the first day of his trial on charges of blasphemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/jakarta-christian-governor-to-face-blasphemy-trial-over-islam-insult-claim>
 on Tuesday.

Ahok, a Christian of Chinese descent, angered religious conservatives after he 
referenced a verse from the Islamic holy book, Al-Maidah 51 of the Qur’an, on 
the campaign trail in September. Ahok rather boldly told voters they should not 
be duped by religious leaders using the verse to justify the claim that Muslims 
should not be led by non-Muslims.

Jakarta's violent identity crisis: behind the vilification of 
Chinese-Indonesians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/25/jakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok>
An edited version of that speech was later posted online with several words 
omitted, making it seem as though Ahok was suggesting the Qur’anic verse itself 
was misleading, not the Islamic leaders citing it.

A recent poll by Saiful Manjani Research and Consulting (SMRC) showed that 
more than 45% of Indonesians believe Ahok’s statement was blasphemous. However, 
88% of those polled across the country said they were unaware of how exactly 
Ahok referred to the Qur’anic verse.

Why is it happening?

For a start, Indonesia’s strict 1965 blasphemy law, which makes it possible to 
prosecute Ahok for his provocative comments. Rights groups have long campaigned 
for the law to be revoked. In 2012, a civil servant from Sumatra was sentenced 
to two-and-a-half years in prison for declaring himself an atheist on Facebook.

The second, more complicated, part of the answer appears to be politics. In 
the run-up to the Jakarta governor election in February there has been intense 
pressure from religious conservatives and hardliners, who have stagedthree 
colossal rallies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/jakarta-protests-muslims-against-christian-governor-ahok>
 since October calling for Ahok to be jailed for insulting Islam.

The rallies have put pressure on President Joko Widodo, leading the government 
to declare the case would be dealt with swiftly and would go to trial. The 
president has also publicly deplored “political actors” who he said have 
exploited the rallies for political gain.

Who is benefiting?

In short, Ahok’s rivals in the gubernatorial election. Before the blasphemy 
storm hit, Ahok and his running mate Djarot Saiful Hidayat were ahead in the 
polls, but that lead has since been eroded.

Running against Ahok are two pairs of candidates: one headed by Agus Harimurti 
Yudhoyono, the son of the previous president, and the other by Anies Baswedan, 
who was axed as education minister in July. Three polls from November show Agus 
Yudhoyono now has a slight lead.

Does the Ahok blasphemy case mean Indonesia is becoming more radical?

Several indicators over recent years point to rising religious intolerance in 
the world’s largest Muslim-majority nation, including growing discrimination 
and attacks against religious minorities, and a recent wave of vitriol against 
the LGBT community.

Rising religious intolerance was a criticism aimed at the former Yudhoyono 
administration, which oversaw a period when the hardline antics of Islamic thug 
groups such as the Islamic Defender’s Front (FPI) were largely tolerated.

The anti-Ahok rallies – the latest which saw an estimated 500,000 people take 
to the streets – was organised by a newly formed coalition of Islamist groups 
called the National Movement to Guard the MUI Fatwa (GNPF-MUI). The coalition 
also includes well-known members of the FPI.

While religious intolerance is a factor in Indonesian society, analysts have 
been reluctant to say the recent rallies are a sign the country embracing a 
more radical version ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> – in 
part because there is a strong political dimension to the rallies.

The 2 December gathering was the biggest protest the country has witnessed in 
years but despite the huge turnout, in comparison to the more than 200 million 
Muslims in the country, it is still a small minority. Indonesia’s largest 
Islamic group, Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), also urged its members not to take part.

However, there has been a new validation of hardline voices. The president’s 
decision to pray on stage with members of the FPI and other groups at the 
December rally appeared to diffuse tensions on the day, but some say it has 
imbued hardline groups with an unwarranted sense of legitimacy. Critics say 
courting such groups sets a dangerous precedent, one where a noisy hardline 
minority can influence the government and legal processes.

What happens next?

With his case expedited Ahok will attend his first court hearing on Tuesday, 
where he will be officially charged with blasphemy. If found guilty, he faces a 
maximum five-year jail term. Acquittals in blasphemy cases in the Indonesian 
courts are rare, but Ahok has vowed to continue his campaign and to contest the 
election.

Long term, the political pandora’s box Ahok’s case has opened up has raised 
big questions about Indonesia’s democratic progress, its commitment to unity 
and diversity, and the viability of members of the ethnic Chinese Indonesian 
minority holding prominent political positions in the future.
 