
TS Eliot was wrong: April is not the cruellest month, it’s January – with the 
falling temperature, the post-Christmas slump and the dreaded self-examination 
and setting then breaking of resolutions. Add to that the tightening of budgets 
as the excess of Christmas and New Year wreaks havoc on bank balances across 
the country. Now imagine all of this but, in addition, that your income has 
been cut by almost the exact amount of your rent. This is the situation facing 
many families around the countryas a result of the reduced benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/03/reduced-benefit-cap-families-dwp>
.

In Grimsby, 42 families were left with 50p or less a week to pay their rent 
thanks to a reduction in housing benefit just before Christmas,the Grimsby 
Telegraph reports 
<http://www.grimsbytelegraph.co.uk/revealed-families-left-with-just-50p-a-week-in-housing-benefit-after-cuts/story-30033234-detail/story.html>
. This is a policy change that affects children in particular: the more 
children in a family, the more likely it is to reach the cap and therefore have 
its benefits reduced. So, families like those in Grimsby will see a drastic 
fall in their income and struggle to pay rent and bills, leaving only those 
outgoings that can be controlled and reduced such as food and heating – what 
luxuries – with which to recoup some savings.

I lived in poverty for far longer than I have been writing about it, so I’m 
familiar with every argument in favour of state-sanctioned economic cruelty to 
the poorest and most vulnerable in society. Many people, especially in the 
comments section, will happily see children go without food and warmth to make 
a political point. Others claim to be convinced that the UK is a country in 
which full employment is possible. I’ve visited Grimsby, and it’s typical of 
post-industrial England. Very few jobs, very little job security for those in 
work, and very low pay in those jobs. In fact, many of Grimsby’s residents are 
the “just about managing” families Theresa May claims to court. Instead, she’s 
hammering them.

If you think the country cannot afford to spend as much on families claiming 
benefits as it is currently, the benefit cap is an utterly wrong-headed 
approach that in the long term will massively increase expenditure. When 
families like those left with 50p a week housing benefit cannot pay their rent, 
they are evicted. When they are evicted, they approach their council for help. 
The council will house them in temporary accommodation run by a private firm at 
eye-watering cost: I visited a family in south London this week who were living 
four to a room, and the council was paying the same per week for that room as I 
do for a three-bedroom flat in Clapham. The mother I met pointed out that the 
weekly cost was three times the monthly rent for the three-bedroom flat that 
they had lived in previously.

This isn’t about saving money, it’s entirely about ideology and being seen to 
be “tough on scroungers”. You’d think the government had learned its lesson 
from the bedroom tax. In that case, councils spent far more money on 
discretionary housing payments and advice to tenants, and the government spent 
thousands fighting disabled tenants in court and losing.

If anyone’s “scrounging” from the state, it is the outsourcing companies 
profiting from the misery of evicted tenants. For them, with the reduction of 
the benefit cap and increased homelessness, it’s boom time.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 