
Northampton’s upturn continues, this win lifting them to fifth in the table, 
but if they had deprivedBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby>
 of a bonus point, which they threatened to in the final minutes, it would have 
been a travesty. It was a compelling encounter, the teams level until the 73rd 
minute, but it was the visitors who looked the better side for long periods – 
quite possibly the majority.

“We’ve got belief,” said Mark Tainton, Bristol’s acting head coach, “and with 
belief comes confidence. When you’ve got confidence you can achieve anything. 
And we nearly achieved something special this evening.”

Worcester facing relegation fight after Jonny May sparks Gloucester rout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/gloucester-worcester-premiership-match-report>
They are unrecognisable from the side who gave up bonus-point victories to the 
opposition as a matter of course earlier in the season. This was another of 
those but can be put down to the power of Louis Picamoles and a momentary lapse 
of concentration from Will Cliff, who yielded Northampton’s bonus-point try to 
a JJ Hanrahan chargedown, just after Bristol had retaken the lead.

Four tries for Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> but, bar Tom Wood’s just 
after half-time, they were scrappy affairs. Bristol’s pair were wonderful 
exhibitions of precision and confidence. On the back of it Jason Woodward, who 
looks one of the signings of the season, gathered 21 points. Bristol will say 
that they have always been confident, just inconsistent, but they play with 
authority now when they have the ball and not as if by the seat of their pants.

It is their defence, though, that has improved most. Not that Northampton are 
particularly the side, in this form, to expose any lingering fallibility. Their 
two first-half tries were typical of a side haunted by the heights they are not 
hitting. True, the first was triggered by a rare foray from George North, who 
ran back a loose kick with pace and power, but the finish required the 
subsequent attacking scrum, which twisted to allow Picamoles to burst off the 
base for the line.

Their second came from a series of lineout drives. The Saints insisted on 
keeping the ball tight, which eventually came off when Mikey Haywood was driven 
over for their second, but the sterility of it smacked of a side constricted by 
fear.

In between, Bristol scored their only try of the first half, which was much 
more like it. Jack Wallace was released down the right and cut inside North 
with ease, setting up a couple of charges by Nick Fenton-Wells. After the 
second of those he off-loaded to Mitch Eadie, who charged through the challenge 
of Tom Wood to the line.

It was a fitting score, featuring as it did contributions from two of 
Bristol’s excellent back row, the third of whom is Olly Robinson, captain for 
now and son of the recently dismissed director of rugby, Andy. The influence of 
Andy lives on, because Olly looks, plays and exhorts like his old man. Who is 
to say he won’t become as great a player?

George Ford’s missed kicks prove costly as Newcastle comeback downs Bath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/newcastle-bath-premiership-rugby-match-report>
Meanwhile, if the dog is biting as always, the new twist of class is best 
embodied by Woodward, the former Hurricane. He put Wallace away for that 
crucial gallop and kicked two penalties, which kept Bristol just the one point 
behind at the break.

Bristol’s resolve – and that consistency – was tested when another Picamoles 
charge from the base of a scrum, this one through four defenders, set up Wood 
for Saints’ third to stretch their lead to eight.

Bristol responded with 10 points in three minutes, all from Woodward who 
registered a penalty followed by the try of the match. He chipped out of his 
22, Tom Varndell won the race to the ball and turned it inside for the 
full-back to race away.

So Bristol had the lead again, with just over 20 minutes to go, but they ceded 
it straight from the restart when Hanrahan charged down Cliff’s clearance for 
the bonus point. Woodward’s fourth penalty drew Bristol level, but they would 
not threaten again.

It was Northampton who finished the stronger. Myler’s penalty edged them ahead 
with just over five minutes to go, and Harry Mallinder landed a drop goal for 
that six-point deficit.

Bristol held on for the bonus point, which pulls them to just the one behind 
Worcester at the bottom of the table. It no longer seems an impossible escape.

NORTHAMPTON Foden; Elliott (Estelles 12), Burrell, Hanrahan (Mallinder 67), 
North; Myler, Groom (Dickson 70); A Waller (E Waller 68), Haywood, Brookes 
(Hill 62), Lawes, Day (Craig 68), Wood (capt), Harrison, Picamoles (Gibson 67)
Tries Picamoles, Haywood, Wood, Hanrahan Cons Myler 3 Pen Myler Drop goal 
Mallinder

BRISTOL Woodward (Thalamo 78); Wallace, Palamo (Arscott 70), Hurrell, 
Varndell; Jarvis (Searle 62), Cliff (Williams 62); Traynor (Bevington 62), 
Hawkins (Crumpton 53), Ford-Robinson (Cortes 62), Tuohy, Glynn (Sorenson 60), 
Fenton-Wells (Lam 67), Robinson (capt), EadieTries Eadie, Woodward Cons 
Woodward 2Pens Woodward 4

Attendance 14,872

Game rating 7 Referee Andrew Jackson
 