
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has 
attributed Labour’s low rating in opinion polls to the distraction of the 
leadership contest and said some Labour MPs will never be satisfied.

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader said he would 
continue to be optimistic and offer hope while seeing how the polls developed 
as the party set out its economic plans.

Labour has sunk to its lowest level in the polls since Gordon Brown was in 
charge after the financial crisis in 2009, with ratings ranging from 25% to 
around 28%.

The figures suggest dozens of Labour MPs could lose their seats and there 
would be a decisive Conservative majority if Theresa May decided to call a snap 
general election to get a mandate for her Brexit strategy.

After Labour was relegated into fourth place in the Sleaford byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/stark-warning-for-labour-sleaford-byelection-eu-referendum>
 and lost its deposit inRichmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
, some senior figures in the party have said Corbyn has a year to appeal to a 
wider base.

But in an interview with the New Statesman, the leader appeared relaxed about 
Labour’s prospects, and highlighted his success in increasing membership.

Asked about the polling, Corbyn said: “We were distracted by the leadership 
contest when we could have been attacking the Tories. We’ll see how they [the 
polls] develop as we develop our economic programme. We have got to be 
optimistic. We have got to offer hope, not blame.”

Pressed on why some voters apparently were not listening, he said: “It’s 
extremely noisy, there is a lot of hate out there. But people also think about 
things more deeply than many give them credit for. And a lot of media tend to 
speak to a lot of other media and don’t recognise that there’s a whole parallel 
system of information going on through social media that never touches the rest 
of it.

“So there are different forms of communication going on, and the dangers of 
racist populism are very serious indeed. And you have to confront it.”

He said some Labour MPs would never accept his leadership. “Some people are 
just never satisfied,” he said. “Look, I hope they all have a wonderful 
Christmas, and I hope that we can do what we did on the schools, on the health 
service, on the economy, and win the election campaigns to come. We are on the 
way. We are hopeful. We are confident. And we are committed.”

It came as Labour MPs reacted angrily to the news that Corbyn had hired a 
former Sinn Féin worker to join his office. The Labour leader told a committee 
of MPs that Jayne Fisher – who he described as “very lovely” – would join the 
party as head of stakeholder engagement.

One backbench MP told the Guardian that it was a “disastrous decision”. 

“It will result in a whole load of headlines about Jeremy Corbyn’s 
longstanding support for the IRA,” he said.

The leader attracted controversy in 1984 when he invited Gerry Adams and other 
members of Sinn Féin to the Commons shortly after the IRA Brighton bomb nearly 
killed Margaret Thatcher and other members of her cabinet. However, he insisted 
that he was working towards achieving peace.

The MP added: “The Labour party members voted for Jeremy but they did not vote 
for him to employ Sinn Féin or supporters of the SWP.”

A spokeswoman for the Labour party said: “We don’t comment on staffing 
matters.”

However, sources said that Fisher had been in the Labour party since she was 
18 and was part of the party’s women’s conference in the 1980s and 1990s.

They said she took part in an initiative to support the Good Friday agreement 
with cross-party support, which led to her working for the Sinn Féin 
parliamentary group. They said that was part of ensuring a presence in 
Westminster during the peace process and was about political outreach.

 