
Jill Saward, who has died aged 51 after suffering from a stroke, was a 
formidable campaigner on behalf of survivors of sexual assault, who inspired 
changes to legislation, policy and attitudes on rape. In 1986, when Saward was 
21, a gang of men in balaclavas armed with knives, broke into her father’s 
vicarage in Ealing, westLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

They beat Saward’s then boyfriend, David Kerr, and her father almost to death, 
while two of the gang dragged Saward upstairs and repeatedly raped her. A few 
days later, the front page of the Sun newspaper carried a full-length photo of 
Saward, taken while on her way to church, with her eyes covered by a thin line. 
Saward was identified as the woman who had been the victim of what became 
widely known in the media as the “Ealing vicarage rape attack”

The action of the newspaper provoked an outcry, with feminist and victim 
support groups calling for better protection for those who had been raped.

The trial of the three men 11 months later at the Old Bailey provoked 
significant media coverage, partly because much of the previous press reporting 
had been salacious and exploitative. Saward was presented as “the perfect 
victim”, and much was made of the fact that she was, as the trial prosecutor 
told the jury, “a virgin” and, of course, a vicar’s daughter.

There were public protestations when the defendant who did not take part in 
the rape received a substantially longer jail sentence for burglary than the 
two convicted of rape. The judge,Sir John Leonard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/aug/26/guardianobituaries>, sought to 
justify this by claiming, in a comment he later regretted, that Saward’s trauma 
“had not been so great”. The case was one of a number that led to a change in 
the law, in 1988, to allow prosecutors to appeal for longer sentences.

A week after the trial, Saward approached her MP to ask him to “urge the House 
of Commons to accept the home secretary’s proposed new rules, which are framed 
with a view to protecting a victim’s identity from the moment of assault”. The 
law was changed in 1988, so that full anonymity was extended for rape victims, 
in that newspapers were prohibited from publishing photographs of complainants, 
and removed from defendants altogether. These changes came about as a result of 
the outcry following Saward’s trial and her subsequent lobbying of 
parliamentarians.

In 1990, on the publication of her book, Rape: My Story 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Rape-My-Story-Jill-Saward/0747507511> 
(written with Wendy Green), Saward became the first rape survivor to choose to 
waive her anonymity, and soon became a household name, appearing on TV and 
radio, and speaking at public events.

Jill, an identical twin with Sue, was born in Liverpool to the Rev Michael 
Saward and his wife, Jacqueline (nee Atkinson). The twins had two older 
siblings, Rachel and Joe. The family moved to London when Jill was two, when 
her father became radio and television officer to the Church of England, and 
lived in the Ealing vicarage from 1978 when Michael was appointed to the parish 
of St Mary’s. Jill and Sue went to Lady Margaret school in Fulham. When Jill 
was 12 years old, she became involved with the Scripture Union beach mission in 
Nefyn, north Wales, and remained a committed Christian all her life. In 1988 
she married Gary Huxley, but they separated in 1992. She subsequently met and 
married Gavin Drake, a journalist, and they had three sons.

I first met Saward in a TV studio in 1991, during a debate about whether those 
accused of rape should be granted anonymity. Saward said, in her usual 
forthright but calm manner, that the accused should be named from arrest, 
because many rapists are multiple offenders and that releasing their names 
could result in other women coming forward.

Over the years, our paths crossed often. For example, we were both involved in 
the successful campaign in the 1990s to change the law that allowed men accused 
of rape to cross-examine the complainant in court.

Somewhat of a maverick, Saward could not be easily claimed by any political 
party or campaign group. In 1997 I heard Saward speak at a conference at which 
she argued that women who dress scantily should not be surprised if men think 
they are up for sex – not a popular view among feminists. But Saward always had 
the welfare of the women affected by rape at the heart of her endeavours. Also 
in 1997, she set up Hurt (Help Untwist Rape Trauma), which provided counselling 
and support for survivors of sex crime.

Not only was Saward a keen and able lobbyist, she also had a crack at becoming 
an MP herself. In 2008, she ran against David Davies in the Haltemprice and 
Howden byelection as an independent candidate. Inan interview with Saward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/jul/02/women.haltemprice> during 
the election campaign, I asked her why she wanted to be a politician. “One of 
the main things I would like to push for is proper support for specialised 
services that deal with those issues – groups like Rape Crisis – because they 
are being crushed.”

Contrary to popular belief, Saward was not primarily a “victims’ rights” 
campaigner, but spent much of her time campaigning for stronger deterrents for 
would-be perpetrators. She possessed a forensic understanding of the workings 
of the criminal justice system in relation to sex crimes.

In 2014, Saward co-founded, with Alison Boydell 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-38522547>, Juries – Jurors Understanding 
Rape Is Essential Standard – with an aim of educating jurors on the harmful 
stereotypes that surround rape cases, such as that women are “asking for it” if 
they drink alcohol or agree to be alone with the perpetrator. “We can train 
judges until we’re blue in the face,” said Saward, “but jurors are members of 
the public who absorb the myths all the time.”

Saward enjoyed social media, and would post photographs of herself in slippers 
and pyjamas while giving radio interviews on serious topics. Her humour was dry 
and often self-deprecating. One of Saward’s many skills was her ability to make 
connections across political and social divides, and she was popular and well 
respected by politicians, faith-based organisations and other feminist 
campaigners.

Perhaps Saward’s most important legacy is that she removed the shame and 
stigma so often attached to women who experience rape, and transferred it to 
the rapists. Saward gave hope to those women, by showing that it is not just 
possible to survive after rape, but to thrive.

Her mother died in 2009, and her father in 2015 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/11384795/Canon-Michael-Saward-clergyman-obituary.html>
. She is survived by Gavin and their sons, and her siblings.

• Jill Saward (Drake), campaigner, born 14 January 1965; died 5 January 2017
 