
In 1919, a black soldier returned home to Blakely, Georgia, having survived 
the horrors of the first world war only to face the terrors of a white mob that 
awaited him in the Jim Crow-era south. When the soldier, William Little, 
refused to remove his army uniform, the savage mob exacted their punishment.

Little was just one of 3,959 African Americans who were brutally and often 
publicly killed across the southern states between the end of the 
Reconstruction era and the second world war, which is at least 700 more 
lynchings in these states than previously recorded, according toa report 
released on Tuesday by the Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) 
<http://www.eji.org/files/EJI%20Lynching%20in%20America%20SUMMARY.pdf>. The 
authors’ inventory of the nearly 4,000 victims of what the report calls “terror 
lynchings” reveals a history of racial violence more extensive and more brutal 
than initially reported.

Many of the victims were, like Little, killed for minor transgressions against 
segregationist mores – or simply for demanding basic human rights or refusing 
to submit to unfair treatment. And though the names and faces of many who were 
lynched have slipped from the pages of history, their deaths, the report 
argues, have left an indelible mark on race relations in America.

“The trauma and anguish that lynchings and racial violence created in this 
country continues to haunt us and to contaminate race relations and our 
criminal justice system in too many places across the country,” it concluded.

The report, titled Lynching in America: Confronting the Legacy of Racial 
Terror, is the result of nearly five years of investigation by EJI, a nonprofit 
organisation based in Montgomery, Alabama, into lynchings that occurred in 12 
southern states between 1877 and 1950. It explores how the legacy of racial 
inequality in America was shaped and complicated by these violent decades, 
which saw thousands of African American men, women and children killed by 
“terror lynchings”, horrific acts of violence inflicted on racial minorities.

The sites of nearly all of these killings, however, remain unmarked in what 
the report calls an “astonishing absence of any effort to acknowledge, discuss 
or address” the violence that occurred. The authors make the case that the 
country cannot fully heal from this painful chapter of its history until it 
acknowledges the devastation that this era created and the residual effects of 
these acts.

Bryan Stevenson, the director of EJI, said the organization plans to erect 
monuments, memorials and markers in the communities where the lynchings took 
place, as a way of piercing the silence and starting a conversation.

Acknowledging the hardships he faces in getting the funding and approval to 
build the markers, not to mention the controversy that will almost certainly 
ensue, Stevenson said the process will force communities to reckon with the 
vicious history of racial violence.

“We want to change the visual landscape of this country so that when people 
move through these communities and live in these communities, that they’re 
mindful of this history,” Stevenson said. “We really want to see truth and 
reconciliation emerge, so that we can turn the page on race relations.”

He added: “We don’t think you should be able to come to these places without 
facing their histories.”

The report argues that atrocities carried out against African Americans during 
this period were akin to terrorism, and that lynchings were a tool to “enforce 
racial subordination and segregation”. It is the follow-up to the 
organisation’s 2013 report Slavery in America.


“It’s important to begin talking about it,” Stevenson said. “These lynchings 
were torturous and violent and extreme. They were sometimes attended by the 
entire white community. It was sometimes not enough to lynch the person who was 
the target, but it was necessary to terrorise the entire black community: burn 
down churches and attack black homes. I think that that kind of history really 
can’t be ignored.”

Stevenson said this era had a profound impact on contemporary issues facing 
African Americans.


“The failings of this era very much reflect what young people are now saying 
about police shootings,” Stevenson said. “It is about embracing this idea that 
‘black lives matter’,” he added. “I also think that the lynching era created a 
narrative of racial difference, a presumption of guilt, a presumption of 
dangerousness that got assigned to African Americans in particular – and that’s 
the same presumption of guilt that burdens young kids living in urban areas who 
are sometimes menaced, threatened, or shot and killed by law enforcement 
officers.”
 