
And so the readjustment begins. After the wailing and gnashing of teeth – the 
hysteria, some have called it – followingEngland’s premature exit from the 
World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster-10-reasons>
, the English are starting to work some of the frustration out of their system. 
In the first two weeks of European competition, the six English clubs in the 
premier tournament have between them collected notable wins over opponents from 
France, Ireland, Wales and now Scotland, all nations who fared noticeably 
better in the World Cup.

Northampton had been the least impressive of the six in the opening matches of 
the season, but they burst into life here witha comprehensive dismantling of 
the champions of the Pro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/glasgow-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
. And 12 of the starting lineup were English – or England-qualified in the case 
of the superb Michael Paterson. They were all excellent.

Resurgent Northampton see off Glasgow as Ahsee Tuala crosses twice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/glasgow-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
“We don’t feel it’s all doom and gloom in England,” said Jim Mallinder, 
Northampton’s director of rugby and one of the more credible English candidates 
for therecently filled England job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/20/england-culture-shock-eddie-jones-head-coach>
. “It’s hard not to be gloomy if you wanted England to do well in the World 
Cup, so I think it’s quite understandable. There’s been lots of chat about 
England coaches, and of course the World Cup was disappointing, but in terms of 
the clubs we’re pretty buoyant and looking forward to the future.”

Mallinder had distanced himself from the England job, as had all the 
contenders bar Jake White, but some of his peers in the Premiership had voiced 
the opinion that an Englishman should be given the gig. All spoke highly of 
Stuart Lancaster, the previous incumbent who forged harmonious relationships 
with the clubs. When asked his opinion on the appointment of the Australian 
Eddie Jones, Mallinder would not be drawn, other than to smile and say: 
“Interesting.”

Jones’s job is looking easier now than it might have after England’s early 
exit. The young English front row that Northampton fielded here, minus Dylan 
Hartley, made a mess of one of the Pro12’s better set-piece teams. Glasgow had 
already lost three hookers to injury this season, so when a fourth, Pat 
MacArthur, was forced off in the eighth minute they were vulnerable.Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> were not slow to take 
advantage.

Kieran Brookes, a regular in England’s matchday squad, must now be pushing for 
a starting place at tighthead. He was awarded man of the match, but the rest of 
the pack were not far behind, and nor were Luther Burrell and Ben Foden behind 
the scrum. The former had a hand in Northampton’s first two tries – all three 
were scored by the two Samoans in the team – and the latter set up the third 
with a brilliant counter, followed by a chip to the line. In between, 
Northampton won penalty after penalty at the scrum and defused the odd lineout, 
too, as Glasgow pushed hard in the second half.

It was a sobering evening for the Pro12 champions. They lost Ryan Grant to the 
sin-bin midway through the first half, punished for the scrum problems his 
absence would only make worse, and their famed attacking game fired only 
fitfully. “We’ve got to take a good, hard look at ourselves,” said Josh 
Strauss, their No8, “especially in the set piece.”

Jones, meanwhile, has another video of high-performing Englishmen to look at 
good and hard himself.

Glasgow Hogg (Naiyaravoro, 54); Seymour, Bennett, Horne (Vernon, 64), Lamont; 
Russell, Blair (Hart, 74); Grant (Reid, 54), MacArthur (Mamukashvili, 8), 
Puafisi (Ferguson, 59), Nakarawa (Swinson, 69), Gray (capt), Harley, Favaro 
(Wilson, 54), Strauss.

Sin-bin Grant 19.

Tries Horne, Strauss. Con Russell. Pen Russell.

Northampton Foden; Tuala (Elliott, 62), G Pisi, Burrell, North; Myler, Dickson 
(capt; Fotulai’i, h-t), A Waller (E Waller, 65), Haywood, Brookes (Hill, 65), 
Paterson (Harrison, 69), Day, Gibson (Fisher, 74), Wood, Dickinson.Sin-bin 
Burrell 58.

Tries G Pisi, Tuala 2. Con Myler. Pens Myler 3.

Referee P Gaüzère (France). Attendance 6,800.
 