
My father, Jimmy Johns, who has died aged 80, was a campaigner for social 
justice and against war. He was once referred to as “the silver-haired 
spokesman” for his leadership within Essex CND. His principal belief was that 
mass non-violent direct action is the most effective tactic to respond to the 
power of government and state.

From 1980 onwards, with the announcement of Cruise missile deployment in the 
UK, Jimmy stepped forward as the main coordinator for Essex CND. He travelled 
all over the county to mobilise supporters, producing weekly and monthly 
newsletters, bulletins and leaflets. Over the years he brought together 
thousands of people for blockades of air bases and of the US embassy in London. 
His activism was noted by MI5, who were increasingly concerned by the success 
of Essex CND.

Jimmy also supported other campaigns and always ensured the message got 
across. Whether grave, dressed as a grim reaper and bearing the sign “US 
special envoy to El Salvador”, or mocking, wearing the Catholic bishop costume 
he paraded to decry anti-abortionists, or absurd, carrying a four-metre-long 
sculpted “Turdent”, clearly a submarine at the front but something very 
different at the rear, he never failed to bring a jolt of recognition.

Born in Bow, east London, Jimmy was one of five children of Ada (nee Murphy), 
who did piecework from home, and James, a labourer and dockworker who was 
active in local politics. At a young age, Jimmy taught himself to write poetry 
and draw, with pen and ink his preferred medium.

Having left school aged 14, Jimmy worked in a wide range of jobs, including 
stints as a commercial illustrator and Fleet Street picture editor. From the 
late 1950s he was an active CND campaigner and in 1962 set up the Peanuts jazz, 
folk and poetry club. In 1967 he married Sue Milsted, and in 1970 they moved to 
Essex, where they raised four children.

Jimmy’s vitality and generosity of spirit led to the establishment in the late 
80s of a live-music venue in Chelmsford in an empty YMCA building that was 
refurbished and relaunched as the Y-Bar. He believed that the arts represented 
the best of the human psyche and always fostered this in others. He also set up 
a life-drawing workshop in Writtle that was well attended for more than two 
decades.

He is survived by Sue, and by four children, Annie, Simon, Ellen and me, six 
grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.
 