
It took a while to open out, but another fabulous Anglo-French encounter 
finished as it had started — too tight to call and all the more magical for 
that. Wasps survived a ferocious pounding from the heavyweights ofToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> and, as so often, their wit and 
dexterity had the final say, squaring a match it would have been no disgrace to 
lose. With a chorus of whistles sweeping round this classically raucous French 
venue, Jimmy Gopperth nailed the conversion of Nathan Hughes’s 78th-minute try 
from wide out on the right to claim a valuable pair of points.

Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> were well worth them, 
despite the onslaught they endured. Indeed, with a little luck they might have 
had more. Inconclusive footage saved Sébastian Bézy from a yellow card and 
Toulouse from a penalty try against, when the scrum-half seemed to knock down a 
ball destined for the hands of Guy Thompson and thence the tryline. And as for 
the state of the pitch, it would be politest to say it was of a different 
standard altogether from the stuff played on it.

Exeter suffer late misery after Ulster’s Paddy Jackson lands drop goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/ulster-exeter-european-champions-cup-match-report>
“It looked to me on the screen that it was a blatant knock-on, and if it was 
it was a penalty try,” said Wasps’ director of rugby, Dai Young. “The players 
are adamant it was. I don’t blame referees, but I think it was fair to say 
there were a number of decisions out there that could have gone a different 
way. I was just pleased the boys didn’t get too frustrated and found a way to 
get back in the game.”

What with all the reset scrums on the sliding turf, it is a wonder we had time 
for such pyrotechnics elsewhere. Then again, six European titles have been 
shared between these two, so we should have expected nothing less. The first 
half may have finished with the more prosaically level scoreline of 6-6, but 
what a softening up the visitors had endured. Tommy Taylor felt the full force 
of one challenge, which put him off in the first half with a stinger – another 
injury concern for England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/eddie-jones-england-maro-itoje-hand-injury>
 – and Thomas Young followed at half‑time. But Wasps were still in the fight by 
then.

Toulouse’s pressure had reached a pitch at the end of the first half. They 
were awarded a five-metre attacking scrum after their penalty to the corner 
went wrong, albeit in their favour by the grace of a lucky bounce against the 
covering Christian Wade. So it was over to the packs and a pitch that rolled up 
like a carpet wherever set pieces came together.

Toulouse seemed to have the nudge at most, although chances were affected by 
the quality of the turf underfoot, in other words: by a lottery. Wasps 
benefited from solid ground for the series of five scrums that followed, but 
not enough to avoid being punished: twice by free-kicks, twice by penalties. At 
the fifth they managed to force Toulouse to run the ball and closed them out 
with unyielding defence.

Surviving that face-off, well after the clock had turned red, felt like a 
significant triumph. But such pressure can bend the mind, and when the 
hammering resumed after the break, Wasps’ composure started to creak. Wade 
tried to run a mark out of defence, which went wrong, though not quite enough 
to cost any points.

Eddie Jones and England wait for news of Maro Itoje hand injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/eddie-jones-england-maro-itoje-hand-injury>
The wobbling continued. Dan Robson’s kicking had been excellent, but deep in 
his own 22 he chose not to resort to it. When he fed Danny Cipriani instead, 
the fly-half tried a crazy cross-kick from in front of his own posts, which 
Thierry Dusautoir, on vintage form, half-charged down, allowing Census Johnston 
to barrel over for the game’s first try.

Now the game was cooking. For both sides. Wasps started to look for and find 
space in Toulouse’s half. They thought they had that penalty try and certain 
yellow card when Thompson couldn’t take Gopperth’s inside ball, which he blamed 
most furiously on a deliberate knock-on. Toulouse escaped then, but not a few 
minutes later.

Wade was now darting in between the vast grasping hands, and a blur of Wasps 
handling saw Josh Bassett released down the left for a fine riposte, tarnished 
when he caught his foot in the disintegrating turf as he scored, twisting his 
knee. These pitches are dangerous as well as disruptive.

Toulouse were not put off by the score. Their surfeit of lineout ball was 
overwhelming and from it the heavy runners kept pounding. One of their few 
concessions to levity, Bézy, darted round the edge of one maul to set up a 
couple of drives to the heart of the visitors’ defence, then set the hands in 
motion that released another light on his feet, Gaël Fickou, for the try that 
seemed to have won the game. Toulouse kept coming even then, but now their 
handling was letting them down, bombing one threatening move and a few others 
that might have developed so.

Instead, it was Wasps who held their nerve. Kyle Eastmond, one of so many 
jostling for that No12 shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/12/brad-baritt-saracens-england>, 
made the first cut, opened further by Joe Simpson. Clean hands then sent Hughes 
galloping past the challenge of Paul Perez for one final try. Gopperth, of 
course, could be relied on to land the angled conversion that tied this 
wonderful occasion with a suitable bow.

Toulouse Médard; Kunatani, Fickou, David, Perez; Flood (Doussain 56), Bézy; 
Baille (Steenkamp 56), Tolofua (Ghiraldini 56), Aldegheri (Johnston h-t; 
Aldegheri 77), Maestri, Tekori (Lamboley 61), Cros, Dusautoir (capt), Axtens.

Tries Johnston, Fickou Cons Bézy 2 Pens Bézy 2.

Wasps Gopperth; Wade, Daly, Eastmond, Bassett (Leiua 65); Cipriani, Robson 
(Simpson 59); Mullan, Taylor (Cruse 26), Cooper-Woolley (Moore h-t), Launchbury 
(capt), Symons (Myall 56), Johnson, Young (Thompson h-t), Hughes.

Tries Bassett, Hughes Cons Gopperth 2 Pens Gopperth 2.

Referee G Clancy (Ire). Attendance 14,206.
 