
Joe Launchbury faces missing the start of the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> after being left out of the 
England squad who assemble in Brighton on Sunday for a two-day training camp. 
The second-row missed Wasps’ win over Newcastle on Friday because of a calf 
strain and the Premiership club are waiting for a scan to determine how long he 
will be out of action. Launchbury has been ruled out of the 33-man squad for 
the Brighton camp, while being included in the 45-strong elite group.

The Bath lock Charlie Ewels, who won his first cap as a replacement in the 
autumn, replaces Launchbury, chosen ahead of his club-mate Dave Attwood.

Dylan Hartley, currently serving his latest suspension, which ends just before 
the England squad gather to start preparing for the Six Nations, will be among 
the 33 players in Brighton and is set to retain the captaincy.

Manu Tuilagi has been included in the squad for Brighton after making a 
successful return from injury for Leicester. The 25-year-old centre has been 
dogged by groin problems for two years and has not started for England since 
June 2014. His only international appearance since then came as a replacement 
in the Six Nations meeting with Wales in March.

Anthony Watson is poised to resume his international career after missing the 
entire autumn series with a fractured jaw sustained when England last trained 
in October.

The second-row Maro Itoje, who missed all four autumn internationals because 
of a hand injury, returns but the Vunipola brothers, Mako and Billy, have been 
left out of the 33 with knee problems that are likely to keep them out of the 
first month of the Six Nations.

Jones is taking two loosehead props to Brighton in addition to Joe Marler, 
namely Matt Mullan and the uncapped Nathan Catt, while picking only two 
tightheads, Dan Cole and Kyle Sinckler.

Semesa Rokoduguni: ‘I like working with Eddie. When he’s not happy, he tells 
you’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/semesa-rokoduguni-bath-england-exeter>
Jones has chosen four second‑rows, backed up by the Sale No8 Josh Beaumont, 
who can play at lock, and six back-rows with James Haskell, who is expected to 
return for Wasps against Leicester next Sunday, included along with Leicester’s 
uncapped Mike Williams.

Jack Nowell is also back from injury. Henry Slade is in the 45, along with the 
Bath wing Semesa Rokoduguni. Mike Brown is the only specialist full-back going 
to Brighton, backed up in the elite squad by Sale’s Mike Haley, with Alex 
Goode, who played against Fiji in November, left out altogether.

The last time England were in Brighton, at the beginning of October, Jones 
introduced judo sessions and a number of players returned to their clubs with 
injuries, including Watson and Nowell. That sport is not expected to be on the 
menu following a busy festive period for players.

“The short camp allows us to do some of the organisational work we need for 
the Six Nations,” Jones said. “We have France first up who are one of the most 
improved sides in Europe. They should have beaten Australia and could have 
beaten the All Blacks in November, so they’ll come into the Six Nations with a 
lot of confidence.

“We’ve got to make sure that we use this training camp to get an understanding 
of how we’re going to beat France. We want to see a good attitude from the 
players and, as always, we’re looking for players who are desperate to play for 
England. The thing that struck me about last year’s Six Nations is that sides 
were scared to lose and we want to make sure in this Six Nations, right from 
the word go, that we’re daring and we have the courage to play our game.”

Eddie Jones tells England players to keep performing or risk being dropped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/eddie-jones-england-australia-autumn-internationals-six-nations>
Jones has said he wants England’s attacking game to improve, although they 
averaged four tries a match in the second half of 2016. Tuilagi is an option at 
12 and 13, Elliot Daly covers outsidecentre, the wing and full-back and while 
all four centres in the 33 have played at 13, the inclusion of Harlequins’ Joe 
Marchant in the elite squad puts him in contention for the Six Nations.

Jones will announce his squad on 20 January for the championship England are 
defending after last year’s grand slam. He will know more by then about 
Launchbury, who missed the final two matches in the autumn because of 
suspension having shown in the opening two that he was a rival to Itoje and 
George Kruis.
 