
On young people today

The youth of today have every possibility of being as smart or as stupid as 
the youth of the past, so long as you remove Russell Brand from the agenda. I 
think he’s absolutely clarified himself as arsehole number one. It’s not funny 
to talk nonsense. I think his words are the words of somebody else. 
Misconstrued.

Would you stand as an MP? 

This is constantly suggested to me. I suggest everybody votes, everybody 
should try to make the best of a bad situation. I despise the entire shitstem 
because it is corrupt, but that corruption has only come about because of the 
indolence of us as a population. I’d get into Westminster if I need a new 
apartment.

His views on Ukip

A black hole for the ignorant to fall into. That’s it. Farage? I wonder what 
the roots of that name are. I think he’s faragical.

Did he vote for Thatcher? 

Nobody sensible voted for Thatcher. For me, in political terms, the most 
admirable person and the most influential would have been the philosophy of 
Gandhi. The ideology of passive resistance worked and can work again and again. 
It is the exact opposite of violence. A glorious conception.

Johnny Rotten or Arsenal’s Johnny Radford?


I am Johnny Rotten. And I will forever remember fondly Johnny Radford’s 
contribution to that then most excellent team called Arsenal, before it became 
Arsenmonkey.

What does he think of ‘pop punk’

I have all my life resented categories or labels of inadequate definitions, 
for instance, something is either good or bad. An example of bad would be Green 
Day. And yet they’re astoundingly popular and enormously hollow. Go figure.

How he drinks his tea

Brewed so thick, you could trot a horse over it. No sugar, skimmed milk.

Why he would never accept a knighthood

No. No. No. Don’t want. Don’t need.

How the internet killed punk

Since the demise of record stores and corner shops, the social aspect of 
music, and in particular live venues, is being reduced. Communication has been 
reduced to the all-glorious failure of the international highway of truth we 
now know as the internet. Impersonal. Does not solve the problems that are so 
deeply personal. Hello, human beings.

His spiritual and religious beliefs

I like lime-flavoured yoghurt. The end. There is no religion. It’s a man-made 
fabrication. Once you understand that, you’ll be a happier individual. Atheism 
is as pointless as satanism.

Sex Pistols or the Clash? 

Nobody gives a toss about the Clash.

• Read the full webchat session here  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2014/oct/10/john-lydon-webchat-anger-is-an-energy>

Anger Is an Energy: My Life Uncensored by John Lydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/15/anger-is-an-energy-my-uncensored-life-john-lydon-review>
 is published in the UK by Simon & Schuster, £20.To buy it for £16 with free UK 
p&p go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/anger-is-an-energy-my-life-uncensored.html>

 