
Our father, John Smith, who has died aged 94, served during the second world 
war in the Royal Engineers and was later a teacher and accomplished 
architectural historian.

He was born in Birmingham, the son of Thomas, a clerk at the Co-op, and his 
wife, Gertrude (nee Walker). From an early age, John was a railway enthusiast 
and as soon as he could, he travelled around Britain to collect engine numbers. 
Educated at Camp Hill grammar school, he went on to Birmingham University to 
study English and history. After starting his degree, he was called up in 1942, 
taking part in the Normandy landings from D-Day+1 and serving in Europe until 
1946, finishing as a teacher for the Army College of the Rhine.

Returning to Birmingham, he completed his degree, then studied for a master’s 
in history, researching 17th-century Shrewsbury. Later, he worked on threatened 
buildings, and wrote the Royal Commission on Historic Monuments volume on 
Breconshire, which was pioneering in looking at a selection of all types of 
dwelling, not predominantly country houses.

He was invited to take charge of the commission’s York office but declined as 
his wife,Heather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/07/heather-smith-obituary> (nee 
Boese, whom he had married in 1955), had an established career in social work 
in Hertfordshire. Nevertheless he became its senior investigator and 
architectural adviser to the commission’s secretary. He also ran courses on the 
study of medieval architecture in Wales and formed the Essex Architectural 
Research Society.

On his retirement in 1987, he received a grant from the Wilson Centre, 
Washington DC, to continue earlier research on Roman villas. He made frequent 
visits to the Römisch-Germanische Kommission, Frankfurt, a division of the 
German Archaeological Institute, and wroteRoman Villas 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Roman-Villas-Study-Social-Structure/dp/0415167191>: A 
Study in Social Structure (1997).

Spending their retirement in St Albans, he and Heather formed a medieval 
studies group under the aegis of St Albans and Hertfordshire Architectural and 
Archaeological Society to produce a book,St Albans 1650-1700 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/St-Albans-1650-1700-Thoroughfare-People/dp/0954218930>
: A Thoroughfare Town and its People (2003), offering an insight into social 
change in a typical English community.

John was interested in social change and the transmission of ideas across 
Europe and how this was illustrated in building design. An able linguist with a 
European outlook, he made many friends across the continent and built up a vast 
library with books in many languages. He was a warm, brilliant man who was 
interested in people and society: intolerant of prejudice and narrow minded 
attitudes.

Heather died in March. He is survived by us, his three sons, and by four 
grandsons and a great-grandson.
 