
Freshwater fish are out of sight and out of mind for most of the British 
public. And so are the dedicated band of fishery scientists who look after a 
resource that indicates the health of our rivers and lakes, and supports 
angling. Such an individual was my friend John Gregory, who has died aged 67, 
after a lifelong career in fisheries management.

John was born in Sutton-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire. His father, Tom, was an 
engineer at Rolls-Royce in Derby and his mother, Jenny, worked in the local 
hospital. After graduating in biological sciences from the University of East 
Anglia, and getting married to Lynden Stratten in 1971, John spent two years as 
a fisheries officer in the Solomon Islands.

He returned to Britain to join the recently formed Anglian Water Authority in 
1974 to work on coarse fish management. He and Lynden and their young son, Sam, 
then moved to Wales in 1980 when John transferred to what was to become the 
Welsh Water Authority as a fisheries scientist. He spent the next 30 years 
working in Wales, successively for the NationalRivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rivers> Authority when it was set up 
in 1989 and the Environment Agency, from its formation in 1996 until he retired 
in 2012.

His major contribution, however, was in the area of professional development 
as a member of theInstitute of Fisheries Management <https://ifm.org.uk> (IFM). 
He founded the East Anglian branch and became its first secretary. He joined 
the IFM council in 1981 and served on every major committee, and as chairman 
from 1998 until 2003. He was also the first editor of the quarterly Fish 
magazine.

John was a fine ambassador for the IFM. He represented it at the annual 
meetings of theNorth Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organisation 
<http://www.nasco.int> from 1996 until last year, and became secretary of its 
influential 30-strong accredited NGO group.

He was similarly influential when the prestigious Society for the Environment 
<http://socenv.org.uk/?> was launched in 2002. The IFM was one of the 
constituent founding members and John chaired the new organisation for three 
years.

John inspired trust and loyalty in those around him and he developed close 
friendships with many colleagues. He retired to Norfolk and spent many happy 
hours bird watching.

Lynden died suddenly in April and John was diagnosed shortly after with an 
inoperable brain tumour.

He is survived by Sam and two grandchildren, Amelie and Louis, and by his 
sister, Anne.
 