
My friend John Wright, who has died aged 88, was an artist and lecturer, full 
of passion and curiosity.

In the 1960s and 70s, John showed his work at the John Moores exhibition, the 
Royal Academy summer exhibition, and galleries inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Liverpool and Bradford. In the 20-year 
period following his retirement, he was able to devote himself more fully to 
painting, producing a significant body of work that testifies to the depth of 
his talent.

During this time he exhibited in several group shows, had two very successful 
one-man shows at the Millinery Works in Islington, north London, and worked 
with the poetRobert Vas Dias  <http://www.robertvasdias.com/>on collaborations 
combining words and images that were published as The Guts of Shadows (2003) 
and The Lascaux Variations (2009).

John’s work was characterised by meticulous research, skilled draughtsmanship, 
variation of style and technique, and a subtle, sophisticated use of colour. To 
see the images he produced is to share his concerns and passions – aeronautics, 
the flamboyance of Spain, the relationship between man and machine and the 
brutality of armed authority.

He was born in Islington, the son of Dorothy (nee Dewar) and Frederick Wright. 
On leaving the Stationers’ Company’s school, Hornsey, John followed in the 
footsteps of his father by joining the engineering department of the GPO. 
During his national service with the RAF he developed a lasting interest in 
aeronautics.

John had no formal art training until his late 20s, when he attended classes 
at Hornsey College ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>. He 
began sketching scenes around the East End, producing powerful images of urban 
and industrial landscapes.

In the 60s, he became a lecturer at North London College 
<http://www.northlondoncollege.co.uk/index.php/en/>, where he remained until 
1986, retiring as senior lecturer. As a teacher he had the gift of encouraging 
others to believe in themselves and to expand their lives.

John and his first wife, Margaret, whom he married in 1956, had two sons, 
Timothy and Jonathan. They separated in the 70s and divorced in 1993.

In 1975 John met Ceri Nicholas at North London College. They were soulmates 
and lived very happily together in London. They married in New York in 1997. 
Despite the dementia that shadowed John’s last years, the warmth and strength 
of his personality were never totally dimmed.

John is survived by Ceri, his sons and six grandchildren.
 