
From the start of the new century, the Crusades have gained more intense 
contemporary resonance than for many centuries past. Jonathan Riley-Smith, who 
has died aged 78, was the subject’s pre-eminent scholar, his research focusing 
on the beliefs that suddenly, at the end of the 11th century, prompted armies 
of westerners to attempt to conquer the Holy Land, and to pull off against 
apparently insurmountable odds what was seen as a miracle: a divine 
intervention in the affairs of the world comparable to the incarnation of 
Christ.

What motivated thousands of well-heeled French, English, German and Italian 
laymen to walk away from their daily existences and risk everything, including 
life itself, at the other end of the known world? How did the papacy justify 
such a radical – indeed, subversive – innovation in terms of Christian 
theology? How was this extraordinary concatenation of ideas and events moulded 
into an institutional structure to sustain the territorial consequences of this 
transformation in geopolitics? How was it then deployed to legitimise Christian 
violence elsewhere?
 Jonathan Riley-Smith was a founder member, and later president, of the 
Society for the History of the Crusades and the Latin East 
Some German and French historians had addressed some of these questions, but 
Riley-Smith answered them with an unprecedented clarity and directness, founded 
on a far wider and more systematic reading of theology and canon law as well as 
of narrative sources and documents. His primary interest was always what people 
thought, whether the inchoate spiritual fervour of illiterate lay Crusaders, or 
the elaborate theological and legal contortions of popes and their advisers, or 
popularised versions of the latter, devised by Crusade preachers, which so 
successfully aroused the former. His devout Catholic faith gave him a clear 
insight into the mentality, but did not in any sense make him an apologist.

For the first time in the middle ages, fighting – that quintessential lay 
aristocratic activity – ceased to be a sinful necessity in a fallen world, and 
became instead an expression of devoted and meritorious service to Christ as 
lord. It was an entrance ticket to heaven, issued by the pope on Christ’s 
behalf.

Crusading became a manifestation of lay piety, of Christian love, as the 
territory sanctified by Christ’s terrestrial presence – Christ’s very patrimony 
– was retaken from the infidel and defended in his name. The traditional 
metaphor of the monk as soldier fighting in Christ’s cause through prayer was 
actualised.

In my favourite Riley-Smith book – The First Crusade and the Idea of Crusading 
(1986) – he showed how the diffuse elements in the original proclamation of an 
armed pilgrimage by Pope Urban II in 1095 were fused and transformed in the 
aftermath of the taking of Jerusalem in 1099 by the historians who wrote 
accounts of the triumph of a lay monastery on the march. It was this 
interpretation that was adopted by subsequent popes. The First Crusaders, 
1095-1131 (1997) meticulously tracked down every identifiable participant, and 
sought to reconstruct his likely motives.

Riley-Smith’s arguments had already been sketched out over a much longer 
timescale in his trenchant What Were the Crusades? (1977; 4th edition 2009), 
and in a seminal essay with the characteristically provocative title Crusading 
As an Act of Love (1980). The Knights of St John in Jerusalem and Cyprus, 
c.1050-1310 (1967; 2nd edition 2012) dealt with the subject of his doctoral 
research, the Knights of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of the 
orders of soldier monks that crusading engendered. The Feudal Nobility and the 
Kingdom of Jerusalem, 1174-1277 (1973; 2nd edition 2002) showed how the system 
of western feudal law was imported into the newly established kingdom of 
Jerusalem by the settler nobility.

There were many more books on the same and similar themes, which tapped into 
the wider public interest that Riley-Smith had been a leading light in 
promoting. This August he launcheda massive internet calendar of the charters 
and other legal documents of the Latin East <http://crusades-regesta.com>.

A founder member, and later president, of the Society for the History of the 
Crusades and the Latin East, he became familiar on television and radio. As 
director of studies in history at Queens’ College, Cambridge (1972-78), he 
inspired some of us to become medievalists. From being professor of history at
Royal Holloway, University of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/royalhollowayuniversity> (1978-94) he 
returned to Cambridge as professor of ecclesiastical history, at Emmanuel 
College (1994-2005).

Born in Harrogate, he was the son of William Riley-Smith and his wife, Elspeth 
(nee Craik Henderson). The Riley-Smith family had prospered from its 
involvement in the Yorkshire firm of John Smith’s Brewery. From Eton College, 
Jonathan went to Trinity College, Cambridge. As an undergraduate, he spent a 
lot of time at the racecourse at Newmarket, but less conventionally acquired 
for himself a copy of the massive 19th-century French edition of the crusading 
chroniclers. He had found his vocation.

After graduating in 1960, he embarked on research. At the time, Sir Steven 
Runciman 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/1372747/Sir-Steven-Runciman.html>’s 
three-volume history of the Crusades, 1951-54, was the latest word, at least in 
Anglophone scholarship. Riley-Smith developed an approach that surpassed its 
mellifluous narrative, by focusing on what legitimated Crusades and motivated 
Crusaders. His first lecturing post was at the University of St Andrews 
(1964-72).

As a companion, he was enthusiastic, forceful, funny, direct, sympathetic, 
perceptive, old-fashioned (he was forever enveloped in a miasma of pipe smoke, 
and latterly snuff) and courageous. He evinced a boundless generosity of spirit.

In 1968 he married Louise Field, a portrait painter. She survives him, as do 
their children, Toby, Tammy and Polly.

• Jonathan Simon Christopher Riley-Smith, historian, born 27 June 1938; died 
13 September 2016
 