


Bath have had some champagne moments this season but this was a vintage 
display by anyone’s standards. While they are not yet certain to advance to the 
knockout stage of Europe’s premier club competition for the first time in six 
years, a spectacular four-try away win over their previously unbeaten Pool Four 
rivalsToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> represented the 
club’s most glorious day on French soil since they lifted the old Heineken Cup 
way back in 1998.

It was not just the result which will linger in the memory. Had a French side 
attacked with the elan Bath frequently exhibited it would have been hailed as a 
thrilling renaissance of Gallic flair. Bath were almost ridiculously fast and 
loose at times, running Toulouse’s big forwards around to the point of 
befuddlement. It was a pragmatist’s worst nightmare – or would have been had 
the visitors lost. Instead it will be forever remembered as the dayBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> threw caution to the winds and reaped 
full reward for it.

It made for a crazy, helter-skelter contest which developed into a minor 
classic after a hare-brained start by the sluggish hosts. Bath’s forwards were 
heroic at times but the real magic potion was in midfield. Jonathan Joseph and 
Kyle Eastmond have not always been the England selectors’ cup of tea but if 
both are not named in Stuart Lancaster’s Six Nations squad due to be announced 
on Wednesday there will be no justice.

If there was one highlight among several it was Bath’s 71st-minute 
game-clinching try, created by the wonderfully elusive Joseph. A clever chip 
and regather was followed by a snaking break towards the posts before Ross 
Batty cut back on the angle and Francois Louw swallow-dived over the line to 
complete a stunning score. George Ford’s conversion and subsequent penalty put 
the icing on an award-winning gateau.

Joseph, 23, has not featured for England since winning the last of his six 
caps in Argentina in 2013 but Bath’s director of rugby, Mike Ford, described 
his performance as “sublime, outstanding” and “world-class”. Ford is now hoping 
the outside centre has played his way back into the Test equation: “He has 
really stepped it up. If JJ wasn’t in before today, I know the England coaches 
are meeting tomorrow and they’re going to have a good rethink I think.

“England have got a lot of decisions to make but there is no denying what the 
England boys did out there today. Stuart’s got a dilemma with the way he 
potentially wants to play the game. Does he want to play more direct? If you 
want to play two receivers who can create mayhem that 10-12-13 for us today ... 
there’s different ways you can play.”

The Bath method is certainly producing the goods at present. This was 
precisely the kind of grand fixture their francophile owner Bruce Craig was 
envisaging when he first invested in the club and the players rose triumphantly 
to the challenge. “We could have gone out of the competition today so we wanted 
to go out in the Bath way,” stressed Ford, delighted with the positive intent 
his team showed. “We talked about sending out a statement to ourselves, not to 
anybody else. To have the belief to do what we did today was fantastic.”

If there was also an element of luck, fortune often favours the brave. Was 
there a hint of a forward pass from Louw to Matt Banahan for the first try? Was 
Chris Cook offside when he seized on a 75-metre interception of Jean-Marc 
Doussain’s pass? No matter. The Irish referee George Clancy was happy to award 
both, stirring the home supporters into belated life.

Yoann Maestri swiftly grabbed a try back for Toulouse but Bath could still 
have had the bonus point wrapped up well before half-time. They had a third try 
safely tucked away inside 27 minutes, Eastmond making a scintillating break 
before throwing a superb miss pass left to Banahan whose subsequent sly offload 
sent Joseph over for a sweet score.

Eastmond was clattered in the process but, within moments, was back up on his 
feet, contributing to another flowing move which should have yielded a fourth 
try. Anthony Watson was held up over the line when it had seemed easier to 
score.

It was the reprieve Toulouse needed and a try from Yann Huget, later guilty of 
the most reprehensible of fake “dives” in an attempt to con the referee into 
awarding a penalty for foul play, brought them back to just 25-15 down at 
half-time. Another Toby Flood penalty narrowed the deficit even further and 
Bath had further reason to be grateful to the busy Ford, who managed to hold up 
Yannick Nyanga when it seemed Toulouse were about to draw level.

The visiting supporters were equally relieved when Banahan escaped a yellow 
card for a high tackle on Doussain, setting the scene for Joseph’s dramatic 
late flourish. The qualifying maths remain complicated but if Bath defeat 
Glasgow at the Rec with a bonus point on Sunday they can expect to take their 
place in the last eight. On this evidence, no one will be keen to play them in 
the quarter-finals.

Toulouse Medard; Clerc, David (Poitrenaud, 44), McAlister, Huget; Flood 
(Vermaak, 64), Doussain; Steenkamp (Kakovin, 65), Flynn (Marchand, 75), 
Johnston (Pulu, 67); Tekori (Albacete, 53), Maestri; Nyanga (Lamboley, 72), 
Dusautoir (capt), Picamoles (Galan, 65).

Tries Huget, Maestri. Con Flood. Pens Flood 2.

Bath Watson (Devoto, 44); Agulla (Stringer, 72), Joseph, Eastmond (Woodburn, 
62), Banahan; Ford, Cook; James (capt; Auterac, 55), Webber (Batty, 53), Wilson 
(Thomas, 47); Day (Fearns, 47), Attwood (Hooper, 62); Garvey, Louw, Houston.

Tries Banahan, Cook, Joseph, Louw. Cons Ford 3. Pens Ford 3.

Referee G Clancy (Ireland). Attendance 16,061.
 