
The chances of Leeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>
, managed by Garry Monk, replacing Swansea City, the club that sacked him 12 
months ago, in the Premier League next season cannot be discounted. Only the 
sharp eyes of the assistant referee gave Villa a late penalty that preserved 
their unbeaten home record under Steve Bruce here, and even then Leeds should 
have won the game, Hadi Sacko lifting the ball over the Villa goalkeeper, Mark 
Bunn, only to see it bounce down off the underside of the bar.

Having watched his side produce a vibrant second-half performance after a 
goalless and relatively insipid first period, Monk could only bemoan their 
failure to kill the game off after their impressive Swedish centre-half Pontus 
Jansson had put them ahead with a header from a corner. Jansson, a 25-year-old 
on season-long loan from Torino, nearly made it two in as many minutes with a 
volley which bounced off the bar, while Sacko missed several opportunities to 
either score himself or put the ball on a plate for others, before and after 
Jonathan Kodjia had scored the penalty rightly awarded after Liam Cooper 
handled the ball.

Burton’s quickfire first-half double piles misery on luckless Rotherham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/rotherham-united-burton-albion-championship-match-report>
“They started well, but we grew into the game and in the second half we were 
aggressive, played front-foot football and delivered a fantastic performance,” 
said Monk. “In the first 30 minutes of the second half we had really good 
chances and should have put it to bed. But it shows how far we have come, to be 
disappointed leaving with a point from a club with such a strong home record. 
My team take massive credit from tonight.”

So they do: the question is whether they can maintain their challenge. Having 
seen his team pick up 25 points from the last 33 available (after just four 
points from his first six games in charge), Monk spoke about building on that 
foundation. “I knew from the day I came in here it would take time, there was 
nothing in place, and we’re still not where we want to be, but we’re seeing a 
very young group grow,” he said. They have an option to buy Jansson after he 
makes one more appearance, reportedly for £3.5m, and assuming the owner, 
Massimo Cellino, can lay his hands on such a sum – which given his record 
cannot be taken as read – they would be crazy not to exercise it.

Steve Bruce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce>, who felt Villa 
had “edged” the first half, admitted they had been second best thereafter. “You 
can’t allow a free header from a corner, and we had a really dodgy period for 
20 to 25 minutes after that, but we stuck at it against the best Leeds team 
I’ve seen for a number of years and we might even have pinched it, though that 
would have been unfair. The penalty was the right decision, and we’re still 
unbeaten [at home], but we still have a lot to do. I’m under no illusions about 
that.”

Leeds almost handed Villa a lead within two minutes of the start, and would 
surely have done so had Jansson not been alert when Kalvin Phillips’s appalling 
pass presented Kodjia with the ball around ten yards from goal. The defender 
got in a tackle just as Kodjia got his shot away, deflecting the ball wide.

Remarkably, Phillips did it again a few minutes later. This time his sloppy 
pass handed possession to Kodjia outside the penalty area and he must have been 
hugely relieved to see his goalkeeper Rob Green dive to his left to palm a 
deflected shot behind.

Once Leeds settled, however, the sides and formations cancelled each other 
out, at least until Jack Grealish was replaced early in the second half. Bruce 
sent on the former Leeds striker Ross McCormack in the hope the immutable law 
would prove just that, and Villa immediately looked more threatening going 
forward. But so too, with more room in midfield, did Leeds. An outswinging 
corner from the right picked out the run of Jansson, whose firm header squeezed 
through Bunn’s attempted save.

Aston Villa v Leeds United: Championship – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/29/aston-villa-v-leeds-united-championship-live>
From another corner the Swede controlled a loose ball on the edge of the 
penalty area and volleyed it past Bunn, only to see it bounce off the top of 
the bar. Monk, trying to force home the advantage, sent on the creative Pablo 
Hernández (another loanee), and had Sacko pulled the ball across goal to the 
unmarked Chris Wood, instead of trying to dink it past Bunn, they would have 
made the game safe.

As it was, the linesman’s sharp eyes, and the few minutes of mayhem that 
followed at both ends, ensured both sets of spectators left the ground with 
reasons for satisfaction.
 