
Two finals, two cities and two farewells, a little less than two hours apart. 
At 6.15pm on Saturday evening in Dublin Brian O’Driscoll, the most capped 
player in the history of international rugby, will start the final game of his 
professional career, the Pro12 final between Leinster and Glasgow. And at 8pm 
in Paris, just as that match is coming to a close,Jonny Wilkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-wilkinson>, who has scored more points 
in Tests than anyone other than Dan Carter, will be beginning his own last 
hurrah, for Toulon in the Top 14 final against Castres. Come Sunday morning, 
rugby will look and feel a little different for the lack of two of the greatest 
players the game has known.

There’s no doubt who the neutrals will be rooting for, even though both Toulon 
andLeinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> start as favourites, 
although the former lost to Castres in last year’s final, 19-14. Typically this 
year’s match would be billed as a reprise, a bid for revenge but that storyline 
has been entirely overshadowed by Wilkinson’s retirement. The club have just 
confirmed that he will be joining their coaching staff next season, though he 
won’t be working with them full-time. It seems that they have created a job 
just so they can keep him around.

They hold him in such esteem that they have created special jerseys for the 
match, with the words “Merci Jonny” stitched across the inside of their 
collars. Their owner, Mourad Boudjellal, said this week: “I don’t know if this 
will be the biggest trophy that we win atToulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon>, but it will be the most moving.”

The Top 14 is one of the few trophies Wilkinson could have won that he has not 
yet got his hands on. Last year, Boudjellal explained, Toulon made the mistake 
of underestimating Castres and were undone by a wonderful performance from the 
South African scrum-half, Rory Kockott. Boudjellal says they will not make that 
error again, but also feels that “[even] with all the respect I have forCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres>, we cannot fail”.

Castres finished sixth in the regular season, in the last qualifying spot for 
the play-offs, and only achieved that because Toulon beat Stade Français in the 
final round. Even Wilkinson’s opposite number, Castres fly-half Rémi Talès, has 
said that he is “lucky to be playing against Jonny in his last match” and that 
he feels it is “a great honour”.

Leinster, on the other hand, are looking to defend the title they won when 
they beat Ulster 24-18 in last year’s final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/25/ulster-leinster-rabodirectpro12-final>
. They will play Glasgow, who qualified after winning nine games in a row, a 
run that stretches right back to a 28-25 loss to Leinster at the RDS in March. 
It is their first appearance in a league final.

Leinster have been in the last five in succession. Their talismanic captain 
Leo Cullen – “the heartbeat of the side,” according to O’Driscoll – will also 
be retiring after the final. Like Wilkinson, he will be taking up a coaching 
job with his club.

The Glasgow coach, Gregor Townsend, has been trying to underplay the 
significance of it being O’Driscoll’s last match, insisting that “finals are 
very emotional anyway” and that “there are always players leaving at the end of 
the season”. That may be, but there’s never been another pair like Wilkinson 
and O’Driscoll.

Leinster v Glasgow, , 6.15pm, live on BBC Alba (Sky channel 143) and BBC2 
Scotland (Sky channel 970); Toulon v Castres, , 8pm, live on BT Sport 1
 