
Dogs <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dogs> are property and cannot 
be considered in the same vein as children, a Canadian judge has ruled, in a 
scathing decision that blasted a newly separated couple for a “ridiculous” 
attempt to use the court system to settle a custody dispute over two of their 
dogs.


The childless couple, who separated in April after 16 years of marriage, 
turned to the court system earlier this year to settle a row over where two of 
their three dogs would live.

The initial application to the court was made by the husband, who wanted to 
keep one of the couple’s dogs.

Lawyers for the wife – who pointedly described her estranged husband as a “cat 
person” in court documents – pushed the court to consider the matter as they 
would any other custody issue, urging the judge to allow the dogs, aged 9 and 
2, to live with her and grant visitation rights to her husband.

Any similarity between children and pets was roundly rejected by the judge. 
“Many dogs are treated as members of the family with whom they live,” Justice 
Richard Danyliuk wrote in his decision, issued in August and which came to 
light this week aftera report by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/dog-custody-dispute-saskatoon-1.3889188>
 “But after all is said and done, a dog is a dog. At law it is property, a 
domesticated animal that is owned. At law it enjoys no familial rights.”

While he acknowledged that pets can differ from other property in that 
statutory protection exists to prevent them from being treated with cruelty or 
neglect, he drew the line at applying the principles of child custody to 
animals.

He pointed to the differences in how society treats dogs and children to 
explain his reasoning. “InCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, we 
tend not to purchase our children from breeders,” he wrote. “In turn, we tend 
not to breed our children with other humans to ensure good bloodlines, nor do 
we charge for such services … When our children act improperly, even seriously 
and violently so, we generally do not muzzle them or even put them to death for 
repeated transgressions.”

Since the couple’s separation, the dogs – named Kenya and Willow, or Willy for 
short – have been staying with the parents of the wife.

The men who live as dogs: 'We're just the same as any person on the high 
street'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/25/secret-life-of-the-human-pups-the-men-who-live-as-dogs>
For the time being, said the judge, the dogs should remain where they are. He 
likened the matter to being asked to rule on what the couple should do with 
other joint property they may own. “Am I to make an order that one party have 
interim possession of (for example) the family butter knives but, due to a deep 
attachment to both butter and those knives, order that the other party have 
limited access to those knives for 1.5 hours per week to butter his or her 
toast?” Justice Danyliuk wrote. “A somewhat ridiculous example, to be sure, but 
one that is raised in response to what I see as a somewhat ridiculous 
application.”

In a court system plagued with delays, where many are forced to wait months to 
hear applications relating to child welfare and other family matters, he 
slammed the couple for tying up valuable resources. While he was sure that the 
couple felt the living arrangement of their dogs was a “most important matter”, 
he urged them to consider the bigger picture. “To consume scarce judicial 
resources with this matter is wasteful.”

The couple was taking a substantial risk in pursuing this matter in court, he 
warned. “Both parties should bear in mind that if the court cannot reach a 
decision on where the dogs go, it is open to the court under the legislation to 
order them sold and the proceeds split – something I am sure neither party 
wants.”

Ultimately he dismissed the application, pressing the pair to sort out the 
dispute themselves and leave the court to other matters. “Simply put,” said the 
judge, “I am not about to make what amounts to a custody order pertaining to 
dogs.”
 