
A crown court judge who retaliated with blunt, verbal abuse when insulted by a 
defendant has been cleared of judicial misconduct.

The widely reported exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/10/judge-defendant-john-hennigan-exchange-insults-chelmsford-court>
, which triggered complaints from the public, occurred last summer when 
Patricia Lynch QC informed the repeat offender John Hennigan that he would be 
sent to prison for breaching an antisocial behaviour order (asbo).

 The defendant, who was appearing at Chelmsford crown court, interrupted her, 
saying: “It’s obvious, isn’t it? Because you’re a cunt and I’m not.” The judge 
then responded: “Well, you’re a bit of a cunt yourself. Being offensive to me 
doesn’t make things better at all.”


When Lynch confirmed the defendant’s sentence, Hennigan, 50, said: “Go fuck 
yourself.” Lynch retorted: “You too. Take him down.”

Hennigan, from Harlow, Essex <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex>, has 
dozens of previous convictions, including for drug and firearm possession, and 
common assault. An asbo was previously imposed on him in 2005 when a swastika 
was painted on the front door of his council house.

After the hearing on 11 August, the Judicial Conduct Investigations Office 
(JCIO) received about 10 complaints about the judge’s behaviour and her use of 
the word “cunt”.

Lynch told the investigators that she deeply regretted the incident and that 
her remarks were a momentary lapse of judgment that should have never happened. 
She apologised “unreservedly” for her remarks, according to a JCIO statement 
sent to one of the complainants, Robert Hackett.

A report on the incident was referred to the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas 
of Cwmgiedd, and the lord chancellor, who is the justice secretary, Liz Truss.

The JCIO statement said: “Although the lord chancellor and the lord chief 
justice considered HHJ Lynch’s remarks to be inappropriate, they did not find 
that they amounted to misconduct or warranted any disciplinary sanction. [They] 
were of the view that the matter should be dealt with by informal advice.”

Lynch had now been been advised to “ensure that she responded appropriately to 
parties in court at all times”.

Responding to the JCIO statement, one of the the complainants, Robert Hackett, 
said: “I do feel this has taken an extraordinary amount of time and that the 
judge has been let off very lightly. Her behaviour was inexcusable.”
 