
Folake Ekunbayo ran out of money to pay divorce lawyers. As she struggled to 
turn herself into a litigant in person, she eventually, for a relatively small 
fee, hired a McKenzie Friend – a lay legal adviser – and settled the 
protracted dispute. She is not alone. As the cost of representation spirals and 
legal aid disappears, the role of these professional courtroom advisers who are 
not fully legally qualified has expanded to fill a cavernous gap in the market. 
Cheaper lay advisers have become so widespread that the judiciary is now 
considering imposing strict regulations that will ban them from being paid in 
England and Wales.

The term McKenzie Friend derives from a 1970 London divorce case. The husband 
could not afford representation but was provided with an Australian barrister – 
who was not qualified to sit in an English court – to help direct questioning. 
The judge barred the Australian from sitting beside McKenzie. The husband 
appealed, arguing he had been unfairly deprived of help. The court of appeal 
agreed and thus broke lawyers’ monopoly on providing legal representation.

Revealed: divorce software error hits thousands of settlements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/17/revealed-divorce-software-error-to-hit-thousands-of-settlements>
Since then, the number of McKenzie Friends who charge for their services has 
expanded rapidly. There are estimated to be more than 100, of whom 28 are 
members of theSociety of Professional McKenzie Friends 
<http://www.mckenziefriends.directory/> who carry indemnity insurance. 
Ekunbayo’s experience is typical. Having spent £15,000 on lawyers, she could no 
longer afford to retain them. “I went online and checked out how to be a 
litigant in person,” she explains. “I bought books about how to run your own 
divorce. My house filled up with so much paper I couldn’t invite friends over. 
The law as an industry makes things so inaccessible. I’m not stupid; I’m an 
architect and have a PhD but I couldn’t make sense of what was important or 
not.”

In desperation she contacted a local professional McKenzie Friend. “She helped 
me prepare. In court, she was able to sit beside me,” says Ekunbayo.

Ken Walsh, an engineer, has also hired a McKenzie Friend to help him navigate 
his way through divorce. He approached lawyers but found most hid their costs, 
providing hourly rates but not an estimate of how long cases would take. “[My 
McKenzie Friend] sits beside me in court and whispers to me. My wife has a 
barrister and whispers into her lawyer’s ear. It’s the reverse image. The legal 
profession has made [the law] unnecessarily complex. It’s contrived to keep 
fees up.”

Both Walsh and Ekunbayo are clients of Nicola Matheson-Durrant of the Family 
Law Clinic in Windsor. With a law degree and 25 years’ experience as a McKenzie 
Friend, Matheson-Durrant came to prominence last year when she exposed a
critical flaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/17/revealed-divorce-software-error-to-hit-thousands-of-settlements>
 in the Ministry of Justice’s online form for divorcing couples to record their 
assets. For years, thousands of supposedly more qualified solicitors, 
barristers and judges had failed to spot the error. Matheson-Durrant fears the 
proposed ban will criminalise those who hire alternative advisers: “Under the 
current rules, McKenzie Friends have no legal rights or standing in court. 
Courts have the discretion to allow them to do more for their clients. Anyone, 
however, can offer legal advice.

“Independent alternative legal advisers, pressure groups and charities fulfil 
the need those on low and middle incomes have for quality legal advice. I 
support freedom of the litigant in person to choose.”

But the judges’ proposed reform of court rules governing McKenzie Friends sets 
legal professionals at odds with advisers like Matheson-Durrant. Theconsultation
 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/publications/consultation-reforming-the-courts-approach-to-mckenzie-friends/>
 closes on 19 May. The “provisional view” of the Judicial Executive Board, made 
up of the jurisdiction’s most senior judges, is that courts should adopt 
Scotland’s restrictive approach and ban payments.

“Reform should prohibit recovery of expenses and fees incurred by McKenzie 
Friends,” the consultation proposes. It also suggests using a more easily 
understood name, such as “court supporter”. But another McKenzie Friend, Nicola 
Ingram, formerly a legal executive, who runs the Family Advisory Bureau in West 
Sussex, says the proposals would mean those on low incomes will suffer. 
“Prohibition of fees will put us out of business,” she says. “[Judges] don’t 
seem to have a problem with McKenzie Friends but they have a problem with them 
charging.

“That will take out the qualified lawyers and just leave those doing it for 
fun. Local solicitors charge around £250 to £300 an hour; I charge £60 an hour. 
It smacks of legal protectionism. If you bring in too much regulation, you will 
have high costs.”

But the legal profession is firmly against allowing McKenzie Friends to 
charge. Law Society president Jonathan Smithers says: “There are different 
types of McKenzie Friends. They could be family or friends, or pro-bono scheme 
volunteers who may have some legal background; and then there are those who 
charge for their services, possibly selling an expertise they are not qualified 
to offer.

McKenzie Friends are unregulated, uninsured and mostly unqualified. They 
should not be allowed to charge people

“Clients of fee-paid McKenzie Friends have no assurance of their legal 
knowledge, and are left with no redress if things go wrong. They are not 
necessarily cheaper than solicitors, who are highly regulated and deliver a 
high standard of quality service.”

There are also concerns that lack of professional status makes it easier for 
unsuitable people to act as McKenzie Friends. The chairman of the bar, 
Chantal-Aimée Doerries QC says: “McKenzie Friends are unregulated, uninsured 
and mostly unqualified. They should not be allowed to charge people for legal 
services.

“We have already seen one McKenzie Friend banned from court for intimidating 
witnesses and legal representatives, and another jailed for defrauding his 
clients.”

But Ingram points out that the legal profession is far from immune from 
inappropriate behaviour: in 2013, the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal struck 
off 75 solicitors for misbehaviour in England and Wales.

For Ekunbayo, having a McKenzie Friend was invaluable. “If I’d had a 
solicitor, the lawyers would still be arguing points of law. It would be a 
tragedy if that option was taken away. Not everyone can afford lawyers.”
 