
The government must be jolly worried about Abdel Hakim Belhaj’s historic 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/30/abdel-hakim-belhaj-court-kidnap-mi6-cia-torture>
 in the court of appeal. In allowing the Libyan dissident to sue the UK’s 
intelligence services, three appeal judges have created a “clear risk of 
serious harm to essential UK national security interests”.

That, at least, is what the court was told in evidence by Dr Laurie Bristow, 
now national security director at the Foreign Office.

Bristow thought there would be a real risk of serious harm to the UK’s 
national security interests if a court were even to hear allegations that 
foreign states had acted unlawfully. He noted that Belhaj was claiming that the 
UK had shared intelligence with the United States and other countries in order 
to help those countries carry out illegal acts against Belhaj and his wife. 
There would be serious damage to the UK’s interests if the courts ruled in the 
claimants’ favour.

Indeed, Bristow went further. “For the United Kingdom, through its courts, to 
assume the authority to judge the acts of foreign states abroad would be very 
likely to be seen as undue interference in their affairs.”

Isn’t that what the appeal court has just done? Perhaps not: Belhaj is not 
suing any foreign states directly. All the defendants are “current or former 
officers or officials of state in the United Kingdom or government departments 
or agencies”. But, as the court explained, the only reason it might be argued 
that the English courts would not have jurisdiction over the “very grave 
allegations” against these defendants was that officials from foreign states 
were allegedly involved.

The judges accepted that “the present proceedings would entail an 
investigation of the legality of the conduct of those foreign officials”. But 
that was no reason for allowing the British defendants to shelter behind the 
so-called act of state doctrine. That defence was not unlimited and there were 
compelling reasons of public policy for allowing exceptions in cases where 
grave violations of human rights – torture and unlawful rendition – were 
alleged.

As for Bristow’s evidence that there was a risk of damaging the UK’s foreign 
relations and national security interests if a court inquired into the conduct 
of a foreign state, Lord Dyson, Lord Justice Lloyd Jones and Lady Justice Sharp 
were of one voice: “We do not consider that, in the particular circumstances of 
this case, these considerations can outweigh the need for our courts to 
exercise jurisdiction.”

The judges are right to call the government’s bluff. Bristow has spelled out 
the dangers as he sees them: Congress would be particularly concerned that a UK 
court had presumed to sit in judgment on US actions outside the UK; the US 
administration would “express anger and upset”; the US might “substantially 
modify the historic intelligence-sharing relationship” it has with the UK. But 
it’s fairly clear from the extracts from Bristow’s statement quoted by the 
court that this harm would follow only if the English courts actually tried 
Belhaj’s allegations. We have not got to that stage yet.

So the government has left itself with two options. One is to appeal to the 
supreme court. It was given permission to do so because the court of appeal 
recognised that it was breaking new ground. It would be sensible to get an 
authoritative ruling on the act of state doctrine and its limitations. And the 
government might just win (though I wouldn’t put money on it).

The second option is to settle Belhaj’s claim by paying him some compensation. 
But that would not be sufficient. He wants the government to say what happened 
to him. And that’s inconsistent with the government’s invariable policy in 
intelligence and security cases, which is to “neither confirm nor deny” 
specific operations. MI6 would not even confirm or deny that Sir Mark Allen was 
director of counter-terrorism when Belhaj and his wife were detained and sent to
Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> in 2004.

But the government may have no choice. First, it needs to reassure Washington 
that no harm has yet been done, despite Bristow’s predicted apocalypse. 
Secondly, it needs to tell the US that Belhaj’s allegations will never be 
tested in a court of law. And thirdly, it will have to explain that – barring 
an unexpected rescue operation mounted by the UK supreme court – it will, for 
once, have to confirm facts that it is in no position to deny.
 