
Juventus, the champions, look set to end the year with a healthy lead in Serie 
A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> after Gonzalo Higuaín 
scored twice in a 3-1 derby victory atTorino.

A stoppage-time goal from the substitute Miralem Pjanic rubber-stamped Juve’s 
13th league win this season after Higuaín responded to Andrea Belotti’s opener 
with a goal in each half.

The result pushes the Bianconeri seven points clear of Roma and Milan, who are 
joint second before going head-to-head in the capital on Monday night.

Juve then host Roma and visit Crotone before seeing out a prosperous 2016 with 
a Supercoppa clash against Milan in Qatar just before Christmas.

Dries Mertens scored a hat-trick as Napoli ran riot at Cagliari with a 5-0 
win. Mertens was the hero in midweek when he secured Napoli’s passage into the 
last 16 of the Champions League, scoring the decisive goal in a 2-1 victory at 
Benfica.

The Belgium forward made it 13 goals for the season as Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> extended their unbeaten run in 
all competitions to eight games. Marek Hamsik and Piotr Zielinski were also on 
target in Sardinia.

Later in the day Udinese sprang a surprise with a 3-1 victory at sixth-placed 
Atalanta. Duvan Zapata brought a tight contest to life on the stroke of 
half-time but Jasmin Kurtic headed in-formAtalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> level just after the restart.

Seko Fofana restored Udinese’s lead before Cyril Thereau confirmed the outcome 
with a late goal.

Chievo condemned the bottom club, Palermo, to an eighth successive home defeat 
in the league with goals early in each half from Valter Birsa and Sergio 
Pellissier giving the visitors a 2-0 success.

In the evening game Marcelo Brozovic’s brace boosted Internazionale to a 2-0 
victory overGenoa and into the top half of the table.

The Croatian box-to-box midfielder notched the opener against the run of play 
at San Siro before blasting a powerful drive beyond the visiting goalkeeper, 
Mattia Perin, in the second half.
 