
On 14 June, the website buzzfeed.com 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/perpetua/reasons-you-wont-hear-yeezus-early> published 
a list titled Eight Reasons You Won't Hear Yeezus Early, detailing the 
remarkable security measures installed to prevent Kanye West's sixth studio 
album from leaking on to the internet before its release date. These included 
not working in recording studios, lest one of their employees make a copy of 
the music; declining to communicate with engineers or producers via email and 
keeping all work in progress not on a computer, but on a hard drive locked in 
an airtight, watertight case, that can, according to its manufacturers, 
withstand everything from plane crashes to being blown up by insurgents. "Kanye 
West," it announced, "is basically the only major star who's worked out how to 
keep his music from leaking." A grand total of four hours after this compelling 
argument appeared online, buzzfeed.com was obliged to issue a Tweet. "So much 
for all that," it read. "Yeezus has leaked."

One suggestion was that West himself might be responsible for the leak. You 
don't have to be a conspiracy theorist to note that contrary behaviour of that 
nature would certainly fit with Yeezus itself, which is as dementedly contrary 
an album as you're going to hear from a major artist this year. It is an album 
on which a man who collaborated on a$1,600 pair of sandals with footwear 
designer Giuseppe Zanotti 
<http://www.giuseppezanotticlub.com/product/giuseppe-zanotti-firewings-sandals-by-kanye-west-in-white.html>
 (who has now reduced them to $230) rails against the evil influence of 
aspirational fashion on the black community, with specific reference to the 
2011 GQ menswear designer of the year and creative director of Balenciaga: 
"spending everything on Alexander Wang – new slaves," snarls West, recently 
spotted doing his bit to emancipate African-Americans from the yoke imposed on 
them by the 2011 GQ menswear designer of the year and creative director of 
Balenciaga by wearing one of his jumpers.

It is an album that paints a compelling pen portrait of what West calls "rich 
nigger racism" – the condescending luxury goods salesman hiding his contempt 
behind a mask of obsequiousness – that would be perhaps be more compelling 
still, if the man who came up with it didn't subsequently come up with the 
line: "Eating Asian pussy, all I need is sweet and sour sauce." And it is an 
album that samples Nina Simone's version of Strange Fruit, then presses it into 
service on a song about how awful it is that Kanye West has to sit in a 
different part of the VIP area at a basketball game to his ex-girlfriend, lest 
she bump into his current girlfriend, a situation he compares to – assume the 
brace position now – apartheid. "My message isn't perfectly defined,"he told 
the New York Times recently 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/16/arts/music/kanye-west-talks-about-his-career-and-album-yeezus.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, which once you've heard Yeezus, seems like a rare moment of shy 
understatement.

There are three possible responses to this kind of thing. The straightforward 
one is that West is an idiot, so mired in a fog of narcissism and self-delusion 
that he doesn't realise the full implications of what he's saying: if you tend 
to that interpretation, you'd have plenty of company. The second is that he 
appears to be having some kind of meltdown: that Yeezus represents the most 
extreme manifestation in the history of pop of the pre-fatherhood jitters most 
men feel during their partner's first pregnancy. The other response, however, 
is that West knows exactly what he's doing and that, from its title down, 
Yeezus is intended as a deliberately contrary, ambiguous act of provocation in 
a musical world where provocation is in pretty short supply. These days, pop 
stars of West's commercial stature usually tend to bland professionalism. They 
do not adhere to the motto he offers onI Am a God 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=olD7Sebl8do>: "soon as they like you, make 'em 
un-like you."

That latter interpretation is bolstered by the fact that the music on Yeezus 
is as jarring and antagonistic and contrary as the words. It is influenced by 
EDM and Chicago house, co-opting Daft Punk – progenitors of the former, 
students of the latter – to make the kind of music some people doubtless wish 
they'd made instead of Random Access Memories: a screaming,distorted acid line 
runs through the opening On Sight <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIGeImFigq0>; 
I Am a God offers up a bass pulse overlaid with epic, cavernous synthesisers; 
the mid-tempo four-to-the-floor thud ofSend It Up 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fjSEsxxzcXA> is strafed with electronic squeals 
and bursts of menacing, growling bass. And yet, for all its dance influences, 
if West were any more intent on preventing you from dancing, he'd come round to 
your house and tie your ankles together. The beats suddenly drop out, seemingly 
unrelated sounds and textures crash into the mix, often out of time; over and 
over again I Am a God short-circuits, the bass pulse variously replaced by 
bursts of noise, arrhythmic silence – as if someone's just leaned on the pause 
button by accident – and an interlude entirely comprised of screaming and 
panting. It's simultaneously incredibly powerful and deeply disconcerting.

It's not the only point at which Yeezus seems to be going out of its way to 
unsettle the listener. The sound feels harsh and strip-lit and punishing: on 
several occasions, not least the battering bovver-glam drum and sampled 
screaming ofBlack Skinhead <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xuhl6Ji5zHM>, West 
appears to be operating under the influence of industrial music. The crackling 
old soul samples don't add their traditional warm glow: they either spin 
gratingly out of time with the beats or else are fragmented into piercing 
squeaks and squeals. When Bon Iver's Justin Vernon turns up onHold My Liquor 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wXLRgDUtuqg>, his singing is electronically 
warped until it sounds like it's been put through one of those voice changers 
documentaries and news shows use to preserve anonymity.

The lyrics often sound like a kind of unfiltered, instinctual vomiting forth 
of thoughts in a world of PR control and damage limitation. They're variously 
shocking, funny, thought-provoking, nonsensical, contradictory and occasionally 
reprehensible: the only consistent thing about them is how inconsistent they 
are. Despite that, Yeezus never sounds self-indulgent. The sonic chaos behind 
the words seems very precisely rendered, it's an album that's clearly been 
tightly edited: it clocks in at 40 minutes, which by the standards of your 
average hip-hop album, makes it the very model of brevity. It all feels 
intended, which gives further lie to the notion that its maker is either dumb 
or nuts. Perhaps he just understands better than most of his peers that musical 
stars are meant to be extraordinary, provocative, divisive, controversial 
figures. Noisy, gripping, maddening, potent, audibly the product of, as he put 
it "giving no fucks at all", Yeezus is the sound of a man just doing his job 
properly.
 