
The former justice secretary Ken Clarke has criticised as “absurd” the 
situation where a defunct scheme for sentencing prisoners to indeterminate 
sentences means a man given a 10-month term is still in prison almost 10 years 
later.

The case of James Ward, now 31, was highlighted by BBC Radio 4’s Today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36410539> after he wrote to the programme saying 
he felt “trapped in a box” over his continued incarceration under a sentencing 
programme which was abolished as a failure in 2012.
 James Ward wrote to the BBC saying he felt ‘trapped in a box’ over his 
continued incarceration. Photograph: BBC 
Ward is among thousands of prisoners still incarcerated under the imprisonment 
for public protection (IPP) system, introduced in 2003 by the then-Labour 
government. Those jailed under the guidelines must remain in jail until they 
can prove to a parole board they are no longer a threat.

Initially targeted at fewer than 1,000 serious offenders, the IPP system was 
used to sentence about 6,000 people, many for minor crimes. According to the 
BBC, 4,000 remain in jail, and 400 of these have served more than five times 
the minimum term.

Ward, who has a troubled background and mental health problems, was initially 
jailed for a year under normal sentencing guidelines for attacking his father 
during a domestic argument. But near the end of that sentence he set fire to 
his prison mattress, and received an IPP with a minimum term of 10 months. He 
has remained in jail ever since. According to his family, Ward frequently 
self-harms, barricades himself in his cell or sets light to it, and stages 
dirty protests.

Clarke, as justice secretary, abolished IPP sentences in 2012, but those who 
were jailed under them can only be freed by a parole board. “It is quite absurd 
that there are people who might be there for the rest of their lives, in 
theory, who are serving a sentence which parliament agreed to get rid of 
because it hadn’t worked as anybody intended a few years ago,” Clarke told 
Today on Monday.

“The trouble is this ridiculous burden on the parole board of saying they can 
only release people if it’s proved to them that they’re not really a danger to 
the public. No prisoner can prove that – you never know when people are going 
to lose their control, what’s going to happen to them when they’re released.”

The veteran Conservative, now a backbench MP, said the IPP was indicative of 
an approach to justice under Labour “determined for fear of the tabloid 
newspapers”.

Clarke said: “You have a few thousand people still in our prisons with no idea 
when they are going to get out and a parole board that dare not let them out 
for fear of public attack if one of them does something serious when they said 
they were satisfied that they were safe. You can’t be satisfied.”

Michael Gove, the current justice secretary, this month announced a review 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/13/michael-gove-boosts-prison-early-release-scheme-despite-skull-cr/>
 into prisoners potentially trapped in jail under IPP, saying they “need to be 
given hope that they can contribute positively to society in the future”.

Indeterminate sentences: a 'stain' on the criminal justice system | Sophie 
Barnes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/sep/18/prisoners-indeterminate-sentences-ipps>
Ward’s solicitor, Pippa Carruthers, told the BBC that his actions were 
connected to mental health problems, themselves exacerbated by prison: “He 
becomes overwhelmed. He loses sight of what he needs to do to prove to a parole 
board that he is no longer a risk, and he acts destructively.”

His sister, April, said the family were becoming desperate. “I do believe that 
one day we’ll get the phone call that Jimmy has taken his own life, 
definitely,” she said.

In letters to the programme, Ward said he was “rotting” in the system. 
According to the BBC, his case has not been reviewed for two years, and because 
of a lack of psychiatric assessment he might have to wait another year for a 
parole board hearing.

“I find prison hard to cope with, being trapped in a box,” Ward wrote. “Prison 
is not fit to accommodate people like me with mental health problems. It’s made 
me worse. How can I change in a place like this? I wake up every morning scared 
of what the day may hold.”
 