
Kevin Nolan, appointed on Thursday, was all but anointed on Saturday. Notts 
County’s manager had arrived at Meadow Lane the day after Alan Hardy’s takeover 
from Ray Trew was completed and their first game in charge was the lunchtime 
derby at home to the Stags ofMansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield>. After 10 successive league 
defeats County were the ones in a rut and the goalless draw was a triumph, 
their first clean sheet since October.

Two hours later Cheltenham’s defeat of Accrington Stanley sent the world’s 
oldest football league club below the relegation line in League Two but Nolan 
had seen reassurance enough to justify his pre-match excitement. “I’m really 
happy that I’m here,” he had said, “and can’t wait to sink my teeth into it.” 
Afterwards he was “delighted” with the team against a side who had won their 
previous three games. “We competed from start to finish. I had a chance to work 
with the players for an hour on Friday and it seems they took it all on board. 
It proved we are good enough to get results and start climbing the table.”

Hartlepool United manager Craig Hignett leaves club by mutual consent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/craig-hignett-departs-hartlepool-united-league-two>
It helped perhaps to have Alan Smith, a former team-mate at Newcastle, as 
assistant. He had taken charge for one match after Trew completed his reign by 
sacking John Sheridan. Trew got through 11 managers in seven cheerless years, 
one of them, Shaun Derry, still appearing on Soccerbase as a County player 
despite managing Cambridge since November 2015. Smith, still playing, and 
Nolan, available when Hardy clears the debts which have led to a transfer 
embargo, suggest tough organisation on and off the field. On Saturday the 
captain, Michael O’Connor, and Rob Milsom gave the back four, in which Richard 
Duffy stood out, a security that has evidently been lacking.

Hardy, locally born and a County fan, is well known in the city and has 
declared higher ambitions. Founder of a thriving office fit-out company and 
owner of Nottinghamshire Golf and Country Club, he said: “There is no reason 
why we can’t be as big as Forest.” At the present rate of striking Forest, who 
also drew goallessly, may meet them half way; they remain in hands their fans 
would rather they were out of. The city’s two clubs were last in the same 
division, the second tier, in 1994.

The new owner’s entrepreneurial instinct and identity with fans offered free 
pies on Saturday to the first 2,000 to turn up. Eventually 11,328 did, 
including Mansfield’s 3,485 – a season’s best by 3,316 without challenging the 
record set by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Hardy has stated as a priority “finding an area we can call our own training 
ground and academy. That is one of the key deliverables to unlock the success,” 
he said. On the field the key deliverables were elusive. Just after half-time a 
corner taken short led to a shot from O’Connor that took only a slight 
deflection and flew narrowly wide. But that was as close as they went, for all 
the scampering of Adam Campbell and wide possibilities of Jonathan Forte. The 
leggy, long-suffering Jon Stead got little protection from two well-armed 
stranglers at centre-back no doubt aware of his sparkling unpicking of Chelsea 
in the FA Cup two years ago with Bradford City. He has 10 goals this season.

Mansfield, probably most settled of the county’s three league clubs over the 
past few years, were hardly more creative in a game where commitment left 
little room for quality. In the first half Ben Whiteman’s shot squirted in an 
unexpected loop that had Adam Collin back-pedalling to tip away. In the second 
a rare indecision in County’s defence admitted a cross that Yoann Arquin poked 
impossibly wide of a gaping goal. But the occasion always seemed more about 
County, who hold a league record for relegations (16) and promotions (13) and 
cannot afford another of the former before one of the latter. Last year they 
enjoyed only three home league wins.

Nolan’s first foray into management, a year ago at Leyton Orient, fell foul of 
another duff owner. Saturday was not easy. The minute’s applause for Graham 
Taylor was a reminder of absolute decency in and out of the dugout and Nolan, 
acknowledging later “a brilliant reception with hairs rising on the back of his 
neck”, apologised for being “a bit emotional” without mentioning his 
grandfather, too, had just died.

The Stags’ Steve Evans, charmless as ever, could not have struck a starker 
contrast until the fourth official called the referee to intervene. It was a 
disgrace to Taylor’s name. But after Collin’s last-minute reflex save to divert 
a deflection the majority left smiling. The mood at last was too good to be 
Trew.

• John Sheridan’s dismissal by Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> gave Oldham Athletic, bottom 
of League One, the chance to engage him as manager for a fifth time, the first 
two as caretaker while still playing. What does this say about the club’s 
judgment? Or Sheridan’s? At least he kicked off with a win, 1-0 at home to 
Gillingham, in keeping with his record of more victories than defeats for them. 
It got them off the foot of the table.

• Bury, after a run of 20 matches in all competitions since September without 
a win and with 16 of them defeats, sprang back with a vengeance on Saturday. 
Since Chris Brass took over in mid-November most of their games have been 
against top-half League One clubs but Peterborough were no different in that 
and they were put to the sword 5-0 after scoring first. James Vaughan, 
threatening for some years to be a prolific striker, got four in 21 first-half 
minutes and hit the post in the second half.

• Sooner or later records go, like managers. Brighton’s positive run stretched 
even further back than Bury’s negative one – to 10 September in the 
Championship, 20 September in the EFL Cup – until Preston beat them 2-0 at 
Deepdale on Saturday. The interesting thing then is to see the response. Their 
next match is against Sheffield Wednesday on Friday at the Amex Stadium, where 
those previous two defeats took place. Wednesday are unbeaten in six, with four 
wins. Who would be the favourites?

• In League Two Paul Tisdale continues to justify Exeter City’s faith in the 
unconventional policy of not reacting too quickly in face of a run of bad 
results. Many clubs might have fingered the safety catch if the first 17 
matches produced 16 points. The next eight have added 20 and the Grecians, far 
from staring at the National League, are looking at the play-offs. Sometimes 
backing is better than sacking.
 