
It was the speech that was supposed to make clear, once and for all, what 
“Brexit means Brexit” actually means. So what did we learn from Theresa May’s 
biggest speech yet as prime minister about the kind of deal she is seeking?

Related: Theresa May's Brexit speech: 'No deal for Britain is better than a 
bad deal' - Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>

The single market

The prime minister does not want Britain to stay in the single market. This is 
no surprise: May has been repeating since the Conservative party conference in 
October that her top two Brexit priorities are controlling EU immigration and 
withdrawing from the jurisdiction of the European court of justice.

Those two objectives are incompatible with membership of the single market and 
her comments on Tuesday merely confirm that she acknowledges that.

“We will take back control of our laws and put an end to the jurisdiction of 
the European court in Britain,” May said in her speech. “I want to be clear 
that what I am proposing cannot mean membership of the single market.”

Single market membership, she said, would mean accepting the EU’s four 
freedoms – free movement of goods, services, capital and people – and 
“complying with the EU’s rules and regulations that regulate those freedoms”.

To all intents and purposes, she said, it would mean “not leaving the EU at 
all”. Instead of membership of the single market, Britain will seek “the 
greatest possible access to it through a new, comprehensive, bold and ambitious 
free trade agreement”.

That new trade agreement could, May said, include “elements of current single 
market arrangements in certain areas”, such as the freedom for the City of 
London to provide financial services across national borders, since it “makes 
no sense to start again from scratch”.

The customs union

The customs union is the EU’s common trading area: goods from outside the area 
are charged a common external tariff to cross its border and enter it; goods 
already within it can circulate and cross borders freely.

A country that is part of the customs union cannot negotiate trade deals on 
its own – which is why many felt Britain was always destined to leave it, 
because negotiating independent trade deals is a big part of what pro-Brexit 
campaigners think Brexit should mean.

Here the prime minister was less clear. “Full membership of the customs union 
prevents us from negotiating our own trade deals” outside the EU, she 
acknowledged – so she did not want Britain to be bound by the common commercial 
policy and the common external tariff.

But she also said she wanted tariff-free trade with Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and cross-border trade there to 
be “as frictionless as possible”, so she did want Britain to have a customs 
agreement with the EU.

That could come in the form of a completely new customs agreement, or Britain 
could become an associate member of the customs union in some way, or retain 
some parts of it: “I have an open mind on how we do it,” May said.

This seems to confirm the government will be looking for sector-by-sector 
deals for certain key businesses. Car parts, for example, cross EU borders 
dozens of times before completion, and customs checks would be disastrous for 
the automotive industry.

Parliamentary involvement and article 50 timing

May is apparently still determined to kick off two-year negotiations over 
Britain’s divorce from the EU by the end of March, although she made no 
reference to this in her speech on Tuesday.

This deadline may be problematic if the supreme court rules, as expected, 
later this month that parliament must vote on the formal article 50 
notification to the EU, and it could also be delayed by elections in Northern 
Ireland.

Assuming the court does rule that parliament must have its say, there is still 
no clear indication of what exactly it will get to vote on, nor on the extent 
to which MPs will be able to reframe the terms of the government’s notification 
if they do not like it.

May did, however, confirm for the first time that parliament – both the 
Commons and the Lords – would have their say on the final deal: “I can confirm 
today that the government will put the final deal that is agreed between the UK 
and the EU to a vote in both Houses of Parliament, before it comes into force.”

Controlling EU immigration

May had repeatedly said control over Britain’s borders was a Brexit priority, 
and reiterated on Tuesday: while wanting to continue to attract “the brightest 
and best to study and work in Britain”, she said “we will get control over 
number of people coming to Britain from the EU”.

Reminding her audience she was previously home office minister, May added: 
“You cannot control immigration overall when there is free movement from Europe 
... Brexit must mean control of number of people coming to Britain from Europe.”

However, the prime minister has yet to give any indication of the kind of 
immigration system she envisages for EU citizens after Brexit. She has 
previously rejected the idea of a point-based regime, and ministers have hinted 
at the possibility of work visas, but no new system has yet been formally 
announced.

A transitional deal


British business has insisted some kind of transitional arrangement with the 
EU will be essential to avoid the potential economic disaster of a 
“cliff-edge”: the UK leaving the bloc at the end of the two-year article 50 
divorce talks, with no future relationship defined.

May has spoken in the past of an “implementation period” – a set length of 
time allowing for the ground-rules of a previously agreed future relationship 
to be phased in. She repeated the term on Tuesday, saying it was “in no one’s 
interests to have a cliff-edge” so she wanted a phased process of 
implementation.

But she is opposed to the kind of interim arrangement favoured by some who 
want a lengthy (or even open-ended) transitional deal in which EU rules would 
continue to apply while the future UK-EU relationship is hashed out in detail.

An indefinite interim deal, May said, would be “permanent political purgatory” 
and she wanted “nothing that leaves us half-in, half-out”. Instead, she will 
seek to reach agreement on the future relationship within the two-year 
timeframe of the article 50 divorce talks.

They would be followed by a flexible “phased process of implementation” that 
could vary in length according to the issue concerned – immigration controls, 
customs arrangements, financial services – and the complexity of the new 
arrangements needed.

Status of EU citizens in UK and UK citizens on continent

This could have been a chance for the prime minister – as campaigners have 
demanded – to make a unilateral guarantee that the rights of the 3 million EU 
citizens living the UK would be maintained after Brexit.

For the time being, though, they look set to remain what the home secretary 
recently referred to as “negotiating capital”. May said on Tuesday that the 
government wants to guarantee their rights – and those of British citizens on 
the continent – “as early as we can”.

She said she had told other EU leaders that “we could give people the 
certainty they want straight away, and reach such a deal now”, but that while 
many were in favour, a few were not (the EU-27 has refused any such talks under 
its rule of no negotiation before notification.)

But she said she wanted “everyone to know that it remains an important 
priority for Britain – and for many other member states – to resolve this 
challenge as soon as possible”.

The EU budget

Ministers, including the Brexit secretary, David Davis, and officials have 
previously said some kind of payment into the EU’s budget might have to be part 
of whatever future trade deal the government negotiates with the EU.

May did not say much on this question, but did make clear that “because we 
will no longer be members of the single market ... the days of Britain making 
vast contributions to theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
every year will end.”

There may, though, be “some specific European programmes in which we might 
want to participate. If so, and this will be for us to decide, it is reasonable 
that we should make an appropriate contribution.”

The EEA option

The European Economic Area (EEA) is an extension of the EU’s internal market, 
made up of the 28 member states and members of the European Free Trade 
Association (EftaFTA ), which includes Norway.

Britain could become a member of the EEA after leaving the EU by joining Efta, 
giving it – like Norway – single market membership in exchange for a financial 
contribution and accepting the core principles of the EU’s internal market, 
including free movement of people.

This always looked unlikely because of the importance the government has 
placed on controlling EU free movement. May confirmed that on Tuesday, saying: 
“We do not seek to adopt a model already enjoyed by other countries.”

Her comment that Britain did not want “partial membership of the European 
Union, or associate membership of the European Union”, seemed to underline the 
point.

Ireland and the union

The prime minister again said she was committed to maintaining the pre-EU 
common travel area between Britain and Ireland and promised that the government 
would seek to avoid a “hard border” between Northern Ireland and the Republic.

She also pledged to preserve the United Kingdom, describing the union between 
England, Scotland and Wales as precious. “It is only by coming together as one 
great union of nations and people that we can make the most of opportunities 
ahead,” she said.

Tone

The perceived anti-immigration tone of the Tory party conference shocked many 
on the continent, as has the insistence by some ministers since that the EU 
would wind up cutting Britain a special deal in defiance of all its single 
market principles.

May paid lip service to the notion that if they are to be successful, 
negotiations with the EU will have to be conducted without animosity: “I want 
us to be ... the best friend and neighbour to our European partners,” she said.


Referring repeatedly to “our friends and allies in the EU”, the prime minister 
added she had no interest in the bloc unravelling: “It remains overwhelmingly 
and compellingly in Britain’s national interest that the EU should succeed.”

But she warned that if the EU 27 heeded those “voices calling for a punitive 
deal that punishes Britain”, it would amount to “an act of calamitous self-harm 
for the countries of Europe. And it would not be the act of a friend.”

She also stressed that “no deal for Britain is better than a bad deal for 
Britain”, and repeated chancellor Philip Hammond’s veiled threat that if it 
does not get the deal it wants, Britain could become a low-tax rival, saying 
the government was “free to change the basis of Britain’s economic model”.

Conclusion

We have a greater degree of clarity on what May’s Brexit objectives are, but 
they remain objectives. All is yet to be negotiated, and it is far from clear 
how much the EU 27 will be prepared to concede. So we know more about what 
“Brexit means Brexit” will not mean – but little, still, about what it will.



 