
The case of a man who was jailed for life 17 years ago for the murder of a 
Liverpool bookmaker is being re-examined by theCriminal Cases Review Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/criminal-cases-review-commission>.

 Johnny Kamara, now aged 42, has consistently protested he had no part in the 
stabbing of John Suffield during a botched robbery in 1981.

 The commission is examining allegations that Kamara's identity parade was 
unfair, and that another man later confessed to police that he committed the 
murder.

 A spokeswoman for the commission yesterday confirmed the case had been 
referred by the Home Office, but said it was unclear when a decision would be 
made.

 "We are in the middle of an investigation and there is quite a lot of work to 
be done," she said. "It will probably be some months before we make a decision."

During Kamara's trial, Liverpool crown court heard that he and accomplice 
Raymond Gilbert <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/raymond-gilbert> stabbed 
Suffield 19 times during the robbery at the betting shop he managed in the 
Toxteth area of Liverpool.

 Gilbert changed his plea to guilty during the trial, and while Kamara 
protested his innocence, the jury convicted him of the same charge.

 Kamara's case will be featured in a Channel 4 documentary, Trial and Error, 
to be screened tonight. The programme will present evidence which it claims 
casts doubt on the fairness of Kamara's identity parade.

 The programme also reveals that six years after the trial, another criminal 
confessed to police that he was the second man involved in the murder. However, 
because he refused to confirm his confession, Merseyside police and the Home 
Office decided it was insufficient to throw doubt on his conviction.

 Kamara's is the latest in a long line of cases to be reviewed by the 
commission, established in 1997 in the wake of several miscarriages of justice 
cases including the Birmingham Six and the Guildford Four.

 The commission has reviewed 613 cases of alleged miscarriages of justice, 
with a further 490 under review and 1,020 waiting to be looked at.

 As of the end of November, 34 cases had been referred to the Court of Appeal. 
Of the 10 cases heard so far, eight convictions have been quashed.
 