
Korean Air Lines has said it will allow crew members to “readily use stun 
guns” to manage in-flight disturbances, after beingcriticised by US singer 
Richard Marx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/singer-richard-marx-restrain-man-flight-crew-korean-air>
 for its handling of an incident involving a violent passenger.

The South Korean carrier also said on Tuesday it will beef up security 
training of crew members.

 Last week, Marx said on Facebook and Twitter he helped initially subdue “a 
psycho passenger attacking crew members and other passengers”. He also accused 
crew members of being “ill-trained” and “ill-equipped” to handle the “chaotic 
and dangerous event”.

Marx’s wife, Daisy Fuentes, who was with the singer during the flight from 
Vietnam toSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>, said on 
Instagram that crew members “didn’t know how to use the taser & they didn’t 
know how to secure the rope around him (he got loose from their rope restraints 
3 times)”.

Korean Air Lines said on Tuesday its crew members were “hesitant” to use taser 
guns because they were permitted for use on only “grave” situations which 
jeopardise the life of a passenger or crew member or the safety of a flight.

On our flight from Hanoi to Seoul a guy sitting in the next row from us got 
crazy & started attacking the flight attendants & passengers. When he started 
pushing the female staff and pulling them by the hair @therichardmarx was the 
first to help subdue him. This went on for FOUR hrs. I feel horrible for the 
abuse the staff had to endure but no one was prepared for this. They never 
fully got control of him. They didn't know how to use the taser & they didn't 
know how to secure the rope around him (he got loose from their rope restraints 
3 times). I'll be posting some of the video after our next flight. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOPJdvCD4qh/>

A photo posted by DAISY (@daisyfuentes) on Dec 20, 2016 at 3:07am PST

 “We have decided to improve our conditions and procedure on using Taser guns 
to cope with violent acts and disturbances on board in a fast and efficient 
manner,” it said in a statement, without elaborating on how it would revise the 
rules.

 However, a spokesman said the changes would ease conditions on using Taser 
guns so that crew can “readily use stun guns”.

In South Korea, the number of unlawful acts committed aboard planes has more 
than tripled in the past five years, according to government data.

 Video footage of the recent incident posted on YouTube showed a young man in 
a business class seat spitting and swearing at crew members trying to restrain 
him with a rope.

 On Monday, the passenger appeared for questioning by police, wearing a mask, 
thick-rimmed glasses and a hat. He apologised for his behaviour but said he 
could not remember what had happened, according to video shown by broadcaster 
SBS.
 