
A Labour MP has walked free from court after a sheriff described allegations 
that she had assaulted aScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> campaigner as “a 
storm in a teacup”.

Sheriff Kenneth Hogg found the charge that Marie Rimmer had kicked yes 
campaigner Patricia McLeish on the day of the independence referendum in 
September 2014 was not proven, a verdict under Scottish law short of being 
found not guilty.

The sheriff said he was not convinced that either party was telling the full 
truth, but wished the police had greater discretion in such cases. This was a 
“storm in a teacup”, he said, and a “yellow card would have been preferable to 
a red”.

Rimmer, the MP for St Helens South and Whiston, had been cleared of a second 
charge of acting in a threatening or abusive manner on Tuesday after 
prosecutors agreed she had no case to answer as there was insufficient evidence 
to prove she had been abusive.

The case focused on an apparent confrontation between Rimmer, then a Labour 
councillor who was inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to 
support the no vote, and McLeish, a trade union member and activist in the 
Solidarity party, as they canvassed outside a referendum polling station in 
Shettleston, Glasgow on 18 September.

McLeish alleged that Rimmer had been aggressive and kicked her in the shin 
after stepping up to her in an intimidatory manner. Rimmer said she was
astonished by the accusations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/01/labour-mp-shocked-to-be-accused-of-kicking-yes-campaigner>
, which she vehemently denied.


The MP said she had tried to engage McLeish in conversation after the 
independence activist had verbally attacked her, calling her a “red Tory” and 
claimingLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> had wrecked the 
NHS.

“I would never dream of hurting anyone or kicking anyone,” Rimmer had told the 
court. “I wasn’t aggressive, anything but. If anyone was aggressive, it was Ms 
McLeish against me.”

Hogg said that he had been astonished at some of the evidence he had heard. “I 
am not clear any party in this case, apart from the lady police officer, has 
told me what really happened on that day. I have unease with the whole evidence 
and am still unable to form a clear picture,” he said.

The court heard lawyers for both sides arguing about the validity of the case. 
Liam Ewing, Rimmer’s defence solicitor, said there was “an inescapable” 
political context to the case which made it more significant than it might 
otherwise have been.


Adele MacDonald, a fiscal depute, insisted the evidence had made clear it was 
not a malicious allegation but had actually happened.
 