
Labour MPs are expected to be split on Wednesday over whether to back a 
cross-party motion calling forTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> to be held to account for his 
role in the Iraq war after he was criticised by the Chilcot report.

Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader and long-term critic of Blair, is expected to 
stay away from the debate called by the SNP but otherLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs are likely to turn up to 
fiercely defend the former prime minister’s record.

There is only a one-line whip on attendance by Labour MPs but those who turn 
up are expected to vote against.

The motion reads that the Chilcot inquiry “provided substantial evidence of 
misleading information being presented by the then prime minister and others on 
the development of the then government’s policy towards the invasion of Iraq”. 
It goes on to call for parliamentary committees of the house to investigate and 
take appropriate action.

In addition to the SNP, the motion is backed by MPs from across the Commons 
including several from Labour, the Conservatives, the Liberal Democrats, the 
Green party, Plaid Cymru and the SDLP.

Alex Salmond, the SNP former first minister of Scotland, released a report by 
a Cambridge academic, Dr Glen Rangwala, which examines the contrast between 
Blair’s public statements to parliament and his private correspondence with the 
then US president, George W Bush.

Before the debate on Wednesday afternoon <>, Salmond said: “MPs from parties 
from across the House of Commons have put their political differences aside in 
a stand to call for parliament to investigate the extent to which this house 
was held in such blatant contempt.

“Blair’s premeditated and calculated commitment to Bush that ‘I will be with 
you whatever’ will forever ring loud for the millions who marched against the 
war, to the families of dead soldiers and to hundreds of thousands of Iraqis 
who lost their lives due to an illegal invasion based on deception and deceit.

“At a time when Blair is planning his political comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/tony-blair-brexit-could-be-stopped-if-britons-change-their-minds>
, it is high time that this parliament and its committees at long last brought 
this dark stain on UK foreign policy to a close by investigating how such grave 
misleading occurred and taking the appropriate action to avoid it happening 
again.”

Caroline Lucas, the co-leader of the Green party, urged the Labour leadership 
to vote in favour of the motion.

“Top figures in the Labour party like Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell fought 
long and hard against the Iraq war, and have called for those who led us into 
the disastrous conflict to be held to account. To now back away from taking the 
action to match their words would be deeply disappointing and would damage the 
prospects of learning serious lessons from what went wrong in the run-up to war 
inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>,” Lucas said.

“Labour should not shy away from their role in Iraq, and shouldn’t be 
protecting Blair and his allies from being held to account for the actions 
which led this country into military intervention. We must learn lessons from 
the Iraq disaster. That’s why I’m working with MPs from across the political 
divide in calling on the public administration select committee of the house to 
further examine the lack of any process of accountability following the damning 
evidence presented by the Chilcot report. We were taken to war in a duplicitous 
way, and our political system must match that knowledge with a process that 
holds those responsible to account.”
 