
Buy to let landlords are scrambling to avoid the impact of tax changes that 
come into effect next year, a report has found.

The Buy to Let Britain report found landlords were restructuring their 
portfolios to escape higher taxes on their rental income, which will be phased 
in from April 2017. Some landlords have set up limited companies, it said, 
while others have increased rents or transferred properties to family members.

The report, compiled by mortgage lender Kent Reliance, also found that the 
average rent in Great Britain has hit a record high of £881 a month, and 
landlords indicated they intended to raise prices by an average of 5.4% – the 
equivalent of £571 a year for households.

Buy-to-let lending falls as tougher rules bite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/buy-to-let-lending-nationwide-tax-changes-landlords>
It also revealed strong house price growth has pushed the value of rented 
accommodation in the UK to £1.3tn, up by 16% in the last year to September.


The buy-to-let tax changes, which were unsuccessfully opposed in court by 
landlords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/06/landlords-lose-legal-challenge-buy-to-let-tax-changes-cherie-booth>
 represented by Cherie Booth, were introduced in the 2015 budget to level the 
playing field for owner-occupiers and investors. At the time the then 
chancellor George Osborne said buy-to-let landlords had a “huge advantage” over 
homebuyers. “And the better off the landlord, the more tax relief they get,” he 
added.


Currently, landlords can offset their entire mortgage interest costs against 
the rent they get from a property before they declare an income, but over the 
next four years that will be changed so that by 2021 just 20% of the interest 
will be subject to tax relief.


Kent Reliance said an increasing number of landlords were holding their 
properties in limited companies, which are not subject to the same taxes. In 
the first nine months of this year, 100,000 limited company loans were taken 
out by landlords buying properties, it said – double the number for all of 
2015. In March, as purchases soared ahead of a new higher rate of stamp duty on 
second homes, 20,500 of the loans were taken out.

The lender said demand for this type of arrangement was likely to grow “as the 
tax changes bite”, and could account for two-thirds of buy-to-let loans in 
2017. A survey of 900 landlords found that 11% had already incorporated, or had 
moved holdings to a lower-rate tax-paying spouse or partner. A further 25% were 
considering making one of those changes.

The bad news for tenants is that landlords are also considering raising rents 
to make up for lost income. A third of those questioned said they expected to 
hike rents in the next six months, with two-thirds of them blaming the tax 
change.

Andy Golding, chief executive of OneSavings Bank, which owns Kent Reliance, 
said: “The stamp duty levy clearly took its toll on the market, and combined 
with the forthcoming tax changes, landlords have felt at the mercy of a 
political agenda. But confidence is returning as landlords take action to limit 
the damage to their finances. The use of limited companies is soaring, and 
rents are increasing, even after one of the biggest surges in rental supply in 
recent history.”


Bank of England given new powers to curb risky buy-to-let lending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/bank-england-powers-curb-buy-to-let-lending-mortgages>
Golding said the measures, which were designed to help aspiring 
owner-occupiers, would achieve the opposite. “We have warned all along that the 
tax changes will push up rents, and this is already starting to happen,” he 
said. “Only through a substantive and long-term building programme across all 
tenures will we see an end to escalating house prices and rents.”

David Hollingworth of mortgage broker London & Country said there were 
advantages to using a limited company to buy property, but landlords should 
consider the implications. “You cannot just transfer a property into a company 
– you have to sell it to the company and that could trigger other costs,” he 
said. “While corporation tax is low, you do have to think about things like how 
you will get your income out of the company.”

Hollingworth said the structure was unlikely to help anyone with just one or 
two buy-to-let properties.

The Residential Landlords Association (RLA) said its research had found that 
40% of landlords had considered switching to limited company status, but that 
four in five had decided it was unsuitable.

Andrew Goodacre, RLA chief executive, said such a move was positive for new 
properties only.

He said: “Ultimately though, we need to encourage landlords to develop new 
properties whatever status. That is why the RLA believes the mortgage interest 
changes should apply only to new borrowing and that the stamp duty levy should 
not apply where a landlord invests in property that adds to the net supply of 
housing.”
 