
It's 29 years since I last went on a family holiday. I was 11 and spent most 
of it sulking in the back of a car in France, soaking up an atmosphere of 
simmering resentment. I haven't missed them much, but you get a husband, have a 
baby – what can you do? All I knew was that I didn't want to spend my next one 
sulking in a car. I wanted somewhere warm, with more to see than dispiriting 
rows of sun loungers, that respected adults while catering for toddlers.

Lanzarote may not seem the obvious choice, but flee its flop-and-drop resorts 
for the north and this Canary Island comes into its own. We stayed nearArrieta 
<http://lanzaroteretreats.com/info/about-lanzarote/places-visit/arrieta-fishing-village/>
, a crisp, white fishing village crisscrossed with cobbled alleyways next to 
the clean sand of La Garita beach.

While Arrieta felt traditional, a throwback to pre-package-holiday days, the 
retreat where we stayed was unique. Finca de Arrieta started as a tumbledown 
farm and grew with its owners, Michelle and Tila Braddock. They renovated the 
farmhouse and barns, moving from one to the other as their family expanded, 
letting the properties they'd outgrown. A guest suggested that a yurt would 
make a useful extra bedroom and that really set the ball rolling. The property 
now comprises 11 self-catering properties, a mix of buildings and luxury yurts, 
all off-grid, with a communal veranda and two large sunken water tanks serving 
as splash pools. The yurts come with kitchens and bathrooms so you can pretend 
to impressionable children that you're camping yet still enjoy a massive double 
bed and cook with a fully fitted oven.
 Alice and Robin by their yurt in Lanzarote. Photograph: Observer 
You won't know how great the Finca is unless you have kids. My daughter thinks 
6am is a lie-in. That's at least four hours to fill before any shop, café or 
tourist attraction opens. I don't know what I'd have done without Molly the 
donkey, the clutch of chickens and the children's playground at the Finca. No 
one wants to be on a trampoline as the sun rises but as the alternative was 
staring into her adorable, shouting, bored face, most mornings I could have 
kissed its coiled steel springs.

This was all amazing, but not enough. I get as irked as a toddler without some 
cultural distraction. And this was where Lanzarote really surprised me. The 
island has fascinating landmarks thanks to the vision of one man. Local artist 
and architectCésar Manrique <http://www.cesarmanrique.com/fundacion_i.htm> 
loved Lanzarote and dedicated his life to preserving its natural volcanic 
charm. His influence on planning regulations from the late 60s onwards has kept 
the island's resorts low rise and their architecture close to traditional 
styles. He also designed facilities at many key attractions, mainly in the late 
60s to early 70s, and his take on luxury tourism that respects the environment 
is remarkable.

Lanzarote is a Unesco-designated biosphere reserve and has many sites of 
great, unusual beauty, such as the Mirador del Río lookout post in the Famara 
mountains, the volcanic wastelands inTimanfaya national park 
<http://www.discoverlanzarote.com/timanfaya.asp> and Jameos del Agua 
<http://www.lanzarote.com/jameos-del-agua/>'s surreal underground lake, part of 
a vast lava tube. These have all been augmented with Manrique's equally 
stunning manmade additions – grand concert auditoriums, swimming pools and 
restaurants.
 Camp it up: a luxury yurt at Finca de Arrieta. Photograph: Ronn Ballantyne 
While the architecture works with Lanzarote's rather severe landscape, the 
interiors are all about Manrique. They are beautifully preserved time-warp 
examples of 1960s modern design, full of leather banquettes, picture windows 
and abstract metal sculptures. You will not visit a more elegant sightseers' 
café than that at Mirador del Río. Even changing a nappy felt slightly 
sophisticated when done in the toilets at El Diablo, the restaurant Manrique 
designed in Timanfaya. The architect built his own home in Tahíche in 1968, 
based around a series of five subterranean lava bubbles, and it looks like the 
sort of place that Dr No would have come to work on his tan. The building now 
houses theCésar Manrique Foundation, 
<http://www.cesarmanrique.com/fundacion_i.htm> which continues his conservation 
work, and a rather excellent art collection.

What I thought would be a limp compromise was a revelation. Family isn't such 
an impediment to a good time after all. Especially if you go to Lanzarote. From 
the moment you arrive, the island's sun, sand and sea shouts holiday, but there 
are also many subtler, more unexpected sights and experiences to be had on its 
peculiar craggy shores. Go. You simply won't have time to sulk.

Essentials

Alice Fisher travelled courtesy of the Lanzarote Tourist Board and stayed at 
Finca de Arrieta (lanzaroteretreats.com <http://lanzaroteretreats.com/>), where 
yurts cost from £495 per week. Monarch has flights to Lanzarote from 
Birmingham, East Midlands, Gatwick, Luton, Leeds, Bradford and Manchester from 
£145 return including taxes (monarch.co.uk <http://www.monarch.co.uk/>). More 
details on Lanzarote atturismolanzarote.com/en  
<http://turismolanzarote.com/en/>
 