
Britons on stag parties to the Latvian capital, Riga, will not be welcomed 
with open arms, according to its mayor.

The city has run out of patience with unruly British tourists who head there 
for boozy breaks, putting off other potential visitors, the mayor, Nils 
Usakovs, has told a Latvian magazine.

Riga is a popular destination for stag parties, along with Budapest, Prague, 
Bratislava, Tallinn and a handful of other central and eastern European cities.

But rowdy parties in search of cheap beer are deterring a wider range of 
visitors asLatvia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/latvia> struggles to fight 
off a deepening recession.

Usakovs told Rigas Laiks magazine <http://www.rigaslaiks.lv/>: "The only 
problem is that we have a large share of those British tourists.

"If we also had other tourists, then British visitors who piss about all the 
time would not be as noticeable. Let's not be politically correct – 
unfortunately, this is their speciality."

The biggest complaint is tourists who urinate on Riga's Freedom Monument, 
honouring soldiers killed during the Latvian war of independence, according to 
the mayor.

Visitors have regularly been arrested and fined for relieving themselves on 
the 42-metre monument, or climbing on it naked to pose for pictures.

Last year, the country's then interior minister, Mareks Seglins, hit out at 
"English pigs" for being a "dirty, hoggish people" after a British tourist was 
sentenced to five days in prison when he was caught urinating on the monument.

The president, Valdis Zatlers, condemned his negative comments.

A spokeswoman for Usakovs said Riga's problems started with the arrival of 
low-budget airlines.

"The British first started to make bachelor parties, and the most popular 
thing was using our monument of liberty as a toilet. We have a stigma about 
British tourists. They are probably not the ones we want to see," she said.

"We are thinking about making a tourist police who will be located in the old 
town and will pay more attention to these tourist issues."
 