
You might have expected the Cambridge United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cambridge-united> manager, Shaun Derry, to 
be pleased that his side gave Leeds United, a team two divisions above his own, 
a significant scare in their FA Cup third round tie on Monday. Not a bit of it. 
“I’ve got disappointment seeping through my blood,” said Derry, after Leeds 
came from a goal down to seal victory at the Cambs Glass Stadium.

Derry’s disappointment stemmed from an eight-minute second half spell in which 
Leeds scored two virtually identical goals, through Stuart Dallas and Alex 
Mowatt, when Cambridge had dominated the first half and could have added to 
Uche Ikpeazu’s opener. “Yes, we can walk out with our heads held high in many 
respects, but I’m disappointed we didn’t come in 2-0 up at half-time,” said 
Derry, a man clearly not satisfied with moral victories.

Before the game the Leeds manager, Garry Monk, had promised he would “respect” 
the competition with his team selection but he made eight changes: he would 
protest it was not a weakened side but eyes were clearly and understandably on 
Friday’s big game against Derby.

The calculated gamble looked like it had backfired before the break, as the 
hosts troubled the Leeds defence with a style of play that can be filed under 
“no frills”, but without being agricultural.

FA Cup fourth-round draw: Southampton or Norwich v Arsenal, Manchester United 
v Wigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/fa-cup-fourth-round-draw-arsenal-southampton-norwich-manchester-united-wigan>
The vast Ikpeazu in particular seemed to disquiet the usually sturdy Pontus 
Jansson. The Leeds defender, who with his mohawk resembles a video game 
henchman, seemed to have met his match. A booking means he will miss the Derby 
game, while a second-half injury to Liam Cooper had Monk joking he would hunt 
for his boots, so light are they at the back.

Cambridge’s fine play was rewarded when Luke Berry, whose straggly locks gave 
him a look of a budget Karel Poborsky, thumped a free-kick into the wall and 
the ball broke loose for Ikpeazu on the right side of the area. He spun with 
ballerina delicacy and shot home via a flick off the near post.

They pressed for another before the break, and on the balance of play they 
should have got one. “I wanted us to take the game to the opposition,” said 
Derry. “We got right under their skin.” Everything Leeds tried seemed not to 
work: back passes were under hit, first touches bounced away like rubber balls 
off rubber walls, passes slipped through legs. Everything, that is, until the 
56th minute.

Mowatt, Leeds’s best player on the night, clipped a cross to the back post 
where Dallas nodded it back into the six-yard box and into the corner. It would 
be a stretch to say Leeds deserved to be level but the brittleness that showed 
in the Cambridge defence must have encouraged Monk that a breakthrough would 
surely come.

Eight minutes later they took the lead, and in very similar fashion. This time 
Jansson rose, won the header and there was Mowatt to help the ball into the 
net. The similarity of the two goals was the source of Derry’s frustration.

Liverpool held by Plymouth and other FA Cup tales – Football Weekly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2017/jan/09/liverpool-held-by-plymouth-and-other-fa-cup-tales-football-weekly>
“I’m gutted at the goals we conceded tonight,” he said. “You always know when 
you play against a higher opponent that they always have that little switch 
they can turn. If they drop their shoulder and ping one in from 35 yards, 
there’s your moment of quality. But they were standard crosses into the box.”

For Leeds, it was a job done, and perhaps a glimpse of what Mowatt, a player 
whose career has drifted a little, is capable of. The midfielder looked a star 
in the making when he broke into the first team a few years ago but has started 
only four league games this season.

Yet while this was “only” a League Two side, his performance suggests he could 
feature more as the season goes on. “It’s never easy when you haven’t had many 
minutes, but he epitomised everything good we did tonight,” said Monk afterwards

Cambridge came back in the latter stages, Ikpeazu creating more problems, but 
a late goalmouth scramble, surely the most fitting way to finish anFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie such as this, resulted in 
nothing, and Leeds held on.

They now face another trip to rustic surroundings in the fourth round, where 
they will play either AFC Wimbledon or Sutton United. “That’s the FA Cup,” said 
Monk.
 