
Fresh legal safeguards are needed to prevent police and the security services 
from eavesdropping on meetings between lawyers and their clients, according to 
the legal profession.

A joint statement from the Bar Council, the Law Society and Scotland’s Faculty 
of Advocates has called for greater protection fromthe mass internet and 
telephone surveillance revealed by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/nsa-secret-surveillance-lawmakers-live>
.

A case had already been taken to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal challenging 
GCHQ and other intelligence agencies overclaims that they listened in to 
conversations between the Libyan dissidents Abdel Hakim Belhaj and Sami 
El-Saadi and their lawyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/intelligence-agencies-lawyer-client-abdel-hakim-belhaj-mi5-mi6-gchq>
. Both men were subjected to rendition and forcibly returned to Colonel Gaddafi 
in Libya in 2004.

The new chairman-elect of the Bar Council, Alistair MacDonald QC said: 
“Communications between lawyers and their clients should remain confidential. 
If the state eavesdrops on privileged communications to gather intelligence, 
clients will feel unable to speak openly with their lawyers. In many cases, the 
effect will be that such cases cannot properly be put and a just result will 
not be achieved.”

Andrew Caplen, president of the Law Society which represents solcitors in 
England and Wales, said: “For many years [we have] called for a review of the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. The absence of explicit statutory 
protection for legal professional privilege remains a matter of serious concern 
to us.

“Ripa is not fit for purpose. Law enforcement agencies fail to routinely 
record the professions of individuals who have had their communications data 
accessed. There needs to be explicit protection for legal professional 
privilege in the act.”

James Wolffe QC, dean of the Faculty of Advocates, said: “Lawyer-client 
confidentiality matters to anyone who needs or might need legal representation. 
It is a core value of the legal profession across Europe.”

The only situation in which private communications between lawyer and client, 
known as legal professional privilege, should be capable of being spied on is 
when they are believed to be in furtherance of a criminal purpose, the lawyers 
argue.

MacDonald added: “After the House of Lords ruled in 2009 that Ripa can be used 
by the security services and police to obtain legally privileged information, 
the government created a series of codes to address the issue of legal 
professional privilege.

“For years we have argued that they are not effective, and we are delighted to 
make common cause with Bar Councils and Law Societies across Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, as well as with the Faculty of Advocates, in demanding 
primary legislation.”

The Home Office said: “The privilege attached to the contents of 
communications between lawyer and client must be protected. Robust safeguards, 
including oversight by the Interception Commissioner, are set out in the 
statutory interception of communications code of practice.”
 