
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> may not have 
made quite as sizzling a start to the season as their Premier League football 
neighbours but they have lost only once in 10 matches and victory over hapless 
Treviso here next month should take them into the last eight of a tournament 
they last won 13 years ago.

It was a day for the 13s: Leicester’s Peter Betham and Munster’s Francis Saili 
provided what gloss there was on an evening of graft and whileMunster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> provided more obdurate opposition 
than they had the previous week, there is a cussedness about the Tigers, a 
quality the Irish province knows all about, that lifts them when they are not 
at their best.

Clermont Auvergne back on track for Champions Cup after mauling Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/20/clermont-auvergne-exeter-chiefs-match-report>
The England head coach, Eddie Jones, was among the spectators as he scours the 
country in the hope of sighting an elusive species, a genuine openside flanker. 
He would have noted the impact made by Leicester’s Brendon O’Connor who, after 
struggling at the breakdown like the rest of his side, came to master it.

The Tigers used the staples of scrum and lineout to take control of a game 
they could not get any grasp of for a long time. It took them 17 minutes to 
earn their first penalty, O’Connor forcing CJ Stander to hold on to the ball 
after a tackle, and, although their progress was delayed when a powerful scrum 
drive ended in a penalty for Munster, Telusa Veainu’s thrust into midfield 
provided the position for the Leicester captain, Ed Slater, to lift himself 
into the air and over the line.

A game was threatening to break out at this stage, with Munster showing the 
sustained intensity that had been lacking eight days before, but despite the 
rarity of a dry day, skills did not match ambition. Munster blew two tries 
through a handling error and a forward pass and, when Leicester sustained 
pressure for the first time in the second half, Ben Youngs’s fumble 15 metres 
from the line provided Saili with the chance of a breakout.

The All Black made it as far as the Leicester 22 where, as he was about to be 
overhauled by Veainu, he found Simon Zebo who looked certain to score but Adam 
Thompstone summed up Leicester’s spirit by coming across from his wing to make 
the game’s decisive play. Saili had been denied a try at the start of the 
second period by his opposite number Betham and it was Betham who jinked inside 
Saili and Mark Chisholm with 15 minutes to go and popped a pass to Vereniki 
Goneva for the Tigers’ second and conclusive try.

It was hard on Saili, an outside-centre worthy of the international arena 
whose Test career stalled after two caps because he was unlucky to be a 13 in 
New Zealand, who was at the heart of most that was good about Munster. He 
followed up successfully chasing a high kick by offloading out of the back of 
his hand as he hit the ground but the Irish province did not have enough 
quality to complement his.

Leicester led 10-3 at half-time, Freddie Burns kicking a penalty on 35 minutes 
in his first match of the season after recovering from injury, but he missed a 
kick from in front of the posts after the break. Ian Keatley was off target 
twice, costly in a low-scoring game. Munster did not secure a group point from 
Leicester in the two matches, something that may cost them a place in the last 
eight. They have the consolation of a sure five points against Treviso but will 
probably need to defeat the Top 14 champions, Stade Français, home and away to 
make the last eight.

The departure of Paul O’Connell to Toulon marked the end of Munster’s golden 
era. Keatley has yet to prove a match-winner in the mould of Ronan O’Gara and 
the Munster of old would have closed out a match that was there to be won but 
it is a period of regrowth for them. “They played very well and will be 
disappointed not to have got more from the game,” said the Leicester director 
of rugby, Richard Cockerill. “They will grow again organically.”

Cockerill had some advice for his fellow former hooker Jones, who last week was
reported to be considering Dylan Hartley as his captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/17/dylan-hartley-england-captain-eddie-jones>
 for the Six Nations. There is nothing, even in the season of goodwill, likely 
to provoke someone as steeped in Leicester as Cockerill as the spotlight 
falling on the club’s east Midlands rivals Northampton.

“I do not know where all this talk about Hartley is,” Cockerill said. “Tom 
Youngs was outstanding today and he is the best hooker in England by a country 
mile. Maybe he should captain England and he should definitely be the first 
name on the teamsheet. He leads by example in the way he plays and behaves.”

Leicester Veainu; Thompstone, Betham, Smith, Goneva (Bai, 71); Burns (Bell, 
66), B Youngs (Harrison, 75); Ayerza (Aguero, 70) T Youngs (Thacker, 72) Cole 
(Balmain, 57) Fitzgerald (Croft, 51), Kitchener, Slater (capt), O’Connor, 
McCaffrey.

Tries Slater, Goneva. Cons Burns 2. Pen Burns.

Sin-bin Barrow 40.

Munster Conway; Earls, Saili, Hurley (Amorosino, 74), Zebo; Keatley (R 
Scannell, 66), Murray (O’Leary, 59); Cronin (Kilcoyne, 65), Sherry (N Scannell, 
69), Ryan (Sagario, 74), Foley, Chisholm (Holland, 69), Copeland, O’Callaghan 
(O’Donoghue, 51), Stander (capt).

Pens Keatley 2.

Referee J Garcès (Fr).

Attendance 21,645.
 