
Richard Cockerill has admitted Manu Tuilagi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manu-tuilagi> was tempted by substantial 
offers from rival clubs before agreeing a new three-year contract with 
Leicester that has made the England centre one of the highest paid players in 
the Premiership.

Historically Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> 
have not been drawn into offering inflated salaries to individuals, preferring 
to spread the salary cap allowance more evenly. But after missing out on two 
successive Premiership finals they were determined to keep Tuilagi, 24, when it 
became known Saracens were interested in the player, although he has not 
appeared for 14 months because of a groin injury but is set for a return after 
Christmas.

Leicester this week announced that four of their England players had signed 
new contracts, Tuilagi, Ben Youngs, Ed Slater and Freddie Burns. “The talks 
were relatively straightforward, apart from those with Manu,” said Cockerill, 
Leicester’s director of rugby. “There was the supposed interest of other clubs 
offering him a lot more money and that turned his head and made the process 
longer. You have to think things through and make sure he comes to the right 
decision, which he did.”

Richard Cockerill angry at ‘obscene offers’ for Leicester’s Manu Tuilagi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/25/richard-cockerill-leicester-tigers-wasps-worcester-manu-tuilagi-angry>
Cockerill said claims that Tuilagi’s salary had risen to £425,000 a year were 
inaccurate. “I do not know what the rest of them get paid,” he said when asked 
if Tuilagi was to become the highest paid player in England. “The reports of 
what Manu is getting paid here are a bit exaggerated. Once contracts are 
signed, we move on. The press will speculate about what he or someone else 
earns but I am not interested in that. Manu is our player, so is Ben Youngs, 
Freddie Burns and Ed Slater.

“We are talking to a few other players who are coming out of contract. When 
you are spending money at the top end and paying guys more with the salary cap 
increasing, you have to find the budget and make sure that the jigsaw fits. 
Sometimes you have to get the bigger pieces in place before you can put the 
others together. We are big-hitters in the game. We get criticised that we are 
not in the market for marquee players but the four we have re-signed would all 
be marquee if they went somewhere else.”

Slater, the Leicester captain, said keeping Tuilagi, left, showed the club’s 
ambition. “It is a big statement,” he added. “Manu didn’t want to chase the 
money, otherwise he wouldn’t have re-signed. The whole package he saw at 
Leicester was more important than getting money elsewhere.”

Leicester will be without the flanker Matt Williams for the next three months. 
He broke his left arm playing against his former club, Worcester, last weekend 
and has had surgery. “He made a tackle and instead of going down he got back 
into the defensive line,” said Cockerill. “I don’t know whether he is daft or 
brave but it just shows his attitude is fantastic.”

Meanwhile the Wales and Lions No8 Taulupe Faletau, who had hoped to join Bath 
at the end of the World Cup only for the move to be blocked by the national 
head coach, Warren Gatland, is in talks with Newport Gwent Dragons and the 
Welsh Rugby Union about signing the national dual contract he rejected last 
season.

One player who will not be on a dual contract next season is the centre Scott 
Williams, who led Wales in a World Cup warm-up match. He has sparked a bidding 
war between his region, theScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>
, and Ospreys, taking him out of the WRU’s price bracket.

“It’s over to the regions really to try and keep Scott,” said the WRU 
chairman, Gareth Davies. “The central contract from us has been withdrawn after 
some of the regions started upping the ante. Funding issues mean we cannot 
centrally contract everybody and it is important that the regions and the union 
work together to ensure we retain as many players as possible.”
 