
The Thomond Park spectators exhorted their players to stand up and fight 
before the start of Saturday’s Champions Cup match againstLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, a year after many of them 
stood up and walked out as the Tigers completed the first leg of a European 
double over the Irish province.

This year Leicester sat down and capitulated, not for the first time on the 
road in the last three seasons. Their director of rugby Richard Cockerill 
afterwards pointed out that his club, like Munster, had had ups and downs in a 
decade when the landscape of the game changed.

He was referring to the growing financial muscle of many clubs in the Top 14 
and in the Premiership, where the leading three in the table have built their 
ascent on debt. The likes of Leicester and their east Midlands rivalsNorthampton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> – whose season is in 
danger of disintegrating after George North’s treatment after an apparent head 
injury and Dylan Hartley’s third red card in as many years against Leinster – 
are finding that living off their means, even when they are increasing, means 
they are falling behind those nourished by wealthy backers.

Dylan Hartley banned for six weeks leaving him available for Six Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/dyland-hartley-banned-six-weeks-available-six-nations-rugby-union>
Leicester are, by some way, the best supported club in England with an average 
crowd nearly three times that of Saracens, but their response to losing their 
dominance is to look to recruit rather than nurture. They only supplied two 
players to England’s match-day squads in the autumn series, Ben Youngs and Dan 
Cole, although Manu Tuilagi would probably have made it three had he been fit 
and firing. Like Northampton’s current internationals, Hartley, Courtney Lawes 
and Tom Wood, they have been around for a while (Tamana Harrison was a New 
Zealand import).

Other than Ellis Genge, signed from Bristol, Leicester have no young players 
pushing for a place in the 23; injuries have given the 20-year old George 
Worth, a season-ticket holder at Welford Road from the age of seven, his 
opportunity at full-back, although at Munster he was reduced to attempting to 
catch high kicks and tackling. Northampton have Alex Waller, but neither club 
has followed the example of Leinster who have come to rely on their academy 
slightly more than Munster.

Northampton and Leicester are trying to find their way in the new world having 
forged success in an era when bulk was beautiful. They are struggling to adapt 
to a faster game in which size is not the only thing: there were reports this 
week of tension between the Tigers’ director of rugby Cockerill and the head 
coach Aaron Mauger over playing style, while earlier this season Alex King, a 
coach in the Mauger mould, left Northampton suddenly while director of rugby 
Jim Mallinder and forwards coach Dorian West remained. The Saints are so blunt 
in attack they resemble Wales, uncomfortable moving away from the tried and 
tested.The Franklin’s Gardens faithful are not impressed 
<https://www.northamptonsaints.co.uk/news/latest-headlines/2016/dec-2016/message-from-tony-hewitt-to-saints-supporters/>
.

Leicester will no doubt stand up for a fight in Saturday’s return in front of 
their own supporters, but it will be a battle in a war that has been all but 
lost. It is unlikely that the team which finishes second in the group qualifies 
for the quarter-finals, unless Racing 92 react to losing their first two 
matches by doing what so many Top 14 sides have over the years done in Europe 
when the cause is lost and rest their leading players with the focus on the Top 
14.

Even then, they would probably need at least two winning bonus points. They 
are no longer among Europe’s elite: they made the semi-finals last season, a 
campaign in which the Irish provinces (and Glasgow) suffered because of the 
World Cup and, in the case of Leinster and Munster, the nascent nature of their 
squads.

After resisting making a marquee signing for a couple of seasons, Leicester 
relented after a third year without making the Premiership play-off final, but 
in his second match for the club, the Australia centre Matt Toomua suffered a 
serious knee injury. Leinster, in contrast, have invested faith in their 
academy centre Garry Ringrose who was joined against Northampton by another 
player who came through the province’s system, the outside-half Joey Carbery.

The frustration of Northampton and Leicester at being outplayed by Leinster 
and Munster resulted in two England internationals having a card waved at them 
for making a challenge with swinging arm. Hartley saw red for connecting with 
the head of Sean O’Brien and concussing the Ireland flanker; Tuilagi, whose 
challenge was no less rash, escaped with a yellow as Jean Kleyn ducked under 
his challenge and escaped injury.

Tuilagi, making his first start since the opening night of the season, had 
only touched the ball three times and stood helplessly while his opposite 
number Jaco Taute scored the second of his two tries. The game was lost when he 
belatedly joined a breakdown and displayed no more composure than Hartley had 
the night before.

Mauger is fighting not just the Leicester way but the traditional England way, 
which is why the England coach Eddie Jones uses extra training sessions to 
condition his charges for modern which is about more than bulk and gym work. A 
recent study compared the England team that played Ireland in the 1980s with 
the England Under-18 team that played Ireland in 2014: the boys were on average 
more than a stone a player heavier than the men.

Jones was not in Limerick, but he was in the stand at Franklin’s Gardens to 
see Hartley lose his head. The England captain had started the match on the 
bench, which would not have pleased him, and while his international role is 
clearly defined, his Northampton career has this season appeared to be drawing 
to its close.

There have been suggestions since he suffered a back injury in the second 
match of the season at Bristol that caused him to miss Northampton’s next five 
matches that the club would be prepared to let him go at the end of the season. 
He has started more games for England this season, four compared to three, and 
he started a match the Saints had to win on the bench having completed an 
unbeaten year with England while Lawes and Wood started.

Leinster were in the lead when Hartley came on, but not out of sight. His 
dismissal ended the contest and it is hard to see Northampton having anything 
more to do with a player whose latest ban will mean he has spent virtually two 
seasons of rugby in his career serving suspensions, whether or not the current 
management team remains in place.

His international career will hinge on Jones, who will not be deflected by 
advice he receives in the media. When the point comes that Hartley’s value as a 
leader is outweighed by the impact of his rival for the hooker’s jersey, Jamie 
George, he will be gone.

Jones has groomed Owen Farrell and Billy Vunipola as vice-captains, but he 
will also have an eye on the return of James Haskell from injury next month. 
Haskell, like Hartley, divides opinion, but the England head coach has faith in 
him.

As for the Lions, Warren Gatland may remember his 2011 observations about 
Hartley when he claimed he “cracked under pressure” rather than his words last 
week when he cited him as a potential tour captain.

• This is an extract taken from the Breakdown, the Guardian’s weekly rugby 
union email.To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-breakdown>.
 