
The forwards coach Jono Gibbes praised Leinster's resilience as they came from 
two converted tries down to beatCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> 29–22 at Stade Pierre-Antoine.

The Heineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> Pool One 
leaders were staring at a second successive European defeat after Richie Gray 
and Brice Dulin touched down for a 14-0 Castres lead after 20 minutes.

But the fly-half Jimmy Gopperth inspired the comeback with 21 points, scoring 
two first-half tries, with the man of the match Rob Kearney dropping a goal and 
Jordi Murphy adding a late try.

It was a gutsy recovery from the Irish province, who struggled at scrum‑time 
against the powerful French champions and had to scramble in defence on a 
number of occasions.

"Castres delivered everything we thought they would - they were massively 
combative, very physical at the breakdown and a good set-piece," said Gibbes. 
"It took a massive effort from us to score three tries and we almost sniffed 
out an opportunity for a fourth at the end. To come to a place like this 
against a well-organised team that haven't given up a lot of tries at home, 
it's a satisfying result and puts a spring in our step for next week."

Commenting on his side's early lapses, the New Zealander admitted: "It wasn't 
an ideal start. The way they were able to gain access was more about our 
deficiencies rather than them creating a hell of a lot - but they're a good 
team, we gave them a little bit and they took those two tries early.

"We just felt if we were able to get a little bit of a foothold with 
possession, particularly at set-piece, that we may be able to put pressure on 
them later on … and it took quite a long time to do that. I thought the boys' 
resilience and energy and their commitment to keep getting up and running into 
these big fellas here was first class."

Having become the first away team to win in Castres since January 2013, 
Leinster now need only one point at home to the Ospreys on Friday to qualify 
for the last eight as pool winners.Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> are four points ahead of 
second-placed Northampton Saints, who host Castres in round six, and Gopperth 
is aiming for another win to seal a home quarter-final. "Of course you want a 
home quarter and to achieve that we've got to win the game next week," said the 
Kiwi No10.

"We've just got to make sure we get the points on the board early, make sure 
we win first and let the game take care of itself after that. Hopefully we'll 
get a good outcome from it."

Gopperth singled out the collective belief shown by the Leinster players as an 
important factor in their fightback in the south of France.

"We were disappointed with missing a couple of first-up tackles that got us 
into that situation [of being 14-0 down]. It's the belief in each other and 
wanting to work hard for each other. Leinster have always been a great 
scrambling team and I think we just worked hard for each other because we want 
to be in the top eight.

"Our set-piece took a bit of a hard knock and they got their act into gear, 
and we really got some go-forward ball and looked after it in the second half. 
That's when we created opportunities and we finished well."
 