
Leinster’s head coach, Matt O’Connor, hailed his side’s collective performance 
at the RDS on Saturday evening as they kept alive their European Champions Cup 
hopes with a comprehensive 50-8 victory overCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> in Pool 2.

First-half tries by Dave Kearney, Martin Moore, Eoin Reddan and Sean Cronin 
meant the hosts had already secured a much-needed bonus point by half-time in 
this round-five contest. Further touchdowns from the replacements Tadhg Furlong 
and Darragh Fanning helped Leinster maintain momentum upon the resumption and, 
after the French side responded with a 70th-minute score from Romain Martial, 
the replacement scrum-half, Luke McGrath, completed a memorable night for
Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> with their seventh try.

Speaking after a distinctly one-sided encounter, O’Connor agreed that it was 
one of the Blues’ best defensive performances of the season. “Yes, probably,” 
he said. “The preparation was very, very good throughout the week.

“We knew that Castres’ motivation would be questionable, so if we got a 
platform up front there would be space to play, and we tried to tap and go, 
counterattack and build phases – that way by making them work really hard, and 
we got the benefit out of it.”

Given the woes of Castres in the inaugural year of the Champions Cup, O’Connor 
felt it was necessary for Leinster to keep the ball in play for as long as 
possible. Kearney’s second-minute try was still a welcome surprise, however, 
and he was thrilled to see Cronin crossing for a bonus-point score on the 
stroke of 40 minutes, which offered them the luxury of resting players ahead of 
next week’s crunch sixth-round trip to Coventry to face Wasps.

“The plan was to try to fit as much ball in play in the 80 minutes as 
possible,” O’Connor said. “We thought that if we could do that, given the 
conditions, that we would get pay out of it at some point. We didn’t think we’d 
get pay as early as we did with Dave’s try, but it was a great way to start the 
game.

“We were a little bit untidy after that, but I thought the composure to keep 
playing throughout the first half was important. To come away with four tries 
in the first 40 gave us the luxury to rest guys up and manage the [squad of] 
23.”

Castres did not provide a coach or player to talk to the media after the game.
 