
Lemmy, Motörhead frontman, dies at 70
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/29/lemmy-lead-singer-of-motorhead-dies-at-70-after-battle-with-cancer>
The School for the Dancing Arts and Education Tring, Hertfordshire, mmmmm! 
Wonderful. Wonderful. All ballet dancers come down to get a bit of rough. 
Beautiful women, voluptuous, long legs – beautiful naked women pirouetting 
round the room, with shawls hanging off the ceiling ... Great stuff. But you 
can’t do it nowadays; you can’t get the staff. And you don’t seem to be able to 
get the shawls either.


To Mat Snow, Q, March 1991

Being fired from Hawkwind for drugs is a bit like being pushed off the Empire 
State Building for liking heights, you know?

To Joel McIver, Record Collector, 1999

You can’t keep guys faithful. If people want to get married and then run 
around, I think that’s dishonest. If you’re going to get married, get fucking 
married and that’s it. I never saw a chick that could stop me looking at all 
the others, so I didn’t.

To Stephen Dalton, the Times, 2007

I suppose I was about 10 when I had my first wet dream … first nocturnal 
emission. Spelt with an ‘o’, – omission – there was nobody with me, see?

To Sylvie Simmons, Kerrrang!, 2006

Lemmy of Motörhead – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2015/dec/29/lemmy-of-motorhead-a-life-in-pictures>
If you can give the kids a good time then that’s all it’s for. Forget art and 
all that – that’s bullshit. If you can send that shiver down a kid’s back then 
that’s what it’s all about. All else is bullshit. That’s what rock’n’roll was 
for in the first place and as far as I’m concerned that’s what it’s still 
about. I’m trying to give them that feeling I felt the first time I heard All 
Shook Up or Good Golly Miss Molly. I just want to send that shiver up their 
back because it’s the best thing I ever felt. It’s better than screwing.

To Chris Salewicz, NME, 1979

I didn’t know what to call the band at first, it was all done in a bit of a 
hurry. Motorhead was the last song I wrote with Hawkwind, so we thought, ‘Why 
not? Let’s use that.’ If you sit around thinking about it, you end up with 
silly names like Granny Tangerine’s Prescription. So I thought, Motorhead will 
do – it’s a single word, it’s easy to remember, it’s also the slang name in 
America for a speed-freak … what can I say, straight from a sulphate bust?

To Geoff Barton, Sounds, 1975

I like hotels. They give you clean sheets. They bring you your meals, and then 
they take that dirty shit away and wash it. Wonderful! I don’t let them in the 
room to clean it up. I make my own bed. I don’t want them to fuck with my 
stuff. They take things away that you want to keep. I mean, I’ve got a pizza in 
that second drawer down there that I bought the first night I was here, you 
know, because they only sell you the big ones, so I eat a pizza for three days, 
and it’s great. It’s an acquired taste, you know? I think it’s the sound 
quality in there. We discovered in Hawkwind that sound can affect things. You 
can shake things to bits with sound, so if you build a pyramid it keeps 
everything in sharp and shit, so I just put the pizza in the drawer there – 
it’s acoustically enhanced pizza.

To Christine Natanael, Powerline, 1989

[My ears] sound like a bloody fire engine, never mind the ringing. They 
SCREAM! I’ve always enjoyed damaging my body, but it’s usually been connected 
with the most absolutely fantastic cerebral trips.

To Kris Needs, ZigZag, 1980

We wanna be like Status Quo and go on forever. Chuck Berry never changed. 
Little Richard never changed. I’d rather be like that and stick to a formula 
we’re happy with.

To Garry Bushell, Sounds, 1980

I don’t eat vegetables. I eat potatoes and green beans and that’s it. I don’t 
care if you eat 200 artichokes, you still won’t last through a tour. Mushy 
peas, I like … Brussels sprouts, foul. I won’t eat anything with onions in 
whatsoever, I hate them – me and Ringo Starr have that in common.

To John Hinds, the Observer, 2010

Rock’n’roll sounded like music from another planet. The first time around, we 
had people like Elvis, Little Richard, Chuck Berry,Jerry Lee Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/08/jerry-lee-lewis-interview-heaven-hell>
 – all them people. And they were gone within two years.Chuck Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chuck-berry> was in jail. Jerry Lee’s career 
had been destroyed by the British press. Elvis was in the fucking army.” He 
then ponders the early 60s and offers his summation: “And then we got Bobby 
Rydell and all them cunts. It took us a couple of years to get rid of them, 
then the Beatles showed up. That was all right.

To Michael Hann, the Guardian, 2015

In your twenties, you think you are immortal. In your thirties, you hope you 
are immortal. In your forties, you just pray it doesn’t hurt too much, and by 
the time you reach my age, you become convinced that, well, it could be just 
around the corner. Do I think about death a lot? It’s difficult not to when 
you’re 65, son.

To Nick Duerden, the Independent, 2010

You knew the punks were going to be a big thing because they told you they 
were. Rat Scabies came up behind me in Dingwalls, this terrible urchin with 
awful red hair, spots all over him. He said, “Oi, you’reLemmy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lemmy> aren’t you?’ I said, ‘Yeah.’ He said, 
‘You think you’re a rock star or something?’ I said, ‘Well if there’s going to 
be one, it might as well be me.’ He said, ‘Fair enough, I’ll buy you a drink.’ 
We’ve been friends ever since.

To Ben Graham, the Quietus, 2010

I was 13 and living in Benllech and I knew this guy called Tom who had a 
prosthetic arm. One night we sneaked into this Girl Guides camp and, you know, 
started getting down to business. So there I am bathing in the soft afterglow 
in some girl’s tent when, all of a sudden, I hear ‘Whack! Ow! Whack! Ow!’. I 
thought, ‘what the bloody hell is that’? and looked out to see Tom running 
naked down the road with this Guide mistress belting him over the head with his 
own false arm.

To Nathan Bevan, Wales Online, 2007

 