
The Kilmarnock manager, Mixu Paatelainen, hailed Liam Kelly's "excellent work 
rate and willingness" after the midfielder's first-half double againstHibernian 
moved Killie into fifth place in the Scottish Premier League.

Kelly, who signed a two-and-a-half year deal on Friday, finished off assists 
from Ben Gordon with either foot to continue Kilmarnock's impressive form.

Killie took the lead in the ninth minute when Kelly finished off a wonderful 
flowing move. Mehdi Taouil opened up Hibs by playing a reverse pass inside 
Michael Hart for Gordon, who squared for Kelly to stroke the ball into the 
corner from 15 yards with his right foot.

Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> took a firm grip 
of possession and threatened again from Alexei Eremenko's corner, but neither 
Manuel Pascali nor Craig Bryson could get a decisive touch.

But the home side moved further ahead in the 43rd minute when Kelly produced 
another first-time finish inside the penalty area. Jamie Hamill's diagonal ball 
eventually fell for Gordon and his inside pass was swept in by Kelly from 10 
yards with his left foot.

The second half started in uneventful fashion until Derek Riordan produced a 
piece of magic 10 minutes in. The forward instantly took advantage of a few 
yards of room almost 25 yards out to send an unstoppable swerving shot into the 
top corner.

Hibs brought on Colin Nish for Rankin and pushed more men forward. But they 
still struggled to cut open the defence and the hosts began to find some rhythm 
previously missing in the second half to exploit gaps in the visiting defence.

The visitors had the chance to level in the 78th minute when a brilliant piece 
of skill from David Wotherspoon finally opened up the home defence. He laid the 
ball to Edwin de Graaf but the Dutchman drove the ball into the side netting.

Hibs' chances were soon undone when Liam Miller was sent off amid some 
controversy and confusion.

In the First Division Dundee beat Stirling 2-0 at home thanks to goals from 
Stephen O'Donnell and Lee Griffiths and are now one point behind the leaders, 
Dunfermline.Stirling <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stirling> have now 
lost five games in a row. In the only other games in the Scottish League,
Airdrie United beat Alloa 3-2 with two late goals from Jamie Stevenson and 
Anthony Watt in the Second Division and the Third Division sidesQueen's Park and
Elgin shared the points in a 1-1 draw.
 