
Wales may have ended their autumn blues against Argentina but there are few 
signs their white-line fever has been cured. Liam Williams seems to be only one 
immune – a bundle of energy on his return on Saturday – and you have to wonder 
where Wales would be without him.

It was his try against the disappointing Pumas, shortly after half-time, that 
finally gave Wales belief a run of five straight defeats could be ended, that 
their ears might stop ringing following their awful performance against 
Australia the week before. It was alsoWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/liam-williams-wales-six-nations-rugby-union-england-mike-brown-2016>
 whocarried the fight to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/18/new-zealand-v-wales-second-test-live>
 over the summer – always a counterattacking threat and immaculate under the 
high ball.

“He is like a bag of spanners, isn’t he? He is a great player, a player who 
gives 100% every time he takes the field. It is great to play with him, 
hopefully he will keep playing well,” said his Scarlets team-mate Scott 
Williams, while Rob Howley was only too happy to describe him as having “the x 
factor” in a side so devoid of it elsewhere.

The problem for Wales was evident, in microcosm, in the 10 minutes before 
half-time. A restless crowd was stirred as Dan Biggar kept kicking to the 
corner, scenting Wales’ superiority in the collisions would translate into the 
first try. The driving maul was dreadful however and despite a series of scrums 
and a yellow card for the Pumas tighthead, Ramiro Herrera, they could not 
breach the line – while for both their tries, Gareth Davies sniped over for the 
second, the scorers had plenty of work to do when receiving the ball.

“We spoke all week about not being individual about what we are doing close to 
the line,” said the hooker, Ken Owens, who went off with a rib and hip injury 
in the second half. “There was a bit of white-line fever at times and we didn’t 
execute as well as we would have liked in that area. The top teams in the 
southern hemisphere convert those chances – just look at Australia last week – 
we still have to work on that part of our game.”

It was clear from the onset Wales would take on Argentina up front; add more 
fire and brimstone rather than fancy footwork in the backs with the returning 
Sam Warburton and Alun Wyn Jones hugely influential. And while Wales could not 
pull away from Argentina and needed two late Leigh Halfpenny penalties to get 
over the line, it worked. Just.

This victory – Howley’s first against a southern hemisphere side in seven 
attempts – will not live long in the memory, although it may go some way to 
keeping Wales in the top eight of the world rankings when the World Cup draw is 
made in May; Argentina had after all just gone above their hosts.

Wales ring changes and end woeful run with narrow win over Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
“It’s about home wins. The world rankings will look after themselves. When you 
look at four to 10, they’re going to swing, it’s a cluster between four and 
nine but to win against a side above us in the rankings is obviously important 
but more important is to win at home,” said Howley, no doubt relieved after
dropping Jamie Roberts, Dan Lydiate and Alex Cuthbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/wales-rob-howley-drops-jamie-roberts-dan-lydiate-argentina-rugby-union>
 – all Lions. “I think it’s important that you celebrate wins, it’s against a 
good Argentina side. I can’t speak highly enough of the leadership group, they 
can be very proud. We prepared really well and the players put a shift in.”

Wales’s inability to put breathing space between themselves and Argentina was 
largely down to the skills of the half-backs Martin Landajo, who plunged over 
for the second try soon after Davies’s score, and Nicolas Sánchez, who kicked 
10 points.

There were few glimpses of their vaunted running game that put 43 points on 
Ireland on their last visit to Cardiff in the World Cup quarter-finals, while 
the return of Juan Martín Hernández led to a number of high kicks, few of them 
successful, even if he was there to finish off Argentina’s first try.

“We have to take a step forward after this game and analyse and start thinking 
about a strategy for the next games,” said the coach, Daniel Hourcade, whose 
side face Scotland on Saturday and England a week later.

“That’s what you have to do against the teams of the northern hemisphere. 
Scotland are a solid team, a tough team with very good players and a very 
straight game plan, similar to Wales. We need to put our system into place.”

Wales Halfpenny; North, J Davies, S Williams, Liam Williams; Biggar, G Davies; 
Jenkins (capt; Smith, 63), Owens (Baldwin, 46), Francis, Charteris, Jones, 
Warburton, Tipuric, Moriarty

Tries Liam Williams, G Davies. Con Halfpenny. Pens Halfpenny 4.

Argentina Tuculet (De La Fuente, 37); Moroni, Orlando, Hernández (González 
Iglesias, 75), Cordero, Sánchez, Landajo (Cubelli, 64); Noguera Paz (García 
Botta, 50), Creevy (capt; Montoya, 66), Herrera (Pieretto, 71), Petti (Lezana, 
59), Alemanno, Matera (Senatore, 63), Ortega Desio, Isa.Sin-bin Herrera, 39

Tries Hernandez, Landajo. Cons Sánchez 2. Pens Sánchez 2.

Referee Angus Gardner (Aus). Attendance 50,175
 