
Politicians seeking re-election don’t like it when voters turn up to town hall 
meetings wearing devil horns and carrying tombstones scrawled with the 
officeholder’s name.

They don’t like it when their offices are inundated with angry calls from 
residents. They don’t like it when protesters turn up at events they were 
expecting to provide positive press and complain about every vote they have 
made.

They don’t like it, but they can’t ignore it. It’s how the Tea Party movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tea-party-movement> propelled its 
startling rise to power, from its beginnings in 2009 to the stunning election 
of 2016.

America: don't be polite in the face of demagoguery | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/progressive-american-values-no-compromise-trump-presidency>
As the fight against Donald Trump takes shape, some former congressional 
staffers think progressives should copy the conservative protest playbook.

About 30 staffers from Congress and not-for-profit groups have created the 
Indivisible guide <https://www.indivisibleguide.com/>, which offers very 
specific advice for “resisting the Trump agenda”.

“Unless you worked in congress the summer of 2009, you cannot fathom the 
volume of phone calls [that came in],” said Sarah Dohl, co-author, spokeswoman 
for the Indivisible guide and, between 2009 and 2013, a communications staffer 
for Lloyd Doggett, a Democratic Texas congressman.

Office phones would ring with Tea Party-aligned voters complaining from the 
moment staff arrived at the congressman’s office to well after they left, said 
Dohl. The office’s voicemail was always full.

“You’re trying to do things in your daily job – policy briefs, speeches – and 
you’re forced to take these phone calls and respond to emails and write 
letters,” she said.

“That’s why the Tea Party was so successful: it slowed federal policymaking to 
a halt.”

Dohl remembers clearly the day when her boss turned up for an event in a 
supermarket in Austin, in August 2009, to find protesters wearing devil horns, 
carrying tombstones with “RIP Doggett” written across them, and chanting “just 
say no”.


“That was the first time we saw it and that really set the tone for the next 
several years,” said Dohl, who now works with not-for-profit organizations. “It 
made it very hard to get anything done.”

Highly defensive “just say no” tactics could prove effective against the new 
Congress, said Dohl.

“If they were able to be successful against a president and Congress with a 
national mandate for change,” said Dohl, “we believe we can be just as 
[successful] if not more so with a president not coming into the office with 
the majority of Americans behind him or the Congress that does not enjoy the 
same majority that theDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> 
did.”

Hillary Clinton won nearly 3m more votes than Trump, who won the presidency in 
the electoral college.Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> hold 52 Senate seats to the 
Democrats’ 48 and control the House 241 to 194.

The Indivisible guide explains how congressional offices work and the best 
methods for getting Congress to pay attention.

“Many people probably don’t realize their members of Congress are re-elected 
every two years,” Dohl said. “What that system breeds is a person [who] is very 
accountable to the people who elect them.”

Conversely, she warns against people wasting time protesting against 
politicians who do not represent them.

“If people are calling Paul Ryan that don’t live in the first district of 
Wisconsin, it’s horrible to say he doesn’t care, but he’s not beholden to 
people who don’t elect him,” Dohl said.

Voters are better off calling their own members of congress, she said. If they 
like and agree with their member’s decisions, they should call the lawmaker’s 
office and say so.

“Rally the troops behind the members,” Dohl said. “Say: ‘Thank you for 
opposing Trump’s agenda but also speak out at every turn.’ Quiet opposition 
does not do as a much good as bold opposition.”

Progressives often struggle with an inclination to be defensive, the guide 
notes, because they want to set a new agenda with liberal ideas, not just stop 
things.

Democrats embracing Tea Party tactics? That won't work without a new ideology 
| Jamie Peck
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/democrats-tea-party-tactics-liberal-policies>
“We don’t believe in abandoning those values,” Dohl said, “but in order to 
protect them and looking at the reality we face with Congress and Trump as 
president, simply we have to resist and defend those policies at every turn, 
and that means standing up against the policies of Congress and Trump.”

The guide also shows voters how to set up political organizing groups – or 
join existing ones – and then how to protest effectively.

For example, to protest a town hall meeting, the guide recommends preparing 
questions, scattering the group through the crowd, videoing and tweeting what 
happens and contacting local reporters.

So far, 1,000 groups have registered with the Indivisible guide. Volunteers 
are building a map so people can search for the nearest group to join.

Dohl said she hoped the guide would demystify the political process and remind 
voters that politicians are just normal people who want to keep their jobs.

“These are average people who can sometimes make bad decisions,” she said. 
“The responsibility we have as a country, as Americans, is to watch those 
decisions and have those voices heard when they’re making decisions that aren’t 
best for the country.”


 