
Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> campaign group 
Liberty has launched a crowdfunded legal challenge to the “sweeping state 
spying powers” in the newly enacted Investigatory Powers Act, which has been 
dubbed the snooper’s charter.

Liberty is seeking a high court judicial review into the new legislation’s 
core powers, which include tracking everybody’s web browsing history and 
hacking computers, phones and tablets “on an industrial scale”.

The group is asking the public to help fund the legal challenge 
<https://www.crowdjustice.org/case/snoopers-charter/> after more than 206,000 
people signed a petition calling for the repeal of theInvestigatory Powers Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
, which reached the statute book last month.

The legal challenge has been triggered by last month’s ruling by the European 
Union’s court of justice that the“general and indiscriminate retention” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/21/eus-highest-court-delivers-blow-to-uk-snoopers-charter>
 of email, text and phone records for access by the state security and police 
is unlawful.

The EU court of justice ruling declared unlawful the powers contained in the 
Data Retention and Investigatory Powers Act (Dripa) 2014, which expired on 31 
December.

 But Liberty say its mass surveillance powers are “replicated and vastly 
expanded” in the Investigatory Powers Act without any effort to counter the 
lack of safeguards found unlawful in the European court case. The challenge to 
Dripa was brought by the Labour party deputy leader,Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/data-retention-and-surveillance-legislation-ruled-unlawful>
.

Martha Spurrier, the director of Liberty, said: “Last year, this government 
exploited fear and distraction to quietly create the most extreme surveillance 
regime of any democracy in history. Hundreds of thousands of people have since 
called for this Act’s repeal because they see it for what it is – an 
unprecedented, unjustified assault on our freedom.

“We hope anybody with an interest in defending our democracy, privacy, press 
freedom, fair trials, protest rights, free speech and the safety and 
cybersecurity of everyone in the UK will support this crowdfunded challenge, 
and make 2017 the year we reclaim our rights.”

Spurrier said the Investigatory Powers Act was passed in an atmosphere of 
shambolic political opposition last year, despite the government failing to 
provide any evidence that such indiscriminate powers were lawful or necessary 
to prevent or detect crime.

The powers at the heart of the new state surveillance regime to be challenged 
in the case include:

• bulk hacking – the new legislation empowers police and state agencies to 
access, control and alter electronic devices, computers, phones and tablets “on 
an industrial scale”, regardless of whether their owners are suspected of 
involvement in crime. Liberty say this will leave them vulnerable to further 
attack by hackers.

• bulk interception – the new Act allows the state to read texts, online 
messages and emails and listen in on phone calls en masse, without requiring 
suspicion of criminal activity. Bulk interception has to be authorised by 
ministerial warrant subject to approval by a judicial commissioner.

• bulk acquisition of communications data and internet connection records – 
the Act requires phone and web companies to hand over 12 months of records of 
everybody’s emails, phone calls and texts and entire web browsing history to 
state agencies to store, data-mine and profile. Liberty say these powers could 
provide a goldmine of valuable personal information for criminal hackers and 
foreign spies.

• bulk personal datasets – the new law allows state agencies to acquire and 
link vast databases held by the public or private sector. Liberty say these can 
contain details on religion, ethnic origin, sexuality, political leanings and 
health problems, potentially on the entire population – and are ripe for abuse 
and discrimination.

The Home Office say the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 will ensure that law 
enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies have the powers they 
need in a digital age to disrupt terrorist attacks, subject to strict 
safeguards and world-leading oversight.

The home secretary, Amber Rudd, has said the new law brings together and 
updates existing powers while radically overhauling how they are authorised and 
overseen. It also creates one new power: the introduction ofinternet connection 
records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/30/telecoms-companies-to-retain-browsing-data-under-new-law>
, which will be accessible by law enforcement and the intelligence agencies to 
disrupt terrorist attacks and prosecute suspects.
 