
If it was bad behaviour, everyone working at Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> investment bank offices on both 
sides of the Atlantic were in the know, according to the most senior banker yet 
to be convicted of plotting to manipulate Libor interests rates.

From the witness box, Jay Merchant, a former Barclays bank employee, had 
insisted that he “found it difficult to believe” his bosses had not known that 
all banks making submissions as part of the daily process of settingLibor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> behaved in a self-interested 
manner.


“Everybody knew the banks set Libor to their own commercial interests,” he 
said. “It was completely open from the day I joined [the trading desk].” 
However, he claimed, that did not mean there was a plot at Barclays to fix the 
rate: “We were just doing our job,” he said.


James Hines QC, for the Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> (SFO), showed the jury a 
catalogue of emails that made clear Merchant and his fellow conspirators knew 
they were acting dishonestly. He explained that the conspiracy ran from 2005 to 
2007 and concerned dollar Libor, an important financial industry benchmark used 
to price a wide range of loans and derivatives.


Libor-rigging scandal: three former Barclays traders found guilty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/libor-rigging-scandal-three-former-barclays-traders-found-guilty>
The London interbank offered rate (Libor) is supposed to reflect an average 
interest rate at which banks, including Barclays, lend to one another. It was 
set each day based on submissions from a group of major banks.


By 2012, however, published Libor rates stretching back many years were 
discredited after regulators found that Barclays and other banks had sought to 
manipulate the figure.

Since then, this deception has led to a string of fines against some of the 
world’s largest banks running into billions of dollars. There have also been 
criminal prosecutions of individual bankers around the world – several of them 
British – with more expected.

Two of those involved in the Merchant-led conspiracy at Barclays – New 
York-based Alex Pabon and Jonathan Mathew in London – had only been in their 
mid 20s when the plotting began. Their lawyers argued they had been naive and 
intimidated.

They said Mathew was dyslexic, partially deaf and had left school with a D and 
two E grades at A-level. He had only got a job at Barclays because of a family 
connection, they said.


Mathew told the jury it had never crossed his mind that he was doing anything 
wrong in the way he made Libor rate submissions, insisting that he was acting 
as Peter Johnson had taught him. Johnson, who is almost 30 years his senior, 
had already pleaded guilty to his role in the rate-fixing conspiracy.


Mathew told how his boss had called him a “deaf git” and, in one email, a 
“bick drain” – a spoonerism designed to get around the bank’s offensive 
language email filter.


On one occasion, Mathew explained, Johnson had struck him with a small 
baseball bat because he had not known that Manila was the capital of the 
Philippines.


Mathew recalled: “He [Johnson] had a 12-inch baseball bat on his desk and he 
whacked me across the back of the head and knuckles ... It wasn’t particularly 
hard. It was designed to humiliate me.” He had been made to stand on his chair, 
in the middle of the bank’s trading floor, and face questions on capital cities.

But prosecutors rejected claims that any of the plotters were naive or unaware 
their actions were deceitful. “The defendants in this case are all very 
successful, intelligent, well-educated and experienced professionals,” said 
Hines. “These men were trusted by Barclays bank to trade in deals worth 
billions of dollars.”

Even Mathew, with few academic qualifications, had proved himself a highly 
adept banker, rising to be Barclays’ lead manager of dollar cash dealings by 
2010, earning more than £250,000 a year.

Email evidence made plain that Merchant and his fellow plotters had known they 
were acting dishonestly, conspiring to create Libor rate submissions that were 
intentionally skewed to favour the traders’ own derivative positions. One 
message read: “We just need to f****** smash it. Have him set it low.” On 
another occasion, Merchant stated which rate he wanted: “4.48 fixing [...or] I 
will get slaughtered.”

The convictions for three former Barclays traders and a guilty plea from a 
fourth come four years after the bank wasfined £290m by US and UK regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
 for attempting to manipulate Libor rates. There has been no admission of 
criminal liability from the bank, but the scandal ultimately led to the 
departure of thechief executive Bob Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/03/bob-diamond-quits-barclays-libor-scandal>
, chairman Marcus Agius and other senior bank bosses.

In its damning 2012 ruling, the UK’s Financial Services Authority (FSA), now 
known as the Financial Conduct Authority, found the bank’s misconduct had been 
“serious, widespread and extended over a number of years”.
The case was immediately taken on by the SFO for criminal investigation. Since 
then, investigators have been looking into two separate alleged Libor-fixing 
plots at Barclays – in addition to the conspiracy for which Merchant and his 
colleagues have been convicted.


Last November, one line of inquiry led to charges being brought against 11 
former bankers for an alleged plot to manipulate Euribor, the benchmark 
interest rate for euro-denominated loans. Of the 11, four are former Barclays 
employees.

Another question the SFO is looking into is whether Barclays attempted to 
manipulated Libor during the financial crisis of 2007-9. No charges have yet 
been brought in relation to this inquiry, but regulators from the FSA found in 
2012 that some bank staff had received instructions to make false submissions 
to the Libor-setting process during this crisis period.

This, they concluded, was in response to fears at the top of the bank about 
the media using Barclays’ Libor submission figures to speculate that the bank 
was in financial trouble.
The FSA found that “the origin of these instructions is unclear”. It remains 
to be seen whether the SFO can discover more.


The SFO had initially been reluctant – under different leadership – to bring 
Libor prosecutions, believing the complex facts of such cases were poorly 
suited to trial before a jury. That decision was reversed in 2012 by the 
current SFO director, David Green, and the agency received additional Treasury 
funding to pursue its Libor-fixing inquiries.
 