
The transfer of Tom Hayes’s half of a seven-bedroom country house to the wife 
of the convicted former City trader appears to have been a sham or a tainted 
gift, prosecutors told a hearing at the Old Bailey.

Hayes was found guilty in August of conspiring to rig the benchmark Libor 
inter-bank lending rate andis serving an 11-year jail sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/libor-trader-tom-hayes-loses-appeal-but-has-jail-sentence-cut-to-11-years>
. He and his wife, Sarah Tighe, are attempting to stop the Serious Fraud Office 
(SFO) from seizing assets representing the £2.4m Hayes was paid for the period 
in question.

Hayes and Tighe were in court six at the Old Bailey on Monday for the first 
day of the confiscation of assets hearing, which is expected to last five days.

The couple’s main asset is the Old Rectory in Surrey, which they bought in 
2011 before the SFO started criminal proceedings. They now rent out the house 
after moving to a smaller property in Hampshire.

Michael Parroy QC, representing the SFO, read out emails between Hayes and his 
then barrister, Lydia Jonson, from April 2013. Hayes said he wanted to move his 
half of the house into his wife’s name “for mortgage purposes”.


Jonson wrote back that whether he did so would depend on proceeds of crime 
proceedings, but Hayes replied: “I’m going to protest any proceeds of crime 
order anyway so I’m going to do it now.” Jonson said: “No, you mustn’t do it 
now. It will look like you are trying to dissipate an asset.”

Hayes said he and Tighe wanted a buy-to-let mortgage for the Old Rectory and 
“no one is going to give me a mortgage”. Soon after, Tighe contacted a broker 
about the mortgage.

Parroy told judge Jeremy Cooke: “If one takes that at its face value, you can 
see how the possibility of a sham transaction or a tainted gift could arise.”

Hayes sat behind glass in the dock wearing a dark blue sweatshirt, jeans and 
white trainers. The former UBS and Citi trader scribbled notes and shook his 
head during proceedings and at one point sent a note to his legal team.

During a break, he spoke through the glass to Tighe, a corporate lawyer, who 
was sitting in front of him dressed in black. When the judge asked if 
arrangements for the remaining days of the trial suited him, Hayes shouted 
back: “Yeah.”

At his trial, Hayes denied all charges and argued he had been open about his 
trading methods, which he said were condoned by his senior managers and common 
in the industry. He lost an appeal in December but his 14-year sentence was 
reduced to 11 years.

Parroy will start his opening argument on Tuesday. 
 