
More than a year after receiving a Metropolitan police dossier of evidence 
about the secret abduction of a Libyan dissident in a joint MI6-CIA operation, 
the Crown Prosecution Service has still to decide whether anyone should face 
charges.

On Monday, the supreme court will hear an appeal to decide whether Abdel Hakim 
Belhaj’s civil claim for damages against the former foreign secretaryJack Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, Sir Mark Allen, MI6’s 
counter-terrorism chief at the time, the Home Office and the Foreign Office 
should be allowed to proceed.


The quest for justice conducted by Belhaj and his Moroccan wife, Fatima 
Bouchar, following their 2004 rendition from the far east to Muammar Gaddafi’s 
interrogation and torture cells in Tripoli may be moving with frustrating 
slowness but it threatens to inflict fresh embarrassment on the authorities.


Speaking from Tripoli, Bouchar told the Guardian: “I just want an apology from 
the British government for what I have suffered. I would like the people who 
were responsible for kidnapping me to be put on trial. I would like to see 
[them] being charged. I have talked to the British police. I would be very 
happy to appear in a British court and testify there.”


Bouchar, who was pregnant at the time, and her husband were taken off a flight 
in Thailand in early 2004. He was a leading member of the Libyan Islamic 
Fighting Group (LIFG), an organisation dedicated to Gaddafi’s removal. They 
were held in what was believed to be a CIA intelligence station near Bangkok 
airport.


“After four days, two men and a woman came to the centre and tied me to a 
stretcher. My hands were tied behind me, my eyes taped shut. When I heard the 
sounds of an aircraft, I knew I was in an airport.


“They removed my hijab and put on a dark blue dress over me. After that I was 
injected with something in my left and right arms. I felt really weak and lost 
all my energy. One of [the abductors] put his hands on my stomach and pushed. I 
was pregnant.”


Bouchar and her husband eventually arrived at Tajoura prison near Tripoli. She 
was interrogated and her husband tortured. After giving birth to a son, Bouchar 
was released but forced to stay in Libya.


Proof of their ordeal emerged in correspondence with Allen discovered inside 
the abandoned office of Moussa Koussa, Gaddafi’s foreign minister and former 
intelligence chief, after the regime fell.

 “There was no reason for us to be kidnapped,” Bouchar said. She and her 
husband have offered to settle for an apology and a token £1 payment from 
Straw, Allen and the FCO.


The Metropolitan police confirmed that it first passed evidence from its 
investigation into British officials’ role in the rendition, codenamedOperation 
Lydd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/31/met-libya-abduction-rendition-cps>
, to the CPS in June 2014. A second file followed in December last year.


Asked whether a decision had been made, a CPS spokesman said: “The latest 
submission by the police was at the end of July this year and we are continuing 
to advise the police and to look at all the evidence in relation to what is a 
very large and complex investigation. At this stage, as the matter is under 
review, we cannot say when we will have sufficient evidence to make a final 
decision.”


The civil case being heard by seven supreme court justices on Monday will 
assess whether the foreign act of state doctrine should prevent Belhaj’s claim 
being pursued on the grounds that it would involve other countries. The appeal 
court dismissed Foreign Office objections that the case should not proceed.


Cori Crider, a director of the human rights organisation Reprieve and lawyer 
for the victims, said: “For years the British government has sought to shut the 
door of the British courts to victims of torture and state-sponsored 
kidnapping. This is not only a shameful attempt to deny our clients’ simple 
request for an apology, it’s also a shocking waste of public money and official 
time. The Belhaj family … deserve justice for their abuse at the hands of our 
government. The sooner British officials accept that, the better.”

Sapna Malik, from the law firm Leigh Day and lawyer for Belhaj, said: “The 
court of appeal last year recognised the gravity of the allegations raised by 
our clients and we are confident that the supreme court will also agree that it 
is the constitutional duty of the English courts to deal with such important 
cases despite these attempts to shield the conduct of the security services 
from judicial scrutiny.”


Andrew Cannon, a partner at Herbert Smith Freehills and former Foreign Office 
legal adviser, said: “The court of appeal was clear that the case could be 
heard even where investigation of the conduct of a foreign state is required.


“It was clearly influenced by the seriousness of the allegations, the strength 
of international condemnation of torture and rendition, and a concern that 
unless the English courts took jurisdiction, the very grave allegations would 
go uninvestigated and the alleged victims would be left without recourse or 
remedy. The fact that the supreme court agreed to hear the appeal reflects the 
significance of the issues involved.”


The supreme court will also hear the case of Pakistani-born Yunus Rahmatullah, 
seized by British special forces in Iraq in 2004. He says he was tortured 
before being handed over to the US and rendered to Bagram prison in 
Afghanistan. He was released in June last year.


Last year, the UK government abandoned its longstanding claim that relations 
with Washington would suffer if Rahmatullah was allowed to sue for damages in 
court. It made the concession as a former US ambassador roundly dismissed the 
government’s case. “It is highly unlikely the US government would limit 
intelligence cooperation with the UK if British courts heard Rahmatullah’s or 
similar claims,” Tom Pickering told the Guardian.

The court of appeal ruled last year: “There is a compelling public interest in 
the investigation by the English courts of these very grave allegations. The 
risk of displeasing our allies or offending other states … cannot justify our 
declining jurisdiction on grounds of act of state over what is a properly 
justiciable claim.”


Reprieve has asked the Iraq Historic Allegations Team (Ihat), set up in 2010 
to conduct criminal investigations into the treatment of detainees, to seek a 
full copy of last December’s US Senate report on torture for evidence relating 
to Rahmatullah’s case.


Ihat told the Guardian: “It would be inappropriate to give any details of 
lines of inquiry in an ongoing investigation. Whether and when to approach the 
US authorities, and the method of that approach, is an operational matter for 
the investigators concerned.”


Kat Craig, Reprieve’s legal director, said: “Ihat’s continued delay in 
requesting a full, unredacted copy of the torture report is truly inexplicable 
… It’s high time Ihat take concrete steps in their investigation.”

Reprieve is also concerned about Ihat passing Rahmatullah’s evidence to the 
Ministry of Defence before it is heard by the supreme court.


Ihat said it did not provide any information to the MoD that could prejudice a 
criminal investigation, “unless there is a legal obligation to do so due to 
parallel civil proceedings in which the secretary of state for defence is a 
party.”


Craig said: “How can Ihat do its job effectively if suspects are able to keep 
tabs on the criminal investigation against them? And how can our clients have 
any faith that this process might finally bring them justice? This development 
suggests, yet again, that the government is more concerned about evading 
accountability than righting the wrongs of the past.”

 