
They say the devil has all the best tunes, but today, disconcertingly, Guy 
Chambers appears a vision of well-scrubbed cherubism. "I think truly ambitious 
people can be evil," he says sweetly, "but I don't think I've ever been evil 
with a capital E." Nevertheless, Chambers is behind many of the world's most 
successful pop records, and tomorrow will collect an Ivor Novello award for 
having written the "song of the decade" - Angels, recorded by Robbie Williams. 
Though he has gone on to write for many other artists - Jamie Cullum, Brian 
McFadden, Charlotte Church and Kylie Minogue among them - it is with Williams, 
the singer with whom he worked for five and a half years, and from whom he 
acrimoniously split in 2002, that his name is most stickily entangled.

Despite the low-level fame the association has brought him, his face has 
remained rather less well known. There is an air of David Cassidy about him, a 
hint of Daniel Bedingfield, but one would be hard-put to place him. One 
afternoon not so very long ago, he found himself at Buckingham Palace. "I was 
speaking to Francis Rossi and Rick Parfitt, and then the Queen came up to us. 
'You must be the newest member,' she said to me. I think she thought I was in 
Status Quo."

His most recent work, the Isis Project, is unlikely to bring quite as much 
attention as some of his previous collaborations. Recorded as a gift for his 
five-year-old daughter, Isis, all of the songs are in French, the lyrics 
written by the French artist Keren Ann Zeidel, set to Chambers' music, and sung 
by British actress Sophie Hunter. "We went," Chambers puts it, "down the Jane 
Birkin road." Chambers himself does not speak French. "I like the fact it's in 
French, and the fact that the words are very poetic, sort of metaphors and sort 
of archaic. And I like the fact that I don't know specifically what the songs 
are about. The music's very personal, but the message and the words are just 
part of the sound of it for me. And I love being able to switch that part of my 
brain off - the critical part. Because I did get a bit tired a year or two ago 
of listening to English."

It's certainly a long way from the pop fodder of his work with Williams. 
Angels was a typical Chambers confection, soaring orchestral strings, stirring 
piano, and a chorus about waterfalls and love and affection and loving angels 
instead. It lends itself well to karaoke, and throughout the summer of 1999 
proved inescapable.

The song's phenomenal success brought a procession of hopeful young artists to 
his Primrose Hill studio. What, I ask, would he do if I were a young popstrel 
in search of a song. "Well, I'd ask you what you'd been doing and what's your 
state of mind, cos it's all about people's energy. You know, are you the sort 
of person who wants to take a risk with your sound? Or are you very 
conservative? Or are you very emotional, are you very confrontational? And then 
you try to bring that out in the music ... so that when they walk out the door 
with this music they feel it's them - I don't want them to go away thinking, 
'That's really Guy Chambers'."

He might start by muddling around with a sample or a guitar. "Or he or she 
might have a melody that they're walking around with. Or he or she may say 
something that makes me think 'that's a great title.' I'm always looking for 
titles. I'm title obsessed." And what's his best title? "Ooh," he says. "I 
think Millennium was quite clever. Because we didn't have a title for that, and 
then I said 'Millennium', and he [Robbie] went, 'What's that got to do with 
anything?' and I said, 'Well, the Millennium's coming up and it's gonna be 
huge, and the radio's gonna want a tune with Millennium on it."

Songwriting, he says, is easiest when someone has "an emotional block they 
want to unblock - cos I think music can do that." He says the Isis Project has 
been an unblocking for him. "It's a way of me moving on from the Robbie 
legacy." He speaks a lot like this, his sentences laced with the easy, faintly 
cheesy sentiment of the pop lyric. "I can't repeat that with anybody else, but 
it's taken a while to realise that - I can't find another Robbie because there 
isn't another Robbie." He talks of Williams as one might refer to a great lost 
love, returning to him with a persistent, scab-picking obsessiveness, his voice 
carrying a mingling of affection and begrudgery and bewilderment.

Pre-Robbie, Chambers, now 41, had a mildly successful, persistently musical 
existence. He grew up in Surrey, his mother had worked for a record label, his 
father was a flute player with the London Philharmonic, and the young Chambers 
would sit in on rehearsals at the Royal Festival Hall. "I had piano lessons 
from when I was five. And I was in a choir and I picked up the guitar when I 
was 10. I tried the french horn, I tried the trumpet, I tried the violin. But 
then I found the piano and the guitar, because I liked to write my own songs. 
My piano teacher, when I was about six, said to my mum, 'Oh he really likes 
jazz' because I was trying to change the music - I would get bored of trying to 
read other people's music."

When Chambers was 13 his father accepted a job with the Liverpool 
Philharmonic, and the family moved north. He started bunking off to go to a 
friend's house and listen to records - "in those days it would have been Deaf 
School and Echo and the Bunnymen and Teardrop Explodes and the Clash."

He went on to study music at Guildhall and stayed to do a postgraduate course 
in composition, despite not actually enjoying it. "At Guildhall a lot of the 
kids were from posh homes and they didn't seem to be doing it for the right 
reasons." Which are? "I suppose I'm a bit romantic about music. I believe that 
if you're a musician you should want to die for it. It should be the most 
important thing in your life." And how does his wife feel about that? "One of 
the reasons I married her is that she's cool with that fact, that I put music 
first. But having said that, since I had kids it's changed." Chambers has three 
children - Isis, Mali and Gala. "The sort of love that your children bring out 
in you is so unique. It's as deep as the love of music, but because it's your 
own flesh and blood it's ... radical love. There," he grins, "is a good title."

He dabbled in bands himself, of course - a synth-led group named Hambi and the 
Dance, who were once supported by Frankie Goes to Hollywood; a brief stint 
playing keyboards for Jimmy Nail ("It was when he did Crocodile bleedin' Shoes. 
But I needed the roof doing"), the Waterboys, World Party, the Lemon Trees. But 
it was when he was introduced to Robbie that his fortunes changed. He recalls 
that the first time they met, "I was intimidated by him. Just like he was 
intimidated by me. It was a mutual intimidation. I'm still intimidated by him. 
He's got this persona, you never know what he's going to say or think. He's 
edgy. But that's quite good for me creatively. It woke me up a bit."

Their working relationship was relentlessly intense. Chambers toured with 
Williams, and they wrote continually. "We'd write songs on the back of buses, 
in hotels. He came on holiday with me." Does he miss him? "Sometimes, yeah. But 
I don't miss the pressure and some of the politics." The pressure was to write 
huge hits. "And I love that - it's an incredible challenge, but at the same 
time it grinds you down after a while." And the politics? "That's more of a 
personal thing." They both lost perspective, he says. "I think I got a bit big 
for my boots, and I think I did try to work with too many people. But I'm 
restless. And I think it was just very difficult to communicate with him at 
that time, that last year - not least cos he'd moved to LA. And I think once 
we'd lost that connection of seeing one another almost daily, I think things 
started breaking down."

Anyway, he continues, "we're talking again now". He drops it into the 
conversation nonchalantly, between mouthfuls of tabbouleh and a shrug. "I went 
to the Troubador in LA to see Coldplay and he was there at the same gig. It's a 
small club, so I bumped into him at the bar and we had a hug and afterwards 
there was an aftershow and we had a little chat together and then we went for 
dinner the following week and had a really, really good chat."

And would they consider working together again? "Yeah," he says, "we're 
definitely going to do something. But I can't say what it is, it's top secret. 
I haven't told anyone - my brother doesn't even know. But it is completely 
different. It's a project. I'm not saying what it is." His eyes twinkle, and 
for one fleeting second one glimpses the devilish side of Guy Chambers.
 