
There is more than one thing that makes Lincoln City an unusual football club. 
First there is their crest, a 14th-century grotesque – an imp who once caused 
havoc inLincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> Cathedral (until 
it was turned to stone, so legend has it, by an angel hiding in a book). There 
is the fact that their manager, Danny Cowley, employs his brother, Nicky, as 
his assistant. Then, to top it off, there are the “gold members”, VIP fans who 
pay a standing order to have a say in the club’s direction.

In the past 10 days Lincoln have attracted attention for another unlikely 
occurrence, theirintrepid FA Cup performance at Portman Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/ipswich-town-lincoln-city-fa-cup-match-report>
. The National League side twice took the lead against Championship Ipswich and 
looked set to cause the upset of the third round until Tom Lawrence’s low shot 
from distance in the 86th minute snatched a 2-2 draw and forced a replay. Now 
it is the Imps against the Tractor Boys at Sincil Bank and the game is a 
sell-out.

Recent times have not been great for Lincoln. A club whose glory days came in 
the 1970s with rookie managerGraham Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-obituary>, they 
held the record of most years in the Football League without reaching the top 
flight (104) but have been out of the league altogether since relegation in 
2011. But the Cup has sparked a flame of enthusiasm. A queue several hundred 
fans deep awaited the release of replay tickets and the game sold out within 
three hours of the box office opening. That means 8,000 home fans alone, more 
than double Lincoln’s average gate. As well as atmosphere, of course, this 
means revenue. The replay is also being shown on BBC1, which will add another 
£72,000 to the kitty. These are not insignificant funds for a non-league club.

“It will mean a lot for the fans – we’ve not reached that stage since I can’t 
remember when,” says Steve Tointon, the aforementioned gold member board 
member. “Our performance at Portman Road was one of the best I’ve seen by a 
Lincoln side, but if we can repeat it we’ve got every chance of winning. The 
only thing is that Ipswich will be ready for us this time.”

Lincoln’s gold member scheme is perhaps unique in the British game. It allows 
fans to visit the boardroom (with a guest) and meet the manager three times a 
season. All for just £1,200 over five years. More controversially, perhaps, the 
gold members then vote to elect one of their body to the club board, the 
representative then having a vote on the running of the club. There is also a 
representative of the Lincoln City Supporters’ Trust sitting on the board, 
ostensibly meaning two of eight board votes are held by supporters.

Tom Lawrence’s strikes spare Ipswich and deny superior Lincoln a shock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/ipswich-town-lincoln-city-fa-cup-match-report>
“I would like to think we can have a positive influence,” Tointon says. “The 
gold membership is a subdivision of the Trust and together we have been able to 
make a contribution, especially when times have been difficult for the club. 
Most of it relates to things that would matter to fans, the ticketing and 
things like that. So on matches like this we try to get the best arrangements 
for those fans who are committed to the club.”

Tointon may be a highly committed supporter but he is not overly romantic 
about Cup success, with a fourth-round tie at Brighton awaiting should the Imps 
triumph over Ipswich at the second time of asking. “The downside is that [the 
Cup run] takes us out of the league a bit, and the big step for Lincoln, 
without any question, is getting out of this league,” he says. “Very little 
money comes in to the club from outside sources. But if we can get up into the 
next division, we can reset our position. From there we can start to plan for 
our future based on more certainty of income.”

Such an opportunity seems much more likely with the Cowley brothers at the 
helm. Lincoln are two points clear at the top of the National League and with 
two games in hand on their nearest rivals, Forest Green Rovers. Recruited as a 
pair from Braintree last summer, Danny and Nicky have brought an attractive 
style of football and, perhaps more importantly, a meticulous approach to 
training and conditioning. The pair agreed contract extensions to 2021 last 
week.

“I was involved in making the decision, I knew who we were looking at and who 
was the favourite,” says Tointon. “Clearly one or two [club officials] had done 
their homework, and fortunately we made the right decision. We knew that they 
came as a team and if you saw the reaction when we had a fans forum recently, 
you’d know there was complete agreement from the supporters too. It was an 
amazing night.” The mischievous Imps will be hoping for another night to 
rememberon Tuesday.
 