
When the appearance of a great city is about to be radically transformed, it 
is a good idea for its citizens to be shown what is going to happen and have a 
say in it. It is also a good idea if the city's government has a vision, or at 
least an overview, of what is happening.

Neither of these applies to the wave of towers about to hit London. There are 
plans for more than 230, at the last count. They range in height from 20 
storeys to more than 60, in central and suburban locations. Yet it has taken a 
privately funded organisation,New London Architecture 
<http://www.newlondonarchitecture.org/>, to discover this number. When Kit 
Malthouse, deputy mayor for business, was presented with this figure, he was 
not only ignorant of it, but denied it could be possible.

On these pages we show the cumulative effect of these planned towers on key 
locations along the Thames, where several of the proposals are concentrated. 
The images are of those that are known: many more can be expected in the coming 
months and years. It is the first time that the future skyline has been shown 
to this extent, even though the technology is there to do so.

Today we also publish a statement signed by scores of leading figures in 
culture, politics and business, and societies representing citizens. They 
include architects who have won the profession's highest awards, contemporary 
artists, property developers, MPs, authors and the heads of colleges and 
museums. These are not Luddites or fogeys, they are not enemies of business or 
of the new, but they share simple shock at the thoughtlessness with which 
change on this scale is happening.

Here's another good idea: buildings in cities should not be designed in 
isolation, but in relation to the places in which they are set, whether these 
are views to and from world heritage sites, or the fabric of adjoining streets. 
Together with its present and future neighbours, new development should make 
accessible public spaces that are a pleasure to inhabit – the effects of tall 
buildings are as important at ground level as they are in the sky. And the 
larger and more prominently placed a building is, the greater the care that 
should be taken over its design.

Nobody could go to the places already being shaped by towers – Elephant and 
Castle, Vauxhall or Stratford High Street, a discus-throw from the Olympic Park 
– and say that these are great places to linger, or that the tall buildings now 
rising there enhance the experience. Images of these places in the future, when 
further skyscrapers will jostle for attention, suggest more of the same. New 
urban zones are being created with no overall idea of how the parts contribute 
to the whole, of the places that are being made at their base.

Rather, new London tower design tends to go out of its way to be as assertive 
and architecturally antisocial as possible.Strata SE1 
<http://www.stratalondon.com/> in Elephant and Castle, with its slashed 
rooftop, randomised aluminium cladding patterns and bulbous form, seems to be 
setting out to be as hostile as possible to any future neighbour. In Stratford 
the fashion is for arbitrary clashing colours – another idea that kills the 
prospect of making coherent public places.

Nor, when you get close to a building such as St George's Tower 
<http://www.stgeorgeplc.com/index.cfm?articleID=643> in Vauxhall, would you say 
that you are in the presence of quality. Its details clash and its cladding 
looks cheap and plasticky. There is no great reason to believe that these 
surfaces will age well. Images of proposed future projects, such as theQuill in 
Bermondsey <http://www.spparcstudio.com/project/QUILLLondonBridgeSE1.aspx> and 
1 Merchant Square in Paddington 
<http://www.merchantsquare.co.uk/the-buildings/1-merchant-square/>, suggest 
little improvement in the future.

Combined with frantic attempts at individuality is a profound sameness. These 
projects tend to use the same type of cladding and floor layouts. It is 
sometimes said that London needs skyscrapers to make an "iconic" statement on 
the world stage, but these developments make it look less distinctive. And if 
the city tries to engage in the global race for height, it can only lose. It is 
outpaced by the likes of Shanghai and Dubai, the height of whoseBurj Khalifa 
<http://www.burjkhalifa.ae/en/> is 2.7 times that of the Shard 
<http://the-shard.com/overview/>.

If towers can sometimes look dramatic and impressive, they also bring 
drawbacks. They are inflexible, expensive to run and maintain and consume 
money, space and resources on lifts, air conditioning and structure that lower 
buildings do not require. Above a certain height such simple pleasures as 
opening windows and outdoor space become difficult. Towers disconnect residents 
from their surroundings.

Overcoming these issues requires effort in design, effort that is hard to see 
here. It was decided in the 1970s that councils should no longer build 
high-rise blocks for families, particularly where there were not enough open 
spaces and communal facilities. Those now being built are for the higher end of 
the market, but the lessons of the past have not been learned.

The majority of the tall buildings now proposed are residential. There is, of 
course, an acute shortage of homes in London, but stacks of high-rise, 
high-price flats are not what the city needs. In a recent Ipsos Mori poll 
commissioned by New LondonArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, a majority of 
Londoners said they would not want to live in towers. The transformation of the 
skyline is not driven by serving their needs, but by a bubble of overseas 
investment in high-end residential property. Many of these flats are likely to 
be left empty.

The best thing about these buildings is that, under existing planning policy, 
developers must make a contribution to affordable housing, which can be spent 
at another location. But it would be possible to build developments that are 
both lower and better-designed and still achieve this benefit.

We have got to this point through several factors. Early in Tony Blair's 
government, a taskforce led by Lord Rogers of Riverside  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2002/jul/21/regeneration.comment>produced 
a report on the "Urban Renaissance", arguing for using land more effectively 
and making cities more vibrant through higher densities, achieved with the help 
of good design and quality public spaces. As mayor of London, Ken Livingstone 
employed Rogers as an adviser and built these ideas into theLondon Plan 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/planning/london-plan>, which guides 
development. The plan, and other policy statements, stress that towers are 
acceptable only if they "are well-designed and in the right place".

What we have now is a bastardisation of Rogers's ideas. "Density" has been 
translated into height, and the pieties about design and siting are almost 
meaningless. Significant decisions have blown holes in such policies as exist. 
John Prescott and Hazel Blears, when they were the ministers responsible, 
overturned the advice of planning inquiries into key projects. The City of 
London, which had a plan to confine tall buildings in a cluster around the Bank 
of England, permitted20 Fenchurch Street <http://www.20fenchurchstreet.co.uk/>, 
aka the Walkie Talkie, which stands outside it.

Boris Johnson, when first running for London mayor, vowed he would reverse 
Livingstone's friendliness to building high and prevent a "Dubai-on-Thames", 
but its creation has accelerated on his watch. The communities secretary, Eric 
Pickles, has told theArchitects Journal <http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/>: 
"We attach great importance to good design of buildings and neighbourhoods and 
have empowered communities so they can shape developments to reflect local 
needs."

What this means in practice is that south London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> boroughs such as Southwark, Lambeth and 
Wandsworth readily give permission for tall buildings south of the river. They 
do this so they can collect contributions to affordable housing and because 
they lack the resources to argue for long with well-financed developers. The 
wall of towers forming along the river is a direct expression of this.

But buildings of this prominence are a matter not just for boroughs, but for 
the city, the country and, given London's international importance, the world. 
For this reason Johnson has the power to intervene, but doesn't, much. Pickles 
pleads his love of communities, but, wanting to favour developers, he stands 
back.

So what should be done now? Peter Murray of New London Architecture has 
proposed a mayoral London Skyline Commission, in which experts would scrutinise 
the quality of new proposals and guide developers. He also wants a publicly 
accessible digital model of the city, which would enable everyone to see the 
effects of any planning application. Both would be welcome steps, but they 
don't go far enough. Murray's commission sounds like a (possibly improved) 
version of theCommission for Architecture and the Built Environment 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/commission-for-architecture-and-the-built-environment>
, which has existed for 15 years and is now part of the Design Council, during 
which London's planning has got into this state.

The city needs a clearer, more precise framework, one that states where height 
is acceptable and where not. It can identify opportunities for vertical growth 
as well as restrictions. Something like this exists already, in the rules 
controlling strategic views of St Paul's and the Palace of Westminster. The 
problem is that, where these rules do not prevail, there is often havoc.

Such a framework would be more efficient than the current system, where it has 
taken 10 years, three architectural practices, and untold millions of 
professional and legal fees, for the proposed rebuilding ofElizabeth House in 
Waterloo <http://www.elizabethhousewaterloo.co.uk/> to be permitted. New York 
has applied strict rules to the building of skyscrapers for nearly a century, 
during which it became the world's most dynamic city – so rules are not bad for 
business.

It is not easy to work out the right policies for London. In the coming weeks 
theObserver, our Cities website <https://www.theguardian.com/cities> and the 
Architects' Journal will develop the debate. But this effort is essential: the 
alternative is to accept that civic democracy is powerless to influence the 
effects of financial speculation.
 