
Before the arrival of Lou Reed <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lou-reed>, 
it could be said that rock'n'roll remained a part of the entertainment 
industry, still in the business of ingratiating itself with its target audience 
even as it tried equally hard to alienate their parents. Reed, who has died 
aged 71, made alienation the dominant mode and an article of faith for 
subsequent generations.

With his band, the Velvet Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/velvetunderground>, and in his subsequent 
solo career, his hymns to transgressive behaviour shaped the approach of such 
near-contemporaries as David Bowie, Iggy Pop and Patti Smith before exercising 
a pervasive influence on such successors as Talking Heads, the Sex Pistols, Joy 
Division, REM, the Strokes, and almost certainly whichever indie band finds 
itself on the cover of the next issue of the New Musical Express.

After the affectless New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
drawl heard on Walk on the Wild Side and Perfect Day, his fearlessness was the 
most distinctive quality that Reed brought to the business of making 
rock'n'roll. Unafraid to jolt his audience by presenting them with noise 
elements borrowed from the jazz and classical avant-garde or with images of 
himself as a representative of a sexually ambiguous underworld, eventually he 
would find that he had created an audience of outsiders who coalesced around 
his example.

For five years following the release in 1967 of The Velvet Underground and 
Nico, an album ostensibly "produced" byAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> and featuring the 
artist's peel-off banana on the cover, the music of Reed and his colleagues was 
listened to only by a devoted few. Those few, however, eventually emerged as 
the shapers of a new and powerful strain of popular music. Once the punk and 
new wave explosions had occurred on both sides of the Atlantic, it could be 
seen that Reed had changed the mood and the direction of pop in a way that 
might legitimately be compared with the impact of Elvis Presley, the Beatles or 
Bob Dylan.

Before Reed got to work, pop's idea of darkness was the romantic despair of 
Roy Orbison's Running Scared, the adolescent misogyny of the Rolling Stones' 
Under My Thumb or the acid put-down of Dylan's Positively 4th Street. Right 
from the beginning, the Velvet Underground's songs plunged into the real 
darkness of hard drugs, sexual degradation and psychosis, the mood of Venus in 
Furs and the even more startlingly explicit Heroin recalibrating rock'n'roll's 
sights.

The prevailing darkness was reflected in the way Reed and his fellow musicians 
rebooted the music's primal look: they wore black, black, and more black, a 
blatant rejection of the vivid palette of psychedelia and its love-and-peace 
attitudes. The look flourishes today among young groups seeking to evoke the 
illicit thrill of Warhol's Exploding Plastic Inevitable multimedia shows, in 
which the Velvet Underground played while the actress Edie Sedgwick gyrated and 
the poetGerard Malanga  <http://www.gerardmalanga.com>cracked a bullwhip, all 
against a backdrop of Warhol's movies.

Reed's more profound ambition was to use rock's immediacy as a vehicle for a 
certain kind of literary approach. "Let's take Crime and Punishment and turn it 
into a rock'n'roll song," he said. As well as Dostoevsky, his heroes included 
Raymond Chandler,Hubert Selby Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/apr/28/guardianobituaries.film>, William 
Burroughs and Edgar Allan Poe. His later career included collaborations with 
artists from various fields, including theatre pieces with Robert Wilson, films 
with Wim Wenders and works with the composer Laurie Anderson, who was his 
companion for the last 20 years.

Reed was born to a middle-class Jewish family in Brooklyn, the son of a tax 
accountant and a former beauty queen. Growing up from the age of 11 on Long 
Island, he was sent to a psychiatric hospital for electroconvulsive therapy, 
intended to cure him of a general hostility to his parents and what they 
believed to be homosexual instincts. Attracted to the sounds of rock'n'roll, 
doo-wop vocal groups and avant-garde jazz, he had taught himself to play the 
guitar and made his first record with a doo-wop group, the Jades, at the age of 
14.

In 1960 he enrolled at Syracuse University, where he studied film directing, 
creative writing and journalism, and fell under the influence of the poet and 
short-story writer Delmore Schwartz. On graduating in 1964, and intent on a 
career in music, he went to work as a songwriter for Pickwick Records, whose 
principal business was churning out budget-priced discs for sale in 
supermarkets. When one of his compositions, titled The Ostrich and intended to 
promote a made-up dance craze, threatened to become a hit, a band was quickly 
assembled to help promote it, and it was there that Reed metJohn Cale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-cale>, who would become his most 
important musical collaborator.

The Welsh-born Cale, whose instruments were the viola and the bass guitar, had 
studied composition with Aaron Copland andIannis Xenakis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/feb/05/guardianobituaries>and performed 
withJohn Cage  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jul/10/john-cage-composer-drawings-exhibition>
and La Monte Young's Dream Syndicate. His discovery that Reed played The 
Ostrich on a guitar with all its strings tuned to the same note encouraged him 
to pursue their collaboration. Rehearsing in an apartment on the Lower East 
Side withSterling Morrison 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-sterling-morrison-1599390.html>
, a friend of Reed's from Syracuse, on rhythm guitar and the sculptor Walter De 
Maria on drums, they went through a series of names: the Primitives, the 
Warlocks, the Falling Spikes. Once De Maria had departed and his replacement, 
Angus MacLise, had been succeeded by Maureen Tucker, they settled on calling 
themselves the Velvet Underground, after a pulp paperback devoted to aberrant 
sexual behaviour.

Returning from a visit to London with copies of records by the Who and the 
Small Faces, Cale advocated a shift from their conventional Dylan-influenced 
folk-rock style to something more adventurous and confrontational. With Reed 
adding the abstract noise elements of free-form jazz, Cale alternating between 
hammering out piano ostinati and using his viola to produce grating drones, and 
Tucker thumping her tom-toms from a standing position, the group began to 
produce the morose, sludgy ensemble sound that was like nothing else in popular 
music, as well as rendering Reed's vocals tantalisingly indistinct.

Both rudimentary and highly sophisticated, their music appealed to Warhol, who 
was looking for a rock group to add to his menagerie of soi-disant superstars 
and was taken to hear them at a Greenwich Village coffee house. They soon 
became familiar figures at the Factory, where they were introduced to the 
German actress and model Nico (born Christa Päffgen), who had recently made a 
record in London. At Warhol's suggestion she became their fifth member, adding 
an element of glamour and mystery as she intoned Reed's songs, notably Femme 
Fatale, I'll Be Your Mirror and All Tomorrow's Parties, in her deep, virtually 
expressionless voice.

It is hard to exaggerate the degree to which they were swimming against the 
tide of popular fashion, or the extent of the mingled scorn and indifference 
with which their debut album was received. Supposedly, San Francisco and Los 
Angeles were the crucibles of the new music emerging to accompany the 
celebrations of the Summer of Love, while New York had been temporarily 
relegated to the status of a black hole from which no cultural light escaped.

Nico left the band after the first album, but the remaining Velvets carried on 
as a quartet to record a second album, one that would be just as striking and, 
ultimately, as influential as its predecessor. The centrepiece of White 
Light/White Heat (1968) was the majestic 17-minute Sister Ray, probably the 
closest any of the studio records came to reproducing the controlled anarchy of 
their live performances.

Tensions between Reed and Cale led to the Welshman's enforced departure before 
their third album, The Velvet Underground, in which Reed adopted a gentler 
overall tone – except for a song called Murder Mystery, in which he 
experimented with parallel narratives delivered simultaneously from either side 
of the stereo sound-picture. A fourth album, Loaded, contained two songs that 
would become classics, Sweet Jane and Rock & Roll, but by the time of its 
release in 1970 Reed had left the group, disillusioned by its failure to make 
any sort of commercial impact.

He returned to his parents' home, working as a clerk at his father's firm for 
more than a year before re-emerging at the end of 1971 to begin a series of 
albums under a new contract with RCA Records. The first was not a success but 
the second, Transformer, was the one that finally brought him attention: 
produced by his new friend Bowie, it contained a hit single, the seductive Walk 
on the Wild Side, in which he portrayed a series of picaresque Warhol 
characters. Its packaging aligned him with the new mood of glamour and 
decadence to whose adherents, thanks largely to Bowie's enthusastic patronage, 
he became an object of veneration.

He retained his status as glam-rock gave way to punk, but his recording career 
became characterised by its inconsistency: sometimes infuriatingly 
sub-standard, occasionally brilliant. The moments of brilliance were usually 
those most likely to lose him his following, such as a song-cycle of epic 
morbidity titled Berlin (1973), and Metal Machine Music (1975), a double album 
of guitar noise which could have been explicitly devised to ensure the 
termination of his recording contract.

Street Hassle (1978), The Bells (1979) and The Blue Mask (1982) all contained 
pieces in which he stretched himself in interesting directions, but with New 
York (1989) and Magic and Loss (1992) he hit his full stride once more, the 
songs Dirty Blvd and What's Good proving his continuing ability to invest the 
two-chord rock'n'roll song with an irresistible freshness. At the other extreme 
came The Raven (2003), a series of pieces inspired by Poe, demonstrating the 
extent of his extraordinary range.

He collaborated with Cale once again in 1990 on Songs for Drella, a threnody 
for Warhol, and in 1993 the four original Velvets re-formed for a brief series 
of European concerts that ended, appropriately enough, in acrimony. Reed, Cale 
and Tucker played together once more, while being inducted into the Rock and 
Roll Hall of Fame in 1996, the year after Morrison's death.

Reed's final years were full of activity, including several theatre pieces 
with Wilson, the publication of his lyrics and photographs in book form, an 
adaptation of Wedekind's Lulu plays with Metallica, concert performances and a 
film (directed by Julian Schnabel) of Berlin, and appearances on records by 
Gorillaz and the Killers and on tribute albums to Buddy Holly and to his great 
friend the songwriter Doc Pomus. Ornette Coleman, Jimmy Scott, Antony Hegarty 
and the Blind Boys of Alabama were guests on his records, and he took part in 
the most unlikely of projects, a live orchestral rendering of Metal Machine 
Music. He never renounced the habit of terrifying journalists who failed to ask 
questions that engaged his attention.

What Reed possessed was authenticity. When he sang about going up to Harlem to 
buy heroin or about transgressive sex, his writing came from first-hand 
experience. Drugs and drink were a constant companion for most of his adult 
life, and between his first and second marriages — to Bettye Kronstadt in 1973 
and Sylvia Morales in 1980 — he lived openly for several years with a 
transvestite named Rachel. And he could turn it all into an unflinching poetry.

He gave up drink and drugs in his 50s, opting for T'ai Chi and studies with a 
Tibetan lama. He underwent a liver transplant earlier this year and died in the 
Long Island home he shared with Anderson, whom he married in 2008 and who 
survives him.

• Lou (Lewis Allen) Reed, singer, songwriter and guitarist, born 2 March 1942; 
died 27 October 2013
 