
Last season’s finalists have moved off the bottom of the table. Indeed, this 
bonus-point win, very much a resumption of normal service, moves them back into 
the top half. Luke Cowan-Dickie scored a hat-trick of tries, having seemingly 
replaced Thomas Waldrom as the steerer of Exeter’s driven lineouts. Or perhaps 
the Tank Engine has seen fit to let someone else have a go at benefiting from 
the Premiership’s most reliable source of tries.

Not that this was a forward-orientated affair. Lachlan Turner had his best 
game yet in a Chiefs shirt and claimed two tries, but the home side’s relief 
was tempered by a red card for Tomas Francis, victim of a new directive to 
punish careless disruption of rucks. In trying to kick the ball, his shin 
connected with the back of Danny Care’s head.

“It’s difficult,” said Rob Baxter, his director of rugby. “One thing I can’t 
deny is that we were told at the start of the season that if you flash a foot 
into a ruck and it connects with someone’s head there’s a chance you’ll get a 
red card.”

It happened in the buildup to the second of two late tries by Quins, leaving 
them with eight minutes against 14 men to claim an unlikely bonus point. They 
did not come close on another concerning afternoon for the away side. Instead 
it wasExeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> who finished the 
stronger.

Saracens slug it out to defeat Northampton in Premiership battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/saracens-northampton-premiership-match-report>
After two defeats from two, those who had seen it all were preparing to nod 
their heads wisely and posit the difficulty of Exeter backing up a 
groundbreaking campaign. The jury was out, though. Defeats away to Wasps and at 
home to Saracens, however heavy the latter, are forgivable. A home match 
against out-of-sortsHarlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru>
, on the other hand – by that they might be judged.

Exeter burst into the game as if they knew it, deadly when they were allowed 
to play in the first half. And, boy, Quins let them do that.

Turner, the Wallaby international who joined midway through last season, was 
given a start at full-back, a chance he seized. In only the seventh minute, 
Exeter repeatedly tested Quins’ short side, with Don Armand and Will Chudley 
applying the deepest cuts, and Turner took a short ball to finish the game’s 
first try.

Quins converted two penalties in quick succession to take a fleeting lead, but 
it was not long before Turner came into the line to send Ian Whitten away. When 
Ollie Devoto was forced into touch just short, Quins threw straight to 
Cowan-Dickie, loitering at the back of the lineout, and he crashed over pretty 
much unopposed.

Gloucester beat Sale for first win but Steve Diamond queries concussion rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/sale-gloucester-premiership-match-report>
It was a painful sequence for the visitors – and not an isolated one, in this 
match or their season’s opening. Another followed pretty much from the restart, 
when Turner came into the line again, this time off first-phase possession, 
before taking a return ball from Ollie Woodburn to sprint home unchecked for 
his second. Life after Conor O’Shea is not going well for Quins. Beyond the odd 
thrust from Marland Yarde, the west London side looked flat in attack, although 
they did score from a lineout and drive to pull back to within six points.

But, after a 6-0 penalty count in Quins’ favour until then, referee Matt 
Carley started to penalise them in the final 10 minutes of the half and Exeter 
piled on 10 points. The Chiefs sent two of those penalties to the corner and 
drove Cowan-Dickie over for his second, before Gareth Steenson, captain on his 
return to the side, landed a penalty, after more outrageous generosity from the 
visitors, for a 29-13 lead at the break.

Cowan-Dickie’s third followed shortly after the restart to put the game to 
bed, before Quins’ late but unconvincing rally. Mike Brown, making his first 
start of the season after illness, put Care away, and then the latter took his 
blow to the head as Charlie Walker was worked over for a neat score in the last 
10 minutes. No one at Quins will be fooled. None of their several England 
players could find a way into the game until the game had gone, and it was 
Exeter, a man short, who came closest to scoring in those final stages. Early 
days yet, but it seems those first two matches might have been no more than an 
aberration.
 