
I had assured friends that staying in a yurt in Lanzarote would be a treat, 
not a chore. But even I didn't realise just how luxurious the Eco Yurt Royale 
would be, nor how beautiful the island. I got a hint when my boyfriend and I 
were greeted at the airport with a chilled bottle of cava and taken on a 
chauffeur-driven tour through the mountains at sunset. And another when we 
arrived at the finca on the edge of Arrieta, a fishing village on the 
north-east coast, to see our private terrace lit by dozens of twinkling 
lanterns. Then we were whisked to El Lago in Arrieta (+34 928 848176) for 
Canarian tapas – stuffed peppers, grilled octopus, garlicky prawns – then fish 
andpapas arrugados, the Canaries' addictive wrinkled potatoes, with mojo sauce.

Back at the finca, we sat amid tea lights in the raised bamboo gazebo that 
would become our favourite spot, sipped white wine and listened to waves 
crashing on the beach. Our yurt was at one end of its own walled plot. On one 
side was a marble-floored wet room and toilet, a shaded daybed and the gazebo. 
On the other side was a covered outdoor kitchen with granite-topped breakfast 
bar and a covered lounge area, for rare rainy days or, more likely, a break 
from the sun: Lanzarote is sunny all year round. In February we lolled on sun 
loungers while freezing fog settle over England; in October, the average is 
26C, falling to a still-pleasant 24C in November.

The yurt itself was a vast circular space split into sleeping areas: a wooden 
frame made from criss-crossed poles with a domed ceiling covered by fabric 
skins and a skylight. The walls were scarlet, the floor tiled and inset with 
star-shaped lights, the furniture antique, the bed king-size and sumptuous.

This was the most palatial of several yurts on the finca. But if sleeping 
under canvas doesn't appeal – however far removed it is from a two-man from 
Millets – a couple of stone-built properties have just opened, including a 
restored watermill four-poster bed. The owners' house is on site, and their 
four children and various pets add a delightful Darling Buds of May feel, 
tempering the stylish side and helping guests feel at home.

Breakfasts were special: we were encouraged to rummage in the hen boxes for 
just-laid eggs, which were scrambled for us and served with coffee. 
Self-caterers can order a box of local fruit and vegetables, cheese, honey and 
corn bread. I began to fantasise about staying on our plot all holiday, 
emerging occasionally for a dip in the small communal pool, or to stroll to the 
beach, tapas bar and village.
 Finca de Arrieta, with pool and garden 
But guests in the luxury yurt also have use of a hybrid car. (The environment 
is taken seriously here: the retreat is off-grid, powered by wind turbines and 
solar panels.) We were duty-bound to explore. It is unfair that Lanzarote 
retains its "grotty" image. The landscape is a kaleidoscope of colours, albeit 
from a restricted palette: white houses, black volcanic rock, green cacti, 
golden beaches, sparkling sapphire seas.

The main sights are linked to César Manrique, the celebrated 1960s artist who 
prevented mass development marring his beloved island and made a virtue of its 
geographical quirks. The lower level of his house – now a gallery – is made 
from huge air bubbles left by flowing lava (+34 928 843138,cesarmanrique.com 
<http://www.cesarmanrique.com/fundacion_i.htm>, adults €25, children €12). 
Concert halls, restaurants and a swimming pool are situated in volcanic caves; 
an old quarry is now a cactus garden; a lookout point and former gun 
emplacement is now a cafe/bar. Every roundabout has a Manrique sculpture or 
wind chime.

He is rivalled only by the volcanic landscape he so loved. The Montañas de 
Fuego in the west is the most dramatic example, an other-worldly, scarred 
landscape that saw cataclysmic eruptions in the 18th century. But Manrique 
managed to stamp his mark on this too, designing El Diablo there (+34 928 
840056), a circular, glass-walled restaurant that uses volcanic heat to cook 
its fish and steaks.

Volcano-fired fare was a novelty, but we preferred our barbecue at the yurt – 
simple food in simply stunning surroundings.

• One Off Places (oneoffplaces.co.uk 
<http://www.oneoffplaces.co.uk/Europe/Canary-Islands/Lanzarote/Eco-Yurt-Royale.aspx>
) has a week self-catering for up to six at the Eco Yurt Royale from €1,400. 
Other yurts cost from €65 a night, seelanzaroteretreats.com 
<http://lanzaroteretreats.com/>. Jet2.com (0871 226 1737, jet2.com 
<http://www.jet2.com/>) flies to Lanzarote from Leeds Bradford, Manchester, 
East Midlands and Newcastle from £80 return
 