
An 18-year-old man has been arrested on suspicion of murdering a teenage girl 
who was found dead on a pathway in Rotherham, police have said.

The body of the victim – who has not yet been formally identified but was 
named locally as 16-year-old Leonne Weeks – was discovered on a pathway in the 
Dinnington area of Rotherham on Monday after friends and family members had 
issued desperate appeals on social media for her whereabouts.

South Yorkshire police said they were called to the scene at about 10.55am 
after receiving reports from members of the public. At a press conference on 
Monday night, they said they were treating the death as suspicious because of 
“concerns around the state of the body and injuries”.

Supt Sarah Poolman said police had received a missing persons report 20 
minutes before the body was found and that additional police patrols would be 
in place over the coming days to provide “reassurance to the local community 
and wider general public”. She urged anyone with information about the incident 
to come forward.

Facebook posts from Monday morning show friends and family appealing to anyone 
with information about the girl’s whereabouts to contact them, after Weeks did 
not return home on Sunday night.

On Tuesday morning, the victim’s uncle Danny Bowskill wrote on Facebook: “Rest 
in peace my wonderful niece never thought I would ever be writing this but 
Leonne Weeks you (were) and still are loved by so many. I’ll be there for your 
dad and mum all the way.”

The alleyway where Weeks’s body was found, remained cordoned off at both ends 
on Tuesday morning, with police standing guard. A growing pile of flowers 
included notes paying tribute to Weeks. “All our thoughts are with you. Heaven 
has gained an angel. Fly high sweetie,” read one.

On Tuesday morning, forensics experts were seen entering a house on a nearby 
street, with a police car and crime scene investigations van stationed outside.

One woman who had come to the scene to leave flowers and pay her respects said 
she lived in the area with her young children. “This is a shock to the system. 
It’s the first time I’ve heard of anything like this happening around here,” 
she said.

A neighbour of Weeks’s mother, who declined to be named, said she was appalled 
by what happened. “You don’t expect it to happen on your doorstep. I’m just off 
to get her mother a card,” she said.

Writing on Twitter before news of the arrest broke, local MP for Rother 
Valley, Kevin Barron, tweeted:
Kevin Barron MP (@KevinBarronMP) 
I am incredibly sad to hear about the discovery of a teenage girl’s body in 
Dinnington near my constituency office this morning.
 <https://twitter.com/KevinBarronMP/status/821032043240898560> January 16, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/KevinBarronMP/status/821032043240898560> Kevin Barron MP 
(@KevinBarronMP) 
I would like to send my condolences to the family and friends of this young 
girl. We must now allow the police time to investigate.
 <https://twitter.com/KevinBarronMP/status/821032239463092225> January 16, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/KevinBarronMP/status/821032239463092225> 
Anyone with information is asked to call 101 quoting incident number 256 of 16 
January.
 