
A British man was removed from a plane by armed police at Luton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/luton> airport after a fellow passenger read a 
message on his mobile phone about “prayer” and reported him as a security 
threat.

Laolu Opebiyi, 40, from London, said he was forced to hand over his phone and 
supply his password in order to establish his innocence after he tried to 
arrange a conference call prayer with friends using WhatsApp.

A detective subsequently questioned and cleared Opebiyi but the pilot refused 
to allow him back on to theeasyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> flight to Amsterdam last 
Thursday and he was forced to wait more than three hours for the next scheduled 
departure.

The Nigerian-born Christian believes the passenger next to him assumed he was 
a Muslim and jumped to the conclusion that he may be a terrorist.


“That guy doesn’t know me and within two minutes he’s judging me,” he told the 
Guardian. “Even if I was a Muslim, it was pretty unfair the way I was treated. 
I don’t think anyone, irrespective of their religion should be treated in such 
a way.

“If we keep on giving into this kind of bigotry and irrational fear, I dare 
say that the terrorists will have achieved their aim.”

Opebiyi, a business analyst, said that as they awaited the plane’s 6.45am 
departure, his fellow passenger asked him: “What do you mean by ‘prayer’?” 
Taken aback that he had been reading over his shoulder, Opebiyi explained that 
he was arranging to pray with friends.

About two minutes later, the male passenger went to the front of the plane and 
began a conversation with the cabin crew, Opebiyi said. The man was taken to 
the door of the cockpit and returned 15 minutes later, telling Opebiyi that he 
was getting off the plane because he felt unwell. A few minutes later, two 
armed officers entered the plane. They asked Opebiyi for his phone and told him 
to remove his belongings and accompany them off the plane and into the terminal 
building.

After an officer confirmed that he was being questioned because of what 
happened with the other passenger, Opebiyi explained that he was a Christian, 
showing them a copy of the Bible in his bag. “They asked me which church I 
attend and how long I have been going there,” he said. “They also ask if I have 
ever thought about changing my religion to which I replied ‘no’.”

They also asked him about the name of the conference call prayer group, which 
was “ISI men” – an acronym for “iron sharpens iron”, from theBible quote 
<https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Proverbs+27%3A17> “As iron 
sharpens iron, so one person sharpens another”. The Guardian understands that 
the passenger who reported Opebiyi may have misread this as “Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>”.

An officer eventually told Opebiyi that he was in the clear but that the pilot 
had said he should take another flight. He suffered further humiliation when an 
officer accompanied him to the easyJet desk to help him get on the next flight 
and seven other passengers from the 6.45am flight, who had left the plane 
because of security fears, also joined the queue.

Opebiyi said one of them spotted him and said: “If he is on the next flight, I 
am not getting on the flight.” He said the officer took the female passenger 
aside and explained the situation. Before Opebiyi boarded the 10.25am flight, 
the officer shook his hand and expressed sympathy for his ordeal, he said.

But he now fears he is on a terrorist watchlist because when he returned the 
next day from his business trip, the electronic passport gate did not let him 
through and he had to speak to an immigration officer before proceeding.

“Someone felt I was a terrorist because they saw the word ‘prayer’ on my phone 
and now I stand in uncertainty about my freedom of movement in and out of the 
United Kingdom,” he said.

A Bedfordshire police spokeswoman confirmed that its officers removed an 
individual from the flight but “were satisfied that there was no concern around 
the passenger travelling”.

An easyJet spokesman said: “The safety and security of its passengers and crew 
is our highest priority which means that if a security concern is raised we 
will always investigate it as a precautionary measure. We would like to 
apologise for any inconvenience caused to the passenger.”
 