
Leicester have pledged to nurse Manu Tuilagi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manu-tuilagi> back to health after the 
England centre’s latest cruel injury setback. The 25-year-old has been ruled 
out for the rest of the season with damaged knee ligaments, wrecking his 
chances of making this summer’s British & Irish Lions tour as well as any hope 
of featuring in the Six Nations Championship.

It is now almost four years since the injury-plagued Tuilagi started a Test 
match at Twickenham and he has managed 17 minutes of international action since 
the summer of 2014. Surgery will now be needed to repair his anterior cruciate 
ligament, with only Jonny Wilkinson among modern high-profile English backs 
having bounced back successfully from such a protracted litany of fitness 
issues.

The Pacific Island-born back encountered off-field trouble during a previous 
long-term injury lay-off in 2015 when an assault conviction led him to be 
suspended by the England head coach at the time, Stuart Lancaster.

This time, however, his club is determined to do everything it can to ensure 
the powerful centre, capped 26 times for his adopted country, makes a full 
recovery.

Richard Cockerill pays price for barren spell but Leicester will miss his 
loyalty | Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
The interim Leicester director of rugby, Aaron Mauger, who has assumed control 
after the sacking of Richard Cockerill this week, confirmed Tuilagi would have 
an operation this month and would be sidelined for at least six months after 
being injured nine minutes intothe home defeat by Saracens on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/leicester-saracens-premiership-match-report>
.

“It was just a freak accident,” Mauger said. “He got himself in a good 
position, got around his man and then three guys converged on him at the same 
time. There were three players – and probably 300kg – on his shoulders. One of 
the wingers just clipped his leg and put a bit of pressure on that knee. A bit 
of cartilage spilled out the side and popped back in.

“He’s going to be out for a long time and it can be quite lonely doing rehab. 
But we will have a good support staff and medical team around him. We’ll make 
sure we look after him. He will probably need a bit of space to get his head 
around it and we will allow him the opportunities to do that.”

The Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> captain, Tom 
Youngs, also believes Tuilagi will get his rehab right this time and resume his 
Test career next season. “He’s had a few slip-ups but I think he’s grown a lot 
as a man now and understands a bit better,” Youngs said.

“He will commit to it. I’m absolutely gutted for him. He had just got his 
groin right, was looking sharp and was starting to rumble. It’s very hard for 
him to pick up the pieces again.”

As part of the process, Tuilagi has already been appointed as the club’s new 
training-ground barista. “We’ve got a new coffee machine now so he can learn 
how to do that for us all,” Youngs said.

“I’m sure he will be speaking to people in the right places to help him 
through this difficult time. It’s psychologically hard, so it’s very important 
to keep those guys engaged. It’s horrible when you are injured because you 
don’t feel part of it.”
 