
Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s far-right Front National, has said David 
Cameron’s decision to call the UK’s referendum on European Union membership was 
a “facade” undertaken for purely electoral reasons, while her ownreferendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/european-far-right-hails-britains-brexit-vote-marine-le-pen>
 on France leaving the bloc would be driven not by petty party politics but 
“the interests of the people”.


Le Pen, who, according to current polls, could make it to the final runoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/the-fear-of-marine-le-pen-will-the-next-political-earthquake-happen-in-france>
 in May’s French presidential election but is considered unlikely to win, said 
on Friday she would immediately begin renegotiating France’s position in the EU 
if she took power.

She would demand France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> took back 
border control, economic and monetary sovereignty, as well as control of all 
laws, she said. Within six months, she would call an in-out referendum and, if 
she had not won back all those controls from Brussels, she would call for a 
“Frexit”.

'Well done Britain': Brexit vote boosts French far-right's election machine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/well-done-britain-brexit-vote-boosts-french-far-right-front-national-election-machine>
“Either I will have secured the return of those four sovereignties and I will 
advise the French to remain in a newEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of nations, or I will not and 
then I will advise them to leave the EU,” she told a briefing with the 
Anglo-American Press Association of Paris, which includes the Guardian. “There 
is no question for me of betraying the people,” she said.

The leader of the anti-immigration, anti-EU, anti-establishment FN said her 
proposed negotiations would be nothing like Cameron’s ill-fated bid for a new 
UK deal in Europe before the Brexit referendum. “I think Mr Cameron decided to 
call that referendum for purely electoral reasons,” she said. “He was tripped 
up by his own political strategy. In reality, it was about countering Ukip and 
giving assurances to those inside his party who were more and more bitterly 
opposed to the EU.

“But did he really want to leave? The answer is clearly no. So the referendum 
was in my view a facade ... He said that he got what he wanted in EU 
negotiations but, in reality, he didn’t care what he got. His objective was to 
stay in the EU. My objective is to get back sovereignty.”

Le Pen’s aim to pull France out of the euro currency has been the subject of 
internal party differences in recent years, with some saying the policy could 
scare off older voters, who do not traditionally back the Front National but 
who the party needs to win over if it is to make gains in the presidential 
election. Polls indicate that despite strong misgivings about the EU and the 
eurozone, most French voters want to remain members of both.

Le Pen this week appeared to slightly nuance her stance on quitting the euro, 
saying she was open to a “common currency” coexisting alongside a national 
currency.

But on Friday she denied any softening on her position on the euro, saying: 
“It is important that France recovers its national currency.” She said the euro 
was “an obstacle, a millstone for people’s spending power and for employment”. 
Brussels, she said, had used the euro in Greece “not as a currency but a knife 
that you stick in a country’s ribs to force it to do what its people don’t want 
to do”.

Asked if she might do a U-turn on her anti-EU stance having seen the seeming 
chaos of organising a Brexit in the UK, Le Pen said: “There is no chaos at all 
around Brexit. On the contrary, chaos was forecast and it didn’t happen. 
Britain is doing better than it did before Brexit, the economic indicators are 
very good ... consumer confidence is at its highest in years.”

If the EU attempted to punish the UK for Brexit, she said, Brussels would be 
“showing its real face.” “The EU has always shown its real face in these 
circumstances; it showed its real face with Greece and it has tried to show its 
real face with Britain,” she said.

“The EU doesn’t advance by adherence, because it knows people no longer adhere 
to its political structures, it advances by threat, intimidation and blackmail.

“The way the EU has reacted to Brexit was I think extremely revealing for 
European people - at least for those who thought there was still an ounce of 
democracy left in the European structure.”

With four months to go until the presidential election, Le Pen and her party 
face a delicate balancing act. Despite the FN’s local election gains in recent 
years, many French voters still fear the party and only one third see it as 
capable of governing France.

Le Pen, keen to reassure voters, has attempted to “detoxify” the official 
party discourse from its racist, jackbooted overtones of the past. To do well 
in the presidential election, she must reach beyond her base. She has 
appropriated leftwing economics and state protectionism and her party is nowthe 
favourite among French public sector workers 
<http://www.lesechos.fr/politique-societe/politique/0211658600174-vote-des-fonctionnaires-a-droite-toute-2054554.php>
, a group that historically favoured the left.

But Le Pen must also maintain her reputation for radicalism in order to appeal 
to her far-right base, who are concerned about identity politics, immigration 
and Islam’s place in France. Currently, her focus is on fighting the polls’ 
favourite: the rightwing candidate for Les Républicains, the socially 
conservativeFrançois Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
, who has followed her on to the same ground of identity politics, appealing to 
traditional, Christian values.

Questioned on her warm ties to Vladimir Putin’s Russia, Le Pen denied she 
would be anyone’s puppet. “I am a totally free woman,” she said. “I don’t want 
France to be subjugated by the US ... I also don’t want us to be subjugated by 
Russia.”

 Asked about US charges of Russian cyber-attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/29/fbi-dhs-russian-hacking-report>
 and interference in the American election, Le Pen said she could not see any 
serious evidence behind the charges, saying that nowadays when anything went 
wrong anywhere there was “a tendency to blame it on Russia”.

Le Pen is still struggling to raise millions of euros needed to fund her 
party’s presidential and parliamentary election campaigns. There are no rules 
against borrowing from foreign lenders to fund French election campaigns and Le 
Pen has in the past looked to Russian banks. But Russia has now started legal 
proceedings to recover a €9m (£7.7m) loan from Le Pen’s party after the 
Moscow-based bank which loaned the money in 2014 had its operating licence 
revoked because it held insufficient capital. The impact this will have on the 
party’s finances is unclear.

Le Pen denied that money loaned from Russia could come with agreements that 
she should adopt pro-Russia stances. “When a bank lends me money, there is no 
quid-pro-quo in any way,” she said, adding that her only obligation was to pay 
the money back.

She said all French banks had refused to lend to her party, a situation which 
she called “an absolute scandal”. Le Pen said she was still looking for loans 
abroad. That search included British or US banks. “Whatever bank that agrees to 
loan to us, we’ll accept that loan, except from a country that supports or 
funds Islamist fundamentalism,” she said.

The FN is facing investigations into alleged past campaign funding 
irregularities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/09/france-front-national-charged-election-finance-inquiry-corruption>
, which it denies. This week, French authorities stepped up their investigation 
into accusations that members of the party tricked the European parliament out 
of hundreds of thousands of euros paid to legislative aides. Party members were 
accused of using assistants for political activity even though they were on the 
parliament’s payroll.

The party treasurer, Wallerand de Saint-Just, denied the accusations and 
called the inquiry a persecution campaign aimed at hurting Le Pen’s 
presidential bid.
 