
Maria Balshaw, who is expected to replace Sir Nicholas Serota as director of 
Tate, has been working in the arts for more than 15 years.

Since June 2006, the 47-year-old has been director of the Whitworth in 
Manchester, where, according to its website, she has coordinated “a challenging 
programme of historic, modern and contemporary exhibitions that capitalise on 
the Whitworth’s university location as well as having a strong international 
profile”.

This includes coordinating the £15m redevelopment of the gallery, helping to 
reinvigorate its collections and dramatically increase visitor numbers. Under 
her leadership, the Whitworth won the 2015 museum of the year prize, with the 
Guardian’s art critic Adrian Searle writing that the gallery “feels vital and 
alive”.

Balshaw has been a central figure in the creation of The Factory, the £110m 
arts venue planned on the former site of Granada’s TV studios.


In 2011 she took on the role of director of Manchester City Galleries 
alongside her duties at the Whitworth. She has also recently taken on the role 
of director of culture for Manchester city council, and in April 2014 she was 
appointed as a board member of Arts Council England by the secretary of state 
for culture, media and sport.

Balshaw was awarded a CBE in the Queen’s birthday honours for services to the 
arts in June 2015. In the same year she was named personality of the year by 
Apollo magazine, particularly for her warm relationships with artists. Balshaw 
successfully persuaded Cornelia Parker, for example, that the Whitworth should 
be the venue for an important exhibition in 2015. “She made it impossible to 
turn down,” said Parker inan interview with Apollo 
<http://www.apollo-magazine.com/apollo-awards-2015-personality-of-the-year-maria-balshaw/>
 to mark the award.

Balshaw received a Paul Hamlyn Breakthrough Award in 2010 – a £260,000 grant 
in recognition of her cultural entrepreneurship – and the Whitworth won the 
2011 Lever prize for best cultural organisation in the north west of England.

Balshaw’s early experiences in the industry include working as director of 
development and external relations at Arts Council, West Midlands, and as 
director of creative partnerships in Birmingham from 2002 to 2005.

She has a bachelors degree in English literature and cultural studies from the 
University of Liverpool, a masters in critical theory from the University of 
Sussex, and a doctorate in African-American visual and literary culture, also 
from the University of Sussex. Before moving into the cultural sector she 
worked as research fellow in urban culture at the University of Birmingham and 
as lecturer in cultural studies at University College Northampton.

She has published a number of books and essays on African-American urban 
culture, gender and visuality. She is also a board member of the charity set up 
to run Rothesay Pavilion after its £8m-plus refurbishment.
 