
The Rangers manager Mark Warburton admits he is aware of the need to 
strengthen before a likely return to the Premiership next season. Warburton’s 
side defeated Queen of the South 4-3 at Ibrox on Saturday to move themselves a 
step closer to the Championship title. Having raced into a commanding 4-1 lead, 
with three goals in the first 10 minutes of the second half,Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> conceded twice to make it a 
nervy finish despite dominating large chunks of the game. Similarly, the 
previous week they were quick out of the traps to score two early goals but 
defensive lapses cost them dearly and they went on to lose 3-2 against Falkirk.

They’re all talk but it seems everyone loves a podcast | Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/27/podcasts-football-weekly-barry-glendenning>
Despite perceived defensive frailties, Warburton is keen to add across all 
areas of the squad, not just in the backline.

He said: “In defence Rob Kiernan has been outstanding, as has Danny Wilson.

“We will add one more because we’ll need more numbers next year but we’ll look 
for quality to add to the group.

“We’ll add four or five players to the group overall.” The former Brentford 
manager Warburton enjoys working with a smaller squad and only named five 
substitutes for the visit of Queen of the South.

Many of Rangers’ younger players were on international duty with their 
respective Under-21 squads which left the Ibrox manager without first-team 
stars such as Billy King and Barrie McKay.

“We’ve got eight or nine boys away with the international squads,” said 
Warburton. “We’ve got a tight squad but we always try and help out the 
international teams.

“But when we lose that many boys it leaves us very light in numbers. I don’t 
want a bench filled just for the sake of it.

“I want to make sure that to get on a Rangers bench, you have to earn it. It’s 
a big honour.”

Rangers made blistering starts to both halves, pressing well and hitting their 
opponents with early goals.

The January signing Harry Forrester was one of the players to take advantage 
of the fast start and was delighted to open the scoring for the Glasgow giants 
after just 14 minutes.

He said: “It was good and to get on the score sheet was great too obviously.

“We’ve got to come flying out of the box as sometimes teams sit back towards 
the end of matches.

“So if we can get the early goal then it can settle everybody and we can play 
our stuff.”
 