
As Jermain Defoe raised his eyes to the stands at the final whistle he was 
greeted by a sea of long since emptied seats. With the remaining Sunderland 
fans directing gentle boos and rather resigned shouts of “rubbish” towards the 
pitch, David Moyes’s star striker could have been forgiven for hankering aftera 
return to West Ham before the end of the month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/jermain-defoe-west-ham-slaven-bilic>
.

This latest surrender was not remotely Defoe’s fault – indeed his goal, scored 
when Stoke were three up, provoked sufficient uncertainty among Mark Hughes’s 
defence to almost certainly spare the Wearsiders real humiliation – but the 
forward’s unusually downcast body language seemed indicative of a man losing 
faith in Sunderland’s ability to win their latest relegation fight.

West Ham forget troubles as Andy Carroll stars in win over Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
Moyes said: “We made three poor mistakes for the goals and we never got going. 
The damage was done and we got severely punished.”

Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> were unbeaten in 
their previous 14 league games against Stoke here but, right from the start, 
Hughes’s players appeared minded to change that narrative, with Marko 
Arnautovic, Peter Crouch and Xherdan Shaqiri in particularly incisive mood. 
Accordingly, it was not long before Shaqiri’s long through pass found 
Arnautovic unattended on the left. Seizing this invitation, the Austrian 
unleashed a shot that Vito Mannone repelled with a leg, only for the rebound to 
return straight back to Arnautovic who lashed a stunning shot into the roof of 
the net.

Sunderland were in alarmingly slapdash mode, often conceding possession 
cheaply, and they were suitably punished as Arnautovic swiftly doubled Stoke’s 
advantage. That second goal began with some excellent one-touch stuff from the 
visitors, featuring deft one-twos between first Arnautovic and Shaqiri and then 
the Austrian and the excellent Crouch. It concluded with Arnautovic curling an 
assured left-foot shot beyond the advancing Mannone. “One of the better goals 
I’ve been involved in,” said an approving Hughes.

His side were thoroughly shaking the previous weekend’s FA Cup defeat against 
Wolves out of their system while subjecting Moyes – slumped in his dug-out seat 
with arms folded and expression impassively grim – to unrelenting misery.

Goal No3 beckoned when Shaqiri’s vicious low shot from distance looked to have 
confounded Mannone but the Italian, shaky throughout, somehow fumbled the ball 
on to a post after it had squirmed beneath him. This proved merely a temporary 
reprieve as, shortly afterwards, Charlie Adam’s fine cross exposed negligent 
marking while creating a deserved goal for the unmarked Crouch who, with the 
panicking Mannone off his line, headed Stoke’s third.

With 11 minutes left before half-time hundreds of fans stood up and started 
streaming towards the exits. Undeterred by the sudden rash of empty red plastic 
seats, Defoe succeeded in altering the mood a little by scoring his 12th goal 
of the season.

Burnley rewarded for Joey Barton gamble with win against Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/burnley-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
Connecting with Donald Love’s long ball, the former England forward found 
himself onside and one on one against Lee Grant. There was only one winner, 
Defoe’s subtly curving right-foot shot crashing in off a post – Moyes probably 
dares not even contemplate where he would be without a striker much coveted by 
Slaven Bilic.

If Defoe’s work was destined to be undone by Papy Djilobodji – subsequently 
fortunate to collect a yellow rather than a red card following a wince-inducing 
late challenge on Arnautovic – and his tendency to freeze in the face of 
Crouch’s advances, his side at least stemmed the second-half tide.

Yet although Grant repelled Fabio Borini’s shot and Jack Rodwell missed a good 
chance, this mini home renaissance was largely down to Stoke sitting deep and 
ceding possession as they saw the game out.

“I’m very satisfied,” said Hughes. “The first 35 minutes was the best we’ve 
played away all season. We made sure it was always going to be difficult for 
Sunderland.”
 