
Mark Warburton is not prone to talking in headlines. His unwillingness to 
point to Sunday’sScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>
 semi-final between Rangers and Celtic in anything other than unique context is 
hardly a surprise. Yet other managers would have adopted an alternative stance, 
one relating to the laying down of markers and the like.

“It’s one game,” Warburton says. “You have these one-off results. Andy 
Halliday was in the Bradford team that beat Chelsea. It doesn’t mean Bradford 
are better than Chelsea. It doesn’t mean the gap between Bradford and Chelsea 
is any less.

“The fact of the matter is, we know there’s a gap. That’s a very respectful 
comment because we know we have to work hard as a team, as a club to close the 
gap. I keep saying it, but we do.

“For five years they have been the Premiership champions. We have to recognise 
that, recruit well, keep developing out environment and work hard. We’re not 
going to close the gap completely by August but we have to close it 
significantly. That’s our aim.”

Rangers’ huge budgetary advantage means their winning of Scotland’s second 
tier with plenty to spare is hardly worthy of lavish praise. The same applies 
to Celtic’s imminent retention of the Premiership. That said,Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> followers are entitled to enjoy 
the marked improvement under Warburton after the routinely turgid, aimless fare 
as presided over by his predecessor Ally McCoist.

A basic glance at economics tells the scale of Warburton’s task to restore 
something approaching Glasgow parity, unless Rangers increase investment levels 
substantially next season. A look at the teams rightly installs Celtic as the 
strong favourites for this cup tie. In Leigh Griffiths,Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> have a striker who can damage an 
unconvincing Rangers rearguard.

And yet, Celtic have endured a series of Hampden horror shows, losing four of 
their last six semi-finals at the national stadium. Ronny Deila remains a 
wholly unconvincing manager of the champions, to the point where his future 
beyond the end of this season is far from certain. Defeat to Rangers would 
surely confirm the Norwegian’s exit.

Warburton has expressed routine sympathy for his counterpart across Glasgow. 
The former Brentford manager, a newcomer to the Old Firm environment, has been 
taken aback at levels of intensity; and that’s without the pair being in the 
same league.

“The level of passion in Glasgow is completely different [to England],” 
Warburton says. “People live and breathe their football. That’s magnificent. 
You have to enjoy that and relish being in that environment. Certain things I 
think go to extremes sometimes. The media side is extreme in the buildup but we 
have to accept it and the players and staff learn from it. We had a guest in 
this morning, a guy involved in football at the highest levels, and he couldn’t 
believe the media or the coverage this game gets.

“It tells you it’s a different arena because of the media side of things. It’s 
a huge game, I understand that, but the media coverage is spectacular.”

Matches with deep meaning are not a new phenomenon for Warburton. Only last 
season, his Brentford team lost to Middlesbrough in a play-off semi-final. 
“That was a different type of pressure,” the 53-year-old says.

“If I said Rangers v Celtic, or Brentford v Middlesbrough, what’s the bigger 
game? There’s no comparison. When I say the financial pot of gold is up to 
£140m you can understand where I’m coming from. There was huge pressure on that 
game. What it meant to the winning club to get to it was huge.

“But this is a different type of game, a semi-final and we desperately want to 
win it and perform well. We’re in good shape. If we show the level of 
performance that we’ve shown many times this season, we’ll be OK.

“I don’t think Celtic will have faced many teams that look to keep the ball as 
we do. I hope we pose them a different challenge.”Hibernian await in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/hibernian-dundee-united-scottish-cup-match-report>
.
 