
Most teams, however champion, would be forgiven for only half turning up for 
an assignment like this, but if Saracens’ appetite has been sated by their 
recent successes it is not apparent. The ruthlessness with which the champions 
of everything dispatched a hopelessly outclassedSale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> was impressive – and not a 
little cruel.

They settled for the six tries and 50 points, but they had three others denied 
by the TMO, all fairly. So perhaps they have a heart, after all. If they had 
hit 70, it would not have been a distortion, such was their dominance from 
start to finish. If Sale had come hoping for a runaround against opponents with 
bigger fish to fry, they were sorely mistaken. They came up against players 
who, for all their pre-eminence, seem intent on letting Eddie Jones know they 
are not satisfied with what they have. Maro Itoje was a superman, as ever, but 
the man-of-the-match judge was not spoilt for choice.

Leicester left looking inept and embarrassed by dominant Munster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/munster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Jones was in the stand and will be well pleased with his England boys. Owen 
Farrell came off a minute into the second half with a tight quad, which Mark 
McCall described as a precautionary measure. IfDylan Hartley’s latest 
indiscretion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 proves one too far, Farrell is the likeliest to assume the England captaincy. 
“We decided to take him off, much to his disgust,” McCall said. “We sent him 
back out, because Owen gives a lot of very clear messages to the others at 
half-time, and it seemed the right thing to do.”

A captain in waiting, then, but Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> are full of them. Itoje is 
another, playing like a man possessed when he really did not have to. Jamie 
George, too, has been ready to call himself England’s hooker for a long time; 
now he may get his chance. “Everyone knows it’s going to happen sooner rather 
than later,” McCall said. He scored a try and did not miss a lineout.

However, this was a duck shoot for Saracens. Sale were humiliated. They lost 
their captain after 20 minutes, having to replace him with one of the 
youngsters they had brought down to sit on the bench. Their interest in this 
competition has long since lapsed, but if we have complained about the attitude 
of some of the French sides towards Europe when they have run out of things to 
play for we can hardly overlook this capitulation. Steve Diamond, Sale’s 
director of rugby, refused to speak to the written or broadcast press. Whether 
out of shame or anger we can only speculate – and likewise, if the latter, 
whether with his team or himself.

But even if Sale had properly turned up, they could not have hoped to match 
Saracens. Four of this front five may very well be wearing red against the All 
Blacks in the summer. The torrent of ball that came their way from a smoothly 
functioning lineout, fed by a ballooning penalty count against the visitors, 
was in itself embarrassing. The home team won more than 20 of their throws and 
stole four of Sale’s, ie nearly half of them, with Itoje nicking three on his 
own.

It took a little while to turn the dominance into tries, but having notched 
two by the break for a 26-3 lead Saracens pulled away in the second half. 
Marcelo Bosch finished the first, after Richard Wigglesworth had broken clean 
through a ruck, and Sean Maitland was sent to the posts after Farrell’s neatly 
worked loop round Brad Barritt.

Sale’s cause was not helped by the yellow cards that came with all those 
penalties. Jon Mills saw the second early in the second half, and George 
finished the subsequent lineout and drive. A couple of minutes later another 
midfield loop was executed from another lineout, and Alex Goode chipped to the 
corner, where Chris Wyles finished for the bonus point. And then on came Will 
Skelton, Saracens’ latest signing, whose status, physically and reputationally, 
was in marked contrast to the players Sale were bringing on.

Saracens’ fifth was embarrassing in its ruthlessness and flamboyance, finished 
with ease by Maitland. Richard Barrington drove over to bring up the 50 with 
five minutes to go, after the mighty Skelton carried a few on his back to 
within a few yards. As an unfair contest between the strong and the meek, it 
was a vignette that neatly captured the match’s theme.
 