
Maro Itoje <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maro-itoje> will miss England’s 
four autumn internationals after fracturing his right hand. The Saracens 
second-row requires surgery and is out of action for six weeks.

That puts Itoje in line for a comeback in the second week of December, after 
England’s final international against Australia, and means Eddie Jones is 
without three of the back-five forwards who featured in the Six Nations 
Championship and the summer’s series win in Australia.

Itoje’s club and country second-row colleague George Kruis is out for up to 
eight weeks after ankle surgery while the flanker James Haskell is not expected 
to return until the new year after having reconstructive surgery on the big toe 
of his left foot.

Owen Farrell: ‘I wouldn’t say it’s comfortable playing for Eddie Jones’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/owen-farrell-obsession-saracens-england-rugby-union-interview>
“For any team to lose a player of the ability of Maro is a blow and he will be 
missed through the autumn by both his club and England,” Mark McCall, the
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> director of rugby, said. 
“What’s now important for Maro is his recovery and we look forward to his 
return later this season.”

Itoje was injured during Saracens’ Champions Cup victory against the Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/saracens-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 on Saturday.

Jones had been considering playing Itoje in Haskell’s position for the autumn 
series, operating at wing forward alongside Chris Robshaw, because of a spate 
of injuries in the back row: Sam Jones, Jack Clifford and Mike Williams are all 
out and while Courtney Lawes has played at blindside wing forward, he is likely 
to be needed in the second row with Kruis unavailable.

The Leicester second-row Ed Slater, who has played a number of matches at six 
for his club, is an option, along with the Sale No8, Josh Beaumont, seen by 
Jones as a second-row in the long term, although that may mean moving Robshaw 
back to openside, a position Jones does not believe he is suited for even 
though he played there for England for four years.

There are openside specialists in the Premiership, Matt Kvesic, Luke Wallace 
and Brendon O’Connor among them, but Jones, who will announce his squad for the 
autumn matches against South Africa, Fiji, Argentina and Australia on Wednesday 
morning, has not yet been persuaded by any of them.

Jones is without 10 players for the Twickenham series. The hooker Luke 
Cowan-Dickie has an injured knee while the wings Anthony Watson and Jack Nowell 
are out and no comeback date has been set for the Leicester’s centre Manu 
Tuilagi who has not played since the opening night of the season.

Wales also have injury problems for their four-match autumn campaign that 
starts against Australia on 5 November. Their squad report for training this 
week with the full-back Liam Williams and the second-row Jake Ball, who were 
injured at Saracens, needing fitness checks, along with the centre Scott 
Williams and the wing George North.

The Australia game falls outside World Rugby’s official window but Wales will 
be able to select their six players who are based in England, including North 
and the centre Jamie Roberts, after Premiership Rugby waived, on a one-off 
basis, its rule that clubs held on to their non-England players when they were 
not obliged to release them.

Premiership Rugby said: “As a gesture of flexibility, the clubs will release 
their players outside the approved Test window for matches on the weekend of 
4-6 November. This comes as we continue deliberations on a new post-2019 global 
season structure to find an appropriate balance between club and international 
rugby.”

Wales will not have their England-based players for the two fallow weekends of 
the Six Nations with Premiership Rugby insisting next week is an exception to a 
rule that remains, and by releasing players on a weekend when they would not 
have played anyway because it is an Anglo-Welsh Cup round, the clubs are 
depositing goodwill in the global season debate.
 