
The maximum prison sentence for stalking is to be doubled to 10 years, the 
Ministry of Justice has announced.


Under government amendments to the policing and crime bill, the maximum 
sentence for racially or religiously aggravated harassment will also double, to 
14 years.

The decision to increase punishments for stalking follows cross-party 
political pressure in parliament. Two Conservative backbenchers, Alex Chalk and 
Richard Graham, introduced a private member’s bill last year calling for the 
limit to be doubled.


Their initiative was adopted by the Labour peer Janet Royall in the House of 
Lords where it was passed by a majority last month. Ministers have been in 
discussion since then with MPs and peers.

The justice minister Sam Gyimah said: “Stalkers torment their victims and can 
make everyday life almost unbearable. We are doubling the maximum sentences 
available to the courts so these awful crimes can be properly punished.

“I would like to thank Alex Chalk and Richard Graham for their considerable 
efforts in highlighting this issue. We are also working across the criminal 
justice system to ensure mental health issues associated with these crimes are 
properly addressed.”

Lady Royall, Labour’s former leader in the Lords, said: “I am delighted by the 
government’s decision to double the maximum sentence for the heinous crime of 
stalking from five to 10 years.

“This will ensure that the punishment fits the crime and most importantly it 
will ensure justice for the victims whose lives have been blighted – victims 
likeEllie Aston <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-gloucestershire-37634012>
, whose case was the catalyst for the excellent bill presented to parliament by 
Alex Chalk.”

In 2015, a total of 194 people were convicted of stalking offences and 835 
were convicted of the related offence of putting people in fear of violence. 
The average custodial sentence for stalking was 14.1 months.

High-profile cases involving public figures have raised awareness of the 
problem. Last September Edward Vines, who stalked the Newsnight presenter Emily 
Maitlis for more than two decades, wasjailed for three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/emily-maitlis-stalker-edward-vines-jailed-for-three-years>
. The court was told that he had put Maitlis and her family in fear for their 
safety.


 Alex Gray, who stalked the singer Lily Allen for seven years and eventually 
broke into her home, was convicted last summer andordered to be detained 
indefinitely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/10/lily-allen-stalker-alex-gray-mental-health-act>
 under the Mental Health Act.

Concerns have been raised that doubling the maximum penalties for stalking, 
when compared to sentences for other crimes involving violence and physical 
harm, will upset the hierarchy of punishments available to the courts.


Harry Fletcher, the co-director of the campaign group Voice4Victims, said he 
had pressed the government instead for a change to the powers of the attorney 
general to refer unduly lenient stalking cases to the court of appeal. At 
present, stalking cases are not among those included in the unduly lenient 
appeals process.

“This is a huge message to stalkers to desist,” Fletcher said. “I don’t think 
it will have a massive impact on the prison population. It will not lead to a 
massive increase in average sentence lengths.”


Last month, Amber Rudd, the home secretary, announced the creation of stalking 
protection orders to allow courts to impose restrictions on perpetrators at an 
earlier stage while police investigate complaints.

 The policing and crime bill, with the new sentencing amendments, returns to 
the Commons next Tuesday.

Richard Burgon, the shadow justice secretary, responding to the Ministry of 
Justice announcement on sentencing for stalking offences, said: “In December 
the government voted against Labour peer Baroness Royall’s amendment to 
increase the maximum sentence for stalking.

“Thankfully, under pressure, the Tories have changed their mind. But more 
still needs to be done to ensure that victims of stalking feel confident enough 
that their complaint will be investigated properly when they first report it.”
 