
Buoyed by a losing bonus point at Northampton in round one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/northampton-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
, the Scarlets sank in the cold rain at home against formidable Racing 92. At 
full strength, the Parisian outfit ruled every aspect of play to register – it 
seems slightly hard to believe – their first win in Wales. Their scrum-half, 
Maxime Machenaud, was a live-wire.

Unfortunately for their absolute peace of mind, they were not at full strength 
for the entire game. Their international wing forward, Bernard Le Roux, was 
sent off for stamping, and prop Ben Tameifuna was shown a yellow card for a 
technical offence. Welsh sides do seem to have a problem beating 13-man teams.

They began against 15 with a positive burst. The influential John Barclay was 
off the field at the time, patching up a bump to his nose. In his absence, his 
team set up a series of drives – nothing too wide, nothing too daring – which 
seemed to be doing the trick until Barclay’s replacement, Lewis Rawlings, 
knocked on near the line.

Barclay was soon back but by now his side were struggling to control the ball. 
Hadleigh Parkes put a kick out on the full following a little clumsiness at the 
point of delivery between the forwards and Gareth Davies. Racing all too 
quickly proved that power and a foot-chase might be the formula of choice.

Their forwards drove the lineout following the errant clearance and Joe 
Rokocoko – not renowned for the delicacy of his kicking game – threaded a kick 
behind DTH van der Merwe. Even though he had to turn, the Canadian wing seemed 
to be winning the chase, but somehow managed to miss the ball, allowing 
Machenaud to score. The scrum-half was to shine throughout the night.

Winning any sort of ball was a problem now for the home team. The heavyweight 
visitors were in full control of the conventional sources of possession, 
forcing Ken Owens, for example, to throw long into the rain. Phil John knocked 
on the tap-down. The sense of a long night ahead grew when Racing again kept it 
simple at a line-out, drove a couple of times in midfield before using Rokocoko 
on the overlap.

Not long afterwards, they split the defence even more clinically, this time 
from a scum, when Machenaud and Le Roux made breaks before Chris Masoe finished 
the job. TheScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> claimed 
obstruction off the ball, but in truth they were being overpowered up front and 
out-smarted by Machenaud.

The rain stopped for a minute and the Scarlets looked to end the half as they 
had started, driving for the line. Davies knocked on this time, Racing broke 
clear and Machenaud turned the screw by hitting the blind side and putting 
his wing, Marc Andreu, over. At the interval Racing were 26 points and a bonus 
point to the good; the Scarlets had nothing.

The second was briefly very different. Le Roux stamped – not in a 
bone-breaking way but all too visibly – on the shin of John and was shown the 
red card by the referee, Greg Garner. The Scarlets had a chance, even if Luke 
Charteris a long Welsh thorn in Welsh attacks, was outstanding in defence.

The rain returned with a vengeance, and Racing hunched into full defensive 
mode. They looked comfortable enough, but suddenly Owens, the home hooker, 
produced a pass to beat any defence, a loop near the line that found Aled 
Thomas. The full-back slid through the water to score.

What had been subdued suddenly had volume – on the field and around the 
ground. James Davies rose in prominence. Racing looked anything but comfortable 
now, especially when Tameifuna was sent to the sin bin for delaying release at 
a ruck. Down to 13, the stretched defence immediately conceded a second try, 
Rawlings making no mistake this time near the line as he pirouetted to score 
after a break by the new scrum-half, Aled Davies.

There was a pause after Samson Lee left the field after splitting open his 
forehead in an innocent clash with Mike Phillips. Machenaud had gone, replaced 
by the Welshman on French books. Racing had a breather and they earned 
themselves a penalty, calmly landed by Johan Goosen. A 17-point margin was 
re-established, large enough to carry them safely to the end.
 