
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has told senior 
commanders that every effort must be made to stop British soldiers from falling 
victim to “abuse of the legal system” by lawyers representing Iraqis who allege 
they were victims of war crimes during the occupation of their country.

In a 90-minute meeting with senior commanders, the prime minister said she was 
determined to protect the armed forces against any “vexatious complaints” 
relating to the eight-year occupation, during which tens of thousands of 
British soldiers were deployed to the Arab republic.

It comes amid mounting criticism of the Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> Historic Allegations Team (Ihat), 
which was set up to investigate allegations of murder, abuse and torture by 
British forces. Former soldiers have claimed they have been hounded through the 
courts on unfounded claims and there are growing calls for Ihat to be shut down.

Reports claim more than 1,200 cases of alleged abuse will be dismissed in the 
next three months after the collapse of a single law firm, Public Interest 
Lawyers, afterit was stripped of legal aid funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/15/public-interest-lawyers-iraq-war-al-sweady-theresa-may-uk-troops>
 over a failure to come clean about conflicting evidence in a case against 
British forces.

A Downing Street statement said: “The prime minister spoke of her pride in the 
UK armed forces, and praised the work they do to keep our nation safe. She said 
that every effort must be made to prevent any abuse of the legal system, and 
restated her determination to protect the armed forces against any instances of 
vexatious complaints.”

But the Law Society, which represents lawyers, hit back, warning that 
political interference in the legal cases risked undermining “the independence 
of the legal profession, the rule of law, and the separation of powers which 
are fundamental to a strong and diverse society.”

Robert Bourns, president of the society, said: “Lawyers must not be hindered 
or intimidated in carrying out their professional duties and acting in the best 
interests of their clients within the law. They should not be identified with 
their clients or clients’ cases.”

He added: “The right to access to justice for all depends on lawyers being 
able to represent their clients’ cases within our framework of laws, no matter 
how the client or case may be perceived by the public, media or government. The 
merits of each case are decided by the relevant court, a function that is and 
must remain separate from government.”

In Thursday’s meeting with chief of the defence staff, Air Chief Marshal Sir 
Stuart Peach, the Ministry of Defence permanent under secretary, Stephen 
Lovegrove, the heads of the navy, army and air force, and commander joint 
forces command, May was briefed on “the full extent of current operations”, 
Downing Street said.

“The PM reiterated the UK’s determination to keep Britain’s streets safe by 
taking the fight to Daesh in Iraq and Syria and noted that we have conducted 
more than 1000 airstrikes in both countries, second only to the US,” the 
statement said.

She also discussed tackling the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean, the UK’s 
role in United Nations operations and Nato, collaboration between British and 
French armed forces and the Navy’s operations against pirates off the Horn of 
Africa and in sea lanes in the Gulf.

May said: “The men and women of our armed forces do an incredible job, often 
making huge sacrifices to keep us safe. Whether taking the fight to Daesh in 
Iraq and Syria, helping to tackle the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean or 
providing flood relief at home – we owe them a huge debt of gratitude.

“Our armed forces are the best in the world and with the biggest defence 
budget in Europe and the second biggest in Nato we will continue to play our 
part on the world stage, protecting UK interests across the globe.”

The Conservative MP Johnny Mercer, a member of the defence select committee, 
who is heading an investigation into Ihat, has branded the legal pursuit of 
troops “a national disgrace” and called for the team, which was set up in 2010, 
to be axed. This month, Mercer claimed that May’s predecessor, David Cameron, 
had wanted to shut down the investigations, only to be overruled by the 
attorney general.

The Birmingham-based Public Interest Lawyers had submitted hundreds of 
allegations of misconduct and unlawful killing by British soldiers, including 
triggering the £31mAl-Sweady inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-sweady-inquiry> into the conduct of British 
troops in a 2004 firefight with insurgents.

However, it was subsequently accused of sitting on evidence that undermined 
its clients’ claims in that case for a year, before withdrawing their claim. It 
was criticised when the inquiry’s 2014 report concluded the most serious 
allegations of war crimes following a 2004 battle in southern Iraq were based 
on “deliberate lies, reckless speculation and ingrained hostility”.

It was announced in August that the firm would no longer receive public 
funding after the legal aid agency ruled it had breached contractual 
requirements.

 