
Carli Lloyd scored her 94th international goal, but the main chatter was again 
around Megan Rapinoe, who knelt during the national anthem before USA’s 3-1 
victory over Holland.

Washington Spirit gave Megan Rapinoe fans by stopping her anthem protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/08/washington-spirit-megan-rapinoe-nwsl-anthem-protest>
Rapinoe, who entered as a substitute in the 64th minute, took a knee during 
the anthem for the second straight national team match and fourth game overall. 
She has said she wanted to express solidarity with San Francisco 49ers 
quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who is attempting to bring attention to racial 
inequality and police brutality.

“Do I kneel forever? I don’t know, probably not,” Rapinoe, 31, told ESPN. “But 
I think until I can feel like I’m being more effective in other ways, then this 
seems appropriate to me.

“Obviously there were boos tonight, boos and cheers tonight. I totally respect 
that,” she said. “People feel a certain way, and I want to be respected for the 
way that I feel. I think that’s their right to do that. I totally understand 
that. That said, there’s some people that support me.”

Rapinoe said she had met with coach Jill Ellis and media relations official 
Aaron Heifetz “and just sort of talked through my process”.

“I haven’t talked to US Soccer outside of these guys, and they’re the ones 
here with me, so I expect that would be who I would talk to,” Rapinoe said. 
“But yeah, I want to keep everybody in the loop. It’s sort of an ongoing 
thought process. What’s the best way to handle everything and, for me, what’s 
the best way moving forward? And then, obviously, it affects everyone, so I 
want to appreciate and make sure I’m keeping everyone in the loop and hearing 
their opinions and giving mine as well.”

US Soccer has expressed its displeasure with Rapinoe’s stance, but said they 
wouldn’t be enforcing any punishment yet. However, they could re-evaluate their 
position if Rapinoe continues to kneel.

There was limited opposition to Rapinoe’s stance, although in the silence 
before the anthem a lone voice in the stands could be heard to shout: “Stand 
up.”

Shanice van de Sanden opened the scoring in the second minute before Lloyd 
made it 1-1 after half an hour. USA went in front when Mandy van den Berg put 
through her own net before Allie Long made it 3-1.

The national team next plays on 19 October in Utah in the first of two games 
against Switzerland.
 