
Megan Rapinoe, the US women’s soccer star, has said she will continue to kneel 
during the national anthem “because I simply cannot stand for the kind of 
oppression this country is allowing against its own people.”

Colin Kaepernick’s critics are ignoring the target of his protest | Bryan 
Armen Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/16/colin-kaepernick-protest-racial-iniquity-nfl-american-football>
Rapinoe, 31, has chosen to kneel in support of 49ers quarterback Colin 
Kaepernick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-kaepernick>, who sparked a 
passionate and occasionally ugly debate about injustice, race and patriotism 
when he sat for the national anthem during pre-season. Kaepernick, who is 
objecting to police brutality and racial oppression, has seen his protest 
spread to the NBA and other sports, and high school and college players have 
also picked up the cause.

In a detailed post on the Players’ Tribune 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/megan-rapinoe-why-i-am-kneeling/> on 
Thursday, Rapinoe explained her reasons for kneeling before her games. She 
wrote: “I haven’t experienced over-policing, racial profiling, police brutality 
or the sight of a family member’s body lying dead in the street. But I cannot 
stand idly by while there are people in this country who have had to deal with 
that kind of heartache.

“There is no perfect way to protest. I know that nothing I do will take away 
the pain of those families. But I feel in my heart it is right to continue to 
kneel during the national anthem, and I will do whatever I can to be part of 
the solution.”

Rapinoe, one of the US women’s team’s biggest names, is the highest profile 
soccer player to show her support for Kaepernick. She helped her team to gold 
at the 2012 Olympics and the 2015 World Cup, and is an ambassador for Athlete 
Ally, a charity that combats homophobia in sports. She has chosen to kneel 
before USA international matches and games for Seattle Reign, herNWSL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nwsl-national-womens-soccer-league> club.

But in a separate twist on Thursday, Rapinoe was left out of the USA squad for 
the upcoming friendly games against Switzerland. Alex Morgan, Meghan 
Klingenberg, Ali Krieger and Julie Johnston – who all played on the Women’s 
World Cup-winning team last year and the Olympic team this summer – were also 
left off. Coach Jill Ellis said: “Several of our more experienced players won’t 
be in for this camp while we get to evaluate some different personnel.”

Rapinoe said it was a mistake to view her protest as unpatriotic. “I can 
understand if you think that I’m disrespecting the flag by kneeling, but it is 
because of my utmost respect for the flag and the promise it represents that I 
have chosen to demonstrate in this way. When I take a knee, I am facing the 
flag with my full body, staring straight into the heart of our country’s 
ultimate symbol of freedom – because I believe it is my responsibility, just as 
it is yours, to ensure that freedom is afforded to everyone in this country.”

Her protest has been met with support from soccer fans, but US Soccer, 
America’s governing body, has so far taken a lukewarm view. It said it was the 
federation’s “expectation that our players and coaches will stand and honor our 
flag while the national anthem is played.”

Ellis also stopped short of offering her unqualified support to Rapinoe. “It’s 
a very tough topic,” Ellis said. “Megan’s intent is to have people talking 
about that. You hope that at some point that comes. People are going to be very 
passionate, very opinionated, and I respect that, too. My hope is that we move 
forward in a positive way.”

Rapinoe said she hoped her protest would get people talking. “While there may 
not be a perfect plan or solution in front of us, I encourage everyone reading 
this to join in the conversation,” she wrote. “Together, we can listen to the 
people who are living this nightmare every day. We can try to empathize with 
their pain and start to understand a more complete picture of what is going on 
in our society. We can read articles, editorials, books and stories in order to 
peel back the layers of this centuries-old oppression.

“Having these kinds of conversations can be difficult and complex, but so 
what? We should talk to our family members and challenge them, bringing these 
hard problems to the dinner table and persevering through uncomfortable 
conversations. This is not a ‘them’ problem – this is an ‘us’ problem.

“Even more simply, you can ask yourself this question: ‘Do I truly care about 
equality for all people in this country?’ I am choosing to do something. I am 
choosing to care.”
 