
Leading candidates to be the next commissioner of the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> are planning to pledge 
fresh reforms to Britain’s biggest force with the deadline for applicants 
closing at midday on Wednesday.


The race is wide open and a decision is expected by early next month on who 
will succeedSir Bernard Hogan-Howe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/sir-bernard-hogan-howe-to-retire-as-met-police-commissioner>
.

Likely to apply are Britain’s top counter-terrorism officer, assistant 
commissioner Mark Rowley, and Sara Thornton, currently chair of the National
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Chiefs Council. Stephen 
Kavanagh, the chief constable in Essex and a Met veteran, is also a candidate. 
Cressida Dick, a former counter-terrorism chief who left the Met to join the 
Foreign Office is claimed by some to be the government’s favourite.

The Guardian understands that Simon Byrne, chief constable in Cheshire, has 
also applied. He was brought into the Met by Hogan-Howe to shake up its 
performance and crime fighting. He served in the Met as assistant commissioner 
where he challenged police commanders on their crime-fighting performance.

 Within policing circles, senior and informed sources have rated Rowley, 
Thornton, Kavanagh and Dick as frontrunners, with each having points in their 
favour and question marks against them.

 The decision will technically be made by the Conservative home secretary, 
Amber Rudd, who must take into account the views of London’s Labour mayor, 
Sadiq Khan. Downing Street usually has a significant say in the choice of Met 
commissioner, more so this time given Theresa May’s six-year tenure as home 
secretary where police reform was one of her biggest preoccupations.

 Whoever gets the job has to make budget cuts of £400 and inherits a force 
with low morale and concerns about its performance.

 Dick is highly regarded for her operational experience but left the Met amid 
strains at the top of the force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/01/cressida-dick-leaves-metropolitan-police-terrorism>
. The big question mark against her is her role in overall charge of a 2005 Met 
operation that led police to shoot dead an innocent man, Jean Charles de 
Menezes, whom they mistook for a suicide bomber. It is seen as one of the 
biggest catastrophes in British policing, but Dick’s supporters point out that 
a jury that found the Met guilty of health and safety failings went out of its 
way to say they attached no blame to Dick’s actions.

 The post of Met commissioner carries a salary of £270,648 plus benefits and 
will be a five-year appointment by royal warrant. The advert for the job says 
candidates should “show evidence of successfully leading transformational 
change in a challenging financial climate”.

 It also says those wanting the role must have “an understanding of changing 
crime and threat patterns, and the protection of the most vulnerable”. The Met 
was heavily criticised by the official police inspectorate for being 
substandard in child protection.

 For the first time, non-British police chiefs can apply, as long as they are 
from Australia, Canada, New Zealand or the US.

 Hogan-Howe, the first commissioner in a decade to serve his full five-year 
term, announced in September his decision to stand down. He said it had nothing 
to do withcriticism of the force’s handling of how it investigated child sex 
abuse claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/11/bernard-hogan-howe-child-sex-abuse-claims-metropolitan-police>
 against high-profile figures, which in November castigated the force.

 The two previous commissioners had resigned after the Met became embroiled in 
controversy, and in the last two selection processes – in 2009 and 2011 – the 
early favourite did not get the job.
 