
The Australian authorities leading the search for MH370 have a “high degree of 
confidence” that the plane’s wreck is not to be found in the expanse of Indian 
ocean they have spent more than two years searching.

MH370: data suggests plane was out of control as it plummeted into ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/mh370-australia-new-search-data-plane-plummeted-ocean>
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) on Tuesday released the findings 
from its MH370 First Principles Review summit of crash investigators, aviation 
experts and government representatives, held in Canberra over three days from 4 
November.

The Australian-led search effort of 120,000 sq km of the southern Indian 
ocean, informed by satellite data, has cost $145m (£117m) and is due to end in 
January. Fewer than 10,000 sq km remain to be searched, though progress has 
been slowed by bad weather.

But experts meeting in Canberra to reassess existing evidence and analysis say 
they are now confident the wreck of the plane is not there.

“There is a high degree of confidence that the previously identified 
underwater area searched to date does not contain the missing aircraft.”

New analysis of the satellite data, combined with drift analysis, has 
identified the most likely point that MH370 hit the water as being close to the 
so-called “seventh arc”, north of the current search zone.

In April, the ATSB commissioned the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation (CSIRO) to perform a detailed study of the drift of 
recovered debris. Its findingswere also released on Tuesday 
<http://www.atsb.gov.au/media/5772119/mh370_ocean_driftv29.pdf>, and served to 
narrow down the possible point of impact of the plane.
Atom 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=1115d881-4484-4e3b-82b5-680d60ec1b8a>
The CSIRO’s findings were reinforced by the timing and location of where 
confirmed debris of the plane has been found: in the western Indian Ocean and 
on the east coast of Africa.

Experts have identified a new area of approximately 25,000 sq km – between 
latitudes 33 degrees south and 36 degrees south – as “the area with the highest 
probability of containing the wreckage of the aircraft”, given the 110,000 sq 
km that have been eliminated.

“The experts concluded that, if this area were to be searched, prospective 
areas for locating the aircraft wreckage, based on all the analysis to date, 
would be exhausted.”

Whether the new prospective search will be carried out is dependent on funding 
from Australia,Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> and China, 
the three governments involved in the search effort.

A spokesman for the ATSB told Guardian Australia that the attendees of the 
first principles review summit “were not parties empowered to make decisions 
about any future search efforts”. The report had been provided to the three 
governments “for their consideration”.

“If we are unable to locate the aircraft in the current search area, this new 
area represents the next most likely area to contain the aircraft.”.


How much it would cost to search the new 25,000 sq km area had not been 
determined, he said.



In July, the three transport ministers had agreed that, in the absence of 
credible new evidence, the search for MH370 would be suspended indefinitely 
upon the completion of the effort currently underway.


The Australian transport minister, Darren Chester, seemed to downplay the 
likelihood of the search being extended in a statement which reiterated the 
resolution of the tripartite meeting in July and said the report did “not give 
a specific location of the missing aircraft”.

Malaysia's MH370 search under the spotlight after investigation delays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/malaysia-mh370-search-investigation-delays-madagascar>
“We are very close to completing the 120,000 sq km underwater search area, and 
we remain hopeful that we will locate the aircraft,” he said.

He repeated the decision made in July that the search would be suspended 
“unless credible evidence is available that identifies the specific location of 
the aircraft”.

The Malaysian transport minister, Datuk Seri Liow Tiong Lai, said it remained 
to be seen how the ATSB report could be used to help identify the aircraft’s 
specific location.

“I wish to reiterate that the aspiration to locate MH370 has not been 
abandoned and every decision made has and will always be in the spirit of 
cooperation among the three nations.”

The third anniversary of the plane’s disappearance from Kuala Lumpur to 
Beijing will be on 8 March 2017. The ATSB began searching the 120,000 sq km 
area in October 2014.
 