
MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> has been forced to reveal documents 
detailing how it may access legally privileged communications between 
solicitors and their clients, even if the lawyers are suing the government.

Policy guidance handed over to the civil liberties organisation Reprieve shows 
how the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) is attempting to regulate its mass 
surveillance practices and demonstrate compliance with the law.

The revelations have emerged from a case brought by lawyers for two Libyans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/intelligence-agencies-lawyer-client-abdel-hakim-belhaj-mi5-mi6-gchq>
, Abdel-Hakim Belhaj and Sami al-Saadi, who, along with their families, were 
abducted in a joint MI6-CIA operation and sent back to Tripoli to be tortured 
by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi’s regime in 2004.

Their complaint about illegal monitoring is being heard before the 
investigatory powers tribunal <http://www.ipt-uk.com/> and a full trial of the 
issues is expected this spring.

Exchanges between lawyers and their clients enjoy a special protected status 
under UK law. Following exposure of widespread monitoring by the US 
whistleblower Edward Snowden in 2013, Belhaj’s lawyers feared that their 
exchanges with their clients could have been compromised by GCHQ’s interception 
of phone conversations and emails.

To demonstrate that its policies satisfy legal safeguards, MI6 has been 
required to disclose internal guidance on how intelligence staff should deal 
with material protected by legal professional privilege.

The papers note: “Undertaking interception in such circumstances would be 
extremely rare and would require strong justification and robust safeguards. It 
is essential that such intercepted material is not acquired or used for the 
purpose of conferring an unfair or improper advantage on SIS or HMG [Her 
Majesty’s government] in any such litigation, legal proceedings or criminal 
investigation.”

The internal documents also refer to a visit by the interception commissioner 
(Sir Anthony May) last summer to examine interception warrants, where it was 
discovered that regulations were not being observed. “In relation to one of the 
warrants,” the document explained, “the commissioner identified a number of 
concerns with regard to the handling of [legal professional privilege] 
material”.

The documents also contain references to “bin lists” – apparently material, 
such as lawyers’ phone numbers, that can be discarded as irrelevant. Reprieve 
is considering applying to have its telephone numbers put on this list to avoid 
being targeted.

Commenting on the latest document releases, Cori Crider, a lawyer who 
represents Belhaj, said: “MI6’s brand-new eavesdropping policy still has 
serious problems – it still envisages that MI6 will snoop on private legal 
calls even in cases where it is being sued for torture.

“But these issues only highlight the double-decker-sized loopholes that were 
in place when Mr Belhaj and his wife were preparing their legal claims. This 
last-minute effort by MI6 to clean up their act shows Reprieve was right to 
fear that our private communications with torture victims, and possibly with 
the police in Operation Lydd [the investigation into the Libyan renditions], 
were compromised.

“There can be no justification for spying on our privileged calls. If spying 
took place, and information leaked, the government must come clean about it 
immediately so we can begin to set this family’s torture trial back on a fair 
footing.”
 