
A tie that had threatened to turn into a grim case-study highlighting the 
compelling need for a winter break burst, belatedly, into dramatic life.

If goals from Grant Leadbitter, Alvaro Negredo and Marten de Roon offered 
insufficient excitement, there was also controversy with Middlesbrough’s Dani 
Ayala sent off for a perceived professional foul on Fernando Forestieri as 
Aitor Karanka’s side headed towards the fourth round.

“In the first half we didn’t have the right mentality and I was angry at 
half-time,” said Boro’s manager, who left Rudy Gestede,newly signed from Aston 
Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/middlesbrough-complete-signing-aston-villa-rudy-gestede-transfer>
 for £6m, on the bench alongside Jordan Rhodes and is ready to sell David 
Nugent to Derby County for £3m. “But in the second half we showed the right 
attitude.”

With his Boro side desperate to avoid relegation from the Premier League and 
promotion‑hungry Wednesday anxious to finally escape the Championship, it 
represented something of a phoney war with Karanka and Carlos Carvalhal 
emphasising that their priorities lay elsewhere by making five and six changes 
respectively.

An ominously low tone was set when, unmarked and under minimal pressure, Adama 
Traoré swiftly passed to the feet of Wednesday’s Daniel Pudil. Admittedly 
Traoré subsequently compensated for that slapdash lapse by creating some space 
out of nothing and whipping in a fine cross from which Negredo would have 
surely given Boro the lead had he been concentrating, but that cameo proved to 
be a rare early highlight.

Indeed as hard as Adam Reach, once a Boro player, worked down Wednesday’s 
flanks and willing as George Friend was to overlap from the left-back for 
Karanka’s side, the principal first-half talking point was the visitors’ 
fluorescent orange shorts, nattily accessorised by matching, bonfire-bright 
hooped socks.

It will have been no surprise if the strained eyes of the spectators strayed 
to the electronic perimeter hoardings which kept issuing reminders that 
Emirates flies to six continents. Such advertising was perhaps timely as back 
out on the pitch, Boro, particularly, bore the leaden look of a team in urgent 
need of a spot of winter sun.

Calum McManaman’s second-half introduction produced a slight sea-change, with 
the newcomer ruffling Boro courtesy of some menacing counter-attacking runs.

Almost imperceptibly things livened up and, soon, a goal arrived – albeit from 
a set piece. After Barry Bannan was booked for hackingdown De Roon around 20 
yards out Leadbitter reinforced his reputation as a dead-ball specialist by 
bending the free-kick exquisitely round the wall and low into the bottom 
corner, right footed.

The celebrations had barely subsided when Ayala was shown a red card for 
body-checking Forestieri as the forward accelerated towards goal.

That blatant challenge definitely warranted a booking but could hardly be said 
to denying a clear goal-scoring opportunity as Forestieri was about 25 yards 
out and two defenders were in the vicinity. David Coote, the referee, 
presumably thought the Spaniard was the last man. “The sending off was a 
surprise for everybody,” said Karanka whose side, paradoxically, improved 
radically with 10 men.

Joe Wildsmith, Wednesday’s reserve goalkeeper, promptly assuaged Teesside 
anxieties by fluffing what should have been a routine clearance and allowing 
Negredo to score. Although Wildsmith seemed to have adequate time the striker 
charged him down and the attempted clearance ricocheted off Negredo and flew 
into the back of the net from close range.

Poor Wildsmith – who had been cruelly mocked by Teessiders since enjoying an 
early reprieve when he weakly punched a Leadbitter free-kick straight at Ayala 
only for the defender to miss a splendid chance – was rapidly beaten again but 
Cristhian Stuani’s effort was correctly disallowed for offside. Undeterred, 
Stuani set up De Roon to stylishly sweep the stoppage-time third home.

“We tried everything on the break and the game was evenly balanced for a long 
time,” Carvalhal said. “But we knew it would be very tough ifMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> scored first.”

Tottenham Hotspur v Aston Villa: FA Cup third round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/08/tottenham-hotspur-v-aston-villa-fa-cup-third-round-live>
John Terry sees red, but comfortable Chelsea ease past Peterborough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/chelsea-peterborough-united-fa-cup-match-report> 