
Among the flurry of confirmation hearings happening this week in the Senate, 
one in particular will signal whether President-to-be Donald Trump and his 
administration are, indeed, serious about restoring the failed and discredited 
Bush-era torture policy.

Trump’s pick for CIA chief, the US representative Mike Pompeo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
, will face the Senate intelligence committee and no doubt will be asked about 
his past support for cruelty. If he fails to renounce torture at his hearing, 
the Senate should deem Pompeo unfit for the office and vote down his nomination.

I know what’s at stake from my own experience. I was the navy’s chief lawyer 
when, in 2002, I learned that detainees held at Guantánamo were being subjected 
to cruel and unlawful interrogation practices. This wasn’t a case of “bad 
apples” – it was a case of officials at the highest levels of government 
choosing to radically reinterpret, distort or violate the law so as to 
knowingly apply torture. That can’t happen again.

This is what Pompeo must do to gain confirmation:

First, he must acknowledge that torture is illegal and commit himself to 
obeying the law strictly. Torture has long been illegal, but in the past ten 
years Congress has greatly strengthened the law. President Ronald Reagan signed 
the UN Convention AgainstTorture <https://www.theguardian.com/law/torture> in 
1988, a treaty the US government was active in helping negotiate and promote 
and which the Senate ratified.

Legislation pushed by Senators John McCain and Dianne Feinstein in 2015 
further clarified the federal prohibitions, limiting national security 
interrogation techniques to those found in the Army Field Manual on 
Interrogations. The manual explicitly bans waterboarding, forced nudity and 
beatings, among other things. Torture was unlawful when theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> utilized it years ago, and it remains 
unlawful today without exceptions. At the end of the day, the most important 
thing we need to know about Pompeo is whether he will obey the law.

Democrats urge Obama to 'deprive' Trump of use of Guantánamo Bay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/guantanamo-bay-obama-shut-down-congressional-progressives>
Second, Pompeo must demonstrate awareness of the severe damage that the past 
use of torture caused to core US national interests. Some torture apologists 
are of the view that torture “worked” because it yielded some useful 
intelligence. But the question of whether torture had some utility isn’t 
answered merely by what happened in the interrogation booth.

For decades, organizations such as Amnesty International have challenged 
governments that torture. But now, abusive governments cite American behavior 
in defending human rights violations. Torture damaged our values, laws and 
legal system, our moral authority and leadership, the structure of human rights 
and international law, and our international relations. Torture weakened our 
nation by damaging our alliance structure and impairing military, intelligence, 
and law enforcement cooperation. And torture lessened international public 
support for US war aims and proved a recruiting boon for our enemy.

A CIA candidate who is unwilling to recognize these costs would demonstrate a 
disqualifying lack of both curiosity and respect for fact-based analysis.

Third, Pompeo must acknowledge due deference to and respect for Congress’s 
constitutional oversight role. One would imagine that a sitting congressman 
would understand the critical role that effective congressional oversight has 
in maintaining the separation of powers balance that lies at the heart of 
American freedom, but Pompeo is suspect in this respect.

The Senate select committee on intelligence’s 2014 report detailing the CIA’s 
use of torture and cruel treatment is a landmark monument to principled 
congressional oversight. Pompeo has dismissed the report and seems untroubled 
by the evidence that the CIA actively impeded the committee’s investigative 
efforts, spied on the staff that created it, and sought to discredit its 
findings. Pompeo must commit to cooperating with and assisting Congress in its 
oversight function instead of stalling or seeking to frustrate it.

Finally, Pompeo must commit to refusing to carry out any unlawful orders from 
Donald Trump. That he would receive such an order on torture during the course 
of his tenure is, of course, not merely a theoretical possibility, but a 
probability given the president-elect’s open affection for torture as evidenced 
by his comment that “torture works” and his pledge to bring back waterboarding 
and “a hell of a lot worse”.

All federal officials, including those in the military and intelligence 
community, have not only the right, but also the obligation, to refuse actions 
that are unlawful, no matter how senior the official is who orders them.

The current CIA director, John Brennan, publicly insisted that the agency 
under his control would refuse such orders. Gen James Mattis,nominated by Trump 
to head the Department of Defense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
, has challenged the president-elect on his statements. Pompeo must go further 
by explicitly committing the CIA and himself to abide by the law, even if 
ordered to violate it by the president himself.

It is crucial that the next CIA director be a reliable champion in the fight 
against torture. If Pompeo does not clearly fulfill these simple requirements 
during his confirmation hearing, he will demonstrate without doubt that he is 
not up to the task.
 