
Mario Pasalic scored the winning penalty as Milan lifted the Supercoppa 
Italiana for the first time in five years with a 4-3 shootout victory over the 
holdersJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> in Doha.

The Chelsea loanee kept his nerve to find the top left corner with Milan’s 
fifth spot-kick after their 17-year-old goalkeeper Gianluigi Donnarumma had 
denied Paulo Dybala.

Florence anoints Federico Bernardeschi as heir to Roberto Baggio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/serie-a-fiorentina-napoli-federico-bernardeschi-anointed-heir-roberto-baggio>
Giorgio Chiellini volleyed Juve into an 18th-minute lead at the Jassim Bin 
Hamad Stadium but Giacomo Bonaventura headedMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> level seven minutes before the 
break to leave the game level at 1-1 after extra-time.

The result means Milan have now equalled the Turin club’s record of seven 
super cup wins.

It was the ninth time the competition had been played outside of Italy and 
Massimiliano Allegri’s Juve were strong favourites ahead of the clash.

The Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> champions – 
and current leaders – began brightly and Croatia international striker Mario 
Mandzukic was the first to threaten when his half-volley was tipped around the 
left upright by Donnarumma.

Stefano Sturaro should have opened the scoring in the 17th minute but, after 
being played in by Gonzalo Higuaín, the midfielder’s effort lacked power and 
was repelled by the Milan keeper before the ball was scrambled behind by 
Ignazio Abate.

Juve did not have to wait long for another opportunity, though, and from the 
resultant corner Chiellini powerfully connected with Miralem Pjanic’s delivery 
to claim his first goal since a brace against Sampdoria in October.

Milan, who qualified for the final as runners-up to Juve in last season’s 
Coppa Italia, had struggled up until that point but they gradually grew into 
the game as their opponents failed to build on the early breakthrough.

The Slovakia midfielder Juraj Kucka had a header comfortably saved by Juve 
keeper Gianluigi Buffon nine minutes prior to the interval, before parity was 
restored two minutes later.

The creative midfielder Suso found space on the right to curl in a dangerous 
left-footed cross and Bonaventura timed his run perfectly to flick the ball 
past Buffon and into the far corner.

The equaliser seemed to increase the confidence of the Rossoneri and 12 
minutes after the restart they almost turned the game around.

Suso was once again the provider as his ball from the right was headed towards 
goal by defender Alessio Romagnoli before cannoning back off Buffon’s crossbar.

Sami Khedira then forced Donnarumma into a fine save at the other end, before 
Bianconeri substitute Dybala, a 67th-minute replacement for Pjanic, flashed a 
shot just off target.

Milan, who last lifted the trophy in 2011 when Allegri was their manager, came 
close to snatching a late winner in normal time when another Suso delivery was 
nodded down into the ground by Carlos Bacca before being beaten away by Buffon 
on the line.

The Colombia striker Bacca then wasted a fantastic opportunity two minutes 
into extra-time as he miscontrolled the ball with the goal gaping after Buffon 
had saved the initial attempt.

The Juve full-back Patrice Evra thought he had claimed the winner in the 111th 
minute but he was correctly flagged offside, before Dybala blazed over from 
eight yards to leave the game requiring penalties.

Gianluca Lapadula missed Milan’s first kick but, after Mandzukic hit the bar 
and Dybala saw his effort saved, the substitute Pasalic stepped up to give 
Vincenzo Montella’s men victory.
 