
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen

I used to go to The Stand comedy club a lot and I remember thinking Craig 
Campbell was just otherworldly. I saw him do a long set one night that was all 
stories, and I was utterly beside myself. In particular there was a routine 
about being attacked by birds that included a woman threatening him with the 
words: “You can’t run away from something that can fly!”

The funniest number

Seven. But I think 45 minutes is a funny time.

The funniest meal I’ve ever had

I went to this restaurant in London which was decorated with lots of 
industrial lighting hanging from the ceiling. A waiter came out carrying two 
plates but before he reached the table he banged his head incredibly hard on 
one of the stupid lights, and then didn’t move for an age. The couple asked if 
he was OK, but all he said was “I’m so sorry”, and then walked back to the 
kitchen. What made me laugh was the fact that he was still carrying their 
plates.

The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen

The thing that always makes me howl is Frasier. It’s so full of tiny, 
beautiful jokes but also massive set-pieces. I love the way the writers and 
cast really revel in the pedantry and the minutiae.

The funniest film I’ve ever seen

The Big Lebowski. I think I first saw it at someone’s house in Manchester. I 
was baffled for a while, but then when Jeff Bridges said the line “You are 
obviously not a golfer” I laughed hysterically, and just kept going.

The funniest person I know

One of my best friends, George, who is a policeman in Scotland. We were at 
university together in Edinburgh. We did a double act for a while together, 
before I was distracted bythe bright lights of children’s television 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFuHSWZCwao> and he became obsessed with 
dispensing justice on the streets. I think we only did 12 gigs together but I 
absolutely loved them. When he decides to really take the piss out of you, 
there is nothing on earth you can do but just enjoy it. And he’s had a letter 
published in Viz, which is a very high accolade indeed.

Miles Jupp: Songs Of Freedom is touring to 25 Mar 
<http://www.milesjupp.co.uk/diary/>
 