
Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> Football Club have 
admitted for the first time that they may be forced to leave their south London 
home and relocate to Kent should the seizure of their land go ahead. Lewisham 
council’s plan to compulsorily purchase areas around the Den and sell them on 
to a mysterious offshore developer with connections to the current Labour 
administration has already drawn both disbelief and mass protest.

With the CPO likely to be confirmed at a council meeting next Wednesday 
Millwall have conceded publicly for the first time the club could have to leave 
the area that has been their home since 1910. In a statement Steve Kavanagh, 
their chief executive, told the Guardian: “The chairman has always been 
determined that this would never happen, but under such circumstances any and 
every option would have to be considered to secure the football club and the 
Millwall Community Trust’s future as viable concerns.”

Millwall compulsory purchase order hearing adjourned by Lewisham council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/millwall-compulsory-purchase-order-lewisham-council>
Millwall have so far been cautious about conceding relocation might be the 
real threat. But with the community trust already set to be evicted and the 
club excluded from the benefits of the regeneration scheme, it also emerged 
last month that their academy may be unable to function under the current 
proposals.

There is no suggestion yet of a specific alternative site. The north Kent 
coast has been mentioned more broadly in the past, an uprooting that would see 
the club plonked down up to 75 miles from its historic home. Such a move would 
also be a stunning blow to Lewisham itself. ALondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> borough with a population the size of 
Iceland would be left without a professional sports club of any kind.

Should the order be confirmed the ripples will be felt by other league clubs 
in areas where rising land prices are likely to attract developers with an eye 
on regeneration. Supporters of nearby Charlton Athletic and Leyton Orient will 
be watching with interest, as will other mid-size Football League clubs across 
the country.

Until now concerns over the Millwall land-grab have centred on the council’s 
historic relationship with the offshore developers Renewal. Renewal’s chief 
executive is a former Lewisham officer and colleague of the current Lewisham 
chief executive, Barry Quirk, an unelected official best known locally for 
being paid more pro rata than the prime minister for working a three day week. 
In another bizarre twist Renewal was also set up and originality part-owned by 
the previous Labour mayor of Lewisham, Dave Sullivan. Sullivan has stated he no 
longer has any part in the company, which is owned by two anonymous offshore 
trusts based in the Isle Of Man and the British Virgin Islands.

The chair of Lewisham’s own overview & scrutiny committee, Alan Hall, has been 
a lone voice inside the council with the courage to speak out against the CPO 
process. “Millwall Football Club are part of the cultural history of London and 
Lewisham with over 100 years in the borough,” Hall said. “Over the past five 
years Renewal’s original outline planning application has fallen apart in slow 
motion in front of our very eyes. The ever-shrinking proposed ‘sporting 
village’ will drive away one of football’s most famous clubs and its highly 
successful community scheme.”

The AMS Millwall supporters’ organisation has led the fight on behalf of the 
club’s fans. On Wednesday the AMS published its own open letter to Quirk, who 
has emerged as the driving force behind the scheme – the mayor, Sir Steve 
Bullock, having stepped back due the fact he is, astonishingly, director of a 
Renewal-associated company, the Surrey Canal Sporting Trust.

Millwall given new hope in land battle as disquiet grows over property deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/millwall-the-den-lewisham-council-property-developers>
The AMS letter points to the alarming democratic deficit in Lewisham’s elected 
mayor system. The current setup, introduced as a Blair government initiative, 
has left the borough with a largely unregulated cabinet and a chief executive, 
in the shape of Quirk, who has no mandate, is electorally unaccountable, but is 
currently heading up a scheme that will evict local residents from their homes.

The letter also points out that the council’s attempts to provide reassurance 
on the probity of its plans in the form of an email from Mushtaq Malik, 
Renewal’s CEO, are likely to be met with derision. “Is it right,” the AMS asks, 
“that the council has been put in a position where its chief executive is 
reduced to publishing emails from a third party actively denying that inside 
deals, murkiness and personal relationships are in play?”

The AMS also voiced its own fears that offshore developers could be allowed to 
succeed where the Luftwaffe’s bombs and successive economic depressions have 
previously been staved off: “Failure to listen to genuine concerns could, we 
fear, lead to Millwall Football Club’s loss of academy status as recognised by 
the EFL and ultimately the club being forced to relocate from the London 
borough of Lewisham.”

The Liberal Democrat party has also called for the plans to be scrapped. “The 
only compelling case that’s been made is that this Renewal scheme will be a 
disaster for the local community.” Bobby Dean, Parliamentary spokesperson said. 
“Millwall FC is the largest sporting asset Lewisham has and their future cannot 
be jeopardised by this luxury scheme with no regard to affordable housing. 
Lewisham should withdraw the plans and start again – this time properly 
involving the football club and local community.”

 * This article was corrected on Friday 6 January 2017 to reduce the number of 
miles Millwall could move to Kent from 100 miles to 75  