
A coalition of free speech organisations rallied together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/06/free-speech-groups-defend-publication-of-milo-yiannoploulos-memoir>
 last week to defend Simon & Schuster’s choice to publish professional irritant 
Milo Yiannopoulos’s autobiography, Dangerous, saying that boycotting the book, 
as so many people have called for, would have “a chilling effect” on free 
speech.

I’m sure that having his book (which hit the No 1 spot on Amazon’s pre-sale 
charts the day after it was announced) pulled from shelves or dropped from S&S 
would catapult it to even greater success at another publisher, but never mind. 
It’s clear that this coalition of organisations are standing up for what they 
believe in, and feel it is important to defend Yiannopoulos’ well-rehearsed 
right to speak his mind.

Defending free speech often means finding yourself in the difficult position 
of having to defend people who say disgusting things. People who make jokes 
about rape; Holocaust deniers; straight-up racists. Though we might not like 
what these people say, it’s important that they’re allowed to say it. You can’t 
go around censoring people just because you don’t agree with them. If we can’t 
all express what we think, then we can’t talk to each other about our ideas. We 
can’t have a discussion; we can’t improve; we can’t function as a society.

And yet. Like the tax lawyer I met at a party who insisted several times that 
there was “nothing illegal at all” about what she did for a living, I can’t 
help but feel that Yiannopoulos and his ilk are protesting too much when they 
say something Islamophobic or misogynistic and insist that they are protected 
by “free speech”. And I’m uncertain that these organisations standing up to 
protect Yiannopoulous are doing the right thing – especially when what he says, 
and the people he says it for, are doing so much to poison reasoned discussion.

For a start, Simon & Schuster being criticised for publishing the book is 
hardly censorship. Anyone can write and publish a book without the help of a 
major publishing house these days – and can be very successful at it too. The 
manworks for a news site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/steve-bannon-profile-breitbart-trump-campaign-manager>
, makes numerous media appearances, writes a regular column, and frankly if you 
think that the world lacks for his opinions in any way at the moment then 
please, please tell me which parallel universe you are living in so I can move 
there.

Free speech has limits. You aren’t allowed to shout “fire” in a crowded 
theatre because someone’s probably going to get hurt. Your right to say what 
you like is trumped by your responsibility to stop me being trampled to death 
by a stampede of panicked theatre-goers. Death threats; rape threats; bomb 
threats; online abuse that drives someone to suicide – these are all things 
that free speech doesn’t cover – and which aren’t appropriate to defend in its 
name. Doing so makes it even harder for people to speak freely – not least 
because that idea of “speaking freely” becomes co-opted by people who mistake 
it for “I should be able to shout ‘free speech’ at you until you stop talking”.

Self-proclaimed super-villain Yiannopoulos has made a living from saying and 
doing hateful things, and has successfully embroiled himself in numerous 
headline-grabbing controversies. Whether it’s saying that “gay rights have made 
us dumber”, calling transgender people “mentally ill”, calling rape culture “a 
fantasy”, or being banned by Twitter forallegedly encouraging trolls to attack 
Ghostbusters actor Leslie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 with a tirade of racist and sexist abuse, you can usually find him saying 
something pathologically awful.

So when a major publishing house pays $250,000 to print the work of an 
alt-right figurehead like him, it gives credence to these ideas, and makes them 
part of the mainstream. It endorses them. It empowers everyone who agrees with 
them to act on their worst impulses, and spread hate speech.

Hate speech is not compatible with reasoned debate. You can’t talk to it. When 
you try, it talks over you and ignores you and calls you a fat ugly whore and 
publishes your address online. If you’re not scared out of engaging with it for 
fear of reprisal, chances are you’ll die of exhaustion. How many times do you 
have to explain to people that “racism is bad” or “women are not worse than 
men” before you give up because it’s not worth the bother? These are not 
discussions worth having. They shouldn’t even be discussions.

With the ascendancy of Donald Trump and the rise of the alt-right we have seen 
a dangerous normalisation of ideas that we would once have rejected as too 
outrageous to endorse with our attention. We now publish endless think-pieces 
on them, have panel discussions about them, and publishing houses pay a quarter 
of a million dollars for someone to write a book about them.

For free speech organisations to stand up and defend Yiannopoulos is a 
dangerous miscalculation. It further supports the narrative that he’s a radical 
visionary being oppressed by the system, rather than an opinion-spamming hack 
who brings out the worst in people. In their statement, the coalition write 
that “only vigorous disagreement can counter toxic speech effectively”. But if 
you’ve been on the internet lately, you’ll know that we’re not short of 
vigorous disagreement, and that there’s more toxic speech than ever.

Free speech is vital. Of course it is. But is defending it like this really 
helping?
 