
On Tuesday mornings female refugees like Eden come to practise yoga. The 
sessions are run byOurmala <http://www.ourmala.com/>, a voluntary organisation 
that every week gives around 60 refugee women a safe space to breathe, heal and 
rehabilitate.

Today, Eden, an Eritrean refugee, is joined in the modestly sized studio space 
in east London by eight other women from east and central Africa and 
Afghanistan. Many have experienced torture, trafficking and sexual violence, 
leaving them with nightmares and flashbacks.

NHS workers to be offered health checks and yoga classes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/02/nhs-workers-to-be-offered-health-checks-and-yoga-classes>
They begin by lying on the yoga mats provided, closing their eyes in the dimly 
lit room. Ourmala relies on volunteers like Martha Winfield, a specially 
trained yoga instructor who is heading the class and gently encourages the 
women to slowly transition into different yoga positions, and synchronising 
their breathing with their movements.

Emily Brett, the founder of Ourmala, works her way around the room, helping 
women to adopt the poses, whispering encouragement. Rest and meditation are 
built into the class, which ends with chanting Om, a mantra that vibrates 
around the room. For a few minutes a rare stillness and silence washes over 
their bodies, they leave the room with a chorus of thank yous, calmer and more 
relaxed than when they came in.

“I used to have real trouble sleeping and was on high levels of 
antidepressants. Yoga has helped me sleep – if you can’t sleep, it is difficult 
to do anything,” says Eden, who was referred to the service by the charity, 
Freedom fromTorture <https://www.theguardian.com/law/torture>, two years ago.

There are four classes held every week in locations across London; on Mondays 
Ourmala runs a mother and baby session. It is not uncommon for the children who 
accompany their mothers to have been born as a result of rape. Women at the 
session survive on snatches of sleep, not because of their crying babies, but 
because of their trauma.

“Experiences like that leave a person shredded – the horror doesn’t stop when 
they reach the UK; we have a refugee crisis happening here under the radar,” 
says Brett, who volunteered as a refugee caseworker with the British Red Cross.

Travel expenses are covered by the charity and a hot lunch, English lessons, 
advice and support services are offered after the yoga. Some travel for as long 
as three hours to make the classes and for many, it’s the first hot meal of the 
week and a rare chance for friendly interaction, says Brett.

“Trauma has left them dissociated from their bodies and over time yoga starts 
to make the body a safe and inhabitable place again. The whole integrated 
service we offer helps restore confidence and self-esteem, it reduces anxiety 
and depression and it gives the women energy and hope,” she explains.

Yoga <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/yoga> teaches the women to 
control their breathing, which calms the nervous system and in turn calms the 
mind – a valuable skill off the mat, when at the Home Office or encountering 
setbacks in their day-to-day lives. “It isn’t about creating dependency; it’s 
empowering them to rebuild their lives and integrate.” She says that women can 
be hostile and distrustful at first. “It might take weeks or even months, but 
eventually their chins lift, they look you in the eyes and soften into the 
beautiful, dignified women that they are, because they feel safe and can be 
start to be themselves again.”

The charity’s yoga instructors receive training from Heather Mason, founder of 
The Minded Institute, which advocates mind-body therapy for the treatment of 
mental health issues.

Yoga should be on the NHS as it is cost-effective and helps in the management 
of many long-term chronic conditions
Heather Mason 
“Refugees who have experienced trauma struggle with sleep and often have a lot 
of shame around their bodies, particularly those who have been raped or 
tortured,” she explains. “Yoga puts them back in touch with their bodies and 
gives them grounding.”

Mason is campaigning to get yoga embedded into the NHS and was instrumental in 
Conservative MP Bob Blackman introducing an early day Motion in the Commons in 
June recommending yoga be included for NHS staff and patients. She has taught 
yoga to traumatised refugees in the Maudsley Hospital, and cites areport 
published by the mindfulness all party parliamentary group 
<http://themindfulnessinitiative.org.uk/images/reports/Mindfulness-APPG-Report_Mindful-Nation-UK_Oct2015.pdf>
which estimates that bringing mindfulness into healthcare would save £15 for 
every pound spent.

“Yoga should be on the NHS as it offers preventive value for various chronic 
illnesses, is cost-effective and helps in the management of many long-term 
chronic conditions. It has not happened yet as it is a slow process, requires 
lots of infrastructure and also theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 needs to understand yoga’s safety and efficacy,” she says.

Ourmala was inspired by Brett’s volunteering at Odanadi in Mysore, India, a 
charity that uses Ashtanga Yoga to help trafficked children, and her online 
research into Rwandan charity Project Air , which uses yoga to help genocide 
rape survivors, many of whom are HIV positive, to allay some of their trauma 
and mental health issues. “The women we help are overwhelmed by trauma in the 
way a prey animal can be by a predator, when you have experienced something 
like they have, you become disinhabited,” says Deirdre Summerbell, founder of 
Project Air. Within two or three yoga sessions with a particular group of 
women, who had been resistant to any pharmaceutical or talking therapies, they 
began to sleep throughout the night for the first time in fourteen years, when 
the Rwandan genocide took place.

What can mindfulness teach the police force? | Rachel Pugh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/mindfulness-police-rising-stress-anxiety-depression>
Ourmala receives referrals from a number of charities including The Helen 
Bamber Foundation and the British Red Cross, and works with more than 20 other 
welfare organisations. It hopes to offer up to 20 classes a week by the end of 
2017 and then roll out its services regionally. It is also piloting a scheme 
with the Red Cross with young refugees and asylum seekers. It largely relies on 
donations, sponsorship and income raised through a fundraising network called
The Mala Initiative <http://www.ourmala.com/tmi/>, which encourages the yoga 
community to raise money for Ourmala.

Government support payments for refugees have been cut and services reduced  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/16/asylum-seekers-with-children-to-see-support-payments-cut>
in the five years since Ourmala launched, and women and children are hardest 
hit. Sustained provision like Ourmala is even scarcer beyond the capital. In 
Glasgow, Rokhsaneh Khodayar Madeira has been running Circle of Women, an 
initiative aimed at female survivors of human rights abuses which offers yoga, 
English classes and childcare. But sustaining the offering has been a 
challenge. “We were lucky enough to get the room donated to us by The Project 
Cafe for free, but most places wanted to charge £15+ an hour and it was 
difficult to find funding,” says the yoga teacher, who is on maternity leave 
and has put the service on hold.

It was not the group’s policy to talk about the trauma these women had endured 
– they would have to relive it several times in their Home Office interviews, 
says Khodayar Madeira, but feedback from the women suggested that they were 
sleeping better, formed friendships and had begun to integrate more happily 
into Glasgow life. “I could see that they were more relaxed at each class and 
were happier at the end. At times I used certain movements to challenge them 
and to get them laughing, this always helped to lighten the class and you could 
see and feel the tension leaving.”

Khaleda was a headteacher at a girls’ school in Afghanistan before having to 
flee Taliban forces two years ago. Her husband and two children are still 
living in the country and she has been attending Ourmala for around six months. 
“I worry about my family because of so much war and danger in Afghanistan. 
[Ourmala] is good for my mind and my blood pressure – it helps to release 
stress and there are people here I can talk to”, says the teacher, who has been 
learning to speak English in the past eight months and would like to eventually 
work in a school in England.

Government funding for English classes for speakers of other languages (ESOL) 
has been cut by nearly 40% over the last five years. It puts refugees in an 
impossible situation – poor or no English skills bars them from functioning in 
society and having no right to work prevents them being able to pay for lessons 
themselves.

Jacqueline, a businesswoman who fled her native DRC 14 years ago, now 
volunteers for Ourmala and says she uses what she has learnt in yoga to calm 
herself down and broaden her horizons. “I’d like the government to realise that 
we are willing to work hard and want to integrate into society; a lot of us 
don’t have families here and Ourmala is a beating heart for us.”

• Some names have been changed 
 