
Justice ministers have told MPs they want urgently to ban perpetrators of 
domestic abuse from directly cross-examining their victims within the family 
court system.

The move follows an urgent Commons question from Labour MP Peter Kyle, who 
raised the issue citing recent “excellent Guardian coverage” that exposed how 
women were being directly confronted and questioned by violent and abusive men 
within the secretive family court system.

'Constantly terrified': women on facing their abusers in family courts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/constantly-terrified-women-on-facing-their-abusers-in-family-courts>
Justice minister Sir Oliver Heald told MPs returning from the Christmas recess 
that ministers wanted a ban on cross-examination by perpetrators and are 
prepared to introduce the necessary primary legislation to make the change.

He told the Commons that the timescale for introducing the change would depend 
on how long it took the Ministry of Justice to complete the “fast-track” work 
which was now being conducted.

“The lord chancellor has requested urgent advice. It is illegal in the 
criminal courts and I am determined to see it banned in the civil family courts 
too,” Heald told MPs.

The minister indicated that officials were working to see how the legal ban in 
the criminal courts needed to be transposed to prove effective in the family 
court.

“In order to ban cross-examination it would be necessary for primary 
legislation,” he said. “Primary legislation is also required to cover ancillary 
matters relating to this. Work is being done at great pace to ensure that all 
these matters are dealt with in a comprehensive and effective way. The urgency 
is there.”

He also cautioned against holding a consultation with victims’ and survivors’ 
groups before introducing the proposed ban, saying: “It is pretty straight 
forward what is required. It is a ban and ancillary measures to ensure that it 
is possible for cross-examination to take place without the perpetrator being 
allowed to do it.”

The Guardian last month highlighted evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/revealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims>
 based on interviews with participants, lawyers and court officials that 
revealed how family court procedures allowed men with criminal convictions for 
abusing their former partners to directly question them – sometimes repeatedly.

It also uncovered evidence that restraining orders to protect the women were 
being ignored and that fathers, no matter how violent or abusive, were being 
allowed to repeatedly pursue contact with children and their mothers.

The president of the family court division, Sir James Munby, has been 
outspoken in his support for a ban on direct cross-examination.

Kyle said it had wreaked untold devastation on victims and survivors of 
domestic violence.

He said he had spoken to women who had been cross-examined by their abusers, 
often convicted rapists. He cited one case in which a convicted murderer had 
sued for custody of his child from prison and cross-examined the sister of the 
woman he had murdered and questioned her right to be a parent to his child.

“I have now spoken to numerous survivors of abuse whose accounts of torment 
under cross-examination, often by convicted rapists, in the family court are 
devastating to hear but impossible for most of us to even imagine,” the MP for 
Hove said.

“Abuse is being continued, perpetuated, right under the noses of judges and 
police – the very institutions that should be protecting the vulnerable with 
every sinew of state power.”

Labour MPs repeatedly pressed Heald for a timetable for the introduction of 
the amending legislation to implement the ban but he could only promise to do 
so “shortly”. Conservative MP Robert Neill, who chairs the justice select 
committee, suggested the simplest solution would be to adopt the criminal 
provisions “lock, stock and barrel” and accept that the “modest” cost of a 
court-appointed advocate to undertake the cross-examination was necessary.
 