
On June 14, 1985, the manageress of a sex shop in Swansea was sexually 
assaulted, struck about the head and eventually strangled. There was petrol 
sprayed around the shop although it had not been set alight.

A crowd of journalists and passers-by gathered as the police arrived to 
investigate. Among them were two young men, Wayne and Paul Darvell, a pair of 
out-of-work, homeless brothers who wandered the streets by day, usually 
swigging from a flagon of Dry Blackthorn cider, and slept in a hostel at night.

As part of the inquiry, the Darvell brothers were pulled in. They had been in 
trouble with the police often before. They were a local nuisance. Sometimes 
they would help people to carry their shopping and then make it clear they 
wanted to be paid.

But even in their petty crimes, there was something odd about them. On one 
occasion, Wayne had robbed a man in the street, taken £19 from his wallet and 
then given £14 back, saying that he would return the £5 later.

Wayne Darvell made a series of admissions to the police. He said he had been 
present at the murder and had watched his brother Paul carry it out. Paul 
always maintained his innocence.

The police carried out forensic tests on the brothers' clothes. But although 
there had been a frenzied attack and there was blood spattered round the 
premises of Private Shop, where the murder took place, there were no traces on 
the brothers.

In fact, no fibres, fingerprints or blood stains, or petrol traces were found 
to link them to the crime.

The confessions, the fact that they had been seen by many people near the shop 
and that some reported seeing them with a container which could have held the 
petrol were the main strands of the case against them.

After an eight-week trial at Swansea crown court, they were sentenced to life 
on June 19, 1986, with a recommendation from the judge that Paul serve at least 
20 years and Wayne 15. Their application for leave to appeal was turned down in 
November 1987.

The case was brought to the attention of Rough Justice, the BBC programme that 
looks at possible miscarriages of justice. Their investigations turned up 
several discrepancies.

First, there was something not quite right about Wayne's confessions. He told 
the police he would take them to the place where the murder weapon was hidden 
but no weapon was found.

He gave details of having taken a St Christopher's medal off the dead woman 
but she never had one in the first place. He showed them where a charity 
collecting box he had stolen from the shop was hidden, but it turned out to 
have come from another shop.

Wayne Darvell is on the borders of normality. At the special school he 
attended as a boy, his former teacher, Byron Doel, described him as someone who 
loved to be the centre of attention, a fantasist.
'He was forever confessing things he hadn't done,' Mr Doel told Rough Justice. 
'If he confessed, the teacher's problem was solved and he was happy.'

It transpired that he was a compulsive confessor. He had confessed to the 
murder of a dentist that had received widespread press coverage, according to a 
family friend, John Williams. He had confessed to robberies he had not 
committed. He liked to help.

Wayne's confession to the murder was remarkably similar to a statement he had 
made in confessing to a robbery: in each case, Paul had done it and he had 
watched. Even some of the phraseology was the same.

He has been likened by Gill Grebler, who has written a study of such cases 
called Vulnerable Testimony, as similar in many ways to Timothy Evans who also 
confessed to a murder he was later found not to have committed: weak, 
suggestible and subnormal.

He was also something of a 'police groupie', a crime addict, according to one 
of the workers in the hostel where he stayed. He liked the excitement of the 
police and even seemed to enjoy riding in the police car that took him away 
after his arrest and back to examine his clothes.

Video film of the scene of the crime shows the two brothers peering with 
fascination at the shop to see what had happened. (This, of course, is no 
evidence that they were not involved: the Leopold-Loeb murders in the United 
States, immortalised in the film Compulsion, showed that some murderers like to 
watch the investigation - in that case two students murdered a young boy and 
then watched the police examine the scene, pointing out things they had 
missed.) The Darvells were certainly seen in the vicinity, but witnesses who 
had seen them before and after the murder reported that they wore the same 
clothes.

They did not have access to the hostel by day and would therefore have had to 
commit the crime, change into identical clothes and then reappear on the scene.

The 'petrol container', suggest their lawyers, was the flagon on cider with 
which they passed the day.

Their lawyers remain concerned that the wrong verdict was reached. Mark 
Hancock, solicitor for Wayne, recalled a first interview with Wayne in which he 
said he remembered the day of the murder because the dog had died. When asked 
how he remembered that, he said: 'Because someone had to get up and bite the 
postman.' It struck the lawyer as a bizarre remark for someone facing a murder 
charge.

But if the brothers were innocent, who did carry out the murder? Witnesses 
reported a thick-set man who had been seen in the entrance of the shop at the 
time of the murder. He has never been traced to be eliminated from the inquiry.

Now the case of the two misfits has been referred back to the Court of Appeal 
for the fresh evidence to be examined.
 