
A rabbi and an imam walk into a kitchen and each picks up a knife. It sounds 
the like the start of a bad standup routine. In fact, it was leaders of British 
Jews and Muslims joining forces to help prepare a meal for the homeless and 
hungry as part of a nationwide day of social action on Sunday.

Up to 40,000 people took part in Mitzvah Day, organised by the Jewish 
community in hundreds of synagogues and schools around the country, and 
involving volunteers from neighbouring mosques and churches. Mitzvah literally 
means commandment, but is generally interpreted as good deed.


The chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis, and imam Ibrahim Mogra, assistant general 
secretary of the Muslim Council of Britain, peeled and chopped vegetables in 
the chaotic kitchen of Edgware United synagogue in north-west London. Amid vats 
of potatoes, piles of apple skin and eggshells, dozens of volunteers – 
including the Labour MP Luciana Berger – worked to create a three-course meal 
for the nearby Barnet Winter Shelter.


The menu met kosher and halal requirements: vegetable soup, vegetarian cottage 
pie, apple crumble plus an assortment of cookies.


Mirvis, who acquired a dusting of flour on his customary black jacket, said he 
had “an enormous amount of pride in the generosity, selflessness and community 
engagement” of Mitzvah Day. The interfaith aspect of the day was crucial in 
“this challenged world”, he added. “We must strengthen links and build bridges 
for tolerance and harmony.”


Mogra, who showed impressive dedication to a pile of carrots, said both faiths 
taught the importance of common humanity. “Britain has become a multicultural 
and multifaith society. It’s very important to be cohesive, not just by talking 
but in action,” he said.


The imam said he was usually in his own kitchen on a Sunday morning, knocking 
up a halal version of a full English breakfast for his family, but he was 
delighted to be at the synagogue instead with “my Jewish brothers and sisters”.


Mitzvah Day has been been running in the UK for 10 years, and now involves 
around 350 Jewish communities. “Pretty much every mainstream synagogue, youth 
movement and school takes part,” said the founder, Laura Marks. “In terms of 
the Jewish community, it’s huge,” drawing in those who may not attend synagogue 
regularly “but still want to engage with their Jewish heritage,” she added.


Other events on Sunday included a Jewish primary school joining with a local 
Muslim school to collect for a south London food bank; and Northwood and Pinner 
Liberal Synagogue hosting a past-and-present refugee day, with Jewish refugees 
from the Holocaust and Syrians fleeing the current civil war.


In Edgware, 19-year-old Saha Habib had come to the synagogue from Stanmore 
mosque. Working on a batch of lemon biscuits, she said she was happy to be 
joining a community effort to help people. “There’s a lot in the Qur’an about 
taking care of the less fortunate,” she said.


Marks said bringing together different faiths – and those of no faith – in 
social action projects made it easier to have meaningful conversations about 
the state of the world. “It’s very hard for people to get to know one another 
in different communities. It rarely happens on its own – we have to make it 
happen.”

 