
The government has refused to give an undertaking not to take advantage of any 
intercepted communications between a former detainee, who is suing the Ministry 
of Defence, and his lawyers.

The dispute between Yunus Rahmatullah and the MoD is the latest to become 
entangled in concerns over the legality of intelligence services’ interception 
of legally privileged conversations.

Exchanges between lawyers and their clients enjoy a special protected status 
under the law. The government has previously given an undertaking in another 
case, that of the Libyan dissidentAbdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>, not to read or listen 
to any of his legally privileged material.

Legal privilege and the conflicting interests of GCHQ and the IPT
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/mar/16/legal-privilege-conflicting-interests-gchq-ipt-investigatory-powers-tribunal>
But the MoD maintains that there are already sufficient safeguards in place 
for regulating the obtaining or use of any private exchanges between 
Rahmatullah and his legal representatives. Those handling legal cases are not 
supposed to see intelligence material relating to the case in which they are 
involved.

Lawyers at the human rights group Reprieve represent both men in their claims 
against the MoD and Foreign Office (FCO) for compensation over their treatment. 
Belhaj and his family were forcibly returned to Muammar Gadaffi’s regime in 
Tripoli. Rahmatullah’s lawyers do not want the MoD to gain any unfair advantage 
in the case by reading private exchanges.

Rahmatullah, a Pakistani citizen, accuses the MoD and FCO of allowing him to 
be subjected to torture and severe abuse over a period of 10 years. He was 
captured by British special forces in Iraq in 2004 and handed over to US troops 
soon afterwards. His experiences were initially kept secret from ministers and 
only disclosed to MPs five years later, in 2009. Rahmatullah, 31, was released 
by the US without charge in May last year.

He is believed to have been held first at Camp Nama, a secret detention 
facility at Baghdad airport that British troops helped to run. He was later 
transferred to Iraq’s notorious Abu Ghraib jail before being rendered to the 
Bagram “black prison” inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

The court of appeal ruled in 2011 that Rahmatullah was unlawfully detained and 
ordered a writ of habeas corpus – the ancient British legal right to be charged 
or released from arbitrary detention – to be issued.

However, lawyers acting for the government later successfully argued in the 
supreme court that British ministers had no power “to direct the US” to release 
him from Bagram.

Rahmatullah claims he was at various times beaten unconscious, shackled, 
hooded and subject to simulated drowning. Commenting on the claim, the MoD has 
said: “These allegations of wrongdoing by UK soldiers – which have been made 10 
years after the event – are already being investigated by the Iraq historic 
allegations team. As the case is subject to ongoing legal action we are unable 
to comment further.”


Kat Craig, the legal director of Reprieve, who has visited Rahmatullah in 
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, said the undertaking 
sought was almost identical to the one obtained for Belhaj although it expanded 
the definition of legal privilege to include metadata – information about who 
has been in contact with whom and the timings of any exchange.

Government trying to keep secret spy agencies' unlawful conduct, tribunal hears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/13/government-trying-keep-secret-spy-agencies-unlawful-conduct-ipt>
The draft undertaking, which also refers to the case of another Pakistani 
former detainee, Amanatullah Ali, asks the government to “take all reasonable 
steps to ensure they do not read, listen to or otherwise use or take advantage 
of the claimants’ legally privileged material, whether collected by the 
defendants, [the intelligence services] or provided to them by foreign 
governments and intelligence agencies.”

Earlier this year the government admitted that the regime under which UK 
intelligence agencies, including MI5 andMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>
, have been monitoring conversations between lawyers and their clients for the 
past five years was unlawful because the safeguards under which they operated 
were not made sufficiently public.

Craig said: “Not content with complicity in the torture, rendition and 
decade-long secret detention of Mr Rahmatullah and Mr Ali, the UK is now trying 
to prevent them from achieving justice.

“Why would any government otherwise refuse to implement safeguards that only 
serve to achieve a fair balance – and protect an age-old legal principle that 
is a cornerstone of our justice system? By preventing our clients from 
communicating privately with their legal team, and fairly and robustly seeking 
the justice they so sorely deserve, the UK government is holding itself above 
the law.”

The MoD confirmed that it had been asked to sign an undertaking relating to 
the handling of legally privileged material. It said it had declined to do so, 
however, because it considers it unnecessary.

The code of practice on the Interception of Communications Act 2002 and the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, in addition to other statutory 
provisions in law already provide comprehensive safeguards for the protection 
of legal professional privilege, the MoD added.

 