
Unai Emery lost for the first time as Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> manager as the current 
champions suffered an early defeat in defence of the Ligue 1 title, losing 3-1 
to Monaco.

First-half goals from João Moutinho and Fabinho put Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> in control and, after Edison 
Cavani had offered PSG hope, a Serge Aurier own-goal sealed victory for the 
home side, who moved joint top with Nice and Guingamp.

The visitors made a sluggish start and soon found themselves trailing to 
Monaco when Moutinho expertly guided Djibril Sidibé’s delivery beyond Kevin 
Trapp from just inside the area.

Barcelona maintain perfect start as Ivan Rakitic goal beats Athletic Bilbao
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/barcelona-ivan-rakitic-athletic-bilbao-la-liga>
Cavani had an opportunity to level when Aurier’s pass picked out the Uruguayan 
but his effort failed to find the target from an inviting position.

It was proving to be a first half of few chances but, after Bernardo Silva 
fired wide from a decent position, Monaco shocked Emery’s men with a second 
goal before the break.

David Luiz was to blame and, after the Brazilian defender hauled down Jemerson 
inside the area, Fabinho confidently stepped up to fire the ball beyond Trapp 
and give Monaco a two-goal lead at half-time.

PSG could easily have reduced the deficit 10 minutes after the restart when 
Cavani guided Lucas Moura’s delivery into Layvin Kurzawa’s path but the France 
international failed to find the target against his former employers.

The visitors did drag themselves back into the game with just over an hour 
played when Aurier’s back-post header from Marco Verratti’s header teed-up 
Cavani to score his first league goal of the season.

And Cavani could have levelled moments later but was denied after meeting the 
substitute Thomas Meunier’s delivery and then saw Adrien Rabiot fail to 
capitalise on the follow-up.

PSG continued to dominate and only a fine save from Danijel Subasice prevented 
Kurzawa from levelling after Cavani steered Ángel Di María’s pass into the 
defender’s path.

Then, against the run of play, Monaco restored their two-goal advantage when 
Sidibé’s cross cannoned off Aurier before nestling in the PSG goal beyond Trapp.
 