
A top Kremlin official dubbed a "faceless bureaucrat" by critics became the 
mayor of Moscow today, three weeks after his charismatic predecessor,Yuri 
Luzhkov, was unceremoniously sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/04/sacked-moscow-mayor-luzhkov-democracy>
.

Moscow's rubberstamp city council confirmed Sergei Sobyanin as the capital's 
mayor. Last week PresidentDmitry Medvedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dmitry-medvedev> selected Sobyanin – a 
trusted aide of the prime minister, Vladimir Putin – from a notional shortlist 
of four candidates.

The appointment consolidates the Kremlin's takeover of Moscow and its 
prodigious resources, and marks the formal end of the Luzhkov era. The 
pugnacious Luzhkov, who ran Moscow from 1992, was dismissed after apparently 
growing too powerful and falling out with Russia's ruling Putin-Medvedev 
duumvirate.

Sobyanin, 52, had been the Kremlin chief of staff since 2005, when Putin was 
president, and stayed with Putin when he became prime minister after steering 
Medvedev into the presidency in 2008. Born near the town of Khanty-Mansisk, he 
has spent most of his administrative career in Siberia and the Urals.

In a Brezhnev-like speech, delivered in an uninspiring monotone, Sobyanin 
described his new job as a "great honour and responsibility". He hailed Moscow 
as one of the world's leading megalopolises: "A great deal of work has been 
done in Moscow over the past decades. The city has changed for the better."

Sobyanin, however, laid into his predecessor's legacy, saying he would look 
again at the city's budget and development plan. He acknowledged there was 
"serious corruption" in the housing sector and said he wanted to make life more 
comfortable for the capital's 10.5 million citizens. He promised to keep social 
benefits for Moscow's pensioners.

Critics were distinctly unimpressed. "He's a faceless bureaucrat. He's part of 
the Putin system," said Eduard Limonov, an opposition leader, dissident and 
writer who is frequently detained during anti-Kremlin rallies. "He has no 
distinctive threads. He's an obeying official. He will be boring and absolutely 
flat, square. Luzhkov at least was a picturesque guy."

Asked why the Kremlin decided to sack Luzhkov, Limonov said: "Luzhkov became 
too powerful. He accumulated a lot of might, appointing himself to royal, 
almost feudal power. The other reason was Moscow's wealth. The federal 
government wanted all this wealth for itself."

Others said Sobyanin would have a more progressive attitude on issues such as 
opposition rallies and gay rights. The European court of human rights today 
ruled that Luzhkov's repeated ban on gay parades in Moscow was illegal.

"He [Sobyanin] has to be completely different from the last mayor," a gay 
rights activist, Nikolai Alekseev, said. "He has no other choice."

Asked what he thought of Sobyanin, Alekseev said: "I don't know who he is. I 
can't say anything about him."

Moscow's city Duma confirmed Sobyanin as mayor in a 34-2 vote. (The council's 
two attending communists opposed, while another didn't turn up.) Deputies from 
the pro-Kremlin UnitedRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> party 
dominate the council after last year's elections, which the opposition allege 
were rigged.

Sobyanin was this afternoon inaugurated as mayor in a short ceremony attended 
by Medvedev, Russia's patriarch Kirill and other Kremlin luminaries.

Medvedev told Sobyanin he faced a difficult job but his regional and federal 
experience made him the right man for the post. Sobyanin's most urgent tasks 
would be to sort out Moscow's traffic problems and improve its business 
climate, Medvedev said. "I have no doubt you will work round the clock to deal 
with Moscow's problems."

Putin abolished gubernatorial elections, including those for the Moscow mayor, 
in 2004. He reappointed Luzhkov to the job in 2007. Moscow is now the only 
capital inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> apart from 
Minsk, in next-door authoritarian Belarus, where citizens do not have a say in 
who leads their city.

Since his sacking, Luzhkov has expressed his support for the return of direct 
elections and has – not very plausibly – reinvented himself as an opposition 
figure.

Today, though, he made clear he doesn't intend to stand in elections for the 
federal Duma next year, or in the 2012 presidential poll. Journalists were 
barred from listening to a lecture delivered by Luzhkov, who has taken a job at 
a management university.

In his speech Luzhkov bitterly attacked United Russia. He resigned from the 
party in disgust last month after an unprecedented Kremlin-ordered attack on 
him by Russia's TV channels. "I have always told the [United Russia] party 
chairman, Boris Gryzlov, that we don't have discussions or debates. We have 
always obeyed the [Kremlin] administration on everything," he said. "This is a 
servile party and I quit it."
 