
Early this year, the Court of Appeal will have a chance to hear for the first 
time the case of Jacqueline Fletcher, who was jailed for life at Birmingham 
crown court in 1988 for drowning her six-week-old son, Glen.

Ms Fletcher, now 23, was born in Bangor, north Wales, and grew up in 
Atherstone, Warwickshire. When she left school she started going out with a 
young petty criminal, Glen Miles, and became pregnant by him.

Her first baby was born prematurely after what Warwickshire social services 
described as 'physical abuse and kicking by the father-to-be' and weighed just 
over two pounds. She was not capable of looking after the child properly - 
doctors now say she has an IQ of 70 and a mental age of 10. The child was taken 
into care and eventually adopted.

Her second child, Glen Richard Miles, was born in September 1984, again 
prematurely. The child's father was back in prison shortly after the birth. 
Social services worked closely with Jacqueline to make sure that the child was 
properly cared for. She was visited daily by at least one person connected with 
the social services.

On October 19, 1984, a postman, Gary Penny, arrived to deliver mail and found 
Ms Fletcher crying 'my baby, my baby.' The child was dead on the sofa and Mr 
Penny called the ambulance and police. An ambulanceman attempted mouth-to-mouth 
resuscitation. A pathologist's examination suggested that the child was a cot 
death victim. No inquest was held, as is the normal practice, so that parents 
are not caused further distress.

More than three years later, in December 1987, and a mother again for the 
third time, she was complaining about the fractious nature of the new child. 
With her landlady in the room, she said: 'I'll do to you what I done to the 
other.'

The police were informed and she was taken to Nuneaton police station and 
questioned for six hours. At the start of the interview she told the police 
that she had woken and found her baby dead. But later, after she had asked her 
solicitor, Ian Richardson, to leave the room she is recorded as having admitted 
to the killing, giving 'post-natal depression' as her reason. Her solicitor 
said he was shocked to find she had changed her mind when he returned and 
witnessed her full confession. She was charged with murder.
Even at this stage it did not appear that Ms Fletcher would be jailed for 
life. Infanticide, in which a mother suffering from post-natal depression takes 
her child's life, is normally seen as necessitating treatment and care rather 
than jail.

The main evidence against her in court was her confession, in which she 
described how the baby struggled under water. A Home Office pathologist, Dr 
Peter Andrews, also gave evidence based on an analysis of microscopic slides of 
body tissues, which had been kept for routine research purposes. From these, Dr 
Andrew concluded that the pathology was consistent with drowning. After the 
jury had convicted her on a majority verdict of 10 to two she was given a 
mandatory life sentence.

But there were many puzzling factors which a probation officer working with 
her became concerned about. Justice, the British section of the International 
Commission of Jurists, was contacted. It in turn alerted the BBC programme, 
Rough Justice, and an investigation was launched.

New aspects emerged: her mental age suggested that the confession might be 
unreliable there were inconsistencies in the method by which she said she had 
drowned the baby. The second factor concerned the testimony of Dr Andrews. 
Rough Justice contacted a number of experts in paediatric pathology and their 
findings were that the pathology was equally consistent with cot death.

It was discovered that there had been testimony given by Dr Andrews in which 
he had referred to the child's lungs as being 'waterlogged' this, it 
transpired, had only been an attempt at putting complex pathology into layman's 
language. In fact, far from having any extraneous body fluid in the lungs, the 
fluid to which Dr Andrews was referring was a naturally produced body fluid. 
(The pathologist who carried out the original post-mortem had not been called 
to give evidence in the trial. He stands by his view that the child died a cot 
death.)

Bryan Tully, a clinical psychiatrist, and an expert in police interview 
techniques, said that it was highly unlikely that someone of Ms Fletcher's 
level of intelligence would use a phrase like 'post natal depression.' It could 
have been the case, he suggested, that she had got the idea that, if she just 
pleaded guilty to infanticide, she believed she would not serve any sentence.
With this new evidence, leave for appeal was sought and granted. Just before 
Christmas, Lord Justice Russell gave permission for the defence to seek further 
evidence to be taken from another pathologist, Dr Iain West. Next week there 
will be fresh consultation between the experts at which stage the Crown will 
decide whether or not to contest the appeal.

Warwickshire police have criticised Rough Justice's programme, accusing it of 
'inaccuracies and half-truths.' They have stated that the jury made their 
decision on the evidence in front of them and on the basis of a confession made 
by a woman who said she had killed her child. They say they will co-operate 
with any appeal.

Jacqueline Fletcher's father, Leslie, says he believes the appeal case is 'as 
strong as any case can be' and says he never believed his daughter had killed 
her child.
 