
Jane Jacobs is often portrayed as an almost mythic figure, locked with Robert 
Moses in an epic battle for the future of New York. She was the mother and 
determined journalist with owlish glasses and grey thatch of hair who cruised 
around Greenwich Village on a bicycle, her handbag stowed in a wicker basket on 
the handlebars. He was New York's seemingly unstoppable construction tsar, the 
man the press nicknamed "Big Bob the Builder", a master of backroom politics 
who was chauffeur-driven around the five boroughs in a black stretch limousine 
with pigskin seats. He wanted to tear down her house, neighbourhood, and much 
of the rest of New York so that he could cover it with superblocks and 
expressways. She took him on - David v Goliath - and won. But was the dynamic 
as straightforward as that?

A new book, Anthony Flint's Wrestling With Moses, documents in fascinating 
detail this struggle, which has even been turned into a new children's book 
entitled Genius of Common Sense. Interestingly, Jacobs's own book about urban 
planning, The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1961), only makes 
passing reference to Moses, even if Moses did think those few remarks 
libellous. So why the prizefight?

In The Power Broker, his 1974 biography of Moses, Anthony Caro makes him seem 
as fascinating a character as the devil himself, while one might also glean 
from Flint's book that Moses was a second Stalin who would have liked to 
relocate all those he had the power to evict to a gulag in Queens. In slashing 
through the most rundown areas, Moses most often displaced the poor; critics 
described slum clearance as "Negro removal", and dismissed the modernist towers 
surrounded by parks that re-housed those who were relocated as 
"ghettos-within-ghettos".

Jacobs, a journalist for the now-defunct "Architectural Forum", was the most 
vocal critic of the planning philosophy to which Moses adhered in his prolific 
34-year career, and she successfully fought such schemes as his Lower Manhattan 
Expressway, that would have put a 10-lane straight line across Greenwich 
Village, SoHo, Little Italy, Chinatown and the Lower East Side. But their paths 
crossed only once, in 1958, at a Board of Estimates hearing to decide the fate 
of Washington Square Park. Moses wanted to extend Fifth Avenue through the 
square, ostensibly to ease congestion in Greenwich Village's dense maze of 
streets, but also to reward developers building on 10 blocks he'd razed to the 
south.

Jacobs's children often played in the historic park and joined the battle to 
preserve it: they proved effective at collecting signatures, and were sometimes 
outfitted with sandwich boards that proclaimed, "Save the Square!" (which had a 
double meaning in the hip Village). Not used to defeat, Moses stormed out of 
the hearing shouting furiously: "There is nobody against this - NOBODY, NOBODY, 
NOBODY but a bunch of, a bunch of MOTHERS."

When Jacobs joined this community action as a mere foot soldier, she hadn't 
yet become a public figure, but Moses's power and influence were already in 
retreat. In 1960 he resigned as parks commissioner, construction coordinator 
and chairman of slum clearance to become chief executive of the 1964 World's 
Fair. For obvious dramatic reasons, Flint is keen for Moses to appear as "the 
man behind the curtain", the wizard that Jacobs rendered impotent in her later 
campaigns. In truth, her real bogey-figures were two earlier planning 
theorists, Ebenezer Howard and Le Corbusier. They were the two men who had, she 
felt, many years earlier set the flawed agenda for city planning that 
paternalists such as Moses were now imposing all over America.

In the 1890s Ebenezer Howard proposed decongesting the "cancerous tumour" that 
was London by building garden city satellites that would support their own 
industries and be surrounded by green belts. In the 1920s Le Corbusier wanted 
to raze the traditional city and erect in its place "vertical garden cities" 
composed of high-density super-towers surrounded by parks and highways. Jacobs 
considered both ideas anti-city, hopeless efforts to assert order on a messy 
metropolis, to give the city "all the attributes of a well-kept, dignified 
cemetery". In The Death and Life, she proposed nurturing the virtues of the 
real city instead, with shops, cafés and bars creating a busy street life at 
all hours of the day. The key to making cities safe and attractive, Jacobs 
thought, was not to impose a suburban vision but to foster a sense of community 
- to have as many "eyes on the street" as possible.

Looking out of the window of her home, number 555 Hudson Street, musing on how 
cities work best (and presenting two more curtain-twitching eyes to the 
street), Jacobs noticed what she described as a "street ballet". In the most 
famous passage of her book she describes a day's performance in an ethnographic 
tour de force that shows the order behind apparent chaos. The curtain rises for 
Jacobs when she puts her rubbish out at 8am, as gaggles of students rush to 
school dropping sweet wrappers in their wake.

"While I sweep up the wrappers I watch the other rituals of the morning: Mr 
Halpert unlocking the laundry's handcart from its mooring to a cellar door, Joe 
Cornacchia's son-in-law stacking out the empty crates from the delicatessen, 
the barber bringing out his sidewalk folding chair ... Mr Lofaro, the short, 
thick-bodied, white-aproned fruit man who stands outside his doorway up the 
street, his arms folded, his feet planted, looking solid as earth itself."

On a recent visit to Hudson Street I found that a third of the stores and 
restaurants on Jacobs's block are empty. Jacobs died in 2006, but her cast of 
shopkeepers were swept away by gentrification, of which, ironically, she 
represented the first wave, many years ago. The White Horse Tavern, where Dylan 
Thomas used to prop up the bar, has expanded down the street and is clogged 
with tourists, but Chelsea Cricket, which apparently offered designer clothing 
for toddlers in the storefront of Jacobs's old home, closed earlier this year, 
as did the popular Italian restaurant next door and two other eateries on the 
block - their windows whitewashed on the inside as the recession creates its 
own urban blight. A man with a moustache, whom Jacobs would no doubt have 
thought a "character", was sitting on one of these empty stoops shouting at 
passers-by, "Are you unhappy?"

I introduced myself to two elderly women sitting outside the café next door to 
Jacobs's former home. (The three-storey house that she bought in 1947 for 
$7,000 is currently for sale at $3.75 million.) Margaret Botros, 74, and 
Geraldine Six, 77, were sisters whose brother coincidentally had a bit part in 
Jacobs's book to illustrate the life-saving benefits of late-night eyes on the 
street.

"When Jimmy Rogan fell through a plate-glass window (he was separating some 
scuffling friends) and almost lost his arm, a stranger in an old T-shirt 
emerged from the Ideal bar, swiftly applied an expert tourniquet and, according 
to the hospital's emergency staff, saved Jimmy's life."

Their father was a truck driver and they used to live in an apartment above 
the café. The sisters now live in the dwindling stock of rent-controlled 
apartments a few streets away but return like homing pigeons every day to drink 
coffee. "It was totally different back then," they said, speaking in speedy 
chorus, "There were stores all along here. We had an ice-cream parlour, a 
locksmith, a butcher, a tailor, a baker, a deli, a vegetable stand ... But the 
rents went sky high."

The two sisters were nostalgic for Jacobs's vision of a happy urban village. 
But even at the time, Jacobs's version of Hudson Street was criticised as 
romantic and "folksy": the New York Times review of Jacobs's book compared her 
old-fashioned vision of community to Thornton Wilder's fictional Grover's 
Corner, and Lewis Mumford, the New Yorker's architecture critic and a proponent 
of the garden city, dismissed her ideas for urban improvement as "Home Cures 
for Cancer". The Hudson Street she painted was always under threat - Jacobs 
lamented that the area was increasingly awash with uncivic-minded "high rent 
tenants most of whom are so transient we cannot keep track of their faces". In 
The 100 Mile City (1993), Deyan Sudjic remarked that Jacobs "sounds like a 
pioneer from the Old West, guarding her homestead in hostile territory ... 
Despite her ostensible celebration of diversity and community, the underlying 
message is of unblinking paranoia."

Almost immediately she handed in the manuscript of The Death and Life, 
Jacobs's theories were put to the test when 14 blocks of the West Village, 
including the very section of Hudson Street that she had celebrated in her 
book, were earmarked for urban renewal. This time, Jacobs led the battle to 
save the area and proved a formidable opponent, staging a mock funeral for the 
neighbourhood and choreographing other stunts. She was arrested for rabble 
rousing and newspapers compared her to Joan of Arc and to Madame Defarge 
leading the people to the barricades. She exploited her new celebrity and was 
photographed by Diane Arbus for Esquire and trumpeted as "Queen Jane" by Vogue.

This summer a block of Hudson Street was renamed Jane Jacobs Way, an honour 
that grateful community groups had been trying to bestow on Jacobs since her 
death, even though she hadn't lived in the area since 1968, when she moved to 
Canada so that her sons could avoid the Vietnam draft. When the mayor's 
representative came to unveil the sign, she was mobbed by Jane Jacobs 
look-alikes protesting the rezoning in Coney Island that will see the historic 
amusement park halved in size and shielded from the sea by high towers. It 
seems that anyone standing in the way of the bulldozers must ask, "What would 
Jane Jacobs do?"

Jacobs is not only a hero of grassroots activists, but has set the agenda for 
urban planning for half a century. Her utopian vision of Greenwich Village life 
has been exported unquestioningly to the rest of the world, where an urban 
stage set provides a background for Disneyland-like islands of social fantasy 
that hardly relate to the rest of the city (think of Covent Garden, which was 
also saved from an expressway); suburbs have also been retrofitted so that they 
resemble little villages. In New York, many of the historic districts she 
helped save from the Lower Manhattan Expressway, such as SoHo's cast-iron 
district, have become open-air museums or malls for tourists that are just as 
soulless as the cultural centres and high-rises she so abhorred. In these 
entertainment zones, any semblance of street ballet is swamped by the marching 
of out-of town consumers, most of whom got there via the bridges and tunnels 
Moses built.

In 2007, a triumvirate of revisionist exhibitions tried to remind us that 
Moses, for all his many power-crazed faults, was once a popular figure. He was 
pugnacious and intransigent, but he was a bully, at least at first, for the 
people, using his power to bulldoze through the golf courses and country 
estates of the wealthy so that anyone would have easy access to the parks and 
beaches he created. Flint tallies his impressive achievements: "13 bridges, two 
tunnels, 637 miles of highways, 658 playgrounds, ten giant public swimming 
pools, 17 state parks, and dozens of new or renovated city parks".

It was only when Moses tried to bring light and air into the city that he was 
charged with elitism. Like Jacobs, he wanted to democratise space - it was just 
his techniques that were different. He compared himself to Baron Haussmann, 
whose "dictatorial talents enabled him to accomplish a vast amount in a very 
short time, but also made him many enemies, for he was in the habit of riding 
roughshod over all opposition". Like Haussmann, Moses thought the end always 
justified the means, that the old should make way for the new, that the 
medieval warren should make way for glorious parks, apartment buildings and 
boulevards.

Jacobs checked Moses's mad worship of the car and his despotic excesses. But 
in a world of faux cobblestones, pedestrian zones and hanging baskets, aren't 
we a little nostalgic for Moses's obsessive audacity - for an era when planners 
could transcend the nimbies to execute grand gestures in the public interest?

• Wrestling With Moses is published by Random House. Genius of Common Sense, 
by Glenna Lang and Marjory Wunsch, is released in the UK by David R Godine in 
October.
 