
Parliament will not vote down the deal struck by Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> with other European leaders 
when MPs are given a say on the outcome of negotiations, David Davis has said.

 The Brexit secretary suggested MPs would vote in favour of whatever the prime 
minister manages to achieve as the UK electorate has already opted for Brexit 
in the referendum.

In a round of television interviews, he also revealed that he thought all of 
the UK’s negotiations and trade deals with the EU could be completed within two 
years. After that, Brexit could be phased in over one or two years to cushion 
the blow for businesses, Davis suggested, putting a possible timeframe on the 
“implementation phase” for the first time.

“At the end of two years we will have our deals. What may take longer is 
implementation,” he said. “There are lots and lots of countries who are very 
keen to do deals with us.”

Related: Parliament will not get option of reversing Brexit, says David Davis 
- Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/18/theresa-may-brexit-speech-reaction-pmqs-david-davis-will-not-get-option-of-reversing-brexit-says-david-davis-politics-live>

Asked what would happen if MPs block May’s deal, he said: “They won’t vote it 
down. This negotiation will succeed.”

If parliament refused to approve her plan, May could have a choice of 
returning to the negotiating table, walking away from the need for a deal or 
calling a snap general election to get a mandate for her plan.

Davis dismissed the idea that parliament would block any EU deal after May 
made a speech setting out her fullest plan yet for how Brexit will happen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
. She ruled out being part of the single market in order to achieve controls on 
immigration and indicated the UK will seek bespoke arrangements on customs.

Speaking on BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme, Davis said an implementation period 
to phase in Brexit would “not be too long”, suggesting one or two years would 
be enough. He also indicated it could cover border controls, rules affecting 
businesses and customs arrangements.

He said May’s speech outlining Brexit had prompted a positive reaction from 
other European capitals and cited “very strong interest in deals” on trade from 
countries such as New Zealand, Australia, Canada and the US.

Related: Brexit: May’s threat to Europe: 'no deal for Britain is better than a 
bad deal' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>

While Downing Street claims to have received positive noises from other 
European leaders, there is a barrage of negative headlines in the continental 
press, including Die Welt’s picture of Theresa May with the slogan “Little 
Britain”.

Davis’s optimistic tone was echoed by Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, 
who wrote in his Daily Telegraph column that other countries were “already 
queuing up” for trade deals.

“We will no longer be part of the common commercial policy, or bound by the 
common external tariff, and we will no longer have our trade policy run by the 
EU commission,” he said. “That means – crucially – that we will be able to do 
new free trade deals with countries around the world. They are already queuing 
up.

“Under EU rules, we are not formally allowed to negotiate these new treaties 
until we leave. But there is nothing to say that ideas cannot be pencilled in.”

In her speech on Tuesday, May warned European leaders that the UK is prepared 
to crash out of the EU if she cannot negotiate a reasonable exit deal, 
prompting key figures in Brussels to say that the country was on track for a 
hard Brexit.
 