
Time has caught up with Jim Lauderdale. Since 1991 the Nashville songwriter 
and vocalist has released a dizzying number of albums – 28 in all – that span 
honky-tonk, bluegrass, power-pop, southern soul, psychedelic and many of their 
hybrids. With country music in a perpetual identity crisis, Lauderdale’s music 
somehow has managed to encompass all that is best about its traditional side.

In September he won a lifetime achievement award from the Americana Music 
Association that bears its name. But Lauderdale isn’t keen on being seen as any 
one thing. “That’s one thing I really love about being involved inAmericana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/americana> is that there is no one thing. 
That ‘No, you are this kind of recording artist you can’t just branch out, it’s 
going to ruin things.’ Or you have to stay within that box – and so that’s 
great and liberating just to do whatever I want,” he says.

What Lauderdale wants to do and what he’s able to do has been changed by 
country’s move away from the auteur approach of writing hits, which has been 
replaced by the process of a committee. That shift has forced Lauderdale to 
devote more of his time to getting his own records out than providing songs for 
other people.

Readers recommend playlist: your songs about the American west
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/readers-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-the-american-west>
With more of his music out there, Lauderdale started receiving jobs to 
collaborate with people such asElvis Costello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elviscostello>, and with the Buddy and Jim 
Show, a SiriusXM program he co-hosts each week with Buddy Miller, and he 
started to be recognized by people outside Nashville as representing the rich 
traditions of country’s glory years.

His latest album This Changes Everything (Sky Crunch) would be an 
accomplishment for any budding songwriter, but for Lauderdale it is the 
testament of just a single day in Austin, Texas. Not only did he track the 
record in one spontaneous session earlier this year, the songs were pulled from 
a trick bag of songs he had written previously with a wide range of respected 
Texas songwriters but never released.Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/country> poets such as Daryl Burgess, Odie 
Blackmon, Frank Dycus and Bruce Robison are represented here via songs that 
capture the classic honky-tonk era of the 1950s but fail to sound like museum 
pieces. To round out the set, Lauderdale recorded We Really Shouldn’t Be Doing 
This, his own original given to George Strait years ago.

In a way, Lauderdale is the Robert Pollard of country music. Like the Guided 
By Voices man, Lauderdale makes a dizzying number of records, not necessarily 
according to audience demand, but to create order among the guitar riffs, 
melody hooks, or lyric ideas he has collected all his life and exist on 
cassette tapes in boxes and inside digital recorders waiting one day to serve a 
purpose.

“That’s just the way my mind works, it spins around in chaos and is in so much 
disarray that I really work best when I have this structure of having an album 
in front of me,” he says.

My mind … is in so much disarray that I really work best when I have this 
structure of having an album in front of me
Jim Lauderdale 
Despite that confusion, he has another record out in February 2017 – and it is 
yet another stylistic turn. It replicates the early days of rock’n’roll when 
R&B and country music existed together before format segregation. The 
touchstone was the earliest days of the Beatles, when they spun through 
everything – Bakersfield country, Broadway show tunes and Motown – without 
skipping a beat.

That dexterity came to Lauderdale at a young age when growing up in North 
Carolina, his father a Presbyterian minister and his mother a high school choir 
director and piano teacher. He immersed himself in the bluegrass scene at the 
North Carolina School of the Arts in Winston-Salem before moving to Nashville 
to make a bluegrass record of his own. After a stint in New York he went to Los 
Angeles and found himself in the middle of a community of songwriters that 
included Dave Alvin and Lucinda Williams who revered tradition but also strove 
to make it work in a rock club. The scene allowed Lauderdale to soak in the 
vibe of his fallen heroGram Parsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gramparsons> while scoring a major label 
deal with Epic Records – but it was never released. Today Lauderdale sees the 
experience as a blessing.

“I really wasn’t ready in 1988 when that record was supposed to come out,” he 
says. “The years have had ups and downs. But I think at the end of the day the 
downs have helped my live performances, the writing and recording just as much 
as the good things,” he says. The breakthrough was Planet of Love, his 1994 
debut on Warner Bros. While the album didn’t get a marketing push, mainly 
because Lauderdale was too country for rock stations and too pop for country, 
eight of the 10 songs found new life with other artists.

Like many roots-oriented songwriters during the time, Lauderdale struggled to 
maintain interest from the major labels that signed him despite winning a 
Grammy and earning the respect of chart-topping stars. “It would challenge me. 
I developed this philosophy where I wouldn’t want to get out of bed in the 
morning and get so depressed that I’d say, ‘I’ve got to write myself out of 
this situation’,” he remembers.

Lauderdale got by through supplying hits to his songwriting patrons including 
George Jones, the Dixie Chicks, Elvis Costello, Vince Gill, Shelby Lynne and 
Patty Loveless, which fed his creative hunger especially during low periods 
when he had trouble getting record deals. “The only thing that is going change 
things is get my guitar out and paper and come up with something to change 
things,” he says. “I still feel that way.”

Since then Lauderdale has been on a mad tear of productivity, recording albums 
with a wide range of collaborators, from a Grammy-winning set with Ralph 
Stanley to Patchwork River (Thirty Tigers) in 2010, one of his strongest albums 
featuring lyrics by Grateful Dead lyricist Robert Hunter. Lauderdale’s gift for 
bright melodic hooks and charismatic vocals are the threads connecting all the 
records. Like the way he puts them together, they feel spontaneous and on the 
fly, which translate to the music sounding fresh, bright and untamed.

The Americana phenomenon, which he and his peers helped pave the way for in 
the 80s and 90s, now serves in providing a commercial identity and an artistic 
community. “The artistry and talent has been there a long time, but Americana 
is just putting a name to it,” he says. “It’s not about personalities or 
somebody’s abs. There’s no salaciousness about it, it is purely about the 
music.”
 