
A special envoy of Myanmar’s leader Aung San Suu Kyi will begin top-level 
talks in Bangladesh on Wednesday, as the United Nations said the Rohingya 
crisis prompted 65,000 people to flee Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/65000-rohingya-flee-from-myanmar-to-bangladesh-following-crackdown-un>
 for Bangladesh in the past three months.


 Kyaw Tin, Myanmar’s deputy minister of foreign affairs, will make a three-day 
visit to the Bangladeshi capital of Dhaka, in a rare diplomatic foray to tackle 
the biggest challenge facing Nobel Peace laureate Suu Kyi’s nine-month old 
administration.

Free speech curtailed in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar as prosecutions soar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/free-speech-curtailed-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar-prosecutions-soar>
The stream of new refugees, and reports that Myanmar’s navy has shot at 
Bangladeshi fishermen, have further tested historically strained ties between 
the neighbours, who each see the statelessRohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> Muslims as the other side’s 
problem.

 The visit marks a shift away from Myanmar’s reluctant approach to cooperation 
with its western neighbour, which analysts see as key to solving the growing 
crisis.

Rohingya insurgents attacked Myanmar border posts on 9 October, killing nine 
police. In responseMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> sent the 
army into the Muslim-majority northern part of Rakhine State.

 Residents and refugees have described summary executions, arbitrary arrests 
and rape in the operation. Suu Kyi’s government has denied almost all abuse 
allegations.

 During the visit, the neighbours will discuss bilateral relations, but the 
Myanmar side was unlikely to bring up the “complicated” issue of border 
security, said Aye Aye Soe, deputy director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

 “For the border situation, an operation is still in progress to create 
stability, so I don’t think there will be a lot of results from this first-time 
meeting,” she said.

Kyaw Tin will meet Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina on Wednesday, said a senior 
official at theBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.


 The official, who requested anonymity as he was not authorised to speak to 
the media, said Myanmar had initiated the visit “so that Bangladesh does not 
raise pressure on Myanmar on the Rohingya issue in international forums,” such 
as an upcoming meeting of the Organisation of Islamic Co-operation.

 Southeast Asia’s Muslim-majority nations, Indonesia and Malaysia, have 
publicly pressured Myanmar over the crisis.

 “Bangladesh has been persuading and pressing in international forums behind 
the scenes so as not to hamper the relationship,” the Bangladeshi official said.

 Talks between the neighbours are complicated by the fact that as many as 
500,000 Rohingya who fled to Bangladesh during decades of persecution in 
Myanmar are not recognised as citizens there either.

 The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs says 
that by 5 January about 65,000 more people had arrived in Bangladesh since 9 
October.

 Myanmar’s Aye Aye Soe questioned the UN figure, saying anyone claiming to be 
a refugee from Myanmar would have to be scrutinised.

 She referred to a longstanding government policy that repatriation talks can 
only cover 2,415 people in Bangladesh whom Myanmar recognises as citizens.

 “We need to make sure how many people arrived and where they are from, but no 
one can confirm exactly,” she said. 



 