
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> and Team 
Sky were facing more questions on Monday despite Sir Dave Brailsford finally 
revealing that the mysterious package delivered to Bradley Wiggins in 2011 
contained nothing more than a legal decongestant.

Brailsford claimed at a culture, media and sport select committee hearing into 
doping that he had been told by the Team Sky doctor Richard Freeman that the 
mysterious Jiffy bag, which has been at the centre of a long-running UK 
Anti-Doping investigation, contained the mucus-clearing drug Fluimucil – and 
that a paper trail would back him up. “Dr Freeman told me it was Fluimucil, a 
decongestant you put in a nebuliser,” Brailsford said. “I couldn’t see any 
anti-doping rule violation.”

However, it is understood that as yet there is no independent verification of 
Brailsford’s claim, with Ukad unable to unearth such paperwork despite weeks 
investigating BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>.

MPs miss cue on Team Sky TUEs but Sir Dave Brailsford makes open promise | 
William Fotheringham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/19/team-sky-sir-dave-brailsford-culture-committee-british-cycling>
Brailsford was immediately put on the back foot as he struggled to explain why 
the British Cycling assistant Simon Cope flew from Manchester to Geneva and up 
La Toussuire in June 2011 to deliver medication which could be bought over the 
counter in France for eight euros – or why it took 10 weeks, a Ukad 
investigation and a select committee hearing for him to reveal one simple 
medical fact.

“I understand where your questioning is coming from but from my point of view 
it is not an unusual occurrence,” Brailsford told MPs. “And the sole purpose of 
Simon Cope’s visit wasn’t to bring this product. He was a guy who was coming 
out to do logistics [for our next race]. [Team Sky coach] Rod Ellingworth also 
flew out to help logistics move to the next event.”

Yet that evidence appeared to be contradicted by the former British Cycling 
technical director and Team Sky head coach Shane Sutton, who said that Cope 
“took something back with him, and I got a lift to the airport with him”.

Earlier Sutton had revealed for the first time that Wiggins was given the 
medication contained in the package on the final day of the Criterium du 
Dauphiné in 2011 – a race that he led and then won. But he said he had no idea 
whether Wiggins had received an injection at the time.

Coughing up the facts on Fluimucil, Team Sky’s Jiffy bag decongestant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/team-sky-drugs-in-sport-fluimucil-jiffy-bag-dave-brailsford>
Three hours of testimony from Brailsford, Sutton, the British Cycling 
president, Bob Howden, and the board director Dr George Gilbert also provided 
more heat than light as well as a number of inconsistencies including:

• Sutton had initially said that Wiggins was treated at the Dauphiné “for a 
long‑term illness”, saying he had allergies for years before changing his mind 
and saying it was possibly a chest infection.

• Fluimucil, while legal, is an unlicensed medicine in the UK and not 
generally available yet Brailsford said his riders used it “on a regular 
basis”. Unlicensed medicines, called “specials”, can be supplied in the UK in 
certain circumstances, according to the Medicines and Healthcare Products 
Regulatory Agency.

• Sutton insisted he had no idea what medical treatment Wiggins had taken – 
including the powerful asthma drug triamcinolone before the Tour de France in 
2011 and 2012 – while head coach of Team Sky despite being his close friend and 
mentor.

However, Sutton denied that Wiggins had ever done anything wrong, telling the 
MPs: “Knowing the kid for many, many years as far I’m concerned he never worked 
outside any rules. Given the factDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> was probably the pioneer 
behind clean cycling and created what is probably the cleanest team in the 
world and set up a zero tolerance programme, there was no wrongdoing. I would 
put my life on Brad Wiggins.”

But in one particularly extraordinary exchange a clearly irate Sutton accused 
the MPs of “not embracing the success” of Team Sky and British Cycling. Taking 
aim at the Labour MP Ian Lucas, he told him: “You have actually upset me there.”

“You sitting there being British should be embracing the success they’ve 
achieved and how they’ve achieved it, rather than looking for something that’s 
not there,” he said. “This team, from Laura Trott to Bradley Wiggins to Jason 
Queally that won that gold in Sydney, Sir Chris Hoy, Pendleton, Cooke – they’ve 
all done it clean.

“You’ve actually upset me there in the fact that you’ve not embraced the 
success of British cycling as a whole. I’m astounded that you would make that 
sort of tone, suggesting that we’ve not done anything by the book.”

Dave Brailsford faces grilling from MPs over doping in cycling – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/19/shane-sutton-and-dave-brailsford-face-mps-over-team-skys-use-of-tues-live>
Earlier Lucas had also expressed his frustration at Howden, telling him that 
the last few months had been a “disaster” for British Cycling. “This story is 
casting a massive shadow,” he added. Howden could barely muster a defence, 
replying: “I would agree but we have to stay strong.”

Before he left Brailsford conceded to the MPs that he hadn’t covered himself 
in glory in recent weeks, but insisted: “There is no question of any cover up. 
There was no intention to mislead in any shape or form.”

But after this series of unconvincing performances the gap between his high 
performance rhetoric about the Sky machine and the apparent reality behind the 
scenes has never seemed wider.
 