
Nat Hentoff, an eclectic columnist, critic, novelist and agitator dedicated to 
music, free expression and defying the party line, died on Saturday at age 91.

His son, Tom Hentoff, said his father died from natural causes at his 
Manhattan apartment.

Schooled in the classics and the stories he heard from Duke Ellington and 
other jazz greats, Nat Hentoff enjoyed a diverse and iconoclastic career, 
basking in “the freedom to be infuriating on a myriad of subjects”.

'Jazz was the catalyst for change': Jim Marshall’s images of 60s festivals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/03/jazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport>
He was a bearded, scholarly figure, a kind of secular rabbi, as likely to 
write a column about fiddler Bob Wills as a dissection of the Patriot Act, to 
have his name appear in the liberal Village Voice as the far-right 
WorldNetDaily.com, where his column last appeared in August 2016.

Ellington, Charlie Parker, Malcolm X and IF Stone were among his friends and 
acquaintances. He wrote liner notes for records by Aretha Franklin, Max Roach 
and Ray Charles and was the first non-musician named a jazz master by the 
National Endowment of the Arts.

He also received honors from the American Bar Association, the National Press 
Foundation, and, because of his opposition to abortion, the Human Life 
Foundation.

Hentoff’s steadiest job was with the Voice, where he worked for 50 years and 
wrote a popular column. He wrote for years about jazz for DownBeat and had a 
music column for the Wall Street Journal. His more than 25 books included works 
on jazz and the first amendment, the novels Call the Keeper and Blues for 
Charles Darwin and the memoirs Boston Boy and Speaking Freely.

The documentary The Pleasures of Being Out of Step: Notes on the Life of Nat 
Hentoff was released in 2014.

Jazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> was his first love, but Hentoff 
was an early admirer of Bob Dylan, first hearing the then-unknown singer at a 
Greenwich Village club in 1961 and getting on well enough with him to write 
liner notes two years later for Dylan’s landmark second album, The Freewheelin’ 
Bob Dylan.

“The irrepressible reality of Bob Dylan is a compound of spontaneity, candor, 
slicing wit and an uncommonly perceptive eye and ear for the way many of us 
constrict our capacity for living while a few of us don’t,” Hentoff wrote.

At a time when the media alternately treated Dylan like a prophet or the 
latest teen fad, Hentoff asked well-informed questions that were (usually) 
answered in kind by the cryptic star. Hentoff also was willing to be Dylan’s 
partner in improvisation. A 1966 Playboy interview, he later revealed, had been 
made up from scratch after Dylan rejected the first conversation that was 
supposed to be published by the magazine.

As a columnist, Hentoff focused tirelessly on the constitution and what he saw 
as a bipartisan mission to undermine it. He tallied the crimes of Richard Nixon 
and labeled President Bill Clinton’s anti-terrorism legislation “an all-out 
assault on the bill of rights”.

He even parted from other first amendment advocates, quitting the American 
Civil Liberties Union because of the ACLU’s support for speech codes in schools 
and workplaces.

Leftwing enough to merit an FBI file, an activist from age 15 when he 
organized a union at a Boston candy chain, Hentoff was deeply opposed to 
abortion, angering many of his colleagues at the Village Voice and elsewhere. 
In 2008, he turned against the campaign of Barack Obama over what he regarded 
as the candidate’s extreme views, including rejection of legislation that would 
have banned partial birth abortions.

Hentoff was born in 1925, the son of a Russian-Jewish haberdasher. Thrown out 
of Hebrew school, he flaunted his unbelief, even eating a salami sandwich in 
front of his house on Yom Kippur, the Jewish day of fasting and atonement. In 
1982, his opposition to Israel’s invasion of Lebanon led to a trio of rabbis 
declaring he had been excommunicated.

“I only wished the three rabbis really had the authority to hold that court,” 
Hentoff later wrote. “I would have told them about my life as a heretic, a 
tradition I keep precisely because I am a Jew.”

Bob Dylan finds God – a classic article from the vaults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/11/bob-dylan-classic-article> 
He was educated as a boy at Boston’s Latin School, alma mater to Ralph Waldo 
Emerson among others. But his best lessons were received at a local jazz joint, 
where Ben Webster and Rex Stewart were among those who took a liking to the 
teenage fan and became, Hentoff recalled, “my itinerant foster fathers”. Back 
in the classroom, Hentoff would hide jazz magazines inside his textbooks.

In college at Northeastern University, Hentoff found a home at the Savoy Cafe 
and befriended Ellington, drummer Jo Jones and others. Ellington not only 
lectured him on music, but enlightened young Hentoff (who eventually married 
three times) on the loopholes in monogamy. “Nobody likes to be owned,” 
Ellington told him.

After graduating, Hentoff worked as a disc jockey and moved to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> to edit DownBeat, from which he 
was fired in 1957 because, he alleged, he had attempted to employ an African 
American writer. A year later, he joined the Village Voice and remained until 
he was laid off in December 2008.

“I came here in 1958 because I wanted a place where I could write freely on 
anything I cared about,” Hentoff wrote in his final Voice column, published in 
January 2009.

“Over the years, my advice to new and aspiring reporters is to remember what 
Tom Wicker, a first-class professional spelunker, then at The New York Times, 
said in a tribute to Izzy Stone: ‘He never lost his sense of rage.’ Neither 
have I.”
 