
When, in July 1969, Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong>, who has died aged 82, 
made his celebrated "one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind" by 
becoming the first human being to walk on the moon, he was indeed the 
"reluctant hero" of his family's apt description.

As the commander of the US Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> spacecraft, in 
which he was accompanied by Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, the pilot of the Eagle lunar 
landing module and Michael Collins, pilot of the Columbia command module, he 
became the first man on the moon because he had arrived at the head of the 
queue of around 20 highly experienced and motivated astronauts. They had been 
taking it in turns to conduct the 22 manned spaceflights needed to learn the 
techniques for travelling to the Earth's nearest neighbour – an objective he 
pursued with great seriousness.

Space <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> correspondents like myself, 
attending every mission, soon found that Armstrong was unique among his 
colleagues. A member of the second group to be selected, he was unlike all the 
others, self-conscious and deeply introverted. He did not enjoy talking to us 
unless we were fully informed; the trivial questions posed by general reporters 
he found unbearable, and he remained a quietly dignified figure for the rest of 
his life, working principally as an engineering academic and businessman.

Born in Wapakoneta, Ohio, Armstrong had acquired his student pilot's licence 
by the age of 16. In 1947, he went to Purdue University on a navy scholarship 
to study aeronautical engineering, but two years later the Korean war 
intervened, and he flew 78 combat missions. Eventually he completed his BSc at 
Purdue and an MSc in aerospace engineering at the University of Southern
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.

In 1955 he went to Cleveland, Ohio, as a civilian research pilot at the Lewis 
Research Centre of what became the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (Nasa), and later that year toEdwards Air Force Base 
<http://www.edwards.af.mil/> in California. As a pioneer of many high-speed 
aircraft, involved in both piloting and engineering, he flew over 200 different 
models, including jets, rockets, helicopters and gliders.

When Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> embarked on its second 
astronaut training programme in 1962, he was one of the nine test pilots 
chosen. Four years later, on Gemini 8 for his first space venture, Armstrong 
brought his experience into play when the spacecraft continued spinning after 
completing a docking manoeuvre. The situation could have become 
life-threatening and the mission was abandoned after only a day in orbit.

President John F Kennedy's end-of-the-decade target for a manned moon landing 
was a constant target for Nasa, and early in 1969 I learned from George Low, 
its head of manned spaceflight, that the Apollo 11 crew would be attempting the 
first such expedition.

While Armstrong would be in command, Aldrin would be the first to step on the 
moon; Armstrong would follow the naval tradition of being the last to leave the 
ship. So it came as a shock when I got the flight plan and press kit a few 
weeks ahead of the launch, showing that Armstrong would be first out.

There was much resentment about the change, publicly expressed by Aldrin's 
father, a senior military man. Buzz fretted and raised it internally, but 
Armstrong steadfastly refused to discuss it. Nasa said the change was merely 
because it was physically easier for Armstrong to exit the lunar lander first.

Later I learned that Low and other top Nasa officials had suddenly realised 
that the first man on the moon would become immortal in the public's eyes. The 
grave Armstrong, they realised, was much more suited to the role than Aldrin, a 
brilliant and outspoken mathematician, always liable to challenge and disagree 
with authority.

Apollo 11 took off on 16 July, and four days later the Eagle descended on to a 
plain near the south-western edge of the Sea of Tranquillity. Around six and a 
half hours later, Armstrong stepped off the ladder of the lunar module, the 
first human being to set foot on the moon. After 20 minutes Aldrin joined him 
to address hundreds of millions of television viewers all over the world, 
watching in black and white, and collect rocks.

An interesting consequence is that we do not have a single clear photograph of 
Armstrong on the lunar surface [see footnote]. Aldrin was scheduled in the 
flight plan – which covered every second of their nearly three hours there – to 
take the historic picture of the first man on the moon standing beside the 
lunar module and its plaque reading: "We came in peace for all mankind." When 
the time came, Armstrong duly took up his position, and held out the camera for 
Aldrin to take it. Aldrin, busy collecting lunar samples and setting out 
scientific equipment on the surface, replied: "No, you keep it," and carried 
on. Nothing intentional, he said later, just the way it happened.

So the surface pictures we do have are all of Aldrin taken by Amstrong, the 
most famous of them being the one in which Armstrong is reflected in Aldrin's 
facepiece. Armstrong, following military tradition, never complained, never 
explained.

The ceremonial aspect continued with the raising of the American flag and a 
radiotelephone conversation with PresidentRichard Nixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/richard-nixon>. Experiments were 
completed, and soil and rocks gathered. After more than 21 hours on the lunar 
surface, the Eagle took off to rejoin the Columbia command module, in which 
Collins had been orbiting the moon. Splashdown in the Pacific on 24 July was 
followed by decontamination procedures, and the geological samples and film 
were flown to Nasa mission control in Houston, Texas.

The three astronauts were naturally in demand for tours around the world, and 
once that excitement had died down, Armstrong became deputy associate 
administrator for aeronautics at the Nasa headquarters office of advanced 
research and technology in Washington until 1971, when he resigned, put off by 
the prospect of continuing in the organisation with a desk job. He was 
professor of aeronautical engineering at the University of Cincinnati for the 
next eight years, and for two decades after that acted as director of a variety 
of corporations.

He served on the National Commission on Space, a presidential body examining 
the prospects for taking the space programme further, in 1985-86, and in 1986 
was also vice-chairman of the committee investigating the Space Shuttle 
Challenger disaster. During the early 1990s he presented an aviation 
documentary series for television entitled First Flights.

Though conscious that he had enjoyed a figurehead role for a project that had 
involved thousands of people, Armstrong was always gracious about celebrating 
achievements in space to date. In February this year he spoke at an event at 
Ohio State University to mark the 50th anniversary of the orbiting of the Earth 
by the first American to do so, John Glenn.

A couple of hours after that first landing in July 1969, I talked to Wernher 
von Braun, whose Saturn V rockets had made it all possible. He gave me a copy 
of his longterm plan. It showed the first humans landing on Mars in the 1980s. 
He died in 1977, so never knew that his target would be missed by around 100 
years. Armstrong retained his interest in space exploration policy, and in 2010 
went on camera to express his disappointment at the cancellation of plans to 
send astronauts back to the moon. He later went on to doubt that depending on 
commercial companies would revive the space effort.

Armstrong is survived by his second wife, Carol, and by two sons from his 
first marriage, which ended in divorce.

• Neil Alden Armstrong, astronaut, born 5 August 1930; died 25 August 2012

• This footnote was appended on 28 August 2012. There is, in fact, one 
photograph of Armstrong on the moon. An image of Armstrong working on the base 
of the lunar module in the Sea of Tranquility bears the following agency 
caption: The Moon -- 20 Jul 1969 -- Apollo 11 astronauts trained on Earth to 
take individual photographs in succession in order to create a series of frames 
that could be assembled into panoramic images. This frame from Aldrin's 
panorama of the Apollo 11 landing site is the only good picture of mission 
commander Neil Armstrong on the lunar surface -- Picture by Edwin 
Aldrin/Lightroom Photos/NASA
 