
The neo-Nazi rock band Bound for Glory is believed to have cancelled its first 
gig inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> after campaigners and 
the Scottish government called for the group to be denied entry to the UK.

The US thrash metal band was booked to play a venue in or around Edinburgh on 
22 October.

But Nick Lowles, the founder of the anti-fascist group Hope Not Hate, 
confirmed that on Sunday evening the concert’s organiser emailed those who had 
bought tickets to tell them the event had been cancelled amid “travel concerns”.

Hope Not Hate believed this would be the largest white power concert ever to 
take place in the country, attracting hundreds of skinheads and white 
supremacists from Scotland, England and across Europe.

More than 500 tickets had been sold, with the location of the event kept 
secret by organisers to try to prevent protesters from shutting it down.

Scotland’s justice secretary, Michael Matheson, announced on Sunday that he 
was “considering every option” to prevent the band visiting Scotland, including 
writing to the British home secretary, Amber Rudd, toask her to consider 
refusing them entry to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/amber-rudd-urged-to-prevent-neo-nazi-band-from-entering-uk>
.

“I have also asked the chief constable [of Police Scotland] to consider with 
partners [the] powers available to stop this event happening. There is no place 
for hatred of this kind in Scotland.”

The Scottish National party’s justice and home affairs spokesperson at 
Westminster, Joanna Cherry, was considering raising the issue as an urgent 
question in the House of Commons on Monday.

Lowles told the Guardian he had been “fairly confident” that the gig would be 
cancelled, after 1,700 people contacted their MPs and MSPs over the weekend, 
and the organisers of the event were reported to be increasingly concerned 
about losing money on the venture.

“We had expected the Scottish government to step in, given the politics of the 
SNP which have always been very good on race,” he said. “In Scotland generally 
at the moment, there seems to be more of a public rejection of racism.”

In her closing address to the SNP’s conference in Glasgow on Saturday, the 
leader and first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, talked of the “uniting vision” of 
“an inclusive, prosperous, socially just, open, welcoming and outward-looking 
country”, contrasting this with the xenophobic rhetoric of Theresa May’s 
government.
 