
A few years ago I lived in a country town of some 3,000 people that had four 
award-winning restaurants and at least a dozen coffee shops but nowhere to buy 
light bulbs or milk after midday on a Saturday.

The town proudly boasted it didn’t have McDonald’s or pokie machines, but in 
the locals’ pub (a place that seemed deliberately ugly in order to repel the 
yuppie couples who come down for long weekends) they would complain that they 
had to drive 30km to get their KFC fix.

The locals – those who count their residence in a town by the generations not 
the years – aren’t always happy that there are multiple restaurants that offer 
degustation menus. They would rather an Aldi or a McDonald’s than pay $100 to 
eat teeny-tiny carrots on a dehydrated piece of woodland mushroom.

But it’s not just the restaurants. The gentrifiers are pushing house prices up 
so that the young people who grew up in the town can’t afford to live there. 
Good coffee is no consolation.

Same old, same old. How the hipster aesthetic is taking over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/06/hipster-aesthetic-taking-over-world>
There are at least a dozen culture wars being fought in Australia at any one 
time, but the ground-level skirmishes – where it gets personal – are those 
being fought in areas that are being gentrified.


Australia’s cute country towns – many within cooee of the city – are the 
battlegrounds. We all know the ones. The towns filled with stone cottages and 
historic courthouses and the facade of a blacksmith’s workshop. These towns 
languish for decades, undisturbed by development as the main industries slowly 
die.

The rot sets in. But then people come in from the city – driven out by high 
prices in Melbourne and Sydney, or seeking a weekender. They are thrilled to 
discover these divine, intact little villages where, say, an 1860s miner’s 
cottage with an established garden can be bought for the price of one of those 
coffin-like apartments in the city.

The gentrifiers bring energy to the regions – and more importantly – money. 
But the money comes with strings attached.

And as has been proven time and time again, those who control the economy 
control the values and culture of a place – or at least its aesthetics.

The dominant aesthetic of the gentrifying class might be described as 
neoliberalism through a dreamcatcher – yoga classes instead of football clubs, 
cool cafes instead of Domino’s pizza, homewares shops instead of the Reject 
Shop.

This specific aesthetic and value system signifies class and “taste” – and so 
for example might deem fast food as bad, and veganism as good. Or farmers’ 
markets as great but commercial supermarkets as a scourge.

So what does gentrification look like on the ground in our country towns?

Shops selling beautiful, useless stuff

You cannot buy a pair of socks or a spanner in your town, but there are four 
shops in the main street selling $120 throw cushions. The shops are often 
housed in the facade of old shops. So you can go into a shop called General 
Store where only very specific items are sold – like leather ottomans. And 
leather ottomans only.

Unusual yoga classes

Your village not only offers hot yoga, but niche offerings such as yoga 
accompanied by intuitive harp or yoga classes that only play the music of Tupac 
Shakur.

Newspapers

The local newspaper has folded. But in good news, the newsagent air freights 
Vanity Fair and stocks the Saturday Paper.

Hipsters and artists are the gentrifying foot soldiers of capitalism | Stephen 
Pritchard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/hipsters-artists-gentrifying-capitalism>
When the meat in sausage rolls changes

At the bakery a $3 pie used to be delicious – but take off the lid and the 
meat is a sort of grey paste. Now the bakery has shut down, replaced by a shop 
selling similar products but at a 300% markup. The good news? In pies the meat 
is now recognisable as meat. In addition to real meat, the pies now also 
contain tofu, pumpkin and tarragon, while the sausage rolls come in flavours 
such as spring lamb and rosemary.

Performative farming

There are no real farmers anymore but a load of people walking around dressed 
as farmers, in flannel, beards with hay in them, cardigans and work boots. 
Highly prized is ownership of pre-industrial farming machinery – like scythes. 
These pretend farmers can often be found at farmers’ markets drinking turmeric 
lattes.

The gentrifiers often move to the country not because of cheap houses (they 
would not be so gauche as to admit to that) but because the extra space means 
they can plant their own vegetable garden. The gentrifiers Facebook and 
Instagram their vege patch the way others document the growth of their children.
 