
A Nepalese army officer has been cleared of torturing suspected Maoist 
detainees following years of investigation by Scotland Yard and two war crimes 
trials at the Old Bailey.

Lieut Col Kumar Lama, 49, was charged under a rarely used clause of the 1988 
Criminal Justice Act that allows the prosecution in the UK of alleged foreign 
war criminals.

Lama was arrested in 2013 after settling in St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex, 
with his family. He had been serving as a UN peacekeeper in South Sudan shortly 
before being detained.

He was accused of mistreating prisoner Janak Raut during his country’s civil 
war, which raged between 1996 and 2006. The Old Bailey trial heard that he 
presided over beatings of his alleged victim while in charge of the Gorusinghe 
barracks in Kapilvastu. Lama has always denied the charges.

It was claimed that one of Lama’s more unusual torture methods was to allow a 
soldier’s pet parrot to peck at the victims until they bled.

Lama first stood trial in February 2015 but the jury was discharged following 
the failure to provide sufficiently qualified translators to hear the evidence 
of about a dozen Nepalese witnesses who had been flown to the UK.

Last month, a second jury was discharged after failing to agree on a verdict 
on the remaining torture charge. On Tuesday, the Crown Prosecution Service 
(CPS) announced it would offer no further evidence against Lama.

The prosecutor, Duncan Penny QC, said: “The crown has carefully and thoroughly 
considered the evidence on the remaining count and there was no longer a 
realistic prospect of conviction.”

The judge, Mr Justice Sweeney, told the jury: “It is relatively rare for so 
many witnesses to require interpreters and indeed for so many problems to arise 
in one case.” He assured Lama that he would face no further action in British 
courts.

Section 134 (sub-section 1) of the Criminal Justice Act permits prosecution of 
foreign war criminals in the UK under so-called universal jurisdiction. The UK 
is one of 159 signatories to the UN convention against torture and perpetrators 
must be tried in the country in which they are arrested.

The two trials are estimated to have cost about £1m. His solicitor, Jonathan 
Grimes, a criminal law partner at the law firm Kingsley Napley, said: “I am 
extremely pleased for Col Lama that this case is finally at an end and that he 
can put these allegations behind him.

“The jury’s verdict in August on one of the charges, and today’s decision by 
the CPS on the other, confirm what Col Lama has always maintained: that he 
never ordered, or was complicit in, torture.

 “The past three-and-a-half-years has been an extremely frustrating and 
stressful period for Col Lama and his family. There have been unacceptable 
delays in bringing this case to a conclusion, none of which have been any fault 
of his.

“He has borne these delays with great patience and good spirit and has always 
trusted that justice would prevail. I am pleased that Col Lama, an officer who 
has served with distinction with both the Nepalese army and the UN, will now be 
able to return toNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> and resume his 
military career.

 “This case has run into a number of difficulties, in particular, the 
complexities arising from the fact that most evidence was in Nepal and in 
Nepalese and that the witnesses were located in Nepal. The reliance by British 
police and the CPS on evidence gathered by a human rights organisation, 
Advocacy Forum, has proven to be a mistake.”

Janak Raut, one of the alleged victims, said he respected the jury’s decision 
but hoped the government of Nepal would consider legal action.

Daniel Machover, a solicitor at the law firm Hickman & Rose, which represented 
Raut, and an expert in international criminal jurisdiction, said: “We have 
worked very hard on a number of these cases and it is a source of great 
satisfaction to know that the UK takes seriously its international obligation 
to investigate and where appropriate to prosecute alleged crimes of this 
nature.”

Mandira Sharma, founder of Advocacy Forum, said: “Regardless of the decision 
not to re-prosecute Mr Lama, the case has already established that the door of 
universal jurisdiction for the victims of torture and other gross violations is 
open in the UK and beyond.

“I just hope the government of Nepal understands the gravity of the issue at 
hand and starts a process to end impunity for torture and gross violations of 
human rights in Nepal.”






 