
Hometown: Los Angeles.

The lineup: Kadhja Bonet (vocals, instruments). 

The background: If you feel like you can’t move for Amy Winehouse surrogates, 
try Kadhja Bonet, a new singer and musician from Los Angeles. Hers is 
phantasmagoric R&B, soul from another time, another place. Another dimension, 
even. Bonet just knows the responses to her music will be rapturous evocations 
of the celestial and sublime, that questions will be raised about her 
provenance, such is its unearthly beauty. “[Kadha] was born in 1784 in the 
backseat of a sea-foam green space pinto,” she jokes on her Bandcamp page. 
“After spending an extraordinarily long time in her mother’s plasma, she 
discovered the joys and gratifications of making noise with her hands and face 
while traveling at maximum velocity through intergalactic jungle quadrants.”

“1784”? There is, indeed, something disconcerting about Bonet’s music, an 
almost magic-realist prettiness: it’s not so much timeless – extolling the 
eternal verities of classic soul songwriting, which is after all what the 
sub-Winehouses busy themselves with – as out of time. But which time? Sometimes 
it’s like listening to music from the pre-rock era – from the 1940s, say – 
drenched as it is in Disney-sweet Hollywood strings. At others it seems as 
though it’s beamed in from the 2040s, from a science fictional future when soul 
has become completely deracinated and etherised. She’s a distant relative of 
Kelela andSZA <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/08/sza>, a defiantly 
non-electronic relative of those avant-R&B explorers.

The title of her new EP, The Visitor, has intimations of an alien traveller, 
and Bonet does agree that it’s a concept work of sorts. “It’s supposed to be a 
bite out of my journey and evolution,” she explains. “It’s mostly about the 
events that make you have to redefine yourself and confront yourself and be 
better at who you’re meant to be. If it was a movie, it would be a 
coming-of-age film about someone trying to separate themselves form the false 
reality they’ve created.”

Unlike Janelle Monae <https://www.theguardian.com/music/janelle-monae>, there 
is actually no overarching conceptual apparatus accompanying her music: not for 
Bonet anyrobo-guise or advanced sci-fi imagery 
<https://buttaflyytulsa.files.wordpress.com/2010/10/janellemonae_metropolis.jpg?w=600&h=360>
. There she isin a recent article in LA Weekly 
<http://www.laweekly.com/music/celestial-soul-singer-kadhja-bonets-voice-has-the-power-to-stop-time-7486141>
, dressed like a regular human. Do interviewers turn up imagining her to be 
unreal/incorporeal? Does Bonet get some of what Björk used to get, that 
expectation of a creature verging on a sprite?

“Yeah, maybe some people do,” she laughs. “I’m definitely as elusive as a 
sprite, but not nearly as magical. I’m embarrassed by what humans do sometimes 
– I wouldn’t mind being ‘not human’. I don’t want to let people down with how 
human I am.”

Nevertheless, the flesh-and-blood Bonet does have something of a rarefied 
backstory. She was raised in the East Bay area of San Francisco as one of six 
highly musical siblings, classically schooled in violin and viola, with her 
opera singer father and cellist mother, who envisioned for their daughter a 
career as a concert violinist. She grew up steeped in classical music, with a 
predilection for Shostakovich, Debussy and Ravel, and was discouraged from 
listening to non-classical music. Her production and ornate classical-tinged 
orchestral arrangements can be heard on the eight Visitor tracks, as can her 
playing of the violin, viola, flute and guitar (drums, harp, synth and bass are 
handled by friends). All the writing is hers, except for the Jaco Pastorius 
melody put to her words on Portrait of Tracy and a cover of Milton Nascimento’s 
Francisco. First track Honeycomb sets the otherworldly tone, woozily luscious 
music that creates its own context. The title track opens with a descending 
string motif reminiscent of the intro toJames Brown’s This Is a Man’s Man’s 
Man’s World <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juTeHsKPWhY>, but there the 
connection to 60s R&B ends. Bonet almost scat-sings and swoops between octaves 
with elan over this chamber soul-pop, like a cross between Cleo Lane and Liz 
Fraser of Cocteau Twins. There are hints here of classical, jazz, folk, of
Minnie Riperton’s adventures in paradisal soul with Rotary Connection. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i1tZtL6oz44> Some reviewers have mentioned 
Solange, others Julia Holter and Jenny Hval. Not that Bonet would know – she 
doesn’t read her press. She feels vulnerable giving interviews and 
uncomfortable reading the results.

“It makes me squirm,” she says, although she concedes, “I understand people’s 
curiosity.”

Reproducing the studio intricacy live has proven a challenge, so she tends to 
strip things back. But the reactions are still ones of surprise.

“People usually expect something different from me, for whatever reason,” she 
notes. “Maybe they expect more R&B-soul stuff, that’s more in the box … They 
expect me to sing ‘black’. I don’t sing explicitly ‘black’ – that makes them a 
bit shocked and confused. But it’s not my goal to sound like anyone else.”

Still, she enjoyed the response of fellow Californian Anderson Paak, whose 
Malibu is, like The Visitor, an album of the year. “This,” he declared on 
Twitter, “is the real shit.”

“I had to work hard at sounding like myself,” she says finally, musing on how 
she arrived at her unique sound and deciding it was a struggle. “It’s easiest 
to assume a character if you’re vulnerable – it feels safer to imitate. But 
after hearing myself sing, I began to recognise, ‘That’s not me, that 
inflection isn’t me.’ After picking myself apart, I really sing like myself 
now. I don’t have to think about it anymore.”

The buzz: “Think Joanna Newsome meets Janelle Monae” – IndieCurrent.

The truth: It’s soul music of the spheres. 

Most likely to: Enchant. 

Least likely to: Enrage. 

What to buy: Debut mini-album The Visitor is released on 4 November via Fat 
Possum/Fresh Selects.

File next to: Minnie Riperton, Solange, Julia Holter, Ala.Ni. 

Links <https://soundcloud.com/kadhja-bonet>: Soundcloud.com/kadhja-bonet

Ones to watch: Rejjie Snow, Alexandra Savior, Bossy Love, Leisure, Birthh. 
 