
I read with great interest the various contributions in G2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/05/grand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village>
 (5 January) on garden cities, towns or villages of tomorrow. The plea in the 
first article, by Owen Hatherley, was for a new town that “doesn’t look planned 
by developers but for the public good”. This is what I found in the new town I 
have lived in for almost 60 years. When I moved to Crawley in 1957 it was to a 
new town designated 10 years earlier which was growing rapidly. The main 
characteristic of such new towns of this first postwar generation was planning 
on the neighbourhood principle. Each neighbourhood was built for a population 
of about 8,000 to 10,000, the catchment area for a local primary school, 
doctors and dentist surgeries, pub, church, a small row of shops, a small 
community centre (initially a wooden hut).

This, I believe, is still viable in our digital and car-centred age. Community 
is built from parents meeting at the school gates (another principle was that 
no child under 11 needs to cross a main road to get to school) in the doctor’s 
surgery and at the local shops. These contacts can build a sense of community, 
as I witness daily from my kitchen window which looks out on a primary school.

When the new towns were designated in the 1940s we were a country that 
was almost bankrupt after an expensive war and the withdrawal of aid from the 
US. Surely it is not beyond us to do something similar to meet the crisis in 
housing that exists today?
Gillian Pitt
Crawley, West Sussex

• Citing the great urbanist Jane Jacobs as an inspiration for new settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/05/grand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village>
 is well wide of the mark. She regarded the garden city brigade as having 
“city-destroying ideals” and dismissed both them and the modern movement as 
“decentrists”. So where should we start with “the necessary acreage and a 
serviceable budget”? By tackling existing cities, especially those with 
economic problems, and making them better.

You’re right, of course, that a key garden city concept was vast acres of 
pointless roadside landscaping, ecologically worthless and highly wasteful of 
scarce building land. We can make far better use of it with modest increases in 
density, as our Victorian forebears taught us. Squandering scarce farmland on 
outmoded garden suburb dreams is destructive as well as pointless. The 
ultra-low densities of the garden city movement left us fatally dependent on 
cars, with high greenhouse gas emissions an inevitable follow-on. The bullet we 
need to bite is not building destructive new settlements but moving economic 
activity to where the people are, in sustainable, compact towns and cities.
Jon Reeds
Smart Growth UK 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 