
New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> Rugby will 
introduce random out-of-competition testing for recreational drugs from next 
season, not only for players but for coaches and administrators too.

The testing regime was agreed on Wednesday as part of a collective agreement 
between NZR and the New Zealand Rugby Players Association. Players have 
previously been tested only on game days but the agreement will mean all 
players and others involved in New Zealand’s top competitions being subject to 
random testing.

Battle for the soul of New Zealand rugby after its year of off-field shame | 
Eleanor Ainge Roy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/new-zealand-rugby-year-of-sex-violence>
The NZRPA chief executive, Rob Nichol, said no sanctions had been agreed, even 
for repeat offenders, because the purpose was to provide support and treatment. 
“It’s not about catching and sanctioning,” Nichol said. “If someone is 
struggling in this particular area, either through a positive test or putting 
their hand up or other information that brings a problem to light, then it’s 
about support and rehabilitation.

“And provided individuals who are in that situation embrace that opportunity 
to get things sorted, they’ll be given a lot of support to sort it out.”

The All Blacks coach, Steve Hansen, believes England can successfully defend 
their Six Nations title and break New Zealand’s top-tier record 18-match 
winning streak.

England have extended their run of consecutive victories to 14, four shy of 
the record the All Blacks set before adefeat to Ireland in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 last month.

“They’ve got games against Italy and you’d expect them to beat Italy and I’d 
expect them to beat Scotland so they’ve then got the Irish game, the French 
game and the Welsh game,” Hansen said. “They’ll be toughies but we know they’re 
capable of beating them. They went through last year undefeated so it’s there 
for them to have a crack at.”

England begin the defence of the Six Nations title against France at 
Twickenham on 4 February, before playing Wales (11 February), Italy (26 
February), Scotland (11 March) and Ireland (18 March). A second successive 
grand slam triumph would extend their winning run to 19 internationals.

New Zealand Rugby has agreed a pay rise for its player, boosting the player 
payment pool by NZ$70m (£40m) from $120m (£68m) to $190m (£108m) over the next 
three years. The New Zealand captain, Kieran Read, is likely to become the 
first All Black to earn more than NZ$1m (US$720,000) per season in salary. The 
latest pay increases reflect NZR’s determination to compete with lucrative 
offers from Europe where clubs are competing for All Black signatures.

“We’re in a position where we can offer considerably more for those players 
than the equivalent point four or five years ago and that’s making life a lot 
easier for us at that level. But there are still challenges and one or two of 
those players may still go,” said the NZR contracts manager, Chris Lendrum.
 