
The challengers

There has been some slightly giddy talk about Newcastle United being possibly 
the best team ever to play at this level. It is worth pointing out they have 
the same points total and have lost two more games at this stage than the 
Newcastle side who last played in the Championship, in 2009-10: Chris Hughton’s 
trophy cabinet may not beas loaded as Rafael Benítez’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/31/newcastle-united-rafa-benitez-promotion-extremadura-tenerife-championship>
 but this iteration still has to go some to beat the 102 points accrued seven 
seasons ago.

That said, as the halfway stage approaches, Newcastle are exactly where 
everyone thought they would be, imperious, top of the league and the best team 
in the division. A little closer to them than expected are Hughton’s current 
side,Brighton & Hove Albion. Unlike Newcastle, who underwent a significant 
overhaul in the summer, Brighton’s success has been down to careful evolution, 
a couple of judicious additions improving an already excellent team. Shane 
Duffy has shaken off hisearly-season calamities with Blackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/17/shane-duffy-blackburn-cardiff-qpr-barnsley-championship>
 to strengthen their defence, Glenn Murray could be the canniest striker in the 
division (“more goals” was Hughton’s pithy response to what he brought the 
team) while the return of the fizzing winger Solly March from injury could be 
crucial.

Steve McClaren hopes to banish ‘baggage’ on Derby County return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/steve-mcclaren-derby-county-return-lucky>
Derby County are a good way back from the top two but are still perhaps the 
most interesting team, as they have been for some time. Steve McClaren has lost 
only one game since returning to Pride Park, and they have gone from the 
relegation zone in September to the edge of the play-offs at Christmas. Given 
Derby’s talent for finding new and interesting ways to miss promotion in the 
past few years, one should probably reserve judgment, but it would not be a 
surprise to see them challenge at the top pretty soon.

The rest of the sides in the play-off places are even more difficult to 
predict. At least three of the top six are pretty big surprises, withReading, 
Leeds United and Huddersfield Town exceeding expectations, under managers who 
have found solutions to long-standing problems. Jaap Stam’s first job in 
management is going better than most could have hoped, as his reputation as a 
manager in Holland was not great; Garry Monk seems finally to be making sense of
Massimo Cellino’s Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/leeds-owner-massimo-cellino-banned-18-months>
; David Wagner is doing so well at Huddersfield he reportedly turned down 
Wolfsburg. Carlos Carvalhal has been atSheffield Wednesday a little longer, but 
while his side are not as fluent as they were last season, they are back in the 
top six and could well stick around. The question for this quartet is whether 
any or all have the requisite staying power.

Middle of the road

The middle of the Championship is always more crowded than a Christmas 
shopping street. In a division of teams who all think they can get promoted, 
many with some justification, anyone who can sniff the play-offs will think 
they are in with a chance. Of the chasing pack, the most intriguing are surely
Birmingham City, who dismissed the impressive Gary Rowett for rather spurious 
reasons, replacing him with the affable butnot entirely convincing Gianfranco 
Zola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/gianfranco-zola-birmingham-city>
. The word is the club’s new owners, Trillion Trophy Asia, have money to spend 
next month: thanks to Rowett, Zola has plenty to build on, but he is under 
pressure to prove their controversial decision correct.

Just below them in the table sit Norwich City, who having kept hold of the 
majority of players they had wanted to stay after relegation, looked in good 
shape to spring straight back into the Premier League. But after seven defeats 
in the last nine dropped them from top to 10th, the Norfolk natives are 
restless, many turning on the manager, Alex Neil, during their last game, a 2-1 
home defeat to Huddersfield. Neil, who does a fine job fronting up, admitting 
his and their failings, could nevertheless be on borrowed time, and if he goes 
then Rowett would seem a ready replacement. If the football gods have a sense 
of humour, Rowett leading Norwich to a play-off final against Birmingham would 
raise a smile.

An outside bet for promotion might be Fulham. Despite losing 36 goals with the 
summer departures of Ross McCormack and Moussa Dembélé, plus the manager, 
Slavisa Jokanovic, speaking out in dissatisfaction about some of the club’s 
scouting practices earlier in the season, they are lurking just outside the top 
six, having picked up some impressive results.

Of the others within striking distance of the play-offs, Preston North End are 
probably too inconsistent,Barnsley impressive and absurdly young but would be 
happy with mid-table given they were at the bottom of League One a year ago, 
and then there areAston Villa. Steve Bruce has certainly improved the 
draw-happy side who got Roberto Di Matteo sacked, but they have won consecutive 
games only once in his time at Villa Park. The much-commented on healthy glow 
that came from a summer off has faded and while Bruce is getting a tune out of 
Jack Grealish, and Jonathan Kodjia has been scoring, he has yet to make them 
the sum of their parts. That may come in time but with plenty of traffic ahead, 
reaching the play-offs may still be ambitious.

Struggling

Below Villa there is a no man’s land of teams probably too competent to go 
down but with not quite the chops to go up.Brentford could be capable of more 
but will always be a team who struggle with the restrictions of their slender 
means, plus they rely too heavily on Scott Hogan: he has 13 goals for the 
season, no one else has more than three.Ipswich Town’s time with Mick McCarthy 
has looked up at several points this season, and getting them to the brink of 
promotion a couple of seasons ago on a shoestring increasingly looks like an 
outlier. Their saving grace is a group of promising youngsters such as Teddy 
Bishop (who, curiously, keeps breaking his nose) and Andre Dozzell, but the 
best they can probably hope for is mid-table.

Ian Holloway eyes Premier League comeback for QPR’s traditional support | Alan 
Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/ian-holloway-qpr-returning-manager-loftus-road>
Bristol City’s season has been profoundly odd, starting in flying fashion as 
they cut swathes through the division but since early October they have won 
only twice, a spell that, in possibly related news, coincides with Tammy 
Abraham’s goals drying up. The Chelsea loanee scored eight in his first 11 
appearances but two in the past 11.

Below them sit a trio of sides with a talent for drama, and not in a good way. 
The annexing ofWolverhampton Wanderers by Fosun International, a Chinese 
consortium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/wolves-takeover-sale-chinese-group-fosun-international>
 with ties to Cristiano Ronaldo and José Mourinho’s guiding hand, Jorge Mendes, 
has not gone entirely to plan. They are already on their second manager of the 
season after the Walter Zenga experiment failed. His replacement, Paul Lambert, 
has been broadly positive about their performances but results have been 
patchy, if improving a little.

Nottingham Forest are the team for entertainment, having both the second-best 
attack and second-worst defence in the division. Despite a recent burst of 
three wins in a row, they are looking over their shoulders at the relegation 
zone. An impending takeover may stabilise things but predictability has never 
been their forte. SimilarlyQPR, whose decision to replace Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink with Ian Holloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/ian-holloway-qpr-returning-manager-loftus-road>
 has thus far failed flamboyantly: after an opening win over Norwich, they have 
lost their last five games and are sliding in the direction of the abyss.

What could save them is the woe of others. Neil Warnock will probably get 
Cardiff City out of trouble, even if results have not been spectacular so far, 
because that is what Warnock always does.Burton Albion were always going to 
struggle, as wereWigan Athletic, whose form has been dismal of late. Blackburn 
Rovers’ decision to appoint Owen Coyle, given a group of Rovers fans organised 
a petition demanding his sacking on the day he was hired, is going as well as 
you may expect.Rotherham United, who only escaped last season thanks to 
Warnock’s brand of muck-and-nettles magic, are 12 points adrift and look doomed 
after a couple of seasons on the brink.
 