
Plans to saddle newspapers with the cost of legal disputes regardless of fault 
are “wrong in principle” and could play into the hands of ambulance-chasing 
lawyers, the head of a parliamentary committee has said.

Damian Collins, chairman of the culture, media and sport committee, said the 
proposals should not be implemented as they risked harming freedom of the press 
– and thus democracy – while filling solicitors’ coffers.


The Conservative MP said press regulation was an important issue, but the 
greatest threat to the media’s credibility came from the rise of “fake news” on 
social media and elsewhere, rather than from newspapers.

In an article for the Daily Telegraph, he argued against the activation of 
section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act. Should the clause be introduced, judges 
in libel and privacy cases would have the power to order publications to pay a 
plaintiff’s legal costs, win or lose. A government consultation on the issue 
ends on Tuesday.

“It is hard to think of any other area of law where such a provision would be 
allowed,” Collins said. “Some have said that the risk of heavy costs being 
awarded against the newspapers is not as great as some fear. But I believe it 
is wrong in principle, and once established could create a new industry of 
ambulance-chasing lawyers encouraging people to hire them on no-win, no-fee 
terms to take up complaints against the press. These lawyers could set high 
fees and know that there would be a good chance of getting paid even if they 
lost the case.”


Collins said the ability of the press to hold those in power to account was 
“one of the cornerstones of our democracy”, and warned that the changes would 
have a chilling effect.

“The consequence would be to drive many newspapers out of business and to 
threaten the kind of investigative journalism that we so greatly value. Editors 
would understandably be concerned about the financial risk of causing 
embarrassment, even when they have a duty to report the truth,” he said.

Section 40 forms part of a range of reforms proposed by Sir Brian Leveson 
after his inquiry into the culture and practices of the press in the wake of 
the phone-hacking scandal. Any newspapers that do not sign up to a recognised 
regulator would be vulnerable to the costs provision, which has been enacted by 
parliament but requires the approval of the culture secretary, Karen Bradley.

She has said she wants to maintain a free press while giving victims of 
intrusion access to “cheap justice”. However, the law is seen by some as a 
blunt instrument designed to force newspapers to sign up to a regulator backed 
by royal charter, which MPs have the power to change.

Following the publication of Leveson’s report, a new regulator was created, 
the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), which has the power to 
adjudicate against newspapers and issue fines of up to £1m.


Collins said the press had made “substantial progress” in reforming how it 
governed itself. However, he said the public needed to be made more aware of 
the existence ofIpso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> and the watchdog 
should roll out a low-cost means of arbitration.

Four years on from the Leveson report, the growing number of “fake news” 
reports online that spread misinformation and propaganda should be the focus 
for media monitors, the MP said.

“Press regulation is an important issue. But the greatest threat to the 
credibility of the media no longer emanates from newspapers. Instead it comes 
via the internet, where ‘fake news’ spreads without regulation through social 
media platforms and numerous other channels. That should be a greater concern 
for us now.”
 