
Welcome to what the NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> calls the 
divisional round of the playoffs, where four teams that won a wildcard playoff 
game hit the road to tangle with a team that posted a better record during the 
regular season and thereby got a weekend off. Decks appear stacked.

Odell Beckham Jr's real mistake was not making himself invisible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/10/odell-beckham-jr-yacht-trip-nfl-playoffs>
Las Vegas has made the home team the favorite in all four games, but if form 
generally holds, one of the four visiting teams will win this weekend. Since 
the current 12-team playoff format was launched in 1990, home teams have won 77 
of 104 divisional-round games.

Between 2001 and 2010, there was a bounty (relatively speaking) of 15 
divisional-round upsets. In 2008, three of four visiting teams won second-round 
games: Eagles over Giants, Cardinals over Panthers and Ravens over Titans.

The 2010 divisional round included two upsets: Packers over Falcons, with 
Green Bay going on to beat Pittsburgh in Super Bowl XLV, and Jets over 
Patriots, after which Bart Scott, the linebacker who is now a CBS-TV 
commentator, stood on the frozen field in Foxborough and famously ended an 
interview by exclaiming: “Can’t wait!”

(The Jets lost the following week to the Steelers in Pittsburgh, 24-19.)

The Patriots have reeled off five straight divisional-round victories at home 
since that game, and are two-touchdown-plus favorites to knock off theHouston 
Texans <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/houston-texans> this weekend. Of the 
other three underdogs, the Steelers, who play the Chiefs, probably have the 
best chance.

 But those chances appear to be dwindling again for the visitors in this 
round. All four home teams won in this round last season, capping a five-year 
run in which four visiting teams went on to the next round. In the first five 
years of this format, the visitors won only two of 20 games.

There would seem to be a simple solution to perhaps level the playing field 
and create more divisional-round parity: add four more playoff qualifiers, two 
per conference, and eliminate the wildcard-round byes for the top four teams. 
Make them work just as hard for it.

Four more first-round games would lead to even more money for the 
already-loaded NFL, although first-round games between the Patriots (14-2) and 
Broncos (9-7) and between the Cowboys (13-3) and Washington (8-7-1) hardly 
sound like riveting television.

The NFL appears to have an issue with division champions receiving either a 
bye or a home game in the first round. Houston (9-7) and Green Bay (10-6) 
played at home last weekend against wildcard opponents with better records – 
Oakland (12-4) and the Giants (11-5) – and won, perhaps as a result of 
home-field advantage.

But the divisional format, as is, actually appears to work. It is possible for 
visitors to win on the second weekend of the playoffs. Since the NFL went to an 
eight-division format in 2002, six wildcard teams have won three playoff games 
to capture the Super Bowl, most recently Baltimore in 2012. The Giants have won 
two Super Bowls this way.

Three teams have won Super Bowls since 2002 by capturing three playoff 
victories away from home: Pittsburgh in 2005, the Giants in 2007 and Green Bay 
in 2010. That did not happen at all between the implementation of the wildcard 
system in 1970 and 2001. Green Bay even trounced Atlanta, 48-21, in its 
divisional-round playoff game in 2010.

Eight first-round playoff games would clutter TV, kind of like the endless and 
growing series of college bowl games. Two playoff games each on Saturday and 
Sunday for the first two weeks of the playoffs provide separate and exclusive 
stages.

Playoff games do tend to trudge along. Of the four wildcard-round games last 
weekend, only Seattle’s 26-6 rout of Detroit was completed in less than 3 hours 
10 minutes. Last year’s four divisional-round games were completed in an 
average of 3:14, and only one went overtime.

But teams have an incentive to win in the late season to ensure a first-round 
bye. Howie Roseman, the Philadelphia Eagles general manager, talked last week 
about wanting to build his 7-9 team into a team good enough to earn a bye, 
which he called a “huge edge.”

An NFL season has become such a war of attrition that teams want to get a bye 
even though it might mean they lose some of their edge, especially when facing 
a team that has won the week before.

“I think just some weeks it’s about prioritization,” New England quarterback 
Tom Brady said last week, an idle week for the Patriots. “I’d like to do 
everything all the time, but sometimes that’s not possible … Practice is pretty 
demanding. Our practices certainly are, so sometimes if you practice it might 
set you back a little more than you would want.

“But everyone is dealing with different things, and I think as a player you 
just have to try to be smart. You obviously want to practice because you want 
to be prepared to play, but sometimes if you overdo it, you’re not feeling as 
good as you want to on Sunday when you are playing. I think after 17 years I’ve 
got a pretty good balance for those things. I’m the type of person who likes to 
practice a lot. I’ve also been around long enough to know you’ve got to be 
smart, too, so it’s just trying to find that right balance.”

Super Bowl LI, scheduled to be played 5 February in Houston, now looms as a 
matchup between Brady and the Pats and the resurgentDallas Cowboys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dallas-cowboys> and rookie quarterback Dak 
Prescott. With victories this week, both teams would play at home next week in 
conference championship games. Home teams have won about two of every three 
conference-title games.

But first comes the divisional round, a game that looks like a romp at first 
but could turn treacherous. If all four home teams win, it would mark the first 
time that has happened two years in a row since way back in 1990 and 1991. So 
don’t count on it.
 