
On Wednesday the NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> finally pushed 
their most divisive medical expert out the door. The question is: why did it 
take so long?

Elliot Pellman has long been a strange presence around the league. Once a team 
doctor for the New York Jets, he managed to make himself a key advisor for 
professional sports leagues including the NFL and Major League Baseball. Back 
in 2005, baseball rolled him out as an expert on steroids policy when congress 
began looking at performance-enhancing drugs. A few years later, the NFL made 
him their leading voice as links between the game and long-term head trauma 
were made. The only problem with this was that Pellman was a rheumatologist who 
went to medical school in Mexico despiteclaims in his biography 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/30/sports/baseball/medical-adviser-for-baseball-lists-exaggerated-credentials.html?login=email&_r=0>
 that he was educated in New York.

Pellman may have been a fine rheumatologist, just as he could have been an 
excellent advisor to football and baseball teams. Obviously, some very 
influential people put their trust in him. But his presence in the steroid 
hearings raised eyebrows and his constant appearances on behalf of the NFL 
questioning the growing evidence of football-related CTE made him both he and 
the league look tone deaf. In the face of brain experts armed with studies that 
at least suggested a strong link between football and brain trauma, the NFL’s 
continued reliance upon his advice was startling.

He became something of a punchline for the league as it battled lawsuits from 
former players convinced the game had damaged their brains. Why was the most 
lucrative sports league in the world still taking advice on complicated matters 
from a man trained in the treatment of gout and arthritis at a school in 
Guadalajara? The league’s vast wealth could have bought them the advice of 
countless experts in brain research, educating them on the effects of 
concussions and general hits in football practices. So how was it that Pellman 
was still around?

Perhaps it is fitting that on the day a poll was released 
<https://www.uml.edu/docs/CPOR-Concussion-HIGHLIGHTS_tcm18-248453.pdf> saying 
that 85% of the US believes that football causes the potentially debilitating 
brain condition CTE, the league announced that Pellman was gone. USA Today 
reported that NFL commissioner Roger Goodell had shoved Pellman out the door. 
The league has had several public-relations blemishes in recent years including 
the endless Deflategate saga, the Ray Rice domestic violence case, the Saints 
bounty-gate fiasco and their constant battles against doctors who insist the 
game is responsible for CTE in former players. Pellman’s name on traumatic 
brain injury committees and his face on television interviews only made the 
league appear hopelessly out of touch. Calls for his dismissal have been coming 
for years.

It seemed Pellman wouldn’t have survived last fall’s release of the movie 
Concussion in which he was played by the actor Paul Reiser. If his name had 
disappeared from general conversation before the movie hit theaters, it burst 
out again, raising, once more, the question of why he was still a part of the 
NFL.

In a way, Pellman represented an old NFL, one that is slowly disappearing from 
a more modern league office. Despite its wealth and power, the NFL has until 
very recently been an old fashioned place where many of the teams were owned by 
generations of the same family. When teams needed medical advice they relied on 
who they were comfortable with, regardless of expertise. This has started to 
change in the last 10 years. Teams and players want the best doctors and demand 
specialists. No longer is the word of a doctor kept around for decades by the 
team owner good enough for both coaches and players. Science has demanded 
better care.

The NFL says it will hire a new doctor soon. Chances are it will be someone 
from outside the league, someone with a name and credentials that won’t make 
the league look careless. It won’t just be a guy who knew a couple of guys in 
the league office and looked professional enough in a white coat. Those days 
are over.
 