
“We’ve been in a strange place,” says Nick Cave, three songs into the first 
concert on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/26/nick-cave-and-the-bad-seeds-announce-january-tour-dates-for-skeleton-tree>
the Bad Seeds’ world tour of Skeleton Tree. “We haven’t played for a long time 
and it feels like suddenly I’m coming out and blinking into the light.”

The lights he blinks into currently are swivelling around the rather dated 
dome that is the Derwent Entertainment Centre, a venue in Hobart’s outskirts 
that is underused because, according to a mournful local, “we don’t get many 
big bands down here.”

There is a lot of pain to read between the lines of Cave’s words. Everyone 
here knows at least part of the story: the losshe and his wife, Susie Bick, 
experienced in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/10/nick-caves-son-died-from-fall-after-taking-lsd-inquest-hears>
 when their teenage son died, and how last year’s album Skeleton Tree channeled 
his grief in the aftermath. The empathy of fans was further intensified by 
Andrew Dominik’s “making of” documentary,One More Time With Feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/nick-cave-doc-director-andrew-dominik-he-hated-a-third-of-my-movie>
.

Related: Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds: Skeleton Tree review – brilliant music 
on the verge of collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/nick-cave-and-the-bad-seeds-skeleton-tree-review-brilliant-music-on-the-verge-of-collapse>

Still, what to expect of a concert showcasing an album described by one writer 
as 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/19/nick-cave-one-more-time-with-feeling-skeleton-tree-and-the-power-and-language-of-grief>
 “a requiem mass winging its way out of Cave’s unconscious”? There was a chance 
this show could have been in a Don’t Look Back format in which Skeleton Tree 
would be presented in its entirety, followed or preceded by a set of older 
songs. The new album was too bleak and hymn-like to suffer the interjections of 
songs from a 30-year back-catalogue. Moreover, was there any purpose in 
interrupting Skeleton Tree’s existential ruminations? To lighten the mood? To 
allow us to move and sing and enjoy the bittersweet bliss of our favourite old 
song? To experience an uninterrupted live rendition of Skeleton Tree may help 
to shoulder some of its pain.

That doesn’t happen. The Bad Seeds start with Jesus Alone, then time-travel 
immediately back to 1985 to play Tupelo from The Firstborn Is Dead followed by 
1994’s Red Right Hand. The songs remind us how bracing the Bad Seeds are, live, 
when they escalate from brooding backing band to electrifying din, and back 
again, in an instant.

The songs continue to jump between old and new but as the night goes on, a 
logic becomes apparent. Cave draws energy from the older songs, which he then 
drains out into tracks from Skeleton Tree. He favours Warren Ellis’s side of 
the stage where he reaches into a huddle of outstretched arms to shine the full 
beam of his charisma down upon them. I’m not there, but I’m not far off either; 
I can feel his charm radiating outwards. It is a treat, too, to see Ellis 
wringing out his customary wails and walls of sound on a violin and guitar.

The new songs are introduced by Cave with trepidation. “We’re going to try a 
trio now,” Cave says before they play Girl In Amber, Anthrocene and Magneto. 
Before he plays I Need You he says: “We’re going to give this one a go.”

His hesitation is touching but unwarranted. The new songs are delivered with 
their dark magic intact and the Bad Seeds harmonise with the delicacy of a 
schoolboy choir. The only disappointments are that Anthrocene is stripped of 
its waves of nervous percussion and Danish soprano Else Torp is present on 
Distant Sky only as a giant projection. With eight male Bad Seeds onstage, it 
is a shame she could not be shipped to the antipodes too, or perhaps replaced 
with an Australian singer.

The show is not without its first-show-on-the-tour faltering. The visuals are 
inconsistent, there are gear failures and Cave truncates, and restarts, two 
songs. “Hang on, hang on,” he says when Into My Arms is not proceeding as 
planned. “This is too soft. It’s just a big fucking mess up here.”

At other times he is wickedly funny; irreverent to the core. “Warren,” he 
whines theatrically, after getting bored bantering to a woman near the front 
row. “Start the fucking song!”

The show is an emotional rollercoaster – but the moods are erratic in a way 
that feels fitting.
 