
Nicola Sturgeon warned that she was prepared to stage a second Scottish 
independence <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> 
referendum before the UK quits the European Union as she attacked the Tories 
for their “xenophobic” rhetoric on the EU.

In a clear challenge to Theresa May’s government in London, the first minister 
told the Scottish National party conference in Glasgow she would unveil draft 
legislation next week to prepare for a rerun of the 2014 referendum within the 
next two years.

Sturgeon said the UK government’s recent rhetoric on capping immigration and 
on quitting the EU single market made it clear that the Tory party had been 
taken over by its “rampant and xenophobic” right wing. To applause from 
delegates, Sturgeon singled out the prime minister and declared: “Hear this: if 
you think for one single second that I’m not serious about doing what it takes 
to protect Scotland’s interests, then think again.”

Nicola Sturgeon to publish new independence referendum bill for Scotland - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/13/boris-johnson-brexit-foreign-affairs-committee-quizzed-by-mps-over-brexit-as-pound-falls-again-politics-live>
Her official spokesman cautioned that this was designed to give the Scottish 
government the full range of options. Sturgeon had a dual-track strategy and 
her immediate goal was to get the strongest powers possible for Holyrood in the 
Brexit deal.

Sturgeon said a decision on triggering a second referendum was dependent on 
the strength of the new powers that would pass to Holyrood after Brexit, 
including powers that the Tories are unlikely to offer, on allowing separate 
policies on immigration and foreign affairs.

“It’s clear that beyond hardline rhetoric, the UK government has no detailed 
plan. So the Scottish government will set out a plan forScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>,” she said. “It will require 
substantial additional powers for the Scottish parliament.”

But Sturgeon simultaneously stepped up her anti-Brexit rhetoric by confirming 
that the SNP at Westminster would work with other opposition parties and pro-EU 
Tory MPs to vote against the government bill to enable Brexit to take place, 
regardless of how significant Holyrood’s new powers became.

The SNP has gone back to old politics. IdeaSpace is the antidote | Robin 
McAlpine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/snp-old-politics-ideaspace-independence-vote>
A UK government source said that strategy was “bizarre” because the Brexit 
bill was designed to protect Holyrood’s existing powers by embedding all 
existing EU legislation into UK law. It may also weaken Sturgeon’s hand in 
future Brexit talks: negotiations are due to start in late October, when the 
prime minister meets Sturgeon and the leaders of the Welsh and Northern Irish 
governments to agree on joint plans to prepare for Brexit.

“There are serious contradictions” in Sturgeon’s two-pronged strategy, the 
Cabinet source said. It was also premature to threaten a second vote: the UK 
would be seeking a unique deal with the EU which could meet many of Sturgeon’s 
conditions, he said.


But Sturgeon’s advisers say that speeding up the referendum bill process 
highlights an increasingly significant political divide between the Scottish 
and UK governments, showing Sturgeon’s increasing confidence that the Tory 
shift to a harder line on Brexit has strengthened her hand.

Sturgeon faces substantial obstacles to staging a second independence vote 
before the UK leaves the EU in March 2019. Scottish voters are still not 
convinced of the case for a fast second referendum, and Holyrood requires 
Westminster’s legal authority to stage one.

The latest poll, by BMG, published on Thursday by the Herald, found that there 
is no popular majority in favour of a second referendum. It found that only 12% 
of those voters who do not want independence would switch to support leaving 
the UK if there were a hard Brexit. It found 47% were against a new 
independence vote, 38% in favour and 12% undecided.

The economics of Scottish independence are still extremely difficult: the 
latest GDP data showed Scotland’s economy still growing at a third of the pace 
of the UK’s as a whole, and government data showed a £15bn Scottish spending 
deficit last year – 21% of all government spending in Scotland.

Opposition leaders said Sturgeon could have offered a far more constructive 
vision for reform of Scottish domestic policies but instead had increased the 
divisions and conflicts with the rest of the UK.

Sturgeon made clear that she planned to set out new policies in her main 
conference address on Saturday, but Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, 
responded: “Her comments show she has given up on speaking for Scotland and is 
now solely playing to the SNP gallery. This isn’t the action of a first 
minister of Scotland, but an SNP fundamentalist who puts independence first, 
last and always.”

While the SNP does not have an overall majority in Holyrood, with 62 of 129 
MSPs, the six Scottish Green MSPs could be expected to back a second 
referendum, giving Sturgeon a narrow majority.

Scotland could gain greater independence via Brexit, Holyrood told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/scotland-gain-greater-independence-brexit-holyrood-told>
Ian Murray, Scottish Labour’s only MP, said Labour in Westminster would not 
oppose measures to allow Holyrood to stage a new referendum if it was carried 
by a majority of MSPs because that would fuel Scottish resentment. However, 
Murray said it was extremely risky for Sturgeon to discuss staging a second 
referendum before the UK’s Brexit deal was agreed.

“Nobody quite knows what Brexit means, and to have a discussion on a second 
independence referendum is a dereliction of duty,” Murray said. “The country is 
completely divided [by Brexit]. We don’t need to see any more division layered 
on top of that.”

Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, said: “Nicola Sturgeon’s top 
priority is to divide our nation once again. But our country is already divided 
following the Tories’ reckless Brexit gamble and we should not be seeking 
further divisions. Our economy is in trouble, and the last thing we need is the 
uncertainty of another independence referendum.”

Responding to Sturgeon’s speech, Downing Street said the government would 
continue to engage with Sturgeon and the people of Scotland but would not 
support another referendum. “We believe this issue was addressed in 2014. We 
want to engage different stakeholders around the UK, but we will be delivering 
on the will of the British people, and that is to leave the EU,” a spokesperson 
for Theresa May said.


“The prime minister is approaching both the relationship between the four 
constituent parts of the United Kingdom and our relationship with theEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> as we leave in a constructive and 
engaged spirit that is focused on getting the best interests for the people of 
the UK.


“You only need to look at what she said when she took office on the steps of 
Downing Street about the importance of the union – the fact that her first 
visit she made out of Westminster was to see the first minister to let her know 
that we want to engage Scotland in this process and involve them in these 
consultations.” she added.

 