
The Indigenous affairs minister, Nigel Scullion, has defended the remote 
employment and welfare system aftera draft report found it to be causing “more 
harm than good”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/03/jobs-scheme-doing-more-harm-than-good-in-indigenous-communities>

The report by Jobs Australia, a peak body representing not-for-profit 
employment services, examined the federal Community Development Program (CDP) 
which operates mostly in remote Indigenous communities and pays unemployment 
benefits for “work-like activity”.

It found that the CDP, with 85% of participants Indigenous, had more onerous 
conditions and requirements than non-remote programs like Jobactive, and 
resulted in CDP participants being financially penalised about 70 times more 
often.

A spokesman for Scullion said the minister was unable to comment on a draft of 
a document he is yet to receive, but said he was “concerned at the use of 
anecdotal reports to criticise the outcomes of the Community Development 
Program.”

Greens urge government to revive Indigenous work program CDEP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/greens-urge-government-to-revive-indigenous-work-program-cdep>
He said the CDP had seen a fivefold increase in jobseekers “engaged in 
training or work-like activities”.

“The Turnbull government firmly believes that those who can work, should work 
which is why mutual obligation requirements are a key component of employment 
services,” he said.

“Mutual obligation requirements have been a feature of remote employment 
programs under a number of governments and analysis from the Department of the 
Prime Minister and Cabinet indicates the number of payments that have been 
breached represent less than 1% of the total welfare payments made to people 
not in work in remote communities.”

The CDP replaced the remote jobs and community program (RJCP), which had been 
criticised for a lack of accountability and for its low retention rate. About 
60% of participants dropped out and ended up on “passive welfare”,Scullion said 
last year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/03/remote-jobs-and-community-program-to-be-rebranded-due-to-unpopularity>

Under the CDP, participants must work five hours a day for five days a week, 
all year, but have access to six weeks leave and sick leave. Noncompliance 
results in penalties, including an eight-week ban on payments, something Jobs 
Australia said was causing harm to families and communities who were supported 
by people in the program.

The non-remote Jobactive program doesn’t require work for the dole until its 
second year, and only requires 15 hours a week from people over the age of 30.

The Jobs Australia chief executive, David Thompson, told Guardian Australia on 
Monday that requiring more hours from remote jobseekers was counterproductive 
and arguably discriminatory.

The board of directors of the Arnhem Land Progress Aboriginal Corporation 
(Alpa), which oversees 25 remote community stores and employs CDP participants, 
agreed.

“We believe the current model is broken and dysfunctional and needs urgent 
attention to get people re-engaged and funded to continue to build skills, 
capacity and jobs,” it said in a statement.

“We believe the CDP model is having a negative impact on remote Aboriginal 
people and is a strategy from government to either save money or keep Yolngu 
subjugated, or both.”

Liam Flanagan, community services manager with Alpa, said while the RJCP 
contained more latitude for people to take advantage of the system, the CDP was 
“considerably worse” than its predecessor.

Flanagan said the CDP’s compliance and administration measures were resource 
heavy to the detriment of the program, and the RJCP had a higher value on 
placing people in employment or training.

“The entire funding model on providers now is built around work-for-the-dole 
participation, so it’s become sort of the be all and end all for the Department 
of Prime Minister and Cabinet,” he said.

“That massive extra admin you have to pay people to do, which draws resources 
away from on the ground. It doesn’t drive anything other than the payment 
model. It doesn’t influence the participants or affect welfare.”

Flanagan said it was a big jump for unemployed people to go from zero work 
hours to 25 a week, and the strict reporting requirements triggered penalties 
and compliance assessments early on.

“That’s maybe not the best way to re-engage people, and bring about 
generational changes and an end to welfare dependency,” he said.

Flanagan said all five of Alpa’s member stores had reported a drop in food 
sales since the program began.

“People don’t really understand the program, then they’re having their money 
cut off ... that’s where we’re seeing this massive spike.”

Alpa data suggests a correlation between the increase in CDP penalties and 
declines in the sales of food (10%), meat (20%) and baby food (28%). Tobacco 
sales remained static, prompting concern that cigarettes were being prioritised 
with the reduced money.

Flanagan said the CDP was implemented with very little consultation with 
Indigenous communities or service providers and organisations.

Coalition to reveal plan to tackle welfare dependence across generations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/20/coalition-to-reveal-plan-to-tackle-welfare-dependence-across-generations>
The criticisms come as the federal government embarks on an overhaul of the 
welfare system. The $96m plan 
<http://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-20/government-new-welfare-investment-approach-risk-groups-targeted/7859432?pfmredir=sm>
 seeks to end intergenerational welfare and has called for ideas from state and 
territory governments, stakeholders and NGOs.


The government is considering rolling out trials of its cashless welfare card, 
which restricts spending on alcohol and gambling, to other sections of the 
population, including a specific card for unemployed teenagers,the Australian 
reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/welfare-card-could-replace-cash-for-jobless-teens/news-story/d398beb5bff996402639420bd812d9a1>
 on Tuesday.

A 12-month trial of the cashless card is under way in the South Australian 
town of Ceduna.

The proposal for teenagers is based on a New Zealand model. Bills would be 
paid directly out of welfare payments, with the remainder available on the 
restricted card aside from $50 for cash.

The social services minister, Christian Porter, said on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/qa-christian-porter-says-renewables-unlikely-to-blame-for-sa-blackout>
 government data had identified young people among the groups with the “worst 
outcomes” in terms of transitioning from welfare to employment.

“If a person is under 18 and ­already on welfare payments, the chances of them 
needing ­assistance to help manage their ­finances is likely to be high,” the 
human services minister, Alan Tudge, told the Australian.

“We will take a closer look at this model, but if it helps young people to get 
on top of their finances and get into work, then we should at least trial it 
here.”
 