
The former England captain Nigel Melville has been hired to replace the 
outgoing Rob Andrew in the most far-reachingRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> reshuffle for a 
decade. Andrew will leave Twickenham this summer after 10 eventful years, with 
his fellow Yorkshireman and former team-mate Melville taking over as the 
director of professional rugby.

Bristol hope for third time lucky despite Championship play-off torture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/bristol-championship-rugby-union-play-off>
Melville has been in charge of USA Rugby since 2007, having previously been 
Wasps’ first director of rugby at the dawn of the professional era. As well as 
assuming Andrew’s duties he will also plug the hole left by Joe Lydon’s recent 
departure as head of international player development. The Guardian understands 
a performance expert will also be recruited in the coming months to assist 
Melville with the job of converting England’s huge playing numbers into more 
consistent top-level success.

The RFU insists Andrew was not pushed but instigated discussions with his 
chief executive, Ian Ritchie, earlier this year with a view to departing the 
union. Some will argue the former had outstayed his welcome and was in effect 
sidelined some time ago but he did preside over a gradual improvement in the 
relationship between the clubs and the RFU. Either way it is somehow typical of 
English rugby that,having overseen a new eight-year agreement with the 
Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/rfu-premiership-rugby-england-player-agreement->
 poised to come into force this summer, Andrew is now moving on and leaving his 
successor with only limited scope to effect rapid change.

However, with England’s head coach, Eddie Jones, having made clear he merely 
wants to concentrate on sharpening up the national side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/eddie-jones-clubs-england-revolution-henry-slade>
, there was a clear need for more rugby nous inside Twickenham. In that respect 
the 55-year-old Melville fits the bill neatly, having represented England 13 
times and captained them on his debut against Australia in 1984. The erstwhile 
scrum-half also represented the British and Irish Lions in New Zealand in 1983. 
“I am hugely excited about this opportunity to join England Rugby in what is a 
very buoyant time,” he said. “This year already the men have claimed the grand 
slam, the domestic game has continued to thrive, the U20s are looking to win 
the Junior World Championship in Manchester and the men and women will compete 
in the sevens competition at the Olympics in Rio for the first time ever. I am 
looking forward to helping bring further success to England teams.”

Melville will not be Jones’s boss, with the Australian still reporting 
directly to Ritchie. The structure, even so, now has more clarity to it, 
Andrew’s role at the RFU having undergone a number of different incarnations. 
Since arriving from Newcastle Falcons in 2006 as director of elite rugby he 
became operations director and then professional rugby director, eventually 
outlasting four England head coaches.

Judgment Day offers glimmer of light for struggling Welsh regions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/judgement-day-welsh-regions-pro-12-rugby-union>
“After 10 years at the RFU and with the impending conclusion of the second 
heads of agreement, it feels like the right time to step down at the end of the 
season,” said Andrew, who has latterly been overseeing the regional academies, 
coaching development, referees, rugby operations and the Championship.

“My role has primarily been to set up a structure that would ultimately 
deliver long-term success to England through a pipeline of talented players 
coming through the academy system. The pipeline is going from strength to 
strength and I believe will deliver Eddie Jones and his coaches the world-class 
players England need to ensure increasing success.”

Ritchie paid tribute to Andrew, suggesting the former fly-half had brought 
about “a great deal of positive change” within English professional rugby. “Rob 
was the architect of this structural legacy and should be justifiably proud of 
his achievements,” he added. As a player Andrew won 71 caps for England and 
played five Tests for the Lions. As a director of rugby he guided Newcastle 
Falcons to the Premiership in 1998 as well as two knock-out Cup trophies.
 