
Last week it was revealed that Nottinghamshire police has labelled misogyny a 
hate crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/13/nottinghamshire-police-count-wolf-whistling-hate-crime>
. And yet nothing anyone has ever said to me in my capacity as “woman” has ever 
come close to what comes my way in my capacity as “wheelchair user”.

David Isaac: ‘Disabled people face huge barriers’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/06/david-isaac-head-ehrc-disabled-people-barriers-raise-profile>
Whether amusing or downright offensive, people seem to say most of these 
inappropriate things with the best of intentions, which suggests that they just 
need a point in the right direction. So without further ado, here’s the top 
nine things never to do or say to a wheelchair user.

1. “Don’t run me over”

This one inevitably comes from a slightly ageing man (sorry but it’s true) and 
is accompanied by a theatrical step out of the way or, worse, a dramatic 
flattening against the wall. The logic here is faulty: by saying such a 
skin-crawlingly annoying thing, you only tempt us to run you over. Imagine if 
people repeatedly told you not to walk into them just because, say, you had 
brown hair. Let me assure you that using a wheelchair has not, unfortunately in 
this case, increased my capacity to do you unwitting harm.

2. “Do you have a licence to drive that thing?”

Similar to the above, only the person assumes they’re being more original. 
They’re not. It not only betrays a fundamental misunderstanding of social 
services – if you think they hand out thousands of pounds worth of kit without 
checking you can use it, I frankly envy your innocence – but also a 
misunderstanding of the capabilities of a wheelchair. Mine has a top speed of 
4mph, the speed of the average fast walk. Do you have a licence to use your 
legs?

3. “What happened to you then?”

There is no way to rationalise this one, it’s just rude. You’re asking someone 
to reveal the intimate history of something which might be quite traumatic and 
which affects their life in ways you probably can’t fathom. Sure, you may be 
curious, but what you’re actually asking me to do is explain and justify my 
disability. In case you’re wondering, the only acceptable way to ask about 
someone’s disability is to become friends with them (real friends, not just so 
you can get the low-down) and wait for them to mention it. That is it. If you 
are rude enough to ask, expect an unexpected answer: I like to go for the 
brutal truth and say “I was born”; a friend declares himself to have been hit 
by lightning.

4. Don’t assume we can’t read

This assumption rears its offensive head in restaurants. I can be chatting 
away with my family or friends, perhaps even reading them something from my 
phone (demonstrating an ability to, you know, read) and the person serving will 
hand out menus to everyone except me. It’s happened so often that my dad and I 
have perfected the response. He pointedly hands me his menu, which I study 
while he twiddles his thumbs. If we fancy, I offer to read it to him. 
Eventually, another menu is sheepishly brought over.

It may not seem as bad as actively saying something awful, but the issue here 
is that you’re making two separate, equally offensive assumptions: firstly, 
that a physical disability indicates a learning or intellectual one, and 
secondly, that either of the latter precludes a person from being able to read. 
I shouldn’t have to explain why this is wrong.

'There shouldn’t be spaces, like clubs, where you think we’re out of place. We 
belong anywhere just as much as you do'

5. “Nice to see people like you in a pub/club/the street”

Nice to see you too? If I’m being charitable, this one normally comes from the 
mouth of someone who has had one too many. Still, it’s quite an extraordinary 
thing to say, indicating that you don’t believe wheelchair users do anything 
with our lives. This could not be further from the truth. The other problem 
here is the belief that there are “people like” us; people with disabilities, 
even just wheelchair users, are not a homogenous group. There shouldn’t be 
spaces, like clubs, where you think we’re out of place. We belong anywhere just 
as much as you do.

6. “Well done for getting out and about”

This is very common, and usually leaves me silently screaming. I’m not even 
sure what it means; am I to be congratulated for living more than a housebound 
life? Is that the level of ambition society holds for wheelchair users? It’s 
profoundly patronising to assume that it’s an Everest-like challenge to leave 
the house, although of course for some it is incredibly hard. Even so, we are 
just getting on with the things that need to be done; you may think we’re 
brave, we think we need to do the food shopping.

7. “Is anyone with you? Why are you alone?”

We’re adults, just like you. To be constantly infantalised is both wearisome 
and irritating, not to mention insulting. We haven’t escaped from the “minder” 
you apparently believe we should have, and you’re not about to be called on to 
become our carer. Trust me when I tell you that we have a plan for how to do 
whatever it is we’re doing, and it is not up to you to judge our capacity for 
independence.

8. Don’t try to drive our chairs

Just as people believe that the presence of a wheelchair allows them to ask 
about intimate medical details, so they think they have a right to our 
autonomy. You would never sling a stranger over your shoulder and deposit them 
a few feet away, and yet many will move us out of their way or play with the 
joystick on a powerchair. Our chairs are our independence and autonomy, they do 
not exist for your amusement. Oh and also, able-bodied people are almost always 
terrible chair manoeuvrers – leave it to the experts.

9. “Come to my religious institution and be cured”

This one really makes me angry. Many wheelchair users will have spent huge 
amounts of time and effort in getting better, attending appointments and 
keeping as healthy as possible. Many will be desperately hoping for medical 
advances to help them. Using that as propaganda for your religious cause is 
vile. It also isn’t true. Besides, you shouldn’t assume that we want to be 
“cured” of anything. You are directly implying that there is something wrong 
with us, but there’s not. For me and many others, this is simply who we are, 
and we’re proud of our identities. Above all else, we do not need or want your 
pity.

Among all the ludicrous sayings though, every now and then someone – normally 
a child – comes out with something wonderful. A few months ago I encountered a 
little girl, possibly five or six, walking home from school. As I passed in my 
powerchair, I heard her pipe up, “But mummy, she’s not even old!” I chuckled 
all the way home.
 