
At this stage last year, Saracens destroyed Clermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/clermontauvergne> at Twickenham in a 
record-breaking advance to the final. It was a gruesome day for a proud rugby 
club. And it did not happen again. It was different here – the Stade Geoffroy 
Guichard being anything but the home of the game in England.

In the strange ways of deciding what is a semi-neutral semi, the game came 
here to the footballing city of Saint Etienne. It is rugby city now, made so by 
the impassioned 41,500 who came over the Massif Central from Clermont-Ferrand – 
from one industrial city to another. The Clermont faithful made this a 
desperately difficult place for a visiting team. The crowd was a factor; they 
were brilliant.

It was not the warmest April day Saint Etienne had ever seen before kick-off, 
but the yellow shirts of the crowd brightened up the spectacle and certainly 
made Clermont feel at home. The black-shirtedSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> were outnumbered, it seemed, a 
thousand to one in the stadium.

And then the sun did come out and on the thick, cropped grass of the football 
stadium, hosting a European rugby game for the first time, the scene was 
perfectly set for some sparkle on the playing side. At which point, Napolioni 
Nalaga dropped the first high pass that came his way. Jonathan Davies dropped 
another, that might have released him. The scene was set but the play was 
cloudy.

Clermont did heave one scrum on their own feed to earn a penalty, that became 
a kick to the corner, that became in turn a catch by Sébastien Vahaamahina and 
the first chance for the Clermont eight to build one of their driving mauls. 
Saracens kept that first compressed threat at bay, but when the ball went wide 
to Nalaga again, it seemed a try was inevitable. But the passing to the wing 
was laboured and Chris Ashton, without exactly overusing his arms in the 
tackle, battered him into touch.

In the battle of the England full-backs, between the self-exiled Nick 
Abendanon and Alex Goode, the current number two to Mike Brown, Goode was the 
more prominent, starting the counterattack that put Charlie Hodgson in position 
for a long drop goal, beautifully struck.

Brock James, who had missed a much shorter attempt at a drop goal, levelled 
the scores with a penalty. He was engaged in a compelling head-to-head of his 
own, pitting his wits – as opposed to Billy Vunipola’s contest with, well, the 
entire Clermont pack – against Hodgson. The fly-halves’ finesse against Billy’s 
forthrightness. There was a glimpse too of the talents of Maro Itoje, who made 
a catch and a run that left the industrious Julien Bardy parked in slightly 
undignified style on his rear.

Hodgson, who wisely stayed well clear of such confrontations, could not quite 
finesse over all the penalty opportunities he was given in a 12-minute period 
towards the end of the first half. In fact, he managed only the middle one, 
which left his side ahead 6-3 at half-time, but only by a slender margin. 
Sunshine rugby had yet to come out to play.

And it did not appear after the break. Thunder rugby struck, Clermont cranking 
up their forwards’ game and coming at Saracens with venom. Chouly led the 
charge, followed by Benjamin Kayser and Vincent Debaty. It was not subtle – or 
at least not at first, not until James dinked a little chip over the Saracens 
backs and Wesley Fofana followed up to score untouched. Clermont were in the 
lead for the first time. James converted and the missed penalties looked 
expensive. The game opened up, release on the field coinciding with the rush of 
replacements from the bench. Julien Bonnaire had a dash, as did Davies, looking 
the full part now in the yellow storm that was raging in the stands. There was 
an expectation, every time the ball went near Fofana that he would be able to 
do something extraordinary. He twisted and he turned but and he had had his 
moment for the try.

There was not going to be another try. But the crowd sensed – sniffed – 
victory. Their unique exuberance was hushed for a moment by Owen Farrell, on 
for Hodgson and on kicking duty. His penalty hit the flag on top of the posts 
and was good. Clermont led by just the one point, but it was point that could 
be defended through territorial dominance.

The storm rose. The rumble of full-on celebration began. Saracens were trying 
to play from a long way out. They tried to take the ball wide to Chris Ashton 
but defenders bore down on the wing, every tackle roared. From further and 
further back, Goode had to initiate counters, only for a wall to from in front 
of him.

It was warm. It was exhausting. But Clermont piled into their tackles to the 
very end. A proud club was erasing the memory of the humiliation of last year’s 
semi-final. Every tackle was a statement. Saracens did not release at a 
breakdown and up stepped man of the match James again to make the margin four 
points again.

Play remained resolutely in the Saracens half. The more yards Clermont gained 
and did not yield the more the crowd gave them a rising volume of support, and 
the faster the clock ran down for Saracens.

A forward pass gave a final set piece to Clermont and they began the ritual of 
feeding it and booting the ball off the park. They were on their way to the 
final. Not in sunshine style, but in a rip-roaring ear-splitting shower of 
sound, the bull-fight between stewards and handfuls of pitch-invading fans 
given the full roar way after the players had left the scene. Gone, to start 
making plans for the final.
 