
None of the former police officers under investigation for more than 170 
allegations of misconduct relating to the 1989Hillsborough disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> will face 
disciplinary proceedings because all have retired, the Independent Police 
Complaints Commission (IPCC) has said.


The complaints of misconduct are being investigated in addition to the 
potential criminal offences by 23 police officers, organisations and 
individuals which have led tofiles being sent to the Crown Prosecution Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/hillsborough-investigators-pass-23-cases-to-cps-for-possible-charges>
 (CPS) for consideration of charges.


Police officers can still be prosecuted for criminal offences after 
retirement, but not disciplined. That means none will face internal action over 
the 170 complaints, which include some of improper and callous behaviour by 
some officers on the day of the disaster – in which 96 people were killed at an 
FA Cup semi-final betweenLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> and Nottingham Forest – and 
subsequent alleged falsifying of witness statements.


Bereaved families have accused South Yorkshire police of having mounted a 
cover-up to avoid blame for the disaster, and having falsely blamed the lethal 
crush on the behaviour of Liverpool supporters. West Midlands police, who were 
brought in to investigate, have been accused of failing to act impartially and 
of colluding with the South Yorkshire force.

In April, the jury at new inquests into the disaster found that the 96 people 
were unlawfully killed due to a series of police and safety failings, and gross 
negligence manslaughter by the South Yorkshire police officer in command, Ch 
Supt David Duckenfield. The jury completely exonerated the Liverpool 
supporters, ruling that their behaviour in no way caused the dangerous 
situation at the football ground.

The IPCC’s deputy chair, Rachel Cerfontyne, said that because the most severe 
sanction from a misconduct charge was dismissal, officers could not be 
disciplined after they had retired.


She confirmed that all the officers against whom the complaints had been made, 
by relatives of those who died and others who attended the match and survived 
the lethal crush on the Leppings Lane terrace, had retired.

Trevor Hicks - the president of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, whose 
two teenage daughters, Sarah and Vicki, were among those unlawfully killed at 
the match – said he had always been appalled that police officers were 
protected from misconduct proceedings by retirement.


In 1991, Duckenfield avoided disciplinary charges by retiring on medical 
grounds, diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder. His deputy, Supt 
Bernard Murray, did not subsequently face action because South Yorkshire police 
argued it would be unfair for him to do so alone. No police officer, individual 
or organisation was prosecuted or disciplined for any offence relating to the 
deaths of the 96 people or alleged cover-up, leading to a 28-year campaign by 
families and survivors calling for justice and accountability.

“It is fundamentally wrong that police officers can escape scot-free, with 
pensions for life, when they have allegations of misconduct against them,” 
Hicks said. “Some junior South Yorkshire police officers did a fantastic job 
trying to help people on the day, and I have commended them, but the behaviour 
of some caused great distress to families.”

Becky Shah, who was 17 when her mother, Inger, died at Hillsborough, 
criticised the system as outrageous and said she and her brother Daniel, who 
was 13, remained traumatised by the conduct of some police officers.


She said her friend Stephen Oates, who was at the match with Inger Shah and 
had to identify her body at 2am, was then immediately asked offensive questions 
by South Yorkshire officers, including whether he was “shagging” her.


Daniel Shah, who was also at the match with his mother, was interviewed 
subsequently by West Midlands police officers, who asked him aggressive and 
intrusive questions about whether she drank alcohol and had boyfriends. Becky 
Shah said this had contributed to their trauma in the years since, and that the 
police officers should be held accountable.

 “We are still distressed by how the police behaved and have to live with it 
all our lives,” she said. “It is outrageous that police officers have impunity 
from very serious misconduct offences by retirement, and the law should be 
changed.”

Many survivors have complained of similar aggressive questioning by West 
Midlands police officers, and that the typed statements produced from their 
interviews did not properly reflect what they had said. A group of survivors 
have also alleged that South Yorkshire police falsified witness statements, 
including a claim that Liverpool supporters injured a police horse in the crush.

Cerfontyne said the IPCC continued to investigate the allegations, which 
investigators currently do not consider to be criminal matters, although they 
are being kept under review. The IPCC intends to conclude whether charges would 
have been brought if the officers were still serving, and include these 
findings in a final report on Hillsborough to be published following any 
potential prosecutions.
 