
Northampton denied that George North had been knocked out during Saturday’s 
19-11Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> defeat at 
Leicester. North crashed to the ground heavily after being tackled in the air 
by Adam Thompstone in the 17th minute, earning the Tigers player a yellow card, 
and television replays appeared to show the Wales winger unconscious.

North left the field for a head injury assessment, after a lengthy period of 
treatment, but reappeared five minutes later and finished the game. North has 
had problems with concussion in the past but theNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> director of rugby, Jim 
Mallinder, insisted he had not been knocked out on this occasion.

“I don’t make those decisions and our doctors and medical staff are really 
clear that if anyone gets knocked unconscious or has had a knock where they 
look like they are unconscious, they need to come straight off,” he said. “It’s 
as simple as that. You don’t go to be assessed – you are off straight away. 
George has had some previous issues so he took it steady.

Premiership roundup: Maro Itoje’s Saracens return ends in loss to Bath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/premiership-rugby-roundup-bath-saracens-maro-itoje>
“The doctor was very, very happy even as he walked off that he was just going 
to go for an assessment and thankfully he could come back on.

“Our doctor makes those decisions but there are protocols that go on with 
people looking at the incident.”

North later tweeted: “I am ok. I landed on my neck and was worried about it. 
Thanks to the medics for checking me out properly … I can’t help but feel I 
won’t be looking left or right for a few days.”

Meanwhile, Northampton issued a statement, saying: “George was attended to by 
the Northampton Saints medical team rapidly after landing on his side following 
a challenge in the air by Adam Thompstone. George was communicating immediately 
with attending medics and complaining of neck pain. Significant neck injury was 
excluded on the field but on review of video footage pitch side, the team 
followed World Rugby protocols and used a Head Injury Assessment given the 
potential mechanism for head injury. George was fully assessed by the doctor 
and passed fit to return to play.

“Northampton place the highest importance on player care and their safety is 
the club’s primary concern.”

The Saints’ fourth straight loss to Leicester left them struggling in 
mid‑table on 20 points – 11 behindLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, who reclaimed fourth spot 
a day after losing it to Exeter.

Mallinder said: “It was a mixed performance. There was a lot of effort and 
some good periods. Our set piece has been going well and our defence is good – 
we held them out for long periods. We had opportunities and when you are away 
from home you have to take them. We had a chance with a few minutes to go and 
got turned over.

“We have got two tough games coming up and we are looking forward to them. We 
competed, and we will certainly compete next week.”

Leicester, who led 10-0 and then 13-11 at half-time, won the second half 6-0 
thanks to penalties from Freddie Burns, who kicked 11 points, and Owen Williams 
in the final minute. They owed their win to the forwards, who pinned 
Northampton in their own 22 for long periods of the second half.

Leicester have not lost at home to Northampton since 2007 and their director 
of rugby, Richard Cockerill, was pleased to extend that record. He said: “It’s 
a good four points in a tight game. We started well but Adam Thompston’e yellow 
card gave them some oxygen and they got back into the game.

“The difference was that we controlled field position and put them under 
pressure. If they had scored at the end they would have won but there was some 
good defence from Sam Harrison, Luke Hamilton and Ed Slater to turn them over. 
It could have gone either way but we have got the confidence and belief to get 
over the finishing line.”

Cockerill felt Thompstone’s yellow card was harsh. “I don’t know where he was 
supposed to go after the ball bounced back at him and George jumped in the 
air,” he said. “I’m not sure where he was meant to go, unless he disappeared. 
We are going to put an order in for disappearing cloaks for next week.”

He said England centre Manu Tuilagi, who made his comeback after injury at 
Bristol last week, was ready to start after getting another 30 minutes of 
action. “He looks sharp and healthy,” Cockerill said. “Let’s hope that 
continues and we can get him back to where we would like him to be. I am sure 
he is ready to start.”
 