
Not pretty, but beggars can’t be choosers. Northampton’s opening to the season 
has been such that a win – any old win – was all that mattered. They duly 
opened their European campaign with the desired result, against the kind of 
side who can cause them problems – indeed, who have caused them problems even 
at this very ground.

Saracens’ Chris Wyles scores two tries on bleak night for Toulouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/saracens-toulouse-european-champions-cup-match-report>
The Scarlets have enjoyed an excellent start to their season, up among the 
leaders of the Pro12. They are pacy and smart, with a fabulous back row. 
Physically, they struggled against the mighty Northampton set piece, but they 
scored a lovely try in the second half, run in between a posse of Northampton 
defenders by the incomparable Gareth Davies. If they had not missed four kicks 
at goal (two hitting the post) they might have prevailed. They will also rue 
their failure to score a single point during the two sin-bin spellsNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> served.

They would have been good for the win but equally it would have been against a 
stiff if not overwhelming tide. TheScarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> were missing some hefty front-row 
forwards, not to mention the Williams boys behind. This is not the place to be 
thus compromised. Northampton missed three kicks at goal of their own but the 
physical edge they held was undeniable.

The first of the yellow cards was shown to George North at the end of the 
first quarter – and quite a turning point it proved. Northampton were 7-3 up 
when they scored what looked like a wonderful, sweeping try from their own 
half. Alex Waller turned the ball over and Ken Pisi was away. Ben Foden, North 
and Luther Burrell combined slickly to send the latter over in the corner. But 
amid Burrell’s cathartic celebrations Romain Poite conferred with his TMO.

North had brought his boot down on Michael Tagicakibau, just before Burrell 
went over. The Scarlets winger was holding on to his foot long after the ball 
had gone but a stamp these days is a stamp. Had it connected with his head, 
instead of glancing off his shoulder, the colour of card might have been a 
shade darker. North went to the bin and the try was struck off.

A mere yellow it may have been but it was North’s last meaningful contribution 
against his old mates from out west. After last week’s announcement by Scarlets 
ofJonathan Davies’s return home from France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/13/jonathan-davies-wales-scarlets>, 
there has been talk linking North to a similar move. “We are very, very 
confident that George will stay,” said Jim Mallinder, the Northampton head 
coach. “Very confident.”

Nevertheless, North’s indiscretion rather pricked Northampton’s bubble. No 
doubt chastened by their lack of fizz in thedefeat to Saracens here last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/07/northampton-saracens-premiership-match-report>
, they had burst into the match with vim. They were watched by Victor Matfield, 
who is likely to stiffen further a set piece hardly in need of it. Meanwhile, 
another new signing, JJ Hanrahan, was starting his first game at fly-half. The 
Irishman looked sharp in attack, darting round the fringes of a messy scrum to 
put Ken Pisi over for the game’s first try with only six minutes gone.

Head coach Anthony Foley full of praise for Munster after win over Treviso
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/munster-treviso-european-champions-cup-match-report>
The Saints looked comfortable, if only fitfully dominant at the scrum in those 
early exchanges, but they struggled to shake off the tenacious Scarlets. DTH 
van der Merwe continued his form from the World Cup, a threat whenever he 
received the ball, as in his rather different way was Jake Ball.

Steve Shingler opened the Scarlets’ account with a penalty in the first 
quarter, but both fly-halfs, despite their contributions in attack, kept 
missing those kicks. Hanrahan missed two penalties in the first half, and 
Shingler not only missed from the tee but missed touch with a couple of 
penalties he tried to send to the corner. How rare the attacking fly-half 
reliable of boot.

A straightforward penalty by Shingler brought the Scarlets to within a point 
at half-time. They might have taken the lead just a couple of minutes after the 
break but Shingler skewed his shot at goal horribly. Instead, they did so in a 
style more in keeping with the tradition of Llanelli. Aled Thomas and Gareth 
Owen carved Northampton up on the counterattack, and the latter sent Davies on 
a brilliant run for the Wales scrum-half’s latest try.

But if that is the West Walian way, the East Midlands manner is no less 
difficult to deal with. Within a few minutes of Davies’s try, the Saints drove 
Waller ruthlessly over the line from an attacking lineout, then, with Jamie 
Gibson in the bin, smashed the Scarlets scrum to earn the penalty by which they 
moved four points clear.

Back to the tried and trusted. Back to winning ways at Franklin’s Gardens. 
They will need more of the stardust of those early minutes, though, if they are 
to make it out this fiendish pool.
 