
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> escaped 
without punishment after a review found the club wrongly allowed the Wales wing 
George North to return to the pitch at Leicester even though he had appeared to 
lose consciousness. Steps are being put in place to ensure that if there is a 
repeat, the club concerned will have no excuses and will face disciplinary 
action.

The Concussion Management Review Group, which investigated the incident for 
more than two weeks, concluded there was enough evidence from footage of the 
incident, together with North’s history of concussion, to have kept him off the 
field but accepted Northampton’s medical team acted in the best interests of 
the player having not seen all the available video footage because of Wi-Fi 
problems at Welford Road.

Northampton alarm bells clang with winter of discontent looming | Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/northampton-saints-george-north-dylan-hartley-winter-discontent>
The group, which was chaired by Dr Julian Morris and included a representative 
from Premiership Rugby and the Rugby Football Union, could have ordered 
Northampton and individuals to appear before a disciplinary committee. It 
decided that as it was the first case to be reviewed by the concussion group 
and there was no evidence anyone knew North may have lost consciousness before 
he was allowed to return to the pitch, the need was not for sanctions against 
Saints but measures to prevent a repeat.

The group came up with nine recommendations Premiership Rugby said it would 
take immediate steps to implement. They included ensuring a pitchside reviewer 
remained in his or her allocated seat and was given backup to ensure video 
feeds were monitored continually (Northampton’s was at pitchside immediately 
after North was injured consulting with the doctor because of Wi-Fi problems 
and missed the clips being screened live on television); that Wi-Fi at 
Premiership grounds works properly given problems with the feed at Welford 
Road; that a team doctor should review video footage before and after 
completing a head injury assessment which should take up the full 13 minutes 
laid down by World Rugby’s concussion regulations unless there is clear reason 
to shorten it; and that medical rooms should have hard wire feeds to ensure 
against the loss of a Wi-Fi signal.

“We wanted the review, which was primarily around the medical management and 
treatment of George North, to be thorough and rigorous to ensure we fully 
understood the circumstances of this case,” Morris said. “While the challenges 
in the consistent delivery of best practice in the on-field management of head 
injuries in professional sport are recognised, player welfare is paramount to 
the game of rugby.

“We believe the clear recommendations put forward by this group will minimise 
the risk of incidents of this nature happening in the future, as well as 
providing ways to improve the systems and processes in place to protect the 
welfare of players.”

Northampton referred North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/george-north-northampton-awkward-fall-leicester>
, who suffered three concussions in seven months two seasons ago, to an 
independent expert once they became aware he may have lost consciousness for at 
least five seconds. He was signed off for an indefinite period, although he may 
be considered for selection against Sale at Franklin’s Gardens on Friday night.

“The club continues to offer George its full support and looks forward to 
seeing him on the pitch again as soon as he is ready,” said Northampton in a 
statement released after the review’s findings. “We accept the conclusion that 
George should not have been allowed to return to the field of play but are 
pleased the review group has reflected our concerns about the current 
technologies and processes available to medical teams when assessing concussion.

“The club believes that this is now an opportunity for the whole rugby 
community to reflect on the recommendations to ensure the highest levels of 
player safety and well-being. The club’s management remains absolutely 
confident in the expertise, professionalism and commitment of our medical teams 
and is encouraged to see that the review group has found that the medics had 
nothing other than player welfare in mind during this incident. The club 
continues to take player safety extremely seriously and now looks forward to 
working with the review group and the wider rugby community to improve current 
injury assessment practices so that these sorts of incidents can be avoided.” 

The Rugby Players’ Association said in a statement: “While we feel that 
sanctions would have sent a clear message about the gravity of concussion 
mismanagement, we welcome the recommendations outlined in the report. These 
must be adopted and all concussion processes be kept under constant review so 
that everything is done in terms of training, resource and protocol to ensure 
this does not happen again.”
 