
It has been a Heineken Cup campaign to forget for Northampton and, if it 
peters out here, it will have been in a match memorable only for its 
extraordinary lack of action. Northampton are not quite out of theHeineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> yet, clinging on to the last 
best runners-up spot, if you can have such a thing, courtesy of 10 points in 
the dying minutes. But, among other things, they need Connacht to beat Saracens 
at Saracenson Saturday. Suffice it to say, the Irish are not favourites. It's 
looking like the Amlin Challenge Cup for the Saints.

That late surge earned them a win that neither side really deserved. Their 
power game may well serve them well in the Amlin but in this year's Heineken 
Cup it has proved too limited.Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> have evolved their attack 
this season in the Premiership but the intensity of the Heineken Cup has forced 
them back to type. And the power was well met by Castres, who are the French 
champions, after all.

This encounter was not pleasing on the eye. Even those 10 points at the end 
were ugly. George Pisi's try was a chargedown and came hot on the heels of a 
75th-minute Stephen Myler penalty that had earned Northampton a 6-3 lead. That 
penalty came when Kahn Fotuali'i flung the ball at the head of aCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> prop, who was struggling to his 
feet in an offside position.

All of which means that, yes, the score was 3-3 entering the final five 
minutes. Until then 12,000 people had watched, unenthralled, what happens when 
two big teams of the modern era try to out-slug each other.

The tone was set in the opening minutes when Dylan Hartley, as has been his 
wont this season, turned down two penalty shots at goal in favour of attacking 
scrums. Nothing came of them, even though the scrum was one area Northampton 
would go on to dominate if not when within striking range of the Castres line.

"They're a good team, aren't they?" said Hartley. "You expect French teams 
with nothing to play for maybe to fold. Maybe I should have got the scoreboard 
ticking over early on there but I went for the dominance factor, trying to get 
the pushover try. It didn't pay off. If we'd gone 3-0, 6-0, 9-0, they might 
have gone."

A lot has been made, naturally, of the Saints' 40-7 thrashing at the hands of 
Leinster but it is their defeat at Castres on the opening weekend that they 
should really be kicking themselves over. In the end, an early intercept try 
cost Northampton a game they largely dominated but it was an ugly, tight, 
power-thirsty affair. No surprise, so was this one.

It seemed a match that was gasping for some points might finally have them in 
the first half when Fa'atoina Autagavaia, the latest Samoan to struggle at 
full-back for Northampton, sent a loose kick straight into touch. Brice Dulin 
took the lineout quickly and sent Remi Grosso away to the tryline. Northampton 
were spared, though, when the TMO spotted that Dulin had used the wrong ball.

The first half was to prove not entirely pointless. On the stroke of half-time 
Hartley finally pointed at the posts and Myler obliged. But, if we were now no 
longer pointless, it was soon back at all square in the second half. Rory 
Kockott, Northampton's tormenter in October, came on and more or less straight 
away kicked a 48-metre penalty.

Back to the slugfest. Northampton continued to dominate, although not in a 
convincing manner. There were fleeting moments of life from them. George North 
knocked on a tricky pass on the left and George Pisi could not quite put his 
brother Ken away down the right. Courtney Lawes also found himself with the 
ball a few metres from the line but it caught him by surprise and the move 
broke down. These, though, were counterbalanced by threatening moments from 
Castres. Marcel Garvey slipped after one weaving run, and Yannick Caballero 
slung a forward pass to Grosso, who would have been away again. In despair, he 
called for the TMO once more. But, no, we'd seen enough.

Northampton  Autagavaia (G Dickson 68); K Pisi, G Pisi, Burrell (Waldouck 63), 
North; Myler, L Dickson (Fotuali'i 55); A Waller (Dickinson 60), Hartley (capt; 
Haywood 60), Ma'afu (Denman 41), Lawes, Day, Clark (Dowson 54), Wood, Manoa (E 
Waller 60)

Try G Pisi Con G Dickson Pens Myler 2

Castres Dulin; Garvey (Lakafia 67), Cabannes (capt), Lamerat (Bonnefond 62), 
Grosso; Kirkpatrick, Tomas (Kockott 51); Forestier (Taumoepeau 51), Rallier, 
Peikrishvili (Lazar 28), Samson, Gray, Babillot (Desroches 64), Bornman, 
Faasalele (Caballero 41)

Pen Kockott

Referee Alain Rolland (Ireland)
 