
Andy Robinson is not usually given to overlooking refereeing decisions that go 
against his side. However, so overwhelmed wereBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> in the opening half against 
opponents who used their experience to keep the game tight and their hosts 
pinned deep in their own half, that he responded to Northampton’s third try, 
scored by Ken Pisi after the wing appeared to plant both feet in touch having 
flattened Tom Varndell, with a phlegmatic shrug.

He had been more forthright the weekend before when Harlequins were awarded a 
try despite a scoring pass that was even more forward than Mae West, but where 
the game at Twickenham had been open and oscillatory,Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> shut out Bristol from the 
start. The Saints used the boot of Stephen Myler to secure position, never 
tempted by overlaps for fear of inviting their hosts into the game, and used 
their supremacy in the set pieces to kick resulting penalties into touch, drive 
mauls and keep out gatecrashers.

Saracens send warning signal to Premiership with Exeter demolition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/exeter-saracens-premiership-match-report>
Pisi’s try, after 22 minutes, was their third of the afternoon. It followed 
George North’s opener, created by Louis Picamoles’s surge into the 22 and Dylan 
Hartley’s deft pass (something that the hooker was to repeat at the end of the 
half in his final act before retiring with a back spasm that is not expected to 
keep him out of Saturday’s rather more demanding encounter at Saracens), and 
the second claimed by the France No8 after a driving lineout.

With Myler kicking two penalties to one by Tusi Pisi, who was playing opposite 
his two brothers, George and Ken, without the room or indulgence he enjoyed 
against Harlequins, it was surprising that the Saints did not secure their try 
bonus until two minutes from the end having flatlined in the second period as 
Bristol belatedly became assertive.

Varndell wasted a chance on 45 minutes when only Ahsee Tuala stood in the way 
of the tryline and when two minutes later Pisi, operating from deep, set free 
Will Hurrell who knocked on in contact, even a consolation score looked beyond 
the home side. Ben Mosses inspired the breakthrough, breaking the defensive 
line to set up the hooker Ross McMillan, one of three former Northampton 
players in Bristol’s pack.

Another, the prop Soane Tonga’uiha, sabotaged the home side’s most sustained 
attack of the match, grassing a pass in the Northampton 22 after Bristol had 
worked an overlap. Any hopes of a comeback dropped on to the floor with the 
ball and an untidy second half concluded with a rally from the Saints who, 
after North was beaten to his kick downfield by Varndell and Tom Wood was 
denied a try following another driving lineout, Hartley’s replacement, Mikey 
Haywood, finished off his side’s most flowing move of the game.

Bristol’s players discovered what Robinson already knew: never mind 
Harlequins’ largesse, the Premiership is unforgiving, a place where mistakes 
and weakness are exploited. They will be offered further evidence in the coming 
weeks with last season’s top three next up, in reverse order: Wasps, Exeter and 
Saracens. “Some players will learn and improve; others will fall by the 
wayside,” said Robinson. “The first half was a lesson in how to play rugby in 
thePremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> and why 
questioning Pisi’s try would be clutching at straws.”

Bristol have Gavin Henson to return and add finesse behind, but their season 
will be defined by how they fare against the sides in the bottom half of the 
table, not those contesting the title. Northampton may not be the force they 
were even a couple of seasons ago, but after watching Harlequins keep Bristol 
in the game at Twickenham by being wasteful and loose, they kept Robinson’s men 
at a long arm’s length.

The Saints duly crushed romance without doing much to suggest they will 
improve on last season’s fifth place. Picamoles has provided thrust from the 
back of the scrum, but fitness levels in the Premiership are more demanding 
than those in the Top 14. They do not have the ruthless efficiency of Saracens 
and have fewer gears than Wasps but they are equipped for the winter months 
when their leaden qualities are less of a handicap.

Northampton welcomed Bristol to the realities of life in the Premiership. “We 
needed to come here, shut the crowd up and put massive doubt in their players’ 
minds that they could play at this level,” said the Saints’ director of rugby, 
Jim Mallinder. “Harlequins tried to play a bit too much against them and we 
learned from that.” Wasps next Sunday will be very different and next here are 
Exeter, currently the only team below Bristol in the table.

Bristol Wallace; Edwards, Hurrell, Mosses (Jarvis, 69), Varndell; Pisi, Cliff 
(Williams, 65); Tonga’uiha (Traynor, 58), McMillan (Brooker, 60), Cortes 
(Perenise, 60), Evans (Phillips, 54), Glynn, Fisher (Eadie, 54), Lam (capt), 
Crane (Robinson, 60).

Try McMillan. Con Pisi. Pen Pisi.

Northampton Tuala (Foden, 69); K Pisi, G Pisi (Mallinder, 46), Burrell, North; 
Myler, Dickson (Groom, 45); A Waller (Ma’afu, 66), Hartley (Haywood, ht), 
Brookes (Hill, 61), Lawes, Paterson (S Dickinson, 58), Wood (capt), Harrison 
(Gibson, 68), Picamoles.

Tries North, Picamoles, K Pisi, Haywood. Cons Myler 2, Mallinder. Pens Myler 2.

Referee C Maxwell-Keys Att 11,322
 