
They hoped they had reached their nadir but it seems Northampton have further 
to fall. Having responded to the departure of their attack coach, Alex King, 
the week before with a gutsy home win against mighty French opponents at 
Franklin’s Gardens, mighty French opponents in France proved far too much. Even 
in their darkest, most try-phobic periods,Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> have generally been able 
to count on a solid platform up front. Now even that seems to have deserted 
them. The 40 points Castres posted on them was in no way flattering – to either 
side.

“We were well beaten,” said Jim Mallinder, Northampton’s director of rugby. 
“They were too physical for us. We didn’t get on the front foot at all in the 
first half, and what little ball we got we didn’t look after. The frustrating 
thing is we’ve shown against big, physical packs that we can compete, but today 
we just didn’t at all. We were chasing shadows. We got to half-time and it was 
really game over already.”

Munster honour Anthony Foley with emotional victory over Glasgow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Dylan Hartley made his long-awaited return from injury and the England captain 
assumed position at the heart of a set piece that was dismantled byCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres>, currently hovering just a few 
places above the relegation zone in the Top 14, much as Northampton are in the 
Premiership.

Indeed, an attack coach seemed a laughable luxury for a side whose basics have 
deteriorated as they seemed to have here. Attack is the least of their 
problems. That rugby starts up front is a maxim that hardly needs repeating. A 
legion of attack coaches would be of no use to a side suffering at the 
set-piece like this. They were blown away at the breakdown too.

Saints rode their luck last week, seeing off a ferocious assault from 
Montpellier. Sometimes the shaking up of a coaching panel can sharpen the 
attitude. If so, here was the bounce back down to earth. French sides, it turns 
out, are ferocious in general, never more so than at home. Castres obliterated 
Saints. The whistle of Ian Davies was Northampton’s ally, punishing the home 
side when their counter-rucking became too exuberant, but the referee could do 
only so much to protect the visitors.

Even when the referee sent Rory Kockott to the sin-bin for handling off his 
feet, Castres made hay, scoring their first try while he was away, having 
kicked two early penalties for a 6-0 lead. Their phenomenally explosive 
captain, Alex Tulou, burst clean through a ruck to set up the equally lethal 
winger David Smith for try No1.

Whereupon Northampton wilted still further. They were blown away at another of 
their own rucks. Kockott, now restored, gathered his own chip and Antoine 
Tichit was driven over. A try just before half-time was followed by another 
just after, Tulou down the right, then Robert Ebersohn sending Smith away on 
the switch down the left. Not many could stop the Aussie in this sort of form 
and Northampton are not among them. Try No3, converted from the touchline by 
Benjamín Urdapilleta – 27-0.

Saracens’ injury fear over Maro Itoje after beating Scarlets in Champions Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/saracens-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
The only question left – though it did not seem much of one – was whether 
Castres could register the bonus point. They had 36 minutes in which to do it, 
but the question remained unanswered as we entered the final 10 minutes. 
Inevitably, Northampton won themselves some ball, with Teimana Harrison 
enjoying an industrious return to the team, but still Castres had the best 
chances, one counterattack from their own line particularly thrilling – and 
French.

Northampton scored the next try, with eight minutes remaining, James Wilson 
worked over on the right, but that only made Castres angry. The bonus-point try 
was finally secured two minutes later, Alexandre Bias put over on the left by 
more brilliance from Smith. Then it was time for 40 up, Smith, again, sending 
Antoine Dupont on a brilliant try to the line, which Julien Dumora converted 
from the touchline.

The humiliation of Northampton was complete – or perhaps the absolution of 
Castres. These sides have been champions of their domestic leagues in recent 
years; both have fallen significantly from those heights since. French teams – 
and Castres as much as any of them – we know can fluctuate from the sublime to 
the abysmal on a weekly basis. English sides less so.

That is Northampton’s concern. They can still pull out a cussed victory every 
now and then, but their greatest worry is that flops like this are becoming 
increasingly common. Leinster are next for them in Pool 4 and few can forget 
the hiding the Dubliners meted out the last time they visited Franklin’s 
Gardens. There may yet be more pain on the way.
 