
Eddie ButlerIt was set up to be a mini-version of the final day of last 
season’s Six Nations, an invitation to throw the ball around. It is in the 
Scarlets’ nature to play so and it was definitely in Northampton’s interests to 
score four tries. Win handsomely and they had a chance to progress into the 
last eight as a best runner-up. Today’s games will settle the issue.

If the build-up carried a tingle, the reality was altogether more mundane. The 
visitors won easily and the European form of the Scarlets took yet another 
plunge. Courtney Lawes had an excellent game and Dylan Hartley was sprightly on 
his return. The most eye-catching performance was given by Harry Mallinder, son 
ofNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> coach Jim 
and a centre with speed and excellent distribution.

The quest for the bonus point was made easier with a gift. Morgan Allen, 
trying to find a four-man overlap, instead passed straight to Mallinder. The 
centre has brought a new sense of direction and purpose to a misfiring 
three-quarter line but this was all about straight-line running and he showed 
leggy pace to stay ahead of the chasers.

The Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> were also struggling 
at the scrum and although they showed elsewhere a willingness to pass before 
and after contact, with Regan King and Michael Collins looking dangerous, they 
also slung a couple of final passes into touch. The skidding surface compounded 
their inaccuracy.

It was ugly for the home team and was about to grow even worse when Courtney 
Lawes showed better judgment with the bouncing ball. The second-row found 
himself near the end of an overlap when a long pass came his way – along the 
floor. Instead of bending he watched it and left it for George Pisi who skidded 
over the line for the second try. The second quarter had barely started and 
Northampton were halfway to their bonus.

The Scarlets were awarded a penalty at a scrum – it was as if Northampton were 
a little too eager to pound them at the set-piece – and Aled Thomas kicked the 
points. But penalties were not going to offer them any comfort at the dog-end 
of a poor campaign. The Scarlets needed to shed themselves of their 
self-loathing – their captain Ken Owen had said their recent performance in 
Paris had been “embarrassing and disrespectful”.

This was no better. At the start of the second half Collins sliced a clearance 
to touch and made no more than a yard. Lineout possession was secured, the maul 
driven and the try was scored simply by Sam Dickinson. From the restart 
Northampton made even more easy yards with another maul. The move ended only 
when the noble Owens was penalised for diving off his feet. Much worse was the 
entry by Maselino Paulino, a swinging arm taking out Lawes. The second row was 
fortunate to be shown yellow, not red.

Another penalty put Northampton back in the corner. Dickinson had control of 
the ball and he steered the maul safely to the line, only to be held up over 
it. They had a scrum, won a penalty and opted for more of the same. Dylan 
Hartley, who had said in the week that he was “walking on eggshells” with 
regard to the England position, was playing here with considerably less 
caution. He popped out of the maul and nearly put Tom Kessell over.

The wait for a fourth try was not long. Pisi slipped a neat pass out of the 
tackle to Mallinder, who produced an even better pass – and adjudged not 
forward – to North who touched down with a smile, not necessarily because it 
was a try against his former team but because George has not exactly been 
crossing for fun this season.

There was still most of the final quarter to go. The game was won and Hartley 
gave way for Mike Haywood amid the usual flurry of replacements. The 
scrappiness increased and the Scarlets simply could not hold on to the ball. 
What did make solid contact was the shoulder of Lawes into the back of Paulino, 
an armless tackle of revenge. The referee, Pascal Gaüzère, obviously saw 
mitigating passion in the crime and kept his yellow card in his pocket, 
awarding only a penalty.

A card was shown to Lee Dickson who sacrificed himself for 10 minutes to 
prevent a try during the final minutes of Scarlets’ pressure. They went close 
on several occasions and ended up trying some power-scrummaging, a clear 
indication of how the game had been turned upside down. Again, they nearly 
scored as Aled Davies – named in the Wales Six Nations squad – broke clear. He 
was stopped but at the ruck that followed he dipped his hand into the pile-up 
and pressed down on the ball carried forward by Rhodri Jones. The try was 
awarded, the only bit of good news for the home team. It was so much better for 
Northampton, but they are stuck in the waiting room.

Ospreys’ Paul James says team have hunger to succeed against Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/ospreys-paul-james-hunger-exeter>
Wasps storm past Leinster and into Champions Cup quarter-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/wasps-leinster-european-champions-cup-match-report> 