
A win was non-negotiable for Northampton, and the force of will such 
situations tend to elicit won out. The Saints reacquainted themselves with the 
feeling of topping a table, albeit one game inwith the other in the pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/racing-92-glasgow-warriors-champions-cup-postponed-paris-attacks>
 postponed.

It looked early-on as if they might run away with this one but teams on a bad 
run, as Saints are in the Premiership, often struggle to press home an 
advantage. In the end, they had to call on that force of will against a weakened
Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> team still fast and 
clever enough to sting anyone.

“They stuck in the fight and it was a pretty nail-biting last 10 minutes,” 
said Tom Wood, the man of the match. “That could have easily gone against us. 
You are relying on the bounce of the ball, a refereeing decision, a chargedown, 
an intercept – anything like that can break your heart in the last second. We 
were lucky to get away with it.”

In the final 10 minutes, the Scarlets were awarded a penalty, trailing by four 
points. Some captains might have opted for the corner, all the more so with the 
draw just out of reach with a shot at goal. The goal-kicking had been 
particularly unconvincing for both teams, but with Steve Shingler off, John 
Barclay threw the tee to Aled Thomas. On a windy night, his shot from a fair 
distance on the angle hit a post.

“It was a tight game,” said Barclay, Scarlets’ captain. “My thought process 
was we take the three, get back down there and try to win a penalty. I thought 
it would be one of those games when it was one or two points.”

That it was one of those games was testament to the Scarlets’ wit and spirit. 
They travelled to a famously unforgiving arena without, among others, their 
regular captain, Ken Owens, and Samson Lee, international front-row forwards 
both. They could have done with the ballast because just to hold their own was 
a struggle of concentration for the visitors’ scrum. They managed it enough to 
suggest they were capable, but every now and then the Saints scrum would go 
through them. They will consider a losers’ bonus point a reasonable return from 
such an assignment. This pool is likely to be tight.

Owens should return for the home match against Racing 92 next week, while 
Dylan Hartley, missing with a head knock, should be back for Northampton’s trip 
to Glasgow. It had looked briefly as if they might be heading up to that 
testing assignment with a full house of points. JJ Hanrahan, making his first 
start at fly-half since his signing from Munster, looked sharp and sent Ken 
Pisi over in the first 10 minutes. ThenNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> seemed to have worked a 
superb long-range try for Luther Burrell at the end of the first quarter, but a 
stamp by George North was spotted in the build-up.

The try was struck off and North sent to the sin-bin. With him went 
Northampton’s momentum. A brilliant try from Gareth Davies in the third quarter 
earned Scarlets the lead for a couple of minutes, before Alex Waller was driven 
over for a second Northampton try and Hanrahan slotted a penalty after another 
big scrum.

Which paved the way for the now-mandatory England coach charade. Jim Mallinder 
became the latest to rule himself out. For the record, his way of putting the 
familiar line was: “I’m not going anywhere. This is my club. I have lots of 
challenges ahead this season, and I’m looking forward to those.”

So it was over to Wood to offer his thoughts on the matter. “Certainly on a 
personal note [I am sad to see Stuart Lancaster leave]. I have got an awful lot 
of respect for him. I can vouch for his work rate and commitment. Obviously at 
this level you are judged on results, and we have all got to look at ourselves 
and say we didn’t get the result, so we have all got to be accountable. We will 
fight for our places in the national team.

“ I don’t want any stupid headlines about Jim for England but I can certainly 
vouch for his character as well and the work we do here. I just hope the RFU do 
their due diligence and get the right man. Then we can all put this behind us, 
move on and start to build.”

Amen to that.

Northampton Foden; K Pisi (Tuala ,53), G Pisi (Myler, 62), Burrell, North; 
Hanrahan, Dickson (capt; Fotuali’i, 73); A Waller (E Waller, 64), Haywood, 
Brookes (Hill, 64), Craig (Harrison 65), Day (Paterson 20), Gibson, Wood, 
Dickinson.

Tries K Pisi, A Waller. Con Hanrahan. Pen Hanrahan.

Sin-bin North 20, Gibson 65.

Scarlets Thomas; Tagicakibau, Owen, Parkes, Van der Merwe; S Shingler (T 
Williams, 74), G Davies (A Davies, 74); Evans (John, 67), Phillips, Edwards, 
Ball, Paulino (Rawlins, 57), A Shingler, J Davies, Barclay (capt).

Try G Davies. Pens S Shingler 2.

Referee R Poite (Fr). Attendance 14,512.
 