
Harry Mallinder’s penalty three minutes from time gave Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> a 20-19 win over Exeter – 
the Saints’ first at home in three attempts this season at Franklin’s Gardens.

The visitors dominated possession (81% of it) territory in the opening minutes 
– it was telling to see Louis Picamoles so regularly on the back foot and Harry 
Mallinder’s drop out charged down – and were 13-0 to the good within a quarter 
of an hour. Bookended by a pair of Gareth Steenson penalties, Henry Slade’s 
perfect demonstration of his playmaking ability will surely have piqued Eddie 
Jones’ interest with a cutout pass for the in-form Ollie Woodburn to cross in 
the corner.

The Saints should have hit back immediately after Steenson’s second 
three-pointer. Picamoles regained some of that trademark power and made a break 
in midfield but the scrum-half Nic Groom knocked on his pass intended for 
George North with a three-on-none overlap. Minutes later Calum Clark, playing 
his first match since the 2014-15Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> semi-final, stole a lineout 
five metres from the Exeter line only for his backs to once again butcher the 
chance with Exeter’s defence in a dogleg.

On 22 minutes it was 0-13. On 25 the home side were a point in front. George 
North scored the first after sustained pressure, crashing through Woodburn and 
Lachlan Turner to go over out wide. He brought the crowd to its feet assisting 
a second a minute later.

He made a searing break from his 22, cutting outside and in to leave Exeter 
tacklers gasping and grasping at air. He scorched into theExeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> half and two passes later Rory 
Hutchinson, a late call-up for his debut in place of the unfit Stephen Myler, 
was touching down under the posts; it was hard to tell if he or the fans in the 
Barwell Stand looked more delirious.

Although Northampton were firmly back in the match – largely thanks to 
Picamoles asserting himself from the base of the scrum – and spent the 
following 10 minutes hunting their third try, Exeter finished the first half 
ensconced in Saints territory. However the Chiefs continued to struggle with 
the new set-piece directions and Matthew Carley, the referee, was merciless in 
doling out penalties against their pack.

Steenson missed a straightforward kick to restored Exeter’s lead 12 minutes 
before half-time but was on target 12 , after Alex Waller was offside from a 
Foden miskick. However the Saints No15 atoned for his mistake immediately, with 
a smart pass inside sending North away on yet another marauding run, albeit one 
that came to nothing.

Steenson and Mallinder exchanged penalties with the clock ticking down and, 
when the Chiefs were penalised for not rolling away from a tackle, Mallinder 
narrowly curled over the winning kick.
 