
The Northampton and Wales wing George North will not play again until he has 
been cleared by a concussion expert after the club admitted its medical team 
were unaware that heseemed to have been knocked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/george-north-northampton-awkward-fall-leicester>
 during Saturday’s Premiership match against Leicester in allowing him to 
return to the field.

North was tackled in the air by his opposite number, Adam Thompstone, landing 
on his side but appearing to hit his head on the ground and seeming to 
temporarily lose consciousness. He returned to the field six minutes later 
after passing a head injury assessment, to the incredulity of the television 
commentary team and many on social media.

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> issued a 
statement that night, saying North had landed on his side and was complaining 
of neck pain. “After footage of the incident was reviewed, the team followed 
protocols and used a head injury assessment given the potential mechanism for 
head injury. George was fully assessed by the doctor and passed fit to return 
to play.”

Northampton say George North was not knocked out by fall in Leicester loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/george-north-northampton-awkward-fall-leicester>
The Saints issued a more detailed statement on Tuesday, with Premiership Rugby 
having launched a review of North’s treatment, which happened less than two 
years after he was knocked out playing for Wales against England and allowed to 
play on after treatment because the medical team, who did not have access to a 
replay of the incident, were unaware he had lost consciousness.

“The medical team can only base their decisions on the evidence available to 
them at the time of the assessment,” said Northampton. “George was fully 
assessed by the doctor away from the pitch using the established protocols and 
processes, and passed fit to return to play. As with all such injuries, if 
evidence suggesting a loss of consciousness had been available to the medical 
team at the time of assessment, George would not have been allowed to return to 
the field of play.”

The club added that steps will be taken to improve the footage available to 
medics, pointing out that the video material accessible at pitchside did not 
always include the full range of camera angles available to a television 
audience. “We continue to place player welfare as the No1 priority and we are 
referring George to an independent concussion expert as part of the club’s 
ongoing assessment process. He will be stood down from play until the process 
is complete.”

Northampton took the same action two seasons ago when North suffered a third 
concussion of the 2014-15 campaign. He was knocked out scoring a try against 
Wasps at the end of March and did not play again until Wales’s World Cup 
warm-up match against Ireland in Dublin five months later, having been 
monitored by an independent concussion specialist.

Premiership Rugby has launched an investigation into why North was allowed 
back on to the field on Saturday, having this season invested in technology for 
pitchside medical teams on the side of the pitch in all league matches to view 
incidents in real time, minimising the risk of anyone playing on after being 
knocked out.

Concussion: how rugby union's rulers risk the lives of their players | Andy 
Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/14/rugby-union-concussion-medical-experts>
North has twice been the victim of a system and human error. Had Wales and 
Northampton realised he had lost consciousness he would have been replaced 
immediately, and the 24-year-old will be given advice on how safe it will be 
for him to continue his career.

The Rugby Football Union’s concussion guidelines warn of the potential 
consequences of repeated blows to the head, advising: “There are concerns that 
repeated concussion, particularly before full recovery, could shorten a 
player’s career, significantly interfere with academic performance, and may 
have some potential to result in permanent neurological impairment.

“This emphasises the need for prevention, careful management at the time of 
injury, comprehensive medical assessment and structured follow-up until the 
concussion has fully resolved. Players who suffer two concussions in any 
12-month period are at greater risk of further brain injury and slower recovery 
and should seek medical attention from practitioners experienced in concussion 
management before returning to play.”
 