
“You do not play a derby, you win it.” When Rudi García pronounced those words 
at the start of his first season as Roma manager, few could have imagined how 
prophetic they would turn out to be. TheGiallorossi had lost to Lazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> in the final of the Coppa Italia a 
few short months earlier. They have not done so again since.

Kevin Strootman strikes as Roma see off Lazio in heated Rome derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/lazio-roma-serie-a-match-report>
Roma’s victory over Lazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/lazio-roma-serie-a-match-report>
 on Sunday was their fourth in a row and extended their unbeaten run against 
their neighbours to seven matches. There was only one point between the teams 
before kick-off but the readiness with which theBiancocelesti crumbled in the 
second half hinted at a self-fulfilling element to this subjugation.

We will come back to the football itself, though, in a moment. Regrettably, 
the headline act of Sunday’s derby arrived after the final whistle had blown. 
Senad Lulic, the man who scored Lazio’s winning goal in that famous cup final 
triumph of 2013, was being interviewed live on Mediaset Premium when he was 
asked about pre-match remarks made by his opponent Antonio Rudiger.

The latter player had been dismissive of Lazio, claiming not to know anything 
about the club or its manager. Lulic’s response, though, was of a markedly 
different tone. “Two years ago, in Stuttgart, [Rudiger] was selling socks and 
belts,” Lulic said. “Now suddenly he’s playing the phenomenon.”

Was this a deliberately racist remark? Lulic would insist not, telling 
reporters in the media mixed zone that “white people sell socks, too”. But in a 
nation where crude stereotypes about black street pedlars have poisoned the 
national discourse around immigration for decades, this was, at best, a 
spectacularly ill-considered turn of phrase.

The front page of La Repubblica lamented: “Ten seconds to send us back 100 
years,” accusing Lulic of “vomiting sinister racism all over Rudiger”. Corriere 
dello Sport decried his remarks as “absurd, unacceptable, unqualifiable, 
unsayable”. Roma’s Radja Nainggolan responded by posting a ‘No To Racism’ banner
on his Instagram account <https://www.instagram.com/p/BNnEH36h0GW/>, together 
with the message: “someone has to learn these three words”.

Lulic offered no apology on Sunday, although Lazio’s director of 
communications sought to do so on his behalf. “The club regrets these 
comments,” Arturo Diaconale said. “I apologise on behalf of the club and in the 
name of Senad Lulic. These were remarks made in the heat of the moment after a 
lost derby.”

The player is likely to face a fine and a suspension but already on Sunday 
night questions were being raised about the Italian Football Federation’s moral 
authority to criticise. Its own elected president, Carlo Tavecchio, infamously 
attacked clubs in the past for ignoring domestic talent in favour of the 
imagined “Opti Poba, who came here and before that was eating bananas 
<http://video.repubblica.it/dossier/caso-tavecchio/fassone-su-tavecchio-giudizio-positivo/218128/217324?ref=vd-auto&cnt=1>
”.

The one certainty is that this story does further damage to the image of 
football in Rome, and Italy as a whole. Even before Lulic spoke, this derby had 
been an unedifying spectacle.

On Thursday, footage had emerged <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_9MBVzpJe3w> 
of a group of Lazio Ultras being granted an audience with their team at 
training. In return for their support, they required absolute commitment and a 
recognition of what this game meant to them. “For us, this is not a battle,” 
insisted the man outlining their demands. “For us, this is an ethnic war.”

Roma’s Ultras also turned out in their thousands at training in the days 
leading up to the derby but, unlike their Lazio counterparts, the vast majority 
boycotted the match itself. Theirs is an ongoing protest against the city 
prefect’s decision to partition the Stadio Olimpico’s two Curve with plexiglass 
barriers last year.

Perhaps, in some roundabout way, that situation favoured Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma>. Very often this derby has been won 
by the team who does a better job of keeping their emotions in check. A 
vociferous crowd hardly makes that easier to achieve.

Lazio’s own nervousness was betrayed within two seconds of kick-off - that 
being all the time it took for Lucas Biglia to clatter into Diego Perotti and 
give away the first free-kick of the game. TheBiancocelesti went on to shade 
the first half but this was scrappy stuff, with neither team expressing 
themselves as they had during their respective bright starts to this season.

The referee, Luca Banti, hardly helped the game to settle when he awarded Roma 
a penalty in the 28th minute, only to then amend it to a free-kick on the edge 
of the area. In truth, it should have been neither: Bruno Peres simply lost his 
footing as he passed Biglia on his way in from the right flank.

However, Roma began to build momentum after the interval. Edin Dzeko spurned a 
pair of presentable chances before the opening goal was served to them on a 
plate.

Lazio’s 22-year-old Brazilian centre-back Wallace, playing in his first Rome 
derby following a summer move from Braga, made a disastrous mess of his attempt 
to dribble the ball out from the edge of his own box in the 64th minute. He was 
dispossessed by Kevin Strootman, who surged through on goal and scored with a 
neat chipped finish.

If this was a cool moment for Strootman, further evidence that he is back to 
his best after almost two years lost to injury, then he quickly sullied it. 
Strolling back towards halfway after celebrating under the thinly populated 
Curva Sud, he took the opportunity of passing the Lazio dugout toslosh some 
water over one of their substitutes, Danilo Cataldi 
<https://twitter.com/TransfersCalcio/status/805435324134526977>.

The latter player reacted, chasing Strootman and grabbing at his collar. The 
Dutchman collapsed with a certain dramatic flair, and then all hell broke 
loose. Players and officials from both sides became embroiled in a scuffle that 
dragged on for minutes. At the end, Banti booked Strootman and showed Cataldi a 
red card.

This injustice did not hurt Lazio numerically – since the dismissed player had 
only been on the bench – but it did nothing to soothe their frayed nerves. 
Instead of roaring back at Roma, they quickly conceded a second time, Federico 
Marchetti reacting slowly to Radja Nainggolan’s deflected drive from 25 yards.

The game finished 2-0, a significant triumph for Roma. Victory extended their 
lead over Lazio to four points but, more importantly, kept them within that 
same distance of the league leaders, Juventus. Crucially, they had also shown 
that they could win without the injured Mohamed Salah – whose explosive pace 
has been so central to their best attacking play this season.

Sport picture of the day: watching the Rome derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/dec/05/sport-picture-of-the-day-watching-the-rome-derby>
Further challenges await between now and the winter break. Roma’s next two 
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> matches are at 
home to Milan and then away to Juventus. They might need to play better than 
this to get past either side and certainly they cannot expect to keep getting 
away with the sort of behaviour that Strootman indulged in here.

It speaks to how times have changed that Daniele De Rossi – a man who has 
flipped Lazio fans the bird and punchedan opponent’s face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rZz9Hzx_jRg> in past editions of this fixture 
– should be the one seeking to calm tensions on all sides at full-time.

“Lazio fans and Roma fans always live elbow to elbow, you cannot have people 
talking about wars,” he said. “The derby has a particular flavour but let’s 
leave wars to one side because there are enough of those already. Lazio made a 
mistake, which cost them dear. This match was balanced but in the end these 
derbies are often conditioned by something besides the beauty of your football.”

There was not much beautiful to hold on to in any sense from this derby, 
beyond perhaps one act ofquick-footed escapology from Nainggolan 
<https://twitter.com/futmai5/status/805506838833860608> near the end. Roma, 
though, will be content to have extended the legacy of the departed García. 
This derby was not played, it was won.

Talking points

• The Curva Sud regulars might have stayed away from the derby, but this 
policeman wasn’t going <https://twitter.com/LAROMA24/status/805510764287184896> 
to let a small thing like work stop him from supporting his team.

• Not a great weekend for the Stefano Pioli revival project at Inter. Napoli 
had won just once in their last six games across all competitions, and yet were 
able to wallop the Nerazzurri 3-0. Those bald facts are probably a little 
misleading. Napoli are a better team than their recent run suggests, while 
Inter had more of the game than that scoreline might lead you to believe. If 
Pepe Reina had been less sharp in rushing out to smother a pair of first-half 
Mauro Icardi chances then perhaps things might even have turned a different 
way. If one thing is clear it is that Pioli needs to do something to fix that 
defence. Inter have conceded 10 times in the four games since he took charge.

• Napoli themselves should expect to be punished if they are similarly 
generous at the back against Benfica on Tuesday night. That said, it does feel 
noteworthy that all of their four defeats so far (across all competitions) came 
during the eight-game stretch when Raúl Albiol was ruled out.

• Atalanta’s glorious run came to an abrupt halt in Turin. After taking 25 
points from their past nine league games, the Bergamese side had begun to 
believe that it might just be ready to pull off a first win away to Juventus in 
27 years. Instead, the champions struck twice inside the first 20 minutes to 
break their spirit before they had even got started. In a season when they have 
rarely impressed even in victory, this was one of Juve’s most robust 
performances to date … and they are hoping to welcome Paulo Dybala back from 
injury in midweek as well.

• Four goals in four games now for Gianluca Lapadula, who was already well on 
his way to becoming a fan favourite at Milan even before he started scoring. 
His commitment to celebrating right through theyellow card that he received 
<https://twitter.com/isak_moller/status/805521360399323136> for excessive 
celebration after grabbing an 86th minute against Crotone on Sunday was hard 
not to admire.

• Random, but perhaps interesting stat from Opta, hinting at a greater parity 
across the board in Serie A this year: this is the first time since 1942-43 
that every single team in the division has lost at least three of its first 15 
games.

Results Fiorentina 2-1 Palermo, Juventus 3-1 Atalanta, Lazio 0-2 Roma, Milan 
2-1 Crotone, Napoli 3-0 Inter, Pescara 1-1 Cagliari, Sampdoria 2-0 Torino, 
Sassuolo 3-0 Empoli
 