
Valencia’s shirt did not carry a sponsor but it did carry a slogan. “Junts 
tornem”, it said, a statement of intent written across the players’ “chests as 
they ran on to the pitch: “together, we’ll be back”. Thirteen minutes later, 
they were. Thirteen minutes later, Mestalla was bouncing up and down, 
supporters barely able to believe their eyes, the roars from one goal running 
into the roars for the next. Valencia were 3-0 up against the league champions 
and heading to the top of the table, if only for a couple of hours, and the 
pages were already being written: “Goodbye to the years of sadness”, “A new 
order has arrived”, “The greatValencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> has returned”, “Valencia are 
back”, “This really could be the year of the resurrection”.

Seven games into the season Valencia are second and unbeaten, having won five 
and drawn two – away at Sevilla and Real Sociedad. They have won four from four 
at home, scoring 12 times. They have let in four goals and only Real Madrid and 
Barcelona have scored more. When theSpain squad was named on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/03/spain-vicente-del-bosque-diego-costa-hamstring>
 two of the three strikers were from Valencia, Paco Alcácer shouting into the 
showers after training to tell his team-mate Rodrigo that he was in too. Andon 
Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/04/valencia-atletico-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
, the defeated Atlético Madrid coach Diego Simeone said they are virtually 
guaranteed a Champions League place. The change has been swift and unexpected, 
any fears forgotten.

On Saturday, a huge banner was unfurled. “Welcome to Mestalla” it read. But 
the man they most wanted to welcome is still not there. Two executives 
representing the Singaporean businessman Peter Lim attended, but he did not. 
Although the deal is said to be “close”, his takeover at Mestalla has still not 
been formalised. Negotiations with Bankia, who effectively own Valencia, 
continue, with the bank seeking guarantees that it will be paid before other 
creditors, accusing Lim of moving the goalposts and claiming that it fears what 
would amount to an asset-strip at a club that owns two stadiums, a training 
ground and another significant plot of land in the city. Lim would also give 
Valencia a loan at a higher interest rate than the one he is negotiating from 
Bankia.

Formally, Valencia still have a €230m debt and face a significant challenge to 
finish the new stadium, if they do ultimately do so, and sell the old one. 
Though Lim is not yet the owner of Valencia, they have acted as if he is. This 
summer almost 20 players left. Jérémy Mathieu went to Barcelona and Juan Bernat 
to Bayern Munich. Eleven players came in, including Rodrigo, João Cancelo and 
André Gomes, all whom are owned by Lim’s company, andJorge Mendes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/22/-sp-jorge-mendes-agent-third-party-ownership-players>
’s hand is in much of what they do. Meanwhile, there was talk of Jackson 
Martínez arriving, but it did not happen and the most exciting of their 
signings, Álvaro Negredo, has not played yet.

Valencia also sacked their manager Juan Antonio Pizzi because, the president 
Amadeo Salvo explained, there was no point keeping him only for the new owner 
to ditch him as soon as the sale of the club went through. It still has not 
gone through, almost 10 months after the first deadline Lim set for an 
agreement to be reached. Nuno was Mendes’s first client and Lim’s man. A former 
substitute goalkeeper at Deportivo, few knew much about him; Pizzi had been 
popular, while Nuno’s success at Rio Ave was not sufficient to win people over. 
Not yet, anyway.

There were reasons to be fearful, reasons for there to be frustrations and 
concerns. But they have been overcome. Lim has been projected as the hope, in 
the face of a crisis that was dramatic and fans have been reassured that the 
takeover will happen. Acting on his wishes now helps. The emotional management 
has been clever. Salvo, the president fighting Lim’s corner, is sharp and an 
effective, populist communicator who has brought supporters together against 
the perfect external enemy: a bank. An enemy implicitly presented as blocking 
the path towards a beautiful future together. Valencia have a huge fan base and 
the club are conscious they can play a big part.

A fans’ zone has been set up so that supporters can meet players after games, 
and for the visit of Atlético, Mestalla had been painted black and orange, with 
images of former players going up around the ground. On one side of the stadium 
is a huge picture of the team bus arriving at the ground, fans surrounding it 
on all sides. Superficial it may be, perhaps even a case of papering over the 
cracks, but it is amazing what a lick of paint can do. Mestalla feels 
different: renewed, excited, positive, optimistic. Nuno has worked hard to 
bring supporters on board. At the end of every game, he takes his players into 
the middle of the field to applaud them.

The best way to get them to applaud back is to win and Nuno is doing that too. 
“I was Lim’s man, now I am Valencia’s manager,” he said at his presentation. He 
is charismatic, open and energetic, and the results have been spectacular. 
Players speak of a new, collective spirit, and there is a clarity about the way 
they play too – direct, aggressive, quick and intense. More Jürgen Klopp than 
Pep Guardiola or José Mourinho. Against Atlético, they committed almost twice 
as many fouls as their opponents. Nuno wants his team to go straight for the 
throat. “The midfieldersalways pressure,” Nuno said. “I want the team to always 
attack.”

Nuno believes Spanish players are unused to that style and its rarity in Spain 
can thus make its impact even greater. The challenge was convincing their own 
Spanish players to accept it, to accept him, and Nuno has succeeded. It may 
sound like a contradiction in terms, but there is a warm authority about him 
that has won them over. All over the pitch, they have impressed. Gomes and Dani 
Parejo have led the midfield and Javi Fuego protects the defence. Nicolás 
Otamendi is fast becoming a cult hero. Alcácer, all swift movement arriving at 
the near post, has been scoring goals. And Rodrigo, brought back from Benfica 
and dashing in from the wing, has earned his place in the Spain squad. Dynamic, 
optimistic, aggressive, the goals came: three every week for a month.

Before this weekend, Valencia had won four and drawn two. The second of those 
draws, against Real Sociedad, was an opportunity lost. The chance to go top had 
slipped through their fingers, a reminder not to get too carried away. But 
something was moving and this weekend proved it. If it was tempting to conclude 
that an unbeaten start was as much about fixtures as football – they had also 
faced Sevilla, Málaga, Espanyol, Getafe, Córdoba and Real Sociedad – Saturday 
was different.Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid>, the champions who beat 
Sevilla 4-0 the week before and a team that Nuno pointedly noted “has players 
who cost €15m or €30m sitting on the bench.” A proper test.

Fans gathered two hours before kick-off to welcome the team bus, 55,000 
tickets had been sold and the noise was deafening. “The best thing about the 
game was the fans,” Nuno said. “Wow. Thank you, thank you.”

Valencia tore into Atlético. They were 1-0 up thanks to a bizarre headed 
own-goal from João Miranda after six minutes. Gomes scored a wonderful second 
after eight minutes and Otamendi made it three in the 14th. Then Valencia lost 
control. From the third goal until half-time, Atlético scored one and had eight 
shots on target; Valencia had none. But when it looked like their lead was 
under threat, their goalkeeper Diego Alves was there. Atlético won a penalty 
before half-time which Guilherme Siqueira took.

The problem was that the man standing in front of him was Alves, who has saved 
penalties from Lionel Messi, Cristiano Ronaldo, Diego Costa and Frédéric 
Kanouté, and he saved this one too. Of the 30 penalties he has faced inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, only 16 have been 
scored; if you include other competitions then fewer than half the penalties he 
has faced went in. “We were worried,” Nuno admitted. “But that save was very 
important and we controlled the second half much better.” Atlético’s reaction 
had been superb but their chance had gone. Another three points: “It was 14, 
now it’s 17, next we want 20,” Nuno said.

This was the kind of performance that has defined Valencia this season. They 
have scored first in every game except the first; they have scored six times in 
the opening 15 minutes, eight times under 25 minutes and 10 times inside 31 
minutes. This was the fourth time they had scored three.

And yet it was not the goals that defined them but a moment that most people 
missed. It was about 20 minutes into the game, they led 3-0 and the ball was 
passed among the central defenders. Each pass was greeted with anolé from the 
fans. Nuno leapt from the bench and waggled his finger at them. “It was too 
soon for that; it takes your focus off the game,” he said afterwards. “We have 
to respect Atlético but it’s more than that. It’s that I don’t want possession 
for possession: I want it to attack. It is important that the fans support the 
team but I want them to recognise our style too ... and they did.”

As he stood and waved his finger, the olés died. At the full-time whistle, 
they erupted once more. Nuno led his players on to the pitch to applaud them as 
the chant went round. “Valencia! Valencia! Valencia!” Together, they were back. 
Super Deporte described it as “total ecstasy”. With Barcelona yet to open the 
scoring in Vallecas, Valencia were top. Nuno was asked if this was his best day 
at Valencia. “No,” he said. “The best day is in the future.”

Talking points

• BOOM! Saúl Berjón volleyed in a ridiculously good goal during the game of 
the weekend which Eibar drew 3-3 against Levante, thanks to superbly taken 
94th-minute winner from Piovaccari. Eibar are only three points off a European 
place and are the highest-placed Basque team in the league. In fact, they have 
as many points as Real Sociedad and Athletic Bilbao put together.

• Speaking of Athletic, maybe the international break will come to their 
rescue. Their coach Ernesto Valverde admitted that they need it after a 
terrible run culminated in a 5-0 hammering at the Bernabéu, where Ronaldo got 
another hat-trick. It would have been more but for a handful of superb saves 
from Gorka Iraizoz. “We can’t go on like this,” he had said after their midweek 
defeat to Bate Borisov. But carry on they did. They have lost five in a row in 
the league. “There was so much talk about how bad we were that we ended up 
believing it,” Valverde said. “Emotionally, we are in a bad way.”

• Bravo, Bravo. Claudio kept another clean sheet as Barcelona beat Rayo 
Vallecano 2-0 with two goals in a minute. That is seven clean sheets in the 
first seven games of the season – a new La Liga record.

• Chapi Ferrer was furious. “If you need to put your balls on the line, you do 
it,” he said after Córdoba missed out on the chance to claim a first win of the 
season when Babá got an 89th-minute equaliser for Getafe at the Coliseum.

Results: Getafe 1-1 Córdoba, Valencia 3-1 Atlético, Rayo 0-2 Barcelona, Eibar 
3-3 Levante, Almería 2-2 Elche, Málaga 2-1 Granada, Sevilla 4-1 Deportivo, 
Espanyol 2-2 Real Sociedad, Real Madrid 5-0 Espanyol.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Barcelona 7 19 19 
2 Valencia 7 13 17 
3 Sevilla 7 5 16 
4 Real Madrid 7 16 15 
5 Atletico Madrid 7 5 14 
6 Celta Vigo 7 2 12 
7 Villarreal 7 3 11 
8 Espanyol 7 1 9 
9 Eibar 7 1 9 
10 Almeria 7 0 9 
11 Malaga 7 -2 9 
12 Rayo Vallecano 7 -2 8 
13 Granada 7 -6 8 
14 Getafe 7 -7 7 
15 Real Sociedad 7 -3 5 
16 Elche 7 -9 5 
17 Levante 7 -16 5 
18 Athletic Bilbao 7 -7 4 
19 Cordoba 7 -7 4 
20 Deportivo La Coruna 7 -11 4  