
Victims’ rights advocates are reacting with shock to the remarks of a New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City police captain who said 
that acquaintance rapes are not as serious as rapes perpetrated by strangers.

“They’re not total abomination rapes where strangers are being dragged off the 
streets,” said Captain Peter Rose of the New York City police department’s 94th 
precinct. “If there’s a true stranger rape, a random guy picks up a stranger 
off the street, those are the troubling ones. That person has, like, no moral 
standards.”

Rose made his comments in a community council meeting on Wednesday, according 
toDNAInfo 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20170106/greenpoint/rapes-nypd-arrest>, a 
news site covering New York City neighborhood news.

A spokesman for the 94th precinct, which is headquartered in Brooklyn’s 
Greenpoint neighborhood, referred a request for comment to theNYPD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nypd>.

In a statement, the NYPD said, “Captain Rose’s comments did not properly 
explain the complexity of issues involved with investigating rape complaints. 
Every report of rape is thoroughly investigated by specially trained detectives 
in the NYPD’s Special Victims Unit. All complaints of rape and other types of 
sexual crimes are taken seriously whether they are committed by domestic 
partners, acquaintances, or strangers.”

“Due to the anonymous and random nature of rapes committed by strangers, 
detectives often face greater challenges in these types of crimes. Regardless, 
all sexual offenses are taken seriously.”

Rose echoed his comments in the community meeting in an interview with 
DNAInfo. The website was inquiring about an apparent spike in rape reports in 
the Greenpoint neighborhood, many of which remain unsolved.

“Every rape should be investigated. I wish we could do more,” Rose said. “It 
really becomes a balancing act for the investigators. Some of them were Tinder, 
some of them were hookup sites, some of them were actually coworkers. It’s not 
a trend that we’re too worried about because out of 13 [sex attacks], only two 
were true stranger rapes.”

Rose is not a member of the special victims division that investigates almost 
all reports of rape in New York City. When a rape is reported in his precinct, 
it is likely that officers under his command take an initial report before 
referring the case to that division.

Victims’ rights groups decried Rose’s comments as insensitive toward rape 
victims and not reflective of the reality of many of these crimes.

“Rape is an abomination whether it’s a stranger rape or an acquaintance rape,” 
said Josie Torielli, the assistant director of intervention at the New York 
City Alliance Against Sexual Assault. “Levels of knowledge vary within the 
NYPD. But one of the things we understand here, as advocates, is that 
acquaintance rapes are just as devastating and just as abominable.”

Jennifer Gentile Long, the CEO of Aequitas, a group that advises prosecutors 
in sex crime cases, noted that research consistently shows that the 
overwhelming majority of sexual assaults are perpetrated by someone the victim 
has met.

“Very few rapes are by strangers dragging people off the streets,” she said. 
“One of the best weapons a rapist has is to get a victim in a position where 
they may be trusting, feeling like they know this person.”

She added that many serial rapists commit assaults against both strangers and 
acquaintances. Recent movements to test large backlogs of rape kits have found 
many serial rapists that were identified to police in the past but allowed to 
go free because the accuser was an acquaintance, and her report was dismissed 
or minimized.

“If you’re missing those cases where people know each other, it’s problematic 
for capturing serial rapists” who frequently target strangers.

Torielli said Rose’s comments demonstrate the need for police departments to 
have specially trained officers to oversee reports of rape, as New York’s does. 
Comments like his, she said, could discourage rape victims from making a report.

“When someone’s disclosing an incident of sexual violence, the response that 
they receive not only has an impact on their recovery but could perhaps have an 
impact on other survivors wanting to come forward,” she said.

DNAInfo identified 10 reports of rape and assault dating to 2016 and taking 
place in the 94th precinct in which police had made no arrests. Among the 
accusers, two women claimed they were assaulted by coworkers after socializing 
with them. One woman claimed a friend raped her, another claimed her boss 
forced her to have oral sex. Two women said they were attacked by taxi or Lyft 
drivers.

Two of those 10 cases concluded when the women returned to their homes in 
California and Florida, Rose told the website, and one case concluded after the 
woman reporting the rape declined to go to the hospital or give a description 
of her attacker. Rose blamed the lack of arrests generally on uncooperative 
victims.

“When I hear the phrase we didn’t have a cooperating victim, my antenna always 
goes up,” Jane Manning, the advocacy director of the New York City chapter of 
the National Organization for Women, told DNAInfo. “If you hear ‘I can’t get 
the victim to cooperate’ in case after case, you should be asking yourself what 
are they failing to do?”
 