
South Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> President Park 
Geun-hye’s office has confirmed revelations by an opposition lawmaker that it 
purchased about 360 erectile dysfunction Viagra pills and the generic version 
of the drug in December.


While the report has created a frenzy on the internet, Park’s office said the 
pills were bought to potentially treat altitude sickness for presidential aides 
and employees on Park’s May trips to Ethiopia, Uganda and Kenya, whose capitals 
are thousands of metres above sea level.

Turmoil in east Asia: sensitive moment for region unsettled by Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/turmoil-east-asia-region-unsettled-trump>
The pills were not used, said Jung Youn-kuk, spokesman of the presidential 
Blue House. South Korean doctors sometimes prescribe Viagra-style drugs to 
climbers because they are believed to be effective in preventing altitude 
sickness.

The Viagra revelation comes as Park grapples with a massive political scandal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>

The president is now bracing for an impeachment push by opposition parties and 
some members of her own Saenuri party amid allegations that she let a secretive 
confidante manipulate government affairs and amass an illicit fortune, a 
scandal critics say undermines the country’s democracy.

On Wednesday South Korean prosecutors raided offices of the Samsung Group and 
the state pension fund as the electronics giant was dragged further into the 
scandal engulfing Park.

The raid comes as Samsung faces allegations it bribed Park’s confidant Choi 
Soon-Sil to win state approval for a controversial merger it sought in 2015.

Prosecutors visited the group’s Future Strategy Office, which oversees key 
business decisions, the Yonhap news agency reported.

A Samsung spokesman confirmed the visit by prosecutors but declined to 
elaborate.

On Sunday prosecutors said they believed Park was collusively involved in the 
criminal activities of Choi and two presidential aides who allegedly bullied 
companies into giving tens of millions of dollars to foundations and businesses 
Choi controlled, and that Choi was allowed to interfere with state affairs.

Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this report
 