
Somerset may have missed out on the County Championship but the West Country 
is currently enjoying a sporting renaissance. For the first time there are four 
clubs from the region in thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> and the title of “best in the 
west” has never been so keenly contested. Exeter, on this evidence, stand every 
chance of being crowned cider kings, while Bristol could already do with some 
urgent refreshment.

A fourth straight defeat for Andy Robinson’s side was not as sobering as last 
weekend’s 70-point hammering at Wasps but, once again,Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> could not live with the pace 
and positivity of high-ranking opponents. With the Chiefs forwards on the front 
foot and Gareth Steenson expertly marshalling his backs, the final margin would 
have been wider had they played at full bore for the entire 80 minutes.

Tom Wood: ‘If I play for England I want to play on merit in a quality team’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/tom-wood-england-merit-northampton-saints-rugby-union>
As it was, the visitors still scored five tries, with Olly Woodburn and Thomas 
Waldrom claiming two apiece. The Chiefs’ management will be less satisfied with 
a scrappy second half but, with Henry Slade and Sam Hill reunited at centre, 
there was more of a cutting edge to their midfield. Hill added a fifth try in 
the 78th minute to ensureExeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> 
returned back down the M5 with their first away win of the season.

It was the first time Exeter have played in Bristol since winning promotion at 
the old Memorial Ground in 2010 and the city still seems to inspire them. 
Woodman’s brace of tries in the opening quarter earned them a 14-0 lead almost 
before their hosts had blinked, despite losing Ian Whitten to the sin-bin after 
he and Ryan Edwards collided as they chased an up-and-under. They were still 
able to breach the Bristol defence with 14 men when Slade and Hill combined 
cleverly in midfield to send their wing charging through the middle. The home 
side did strike back when Edwards’ nifty footwork left Lachie Turner marooned 
and put Jordan Williams over but it was a rare early instance of Devonian 
misjudgement.

The Chiefs starting XV was also a statistician’s delight: when was the last 
time an Aviva Premiership pack contained five forwards born in Australia? With 
Kiwi Waldrom at No8 and Turner, a former Wallaby, at full-back there is 
currently no shortage of southern hemisphere influence at Sandy Park. It was 
underlined shortly before the interval when Exeter once again established 
themselves in the danger zone and Waldrom poached another of his trademark 
close-range scores. A try bonus point should probably have been snaffled before 
half-time, only for another rumbling drive to be held up over the line.

On the season’s opening two weekends Chiefs displayed an uncharacteristic lack 
of tempo at times and paid the penalty in the form of frustrating defeats to 
Wasps and Saracens. That lesson has been swiftly absorbed and, with Steenson 
back starting at 10, they look more like their normal, energetic selves.

Initially at least it was a similar tale after half-time with Waldrom adding 
his second try of the evening, again from point-blank range, within three 
minutes of the restart. Loosehead prop Alec Hepburn – born in Perth but an 
England Saxon in the summer – and hooker Luke Cowan-Dickie were equally 
conspicuous in the loose; when Chiefs get their basics right they are hard work 
for anyone.

In the circumstances Bristol will be consoled by their spirit in adversity, 
with front-row forwards Ross McMillan and Max Crumpton both crashing over to 
reduce the deficit, but there is no let-up, with Saracens arriving next week

“The result is pretty damning and disappointing,” admitted Robinson. “There 
was plenty of effort but Exeter controlled the tempo of that game. It could be 
another tough day for us but we understand the challenges we’ve got. These 
games will help us immensely in the battles we’ll have in the future.”

Bristol Williams; Edwards, Hurrell, Palamo, Varndell (Amersbury, 2-12; 49); 
Pisi, Cliff; Traynor (Tonga’uiha, 60), McMillan (Crumpton, 60), Cortes 
(Ford-Robinson, 60), Phillips, Sorenson, Fisher (Joyce, 65), Lam (capt), Crane 
(Eadie, 49).Replacements not used Roberts, Jarvis.

Tries Williams, McMillan, Crumpton. Con Williams.

Exeter Turner (Devoto, 65); Woodburn, Hill, Slade (Short, 68), Whitten; 
Steenson (capt), Chudley (Lewis, 72); Hepburn (Moon, 54), Cowan-Dickie 
(Yeandle, 54), Holmes (Williams, 54), Lees, Welch (Parling, 62), Dennis, Salvi 
(Horstmann, 67), Waldrom.

Tries Woodburn 2, Waldrom 2, Hill. Cons Steenson 5. Pens Steenson 2. Sin-bin 
Whitten 13.

Referee T Foley (RFU). Att 15,065.
 