
Until recently, two things brought visitors to the sparsely occupied Isle of 
Jura in Scotland's Western Isles. First there's the whisky. The island's only 
road leads straight from the ferry to the distillery where 1.4 million litres 
of pure alcohol is produced annually and which attracts 5,000 people each year. 
Next, there's the scenery and wildlife - the 30-mile-long and seven-mile-wide 
island is home to 6,500 deer. Its surrounding sea is full of seals, dolphins 
and porpoises.

Then a couple of months ago, David Cameron sang the island's praises on Desert 
Island Discs. As yet it's too early to observe any Cameron effect, though 
perhaps next year Notting Hill new Tories will outnumber the otters playing 
along its lovely shoreline.

Not that Cameron was the first media manipulator to lay claim to this 
extraordinary outlying place. Back in 1994, the KLF, a group comprised of jaded 
ex-A&R man Bill Drummond and commercially unsuccessful musician Jimmy Cauty, 
who together might be best described as a situationist acid house band, came 
here to burn £1m in cash and film the event. The result - Watch The K 
Foundation Burn A Million Quid - is still occasionally screened (it will be 
shown at PS 1 in Queens, New York, this autumn).

On an island where myths abound and the wee people are still considered by 
some to be responsible for most upsets, mishaps and mislaid possessions, the 
KLF have simply added another story. The money-burning, which took place on the 
little peninsula at Ardfin, just below Jura House, is fresh in the memory here. 
It's just the plentiful details that seem to have been muddied in the retelling.

The group stayed at the Jura Hotel in Craighouse, the only village on an 
island which has a population of around 170 and 80 houses in all. The hotel, 
stark outside and cosy within, has a maximum capacity of 27. It houses the 
island's only bar and its restaurant serves langoustine straight from the sea. 
It has been run by Steve and Fiona Watson for 24 years.

"We didn't really know who they were," Steve says of the KLF as he gazes out 
at the palm trees that flourish in the gulf stream climate. "I didn't see the 
film when they came back to show it in the village hall a bit later, though 
plenty did and were quite upset. People thought they could have given the money 
to charity."

The KLF's motivation was to rid themselves of the gains they'd made out of an 
ugly music industry they'd found it so easy to manipulate. They'd successfully 
accrued a fortune from releasing records that varied from the sublime (Tammy 
Wynette singing on Justified and Ancient) to the downright charmless (Doctoring 
the Tardis, which sampled Gary Glitter and Sweet). Understandably, this was - 
and still is - a little outside the average Hebridean's comprehension.

The weekend I visited Jura, there was nothing more controversial than a 
performance by Pete Smokes and the Roaches in the village hall. The six local 
lads ploughed their way through a repertoire that took in everything from 
Coldplay to the Undertones. A small but appreciative crowd danced. I'd been 
hoping for something more ceilidh and less rock'n'roll, though was mollified by 
an interview with bagpiping's great young hope Stuart Cassells the next day. 
His band is called The Red Hot Chilli Pipers.

The KLF's connection with the Isle of Jura is perhaps not what you would 
expect. I'd assumed they'd been lured by its mystical charms - there's even a 
huge piece of quartzite on the way to Corryvreckan known as the Future stone. 
Lie on it and your future will be revealed. In 1991, at the height of their 
success, they had performed a wicker man burning, again at Ardfin, in the 
presence of 80 specially invited music journalists dressed in saffron robes at 
the summer solstice. "It was a mock pagan ritual," says Jimmy Cauty now. "A bit 
of street theatre gone mad. And the wicker man didn't really burn very well 
because it was so wet."

Yet some islanders are still scandalised after all these years. One man told 
me he'd been so disgusted by the event he'd burnt the wicker man in advance of 
the scheduled time and the entire group had been run off the island. You can 
file that under "myth", but you get his point.

It turns out that Cauty had become friends with the major landowner's son, 
Francis Riley Smith, in his late teens. They used to helicopter on and off the 
island from Glasgow and run riot in the huge house with its astonishing walled 
garden. Now there's a tea pavilion in the garden run by a lone lady with an 
incredible range of biscuity cakes. A pretty walk down to the two beaches below 
- one sand, one pebble - walks off the scones. The family no longer lives there 
and the house can be hired out.

But Jura's celluloid fame doesn't end with the absurd acts of these overmonied 
anarchists. In the far far north of the island, you'll find a natural whirlpool 
- the second largest in the world - in the sea just below a point called 
Corryvreckan. Of course there's a legend attached to this natural phenomenon - 
of unrequited love between a Norseman and a Celtic chieftain's daughter. 
Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger also exploited its drama in their 1945 
film I Know Where I'm Going! When the film's heroine sets off for Mull from 
Kilora against the dictates of her heart, she encounters the whirlpool - as 
much a metaphor of her own inner turmoil as a force of nature.

They surely don't make them like that anymore. And neither can Jura resist 
change, however subtle and slow. On neighbouring Islay, local builders are 
booked up for months, so intense is the current rate of housebuilding. At 
Craighouse, the distillery has converted one of its old buildings into the Jura 
Lodge. Its two massive floors can now accommodate a group of up to eight people 
in de luxe conditions and comes complete with a live-out housekeeper. In 
delightfully overdecorated rooms, created by the Paris-based decorator Bambi 
Sloan (yes, her real name), you will find power showers, freestanding baths and 
high-thread-count linen. Its vast kitchen boasts such idiosyncracies as a 
mirror-fronted 1940s fridge from a cafe in Brazil and a white suit of armour, 
plenty of stags heads and Bakelite phones. Cauty says he can't imagine going 
back to Jura now. But the Cameron set, you feel, will really fit right in.

Getting there

British Airways (0870 8509850, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies Glasgow-Islay 
from £69 return inc tax. Car rental from D&N MacKenzie (01496 302300) at Islay 
airport from £30 per day. Take the ferry from Port Askaig to Feolin.

Where to stay

The Jura Lodge (01496 820240, isleofjura.com <http://www.isleofjura.com>) from 
£1,000 for the weekend (up to 8 people), from £1,500 for the week. Jura Hotel, 
Craighouse (01496 820243,jurahotel.co.uk <http://www.jurahotel.co.uk>) 
£35-£55pp.
 