
People in all societies have disputes. In advanced legal systems the dominant 
approach to resolving them has been to instruct lawyers and appear before 
courts. But with the internet, advanced hardware and cutting-edge software 
coming on-stream, the days of fetching up in front of a judge with bulging 
case-files are beginning to change – though rather faster in some parts of the 
world than others.

Professor Richard Susskind, IT adviser to the UK lord chief justice, argues 
that there are four compelling reasons why courts should explore the emerging 
digital possibilities. “The system is costly for users; it’s usually too time 
consuming and disputes take a long time to resolve; it’s largely 
unintelligible; and it also seems out of step in the internet society,” he 
says. “Citizens have a growing expectation that services will be delivered 
digitally.”


The most visible problem – piles of paperwork that are hard to reference and 
often even harder for the parties to access – has now been solved in the higher 
criminal courts in England and Wales, which completed the transition to fully 
digitised evidence files in April 2016. Civil courts in England and Wales, 
however, have not yet made that leap, and though agovernment consultation is 
being held (pdf) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/553261/joint-vision-statement.pdf>
 on an fundamental rethink of how civil justice is delivered, many other 
countries are far further ahead with their e-justice revolution.


Training can be an issue, as it requires judges and lawyers who may already be 
overstretched to take time out.

Turkey, which won the UN’s public service award in 2012 
<https://www.neweurope.eu/article/turkish-ministry-justice-receives-united-nations-public-service-award/>
, now has a national electronic service across all its judicial functions. 
Lawyers and citizens can examine files, pay application fees, submit their 
documents and claims and file cases electronically to any court in the land. As 
a case progresses, they can access all relevant information and learn the day 
fixed for the trial without checking with court staff by phone or in person.

Turkey’s transformation of the data aspect of its judicial system has resulted 
in a service that is faster, more transparent and more cost efficient, said 
judge Servet Gul, head of information technologies at the ministry of justice, 
speaking at a UN meeting. Advanced video conferencing facilities also mean 
there is less need to transfer prisoners to court. The system has nearly 2 
million users, had led to savings of $100m and has created avirtually paperless 
working environment 
<https://www.un.org/ruleoflaw/blog/2016/06/e-justice-sharing-national-experiences-in-enhancing-transparency-effectiveness-and-access-to-justice/>
, so is greener, too.


In Australia, the federal court was the first judicial setting to put in place 
electronic court files, and is now seen as global leader in how to manage 
digitised court documents. Australia is now moving on to upload all 
administrative records in its various registries.

While the US is clearly an altogether bigger and more diverse jurisdiction, 
many state courts there are also on their way to become paperless, “with an 
obligation for lawyers to electronically file documents that judges can access 
via laptops and other devices,” explains Dr Judith Townend, director of 
Information Law and Policy Centre at the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies, 
University of London.

In addition, she observes, the US supreme court is planning to introduce full 
electronic filing of different types of motions and applications, with free 
public access to these materials on the court’s website – though it seems that 
once bedded in,paper filing will still be required 
<http://uk.pcmag.com/web-sites-products/38632/news/us-supreme-court-to-deploy-new-electronic-filing-system-arou>
, which will perhaps somewhat frustrate the intentions of modernisers.


Related: White House, Whitehall, Singapore - how public bodies copy Silicon 
Valley startups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/17/public-bodies-copy-silicon-valley-tech-digital-services>

Countries that lag behind in efforts to reach a more streamlined, accessible 
online judiciary are often struggling not just with the upfront costs of 
investment, but have not yet convinced lawyers and court clerks who are deeply 
entrenched in the minutiae of existing protocols that there could be another 
way of doing things.


Training can be an issue, as it requires judges and lawyers who may already be 
overstretched to take time out. There can also be capacity issues. In India, 
for instance, there is onlya single training centre  
<http://cjnewsind.blogspot.co.uk/2014/10/e-judiciary-in-india-is-needed.html>
working to support professionals wanting to learn more about the practice and 
principals underpinning the delivery of e-courts.

But novel approaches are also being tried to kickstart a more fundamental 
transformation of the way justice is delivered. Online dispute resolution 
systems developed by tech companies such as eBay and Nominet have inspired some 
countries not simply to substitute electronic documents for bundles of paper, 
but to replace the physical courtroom with a judicial service operated over the 
internet.


Earlier this year, British Colombia in Canada launched the nation’s first ever 
online civil tribunal aimed at allowing citizens to resolve small-value 
property and land disputes: initially voluntary, it will soon be made 
mandatory. For cases involving sums of less than $25,000, the benefit is that 
applicants can now avoid a pricey trip to the supreme court where legal costs 
could easily end up higher than the sums in dispute. According to the Vancouver 
Sun 
<http://vancouversun.com/news/local-news/b-c-launches-first-in-canada-online-tribunal-to-resolve-civil-disputes>
, the pioneering system includes party-to-party negotiations. “If that fails to 
reach an agreement, there is a facilitation phase akin to mediation, and, 
finally, an adjudicator can make a ruling with the same force as a court 
ruling.”

In Pakistan, writing about the online case management system introduced in the 
high courts of Islamabad and Lahore, lawyerTaimur Ali Khan Mohmand points out 
<https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/154687-E-judiciary> that digitising case 
files is only a very basic first step on a journey that, he believes, should 
see fully automated and digitised e-courts introduced across the country, with 
trials conducted over Skype. An electronic judicial service, he suggests, would 
not only stamp out corruption would also improve the justice system to make it 
more accessible for those who live far from legal centres or who struggle to 
afford the costs of seeking justice.


Though it may not be surprising that countries such as Pakistan and India are 
struggling with some aspects of modernising their judicial service, Townend 
says the UK too is “far behind” similarly developed countries such as the 
Netherlands, where the ministry of justice and security has created a service 
that offers automated legal guidance through matrimonial disputes including 
divorce and matters of custody and maintenance.


There are inherent risks when asking people to rely on an 
electronically-delivered judicial service at what is likely to be one of the 
most stressful points of their life. Trust in a system is vital. Governments 
will need to anticipate concerns that the critical quality of human judgment 
could be lost, and that citizens will end up being processed through anonymous 
online pathways that are as alienating as many of the dispute resolution 
services used by large corporates.


Challenges to a more modernised, digitised judicial system also include the 
potentially negative attitudes of professionals working within it, acknowledges 
Susskind, who highlights that “the question of execution” is also critical.


Talking about his hopes that the UK will soon take the leap to instigating a 
fully online civil dispute resolution system, Susskind says that what’s needed 
to achieve success is “to move away from the idea of a blueprint, to being more 
incremental”.


Large government IT contracts, he observes, do not have a happy history, and 
so making each advance a modular step that is thoroughly tested before the next 
one is taken will go a long way to allaying fears both within the notoriously 
risk-averse legal profession, as well developing faith in users that their case 
will be heard fairly, and that justice can truly be done.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 