
A RANDY, abusive, brilliant tyrant who made most people laugh and some cry. 
Strangers thought of Oscar Beuselinck that way. Those who had the privilege of 
knowing Oscar, the show business and media lawyer who has died aged 77, when he 
was not performing, thought him a richer and softer man.

Every day he would perform, not just for his clients and his staff, but also 
for himself. He knew he had the gift of making people laugh and enjoyed the 
pleasure he gave audiences. A 1976 profile by Kathleen Tynan accurately 
described him as 'unorthodox, flamboyant, the delight of almost everybody in 
the world of entertainment'.

I doubt if anyone has been more impersonated. John Osborne, a client and best 
man at Oscar's second wedding was inspired by him to write Inadmissible 
Evidence which starred Nicol Williamson, another client. John Thaw also does a 
mean Oscar.

London and Hollywood dinner parties will now have to make do with the vast 
number of Oscar stories already in circulation. There was the memo he 
circulated the day after a secretary was fired after being caught in flagrante 
on Oscar's leather desk. 'She had to go,' he explained, 'because I'm the only 
one who's had it off in every room in this building and she was becoming a 
threat to my record.'

Oscar was born in Bloomsbury, son of a formidable woman known as Fighting Win. 
His father was a Flemish Catholic chef, at sea much of the time. Oscar was the 
eldest of four children, regular churchgoers forbidden to swear. At 12, Oscar 
worked after school as a tailor's trotter and at 14 left school (without great 
ambition) to become a messenger with a law firm. His talent was spotted and 
after wartime work for British Intelligence (he irritated his superiors by 
reading Tribune), he qualified as a solicitor and took over the firm.

Oscar loved film, theatre and newspapers and the people who worked in them. It 
was his fascination with understanding what made them tick that made him such 
an outstanding lawyer. He knew far more law than he was given credit for, but 
his greatest strength was an ability to analyse the psychological make-up of 
his opponents and then work on the weak spots, sometimes to be found in very 
unobvious places.

He had the confidence to back his own judgment, even when his views were 
rejected by eminent counsel. In 1980, Oscar instructed a QC to prepare a 
statement of claim for a client, and the counsel responded with 'grave 
misgiving' as the client's case was 'quite hopeless in law'. 'Don't worry about 
him, son - issue the writ,' Oscar said to me as his articled clerk, 'We'll 
win'. Four years later we did. The QC, by the way, became a judge.

In 1966, Oscar was sued by Margaret, Duchess of Argyll, who claimed that he 
had given her negligent advice. The case made headlines and the judge rejected 
the Duchess's evidence, preferring Oscar's account.

As a non-smoker and teetotaller, Oscar proclaimed: 'I've only got two vices, 
and one of them is paying alimony.' He joked that his third wife was so 
unimpressed with his track record that she asked for the alimony up front - he 
knew a great line when he heard one.

After more than 50 years in private practice, he worked for Mirror Group 
Newspapers in the late 1980s - Robert Maxwell probably preferred him as an ally 
rather than the adversary he had for so long been. He missed private practice 
and returned to work with Davenport Lyons: for them, he recruited the entire 
litigation team of his first firm, Wright Webb Syrett. He enjoyed 
talent-spotting would-be lawyers from unconventional backgrounds and his 
protegees included libel lawyers Keith Schilling, Kevin Bays and Barry Shaw.

While being a husband always proved difficult for him, Oscar was very loving 
and generous. Although regretting that he had not been better father to Paul 
(the actor Paul Nicholas) and Richard, he loved his sons and grandchildren and 
was proud that his grandson - also Oscar Beuselinck - had gone into the film 
business.

His career spanned generations of powerful and famous clients, including many 
newspapers, and Private Eye. When acting for John Osborne, Oscar suggested that
Look Back In Anger would make a good film and so became a director of Woodfall 
Films, which went on to produceThe Entertainer and Tom Jones.

Many of his clients sought his advice about marriage - since he was ruthless 
and would get the desired result - but he told quite a few of them he was not 
going to render a bill but would give his advice simply as: 'Pay up, stay 
friendly and get on with your life.'

He practised what he preached and it was no surprise to hear that, when Oscar 
was seriously unwell five years ago, all three former Mrs Beuselincks were at 
his bedside - at the same time. For the last nine years, he had a close 
friendship with a delightful lady whom he claimed understood him particularly 
well.

Oscar had great respect for the law. Although he could upset people, he always 
acted with great professionalism and integrity. Oscar's word was known to be a 
reliable bond - if the deal was in writing there was more need to be careful.

After much nagging, Oscar decided to write his life story and had recently 
completed the first draft. To die on a walk before lunch on Folkestone beach, 
only days after issuing his last writ, had a flamboyance in keeping with his 
style. He touched many lives and will be missed.

Oscar Beuselinck, lawyer, born October 10, 1919; died July 27, 1997
 