
Saracens are one English institution that want to remain in Europe 
indefinitely. The Premiership champions won the Champions Cup for the first 
time by an emphatic margin having learned from their defeat to Toulonin the 
final two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/24/toulon-saracens-heineken-cup-final-match-report>
. They kept it simple and neutralised Racing’s “home” advantage.

The setting was French but the climate was more familiar to the British 
contingent in the capacity crowd, cloudbursts so heavy that the overhead 
television camera was wrapped in a coat, thunder and lightning and the 
occasional flash of sun. The only colour came from a rainbow as two teams not 
known for their risk-taking or willingness to run from their own territory 
largely cancelled themselves out.

Saracens: ‘Awesome to be European kings… now for the Premiership’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/14/saracens-european-kings-racing-92-premiership>
Racing did not make a racing start as they had in the previous two rounds when 
taking a 10-point lead in the opening minutes. They wasted the chance to take 
an early lead when Maxime Machenaud missed a 40-metre penalty: he was given the 
kicking duties because his half-back partner Dan Carter was handicapped by a 
calf problem he sustained during the semi-final victory over Leicester.

Carter had a slight limp from the start and his role was muted. His first pass 
was to the feet of Johann Goosen as the ball slipped out of his hand, his 
kicking was wayward, he dropped a high ball under pressure from Owen Farrell 
and was taken out off the ball, and high, by Brad Barritt moments after the
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> captain had been involved 
in a scuffle with the Racing skipper Dimitri Szarzewski as they were being 
spoken to by the referee Nigel Owens.

Carter lasted until two minutes into the second half, double the time that 
Machenaud had spent on the field. The scrum-half exited concussed after coming 
off worst in a collision with Chris Wyles: as he stood up after receiving 
treatment, his legs wobbled, and the two mainstays of Racing’s attacking game 
made minimal contributions. Such was the focus and ferocity of Saracens’ 
defence that even had the pair been at their best, it may not have been enough 
for Racing.

Machenaud was replaced by Mike Phillips, a contrasting scrum-half who 
box-kicked and broke a few tackles, most notably at the start of the second 
half when he started a break from a ruck that ended with Maro Itoje winning a 
penalty at the breakdown. Racing missed Machenaud’s zip and impish touch and, 
while they stayed in the game largely through their counter-rucking and 
strength over the ball, they rarely troubled a defence that again showed a 
remarkable capacity to repair itself in an instant.

It was a match for the devoted, which was unfortunate for the organisers as 
the bulk of the tickets had been sold before the two finalists were known. It 
was not a day to miss penalties: Machenaud’s chance had come after Mako 
Vunipola was ruled to have dropped a scrum; when his opposite number, the 
rather large and burly Ben Tameifuna, was accused of the same offence six 
minutes later, Owen Farrell scored the first points of the afternoon.

Like Carter, Farrell’s first pass hit the grass rather than the hands of its 
target, in his case George Kruis, but his day was to get better. He kicked 
seven penalties from seven attempts as his side, for 70 minutes, were largely 
in control if never far ahead on the scoreboard. He kept Saracens in the right 
areas and his one blemish came in the third quarter when he tackled Chris Masoe 
high and the crowd bayed for Owens to reach for his cards when the incident was 
replayed on the big screen, a moment the French television producer did not 
waste as various camera angles were produced.

Owens contented himself with a penalty and a telling-off, with the challenge 
borderline high, but when Farrell was quickly taken out late by Masoe and 
Wenceslas Lauret after kicking the ball downfield there was no replay on the 
big screen. Farrell milked the challenge but it was a day when one of the few 
advantages Saracens did not have was playing on home soil.

Although they were prepared to counterattack, largely through the 
quick-stepping Alex Goode, once Saracens had regained the lead following 
Goosen’s equalising penalty on 17 minutes after Vunipola had caused another 
scrum to collapse, they squeezed Racing, who by then had lost their attacking 
shape. Hard though the wing Joe Rokocoko tried to inspire Racing, they too 
often had only one or two players standing outside there ball-carrier having 
been dragged out of position.

They were up against players that had only once been on the losing side since 
the World Cup: Itoje, Farrell, the Vunipola brothers, and Kruis (who only 
played for the first three minutes of that reverse against Harlequins in 
January). They dominated the gainline and while Itoje, the Lyon King with his 
man of the match award, again had a considerable impact and continued to play 
like a forward far more experienced, players such as Michael Rhodes and Will 
Fraser were as important, never allowing Racing to take a breather or get a 
foothold.

Saracens are like piranhas when opponents are in possession, devouring 
ball-carriers. With both teams more comfortable defending leads than playing 
catch-up, the advantage built by the boot of Farrell in the opening half when 
the Premiership champions led 12-6 left Racing having to play from deeper than 
they would have preferred.

While the first four penalties in the match were awarded at scrums, most of 
the 13 to follow came at the breakdown where Racing were forced to hold on or 
collapse mauls as the pressure exerted by Saracens told. When Farrell made it 
15-6 six minutes into the second half after Szarzewski was penalised under his 
own posts at a ruck having believed he had the permission of the referee to 
plunder a loose ball, Sarries had a cushion.

Goosen’s third penalty with nine minutes to go gave the crowd a second voice. 
There had been few breaks for them to cheer or jeer with the try lines only 
threatened twice, both after kicks into space and chases, but it was the day 
Farrell came of age at this level with two more penalties taking his points 
tally to a winning 21.
 