
The South Korean president, Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, is fighting for her 
political life after MPs on Friday voted by a huge margin to impeach her over a
corruption and cronyism scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
 that has made her the country’s most unpopular leader since it became a 
democracy in the late 1980s.

Park, the daughter of a former South Korean dictator, who became the country’s 
first female president in late 2012, apologised to ministers for her 
“carelessness” and said she hoped for an early resolution to a political crisis 
that has engulfed everyone from senior aides in the presidential Blue House to 
leaders of some of the country’s biggest companies.

“I solemnly accept the voice of the parliament and the people and sincerely 
hope this confusion is soundly resolved,” Park said, according to the 
presidential office. “I wholeheartedly offer words of apology to the people as 
my lack of virtue and carelessness have caused great confusion at a time when 
the nation faces challenges over national security and the economy.”

As expected, Park said she would prepare for a court review of the impeachment 
motion, and asked ministers to cooperate with South Korea’s acting leader, the 
prime minister, Hwang Kyo-ahn.

South Korea impeachment vote: the key facts behind a presidential crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-korea-impeachment-vote-the-key-facts-behind-a-presidential-crisis>
Hwang, a Park loyalist who could struggle to build public support around his 
leadership, immediately ordered the defence minister, Han Min-koo, to put the 
military on a state of heightened readiness in case of any provocations by 
North Korea. The unification ministry, which handles affairs related to the 
North, said policy towards the regime in Pyongyang would continue “without 
disruption”.

Japan said it was “closely watching” developments in South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>, while China said it hoped that 
the country’s political stability would be restored soon.

Friday’s vote in favour of impeachment is also being seen as a reflection of 
public anger over howSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>
, despite decades of economic development and freedoms that contrast 
dramatically with its neighbourNorth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea>, remains in the grip of a 
political and industrial elite.

Massive anti-Park demonstrations held in recent weeks have called for a new 
era of cleaner politics and for whoever becomes the next president to force the 
country’s family-runchaebol conglomerates to be more transparent and 
accountable.

The crisis, which was sparked in late October by Park’s relationship with Choi 
Soon-sil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/longtime-friend-of-south-korean-president-arrested-in-political-scandal>
, a longtime friend, is by far the most serious of her presidency, which was 
supposed to run until February 2018.

Allegations that Park abused her position to help Choi secure tens of millions 
of dollars of funding for her foundations from major South Korean companies, 
and even allowed her to influence policy, provoked a wave of anger across the 
country, sending the president’s approval rating to a record low of 4%.

Choi faces embezzlement charges while Park, who has been named as a formal 
suspect, has repeatedly apologised for her “naivety” but denied seeking any 
personal gain. Her lawyer has denounced as groundless prosecutors’ allegations 
that she was “collusively involved” in Choi’s alleged activities.

Park first met Choi in the 1970s after the death of Park’s mother during an 
assassination attempt on her father, Park Chung-hee, who was then South Korea’s 
president. Choi’s father, the leader of shady religious cult, emerged as Park’s 
mentor after Park Chung-hee was assassinated by his head of intelligence in 
1979.

For the sake of South Korea, President Park Geun-hye must go now | Aidan 
Foster-Carter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/park-geun-hye-go-now-south-korea>
When Park announced her candidacy for president, older South Koreans were 
sympathetic towards a woman who was thrust into the spotlight as acting first 
lady after her mother’s death. During her campaign, Park, who never married, 
said the absence of family life meant she would be able to devote every waking 
moment to running the country.

But Friday’s vote was a measure of just how deeply her reputation has sunk in 
the space of less than two months. By the time MPs’ votes had been tallied, 
enough members of Park’s own Saenuri party had backed her impeachment to ensure 
the vote was carried.

Kang Dong-wan, a professor at Dong-A University in Busan, attributed the 
overwhelming vote in favour of impeachment to the strength of feeling on 
display at recent demonstrations in Seoul and other cities.

“It looks like more from the ruling Saenuri party gave their support than many 
had expected after realising that the party could collapse if the bill doesn’t 
get approved,” Kang said.

'Rasputin-like' friend of South Korean president returns amid protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/30/south-korea-rasputin-like-friend-president-park-geun-hye-returns>
The national assembly speaker, Chung Sye-kyun, said the bill had been passed 
by a vote of 234 for and 56 against, with nine invalid votes and abstentions. 
The bill needed the support of 200 of the assembly’s 300 members to pass.

As lawmakers brought Park’s presidency to the brink of destruction, protesters 
gathered in front of the national assembly. Inside the chamber, opposition MPs 
sat on the floor, raised their fists and chanted “Impeach!”

“Can you hear the roar of the people in front of the national assembly? We 
need to overcome the old establishment and create a new Republic of Korea by 
passing [the impeachment motion],” Kim Kwan-young, an opposition lawmaker, said 
just before the vote. “Our great people have already opened the way. Let’s make 
it so we can stand honourably in front of history and our descendants.”

After the vote, people outside cheered and held up signs saying “Victory for 
the people” and “New Republic of Korea”.

Park, 64, will now wait for the country’s constitutional court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-korea-impeachment-vote-the-key-facts-behind-a-presidential-crisis>
 to decide whether the impeachment vote is valid – a process that could take up 
to six months.

The bill’s success means Park will be stripped of her power and her duties 
will be temporarily transferred to Hwang while the court reviews whether 
parliament observed due process in impeaching her.

If six of the court’s nine justices support impeachment, Park will be removed 
from office and a presidential election held within 60 days. If six judges 
reject impeachment, however, she will be immediately reinstated and could serve 
the rest of her single, five-year term.

Though powerless, Park will retain the title of president. While the court 
deliberates, she will continue living at the Blue House while Hwang will work 
out of his office in Seoul. Park will also be able to use her official car and 
plane, and will receive her monthly salary of around $15,000.

However, she is no longer commander-in-chief of South Korea’s 630,000-strong 
military, and must cede to Hwang the power to appoint officials and sign 
treaties.


Park would lose presidential immunity if she left office early, and could be 
prosecuted for abuse of power and bribery, among other charges. No sitting 
South Korean president can face criminal charges, other than for insurrection 
and treason.

Analysts said Park would be mistaken to pin her last hopes of survival on the 
constitutional court’s conservative bench. While the judges have sided with her 
before, Kim Jong-dae, who served on the bench for six years until 2012, 
believes they will ratify Park’s impeachment.

“I believe the judges will make a decision based on their love of the country 
and conscience,” Kim said. “They are also people of the Republic of Korea, 
breathing the same air as all of us.”

Attention has inevitably turned to Park’s potential successors as South Korean 
president.

Moon Jae-in, a veteran lawmaker from the opposition Democratic party of Korea, 
is the current frontrunner. The former human rights lawyer has won plaudits for 
his uncompromising stance towards Park and his warning to constitutional court 
judges that overturning an impeachment vote would be a betrayal of the South 
Korean people.

The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, has slipped to second place after 
suffering a dip in support due to his close association with Park’s Saenuri 
party – although he is not a member.

The 72-year-old career diplomat served as South Korea’s foreign minister from 
2004 to 2006. He has signalled that he is interested in returning to South 
Korean politics after he leaves his UN post at the end of the year, but has 
recently refused to comment publicly on the Park scandal.

Turmoil in east Asia: sensitive moment for region unsettled by Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/turmoil-east-asia-region-unsettled-trump>
There has been talk of Park’s predicament creating a “Trump effect” in South 
Korea, fuelled by public fury towards the political establishment and, as 
underlined by the current scandal, its cosy ties with the country’s powerful 
conglomerates.

That sentiment could open the door to Lee Jae-myung, the liberal mayor of 
Seongnam and a vocal supporter of Park’s impeachment. The 52-year-old, who 
could threaten Moon’s left-leaning support base, has been a visible presence at 
the huge demonstrations that have swept South Korea in recent weeks, using them 
to call for a “revolution” in the country’s politics.

Friday’s vote marks a stunning downfall for a politician who was once known as 
the “queen of elections” for her ability to rally support for her party at the 
polls.

“Choi-gate” aside, Park has faced intense criticism over her handling of the 
April 2014 Sewol ferry tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea-ferry-disaster>, in which more 
than 300 schoolchildren and teachers died. Park was absent for seven hours on 
the day of the disaster, sparking a flurry of media speculation over her 
whereabouts.

Critics say her conduct as president has uncomfortable echoes of her father, 
who kickstarted South Korea’s industrial development but presided over 
widespread human rights abuses as leader in the 1960s and 70s.

Under the younger Park, South Korea has become a more illiberal place, her 
critics claim, as she sought to silence dissent with crackdowns on press 
freedoms, and threw her support behind police suppression of anti-government 
protests and the court-ordered dissolution of a minor leftwing party that was
seen as pro-North Korean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/04/pyongyang-south-korea-jails-politician>
.
 