Comment 
There are two views of what the Turkish Cypriots did yesterday. They have 
either, with intolerable haste and insolent braggadocio, carvedCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> in two for good and all, thumbing 
noses at patient negotiators, men of goodwill, America's Congress and aggrieved 
majorities everywhere; or they are still bent on negotiation, but are 
drastically accelerating it, backing Archbishop Makarios down a particularly 
narrow, nasty diplomatic blind alley. Either way, the Greeks will be furious. 
Either way the dream of a unitary island, governed harmoniously by able men of 
both races and lived in peacefully by mingled Greeks and Turks, recedes right 
over the Eastern Mediterranean horizon.

Nevertheless, the precise nature of Mr Denktashs's new game is critically 
important. If he has simply decided there is no point in further talks, that 
what he has he holds, that partition is just around the corner, then the 
deplorable lines of bitter communal hostility and mounting warfare are set for 
decades. The Turks have swaggered too much and reason lies bleeding. This is 
not, however, what Mr Denktash actually said. Yesterday he ruled out partition; 
he did not rule out further talks. Formal declaration of a Federal Republic 
merely puts a quasi-legal seat on the situation as it exists: the Turks in the 
North, the Greeks in the South, and haphazard transfers of population well nigh 
complete. President Makarios has not yet openly taken this revised reality on 
board. He has refused to contemplate a bi-zonal Cyprus. Now the Turkish 
Cypriots - and Ankara, by backing them - have made the reality self-evident and 
almost certainly non-negotiable. Crude stuff, perhaps: but, given accumulated 
Denktash frustration with Markarios's endless wiles, neither unexpected nor 
reprehensible.

The ultimate questions, as ever, are for His Beatitude himself to answer. By 
returning to Cyprus he hogs the centre stage. By promising his people more than 
seems remotely accomplishable, he is trapped in a vice of his own making. Any 
settlement the Greeks make will cause pain and anguish: but how much? How far 
can Mr Clerides progress with Mr Denktash when there are no pressures he can 
bring to bear? The Greeks have much world opinion behind them, and stalwart 
fellows like Senator Eagleton prepared to flex something more than rhetoric. 
But it is not enough. No amount of global denunciation has budged Ankara one 
jot. The cut-off in American military aid has been immediately 
counter-productive. Mr Denktash has 35,000 regular troops on his patch and, 
thus, all the solid arguments. If Archbishop Makarios can steel himself to 
adjust to the essential hopelessness of his bargaining situation, he may win 
substantial concessions. The Turks should not hang on to Famagusta or Morphou 
or Nicosia airport come what may. Economic necessity will rapidly dictate great 
intercommunal traffic and planning. The future will not be entirely bleak. If 
these battles are to be won, however, the Greeks must sooner or later begin 
talking within Mr Denktash's unrelenting frame of reference. They must also 
accept that a lot of northerners who lost their homes and lands will not get 
them back again.

This is not fair. Indeed, it is bad and sad. A single Cypriot state without 
refugees would be far better. Pieties, however, cannot make two peoples live 
together. When the Turkish Cypriot administration rules out mixed villages and 
mixed aspirations it means, inescapably, that the old island can never be 
patched together again. That realised, the business of separation will have to 
be tackled fast, for the present, slow drift compounds bitterness and stokes 
the fires of renewed conflict.
 