
Paul Hanlon struck a stoppage-time equaliser as Hibernian came from two goals 
down at Tynecastle to force aScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> replay with Hearts.

Hibs started the better team but Arnaud Djoum and Sam Nicholson put Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> in control with well-taken 
strikes late in the first half.

The visitors kept plugging away and a brilliant Jason Cummings header gave 
them hope with 10 minutes left, and they stunned their hosts when Hanlon 
scrambled home following a corner.

Before the game Hearts had paraded the manager who led them to their 5-1 final 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/19/hibernian-hearts-scottish-cup-final>
 over their Edinburgh rivals in 2012, Paulo Sergio, but it was the away fans 
who were celebrating after the game.

Sergio’s reception dwarfed the one afforded to China-bound Osman Sow, whose 
place in the team was taken by new signing Abiola Dauda.

Hibs began brightly and Neil Alexander was at full stretch when he stopped 
John McGinn’s curling effort finding the same corner of the net where he 
dispatched hisLeague Cup semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/hibernian-st-johnstone-scottish-league-cup-match-report>
 winner the previous weekend.

Cummings had the ball in the net after a fifth-minute corner but he was just 
offside when he latched on to Darren McGregor’s shot and the flag went up.

Hearts were forced into a change inside 10 minutes when Prince Buaben pulled 
up, handing Don Cowie his debut, and Anthony Stokes headed inches over under 
pressure following Liam Henderson’s corner as the visitors continued to press.

Hibs remained comfortable but fell behind in the 32nd minute, just after Kevin 
Thomson replaced the injured Dylan McGeouch.

Lewis Stevenson dived to head away Callum Paterson’s cross and, as the Hearts 
right-back claimed for a penalty for handball, Djoum picked up the loose ball 
and smacked a shot that swerved away from Mark Oxley and bounced in off the far 
post.

Hearts defenders Alim Ozturk and Jordan McGhee were booked as the hosts 
prevented Hibs from breaking away and Robbie Neilson’s team moved further ahead 
with a minute of the half remaining. Nicholson brought down Paterson’s 
crossfield ball on his chest before setting himself to drill a shot low inside 
Oxley’s near post from 16 yards. The midfielder was booked for gesturing 
towards the away support, who responded by throwing several paper cups.

Both sides lost their captains to injury early in the second half, Ozturk 
failing to shake off a knee problem and David Gray succumbing to a knock.

The physical battle continued with Hibs midfielder Marvin Bartley and Hearts 
substitute Juwon Oshaniwa booked for fouls along with McGregor, whose high, 
studs-up attempted block on McGhee sparked a mass confrontation that led to 
both assistant referees racing on and ended with Blazej Augustyn and Stokes 
getting yellow cards.

Hibs were pushing Hearts back and creating half-chances. Stokes was off target 
with two free-kicks and also shot into the side-netting and Henderson lacked 
conviction as his shot was blocked.

Hibs were rewarded for their persistence when Cummings got his head to 
Henderson’s cross and looped a header underneath the crossbar.

Stevenson had a quick chance to level when he turned in the box but shot 
straight at Alexander and Hibs survived a scare when Dauda glanced Paterson’s 
delivery just wide.

The equaliser soon came when Hanlon swung a leg out on the ground to force the 
ball home after Alexander had stopped McGregor’s header.

And Hibs held on for a replay after their substitute Niklas Gunnarsson lobbed 
a clearance off his own bar before Thomson cleared Augustyn’s header off the 
line.
 