
James Hook kicked 11 points in another impressive performance as Perpignan 
endedEdinburgh's mini-revival with a 31–14 victory in the Heineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup>. The Scottish side caused one 
of the biggest shocks of round one by beating Munster, having gone into the 
match on a run of five consecutive defeats, but the Catalan side proved too 
strong with a commanding second-half performance.

Tim Visser's first-half try put the visitors in the ascendancy but they were 
blown away asPerpignan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/perpignan> secured a 
maximum-points haul with tries from Wandile Mjekevu (two), Joffrey Michel and 
Justin Purll. Cornell Du Preez crossed in the closing stages but it was merely 
a consolation for Edinburgh, who left France empty-handed. The result has blown 
Pool Six wide open, with every team having won once in the opening rounds.

The Ulster coach Mark Anscombe was "enormously proud" of his players after 
their biggest Heineken Cup win on French soil, 25–8 atMontpellier. Andrew 
Trimble crossed for Ulster's only try on 11 minutes before Ruan Pienaar paved 
the way for victory with 15 points from his boot. Paddy Jackson landed a 
conversion and a penalty.

Ulster had waited 15 matches in the Heineken Cup to win in France when they 
edged Castres 9-8 to reach the final eight last season, but this was a far more 
impressive victory. Not only did it move Ulster two points clear of Leicester 
Tigers – whom they beat last week – in Pool Five, but it also prevented
Montpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier> from taking a point 
at home.

The Leinster head coach Matt O'Connor felt his side should have made more of 
their opportunities during the first half of their 19-7 victory overCastres. A 
62nd-minute try from the replacement prop Jack McGrath proved crucial at the 
RDS but the French side were less than an inch away from earning a losing bonus 
point.

Pedrie Wannenburg thought he had crashed over for a try with two minutes left 
but the TV referee Graham Hughes went against the former Ulster flanker. A 
relieved O'Connor said afterwards: "I certainly think we got out of jail with 
regard to them getting nothing [no bonus point]. I don't think we got out of 
jail with regards to the result."
 