
Bolton Wanderers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> may 
have already eclipsed last season’s miserly tally of 30 points but on this 
weekend’s evidence they have plenty of work to do if they are to return to the 
Championship at the first time of asking.

Phil Parkinson, the Bolton manager, had warned his players about basking in 
their promising start but they did just that in a 1-0 defeat atPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United on Sunday, a game 
they went into after five league wins on the bounce. Among supporters, there is 
anything but hubris. “The fact we are still here is the main thing,” said one 
of the 480 travelling supporters at London Road, before Bolton trudged off the 
team coach on arrival.

Bolton have been through the mill and back. Nine years ago this week 
travelling fans made the trip to Germany, where they witnessed Ricardo Gardner 
open the scoring against Bayern Munich at the Allianz Arena. On Sunday fans 
travelled down the A1 to tackle Peterborough inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>. A lot has happened in 
those nine years: five managers, two relegations, all while haemorrhaging money.

There is still a distinct concern over the financial predicament of the club 
followingthe takeover by the consortium owned by Ken Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/10/bolton-wanderers-takeover-completed-sports-shield-consortium-dean-holdsworth>
, a former football agent, and fronted by the former Bolton striker Dean 
Holdsworth, in March. The club are yet to submit their accounts for the last 
financial year (2015). Companies House has started enforcement action against 
the club, who could face criminal action if they do not do so by the end of the 
month. Anderson stated in a BBC interview that the accounts “are not going to 
be pleasant reading”.

Bolton’s squad were much changed from the last time the sides had met in 
Cambridgeshire, when they came out on the losing end of a nine-goal thriller 
four years ago. Following relegation and a season of upheaval, Wanderers 
trimmed their exhaustive wage bill by cutting more than 20 professionals off 
their books. One of those on more modest wages, Rob Holding,joined Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/arsenal-2m-bolton-england-u21-rob-holding>
.

Peterborough took victory this time, too, courtesy of a peach from the 
right-back Michael Smith. Bolton were poor and put in the kind of away 
performance fans were beginning to forget about, the club having gone 495 days 
without a win on the road until August.

“I’ve guarded against complacency – we’ve been second in the league for a 
while and people start talking about going up,” Parkinson said. “We looked 
lacklustre, we looked off the pace and started poorly. We will look at it, 
watch the game back and talk to the players to see if the preparation was not 
quite right or whatever.”

Bolton’s spine is homegrown and the club’s financial woes have at least 
enabled some young talent to blossom through their Category Two academy, 
although high-earners Darren Pratley, Jay Spearing and Ben Amos, on loan at 
Cardiff City, remain on the books.

The midfielder Josh Vela, born in Salford, has been at the club since under-9s 
level, while another Mancunian and academy graduate, the striker Zach Clough, – 
described by former manager Neil Lennon as a “street kid” – has been with them 
since the age of eight. Both are now prized assets who have attracted interest 
from elsewhere. Clough was tamed throughout here but showed a few touches of 
class, neatly turning his defender at one point before unleashing at goal.

Other academy youngsters Alex Perry, Will Jaaskelainen (the son of the former 
Bolton goalkeeper Jussi) and Alex Samizadeh, the Iranian striker whoposted a 
Vine of a sublime piece of skill on Wednesday 
<https://twitter.com/AlexSamizadeh/status/796371563121639424>, are other 
reasons to be cheerful.

Peterborough’s 17-year-old Leonardo da Silva Lopes, already the subject of 
interest of scouts from Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur, was the only youngster 
to shine in front of the cameras. The Portuguese, noticed by Darren Ferguson 
three years ago, was boisterous in the middle of the park and almost pulled off 
an audacious lob on the goalkeeper Ben Alnwick from 30 yards. Later he did the 
dirty work, nicking the ball off of Sammy Ameobi to rally an attack before 
leaving Clough pirouetting after him.

Peterborough’s starting lineup had an average age of 23.4 and they were far 
hungrier and more dynamic than the visitors. Shaquile Coulthirst and Marcus 
Maddison, who was poached from non-league Gateshead and now looks another gem, 
also excelled.

“At 17 years of age, to have his maturity and temperament, the boy’s going to 
have an unbelievable future,” the Peterborough manager, Grant McCann, said of 
Lopes. “He just wants to learn, he comes in before anybody else, watching his 
clips at half eight in the morning. He’s got a top future.”

• Carlisle United’s 15-match unbeaten league run came to an abrupt end at 
Newport County but for Nicky Adams, another impressive record was over. The 
30-year-old former Northampton Town midfielder tasted defeat for the first time 
in 33 league matches, since Portsmouth beat his former club in December last 
year. “We take it on the chin. I think we’ll be a very dangerous animal now,” 
the Carlisle manager, Keith Curle, said of the result. “We’ve been beaten in a 
game of football and we have to accept that’s going to happen. The important 
thing now is that we need to react. A lot of good work has gone into the start 
of the season and that won’t change.”

• The Championship returns on Friday following the international break, with 
Brighton at home to Aston Villa, a game that will be televised by Sky Sports. 
Doubtless Scott Minto or Peter Beagrie – perhaps both – will be in attendance, 
but Ian Holloway’s fierce Bristolian accent is unlikely to be on display after 
being appointed the QPR manager – for the second time. It does seem a slightly 
odd appointment move by QPR, given what looked to be their attempt to move away 
from the archetypal Mr Motivator – see Harry Redknapp and Neil Warnock – by 
bringing Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink to the club. When you look up Holloway’s name, 
unsurprisingly the word “quotes” follows as a suggested search. Now is a apt 
time to republish one of his best. “I am a football manager. I can’t see into 
the future. Last year I thought I was going to Cornwall on my holidays but I 
ended up going to Lyme Regis,” Holloway once said. Anyway, Holloway believes 
his time serving as a pundit will help him get QPR moving in the right 
direction. “The amount of work that goes into an outside broadcast is scary,” 
the 53-year-old said. “It taught me about how the structure is so important in 
getting your product right – the relationship between producer and director is 
so crucial. I’ll use that experience to help develop my working relationship 
with Les [Ferdinand].”

• Just how long will Luke Williams remain the Swindon Town coach? They coasted 
to a 3-0 victory on Saturday against Charlton but only after Tim Sherwood, 
named director of football in midweek, had picked the starting lineup and then 
given the team talk. “Tim felt that was the strongest side he could put on the 
pitch and it proved correct,” said Williams, who was given a five-year contract 
in March. Lee Power, the Swindon chairman, described Williams at the time as 
the best coach he had seen “in 25 years in football”. Swindon remain perilously 
close to the League One relegation zone despite their first win in five matches 
but whether Williams’s job is safe or not, Sherwood’s arrival has certainly 
made an instant impact.
 