
A Philippine provincial newspaper publisher has been shot dead after writing a 
column alleging official negligence over a recently discovered methamphetamine 
laboratory, in the first killing of a journalist during the country’s war on 
drugs.

The National Union of Journalists of the Philippines (NUJP) condemned Monday’s 
murder of Larry Que, publisher of a news site on the island of Catanduanes, and 
said it “challenged” PresidentRodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte> to find the perpetrators 
and utilise a special task force he set up to protect media.

James Taylor cancels Philippines concert over Rodrigo Duterte's drug war 
killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/james-taylor-cancels-philippines-show-rodrigo-duterte-drug-war-killings>
The Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> enjoys one of 
Asia’s most liberal media environments, and one of the most dangerous for 
journalists.

 Scores have been killed in the past three decades, with radio broadcasters 
who cover provincial politics among the most common victims. Investigations of 
killings have often been inconclusive.

 The NUJP said Que had run Catanduanes News Now, a new publication, for only 
two weeks before he was shot in the head outside his workplace. He also owned 
an insurance firm and previously ran for local office.

 His article, according to NUJP, suggested local officials were negligent when 
a laboratory was illegally set up to make “shabu”, a methamphetamine that 
Duterte has vowed to wipe out, along with anyone selling it.

 Duterte signed an administrative order in October to create a task force of 
ministers, police, defence and justice officials to protect media, investigate 
attacks on media workers and create an oversight body to scrutinise probes.

 The NUJP said the presidential panel should be put to work to find Que’s 
killers. It criticised the government for its approach towards media and for 
what it said was a tendency to accuse journalists of distorting the president’s 
words.

UN rights chief calls for murder investigation into Duterte claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/un-rights-chief-calls-for-investigation-into-duterte-claims>
 “We call on this administration to walk the talk and prove its professed 
respect for press freedom, not only by quickly solving these brazen assaults on 
press freedom but, just as importantly, by ending its penchant of falsely 
blaming media for deliberately misinterpreting its often inconsistent and 
incoherent messages,” the NUJP said.

 Duterte’s office has often issued statements that contradict the mercurial 
president’s public remarks. After some of his most controversial comments, his 
communications team has said his words should be taken seriously, but not 
literally.

 Presidential spokesman Ernesto Abella said the government condemned violence 
against journalists and called for a thorough investigation into Que’s death. 
 