
Here in the antipodes, Polly Jean Harvey tours tend to roll around every four 
or five years. Given that she changes her tour presentation with every release, 
astutely and rather dramatically, Australian fans may crave the dynamics of the 
tours of yore.

But PJ Harvey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pjharvey> is an artist 
untamed by popular fame, nor is she driven by the need for more of it. Touring 
in support of last year’s excellent The Hope 6 Demolition Project album, this 
performance showcased that album in majority, with selected back-catalogue 
moments which complemented the prevailing mood.

Related: Darkness and light in PJ Harvey's gritty essay on stark reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/28/darkness-and-light-in-pj-harveys-gritty-essay-on-stark-reality>

It’s the height of summer at the moment, but the Fremantle Doctor can still 
make for a chilling presence. This evening fell between balmy and breezy, and 
therefore very comfortable. Agreeable. A gig some years ago at Belvoir 
Amphitheatre united Harvey and her heaving, surging audience under torrential 
rain; now this was a different kind of gathering with a different kind of album 
to steer the show.

The beating of drums heralded a somewhat ornate opening to proceedings, as 
Harvey’s multi-instrumental backing musicians walked on to the stage with 
snares and bass drums, opening as a marching band. The formalities eased into 
Chain of Keys, a foreboding and starkly dramatic tune, which saw Harvey setting 
down her commanding vocal agenda and wielding a saxophone as part instrument, 
part talisman.

The song The Ministry of Defence emphasised the appearance of the band’s 
members, in ubiquitous black, performing in front of grey, concrete visuals, 
with Harvey at front as the speaker of the House, her arms directing the 
dynamic and all the attention. The musical evocation seems industrial in its 
template, but with a beating, bloodied heart.

Her recent single The Community of Hope found the singer with her arms free. 
Performing a cheery-sounding song in comparison, appropriately hopeful, even, 
Harvey was alluring and magnetic. The exquisite percussion intro of The Orange 
Monkey reinforced the utilitarian sound and presentation while barely hiding 
the beauty and vulnerability inside.

As the evening progressed, the mood shifted without lightening too much. The 
’fess-up of A Line in the Sand was a quirkier exercise. Let England Shake was 
somewhat vocally unhinged as the backdrop of colours broke from grey to orange 
and blue.

As the evening progressed, various members of the 10-piece band (including 
longtime collaborators Mick Harvey and John Parrish) left and returned to the 
stage, bringing back different string, horn and percussive instruments that led 
the musical charge, mostly at the expense of steadfast guitars or bass. From 
the driven clap-a-long of The Words that Maketh Murder to the ethereal Written 
on the Forehead and the terrifying innocence of The Devil, all songs were given 
their moment to shine, each magnificent in its own way.

 The Wheel echoed the driving feel of the Velvet Underground, with twin 
guitars (none held by Harvey, mind) eventually making a stronger appearance.

 Previous Harvey tours have seen more rapturous audience responses, but it was 
a transfixed crowd, nonetheless. However, when the Bo Diddley-blues-styled The 
Ministry of Social Affairs was soon followed by a raucous 50 Ft Queenie, it was 
all the best kinds of chaos.

 Down by the Water drew a welcome shout. Powerful yet subdued, its tide pulled 
all and sundry in. It was something of an antidote to the previous two songs in 
terms of energy, but probably more enthralling.

Related: Nick Cave and The Bad Seeds review – bracing, erratic but irreverent 
to the core 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/13/nick-cave-bad-seeds-review-skeleton-tree>

The band introductions were Harvey’s only spoken allowances of the night, 
other than a humble “thank you so much” at the end. Banter seems unnecessary 
when you consider what followed. To Bring You My Love was resonating. Haunting. 
Captivating. A beautiful economy of song.

 Drawing again from the latest album, Near the Memorials to Vietnam and 
Lincoln was a vocal triumph. From Harvey’s beautifully soaring lead to the 
gentle yet assertive ensemble backing vocals and the a cappella finale, it was 
a fitting end to the main set.

 In the much-demanded encore, Highway 61 Revisited (once voted by Paste 
magazine as the 15th best Bob Dylan cover ever) was a majestic cacophony, with 
the horn section making a good case for overtime. Another return to yore, 
1998’s Is This Desire?, finished the show on a beguiling note, on an occasion 
when the audience, rather than being regaled with (in some cases expected) 
bombast and sentimental faves, was stunned by beauty.


• PJ Harvey is touring Australia until 28 January

 