
Two gift-wrapped goals came at just the right time for Plymouth Argyle and 
returned them to the top of League Two at the expense of their opponents,
Doncaster Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster>. A 14-match 
unbeaten run had taken them seven points clear in mid-November before three 
unlikely defeats enabled Rovers and Carlisle to overhaul them. This 2-0 win at 
Home Park, coupled with Luton holding Carlisle to 1-1, restored the Pilgims’ 
supremacy and confidence at a critical time. Before Christmas they face Newport 
County away in a Cup replay whose winners go lucratively to Anfield.

Saturday’s managers were boyhood friends in Scotland. Derek Adams stayed 
there, bar a couple of games for Burnley, and came to Plymouth 18 months ago on 
the strength of unprecedented success for Ross County. In May, four seasons 
after they were saved from falling into the Conference on the final day, they 
lost in the play-off final to AFC Wimbledon.

Nicklas Bendtner own goal sets up Derby win over Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/derby-county-nottingham-forest-championship-match-report>
Darren Ferguson, also a midfielder, is more familiar and operated mainly in 
England, notably running Peterborough on a shuttle service between second and 
third tiers. Last season was his first at Doncaster, whom he took down to the 
fourth, where they had not been since 2004 coming the other way.

Seven seasons ago the clubs met in the Championship, Plymouth winning 2-1 at 
Home Park. They have known administration since, whereas Rovers’ darkest hours 
came at Belle Vue in the 1990s in the hands of the convicted arsonist, Ken 
Richardson. New Year’s Day marks the 10th anniversary of their first match at 
the Keepmoat.

Both clubs are looking up and they met on Saturday in buoyant mood and 
sweeping rain before 8,575, of whom 385 were away fans. That compares with 641 
(130 away) for Plymouth’s final Checkatrade Trophy match at Swansea. Shaun 
Harvey, the EFL’s chief executive, remarked last week that “not being clear 
about what we were trying to achieve did not help the competition get off on 
the right foot”. Here, in a competition everyone understands, there were right 
feet from the outset. Both goalkeepers were tested inside the first minute, 
Rovers’ Marko Marosi stretching to a cross, Luke McCormick firmly down on Tommy 
Rowe’s shot, and the sharpness and pace were kept up to the interval.

By then Plymouth led. Marosi started what he thought was an attack through 
Niall Mason except that the left-back slipped and Graham Carey, darting in, 
punished the sweeper-keeper with his ninth league goal. It was not only the 
sweetness of the finish that made him a worthy man of the match, though the 
towering left centre-back Sonny Bradley and Oscar Threkeld outside him must 
have run him close as James Coppinger prompted testing attacks down the right 
in search of John Marquis in the centre.

If the first half was crisp as a carrot, the second was flabby as a fistful of 
spinach as all sense of purpose seemed to vanish in ill-considered passing. 
Argyle’s second came from a penalty beyond the hour, Andy Butler bringing down 
Ryan Donaldson and Jake Jervis converting, but the focused athletes of the 
first half had turned into mere stocking fillers, of which one, as advertised, 
was a mug. This turned out in human form to be Coppinger, ironically the one 
player still thinking clearly. In the 90th minute, from another penalty, Liam 
Mandeville was entrusted with maintaining Rovers’ record of scoring in every 
league game but his shot hit a post, McCormick “goaded” in Ferguson’s words and 
in the ensuing fracas the captain was sent off.

As Doncaster Beaux dropped their first points in five games, Ferguson felt 
flattered that Adams had changed his formation. With goals drying up, the local 
paper invited fans to name their preferred formation from 10. Favourite was 
4-4-2. Adams was pleased his 4-3-3 was “hard to play through”. It looked more 
like 4-1-4-1 until injured strikers are fit. Louis Rooney, 20, was on the 
bench, where Rooneys tend to be nowadays, but the Pilgrims look set to sail 
again.

•Sam Barker, writing in Plymouth’s programme, remarks that James Coppinger is 
one of only five players in the top four tiers of English football to have made 
more than 500 appearances for their current clubs. The others are John Terry 
(Chelsea) 716, Dean Lewington (MK Dons) 623, Wayne Rooney (Manchester United) 
528 and Leon Britton (Swansea City) 512, with Coppinger on 513 for Doncaster. 
Numbers are thanks to Soccerbase.

•There is something curious about clubs reappointing managers who have failed 
them before when there are so many alternatives out of work, admittedly 
presumably for the same reasons. Maybe it becomes less difficult the second 
time round. On Saturday Rotherham United, who have had Ronnie Moore twice, 
which is one fewer time than Tranmere Rovers have had him, beat Queens Park 
Rangers 1-0, under Ian Holloway appointed for a second stint a month ago. In 
March 2005, in the equivalent match also in the Championship, QPR won 1-0 and 
Rotherham were shortly relegated.

•At last MK Dons and AFC Wimbledon have met in the league, the match in Milton 
Keynes ending 1-0 to the home side. A penalty decided it, after Dean Lewington 
(as above) was brought down, adding to AFC’s distress. He made 92 appearances 
for the original Wimbledon. For cup meetings in Milton Keynes between the two 
new clubs AFC fans have been torn by wanting to support their team without 
pouring money into the “upstart franchise”. On Saturday 2,000 bit their lips in 
a crowd of 11,185. Maybe if Lewington ever stops playing for the Milton Keynes 
side – and he is still only 32 with a loyalty not in question – MK should doff 
their Dons.

•Why, in Sky Sports Football Yearbook, do AFC Wimbledon fall between 
Accrington Stanley and Arsenal while AFC Bournemouth fall between Bolton 
Wanderers and Bradford City?
 