
It will not be the most important game in Plymouth Argyle’s history. That was 
the 3-2 victory over Swansea in April 1953 that sealed fourth place in what is 
now the Championship, Argyle’s highest league finish. Or perhaps it was in 1973 
when Pelé came to Home Park with Santos, and lost. This is not even their most 
important modern fixture, given that last summerArgyle reached the League Two 
play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/30/plymouth-argyle-wimbledon-league-two-play-off-match-report>
. But, still, Liverpool at Anfield in the third round of the FA Cup? You’re not 
going to forget it, are you?

So how does a Pilgrim approach this big match, the glamour tie, a potential 
Cup upset? David Fox knows better than most. He played againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> for Norwich City who snatched 
a Premier League draw back in 2011. Now anchoring Plymouth’s midfield alongside 
Graham Carey, Fox knows that Anfield can be a different experience altogether. 
“We played in the early evening under the lights and it was the best atmosphere 
I’ve experienced,” the 33-year-old says. “When the Kop are singing ‘You’ll 
Never Walk Alone’, well you can see it on the telly but when you’re out there 
on the pitch … wow.”

Joe Gomez returns for Liverpool against Plymouth in FA Cup third round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/joe-gomez-liverpool-playmouth-fa-cup-jurgen-klopp>
Argyle are in a hard-fought battle for promotion from League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and recently lost top 
spot in the table to Doncaster Rovers. But Fox does not subscribe to the view 
that the Cup must take second place to league points. For a start the tie is 
worth £500,000 to the club. “I don’t know the specifics of how it would work 
out,” he says, “but we’ve already been able to bring in a centre-half and if we 
get the chance to help the squad that would be a big bonus.”

A good performance would also breed confidence. “If we give a good account of 
ourselves that’s something we can take forward,” he says. “Without a doubt it’s 
a chance for a lot of our lads to measure themselves against the best.

“The players in our squad who are 21 or 22 are going to be up against people 
that are playing at the level you aspire to. It’s not beyond possible that they 
can get there and they’ll get a glimpse of what kind of standards you have to 
reach.”

There are other things Plymouth players can look forward to from the trip to 
Anfield. Immaculate turf and functioning plumbing, for example. “The toilets 
are a bit cleaner and the showers a bit warmer – that’s the main difference,” 
he says. “The pitch will also be like a carpet, nice and watered. And you won’t 
be able to hear every individual fan that hammers you, like you can on a League 
Two pitch.”

Speaking of fans, they are the other half of the equation in an FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie that matches giant with 
minnow. Argyle have sold out their allocation, despite there being no train 
that could take you from Devon to Merseyside on Sunday in time.

This is conveyed by Josh Widdicombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/josh-widdicombe>, star of The Last Leg, Mock 
the Week and, for the purposes of this article, a celebrity Argyle supporter. 
“It’s a long old trip,” says Widdicombe, who will be there for the lunchtime 
kick-off. “It is one of the televised games, though, which always feels weird.

“If I wasn’t going I would try to find a Plymouth pub in London and I imagine 
anyone connected with Plymouth will go to the pub too. I mean, what else is 
there to do at 1.30 on a Sunday?”

While Fox is clear about the benefits of a big cup game for Argyle, Widdicombe 
has mixed feelings. “I was watching us play Barnet the other day and thinking: 
‘Would I trade three points here for a win over Liverpool?’ I don’t think 
that’s a deal that was on the table, by the way.

“But the question: ‘What do we care about more?’ is interesting. We’ve been 
trying to get out of League Two for ages, we need to get it done. But on the 
other hand if we beat Liverpool it would be the greatest moment in our history, 
while scraping up to League One in third place and then getting relegated again 
the next season wouldn’t be.”

Liverpool recall dropped goalkeeper Loris Karius for Plymouth FA Cup tie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/liverpool-goalkeeper-loris-karius-plymouth-fa-cup>
Like Fox, Widdicombe is clear that the financial benefits of a big third-round 
tie are the key. “It’s going to make us half a million, which will make a huge 
amount of difference for Argyle. From that perspective it’s huge. I’d say it 
was the only reason any lower league team competes in the FA Cup. The first, 
second round of the Cup feel utterly meaningless. If somebody showed you the 
third-round draw ahead of time and you got another small club, you wouldn’t 
waste the time. It’s only the giant-killing games that make it worthwhile. Or 
at least, the giant-playing games.”

Widdicombe is a big fan of the midfielder Carey, who is “far better than 
anyone in the division” and a keen admirer of the manager, Derek Adams. The 
Scot is cut from less flamboyant cloth than his opposite number at Liverpool 
but Widdicombe believes Jürgen Klopp could hold his own in League Two.

“Derek Adams is a brilliant manager and of all the people currently associated 
with the club, he’s the one most likely to rise, with or without us,” says 
Widdicombe. “But it would be interesting having Klopp in League Two.

“I remember when Liverpool played Exeter last year and he was being 
interviewed in front of the sponsors’ boards. Suddenly they went from a close 
up to a longer shot and it turns out he’s standing next to a sink with loads of 
dirty tea cups piled up on it. He didn’t look out of place. If there’s any 
Premier League manager who could handle the grimness of League Two, it would be 
Jürgen.”
 