
In our recent National Poetry Day poll, Coleridge's ballad,"The Rime of the 
Ancient Mariner 
<http://etext.virginia.edu/stc/Coleridge/poems/Rime_Ancient_Mariner.html>" was 
enthusiastically mentioned by several posters. It's a poem most people read 
when young, quickly falling under the powerful spell of its simple ballad 
metre, its dramatic storytelling and ever-shifting imagery. We're revisiting it 
this week as All Souls' Night approaches, and autumnal shades are not entirely 
banished by the commercialised pumpkin-orange and matt-black masquerade of 
Halloween.

Astonishingly, the poem's spell doesn't seem to weaken over the years. You 
might criticise the sometimes over-blown declamatory style, the archaic words, 
or the ghastly invocation of Christian belief at its most judgmental. 
Certainly, it's easy to agree wholeheartedly with Coleridge's own 
self-criticism, that there is altogether too much of a pious moral. But the 
poem exerts its potency every time. The scenery remains thrillingly hellish, 
while laced with photographically realistic meteorological effects, and the 
narrative drive is irresistible. Not least of its innovations is that filmic 
device of cutting, now and again, between the Mariner's urgent button-holing of 
the wedding-guest, and the tantalising merriment and minstrelsy of the wedding. 
Like the impatient guest, the reader may want to escape, but is held by the 
almost deranged insistency of the Mariner's tone.

Coleridge's theme of crime and punishment is so elemental and passionately 
forged that it seems irrelevant to object that the sin of albatross-shooting 
is, actually, rather minor, and the horrific punishments disproportionate. The 
power of the story may well be founded on its symbolic relation to the poet's 
own sense of worthlessness and impotence, as expressed in a letter to his 
friend, John Morgan:

"What Crime is there scarcely which has not been included in or followed from 
the one guilt of taking opium? Not to speak of ingratitude to my maker for the 
wasted Talents; of ingratitude to so many friends who have loved me I know not 
why; of barbarous neglect of my family … I have in this one dirty business of 
Laudanum an hundred times deceived, tricked, nay, actually & consciously LIED. 
– And yet all these vices are so opposite to my nature, that but for the 
free-agency-annihilating Poison, I verily believe that I should have suffered 
myself to be cut in pieces rather than have committed any one of them."

If addiction is the poem's subtext, it helps explain the oddly un-theological 
plot-strand, in which Death and Life-in-Death throw dice on the spectral ship 
to decide the fates of the Mariner and his crew. The story Coleridge told of 
the origins of his addiction in using laudanum as an analgesic for rheumatic 
pains, points to his own sense of the cruel power of the random. The addiction 
wasn't chosen: it was a fate visited on him. The poison, once ingested, is 
"free-agency-annihilating".

The most convincing reading of the poem as "personal allegory" is George 
Whalley's essay The Mariner and the Albatross 
<http://www.ualberta.ca/~dmiall/MARINER/STC_A01.HTM>. The Mariner, Whalley 
suggests, is the poet. The albatross is the bringer of the benign south wind 
that Coleridge associates, in hisAnima Poetae 
<http://www.archive.org/details/animapoetaefrom00colegoog>, with Genius. In 
killing the albatross, he has destroyed his gift.

The albatross might equally symbolise social connection. At the start of the 
poem, the bird visits the ship regularly and is fed by the sailors. We are not 
told why the Mariner idly decides to kill the bird. Again, the hint is that the 
random act is the root of the evil. The moment at which the Mariner begins to 
climb out of his slough of despond is the moment he overcomes his revulsion 
from the foul sea-snakes and unknowingly, involuntarily, blesses them. These 
snakes may be associated with the imagery of opium-induced nightmare. Perhaps, 
in fact, it is by owning up to the imaginative power of the opium vision that 
the Mariner-Poet redeems his failure.

The following extract comes from Part IV. It includes the glosses which 
Coleridge added to the 1817 edition of the poem, usually printed as marginalia. 
This commentary is sometimes merely explanatory (and now seems unnecessary) but 
it may also shed further psychological light, as in the famous "moon gloss", 
with which my extract begins.

"In his loneliness and fixedness he yearneth towards the journeying Moon, and 
the stars that still sojourn, yet still move onward; and every where the blue 
sky belongs to them, and is their appointed rest, and their native country and 
their own natural homes, which they enter unannounced, as lords that are 
certainly expected and yet there is a silent joy at their arrival."

The moving Moon went up the sky,
And no where did abide:
Softly she was going up,
And a star or two beside –
 
Her beams bemocked the sultry main,
Like April hoar-frost spread;
But where the ship's huge shadow lay,
The charméd water burnt alway
A still and awful red.
 
"By the light of the Moon he beholdeth God's creatures of the great calm." 
 
Beyond the shadow of the ship,
I watched the water-snakes:
They moved in tracks of shining white,
And when they reared, the elfish light
Fell off in hoary flakes. 
 
Within the shadow of the ship
I watched their rich attire:
Blue, glossy green, and velvet black,
They coiled and swam; and every track
Was a flash of golden fire.
 
"Their beauty and their happiness. 
He blesseth them in his heart."
 
O happy living things! no tongue
Their beauty might declare:
A spring of love gushed from my heart,
And I blessed them unaware:
 
Sure my kind saint took pity on me,
And I blessed them unaware.
 
"The spell begins to break."
 
The self-same moment I could pray;
And from my neck so free
The Albatross fell off, and sank
Like lead into the sea.
 
 