
Delhi’s grand plan to deal with record levels of pollution and clean its air 
appears to be stalling before it has even been put into action.

Arvind Kejriwal, the top elected official of the Indian capital, said last 
month that private cars would be allowed on the city’s roads only on alternate 
days from 1-15 January, with days allocated on the basis of whether licence 
plates ended in an even or odd number.

On Thursday, he announced a list of people exempted from that rule: all women, 
top politicians, judges, police and prison officials and sick people. He also 
left out two-wheel vehicles such as motorbikes and scooters.

He added an even bigger caveat: if the watered-down plan inconvenienced 
citizens the plan would be scrapped.

The effects of pollution in Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> 
are palpable: grey, overladen skies, difficulty in breathing and the smell of 
vehicle exhaust.

Environmentalist Anumita Raichaudury warned that with so many exemptions the 
effectiveness of the government efforts would be compromised. “Two-wheelers 
should be brought within its mandate as they make a key contribution to 
pollution,” she said.

“We support the government effort, but it should be executed well.”

This week, the Indian capital was suffering from the worst pollution this 
season.

On Thursday, the Indian environment monitoring index showed record levels of 
PM2.5, particles with diameters no greater than 2.5 micrometres, which can be 
more damaging because they are small enough to be breathed deeply into the 
lungs.

The average PM2.5 levels for the capital on Thursday were over 293, almost 
five times higher than the Indian norm of 60 and almost 15 times the World 
Health Organisation (WHO) standard of 20.

Plans to clean up the city’s pollution had also included shutting down one of 
the oldest and least efficient power plants, a temporary ban on the sale of 
large diesel vehicles and a stiff toll for pollution-spewing trucks entering 
the Indian capital.

The supreme court earlier this month also banned trucks from entering the city 
if they were over 10 years old or just passing through. In addition, all taxis 
in the area, including private ride-hailing services such as Uber, have to 
switch to running on compressed natural gas by 31 March.

But it was the plan to reduce the number of cars on the sprawling capital’s 
roads that was the most dramatic.

Last year, the WHO named Delhi the world’s most polluted city, with 12 other 
Indian cities ranking among the worst 20. Air pollution contributes to more 
than 600,000 deaths each year inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

The watering down of the plan has disappointed many who welcomed the 
announcement of Kejriwal’s grand scheme.

But for others even the watered-down scheme is better than nothing at all.

Economist Surjit Bhalla said the government had acted in response to pressure 
mounting from citizens who had become increasingly aware of the dangers. “But I 
am doubtful about its success.”
 