
A controversial Israeli police operation to demolish buildings in a Bedouin 
village in the country’s south to make way for a new Jewish town has ended with 
two fatalities – including an Israeli police officer – amid sharply conflicting 
versions of what occurred.

The pre-dawn raid by hundreds of armed police on the village of Umm al-Hiran 
in Negev – regarded as illegal by the Israeli courts – ended with a Bedouin man 
shot dead in his car and a police officer fatally run over.

Despite claims by Israeli officials that the dead man was a terrorist who had 
deliberately run into a group of police officers, witnesses – including 
villagers and Israeli activists – offered a different sequence of events.

They said the man’s car had been fired on by police before it hit two officers 
lower down a steep dirt road, suggesting the driver lost control after being 
shot.

Video footage of the incident 
<https://www.facebook.com/AdalahEnglish/videos/1221255557957490/>, taken from a 
police helicopter, seemed to show at least one police officer opened fire on 
the driver as the car was moving slowly. An officer to the front and right of 
the car runs towards it and appears to shoot at least three times from several 
metres away. It is at this point that the car suddenly appears to accelerate. 
What is impossible to ascertain from the video, however, is the point at which 
the driver is shot and how far he was in control of the vehicle at the point 
that the car speeds up – and why.

 Bedouin women outside a structure destroyed by police during the operation in 
in Umm al-Hiran. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the Guardian 
Yaakub Abu al-Qiyan, 50, a teacher, and Israeli police sergeant Erez Levy, 34, 
were killed during protests against the demolitions, which come amid a 
long-running dispute between Israel and the formerly nomadic Bedouins of Umm 
al-Hiran.Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> moved part of a 
Bedouin clan to the state-owned land 60 years ago but now wishes to relocate 
residents to a government-designated Bedouin township despite the fact that the 
village, home to about 1,000 people, lies outside the area slated for the new 
town.

Witnesses who spoke to the Guardian said they heard and saw Israeli police 
fire on a white SUV being driven by Abu al-Qiyan before it appeared to roll 
down a hill killing Levy, finally coming to a halt after hitting another car.


Michal Haramati, an Israeli activist who was in the village to try to prevent 
the demolitions, said she heard gunfire before she saw the car coming down the 
hill.


“It was about 5.30 in the morning. I heard shooting and then saw a big white 
car coming down the hill that seemed to be out of control. Then it hit the 
police and carried on until it crashed into another car which stopped it.”

Isaac Kates Rose, another Israeli activist, was about 60 metres away and said 
the car had attempted to turn away from the police when he heard the shooting 
start.

Local residents said Abu al-Qiyan was trying to leave town and only lost 
control of his vehicle after police shot at him. Abu al-Qiyan’s brother, Ahmad, 
said he had been “murdered in cold blood”. Amnesty International called for an 
inquiry into the reports of excessive force by police.

“The police are light on the trigger when it comes to Arab citizens,” the 
advocacy group Adalah said.
 Bedouin villagers gather outside a destroyed building in Umm al-Hiran. 
Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the Guardian 
The claims by activists and villagers were in marked contrast to official 
Israeli accounts, which described Abu al-Qiyan as a terrorist.

Micky Rosenfeld, a police spokesman, said Abu al-Qiyan had sped towards the 
police officer before knocking down and killing him. “Police were in the area 
to prevent disturbances during house demolitions in the area. As a result of 
the incident, there were riots that took place in the area that police 
responded to.”

Palestinians have carried out a number of vehicular attacks against Israelis 
over the past year and a half. Earlier this month aPalestinian truck driver 
rammed into a group of Israeli soldiers in Jerusalem, killing four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/truck-rammed-into-pedestrians-jerusalem>
.

Protests against the demolitions also resulted in Israel’s most prominent 
Arab-Israeli politician, Ayman Odeh, being injured in the face by what he said 
was a sponge-tipped bullet. Police denied the claim.

“They attacked [Ayman Odeh] and other people – demonstrators – with stun 
grenades, teargas directly in people’s faces,” Odeh’s aide, Anan Maalouf, told 
Israeli army radio.

“There was no car-ramming attack here. There were no clashes here between the 
demonstrators and police.”

The prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and Israeli ministers accused Israeli 
Arab MPs, including Odeh, who had gone to negotiate a halt to the demolitions, 
of incitement.


“I ask everyone, especially members of the Knesset, to be responsible, to stop 
fanning emotions and inciting violence,” said Netanyahu.

“The Bedouin public is part of us; we want to integrate it into Israeli 
society and not radicalise it and push it away from the centre of our life 
experience. The police are operating on the ground with authority and nobody 
has the right to interfere with their mission.”

Israeli authorities regularly carry out demolitions of Bedouin homes deemed to 
have been built illegally. However, building permits are nearly impossible to 
obtain, according to residents and activists, who say Jewish Israelis are given 
preferential treatment.


The latest demolitions come a week after another high-profile police operation 
to demolish illegally built homes in the Arab town of Kalansua in central 
Israel, which had already fanned tensions.
 