
Police have arrested a man following an explosion at a house in Manchester 
that left at least five people injured.

Fire crews were called to a partially collapsed end-of-terrace property in the 
suburb of Blackley in the north of the city at 12.40pm on Monday.

The explosion blew off the top half of a redbrick house, partially destroyed 
the neighbouring property and damaged others nearby. Greater Manchester fire 
and rescue service said it was treating the incident as a suspected gas 
explosion.


A 33-year-old man, who is in a stable condition in hospital following the 
blast, has been arrested on suspicion of causing an explosion to endanger life.

North West ambulance service said on Monday that five people had been injured 
in the incident, two of them seriously. Of the two, one is in a critical 
condition and the other is the suspect.

DI Dave Sinclair said it had been a devastating incident, but that good 
progress was being made in the investigation into the cause of the explosion.

“But we still need to hear from anyone who believes they have any information 
about what happened,” he said. “The house is now being treated as a crime 
scene. Given the problematic working conditions, it may be several days before 
we will be able to return the street to normality.”

Speaking to the Manchester Evening News after incident, neighbours compared 
the sound of the explosion to a bomb. “I went to the street and it looks like 
it has taken out an entire house,” one man said. “There were loads of police 
and fire crews there.”

A neighbour said: “The house shook. We thought someone had crashed a car into 
our house, so we went out to see and it was that bang.”

Firefighters also rescued a kitten from the debris of the house and posted 
images of the animal on Twitter:
Manchester Fire (@manchesterfire) 
Firefighters have rescued this little kitten from the debris at the house 
explosion in Blackley. It's being very well looked after.
pic.twitter.com/W1qQHimKXI <https://t.co/W1qQHimKXI>
 <https://twitter.com/manchesterfire/status/821010346672615424> January 16, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/manchesterfire/status/821010346672615424>  