
Police have confirmed the death of Derek Serpell-Morris,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/11/human-remains-found-in-woodland-near-bristol-believed-to-be-dj-derek>
the veteran DJ from Bristol who went missing in July 2015.

A nationwide search to find the 73-year-old was halted earlier this month when 
a member of the public found human remains near Cribbs Causeway shopping centre 
in Patchway,Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol>. DNA tests have 
confirmed his death.

“Derek’s family have been updated and our thoughts remain with them at this 
very difficult time,” a spokesman for Avon and Somerset police said.

“A post-mortem examination carried out earlier this week was inconclusive and 
further tests are being progressed, but we’re not treating Derek’s death as 
suspicious. We’re continuing to carry out further inquiries on behalf of the 
coroner’s office.”

The DJ, who was formerly an accountant for Cadbury and had lived in St Paul’s, 
Bristol, since 1978, was a staple at local bars and clubs, and at Glastonbury 
festival. As well as his status as Britain’s oldest DJ, he was known for 
playing a combination of 1960s rocksteady, reggae, ska, dancehall and soul 
music.

“Yesterday we got the news that our beloved Derek had been found, I am feeling 
numb right now to think of him being there alone all this time,” his family 
wrote on Facebook following news of the discovery.

Gerald Serpell-Morris, Derek’s older brother, told the Bristol Post: “I was 
amazed how much better I felt when the news came through. The last seven months 
have been a huge strain, not knowing. The whole family has been affected by 
what has happened.”

“The worst part was not knowing, the uncertainty and the knowledge that you 
don’t know where he is and that he may never be found.”


A public celebration of Derek’s life and career is being planned for the end 
of April at a venue in St Paul’s. “We want this to be a joyous occasion, which 
will of course include music. It will be a celebration of Derek’s life and the 
impact he had on his city,” said Serpell-Morris.

 