
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> use of data extraction 
equipment to download information from suspects’ mobile phones should require a 
search warrant, according to privacy campaigners.

The practice is becoming increasingly routine across most forces but is 
inadequately regulated and being carried out by insufficiently trained officers,
Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> International claimed.

Digital forensic equipment has been used under counter-terrorism powers at 
ports and airports to download data from mobile phones for several years. 
Concerns over the practice were first raised by theindependent reviewer of 
terrorism legislation 
<https://terrorismlegislationreviewer.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Report-on-the-Terrorism-Acts-in-2012-FINAL_WEB1.pdf>
, David Anderson QC, in 2012.


The technology has now spread to other police forces. A report by the police 
and crime commissioner for North Yorkshire in 2015 
<http://www.northyorkshire-pcc.gov.uk/content/uploads/2016/01/7ae-Mobile-Phone-Examination.pdf>
, uncovered bythe Bristol Cable magazine 
<https://thebristolcable.org/2017/01/phone-cracking-tech/>, checked on 50 
mobile phone examinations and warned that: “There is a risk that possibly 
sensitive data may have been lost or misappropriated and this raises wider 
issues around the overall security of extracted data.”


It found six files containing information downloaded on to disks had gone 
missing. The report also found that data was not being encrypted and questioned 
whether officers were receiving adequate training.

A Metropolitan police procurement document 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3280381-MPS-Digital-Cyber-and-Communications-Forensics.html>
 obtained by Privacy International says that “self service kiosks” are being 
installed across all London boroughs. It states: “The key objective is to 
enable frontline officers [to obtain] faster and easier access to digital 
information … The use of digital information for intelligence and as evidence 
in gaining criminal convictions is vital.”


It also refers to: “The ingestion of data from tens of thousands of digital 
devices annually at dozens of different locations introduces a complex data 
management challenge. [The Met police] needs the capability to effectively and 
efficiently manage data through its life cycle, this will vary from deletion 
within days of capture to maintenance for an indefinite period extending for 
many years.”

Mobile phone data can contain an enormous amount of private information, 
including photographs. Privacy International points to a landmark US case in 
2014, Riley v California, which ruled that it was illegal to search or seize 
the contents of a mobile phone without a warrant.


Millie Graham Wood, legal officer at Privacy International, said: “The North 
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> report suggests local 
police forces are not yet ready to handle these highly intrusive tools and it 
raises questions about whether other police forces have adopted these 
technologies appropriately.


“The police have lost files, undermined serious investigations and failed to 
safeguard people’s personal data. Across the country the police have expanded 
their use of mobile phone extraction on the quiet, and it is unclear what 
effective oversight exists.


“The bigger issue is whether traditional search practices, where no warrant is 
required, should be applied to mobile phones, which can contain a massive 
amount of highly personal data. Modern mobile phones are not just phones, but 
mini computers, cameras, video players, calendars, recorders, libraries, 
diaries, albums, maps all in one,” Graham Wood said.

“Thus, searching a mobile phone cannot accurately be compared to a search of 
the home, let alone a physical search. It is far more exhaustive. They have 
immense storage capacity, can hold thousands of pictures, videos and apps, all 
of which can reveal so much about your, and potentially your contacts’, 
political, sexual and religious identity. They hold location data, and even 
deleted data as indicated by the Home Office contract.”


Under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE), officers can search, 
seize and retain data from a mobile phone belonging to anyone who has been 
arrested on suspicion of committing an offence.

Any data seized can only be kept for the purpose of a criminal investigation 
and if it is required for use as evidence at trial, or for forensic examination 
or investigation in connection with an offence.


National Police Chiefs’ council lead for digital forensics, Deputy Chief 
Constable Nicholas Baker, said: “Mobile phone kiosks are an invaluable digital 
forensic tool used by police forces to improve the quality of early 
investigations, protect victims, witnesses and the public at large. Authorised 
users are trained to use a controlled approach to extract specific data which 
is invaluable to progressing those early investigations.

“Data extraction from mobile phones is legal under provisions of the Police 
and Criminal Evidence Act, which enables officers to review information stored 
electronically on suspects’ devices while in custody and often leads to 
suspects being charged, preventing further harm and helping to safeguard 
victims.

“We work with the forensic science regulator and associated network of experts 
to ensure that police forces have the necessary guidance to deploy these tools 
effectively and within the provisions of the law. Attaining accreditation and 
improving standards for digital forensics is a top priority for the police 
service that we will continue to work towards.”




 