
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> chiefs have issued an apology 
and paid compensation of more than £20,000 to the family of a woman who was a 
victim of domestic violence and died following a violent attack.

Officers failed to respond to the 999 call of Luisa Mendes, who said she was 
being beaten by two men with whom she lived. When police did finally arrive, 14 
hours later at her address in Leamington Spa, she was dead.

Warwickshire police agreed the payout to the family of the 44-year-old found 
dead in October 2012 the morning after police failed to respond to her 
emergency phone call.

In a letter of apology to her family, Warwickshire police acknowledge that 
errors were made in the case. Chief Constable Martin Jelley said in his apology 
that he was “truly sorry” about what happened and that he and his colleagues 
were reflecting on the “errors and omissions” of the police. He said that the 
police were determined, in future, to do things differently for some of the 
most vulnerable people.

Police failures over domestic violence exposed in damning report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/police-failures-domestic-violence-damning-report>
 No one was charged in relation to Mendes’ death, however a jury at her 
inquest unanimously concluded that on the balance of probabilities she had been 
assaulted and had died because of trauma caused by the assault.

Mendes moved to England from Portugal in the 1990s and led a happy life, 
running a successful business. She experienced difficulties following the 
breakdown of her long-term relationship and the collapse of her business and 
from then on developed alcohol dependency. She became unemployed and 
sporadically homeless.

In the months before she died she called the police on a number of occasions 
saying she had been hit and that she was being followed.

On 24 October 2012, at 8pm, she made a 999 call where she was heard to scream 
and hang up. When the operator called back one of the two men she was with at 
the time answered the phone. Mendes lived with both of the men from time to 
time. Both men denied there was any problem but she confirmed she was being 
beaten and was heard in the background saying repeatedly “don’t beat me, don’t 
touch me”.

The emergency operator said that police would attend within the hour but 
categorised the call as a “rowdy/nuisance call” when it should have been 
classed as “violence”.

Police attended the address the next day at 10am. Mendes was found collapsed 
in the bathroom. Paramedics were called but she was pronounced dead.

The jury at the inquest into Mendes’ death concluded that there were police 
errors and omissions in the call categorisation, the handover procedures for 
the police controllers, the deferral of the 999 call, the police computer 
systems, and the supervision of the police staff. The jury concluded that these 
errors or omissions possibly caused or contributed to Mendes’ death.

Shocking domestic abuse statistics don’t show the real picture: it’s even 
worse | Kate Moss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/domestic-abuse-statistics-ons-worse-education>
Nancy Collins of Hodge, Jones & Allen solicitors, brought a claim against 
Warkwickshire constabulary based on the force’s failure to protect Mendes’ 
right to life under the Human Rights Act. The force admitted liability for the 
breaches of the Human Rights Act and settled the claim for £21,687.

 Following an IPCC investigation, misconduct action was taken against four 
police officers.

 Collins said: “Luisa was a vulnerable woman who was known to the police and 
had been a victim of domestic violence. The police had a duty to protect her 
and when she dialled 999 saying she was being beaten, help should have been 
sent immediately. Instead, the collective failures of police officers and 
employees meant that she was treated as a nuisance rather than a victim and 
help did not arrive until it was far too late. It is hoped that lessons will be 
learnt from Luisa’s death and that where there is a risk of domestic violence 
appropriate and timely support will be provided.”

 A domestic violence homicide review 
<https://apps.warwickshire.gov.uk/api/documents/WCCC-671-101> identified five 
missed opportunities to support Mendes. A report by Her Majesty’sInspectorate 
of Constabulary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/police-failures-domestic-violence-damning-report>
 identified “alarming and unacceptable” weaknesses in the policing of domestic 
violence.

Vitor Mendes, the brother of Luisa, said: “My sister was vulnerable and 
deserved protection from the police, regardless of her difficulties. Whilst 
this settlement does little to compensate for our loss, four years on, I hope 
that Warwickshire police will be true to their word and review their systems 
and policies to ensure they protect people like Luisa in the future.”

 * This article was corrected on 5 January 2016. The police force involved was 
Warwickshire, not West Mercia.
 