
Pornography <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pornography> websites that 
fail to implement stringent age verification controls could be blocked from 
British users after MPs forced the government to strengthen planned measures to 
prevent children accessing such content.

The culture secretary, Karen Bradley, said the move would protect children 
from “harmful pornographic content” and fulfil a Conservative manifesto 
promise. Ministers had previously said such a measure would be disproportionate.

The move has widespread support from child safety campaigners and the general 
public. An ICM poll, commissioned by Durham University’s centre for 
gender-equal media and published last month, found 78% of respondents backed 
blocks on adult websites that allowed under-18s to access their content. Age 
verification had the backing of 86%.

Sexualised behaviour in very young children increasing, say teachers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/12/sexualised-behaviour-in-very-young-children-increasing-say-teachers>
The rules, to be enforced by the British Board of Film Classification, will 
apply to all websites regardless of where they are based. The government says 
they comply with EU country of origin rules.

Digital rights campaigners, however, say the measure has no equivalent in any 
other democratic country, while free speech advocates say it could be the start 
of a slippery slope towards ever greater censorship.


Together with the online surveillance powers introduced by the Investigatory 
Powers Act this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
, it constitutes a significant tightening of control over the internet.

Bradley said: “We made a promise to keep children safe from harmful 
pornographic content online and that is exactly what we are doing. Only adults 
should be allowed to view such content and we have appointed a regulator, BBFC, 
to make sure the right age checks are in place to make that happen. If sites 
refuse to comply, they should be blocked.

“In fulfilling this manifesto commitment and working closely with people like 
[MPs] Claire Perry and Kit Malthouse, who have worked tirelessly on internet 
safety issues, we are protecting children from the consequences of harmful 
content.”

The measure will be introduced as an amendment to the digital economy bill. It 
comes after the Labour MP Louise Haigh introduced her own amendment in the 
bill’s committee stage, calling for non-compliant websites to be blocked. She 
withdrew the amendment in the face of ministerial opposition, but a new 
amendment was introduced by Perry, a Conservative, at the report stage.

It was expected to be passed by a cross-party coalition of MPs after Perry 
threatened to split the Tory vote and defeat the government, Haigh told the 
Guardian.

“[Perry] was obviously feeling a bit feisty and she told them that she was 
going to divide the house,” she said. “There was going to be a vote on Monday. 
She had enough Tory backbenchers to defeat the government.”

According to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, the rules will give 
the BBFC the power to issue a notice to internet service providers, and those 
that cover mobile network operators, to prevent access to websites that have no 
or inadequate age verification for pornography. The details of the amendment 
are still being worked out.


The original bill already gave regulators powers to issue fines of up to 
£250,000, or 5% of turnover, while websites outside British jurisdiction would 
have UK customer payments via services such as Visa and MasterCard cut off. 
Ministers were also seeking cooperation from other services that support 
websites, such as servers, to clamp down on those that fail to comply.

Jim Killock, the executive director of the Open Rights Group, which has 
campaigned against the blocking of websites, said doing so for online 
pornography was an “outrageous” measure that put the UK in the company of 
countries such as Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

“It’s clearly because they [the government] think they might suffer a defeat, 
not because they think this is a workable policy,” he said. “What it will lead 
to is the blocking of a large amount of legal content, and many of those sites 
will have little or no incentive to use the UK’s bespoke age verification 
system, with the result that large amounts of material will be blocked to UK 
adults, despite the material being entirely legal to impart and receive.”

Teach children about pornography before puberty, says Labour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/01/teach-children-about-pornography-before-puberty-says-labour>
Killock said children, especially teenagers, were unlikely to find the blocks 
a barrier to viewing pornography because “they will find their own ways around 
it”.

Jerry Barnett, a free speech campaigner whose book, Porn Panic!, details an 
increasingly illiberal attitude towards pornography in the UK, said he believed 
the censorship introduced by the bill would undoubtedly extend beyond its 
current remit, “partly because the language is very slippery”.


“Sometimes they say ‘porn’, by which they mean all sex, erotica, etc; but 
sometimes they use ‘adult content’, which is a far broader term, and they start 
going on about knife sales or self-harm sites, drug information sites,” he 
said. “And if you look at the BBFC’s remit, what the BBFC believes it’s here to 
protect us from, porn is one of a number of categories.

“Porn, sex and erotica is absolutely the first target, but I can’t see in any 
way, shape or form that they won’t extend it because both the BBFC, for video, 
and Ofcom, for TV, have given themselves an incredibly broad censorship remit 
when it comes to child protection, and porn is just one of the categories.”


Research commissioned by the NSPCC and the children’s commissioner for England 
found that the majority of children are exposed to pornography by their early 
teens. Fifty-three per cent of 11 to 16-year-olds have encountered it online, 
of whom 94% saw it by the age of 14, according to the Middlesex University 
study.

The NSPCC said a generation of children was at risk of being “stripped of 
their childhoods” through exposure to pornography at a young age.
 