
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> clubs’ 
facilities for disabled supporters have been severely criticised in a 
parliamentary report which states MPs would support legal action to force 
compliance by clubs with minimum provision set out by law. The report by the 
culture, media and sport committee cites expert evidence that eight of the 
Premier League’s 20 clubs will fail to achieve the minimum legal number of 
wheelchair spaces for supporters, as set out in the Accessible Stadia Guide, by 
a deadline of August this year.

The report said it was “completely unacceptable” that a number of Premier 
League clubs, principally those in older grounds, have failed to carry out 
basic adaptations over the past 20 years.

“It is very clear that sports clubs, notably many of those with very 
considerable income and resources, have not done anywhere near enough for 
sports fans with disabilities in recent years, despite the increase in income 
many of those clubs have enjoyed,” the report says.

Rugby and cricket clubs and venues, including Twickenham, also fall short on 
provision for disabled spectators, but the campaigning body Level Playing Field 
told the committee the administrators of those sports take the issue seriously 
and have shown a greater willingness to improve than the Premier League,which 
was described in evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/premier- 
league-clubs-criticised-slow-progress-disabled-access> as “defensive”.

Lord Holmes, the disabilities commissioner at the Equalities and Human Rights 
Commission, has threatened the Premier League and its clubs with legal action 
under anti-discrimination legislation ifthey do not comply with minimum 
standards <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/05/premier- 
league-manchester-united-legal-threat-disabled-access>, and the committee says 
it would support this. Holmes compared “pages and pages” in the Premier League 
rulebook on how TV broadcasters must be accommodated, and the rapid changes 
made to stadiums for them if required, to the inaction in many grounds on 
improving disability access.

Having taken evidence from Holmes, Level Playing Field, and the Premier 
League’s executive director, Bill Bush, the report highlights barriers faced by 
disabled supporters, as well as the insufficient number of wheelchair spaces. 
Supporters find booking tickets online difficult at many clubs; there is too 
little provision for disabled parking; the locations and views provided in 
grounds are often poor with access difficult for toilets and training 
facilities.

Level Playing Field told the committee the biggest problem was inadequate 
awareness and training of staff in the needs of disabled supporters, which had 
led to “unpleasant experiences” at matches.

West Ham United are specifically highlighted for, the report says, reducing 
the number of disabled access spaces available at its stadium in its previous 
configuration for the Olympics, and for combining some wheelchair spaces with 
hospitality areas. The report calls on the club to prioritise “the needs of 
disabled fans over the desire to charge a premium for extra hospitality 
accommodation”.

West Ham reject this criticism, saying the converted London Stadium provides 
more wheelchair spaces than the minimum required by the Accessible Stadia 
Guide, and that priority is always given to wheelchair users in that 
hospitality area. “These spaces will never be allocated to another fan at the 
expense of a disabled supporter,” the club said in a statement.

Tony Taylor, the chair of Level Playing Field, confirmed that: “Our 
understanding is West Ham United now not only meets but exceeds the 
requirements for wheelchair user spaces in accessible stadia.”

After years of complaints at clubs’ failure to meet the required legal 
provision of wheelchair spaces <https://www.theguardian.com/ 
football/2015/mar/07/disabled-fans-premier-league-grounds>, the Premier League 
committed that all clubs would reach the minimum number by August this year. 
Failure to do so, Bush told the committee, would mean a club is in breach of 
Premier League rules and could be fined up to £25,000 or, in more serious 
cases, referred to an independent panel with greater powers, including, 
potentially, to deduct points.

The report said an audit by Level Playing Field last year found that eight of 
the clubs would fail to meet the minimum, and the committee was “not convinced” 
that the Premier League would indeed impose suitable penalties on clubs.

The Premier League is shortly to submit a report to the EHRC and the 
parliamentary committee on the progress its clubs have made, and said in a 
statement: “Premier League clubs are working extremely hard to improve disabled 
access in their grounds. Some [clubs] will have significant logistical and 
built environment issues, involving old stands, planning and new stadia. All 
are working towards making their stadiums meet the appropriate standards 
improving the experience for their disabled fans.”
 