
Bath

Coach Todd Blackadder

Captain Guy Mercer

Key player Taulupe Faletau

Last season 9th

Ins (7) inc Faletau, Luke Charteris and Kahn Fotuali’i Outs (15) inc Kyle 
Eastmond, Ollie Devoto and Rob Webber

Can only get better after last season’s struggle. The recruitment of the Lions 
No8 Faletau will give them more thrust and space for the backs, who had to 
labour off slow ball. Blackadder’s arrival from New Zealand should herald an 
increase in tempo but international calls may deny them a top-four finish.

AG verdict Todd Blackadder has a great reputation; a coach coming in late is 
always difficult but Faletau and Charteris add to a fabulous squad and it will 
be a breath of fresh air after last season

Bristol

Coach Andy Robinson

Captain Jack Lam

Key player Jack Lam

Last season Championship winners

Ins (11) inc Jordan Crane, Tusi Pisi and Jordan Williams

Outs (8) inc Ellis Genge, Matthew Morgan and Tommaso Benvenuti.

AG verdict They have not signed enough quality because of how they have been 
burnt in the Championship play-offs before and Robinson has not coached in the
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> for so long. It 
will be a battle all year

Lions tour the prize but first comes treadmill even robots would find wearing 
| Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/lions-tour-treadmill-premiership-pro-12-rugby>
Exeter

Coach Rob Baxter

Captain Jack Yeandle

Key player Henry Slade, right

Last season 2nd (beaten finalists)

Ins (3) Dave Dennis, Ollie Devoto and Greg Holmes

Outs (7) inc Brett Sturgess, Alex Brown and Jerry Sexton

Exeter’s rise this decade has been remarkable, culminating in last May’s 
appearance in the final. Change has been kept to a minimum, but the three 
recruits will add to an already strong, all-round squad. A fit Slade will be 
out to make up for the months he missed last season and there are fewer cannier 
coaches than Baxter.

AG verdict Devoto is a huge signing and speaks volumes. Slade has been playing 
at fly-half in pre-season and is the most gifted No10 I’ve played against in 
recent years. Top four again

Gloucester

Coach David Humphreys

Captain Greig Laidlaw

Key player Ben Morgan

Last season 8th

Ins (9) inc Josh Hohneck, Matt Scott and Andy Symons

Outs (7) inc Rob Cook, Nick Wood and Elliott Stooke

Gloucester’s stated ambition is to win the Premiership. They will need to 
improve their form on the road having failed to win more than three matches 
away in the last six seasons. Morgan has to show England are wrong to keep 
ignoring him by fronting up each week.

AG verdict Can produce some big performances but consistency is poor and they 
often lose to sides below them, which must be frustrating for their loyal fans. 
Billy Burns will be given a run at No10, so he is a key man

Harlequins

Coach John Kingston

Captain Danny Care

Key player Jamie Roberts, left

Last season 7th

Ins (10) inc Ruaridh Jackson, Mark Reddish and George Naoupu

Outs (8) inc Nick Easter (now defence coach), Ben Botica and Tito Tebaldi

Quins enter a new era, the great entertainers supplemented by the arrival of 
the hard-nosed Graham Rowntree as forwards coach. They need to learn to win 
ugly, all the more so after the retirement of Nick Easter, a forward with the 
skills of an All Black back.

AG verdict Conor O’Shea did so much good work but Rowntree is an astute 
appointment as forwards coach. He will harden up the pack in spades. They 
struggle without their England players but should be top six

Leicester

Coach Richard Cockerill

Captain Tom Youngs

Key player Manu Tuilagi

Last season 4th

Ins (6) inc Matt Toomua, JP Pietersen and Ellis Genge

Outs (20) inc Jean de Villiers, Vereniki Goneva and Opeti Fonua

Having missed out on what had become an annual May outing to Twickenham the 
Tigers have added experience behind the scrum. Tuilagi is also fit to start the 
campaign and while their bloody-mindedness ensures they will be up there, the 
tournament is such now that they need more.

AG verdict Toomua is a brilliant acquisition – the link player Tigers have 
missed since Anthony Allen retired. Tuilagi is fit and everyone wants to see 
him playing well. There is pressure on Cockers, though, and it’s time to see 
them back at the top table

Newcastle

Coach Dean Richards

Captain Will Welch

Key player Mike Delany

Last season 11th

Ins (12) inc Vereniki Goneva, Opeti Fonua and Kyle Cooper

Outs (12) inc Alesana Tuilagi, Kane Thompson and Giovanbattista Venditti

Another relegation scrap is being tipped but there have been signs in the last 
two seasons that when the Falcons get it right, they are a match for most. 
Sinotti Sinoti missed most of last season and the wing’s return is an asset, 
but the difference between staying up and going down could be the boot of 
Delany.

AG verdict Goneva and Sinoti are key – Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> will win games at home if 
they can get those two the ball. They’ll improve from 11th to 10th – especially 
without an overweight fly‑half booting the ball around

Northampton

Coach Jim Mallinder

Captain Tom Wood

Key player Louis Picamoles

Last season 5th

Ins (5) inc Louis Picamoles, Nic Groom and Juan Pablo Estelles

Outs (8) inc Victor Matfield, Kahn Fotuali’i and Alex Corbisiero

AG verdict I’m unsure how effective Picamoles will be – anyone from France who 
says he is enjoying theNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> lifestyle I’m not sure 
about! Dylan Hartley is fit but there is not enough depth compared to the other 
big boys

Sale

Coach Steve Diamond

Captain Josh Beaumont

Key player Michael Haley, right

Last season 6th

Ins (12) including Josh Charnley, Mike Phillips and Halani Aulika

Outs (10) inc Danny Cipriani, Tommy Taylor and Chris Cusiter

Diamond has done superbly to keep Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> not only out of relegation 
struggles in recent years but take the Sharks into the European Champions Cup. 
They punch above their weight and are hard to beat at home but they have lost 
players while the clubs immediately below them have strengthened their squads.

AG verdict Unfashionable but very hardworking, epitomised by Diamond. Cipriani 
has gone and they have overachieved recently but have got some good young 
players who care about the club

Saracens

Coach Mark McCall

Captain Brad Barritt

Key player Alex Lozowski

Last season 1st (champions)

Ins (6) inc Schalk Burger, Sean Maitland and Lozowski.

Outs (14) inc Charlie Hodgson, Jacques Burger and Rhys Gill.

It is hard to see Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> 
slipping after last season’s double but the international months will test 
their strength in depth. Three of their five defeats came when Owen Farrell was 
on England duty and Charlie Hodgson was injured and they lacked direction at 
fly-half. Hodgson has retired and instead of going for experience, the 
champions signed the 23-year-old Lozowski from Wasps rather than opt for 
experience to cover for the four months Farrell will be away.

AG verdict I can only see the champions improving. Schalk Burger has come in 
and bought into the culture; he has talked about how he will add value in the 
pub. I’ve got a lot of time for that

Wasps

Coach David Young

Captain Joe Launchbury

Key player Nathan Hughes

Last season 3rd

Ins (13) inc Willie le Roux, Kurtley Beale and Danny Cipriani

Outs (13) inc Bradley Davies, Andrea Masi and Charles Piutau

From Steptoe’s yard to Southfork. From nearly going bust five years ago Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> have become the Premiership’s 
version of Toulon, signing top players from around the world, although in their 
case they also rely on their academy. They resemble the All Blacks in the way 
they try to play total rugby but were vulnerable at times last season when they 
were taken on up front. They will get better.

AG verdict If they can get parity up front their backs can destroy anyone. 
Cipriani must earn his spot, from Jimmy Gopperth, though. George Smith and 
James Haskell (injury) are big misses. Making Launchbury captain is a fantastic 
decision

Worcester

Coach Carl Hogg

Captain Gerrit-Jan van Velze

Key player Ben Te’o

Last season 10th

Ins (7) inc Te’o, Alafoti Fa’osoliva and Jackson Willison

Outs (13) inc Charlie Mulchrone, Andy Symons and Alex Grove

The departure of Dean Ryan is a setback but one of his legacies is the centre 
Te’o, who will fire their backline. They look light at fly-half again but the 
South Africa scrum-half Francois Hougaard will return next month having made an 
impact earlier this year.

AG verdict Losing Ryan was huge. They shipped 50 points to Munster in 
pre-season and it’s a tough start against Saracens. I’m looking forward to 
seeing Te’o but they do not have quality across the squad. Should stay up
 