
The return of the England lock Maro Itoje ended in defeat as Saracens suffered 
the second loss of their league campaign. Three Tom Homer penalties and a Max 
Clark try liftedBath into second place in the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> as they edged out the champions 
14-11 at the Rec.

Sean Maitland touched down for the leaders, while Alex Lozowski – who was also 
sent to the sin-bin – kicked a penalty and a drop goal, before sending a 
52-metre penalty wide with the game’s final kick.

Maro Itoje returns from hand injury to boost Saracens against Bath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/maro-itoje-returns-injury-hand-premiership-saracens>
Itoje missed England’s four-Test autumn series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/maro-itoje-miss-england-autumn-internationals-fracturing-hand>
 after breaking his right hand during Saracens’ European Champions Cup tie 
against the Scarlets in late October. A six-week lay-off ensued but he 
reappeared as Saracens looked to hold their place at the Premiership summit. 
His comeback arrived a week before Saracens resume their European campaign with 
back-to-back games against Sale.

Itoje’s selection was the headline team news, but Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> were also bolstered by Semesa 
Rokodoguni and David Attwood being released from England duty, while the Wales 
internationals Luke Charteris and Taulupe Faletau also featured.

Homer kicked Bath into a sixth‑minute lead as they dominated early territory 
and possession, only for Lozowski to tie things up midway through the first 
half, before a second Homer strike, his 10th successful kick from the past 10 
attempts, edged the home side back in front.

Bath finally breached Saracens’ defence when the centre Ben Tapuai ran 
strongly before delivering a superb pass to his midfield partner Clark, who 
touched down. Homer’s conversion drifted wide but Bath were good value for an 
11-3 lead asSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>, at times, 
struggled to repel the hosts’ attacking  fluency.

The visitors, from their most threatening spell of the first half, went close 
to a try after pummelling Bath’s forwards, but they could find no way through 
as Bath held out despite Faletau going off after he appeared to take an 
accidental finger in the eye.

Saracens, though, kept plugging away, and they reaped reward two minutes 
before the break when patient attacking play ended with Maitland crossing wide 
out as Bath’s lead was trimmed to three points.

Saracens dominated the opening flurries of the second period, launching 
several attacks before they settled for a Lozowski drop goal that levelled the 
score.

The fly-half was then sent to the sin bin by Greg Garner for a high tackle on 
Dan Bowden and Homer kicked the resulting penalty for a 14-11 lead.

Alex Goode, handed the kicking duties while Lozowski was off, missed a 
long-range chance to haul Saracens level.

Bath’s poor kicking out of hand invited Saracens – led by Goode – to attack. 
But no matter how much they huffed and puffed, Saracens could not find a way 
through and Bath held on.

Leicester reclaimed fourth place after a 19-11 victory at home to Northampton 
in a fiercely fought derby.

The Tigers, who had lost the place to Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> 24 hours earlier, just about 
deserved the win thanks to a dominant second-half performance by their forwards 
who pinned the Saints in their own 22 for long periods.

Ed Slater captained Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> after Tom Youngs withdrew 
with a back spasm and they were boosted by the return of two players from 
international duty, the prop Logovi’i Mulipola and winger JP Pietersen who was 
on the bench.

The Saints had the wing George North and No8 Louis Picamoles back from 
international duty while JJ Hanrahan made his first start of the season at 
centre. Northappeared to be knocked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/george-north-northampton-awkward-fall-leicester>
 at one point but he was cleared by medical staff to continue despite his 
history of head injuries.

Leicester led 13-11 at half-time with Adam Thompstone scoring a try for the 
Tigers and Freddie Burns kicking a conversion and two penalties. Mike Haywood 
crossed for the Saints with Stephen Myler adding two penalties.Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> made a terrible start, 
losing Luther Burrell to the sin-bin in the fourth minute for a high tackle and 
trailed 10-0 after 14 minutes.

Burns kicked a penalty and then converted a lovely worked try, Thompstone 
going over after the scrum-half Jono Kitto changed the direction of the attack 
in the 22 and Burns fired out a long pass.

But the Saints recovered well and had the better of the rest of the half, the 
Tigers not being helped by a yellow card for Thompstone for tackling North 
while he was in the air in the 17th minute.

Just after Thompstone’s departure, Haywood squeezed over following a lineout 
and drive. Myler missed the conversion but swapped penalties with Burns before 
kicking a second penalty in the last minute when the Tigers conceded a penalty 
at a scrum.

The England centre Manu Tuilagi, who made his long-awaited return from injury 
atBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> last week as a 
replacement, came on to huge cheers in the 51st minute. Leicester immediately 
lifted their game and were held up over the line in the 56th minute. They 
failed to score from two successive scrums but pinned Northampton in their own 
22 and eventually the pressure told.

After a succession of scrums and several wrestling matches on the Northampton 
line Leicester got a penalty which Burns kicked to make it 16-11.

Williams sealed Leicester’s win with a last-minute penalty.

Gloucester secured a bonus-point victory as they defeated Bristol 26-18 at 
Kingsholm.

The Cherry and Whites fired blanks in the opening half as Bristol went in 6-0 
ahead thanks to two penalties from full-back Jason Woodward. However, an 
improved second period saw centre Matt Scott, scrum-half and captain Willi 
Heinz and wing Henry Purdy all go over for tries, with a penalty try also 
awarded and James Hook kicked three out of four conversions.

Wing Jack Wallace and Luke Arscott scored late Bristol consolation tries.

Rob Baxter refused to criticise his players after Exeter failed to secure a 
bonus point in Friday’s 21-3 victory atSale. The Chiefs were in complete 
control at the break following an early penalty try and further scores from 
James Short and Will Chudley. That made it 21-3 at the interval but they failed 
to build on that platform in the second half and clinch a fourth try that would 
have meant a five-point haul.

Nevertheless, the result temporarily lifted Exeter up to fourth in the 
Premiership and the head coach, said: “You can look at the result and think 
it’s really disappointing not to push on and get the bonus point try. But 
actually I’m really pleased with the lads because we worked exceptionally hard 
to get a result which got us an important win at a place where, traditionally, 
we haven’t played that well or got that many positive results.

“I’m just really pleased because we worked extremely hard. Defensively we were 
excellent with great line speed and good discipline.”

Sale’s director of rugby, Steve Diamond, said: “It was disappointing. The team 
isn’t playing well and there isn’t much confidence in them. We will have a 
change of mindset over the weekend and come back in on Monday morning.

“We are not getting our basics right – we couldn’t stop a driving maul five 
metres out – and maybe I’ve been a bit naive by picking too many youngsters in 
the team. We need to wise up because we’ve gone from a team who have finished 
sixth and seventh in the past couple of years to a team who look like they 
could be in a relegation battle. We need to pull our finger out.” 
 