
A private jet that crashed, killing three members of Osama bin Laden’s family, 
landed too far down the runway because it was travelling 40% faster than the 
recommended speed, accident investigators concluded.


The Saudi-registered Phenom 300 jet smashed into an earth bank at the end of 
the runway at Blackbushe airport, Camberley, on the border of Hampshire and 
Surrey, on 31 July last year before becoming airborne again and colliding with 
several parked cars.

Bin Laden plane crash: aircraft went down in near perfect conditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/01/aviation-experts-bin-laden-plane-crash-cause>
The occupants survived the impacts but died from the effects of a fire, which 
began after the wing separated from the fuselage, the Air Accidents 
Investigation Branch (AAIB) said.

Its report found that the pilot’s ability to adapt and take on new information 
as he was landing was impeded due to a “very high workload situation”.

All three passengers were members of bin Laden’s family. They were his 
stepmother, Raja Bashir Hashem, 75, her daughter, Sana bin Laden, 53, and 
another relative, Zouheir Anuar Hashem, 56.

The Jordanian pilot was 58-year-old Mazen Salim Alqasim.

The AAIB’s report into the accident described how the plane took a steep 
descent which was “significantly above the normal profile” as it approached the 
airport, after manoeuvring out of the path of a microlight.

Algasim attempted to deploy the jet’s “speedbrakes”, which can increase drag, 
but they remained retracted as the flaps on the wing were deployed.

As the plane flew over the start of the runway it was travelling at 151 knots 
indicated airspeed (kias), 40% faster than the target of 108 kias.

“The excessive speed contributed to a touchdown 710m beyond the threshold, 
with only 438m of paved surfaced remaining,” the AAIB said.

“From touchdown … it was no longer possible for the aircraft to stop within 
the remaining runway length.”

The AAIB said the pilot may have been aware of the high speed but believed the 
landing could be achieved, or he may not have appreciated how fast he was 
flying, perhaps because he was “fixated on landing”.

Investigators found that the pilot’s “mental capacity could have become 
saturated” after being exposed to 66 audio warnings, instructions and messages 
during the three minutes and 32 seconds before reaching the start of the runway.

The report stated: “It is possible that in these circumstances the pilot … 
fixated on his initial strategy – landing – and lacked the mental capacity to 
recognise that the approach had become unstable and should be discontinued.”

No technical defects were discovered with the aircraft, the pilot was not 
found to have any substances in his body that would have reduced his 
performance and the weather was good, the AAIB noted.

Bin Laden, who claimed responsibility for the 11 September 2001 attacks in the 
United States, is believed to have had more than 50 brothers and sisters and 
many stepmothers.

His billionaire father, Mohammed, founded a sprawling construction 
conglomerate awarded many major building contracts in the Sunni kingdom. He 
died in a plane crash in Saudi Arabia in 1967.

The Bin Laden family disowned Osama in 1994 when Saudi Arabia stripped him of 
his citizenship because of his militant activities.

The al Qaida leader was killed by US special forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/02/osama-bin-laden-dead-obama> in 
Pakistan in 2011.
 