
So let’s just examine the old scoreboard. Leinster, Munster, Ulster and 
Glasgow played Northampton, Leicester, Clermont Auvergne and Racing Métro in the
European Rugby Champions Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-rugby-champions-cup> last weekend 
and the supposed English and French heavyweights, as they say on television 
sports-news bulletins, may want to look away now. Adding the four results 
together makes for distinctly one-sided reading.

So here are those stats in full: Pro12 4 Premiership/Top14 0. Tries scored 16, 
tries conceded 7. Points for 137, points against 56. A star-studdedWasps did 
beat Connacht at home on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/wasps-connacht-european-rugby-union-champions-cup-match-report>
 but even that was less than straightforward. How different it feels to a year 
ago when Ireland’s proud provinces could barely win a game in Europe and failed 
to have a team in the last eight for the first time since 1997-98.

There are a range of contributory factors, some of them originating closer to 
the East Midlands than Dublin, Limerick, Belfast or Glasgow. There is also a 
round of reverse fixtures to negotiate before drawing too many concrete 
conclusions. But what you can say, without any fear of contradiction, is that 
all four winning sides played outstanding rugby, with the performances every 
bit as eye-catching as the results.

European Champions Cup roundup: Glasgow stand firm to stun Racing 92
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/european-champions-cup-rugby-roundup-glasgow-warriors-racing-92-ulster-clermont-auvergne>
Take Glasgow. Those of us present at Scotstoun to watch them savage Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/glasgow-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 on the tournament’s opening night were already aware of their potential at 
home but to beat the French champions in Paris – they led 23-7 with eight 
minutes to play – was perhaps the finest hour in the club’s history. Finn 
Russell, Jonny Gray, Alex Dunbar … when good, homegrown players thrive at the 
top level for the side that has long nurtured them it is doubly satisfying for 
all concerned.

Ulster, too, were on a different plane, fuelled by their own local boys made 
good. Paddy Jackson, like Russell, is maturing into a top-class stand-off and 
even though Charles Piutau and Ruan Pienaar bring a dash of world-class 
quality, there was an equal amount to admire in the workrate of Iain Henderson 
and the aerial skills of Tommy Bowe. Scoring five tries against Clermont – even 
if the hosts did concede four – does not happen every day.

Munster and Leinster made even shorter work of the Tigers and the Saints, to 
the point where reputations are now on the line in the East Midlands. Leicester 
did rebound from their Glasgow shellacking to defeat Racing at home the 
following week but there has been no holding Munstersince the tragic death of 
Anthony Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
. CJ Stander has been a man inspired and Conor Murray, as the All Blacks can 
testify, grows ever more influential.

The frequent cry last year was that while their first XVs were strong, the 
Irish provinces did not possess the same depth as their English and French 
counterparts. If that is true it did not seem so at Northampton as the home 
team were ruthlessly unpicked late on by the likes of Jamison Gibson-Park and 
Ross Byrne. Earlier Joey Carbery, Robbie Henshaw and Garry Ringrose had looked 
a class above their opposite numbers, making the absence of Jonathan Sexton 
almost irrelevant.

Ireland, even now, have multiple prop stars; if Jack McGrath, Tadhg Furlong 
and Cian Healy do not all make the Lions tour next summer, they really will be 
blessed in that area. Behind Murray at scrum-half, both Luke McGrath and Kieran 
Marmion are looking sharp. As a long-time admirer of Rob Kearney’s full-back 
work, it was also good to see the 30-year-old Lion somewhere close to his 
commanding former self.

European Rugby Champions Cup: talking points from the weekend's action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/12/european-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekends-action>
But why now? Why the sudden upsurge? Is it coincidental this is a Lions year? 
Probably not. Is there a collective desire to right the wrongs of last season? 
Definitely. Only last week the Pro12 organisers produced figures showing there 
had been more tries – 316 in 58 games – scored at this stage than in any 
previous season. The autumn weather has mostly been benign, which always helps, 
but there does appear to have been a distinct shift in mindset.

The national team’s win over New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 has clearly made a difference to their collective self-belief. So did 
Connacht’s Pro12 title, which has undoubtedly stirred the neighbours. The 
question now is whether it can be sustained. Saracens, Wasps and Clermont still 
head three of the five pools at the halfway stage, and nothing is yet nailed 
down. But if Edinburgh can defeat Stade Français and Cardiff Blues topple Bath 
twice in consecutive Challenge Cup weekends, a trend really will start to 
emerge. Maybe England’s December Test outside the international window has had 
some effect but if so, it will only be temporary. The good news for the 
tournament, regardless, is that the Celts are right back in business.

Trouble in paradise 

How sad that the Fijian Rugby Union felt the need to issue a statement 
instructing their Olympic sevens gold-medal guru Ben Ryan to stop commenting 
about his former team. Ryan’s “crime” has simply been to point out that Fiji’s 
players are currently not contracted and have not been paid properly for 
competing in the first two World Sevens Series events. Ryan’s contribution to 
Fiji’s incredible Olympic rugby story was huge and his desire to support his 
players is entirely natural. To try and paint him now as some kind of off-shore 
troublemaker is absurd.

And another thing …

Many people by now will have seen the footage of the Stade Français forward 
Pascal Papé’s cynical stage-dive which led to Edinburgh’s Phil Burleigh being 
shown the red card. It is exactly the kind of simulation rugby is trying to 
eradicate before it becomes as prevalent as it is in football. With 
outcome-based punishments all the rage, it is even more important to weed out 
the play-actors. The only defence is that the 36-year-old Papé has been 
wrestling with his own serious demons, as his recently publicised 
autobiography, Double Jeu, lays bare. Born to an unknown father and a mother 
with significant drug issues, he was taken in by a foster family, battled bouts 
of depression and, as recently as 2013, wanted to commit suicide. What you see 
on the field is never the whole story.
 