
Qinetiq, the defence technology group whose military equipment includes bomb 
detection robots, has jumped nearly 8% after a positive update.

The company - spun out of the Ministry of Defence in 2002 - reported a 7% rise 
in full year profits to a better than expected £107.8m, helped by a good 
performance from its services business in Europe, the middle east and Africa.

It is £128m of the way through a £150m share buyback but this may be reviewed 
when it ends in late summer, with analysts suggesting there was scope for it to 
be extended.

But the company was cautious about the outlook, especially for the UK defence 
industry with the prospect of further austerity measures now the Conservatives 
have won the general election.


Even so, its shares are up 17.1p to 232.3p, helped by news that JP Morgan 
Cazenove had upgraded from neutral to overweight, pointing to an attractive 
free cash flow and dividend yield. Investec analyst Rami Myerson said:

Qinetiq reported a good set of 2015 results... Cash generation was impressive 
and net cash of £195.5m is better than our forecasts for £182m. New chief 
executive Steve Wadey joins a company that is healthy operationally with a 
strong balance sheet. We, and the broader investor community, are keen to 
understand the strategy for the next stage in Qinetiq’s evolution.

Liberum said:

As most exposed to UK defence, the shares rallied post the Conservative 
victory and now trade on a 2015 PE of 14.3 times, dividend per share yield of 
2.9% and free cash flow yield of 5.4%. The buyback provides technical support 
and the shares should respond well to today’s results.

Responding badly to results was Dairy Crest, down 35p at 483p after the 
company reported a 59% fall in full year profits to £22.1m and said it expected 
growth in the current year to be weighted to the second half.

It has been hit by falling sales by its key supermarket customers and a fall 
in milk prices.

The company expects to complete the sale of its dairies business once 
regulatory approval is received, leaving it predominantly a branded business 
including its Cathedral City cheddar.

Jefferies analysts said:

We note that the underlying losses in dairies were greater than anticipated, 
but the divestment of this business is likely to be approved eventually, in our 
view, and investors should rather focus on the business that will be retained. 
Net debt is slightly higher than anticipated due to exceptionals.
 