
It seemed like - and may well have been - a heroic police triumph that 
thwarted a campaign to firebomb department stores. When anti-terrorist officers 
caught two animal rights activists red-handed as they assembled incendiary 
devices to set fire to branches of Debenhams, it appeared their timing could 
not have been better.

As police burst in, the Old Bailey was later to hear, the activists were 
sitting at a table using a soldering iron that was still hot.

But on Wednesday, 25 years after an audacious police investigation led to the 
jailing of two activists for inflicting damage totalling £9m on three Debenhams 
stores, new questions have been raised in parliament about the ethics of the 
operation and the conduct of one particular police spy.

The MP who raised the case - Caroline Lucas of the Green party - conceded that 
much of the infiltration of a cell of the Animal Liberation Front in 1987 
remains shrouded in mystery.

What is unlikely to be disputed is that an undercover police officer, Bob 
Lambert, adopted a fake identity to live deep undercover among hardcore 
activists - gaining crucial intelligence about their campaign against the fur 
trade.

The question raised  <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/13/police> on 
Wednesday was whether Lambert went further, potentially acting as agent 
provocateur. According to the accusation levelled by one convicted activist - 
and aired by Lucas in parliament - Lambert is suspected of planting one of 
three incendiary devices in branches of Debenhams. Lambert has strongly denied 
the allegations.

A long-standing investigation by the Guardian has brought to light various 
aspects of Lambert's clandestine surveillance unit, set up in 1968 to gather 
intelligence about anti-Vietnam war protesters.

Police continue to maintain an army of spies living long-term in activist 
groups - the most infamous example beingMark Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mark-kennedy>, who was last year exposed as a 
police officer after a seven-year deployment among green activists. Kennedy's 
double life as 'Mark Stone' ended in ignominy last year after it emerged he had 
developed sexual relations with women while undercover.

Since Kennedy was unmasked, a further eight undercover police officers have 
been identified, most of whom stand accused of developing sexual relations with 
activists - behaviour police chiefs insist is banned. They include Lambert, who 
has apologised for deceiving "law-abiding members of London Greenpeace" during 
his deployment and admittedhe tricked an innocent woman into having a long-term 
relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/police-spy-tricked-lover-activist?intcmp=239>
 with him, to lend credibility to his alter ego. Lambert alsofathered a child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/20/undercover-police-children-activists>
 with a woman activist he had been sent to spy on.

Responding to Lucas during the parliamentary debate, the policing minister, 
Nick Herbert, said police officers can start sexual relationships with 
suspected criminals if it means they are more plausible. He said that the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (Ripa), the law that has governed 
their activities since 2000, does not explicity prohibit sexual relations, but 
requires the operations to be strictly managed.

Herbert said it was important police were allowed to have sex with activists 
because otherwise it could be used as a test for outing suspected undercover 
officers.

In his almost total adoption of a new identity, and his willingness to develop 
close personal relations with women activists, Lambert followed a similar path 
to that of Kennedy. His journey into the core of the animal rights movement 
started around 1984.

Like other members of the covert unit, then known as the Special Demonstration 
Squad, Lambert radically changed his appearance, growing his hair long to 
reinvent himself as the militant animal rights activist 'Bob Robinson'.

Insiders from the covert police unit confirm Lambert's work inside the ALF 
burnished his reputation as one of their most successful spies. He went on to 
become a spymaster in the unit before leaving the police for a career as a 
lecturer at St Andrews University.

However, his respected record was placed in doubt on Wednesday when Lucas 
raised questions about the extent of his involvement in a campaign to target 
Debenhams stores with incendiary devices. Lucas admitted "we just don't know" 
exactly how far Lambert may have taken his operation.

By 1987, Lambert had infiltrated the small ALF cell co-ordinating arson 
attacks on stores in protest against their sale of fur. The relatively simple 
devices - the size of cigarette boxes - were placed under inflammable objects 
in the stores and were designed to set off the sprinkler systems, causing 
extensive flooding. They were set to go off at night so that people were not 
harmed, according to the activists. In July that year, the incendiary devices 
were simultaneously planted and ignited at three Debenhams stores in Luton, 
Romford and Harrow. But only two activists - Geoff Sheppard and Andrew Clarke - 
were caught and convicted. It appeared that the perpetrator who planted the 
third device had got away.

Lucas told MPs: "Sheppard and Clarke were tried and found guilty but the 
culprit who planted the incendiary device in the Harrow store was never caught. 
Bob Lambert's exposure as an undercover police officer has prompted Geoff 
Sheppard to speak out about that Harrow attack. Sheppard alleges that Lambert 
was the one who planted the third device and was involved in the ALF's 
co-ordinated campaign."

She added: "Sheppard says that two months after the three Debenhams stores 
were set on fire, he and another person were in his flat, making four more 
firebombs, when they were raided by police. Sheppard alleges that the 
intelligence for the raid was so precise that it is now obvious that, and I 
quote, it 'came from Bob Lambert' who knew that the pair were going to be there 
making another set of incendiary devices."

The suggestion that intelligence gathered by Lambert thwarted two activists 
planning a firebombing campaign is likely to be uncontroversial. On 9 
September, police burst into Sheppard's bedsit in Hillside Road, Tottenham and 
caught the pair red-handed surrounded by paraphernalia for making the devices - 
alarm clocks, copper wire, bulbs and batteries.

Victor Temple, for the prosecution, said at the time: "They were in the 
process of what was clearly a well-practised method of constructing incendiary 
devices similar in every significant respect to those used at Harrow, Luton and 
Romford."

Previously, Lambert has spoken about his role in the police operation against 
the ALF, and his specific involvement in the investigation into Sheppard and 
Clarke, saying: "I succeeded in my task and that success included the arrest 
and imprisonment of Geoff Sheppard and Andrew Clarke."

What is likely to prove more controversial is the suggestion, relayed by the 
MP, that Lambert may have gone further than a mere observer, and planted the 
third incendiary device in order to bolster his credibility and "reinforce the 
impression of a genuine and dedicated activist".

That is an allegation that Lambert has firmly denied. He told the Guardian: 
"It was necessary to create the false impression that I was a committed animal 
rights extremist to gain intelligence so as to disrupt serious criminal 
conspiracies. However, I did not commit serious crime such as 'planting an 
incendiary device at the [Debenhams] Harrow store'."

One possibility is that police chiefs authorised some kind of controlled 
explosion at the Harrow store - which the court heard suffered £340,000-worth 
of damage - to maintain Lambert's cover story. That, however, would raise 
further questions.

If Lambert did not let off the incendiary device, who did? And if police knew 
about the plan to start fires in three branches of Debenhams, why did they let 
them go ahead, causing £9m in damages and lost trade?

Both are likely to be questions explored by an internal Metropolitan police 
inquiry into the activities of undercover officers in protest groups between 
1968 and 2008 - a review that has been continuing for several months.

The Met said in a statement: "Any matters arising from the review will be 
assessed and where appropriate will be referred to the IndependentPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission (IPCC)."

Whatever the precise nature - if any - of Lambert's involvement in the 
firebombing campaign, his success in duping hardened animal rights activists 
into believing he was a fellow campaigner is beyond doubt.

In 1988 - a year after the Debenhams fire attacks - Lambert later went abroad, 
telling friends he was escaping the attentions of Special Branch. They could 
not have known he was in fact one Special Branch's finest operatives.

Following their arrests in 1987, Sheppard and Clarke were convicted for 
planting devices in the Debenhams branches. Sheppard was jailed for four years 
and four months, and Clarke for more than three years. Sheppard was jailed 
again in the 1990s but says he stopped doing illegal protests some years ago.

Sheppard said he did not doubt the motives of the man he knew as 'Bob 
Robinson' until his true identity was revealed in the Guardian. The convicted 
activist told the Guardian: "For 24 years I have believed that my friend  … Bob 
Robinson was on the run and had most likely gone to a different country and 
probably made a new life for himself and I just thought - good for him, he was 
the lucky one that managed to get away."

So instinctively did Sheppard trust Lambert, he said, that he was grateful to 
him when he visited him in jail. Sheppard said: "I remember thinking 'Bob's 
still there for me'. Actually, he was the guy who put me there."

Clarke declined to talk about his role in the arson campaign but his lawyer, 
Mike Schwarz, said: "These allegations are very serious. If true, they cast 
doubt on the safety of my client's convictions. Over a month ago I wrote to the 
director of public prosecutions asking about these issues. It is of great 
concern that the Crown Prosecution Service have still not replied to me."

His letter to the DPP, Keir Starmer, states that Lambert played an "active, 
participating and crucial" role in the firebombing campaign, and the failure of 
prosecutors to diclose his information about his role would render Clarke's 
conviction unsafe.

Herbert indicated on Wednesday that the Home Office was not inclined to 
investigate the Lambert case. It may therefore turn out to be in the courts 
where the latest allegations are resolved.

Last year the court of appeal quashed the convictions of 20 environmental 
activists infiltrated by Kennedy. The key issue was the failure by the Crown 
Prosecution Service to disclose details about Kennedy's undercover operation to 
the defence team. On the face of it, the Lambert case presents another example 
in which police or prosecutors did not disclose all the evidence they had 
amassed.

In July last year, when overturning the convictions of green activists, the 
three senior judges said they had evidence indicating Kennedy "was involved in 
activities that went further than the authorisation he was given" and was
"arguably, an agent provocateur" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jul/20/police-spy-on-climate-activists-unlawful>
.

During her speech in parliament, Lucas suggested Kennedy may not be the police 
spy to have "crossed the line".

"The latest allegations concerning Bob Lambert and the planting of incendiary 
devices would beg the question: has another undercover police officer crossed 
the line into acting as an agent provocateur?" she said. "And how many other 
police spies have been encouraging protesters to commit crimes?"
 