
Annan Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/annan-athletic> pulled 
off the biggest result in the club’s 74-year history as they beat top-flight 
Hamilton with a 4-1 victory at Galabank.

The League Two club – who only joined the Scottish leagues in 2008 – claimed 
their first-ever win over Premiership opposition as they moved into the last 16 
of theScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>.

Matty Flynn and Josh Todd scored early in each half before Rabin Omar’s double 
killed off Martin Canning’s team after Greg Docherty had briefly given them 
hope. Accies travelled south packing just one win in their 13 previous games 
but the humiliation dished out by Jim Chapman’s men will now raise serious 
questions about Canning’s future as player-manager.

The New Douglas Park side were stunned after just six minutes when Jesús 
García Tena’s miskick left his side exposed. Omar pounced on the loose ball as 
he prodded it through for Flynn, who took a touch before beating Michael 
McGovern. That nightmare start almost got worse seconds later, with only 
McGovern’s smart reactions keeping out Peter Weatherson’s volley.

Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> should have been at 
home on the plastic Galabank pitch but too often they rushed things when a 
calmer head was needed. They did come close with an Ali Crawford free-kick 
while Michael Devlin headed over from a corner. But the defender got lucky 
after his slip-up let Josh Todd race away, with the Annan striker tugging his 
shot wide.

There was no let-off two minutes into the second half, though, as Todd ran on 
to Weatherson’s pass before stroking a composed finish past McGovern.

Hamilton needed a response but Eammon Brophy’s horrible miss on the hour as he 
pulled a shot wide from six yards out was not it. The young striker did make 
amends five minutes later, though, as he chested the ball down for the 
midfielder Docherty to fire home a lifeline.

But Hamilton’s hope was snuffed out within 60 seconds as Annan raced upfield 
from the kick-off, with Omar slotting home at the second attempt from Todd’s 
cutback.

Todd had run the visitors ragged but he somehow failed to net from a yard out 
when slammed against the post after McGovern spilled Weatherson’s free-kick at 
his feet. But the home element of the 817 Galabank crowd were in raptures once 
more as Omar dinked home the fourth after a Ryan Finnie set piece was deflected 
his way as he put the seal on a famous win.
 