
In the summer of 1993 Rachel Whiteread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whiteread> began work on an ambitious 
project: it involved making a cast of an entire house, one of a terrace in the 
East End of London that had been scheduled for demolition. House was completed 
in October that year, and it became one of the great artistic causes célèbres 
of the past 20 years, overshadowing the work that had been officially nominated 
for the Turner prize. "I was so physically and mentally exhausted I almost 
didn't notice the Turner prize second time round," she says. (Whiteread had 
also been nominated in 1991, when "we knew that Anish Kapoor was going to get 
it; the rest of us were complete youngsters".)

There was a particular edge to the prize in 1993. The K Foundation, formed by 
the former pop band KLF, decided to award a prize of £40,000 (double the Turner 
prize money) for the worst artist of the year. It was, Whiteread came to 
realise, "some sort of huge publicity stunt". And how. On the afternoon of the 
Turner announcement, she was called by Bill Drummond of the K Foundation and 
told that she had won. "I suppose I swore at him," she says. "Some of the other 
artists might have been able to deal with it differently. But I'm not a showy 
person." She was told that if she failed to appear outside the Tate - during 
the Turner party - to receive the cash, it would be destroyed. "I would have 
been blamed for having £40,000 burned in front of me. So I had to accept it."

She gave some of the money to the charity Shelter, and the rest to young 
artists - though that proved to be something of an administra-tive headache, 
since it involved advertising in the art world press and inviting submissions. 
"It wasn't exactly a gift," Whiteread says wryly.

Meanwhile there was the House furore. The world was divided between those who 
thought that the sculpture was an outrage, and those who were determined to 
secure its reprieve from destruction at the hands of the local council and see 
it become a permanent fixture. "I was very affected by that piece," she says. 
"It was something so different: I was used to making work in the studio. With 
this, everything was immediately very public and people had their say at once. 
I had to take a deep breath and step aside. If I wanted to look at it I'd have 
to go down in disguise.

"People were even lobbying in parliament," she says. "There was nothing in the 
art world that had had that level of publicity before. I was very proud of it 
at the time and I still am, and I was very sad to see it go. On the night of 
the Turner prize I was told we hadn't got the stay of execution and it was 
going to be demolished. It was a very complicated time... The Turner prize 
didn't change my life - but House did. House and the Holocaust Memorial [in 
Vienna]: these are the things that have determined how I have worked over the 
past 20 years."
 