
Racing 92 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92> are launching 
civil and criminal actions against the South Africa centre Johan Goosen, 
claiming breach of contract after the 24-year-old left Paris last month saying 
he was retiring from the game and returning home to take up a job as a 
commercial director.

The French champions issued a strongly worded statement saying they found it 
inconceivable a player would end his playing career while at his peak. There 
have been reports in France that if the Montpellier owner, Mohed Altrad, who 
has made his fortune in scaffolding, succeeds in taking overGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> he will look to sign the 
13-cap Goosen, who would not be able to join another French club for 18 months 
because Racing hold his registration to play in the Top 14.

Richard Cockerill pays price for barren spell but Leicester will miss his 
loyalty | Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
Racing said Goosen, who was named the French league’s best player of the year 
last season, is still employed by the club. “He remains bound to the club by a 
contract lasting four years,” the club said. “His residence, company car, 
locker and place in the dressing room all remain at his disposal.

“In response to his behaviour Racing 92 is forced to initiate several legal 
proceedings aimed at enforcing its rights and redressing the harm done to the 
club. Racing 92 believes the club is a victim of blatant fraud which Johan 
Goosen, his associates and various advisers must answer for in court.”

The club said various civil proceedings would be taken out to recoup advance 
image rights payments and compensation for not fulfilling his contract – Goosen 
has not been deregistered for the European Champions Cup, which resumes next 
week – and a complaint would be lodged with a French employment tribunal 
seeking compensation for “significant damage to the club”.

Racing’s statement concluded: “A criminal complaint will also be filed, as the 
open-ended employment contract produced by Johan Goosen and signed by one of 
his friends and business associates appears to constitute a phoney document, 
given it is not conceivable a player puts an end to his sporting career while 
at its peak and accepts a position in a South African company for a salary 10 
times less than what he was earning as a rugby player at Racing 92 (around 
£400,000 a year).

“Full light must be shed on the responsibility of the various people who 
advised Johan Goosen in taking this aberrant and fraudulent strategy, and to 
this extent, there are grounds for wondering how Johan Goosen is being 
supported financially given the numerous commitments and investments he has to 
meet.”

It is the second strongly worded statement issued by Racing this season after 
the clubrounded on various sections of the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/dan-carter-cleared-doping-wrongdoing-french-rugby>
 after the appearance of players, including the former New Zealand fly-half Dan 
Carter, before a panel following a drugs test last year.
 