
Once, Rajshahi’s sweltering summers were made worse by a familiar problem on 
the Asian subcontinent: windows would have to be shut, not because of the wind 
or monsoon, but because of the smog.

Dust blown up from dry riverbeds, fields and roads, and choking smog from 
ranks of brick kilns on the edge of town helped to secure the place a spot in 
the top tier of the world’s most polluted cities.

Then suddenly Rajshahi, in Bangladesh, hit a turning point so dramatic that it 
earned a spot in the record books: last year,according to UN data 
<http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/cities/en/>, the 
town did more than any other worldwide to rid itself of air particles so 
harmful to human health.

“We didn’t know about this,” admits Ashraful Haque, the city’s chief engineer, 
who like some of his fellow residents is rather bemused by the achievement.
Top 10 most improved polluted cities 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-17T15:53:31/embed.html>
Rajshahi does not have a large industrial area, and it is too poor to have 
streets clogged with cars. Instead, Haque believes it was the campaign to clean 
up thebrick kilns <http://www.observerbd.com/2015/11/22/122074.php>, as well as 
efforts to make the city greener, that have turned the tide.

Levels of larger PM10 particles went from 195 micrograms per cubic metre in 
2014, to just 63.9 in 2016, a reduction of about two-thirds, and the largest in 
the world in absolute terms. Smaller PM2.5 particles have been nearly halved to 
37 micrograms per cubic metre from 70.

Haque, who was born and educated in the city, remembers as a child having to 
close windows and doors to shut out a thin film of dirt that would settle 
across every surface in the house when a wind swept in from outside.


Nowadays it’s a different city, thanks to the campaign that began with a 
tree-planting drive more than 15 years ago, and now encompasses everything from 
transport to rubbish collection. Dust still hangs heavy in the air on 
occasions, but the transformation has been welcomed by local residents in a 
country where urban authorities more often generate frustration and resentment.

“Things have got better for my classmates with asthma,” said Fatema Tuzzohra, 
a 13-year-old enjoying a riverside park after school. “I love the city, it is 
really clean and green.”

Membership Event: What will the world look like in 2025? 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/what-will-the-world-look-like-in-2025-25718721388>

The city began tackling transport issues in 2004, importing a fleet of 
battery-powered rickshaws from China, and banning large lorries from the city 
centre in daytime. The three-wheelers are the main form of public transport, 
and their batteries keep the air free of the petrol and diesel fumes that hang 
over other cities.

Upgrades to the brick kilns, such as changing chimneys and fuel, have reduced 
the amount of pollution they spew out around the city, Haque says. And he has 
personally designed and overseen a project to make the city centre greener 
while reducing the amount of dust kicked up by people and vehicles.

“We have a ‘zero soil’ programme in the city, with lots of planting and green 
intervention. When it works, there should be no part of the road that will be 
dirt. It will be all grass, flower or pavement,” says Haque.

He became convinced that the city needed more pavements after trips to study 
urban planning abroad. At the time the asphalt surfacing of the city roads 
mostly ended in a dusty verge, sometimes with open drains, dangerous and 
unappealing for walking along, he said.

“In 2010, after a visit to London, I started creating pavements. I couldn’t 
believe it, everyone has to walk at least 2km a day [in London], but here 
people finish lunch and look for a rickshaw. Even in the good neighbourhoods, 
there are no pavements.”
Search database 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/who-pollution/embed/embed.html> 
Apart from encouraging a healthier lifestyle, they are vital for controlling 
dust in the air, he says. “If you have them, no soil will fly during the summer 
seasons.” So far they have built about 9 miles (15km) of pavements, but soon 
hope to expand to 30, he said.

The road transformation will go beyond pedestrians this month, when city 
workers start building the city’s – and the country’s – very first cycle lane.

Take-up is likely to be slow in a city already sweltering in the summer heat, 
and where the only people on bicycles are those too poor to afford other 
transport, Haque admits. But inspired by trips abroad, he hopes to sow the 
first seeds of change.

“I went to the river Thames and saw people riding bikes, I got the idea from 
Japan and China as well. We don’t have enough land for a separate lane in many 
places, but where we can we will separate with a border, making a pavement and 
a cycle lane beside it.”

People are proud of their town, and have started looking after it more closely 
after the transformation, says restaurateur SM Shihab Uddin, who spent nearly a 
decade working in Cyprus before returning to open his own chain of eating spots 
for the growing middle class.

“It has changed so much,” he said. “I came back in 2009, and I was worried 
that I would find it hard to live here after so much time abroad. But it was 
already transformed.”

Saad Hammadi contributed to this report.

Air pollution rising at an 'alarming rate' in world's cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/air-pollution-rising-at-an-alarming-rate-in-worlds-cities>
India’s cleanest city

The small city of Tezpur in east India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> has traditionally had little to brag 
about. The holy Brahmaputra river roars at its edges and the mighty Himalayan 
mountains adorn its skyline, but couched between these geographical marvels, 
Tezpur itself is little more than a layover stop for travellers in the state of 
Assam.


But while many of India’s industrial towns have reached peak pollution levels, 
Tezpur’s air is getting cleaner. Since the last WHO air-quality report in 2014, 
Tezpur’s PM10 pollution, caused by dust particles, has reduced more than any 
other Indian city to close to 15% of the level it was.

Tezpur’s PM10 levels now stand at 11mg per cubic metre. According to WHO 
guidelines, the permissible limit for PM10s is 20mg per cubic metre.

Tezpur’s air-quality improvement stands out in India, where focus on 
industrial development and rapid urbanisation in recent years has driven 
pollution levels up in most other cities. According to the WHO report,six of 
the 10 most polluted cities in the world are in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/calls-for-action-mount-as-six-indian-cities-hit-top-10-of-air-pollution>
, putting millions of people at serious risk of cardiac and respiratory 
infections.
Bar chart of cities by region 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/archive-zip/giv-125158X7Uhkk84D9S/all-bars.html>




M Nath, senior environmental engineer at the Pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution> Control Board, says 
Tezpur’s clean air is noticeable to travellers from other cities. “When we have 
visitors from other cities like Delhi or Guwahati, they immediately feel the 
difference in the air quality here,” Nath says. “But we’re a small city, we 
don’t have any major industries that cause a lot of pollution and people are 
conscious [about the environment]. It may not be so easy in other places.”

It is difficult to single out one reason for Tezpur’s improvement , but Nath 
explains that heightened awareness means people are making conscious efforts to 
go green. “People in Tezpur are very conscious about the environment,” Nath 
says.

In recent years, rising incomes and greater awareness about the environment 
means people have started buying cars that meet the latest emission standards, 
and discarded older, polluting vehicles.

Last year, more than 800 trees were planted 
<http://www.tezu.ernet.in/news/OneStudentOneTree-AReportofMay9-10_2015.pdf> by 
students in the city, as part of a massive environmental campaign at Tezpur 
University.

Activists such as Jadav Payeng, nicknamed “India’s forest man 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2014/01/indias-forest-man-201411762848958203.html>
”, have also made significant efforts to improve the environment in regions 
near Tezpur. For the last 30 years, Payeng has planted a forest’s worth of 
trees, covering 550 hectares (2.1 sq miles) of land.

Industrial efforts to cut back on coal-powered machines have also helped 
significantly. “The supply of liquefied petroleum gas [LPG] has improved a lot, 
and so many tea plantations are using it now,” he says. LPG is produced from 
fossil fuels, but produces virtually no particulate pollution compared with 
burning coal.

Assam’s hundreds of plantations produce nearly 700,000kg of tea a year, mostly 
exported around the world. Until recently, many of them depended solely on coal 
to fuel their machines.

Nath says LPG has now reached even more remote village areas near Tezpur. 
Access to LPG and subsidies from the government have prompted many villagers to 
use cleaner fuel for cooking and burning waste. “People don’t need to use wood 
fires any more; most of them have access to LPG.”

Sanjiv Eastment, a manager for McLeod Russel, the world’s biggest tea 
producer, says he can feel the improvement in air quality since the company 
started using LPG in their incinerators. “Not just outside, you can feel it in 
the factory itself,” he says. “There’s no more dust, no more breathing 
problems.”

Eastment estimates that better technology and more easily available LPG have 
saved thousands of tonnes of coal in recent years. “We make around 100m kilos 
of tea a year, and for each kilo of tea we burn around 1kg of coal. But it used 
to be much more – 1.6, 1.8 kilos a few years ago. Now we have new boilers that 
are more energy efficient and our incinerators are fuelled by LPG,” he says. 
“We still need to use coal for our tea dryers though.”

According to Eastment, the company switched from coal to LPG because it was 
cheaper. “After all we’re in the business of tea to make money,” he says.

Strong regulation and demands from foreign countries to meet production 
standards have also contributed to the change. Foreign countries have become 
less willing to accept tea imports unless they are certified by the Rainforest 
Alliance. “It means that all open fires have stopped – even in the workers’ 
quarters, to cook or burn waste,” Eastment says. “That makes a really big 
difference.”

For Nath though, it is adopting the right attitude to the problem that is key. 
The Pollution Control Board has run campaigns in schools and villages to 
encourage people to adopt greener lifestyles. “People have been very 
enthusiastic,” Nath says. “They are really proud about the environment here … 
We look after our city.”

 * This article has been amended to correct air pollution measurements of PM10 
and PM2.5 particles mistakenly given in terms of square metres rather than 
cubic metres.
 