
So far this season Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> have not 
been their usual fizzing selves and there was a distinct lack of champagne 
moments for the locals to savour in Devon on Sunday. A nagging fear always 
lurked that the Chiefs’ patchy recent form might not bode well for the visit of 
Clermont and the home side’s worst nightmares were duly confirmed long before 
the final whistle.

Those who opted to stay home on Sunday missed a one-sided contest in which the 
French Top 14 leaders registered three first-half tries against a stiff wind 
and then inflicted further punishment after the interval. With their capped 
England hooker Luke Cowan-Dickie limping off prematurely, key men such as Jack 
Nowell, Dave Ewers and Phil Dolman all sidelined and Henry Slade omitted from 
the starting XV, Exeter’s European campaign already has a battered look to it.

In this instance there was no doubting the quality of their executioners. 
Clermont are not on top of the Top 14 by accident and they counter-attacked 
with consistent class, with Wesley Fofana scoring two of their five tries and 
cutting the sharpest of midfield lines. Ollie Devoto, a possible candidate for 
England recognition in November, also had a lively game at inside centre but, 
for the most part, the Chiefs found themselves firing pea-shooters at an 
immovable white object.

“I’m expecting us to be a bit angry with some of the things that went on out 
there,” said Exeter’s coach, Rob Baxter. “I’m not quite sure what we were doing 
defensively at times...we didn’t really work together. That level of 
performance isn’t anything like we can achieve.”

From the outset Clermont looked like a side determined to learn from previous 
errors. Last year theylost 31-14 in Devon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/exeter-chiefs-clermont-auvergne-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 and, while they duly exacted retribution in the Massif Central, it was the 
Chiefs who unexpectedly progressed as pool winners. For a club of Clermont’s 
stature and resources, finishing bottom of the pool was an unacceptable outcome 
and they have returned bristling with intent.

Some of their offloading, in particular, was a joy to watch once they had 
soaked up a brief early spell of Chiefs pressure. Soft hands from Noa Nakaitaci 
put Julian Bardy over in the left corner for their first try early in the 
second quarter and they grabbed a second after 28 minutes when the Fijian 
cruised over with Exeter struggling in vain to cover for the incapacitated 
Cowan-Dickie.

A potential glimmer of consolatory light emerged when David Strettle had a 
clearance kick charged down by Ian Whitten and scrabbled to recover under 
pressure from Dave Lewis. Video replays, though, showed Lewis had been in an 
offside position and it was Clermont who skipped up the other end to score 
their third shortly before the break, the sprightly Camille Lopez slipping 
Wesley Fofana over.

Any prospect of an Exeter recovery evaporated when Nick Abendanon stepped 
expertly past Olly Woodburn to secure the visitors a try bonus point three 
minutes after the restart.Exeter were well beaten by Saracens last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/exeter-saracens-premiership-match-report>
 on this same ground but this was a flashback to their earliest European days 
when Clermont beat them 46-12 in 2012-13 and followed it up with a 46-3 
drubbing at the Stade Michel Michelin.

Since then the Chiefs have grown into a consistent Premiership force but 
something is awry at the moment. It might be that their European heroics and 
Premiership final journey took too much out of their older forwards’ legs or 
merely that others have regrouped better following a disruptive World Cup 
season for many. Either way Baxter’s side will have to find some kind of 
solution before this weekend’s trip to face Ulster in Belfast, not the easiest 
place to go for a team searching for instant answers.

The good news is they have another promising local talent rolling off the 
production line in the shape of 19-year-old Jack Maunder, a member of the 
England Under-20 squad and the son of Andy Maunder, the club’s loyal captain in 
their County Ground days. These were not the easiest of circumstances in which 
to make a first-term debut but Maunder Jr added some much-needed spark; having 
already captained Exeter Braves in the A league, he did not look remotely fazed 
by the illustrious company he was keeping.

It takes more than the odd flash of youthful enthusiasm, however, to unsettle 
a side as good as these opponents. Toulon may be up against it in Europe after 
their opening weekend defeat by Saracens but, on this evidence, nothing looks 
more certain than that Clermont will top Pool Five. The French giants have not 
yet won a European title and that ambition clearly still burns bright.

They did relax sufficiently to allow Slade to create a last-minute try for the 
persevering Sam Hill but theweekend death of Anthony Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-ireland-rugby-union>
 put that into firm perspective. The impeccably observed minute’s silence 
before the game was given extra gravity by the referee, George Clancy, having 
attended the same school as the former Munster captain and coach. Everything 
that has happened in European rugby this weekend feels strictly relative.

Exeter Turner (Bodily, 53); Woodburn, Devoto, Hill, Whitten; Steenson (capt; 
Slade, 56), Lewis (Maunder, 56); Low (Rimmer, 53), Cowan-Dickie (Yeandle, 29), 
Williams (Holmes, 53), Parling, Welch (Lees, 56), Hortsmann, Salvi, Waldrom 
(Dennis, 56).

Try Hill Pen Steenson.

Clermont Auvergne Abendanon; Strettle, Lamerat (Rougerie, 68) Fofana, 
Nakaitaci; Lopez (Fernandez, 64), Parra (Radosavljevic, 66); Domingo (Falgoux, 
53), Kayser (Charles, 69), Zirakashvili (Ric, 61), Van der Merwe, Vahaamahina, 
Chouly (capt; Jedrasik, 53), Bardy, Lee (Lapandry, 47).

Tries Bardy, Nakaitaci, Fofana 2, Abendanon Cons Parra 4, Fernandez.

Sin-bin Van der Merwe 53.

Referee G Clancy (Ireland). Attendance 9,879.
 