
Whatever else can be said about Rangers' 55th championship, it can safely be 
assumed this was the one Scottish football never anticipated. It is 13 months 
since theIbrox club slumped into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jun/12/rangers-scottish-football-mess>
 and five since the oldco Rangers was formally liquidated. As recently as the 
2010-11 season, Rangers were facing Manchester United in the group stage of the 
Champions League. Last weekend, they werebooed from the field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/23/rangers-third-division-ally-mccoist?INTCMP=SRCH>
 after a home draw with Stirling Albion.

The wounds associated with Rangers' demise will take a long time to heal and 
bitterness remains but at least their supporters now have a tangible reward to 
acknowledge. When this season started, that was their only legitimate 
expectation.Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, as 
anticipated, have cantered to the Division Three championship – secured by 
Saturday's 0-0 draw at Montrose and Queen's Park's home defeat by Elgin – and 
their followers have generally relished a fresh and novel journey through the 
lower echelons of the Scottish game.

Clubs in the bottom tier have benefitted financially from sold-out grounds 
with Rangers' arrival. Further up the chain, the Scottish Premier League has 
witnessed a chase for second place between clubs who could previously only 
dream of such an opportunity. Rangers' fall may have messy but there have been 
some positive offshoots.

In the buildup to this Rangers title win, Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> did not offer much to play 
down its value. The manager spoke of the chance to claim the flag in March as a 
strong incentive to his players. "It would be the first step on a long road 
back," he said. "We're going to have to win titles, and at this we don't know 
how many or what ones. There would be absolutely no reason for our supporters 
and our players to enjoy it any less than they have enjoyed any other title 
before."

That sentiment is entirely in keeping with a bullish Rangers public relations 
stance since their outspoken chief executive, Charles Green, arrived in office. 
And generally that has worked; impressive crowds routinely exceeding 40,000 
have appeared at Ibrox for fixtures against the lowest-ranked professional 
teams in Scotland. Green's bluster, that said, is routinely worthy of more 
scepticism than it is afforded.

McCoist makes reference to the ongoing, farcical situation within the Scottish 
game relating to league reconstruction. It is possible that Rangers could 
remain in the country's bottom tier if a proposal – and a fundamentally flawed 
one at that – is pushed through before the start of next season. Where Rangers 
have a genuine grievance is that rules relating to promotion, relegation and 
league set-up should be established before a season gets underway.

Yet for the Ibrox club there is an underlying commercial necessity for them to 
return as quickly as possible to the SPL, Europe, higher ticket prices and 
enhanced broadcasting revenue. That much was highlighted by half-yearly results 
that showeda £7m loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/04/rangers-ibrox-rights-sports-direct>
.

In basic football terms, Rangers' season has been more notable for the games 
they have lost than the ones they have won. Peterhead, Berwick Rangers, Annan 
Athletic, Elgin City and Montrose are among the lesser lights who have 
inflicted a bloody nose on McCoist's team. Dundee United and Inverness bundled 
Rangers out of the country's two main cup competitions.

The reaction to those defeats has been noticeably fierce towards McCoist, 
which is in part unfair. No SPL team facing Third Division sides over 36 games 
would win every time. Rangers, despite their illustrious past, are also an 
on-field shadow of their former selves.

Still, questions over McCoist and many of his players remain. Those recruited 
from the top flight on salaries of £200,000 and more – namely Ian Black and 
Francisco Sandaza – have failed to impress. McCoist has done little to suggest 
he can prove a fine Rangers manager in the longer term, albeit with a chaotic 
off-field scene as mitigation for last season at least.

The most positive legacy of this Rangers campaign will be the emergence of 
hitherto unseen youngsters. Again, though, that must be taken in the context of 
the part-time opposition against whom these players have flourished.

In a year's time, Rangers will inevitably celebrate another league win. Their 
ascent back to the top of Scottish football will not be short on intrigue; 
given the troubles of the recent past, Glasgow's blue half are more than likely 
to relish whatever opportunity for celebration becomes available.
 