
It took until 9pm on Friday for confirmation to arrive that Rangers' visit to 
Brechin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> City on Sunday would 
take place, which rather sums up Scottish football's chaotic state at present. 
Were the rest of Europe remotely interested, they would look on only in 
bemusement.

On the eve of the season for lower league clubs, supporters had been faced 
with uncertainty. In itself that represented little surprise: buck-passing and 
poor leadership, if not a lack of it altogether, has been glaring over a summer 
in which Rangers' demise triggered schisms and machinations.

The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> support stand 
accused of gullibility in not realising that their club was being so badly 
mismanaged, but even they are entitled to highlight how badly the subsequent 
situation – as the "old" club succumbed to liquidation – has been handled.

Rangers' problems and failings are well-documented. What is also clear is that 
Scottish football's setup remains deeply flawed when the troubles of one, 
albeit significant, club have such a severe impact on the wider scene.

Very few parties, including those charged with the fundamental task of 
ensuring a season starts in a straightforward manner, have emerged from this 
mess with credit. Neil Doncaster, the chief executive of the Scottish Premier 
League, and his counterpart at the Scottish Football Association, Stewart 
Regan, are among those whose credibility is understandably under question from 
paying customers.

A Rangers visit to Glebe Park for a cup tie is not a novel concept. It would 
be disrespectful to Brechin to label their home as dilapidated or anything of 
that sort. Brechin are one of the country's better-run clubs, even if they have 
been anxious to play Rangers, thereby receiving commercial benefit.

The first match for newco Rangers is in the Ramsdens Challenge Cup – a 
tournament for lower league teams – and carries an obvious significance. Not so 
long ago Rangers competed as routine in the Champions League.

Key players such as Allan McGregor, Steven Naismith and Steven Davis have 
departed Ibrox. It will be interesting to see how those who remain handle the 
rigours of lower league football and in what manner the Rangers following 
engage with it. On the field, it would register as a major surprise if Ally 
McCoist's team do not canter to the Third Division title. Insistence from 
Rangers' new owners that they will not sell a majority stake in the club to any 
party is curious, as is an apparent wish to sign players not affordable to any 
other Scottish club outside Celtic.

The Rangers public relations stance is that the club remain the same as ever, 
history intact, despite the fresh corporate identity created by liquidation. It 
would be an obvious stance were it not contradicted by insistence from within 
Ibrox that the club should not be retrospectively punished if found guilty of 
illegally registering players during use of the now infamous employee benefit 
trust scheme.

Rangers fans are bitter about what they perceive as unfair treatment from the 
football authorities, just as supporters of other clubs resent what they see as 
a negative influence of Glasgow's blue half on the game as a whole. The general 
atmosphere in Scottish football has never been more hostile.

The country's top tier is less than a week away from starting, with focus 
there attached to how clubs handle the impact of Rangers' absence and a reduced 
– if yet to be confirmed – broadcasting deal.

At elite level an obligation lies on fans to turn out to support their teams 
after those in boardrooms heeded strong public pressure to deny Rangers 
re-entry to the Premier League. It would be heartening if such a scenario 
occurred even though the reality is completely unknown. As in the bottom tier, 
the destination of the championship trophy is all but inevitable, with Celtic 
generally priced around 50-1 on to claim a second successive league flag.

The Old Firm are now operating on completely different levels. That, if little 
else, can be said with certainty as a new season dawns.
 