
Rangers’ finest day in five years coincided with yet another dark one for 
Ronny Deila. Celtic’s manager, who was not likely to remain in office for next 
season before this Old Firm defeat, is now operating on seriously borrowed 
time. It would be no shock if Deila vacates office imminently; he wore the look 
of a man resigned to his fate when discussing this harrowing loss.

The epic scale of Rangers’ celebrations as they progressed to a Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final with Hibernian 
reflected how much this triumph meant. It represented a release of the 
deep-rooted frustration triggered by the off-field shambles that culminated in 
Rangers taking their place in Scottish football’s lowest tier in 2012. They 
will return to the top flight in August with a spring in their step and 
possibly a major trophy. Rangers are also now only 90 minutes away from 
European football.

This encounter between old foes was thrilling, gripping and as intense as 
ever. Mark Warburton, the Rangers manager, presided over an under-strength team 
that out-fought and out-thought opposition who, on paper, appeared considerably 
stronger. Yet Warburton still urged caution afterwards. In what was perhaps a 
pointed signal to theRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
board, the manager named only five substitutes.

Rangers 2-2 Celtic - Rangers win 5-4 on penaltes: Scottish Cup semi-final - as 
it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/17/rangers-v-celtic-scottish-cup-semi-final-live>
“There is still a gap there, don’t be fooled,” Warburton said. “We were the 
better team and the better team won on the day. ButCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> are a team packed with 
international players. They have European players and we need to recognise 
that. Nothing has changed from the previous message, we have to work hard to 
close the gap. What today showed was that the gap is nowhere near as big as 
certain people have made out.

“I read some outrageous reports about how many Celtic would score and how it 
would be a cricket score. Well, hopefully we have shown the gap is a lot 
narrower.”

Deila refused to discuss his future. “I am very disappointed,” he said. “I’m 
not thinking about that at all.”

Rangers flew from the traps and Celtic appeared stunned. Kenny Miller 
emphasised that superiority with a fine finish after an Andy Halliday pass was 
deflected into his path. Celtic were abject during that opening period but 
should still have been level by the interval, Patrick Roberts instead producing 
a quite incredible miss after a Leigh Griffiths rebound fell to him.

Celtic improved markedly after the restart, a terrific header from Erik 
Sviatchenko cancelling out Miller’s goal.

Six minutes into extra-time, Barrie McKay produced a wonderful shot from 25 
yards that left Craig Gordon helpless. Celtic again rallied, Kieran Tierney’s 
excellent build-up play resulting in a chance for Tom Rogic that the Australian 
converted.

The first Old Firm penalty shootout since 1974 ensued. Callum McGregor and 
Scott Brown had already missed for Celtic by the time Rogic blazed wildly over.

Man of the match Barrie McKay (Rangers)
 