
Rangers will be relaunched against Brechin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> on Sunday after Sevco Scotland 
were granted conditional membership of the Scottish Football Association.

The Scottish Football League announced that agreement had been reached 
following weeks of discussions, releasing a statement on behalf of the three 
football authorities, while the Ibrox club also announced they had signed an 
agreement. The SFL, SFA and Scottish Premier League statement read: "We are 
pleased to confirm that agreement has been reached on all outstanding points 
relating to the transfer of the Scottish FA membership between Rangers FC (In 
Administration) and Sevco Scotland Ltd, who will be the new owners of TheRangers
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> Football Club.

"A conditional membership will be issued to Sevco Scotland Ltd today, allowing 
Sunday's Ramsdens Cup tie against Brechin City to go ahead.

"Following the completion of all legal documentation, the Scottish Premier 
League will conduct the formal transfer of the league share between RFC (IA) 
and Dundee FC on no later than Friday 3 August 2012. At this point, the 
transfer of Scottish FA membership will be complete."

The SPL investigation into alleged undisclosed payments to players, which 
centre on the use of employee benefit trusts (EBTs) that are the subject of an 
ongoing tax tribunal, will continue despite resistance within Ibrox.

And both leagues have reached agreement on the SPL securing the broadcasting 
rights to Rangers' Third Division games in order to safeguard their television 
deals. The SFA have also been satisfied by information on Sevco's shareholders 
and business plan.

The Ibrox chief executive, Charles Green, confirmed that he had signed the 
agreement but vowed to fight any SPL sanctions, which could see Rangers 
stripped of titles.

Green said in a Rangers statement: "In reaching the agreement, the board has 
had to take some very difficult decisions to gain SFA membership, including 
accepting the delayed transfer ban and paying outstanding financial penalties, 
but we are now able to get back to playing football and plan for the new season.

"The agreement enables the club to move forward but there remains an 
outstanding issue with the SPL regarding EBTs.

"As we have proved in the last couple of months, we will stand up to any 
challenges that face Rangers and will continue to fight for the club's best 
interests."

However, Ally McCoist vented his anger at the SPL and SFA, accusing them of 
refusing to allow the club to move forward. In a statement released by his club 
the Ibrox manager said: "Forty-eight hours from now we are supposed to start 
the season with a game at Brechin and, as I sit here today, I don't know 
exactly what our status in the game is and what the future holds for us going 
into next week. It's a ludicrous situation – and I owe it to our fans to make 
my views known on it.

"No one is denying that Rangers were badly mismanaged for 10 months. Nor are 
we disputing that we should be punished for that. We have been. We accept that 
punishment and want to start putting the past behind us and move forward. But 
that is not being allowed to happen – and I have to ask myself why?

"In recent days I have been in a number of meetings with Stewart Regan, Rod 
Petrie and other senior SFA figures – and despair at the lack of leadership 
shown.

"In my years in professional football, I have not always agreed with 
everything the SFA did or said. But, no matter what you thought of their 
decisions, there was no doubt they ran the game firmly and robustly.

"I can only imagine Ernie Walker looking down on us now and shaking his head 
in disbelief at the sad state of affairs and the way they have been mishandled.

"As for the SPL, they seem determined to pursue as hostile an agenda as 
possible towards Rangers. They kicked us out of the SPL – which was their 
right, and we acknowledge that – but that doesn't seem enough for Neil 
Doncaster and some of his board. Not only as they are withholding our SPL prize 
money for last season – they won't tell us how much it is but we reckon it to 
be about £1.3m.

"And having said they don't want us – they do want a bigger share of the TV 
money that our presence will bring to the SFL and its clubs. Never mind 
sporting integrity – where is the moral integrity there?

"And there is no line to be drawn in the sand. Rangers have not been punished 
enough in their eyes and along with one or two people who have a vested 
interest within SPL clubs, our right to past titles will be challenged.

"They want what we and our fans bring, yet seem determined to strip us of 
every bit of our dignity. It has to stop.

"Sadly, only one Scottish football body has offered us any help or assistance 
– the SFL – and I would like to thank David Longmuir, Jim Ballantyne and 29 of 
their 30 member clubs for inviting us into the SFL.

"We are grateful for the opportunity. We are looking forward to the challenges 
ahead, making new friends in the months ahead and having a positive impact on 
the SFL.

"It is now over five months since Rangers went into administration. It is time 
to start playing football again – and I am not alone in thinking this.

"In recent days I have bumped into Celtic, Hearts and Motherwell fans, and 
they were saying the same thing: 'It's time to stop kicking Rangers and start 
getting Scottish football looking forward, not back'. I couldn't agree more."
 