
A man who raped and tortured a woman while keeping her prisoner for three days 
last February has been jailed for 23 years.

Courtney Hutchinson, a rapper and actor who went by the alias DVS, will also 
remain on the sex offenders register for life.

Police say the severe level of violence demonstrated Hutchinson’s “total 
disregard for the victim as a human being”.

Best known for the songs Hometown and Passion, he also played the part of a 
gangster in the British film, The Intent. In one scene he brands a man with a 
hot iron, which was also one of the ways he tortured his victim in real life, 
causing her severe burns.

Despite her horrific injuries, the 20-year-old victim managed to escape from 
his house and ran naked into the street where a member of the public found her. 
She suffered a fractured eye socket, broken nose, internal bleeding, a 
dislocated shoulder and a stab wound to the hand.

Her face was so swollen she was unrecognisable. The woman suffered 20 separate 
injuries and a lawyer on the case said her injuries were the worst he had ever 
seen.

Snaresbrook crown court heard that the victim was rushed to the Royal London 
hospital and continues to receive treatment for the injuries Hutchinson 
inflicted.

He pleaded guilty to GBH with intent, rape and false imprisonment despite an 
earlier tweet, posted from his Twitter account, seemingly proclaiming his 
innocence.

It said: “Whoever’s dumb enough to think I could rape a 17 year girl then so 
be it. But I could never be that guy. So carry on trying slander my name.”

Judge John Lafferty said Hutchinson “posed a serious threat to members of the 
public” as he jailed him for 23 years.

Detective Sergeant Jimi Tele, from Newham police, praised the victim’s 
“bravery and determination” in reporting her ordeal to the police. “Her 
resoluteness in coming forward and working with the police in securing the 
imprisonment of a truly dangerous offender is worthy of the highest 
recognition,” he said.

“Courtney Hutchinson subjected his victim to the most shocking and repeated 
levels of violence. It was her determination, in company with the skill of the 
investigation team, that allowed the full severity of the attack to be revealed 
and that ultimately led to Hutchinson’s arrest and conviction.

“The level of violence he inflicted was so severe it demonstrated his total 
disregard for the victim as a human being, subjecting her to levels of 
callousness and danger that are rarely seen.”

A statement from the filmmakers behind The Intent read: “We would like to 
release this statement expressing that in no way do we condone the actions and 
behaviour of the individual or any persons involved.

“Before the production of The Intent commenced [July 2014], all cast members 
were vigorously screened with respect to any criminal activity and gang 
affiliations before being allowed to participate.

“We would like to offer our sincerest condolences to the victim of the crime 
and hope that she makes a speedy recovery. Like most people, we are shocked and 
appalled by this heinous crime.”
 