
The World Cup final was not a spectacular feast to set before the estimated 
television audience of more than 100 million, because the New Zealanders chose 
to attack largely through the relentless driving play of their forceful 
forwards and because whenever the French tried to make use of the thrust of 
their loose forwards or the inventiveness of their backs, they were met by a 
curtain of All Black brawn.

The French probably had an edge in the scrums, but they seldom got the ball 
cleanly from line-outs, and even Rodrigues, Erbani and Champ, who had his best 
game of the tournament, could not match the sheer vigour and energy of 
Shelford, Jones, and Alan Whetton in the loose. The French captain, Daniel 
Dubroca, said afterwards that his men had peaked for their semi-final against 
the Wallabies.

They never located the inspiration that had enabled them to humble the All 
Black forwards at Nantes last November. "Nantes had been a ghost hanging over 
our front five since November," said David Kirk, the New Zealand captain. 
"Today we put the ghost to rest."

When the All Blacks having been given sun, wind, and showers behind them in 
the first half, reached the interval with the score only 9-0 in their favour, 
the French, in view of their recent ability to stage dramatic recoveries, were 
still very much in with a chance. Soon after half-time Camberabero brought 
France three points with a penalty goal, but from there on the All Blacks 
forged inexorably ahead.

In the first half the New Zealanders opened the scoring with a dropped goal by 
Fox from a tapped free-kick. When Fox then tried to drop another goal, the ball 
sheered off a charging Frenchman towards the right corner, baffled Lagisquet 
with its vicious sping and settled in the grasp of Jones, who ran in for a try 
which Fox converted.

French hopes, encouraged by Camberabero's penalty goal, were soon dashed when 
Fox took the All Blacks 15-3 ahead with two penalty goals. Next Kirk and Fox 
worked the blind side, Jones, as ever, was there to carry on, and Kirk scored.

The kick-off led to a maul from which Kirk wriggled free, deep in his own 
half. When he was eventually brought down, Shelford was on hand to shovel the 
ball out to Kirwan for the All Blacks' third try.

Two more penalty goals by Fox made it 29-3 before Berbizier scored a try for 
France from short range after a thrust on the blind side by Champ, supported by 
Mesnel.
 