
WINNING TIP: Mas Dominik carnival, Roseau, Dominica 


This traditional pre-Lenten Caribbean carnival is friendly and 
uncommercialised. A mixture of African masquerade and French carnival 
traditions, it begins at dawn on the first day, when people take to the streets 
in costumes or pyjamas, banging drums or saucepans. The climax on Carnival 
Tuesday features costume bands. The streets are so narrow that no one can 
remain a spectator for long and will soon find themselves jumping up behind a 
band on a truck.
7-8 March, avirtualdominica.com <http://www.avirtualdominica.com>
dorival

France


Nice Carnival
It's mid-February, but you could be strolling through the streets of Nice in 
your summer garb, enjoying lunch on a sun-kissed terrace, and watching the 
yachts drifting across the azure Baie des Anges. The Nice Carnival is centred 
on Place Masséna, where you can marvel at the massive floats and merry 
procession of comical giant heads, troupes of musicians and assorted street 
art. And as a piece de resistance, you have the spectacle of the battle of 
flowers on the Promenade des Anglais. Nice offers a splendid combination of the 
Old Town, with its picturesque alleys, markets and Vieux Port, snuggled up 
against the wide avenues and pedestrian precincts of the New Town.C'est 
magnifique.
18 February to 8 March, nicecarnaval.com <http://www.nicecarnaval.com/>
Mick McGowan

Spain

Cádiz carnival
Cádiz has one of the oldest carnivals in the world thanks to its port – 
sailors returned home from afar with fashions and trinkets that would be worn 
during street parties. Groups continue this tradition by dressing as today's 
celebrities while singing about current news. They are surrounded by revellers, 
who are also dressed up, resembling a massive British stag do. The atmosphere, 
however, is far more jubilant in this beautiful city with its narrow cobbled 
alleys and tiny bars serving delicious Andalucían food.
3-13 March, cadizturismo.com <http://www.cadizturismo.com>
Niterol
 Photograph: Carlos Guevara/Reuters 
Santa Cruz de Tenerife carnival, Canary Islands
The main events kick off on Friday, 4 March at a parade with a carnival queen, 
Rio-style dancing groups and clowns. From then till Tuesday it's non-stop 
partying. No self-respecting reveller goes out before midnight, and they 
stagger home for breakfast. The Burial of the Sardine on Ash Wednesday, 
symbolising the end of carnal pleasures, is fun. Wailing widows, mostly blokes 
in drag, follow the giant fish to the main square, where it's burnt with 
tragicomic ceremony, followed by fireworks. The final fling is the next 
Saturday night so everyone can resume normal life on Monday… reluctantly.
To 13 March, carnavaltenerife.es <http://www.carnavaltenerife.es>
chrisdunham

Switzerland


Fasnacht, Basel
Three days of processions, bands in the streets, and people in costume 
reciting stories. There is fun and mayhem, with a lot of confetti thrown (being 
Swiss, they clean it up quickly). It begins at 4am in the marketplace. A 
procession of lanterns, drums and piccolos fills the dark square with light and 
sound. I once lived in Basel and have never forgotten the magic of their 
carnival.
14-16 March, basel.ch/en/ 
<http://www.basel.ch/en/kultur/highlights/baslerfasnacht-2011.htm>
Paulinebonner

Germany


Schwarzwald carnival
Most towns and villages in the Black Forest run events from the Thursday 
before Shrove Tuesday to Ash Wednesday and beyond. Customs vary from children 
going from house to house collecting food, to processions of characters in 
carved wooden masks. Highlights for us have been the towns of Empfingen (for 
the straw bears) and Elzach (watch out for the pigs' bladders) and 
Villingen-Schwenningen.
3-8 March, schwarzwald.com/events/fasnacht.html 
<http://www.schwarzwald.com/events/fasnacht.html>
alisonwh

Trinidad and Tobago

 Photograph: Jorge Silva/Reuters 
Trinidad carnival
The grandaddy of Caribbean carnivals is an assault on the senses. The scale is 
hard to conceive, as the bigger bands of masqueraders hold thousands, and some 
costumed players can take up two lanes of the road and tower 20 feet in the 
air. Revellers parade through the streets to the pulsating sounds of soca 
music, and the steel pan orchestras are another delight. If you enjoy the 
Notting Hill carnival, you owe it to yourself to experience the real thing, for 
in Trinidad, people of all ethnic groups, social classes and ages take part in 
a public display of the nation's soul.
7-8 March, gotrinidadandtobago.com/trinidad/carnival/ 
<http://www.gotrinidadandtobago.com/trinidad/carnival/>
dubwise1

Colombia


Barranquilla carnival
The hometown of Shakira! If you like music, colours, heaps of flowers, 
dancing, coloured masks, rum, folklore and much more, then Barranquilla is the 
place to go for carnival. Highlights include the Battle of the Flowers, with 
carts laden with kaleidoscopic flower arrangements, parades with dancers 
wearing giant heads with long noses, and, of course, the music of Colombia – 
the cumbia, paloteo, congo – and dancing to match. Colombians know how to 
party, and Barranquilla is the best of the best!
5-8 March, carnavaldebarranquilla.org <http://www.carnavaldebarranquilla.org>
earthakitt

Bolivia

 Photograph: Juan Karita/AP 
Oruro carnival
Thousands of dancers and musicians in amazing and sometimes outlandish 
costumes descend on (or rather ascend to) this sleepy old town 3,700m above sea 
level in the Andean plateau to party. Growing up there, I loved the 
water-balloon fights. Take changes of clothes and join in, but acclimatise to 
the altitude first, otherwise it will be difficult to walk fast, let alone 
dance.
5-6 March, travel-bolivia.com/carnaval-de-oruro.html 
<http://www.travel-bolivia.com/carnaval-de-oruro.html>
Yawar

Uruguay


Montevideo carnival
The longest and best carnival in the world. Why? The longest because it lasts 
more than 40 days. The best because of the passion, the colours, the music and 
the traditions. Although it is hosted in Montevideo, the capital, it involves 
the whole nation. From January to March everybody breaths, eats and dreams of 
carnival ... and the rest of the year they are preparing for it. It starts with 
parades in the main avenue to the drum's rhythm of the candombe. The election 
of the queens, the competitions, the public itself is a show. Best of all is 
that you see people from 0 to 100+ years old enjoying themselves in the same 
way.
January to March 
AlexanderBattuta

Argentina


Gualeguaychú carnival
The Gualeguaychú carnival is a competition that runs on Saturdays in January 
and February, with the final in March. We went in 2010 and had an amazing time. 
There was a great vibe, and people from all over Argentina but hardly any 
tourists. A family standing next to us came all the way from Uruguay and said 
they did every year. The parade didn't finish until 2am, after which street 
parties continued all through the night.
To 5 March, welcomeargentina.com/carnavales/index_i.html 
<http://www.welcomeargentina.com/carnavales/index_i.html>
Egelantier 
 