
Zidane scored for Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>
 this week – Enzo Zidane, that is. Just when his dad thought things could not 
get any better, the 21-year-old got a goal on his debut – 17 minutes after he 
walked on to the Bernabéu pitch and a decade after his father last walked off 
it.

It is 3,861 days since Zinedine was a Madrid player; 333 days since he became 
the Madrid manager and he is already a European Champion, a European Super Cup 
champion and a very proud parent. Win on Saturday afternoon and the chances are 
he will become a league champion too.

Not that Zidane would say that. On Saturday it is the clásico and Madrid’s 
manager says, “Whatever happens, it won’t be decisive.” Perhaps not but as 
league games in December go this may be about as close to a decider as it gets.

The winger Lucas Vázquez also said there is a long way to go but victory would 
be an important step towards the title, the chance to end a run of only one 
championship in eight years. “A fist on the desk,” the defender Nacho Fernández 
said. Real have not been in a position this good for some time.

Zinedine Zidane’s son Enzo scores on Real Madrid debut in Copa del Rey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/zinedine-zidane-son-enzo-scores-real-madrid-debut-copa-del-rey>
At this stage last season they were 12 points behind Barcelona. When Madrid 
went into the lastclásico at the Camp Nou in April, they were 10 behind. That 
wasZidane’s first as the manager and they won 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
. Now they go into his second with a six-point lead over Barcelona at the top – 
their largest lead since, under José Mourinho, they won there in the spring of 
2012, to all intents clinching that lone title in eight. Victory would give 
them the head-to-head advantage used instead of goal difference. Even this 
early, that would be a huge advantage.

The opportunity is enormous; for Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, so is the obligation. The 
pressure is intense and the performances have mostly been poor. The team so 
long defined by their midfield have occasionally looked as if they do not have 
one, the control gone, the number of passes declining, the ability to play 
through their opponents’ press diminished.

The return of Andrés Iniesta could hardly be more timely. Luis Enrique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/luis-enrique> admits that with the front 
three they have, there is a tendency to play too quickly. And while Lionel 
Messi has been superb, Neymar has gone six games without a goal and Luis Suárez 
is not imposing himself as he did.

“There’s no reason to worry,” Sergi Roberto insisted but saying so revealed 
pessimism is creeping back. Last SundayBarça drew 1-1 at Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/real-sociedad-leave-barcelona-with-more-than-just-food-for-thought>
 and Luis Enrique called it a “miracle” – not that they dropped two points but 
that they gained one. This was no unrewarded siege; not for Barcelona, anyway. 
They had been dominated. This is their worst start under Luis Enrique; the last 
time they had only 27 points at this stage was nine years ago – and Madrid 
ended the season champions, 18 points ahead.

After the draw at Real Sociedad Gerard Piqué was stopped pitch-side and asked 
for his thoughts. He questioned the team’s attitude and said it was as if they 
had not even been out there in the first half. “You can’t win the league 
playing like this,” he said.

Two days later he added: “You have to believe in this team, always. Having 
showered and reflected, if we win on Saturday things will look different.”

If they win, it is back to three points, the title race wide open and 
everything will indeed feel very different. But if they don’t? “If we lose, 
things will become very difficult,” Piqué said.

They face a Madrid side unbeaten in 32, just as Madrid faced a Barça side 
unbeaten in 39 last season – and won. Barcelona won the league anyway but only 
just. “Theclásico is more important for us than for them,” Piqué said. “They 
can allow themselves the luxury of losing. We can’t.”

Madrid do not lose often these days. Zidane has taken charge of 48 games, 
losing two, one of them a Champions League first-leg defeat. InLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> his record reads: played 
33, won 27, drawn 5, lost 1. Scored: 99. Madrid are the only side in Europe’s 
top five leagues who remain unbeaten this season. No manager has ever had a 
start this good in points terms – not even Luis Enrique, whose managerial 
record reads: one treble, one double but who this week said “We’ve got the best 
squad since I’ve been here but the same useless lump as manager”.

Florentino Pérez, the Madrid president, told AFP this week: “Zidane changed 
the history of this club as a player; it was obvious that he would do a great 
job as manager.” In fact, it was not obvious – certainly not to Zidane. For all 
his enormous popularity, the respect he commands, there were significant doubts 
at boardroom level, as well as among supporters.Even as he won the Champions 
League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
, some remained. This season, ridiculous though it sounds, there have been 
doubts too: the fixtures have been reasonably kind and the run has not been as 
impressive as it has been long.

Real Sociedad leave Barcelona with more than just food for thought | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/real-sociedad-leave-barcelona-with-more-than-just-food-for-thought>
Some thought Zidane lucky. He has always said he had a “star” but he is sharp 
and politically astute, too, and was always far more of a competitor, a worker, 
than people allowed. It annoyed him when people said he was an elegant, 
effortless player; there was effort, all right. As a manager, everyone quickly 
agreed he managed the group well – something of a backhanded compliment – but 
they wondered about his coaching, his tactical work, his control.

His calm, almost gentle approach contributed to that: his refusal to project 
his own achievements, to hang medals on himself, his deference to his players, 
his reluctance to engage in tactical analyses, to explain what exactly it was 
he had done, preferring to talk in terms of “intensity”. At the end of it there 
wasthat smile but little else by way of explanation. He took it all in his 
stride, as classy and elegant off the pitch as he had been on it. There were 
injuries – Ronaldo, Benzema, Bale, Marcelo, Casemiro, Kroos, Modric, Ramos, 
Pepe and the rest – but they just kept winning.

The numbers were becoming incontestable anyway and then came Atlético Madrid – 
the first real test, many said – and Real won that too, 3-0 against a team who 
just do not concede three goals and had lost once to them in 10 games. This, 
more than any of the other wins, more than last year’sclásico, more than the 
Champions League, was Zidane’s victory but he refused to put it like that. He 
surprised everyone with his formation, playing Ronaldo at No9 and Isco off the 
front, and got it right again. Now comes theclásico, an almost unique 
opportunity at just the right time.

Enzo Zidane said this week he was living a dream. His dad is not doing too 
badly either.
 