
Political violence in Zimbabwe has increased dramatically in 2016, with record 
levels of assault, abduction and torture recordedas opposition to Robert 
Mugabe’s 36-year rule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/aug/31/zimbabwe-facing-most-intense-unrest-in-almost-a-decade-mugabe-video-report>
 escalates.

Around 654 cases of political violence were recorded by a local NGO, the 
Counselling Services Unit (CSU), as of 21 October, compared to 476 cases in the 
whole of 2015.


The CSU found that assaults were overwhelmingly perpetrated by the state’s 
security forces – including police, military and the secretive Central 
Intelligence Organisation – while opposition supporters and civil society 
activists had been on the receiving end of the increasingly violent treatment.

One activist interviewed by the Guardian, Ostallos Gift Siziba, a student 
protest leader at the University ofZimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe>, said he was abducted by state 
security agents in August and taken to the headquarters of Zanu-PF, the ruling 
party, where he was hung from the ceiling by his feet.

“It is at this time that I experienced brutal, callous and inhumane 
treatment,” he said. “I was tortured and assaulted with my feet hanging upwards 
and my head downwards as 21 youths and men exchanged chances to beat me until I 
passed out.”

Siziba said his interrogators demanded information about other human rights 
defenders, and claims at one point he was dangled over a large drum of 
sulphuric acid.

Siziba was then transferred to the Harare central police station, where the 
beatings continued. “At this instant I had lost a lot of blood and I was still 
bleeding. I was injured in almost all parts of my body. I was denied water, and 
the right to call my parents, a lawyer, or anyone. I received no treatment and 
had to become my own doctor,” he said.

Siziba’s experience tallies with testimonies from other victims, indicating 
that it is not just the frequency of political violence that is on the rise, 
but the severity too.

Others victims reported being injected with unknown substances during 
interrogations, kept in solitary confinement, and subjected to sexual threats.

Frances Lovemore, the director of the NGO, said the allegations of torture had 
become increasingly shocking.

“The injecting unknown substances during torture is of concern, as is the 
abduction of relatives of human rights defenders when the target cannot be 
found. The sheer force of the beatings by the police, resulting in long bone 
fractures and life-threatening soft tissue injuries, is reminiscent of the 
previous violent responses by the state and ruling party when opposition 
parties were deemed a threat to power,” Lovemore said.

Lovemore’s NGO provides medical and rehabilitation services to survivors of 
organised violence and torture in Zimbabwe. The statistics are a record of 
people who have sought medical and counselling assistance from the 
organisation, and therefore provide an indicative rather than complete picture 
of political violence in Zimbabwe. The real number of incidents of political 
violence is likely to be even higher.

Popular resistance to Mugabe, the 92-year-old president, has intensified this 
year before the presidential election scheduled for 2018.Opposition has been 
increased by a severe drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/zimbabwe-protest-leader-calls-for-more-strikes-against-mugabe-rule>
, which has left millions hungry, and a cash shortage that is disrupting 
businesses and has left the government struggling to pay wages.


CSU’s statistics show that of the 654 incidents of political violence 
recorded, the vast majority occurred in Zimbabwe’s two largest cities, Harare 
(334 incidents) and Bulawayo (92), both of which have become centres for the 
recent wave of political opposition.

The CSU found that 45% of victims were of indeterminate political affiliation, 
and of those with clear links to the opposition movement, more than 52% were 
supporters of the official opposition party, the Movement for Democratic 
Change-Tsvangirai (MDC-T).

Obert Gutu, MDC-T’s spokesperson, responded to the findings by saying the 
ruling Zanu-PF’s regime had “over the years routinely targeted MDC supporters 
for assault, torture and intimidation”.

He added: “We are the largest and most popular political party in Zimbabwe and 
the regime is acutely aware of the fact that we command massive support 
throughout the length and breath of Zimbabwe. Hence, the regime has always 
targeted our supporters for victimisation.”

Linda Masarira, a former National Railways employee turned independent 
political activist, also suffered at the hands of the Zimbabwean police. She 
was arrested on 6 July and charged with engaging in violent demonstrations, and 
spent 84 days in jail before being released on bail.

She says she experienced constant physical and psychological abuse while in 
detention, beginning on the day of her arrest.

Zimbabwe protests leader charged with inciting public disorder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/zimbabwe-protests-leader-charged-inciting-public-disorder-evan-mawarire>
“I was the only female person that had been arrested, made to sit between male 
people’s legs [on the prisoner transfer vehicle]. They were touching me all 
over. Police were poking me with baton sticks. They try to take away your 
dignity and self-esteem,” she said.

After leading a protest by prisoners against the poor conditions of the 
Chikurubi female prison, she was moved to the notorious Chikurubi maximum 
security facility, usually reserved for male prisoners. There she was kept in 
solitary confinement for 18 days, and forced to wear leg irons.

“These are some things I had to deal with. When you oppose the ruling party, 
you know you’re going to go through hell. I told myself all this, that I had to 
be strong. And it actually made me stronger. I thought: if they are doing this 
to me, then what I’m doing has an impact,” said Masarira.
 