
It was, said the police, 'the worst rioting ever seen on mainland Britain.' It 
was sparked off by anger over the death of Mrs Cynthia Jarrett who collapsed 
and died of a heart attack after a Metropolitan Police raid on her house.
But the ferocity of October 6, 1985 on the Broadwater Farm State was fulled by 
years of hostility between Tottenhan blacks and the police.

Police Constable Keith Blakelock, stumbling under a hail of missiles, was 
hacked to death by a large group of youths.

The Metropolitan Police, aggrieved at a colleague's death and stunned by the 
collective rage, mounted its biggest ever investigation. Dozens of homes on the 
estate were raided, 369 people arrested and over a thousand police photographs 
scrutinised. But no eye witnesses came forward.

In January 1987 six people, including three juveniles, stood trail for Pc 
Blakelock's murder. Three, Wilson Silcott, Mark Braithwaite and Engin Raghip, 
were convicted in March solely on disputed confessions and, in Mr Silcott's 
case, on a few alleged remarks which, the prosecution claimed, pointed to guilt.

According to a growing list of eminent lawyers as well as Amnesty, the 
Tottenham Three have become a classic case of miscarriage of justice.

On new psychological evidence avout his low intelligence and suggestibility, 
Engin Raghip's case has been referred back to the Court of Appeal. But there 
has been a strong resistance to re-examine the case against the other two, even 
though it is now admitted that the police investigation was deeply flawed.

Juvenile Y, aged 15, was the first of the six to be arrested, four days after 
the riot. Held for three days without access to a lawyer and interviewed on six 
occasions over 10 hours, he said he had cut the officer with a knife and that 
Mr Silcott had taken part in the murder.

But Y, a psychologist testified, had a mental age of seven and a severly 
diminished capacity to remember events. Ruling his statements unreliable and 
inadmissable, the judge criticised the police for their oppressive behaviour.

Juvenile X was arrested on October 9 and admitted throwing stones. He was 
charged after a witness said he had been the group around Pc Blakelock. Under 
cross-examination the witness' story collapsed after he admitted that he had 
repeatedly lied to the police. The judge threw out the charge.

The identity of juvenile Z became known because of the unfair and unlawful way 
he was treated. Jason Hill, aged 13, was arrested on October 11, held 
incommunicado for the first 48 hours, and interviewed in his underpants for a 
total of 15 hours.

He also named Mr Silcott and said he had been given a sword and told to make a 
cut on the body. He later retracted, claiming that he had been nowhere near the 
scene. As with X and Y, the judge instructed the jury to return a verdict of 
not guilty. Mr Justice Hodgson said his statements were 'fantastical.'

Last year, after the Director of Public Prosecutions said there was no 
evidence to prosecute any officers, Detective Chief Superintendent Graham 
Melvin was disciplined at an internal police tribunal. He is appealing to the 
Home Secretary.

Winston Silcott was known to the police. At the time of the riot he was on 
bail charged with murder - which he claimed was self-defence. From an early 
stage the detectives appeared to consider him the ringleader.

He said little to the police after his arrest on October 12. But in his final 
interview he is alleged to have said: 'You ain't got any evidence. Those kids 
will never go to court. You wait and see. No one else will talk to you. You 
can't keep me away from them.' These statements were enough for the jury to 
convict, although other influences may have played a part.

Engin Raghip, the next person arrested, is said to have told police that Mr 
Silcott was making petrol bombs. In his statement Mr Silcott's name was changed 
to N, but in cross-examination it became clear who he was talking about. In the 
statements from Y and Z, Mr Silcott was also called N. The jury was told to 
ignore them but observers believe the jurors made a connection.

Mr Raghip and Mark Braithwaite both claimed that their statements were false 
and made under pressure after long periods of interrogation. Mr Raghip said he 
was near the scene of the murder wielding a broom handle. Mr Braithwaite said 
he hit an officer with an iron bar, but did not think it was Pc Blakelock. At 
the trial, both offered alibi witnesses to say they were elsewhere.

An inquiry into the trials, chaired by Lord Gifford, QC, found in November 
1988 that the convictions had been 'a blot on justice.' It hoped that the 
Appeal Court would overturn them or, failing that, that the Home Secretary 
would grant pardons.

A month later Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, refused leave to appeal. He 
said that Mr Silcott's words represented a solid basis for saying that they 
amounted at an admission.

Amnesty International criticised his judgment, saying the 'doubt continues to 
exist about the safety of convictions based on addmissions made in the absence 
of a lawyer and subsequently contested by the defendants.'

Douglas Hurd, then Home Secretary, questioned Amnesty's impartiality and 
accused it of damaging its reputation.

The campaign has been over-shadowed by the Irish cases of Guilford, the 
Maguires and Birmingham. The families have also had to contend with the 
demonising of Winston Silcott in the tabloid press.

As fresh evidence is unlikely, the families are relying on the Home 
Secretary's powers to refer a case back to the court and hoping to find judges 
who can see a reasonable doubt.
 