
Lawyers representing a Libyan husband and wife who were kidnapped and flown to 
one of Muammar Gaddafi’s prisons are seeking to overturn a decision that there 
was insufficient evidence to prosecute a formerMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> officer for his alleged role.

Mark Allen, the head of counter-terrorism at the agency at the time of the 
so-called rendition operations, had set out his role in a letter to the Gaddafi 
government that came to light during the 2011 Libyan revolution.

However the Crown Prosecution Service decided earlier this year that Allen – 
now Sir Mark – should face no criminal charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
, a ruling that the victims said reflected poorly on British justice.

Lawyers for the couple are now seeking a judicial review of the CPS decision, 
which they have denounced as a “see no evil, hear no evil” ruling that has put 
the government and its intelligence agencies above the rule of law.

Cori Crider of the legal charity Reprieve said: “It’s sad that the CPS will 
aggressively prosecute journalists for ‘misconduct in public office’, but a top 
MI6 officer who helped render kids and a pregnant woman to Gaddafi walks free. 
It’s sadder still that prosecutors felt victim families should have no role in 
the ‘victims’ review.’ The family’s view is clear. Justice was denied. The 
decision leaves the UK’s security services basically exempt from British law. 
That’s why they are fighting it.”

Abdel Hakim Belhaj <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>, an 
opponent of Gaddafi, and his wife Fatima Bouchar, were abducted in Thailand in 
March 2004 while en route from Malaysia to the UK, where they had planned to 
apply for political asylum.

They were held briefly at an American detention facility in Bangkok, and 
allegedly tortured, before being bound and gagged and flown to Tripoli.Bouchar, 
who was pregnant, says she was taped head to foot to a stretcher for the 
17-hour flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/08/special-report-britain-rendition-libya>
.

Evidence of MI6 involvement emerged in correspondence between Allen and 
Gaddafi’s intelligence chief, Moussa Koussa, that was discovered during the 
Libyan revolution.

Other documents included a fax from the CIA to Tripoli, which gave details of 
a second UK-Libyan rendition operation, in which another opponent of Gaddafi, 
Sami al-Saadi, was kidnapped in Hong Kong and flown to Tripoli along with his 
wife and four children.

 Scotland Yard spent four years investigating the kidnappings and sent a 
28,000-page file to the CPS. Police are understood to believe that they had 
built a particularly formidable case against MI6 in the Saadi case.

Detectives are said to have been dismayed that the CPS concluded there was 
insufficient evidence to bring charges against Allen or anyone else. In making 
public their decision, the CPS disclosed that Allen had “sought political 
authority for some of his actions”.

In a letter to the CPS, Belhaj’s lawyers at the London firm Leigh Day claim 
that the decision is unreasonable. They say: “It appears the CPS has 
erroneously proceeded on the basis that political approval would be a 
reasonable excuse for the conduct under investigation.”

Meanwhile, the legal charity Reprieve has complained to the information 
commissioner over the government’s refusal to disclose whether ministers or 
Downing Street officials were in any way involved in the decision to not bring 
charges.

There was no comment from the CPS or Allen, who was not directly named in the 
CPS statement.
 