
In Donald Barthelme's 1974 short story "I Bought a Little City" 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1974/11/11/1974_11_11_042_TNY_CARDS_000308287>
, the narrator decides one day to purchase Galveston, Texas, where he then 
tears down some houses, shoots 6,000 dogs, and rearranges what remains into the 
shape of a giant Mona Lisa jigsaw puzzle visible only from the air. As with 
much of Barthelme's work, the premise seems so absurd that one can't help but 
shake it until a metaphor falls out, and here one might well assume that, in 
the words of the novelist Donald Antrim, "I Bought a Little City" is "a take on 
the role that a writer has in writing a story – playing god, in a certain way". 
But Barthelme first arrived in Greenwich Village, where he would live for most 
of the rest of his life, in the winter of 1962, just as local campaigners were 
narrowly defeating an attempt by the despotic city plannerRobert Moses 
<http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/1218.html> to run a 
10-lane elevated highway through the middle of Washington Square Park. For 
decades, Moses really did play god with New York, and for anyone who ever lived 
within his kingdom, "I Bought a Little City', which was first published in the 
New Yorker, might not have seemed so absurd after all.

Those local campaigners were led by Jane Jacobs, another great Greenwich 
Village writer. Her most famous work,The Death and Life of Great American Cities
, is now 50 years old. For a rigorous and polemical manual of urban planning, 
it achieved a remarkably wide readership, perhaps because it's such a rare joy 
to read a book about cities written by someone who actually seems to appreciate 
what makes them fun to live in. AsLewis Mumford 
<http://www.nd.edu/~ehalton/mumfordbio.html>, one of Jacobs's opponents, wrote 
at the time: "Here was a new kind of 'expert', very refreshing in current 
planning circles, where minds unduly fascinated by computers carefully confine 
themselves to asking only the kind of question that computers can answer and 
are completely negligent of the human contents or the human results. This able 
woman had used her eyes, and, even more admirably, her heart." Today, urbanists 
argue about "what she really meant", as if the book were an ambiguous holy 
codex, but most of Jacobs's prescriptions remain clear and relevant. And when 
she derides, for instance, "the extraordinary governmental financial incentives 
[that] have been required to achieve this degree of monotony, sterility, and 
vulgarity", you think straight away of a dozen recent cases where the words hit 
just as hard.

Quite often, however, I find myself considering Death and Life not as a book 
about cities, but as a book about books. One of the two epigraphs to my novel
Boxer, Beetle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780340998410/boxer-beetle>
, which contains a character based on a young Robert Moses, is a quotation from 
Jacobs: "We are all accustomed to believe that maps and reality are necessarily 
related, or that if they are not, we can make them so by altering reality." My 
historical interpretation of Barthelme's story does not, of course, push out 
the more obvious symbolic one, and Antrim is quite right that making up stories 
can sometimes feel like urban planning. Which is one reason whyDeath and Life 
will be a delight to just about anyone with an interest in the craft of fiction.

Jacobs, who died in 2006, never published any fiction herself, but she 
certainly had a novelist's sensitivity to human relations. She argues inDeath 
and Life, for instance, that one of the paradoxical advantages of urban 
existence is privacy. In contrast to the suburbs, a dense neighbourhood has 
lots of convenient places to stop and chat, so you can be on friendly terms 
with dozens of people who live or work near your home without ever feeling the 
slightest obligation to invite any of them inside for tea. "Under this system, 
it is possible in a city-street neighbourhood to know all kinds of people 
without unwelcome entanglements, without boredom, necessity for excuses, 
explanations, fears of giving offence, embarrassments respecting impositions or 
commitments, and all such paraphernalia of obligations which can accompany less 
limited relationships." If these things had truly been lost toNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, we would never have got Seinfeld
, but the point still stands. How many professional city planners have 
considered everyday life so carefully that they've remembered to take all the 
nanophysics of social awkwardness into account?

My favourite passage in the whole book is Jacobs's account of a day in the 
life of her local newsagent. "One ordinary morning last winter, Mr Jaffe, whose 
formal business name is Bernie, and his wife, whose formal business name is 
Ann, supervised the small children crossing at the corner on the way to PS 41, 
as Bernie always does because he sees the need; lent an umbrella to one 
customer and a dollar to another … gave out information on the range of rents 
in the neighbourhood to an apartment seeker; listened to a tale of domestic 
difficulty and offered reassurance; told some rowdies they could not come in 
unless they behaved and then defined (and got) good behaviour … advised a 
mother who came for a birthday present not to get the ship-model kit because 
another child going to the same birthday party was giving that …"

The chronicle goes on for more than half a page, too long to quote in full, 
and we get a sense here of the pleasure that Jacobs probably would have taken 
from writing fiction. It reads like Dickens – in the omniscient warmth and 
precision of the prose, and in the sense of a whole city crammed into one shop. 
And also in the character of Bernie, who seems to be almost supernaturally 
benign, after the fashion of so many Dickens characters. (In any modern novel, 
he would have to beat Ann with that umbrella.) Finally, it's like Dickens in 
the magnitude of the disparity between Jacobs's urban experience and our own, 
which is so great that it would be easier to believe she was writing about 1861 
than 1961. When I used to live in Bethnal Green, I felt a tender appreciation 
for the unjudgmental 24-hour shop near my flat, but then I wasn't about to ask 
for a loan or wail about my ex-girlfriend. As Sharon Zulkin argues in her 
recent bookNaked City, "Jacobs romanticised social conditions that were already 
becoming obselete by the time she wrote about them."

But that doesn't detract from the usefulness of Bernie when he's reconsidered 
as a lesson in writing. "The social structure of pavement life hangs partly on 
what can be called self-appointed public characters," Jacobs writes. She is not 
– of course – employing the term "character" here in the literary sense, but 
for our purposes she might as well be. Nearly all novelists will have learned 
to make use of "public characters": secondary figures who can plausibly appear 
in almost any part of the book, who have good reasons for making those 
appearances, and who can therefore help to knit together all the curly fibres 
of a slightly disorganised narrative.

Plenty of the requirements Jacobs sets out for building a healthy and diverse 
urban community can be applied with real success to building a vivid and 
plausible fictional community.Death and Life, in other words, is a sort of 
accidental creative writing textbook – perhaps appropriately so, because 
Jacobs's beloved West Village was itself full of writers. Early on, Jacobs 
says: "Under the seeming disorder of the old city, wherever the old city is 
working successfully, is a marvellous order for maintaining the safety of the 
streets and the freedom of the city. It is a complex order. Its essence is 
intricacy of pavement use, bringing with it a constant succession of eyes. This 
order is all composed of movement and change, and although it is life, not art, 
we may fancifully call it the art form of the city and liken it to the dance." 
But the art form of the city is not really dance. The art form of the city, 
described so well in that passage, is the novel.

A word is hovering on the perimeter of this article, and that word is 
modernism. Jacobs was strongly against the modernist planning of Le Corbusier 
and Robert Moses; but on the other hand, a list of the older books that 
exemplify the lessons ofDeath and Life could include Ulysses, Berlin 
Alexanderplatz, Petersburg, Manhattan Transfer and Mrs Dalloway – some of the 
skyscrapers of modernist literature. Everyone knows that modernism can mean 
different things at different times and in different fields, but Jacobs helps 
us to see with great clarity that all writers of fiction, consciously or 
unconsciously, stand – in one sense at least – in opposition to the modernism 
of the mid-century city planners. Fiction, after all, is about human 
difference, and Le Corbusier's futuristic Ville Contemperaine demanded a 
population as interchangeable as pachinko balls. (Barthelme, whose father was a 
modernist architect, spoke of Le Corbusier's "not insignificant totalitarian 
bent".)

For Jacobs herself, the novelist who most convincingly defied Le Corbusier was 
… perhaps you can guess. "Gradgrind would have loved Le Corbusier's much later 
definition of a house as a machine for living," she wrote in an essay onHard 
Times. "An enthusiastic Gradgrind had already made himself mentally and morally 
at home in a future where departments of planning would devote themselves to 
deliberately making the built environments of cities, towns and suburbs 
monotonous in the name of virtue – the kind of result to which Dickens thought 
that worship of the eminently practical was pointing."

Dickens, of course, never met Le Corbusier – but James Joyce did. In 1922, the 
two men were both in Paris completing the works that would define them:Ulysses 
and the plan for la Ville Contemperaine. Fifteen years later, when they were at 
last introduced, they should have had a lot to argue about. In fact, they 
discussed only the novelist's two new parakeets, Pierre and Pipi. Soon 
afterwards, Le Corbusier wrote thatUlysses was "a grand discovery of life", and 
drew parallels between Joyce's work and his own.

Le Corbusier had a hostility to the messy urban street so violent that, the 
architect Michael Sorkin suggests, it "can only be explained by 
psychoanalysis", and yet most ofUlysses takes place on these streets. As with 
Bleak House, one struggles to imagine a version of Ulysses set in la Ville 
Contemperaine, in which Leopold Bloom does not stroll from Sandycove to Phoenix 
Park to Eccles Street but rather takes an electric lift from floor to floor of 
a self-contained 600ft-skyscraper, meeting no one and seeing nothing. That, 
however, is a close approximation to the natural state of any new fictional 
universe, before the novelist has variegated and populated it. The two duties 
are complex, and as Barthelme shows in "I Bought a Little City", playing god 
isn't always easy. But you couldn't hope for a better tutor than Jane Jacobs.
 