
Two-thirds of female fast food workers at restaurants operated by Andrew 
Puzder, Donald Trump’s controversial nomination for US labor secretary, 
experienced sexual harassment at work, a rate much higher than the industry 
average, a stinging advocacy survey has claimed.

Many female workers, according to the research conducted by Restaurant 
Opportunities Center (Roc) United, have been harassed by customers referencing 
the highly sexualised advertising campaigns Puzder has championed as CEO of CKE 
Restaurants, the parent company of chains including Carl’s Jr and Hardee’s.

Andrew Puzder criticized as 'cruel and baffling' choice for labor secretary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/andrew-puzder-labor-secretary-trump-unions-wages>
“Customers have asked why I don’t dress like the women in the commercials,” 
one Tennessee-based Hardee’s employee told researchers.

“I continually get notes left on tables from customers, customers flirt or ask 
me out,” said another Carl’s Jr employee in California. “I have also been 
followed outside the store by customers.”

Puzder, CEO of the billion-dollar company since 2000, has staunchly defended 
his company’s notorious advertising that often features scantily dressed women 
eating burgers in scenessome have compared to pornography 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/copyranter/carls-jr-latest-hamburger-porn-ad?utm_term=.igl3vza93#.cvN4k8rB4>
, arguing in 2011: “We believe in putting hot models in our commercials, 
because ugly ones don’t sell burgers.”

The rate of sexual harassment across the fast food industry is already high, 
with 40% of female workers reporting some form of unwanted contact,according to 
recent polling 
<http://hartresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Fast-Food-Worker-Survey-Memo-10-5-16.pdf>
. But researchers at Roc United, a dedicated nonprofit that advocates for 
restaurant workers’ rights, argued the 66% reporting rate found among CKE 
employees was “disturbing”.

Puzder, who has donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Trump campaign 
and the Republican party, is also an outspoken critic of increasing the federal 
minimum wage to $15 and the expansion of rights to overtime pay. CKE 
Restaurants has settled a number of multimillion-dollar class action lawsuits 
brought by employeesin relation to pay and conditions 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/12/08/andrew-puzder-labor-secretary-nominee/95172276/>
 and, according to arecent filing 
<https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/919628/000091962812000011/cke-11052012x10q.htm>
 with the Securities and Exchange Commission, were subject to similar class 
actions cases in California years later.

The Roc United study of employees also found that close to a third of the 564 
workers surveyed had experienced a form of wage theft, such as failed overtime 
payments, inadequate work breaks and performing multiple duties without 
adequate compensation.

Of workers surveyed in California, where the majority of the sample was taken 
from, 32% said they were not given meal breaks after working more than five 
hours, a violation of the state’s strict worker’s break laws; 79% of survey 
respondents said they had served or prepared food while they were sick.

“I was constantly pressured to cut labor costs – this meant that employees 
were stressed out and customer service suffered because there weren’t enough 
employees working on my shifts,” Abel Gonzalez, a 42-year-old Carl’s Jr 
employee in Los Angeles, told researchers.

CKE Restaurants did not respond to a request for comment on the research 
findings, but Elizabeth Johnson, a spokeswoman for the president-elect’s 
transition team who was not contacted by the Guardian, sent an emailed 
statement, dismissing the report as “fake news” that was “paid for by unions 
and special interests opposed to Andy Puzder’s nomination”.

Johnson accused the union of “attempting to smear” Puzder by using “leading 
questions and deceitful surveying tactics, such as posing as CKE corporate 
representatives”. The spokeswoman provided no evidence for the allegations. 

Jayaraman, the director of the Food Labor Research Center at University of 
California, Berkeley, dismissed Johnson’s claims as “laughable” and false. 
“Clearly they don’t know how survey research is done,” she said. “There is no 
way for us to pose as anything when we’re asking staff to voluntarily fill out 
a survey online.”

Roc United researchers also interviewed CKE staff members at stores in four 
states and, Jayaraman said, identified themselves as researchers before 
commencing with surveys as well as identifying employees through online social 
media.

The academic said the sample size of 564, taken from states across the US, was 
more than enough to draw conclusions about entire workforce of over 20,000.

“When we are looking to do research on a whole metropolitan area, like New 
York City or Los Angeles,” Jayaraman said, “500 is the survey number we use to 
understand how working conditions in a whole metropolitan area, and bearing in 
mind you’re talking about 10 million people and 200,000, 300,000.”

On Tuesday afternoon, current and former employees of Carl’s Jr and Hardee’s 
spoke for nearly two hours before a panel of convened by Senate Democrats about 
the poor working conditions and wages at the fast food chains under Puzder’s 
ownership.

During the emotional testimony, one woman described the hardships of raising 
six children on a salary of only $8.75 an hour after seven years.

“I work almost every day and am still considered poor,” Lupe Guzman said, who 
displayed a framed photograph of her children on the table next to her. She 
added: “People like Andrew Puzder don’t see how regular Americans are living 
day to day.”

Laura McDonald, a former general manager at Carl’s Jr, who is part of a class 
action lawsuit against CKE concerning overtime pay, said she couldn’t think of 
“anyone less qualified” to run the Department of Labor, an agency that has 
traditionally existed to protect workers.

“He never protected the employees at CKE when he was in charge so I don’t 
think he would be the person to protect American workers’ rights,” McDonald 
said.

Democrats have identified Puzder as one of eight nominees who say have 
particularly “troublesome” backgrounds. The fast food CEO is an opponent of 
efforts to raise the minimum wage, a movement that is largely led by industry 
workers. He is also a critic of sick leave policies and supports repealing the 
Affordable Care Act.

Democrats and labor leaders have argued that his appointment is akin to 
letting the fox guard the henhouse, and cannot be trusted to protect workers’ 
interests.

“This is not right,” Senator Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat of Massachusetts 
said as Guzman spoke about the difficulty of raising a family on a minimum wage 
salary.

“This is what the secretary of labor is supposed to stand up for - is people 
like you. We’re here to start the real inquiry about whether or not Mr Puzder 
is a person who can be trusted to stand up for you and all of the workers of 
America.”
 