
What a difference a new coach makes. After Saracens, Leicester and Bath 
continued the excellent start of the English clubs to their European campaigns, 
Northampton became the latest collection of Englishmen totry to catch the eye 
of Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/nov/20/eddie-jones-unveiled-england-rugby-union-head-coach-live>
. The Saints travelled north to the lair of the Pro12 champions, no less, and 
suddenly looked a million dollars. Glasgow were a distant second in most 
departments.

George Ford’s late penalty hands Bath vital victory over Leinster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/bath-leinster-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Having been so lacklustre in the Premiership this season – indeed, fairly flat 
intheir European opener against the Scarlets last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/northampton-scarlets-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 – Northampton played more like the champions they were themselves the year 
before last. And Jones had plenty of English players to consider.

“It’s a fresh slate for everyone,” said Kieran Brookes, the man of the match. 
“Everybody’s aim is to get into the England team. With a new coach, it’s a 
great opportunity for everyone.”

Brookes was a deserved man of the match, but more poignant, in view of his 
recent history, was the performance of Luther Burrell. The centre left out of 
the World Cup had a hand in Northampton’s first two tries and was a point of 
reference throughout, albeit conceding a yellow card in the second half as 
Glasgow chased the game.

But the most notable feature of the match was the Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> scrum, fronted by a trio 
of Englishmen. Glasgow are as powerful a unit as any in the Pro12. They 
couldn’t cope with Brookes and his young English mates, who thrived even 
without Dylan Hartley to anchor their efforts.

The Saints were two tries up by the half-hour mark. After Finn Russell had 
landed the second of two early attempts at goal, Burrell was first to an up and 
under that landed in Glasgow’s 22, tipping it back to George Pisi who darted 
and crashed his way over the line after a quarter of an hour.

It was around then that the disparity in the scrum really kicked in. Pat 
MacArthur left the field in the eighth minute after a blow to his 
already-suspect jaw, deepening Glasgow’s injury crisis at hooker. Shalva 
Mamukashvili was signed recently to help out in that department. They will need 
someone else if MacArthur’s jaw is broken.

The Georgian’s introduction was rude. Northampton’s yeomen drove right through 
the Glasgow eight time and again. Northampton took three points from one such 
rout, and by the end of the first quarter Ryan Grant was in the sin bin. 
Northampton collected another three points from the subsequent lineout and 
drive.

On the half-hour, they stretched their lead further. Burrell punched a hole 
off Myler, and the ball was spun wide, where Ahsee Tuala went through Hogg for 
Northampton’s second try. That 18-3 lead was whittled away in the approach to 
half-time. Russell hit the post with another penalty attempt, but the Saints 
conceded a five-metre scrum in the aftermath. Josh Strauss managed to come away 
with the ball off a retreating scrum, and Peter Horne took a fine line through 
Northampton’s midfield for the try. But there was no escape from those scrums. 
Another huge shove yielded a further three points for the visitors on the 
stroke of half-time for a 21-10 lead that in no way flattered them.

Telusa Veainu scores two tries to give Leicester Tigers win in Treviso
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/treviso-leicester-tigers-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
Glasgow were tighter in the set piece after the break, so Northampton turned 
to their counterattack. Ben Foden – what price a return to England colours for 
him? – went through Horne in running back a kick and was up on his feet when 
the ball came back to send through a chip, which Tuala touched down for his 
second.

Sixteen points down at home, the Pro12 champions had to react. And so they 
did. The penalties started to mount as Glasgow sent in wave after wave of 
attack. Burrell saw yellow just shy of the hour. Russell tapped the penalty, 
Leone Nakarawa charged to five yards, and Strauss finished it off. Russell, 
though, missed the conversion.

Glasgow kept coming, but they were growing desperate. A spilled pass put an 
end to one attack – cue penalty to Northampton at the resultant scrum. 
Christian Day’s steal at a line-out did for another. It was a miserable evening 
for Mamukashvili.

Tom Wood, as he had last weekend, reminded us all – and Jones in particular – 
that he can compete for the ball on the ground, thus stymieing Glasgow’s latest 
tilt at the line. It was in keeping with the evening’s theme. Tuala’s 
interventions may have lent an international feel, but really this was the 
story of Englishman after Englishman making themselves known to a new coach. 
Just a shame they could not manage it for the old one.
 