 The teenage killer of Laurent Kabila is still on the run a month after the 
Congolese president's murder, according to a dramatic account of his 
assassination which has emerged in Paris.
The report also casts new light on why the 'child soldiers' of the 
ex-president's army turned against Kabila and plotted his assassination.

It suggests there was no international conspiracy, nor were Congolese rebels 
who control much of the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo 
responsible. Rather, Kabila's kadogos (Swahili for child soldiers) committed 
parricide against a man they believed to have betrayed them.

Kabila had believed that the kadogos who had served him loyally since his 
rebellion in 1997 against ex-president Mobutu were utterly loyal. He even told 
a visiting foreign businessman: 'They will never do anything against me. They 
have been with me since the beginning. They are my children.'

Kabila's young killer entered the president's office at the Marble Palace in 
Kinshasa on 16 January, as the increasingly paranoid and isolated Kabila was 
discussing with an economics adviser a looming summit with France he hoped 
would be his political salvation.

The assassin bent over Kabila, and the president, assuming the teenager wanted 
to talk to him, leaned towards him. The kadogo then produced a revolver and 
shot the president four times, and then escaped with other conspirators while 
the palace resounded with gunfire.

At least three of those involved in the plot, including the unnamed killer 
himself, fled Kinshasa, crossed the river Congo and may have gone into hiding 
in Brazzaville, capital of the neighbouring Congo.

The investigation casts doubt on the official version of Kabila's murder. 
According to Justice Minister Mwenze Kongolo, Kabila was killed by another 
bodyguard called Rashidi Kasereka, 18, who was then shot dead.

But, according to yesterday's report in Le Monde, Kasereka played a minor role 
in the assassination team. A sub-lieutenant who took part in the 
assassinations, identified by Le Monde only as 'A.L.', said that Kasereka was 
killed by Kabila's bodyguards while the real killer escaped.

'A.L.' was in charge of 35 men who were posted outside the presidential 
palace. Two men got inside the building, four others hid in the palace to 
provide cover.

'Rashidi was one of four men giving covering fire to our partner. But Rashidi 
never got out. The rest of us, we ran about 300 metres to where we had left our 
six vehicles. Then we split up and disappeared into the city.'

The plot to kill Kabila started in early January when a dissident group of 
kadogos went to Brazzaville and drew up a document setting out Operation Mbongo 
Zero. 'Mbongo' is a Swahili word for buffalo, a reference to the ex-president's 
corpulence.

A copy of the assassination plan has been kept by one of the plotters, 
identified by Le Monde only as 'Abdoul'. Consisting of three unsigned 
hand-written pages, it explains how the conspirators would infiltrate strategic 
positions in Kinshasa, including the presidential palace, the national radio 
and television station and the headquarters of the country's electricity 
company. It involved some 75 members of Kabila's bodyguard at the presidential 
palace, many of whom were arrested after the killing.

The roots of the boy soldiers' dissension go deeper. Kabila founded his 
Alliance of Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire in 1996, backed chiefly by 
Rwandan and Ugandan forces (with whom he later fell out), but with support from 
the kadogos, from the east of the country.

Kabila consolidated his power base by organising the assassination of one of 
the co-founders of the Alliance, Andre Kisase Ngandu, who had been chief of the 
National Council of Resistance for Democracy, a group opposed to Mobutu to whom 
many of the kadogos belonged.

One of those kadogos was 'Abdoul', who supported Kabila during the 1997 coup 
d'etat, but never pardoned him for killing his former leader: 'I marched with 
Kabila, but I knew he was a traitor.'

Resentment against Kabila grew. Last June, in a desperate roll of the dice, 
Kabila agreed to meet the Rwandan president General Paul Kagame, to devise a 
plan to protect his teetering regime. Kagame was a long-time enemy of the 
kadogos and thus the meeting alienated them further.

At the same time, Kabila was sowing internal dissension. According to Abdoul, 
he treated his 'children' with contempt: 'We knew no one in Kinshasa. All the 
time we were with Kabila. But he treated us badly. We didn't have salaries, all 
the money came from him. We were like beggars.'

Increasingly paranoid, Kabila started to devour the children of the 
revolution. Last November, he believed he had discovered a plot against him and 
arrested, tortured and killed soldiers loyal to Commandant Anselme Masasu 
Nindaga who had days earlier made a subversive speech at a reunion for 1,200 
kadogos in Kinshasa.

The day before his assassination, Kabila had witnessed the execution of 47 
kadogos, all believed to be plotting against him. His terror had turned on 
those who had been his closest allies, the boy soldiers who had marched with 
him from eastern Congo four years earlier.
 