
In our judgment, the Tempest is a play rather for the closet than for the 
stage. The fatal objection to the Tempest, as an acting drama, is that it is 
not a play of the passions, but purely one of sentiment and of poetic fancy; it 
contains nothing to call forth the deepest emotions of the heart; it can only 
please at best - it can never awaken deep horror or intense sympathy, neither 
can it open the sluices of joy or of sorrow in the human heart.

It is in fact, as put on the stage, a pageant dignified by the richest and 
most imaginative poetry. These circumstances will, to some extent, account for 
what we must call the general disappointment expressed at the performance of 
the play on Saturday evening.

However, there were other circumstances contributing to this, which, however 
unpleasant, our duty to the public requires us to notice. We were glad to see 
the cordial greeting with which the audience recognised a favourite of last 
season in the garb of Prospero; but we must add that the applause of his 
performance of that character was subsequently but partial; and, with every 
disposition to make allowances, we must say that Mr Butler made a very large 
demand on the patience and the forbearance of his audience. Indeed, it has 
rarely been our fortune to hear Shakespeare so mangled by any actor as it was 
on this occasion.

One of the best sustained characters in the piece was the Caliban of Mr Bass; 
it was the best monster that we have ever seen. Mr Davidge's Stephano was 
another able performance; he never forgot his mock gravity or intemperance, and 
his by-play was exceedingly good.

We cannot say much for the Trinculo of Mr CF Marshall, and we must caution 
this actor against his coarse tricks, which savour more of a sawdust arena than 
of the boards of a theatre-royal. Any actor of taste and judgment would feel 
that, when the dramatist has a passage that may be deemed offensive to a modern 
audience, probably the best treatment of it is to utter it quietly and as 
common-place - instead of which, Mr Marshall labours to make the most of it, 
and he seems to dwell on it with pleasure, as though giving him an opportunity 
of currying favour with the gallery.

This must be amended and we shall not be disposed to spare any repetitions of 
this practice. His smelling of "the monster" was a piece of the coarsest and 
most revolting acting ever endured by a respectable audience.
 