
The Rugby Football Union’s safeguarding team dealt with 141 cases involving 
adults and children in the 2015-16 season in England, with some involving 
“serious, harmful sexual behaviour”.

The RFU did not put a number on the incidents involving sexual behaviour, 
saying they were very small and that the police had been called in. Most of the 
cases involved poor practice, such as bullying and bad language.

Met police receive 106 allegations of sexual abuse at football clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/met-police-106-allegations-of-sexual-abuse-at-london-football-clubs>
The revelation, which was made at a meeting of the RFU’s council in October by 
the union’s safeguarding team, which used the words serious, harmful sexual 
behaviour, comes at a time when football is dealing with a growing number of 
historic cases of sexual abuse.

Ian Ritchie, the RFU’s chief executive, said on Tuesday that no one had come 
forward in the light of the revelations made in football to make a case of 
historic abuse, but it is the present that is concerning Twickenham, which last 
season made 13,725 Disclosure and Barring Service checks.

“The RFU is committed to safeguarding the welfare of children in rugby and has 
an experienced in-house safeguarding team,” a spokesperson said. “We have 
worked closely with the Child Protection in Sport Unit and NSPCC to develop 
robust policy and procedures to safeguard children, achieving national advanced 
standards in both for safeguarding and protecting children in sport.

“We work closely with all our clubs and statutory agencies to ensure that 
safeguarding children is prioritised. Any allegation, suspicion of harm or 
concern is taken seriously and responded to swiftly, fairly and appropriately. 
Our expert and experienced safeguarding team [which contains former policemen] 
has a very broad remit, covering 2,000 clubs, approximately 100,000 volunteers 
and around 500,000 children from under‑six to under-18 who participate in rugby.

“The issues and incidents they deal with, which fall into our definition of 
safeguarding, for example include foul and abusive language, allegations around 
peer on peer bullying, and physical assault allegations. Typically, we deal 
with around 140 incidents per year, of which a very small number relate to 
allegations concerning sexual incidents within rugby.”

The RFU has 900 safeguarding officers and Ritchie said that it has put 
processes in place to ensure that complaints are dealt with immediately. “The 
scale in football is shocking because every offence of this kind is distressing 
and distasteful, something you need to discourage,” he said. “It comes down to 
openness and accessibility and we have we got a system and process that is open 
for people bringing their concerns to us, as we should. I hope nobody would be 
discouraged from bringing those forward – quite the opposite – then we will 
deal with them in the appropriate, professional manner.”

Ritchie added there has been increased vigilance since the football 
revelations. “It is the classic what don’t you know over a 30-year period. We 
have been looking whether there is anything there but nothing has come up that 
I have been made aware of, or historical incidents that have not been 
investigated. It is a societal thing. You do as much as you can to prevent it 
happening and we are rigorous if we know something is happening to make sure it 
is investigated fully and that primarily moves into a matter for the police. We 
pass everything on we have.”
 