
England are refusing to make big financial concessions to their cash-strapped 
southern hemisphere rivals and will oppose the idea of sharing the vast 
revenues generated by autumn Twickenham internationals. Instead Ian Ritchie, 
the Rugby Football Union’s chief executive, has advised New Zealand and 
Australia to “go and build a bigger stadium” if they wish to boost their 
profits.

Chris Ashton hopes for England return despite 13-week ban for biting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/chris-ashton-hopes-england-return-13-week-ban-biting-saracens-rugby-union>
Ritchie is fully aware discussions are continuing regarding the global 
calendar beyond 2019 but has ruled out any changes to the financial “bedrocks” 
of the Six Nations and November Tests that have helped make the RFU the richest 
union in the world. He also points out New Zealand will retain all the revenue 
generated from the 2017 Lions tour and sees no reason to amend existing 
arrangements.

“I’m not sure I get this argument,” said Ritchie, stressing the northern 
hemisphere unions have all invested heavily in building bigger, better 
stadiums. “If we manage to sell out 82,000 here it’s because of our efforts and 
because we’ve invested in the stadium. If you look at the amount of money the 
RFU has spent on Twickenham … of course we should get a return on that. Of 
course they would say they want more money. There is nothing to stop Australia 
or New Zealand building a [bigger] stadium. Go and build a stadium if you want 
to increase your revenue growth. When we went to Australia in the summer we 
didn’t get anything out of that. I didn’t ask for a revenue share from 
Australia. And ditto from the Lions. So I don’t see why there is a particularly 
strong case for arguing the other way. I’ve not seen a lot of problems with 
their lack of sustainability in terms of our difficulties in beating southern 
hemisphere teams.”

Ritchie also denies any bust-up with his New Zealand counterpart Steve Tew 
regarding a possible fourth autumn Test between England and New Zealand at 
Twickenham in November next year, following the Lions tour. “We’ve never had a 
discussion or a fallout over money about having a fixture,” said Ritchie, 
suggesting England might no longer seek to pay visiting sides to play them 
outside the Test window as has been the case. “If you throw everything up in 
the air you might say: ‘Why would you pay that?’”

England injury list gives Eddie Jones chance to promote a likely lad or two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/england-injury-list-eddie-jones-autumn-international-squad>
As things stand, New Zealand are not scheduled to face England home or away 
before 2018, with Ritchie also pouring cold water on the notion of a unified 
global season. “As I understand it the southern hemisphere don’t want to play 
in [their] summer and neither do we, so bringing those calendars together 
becomes very difficult,” he said. “We still see rugby as a winter sport.”

England are looking at ways to increase the stock of English coaches capable 
of taking over when Eddie Jones departs as national coach. Ritchie expects 
Jones to step aside at the end of 2019 – “I’m working on that assumption 
because that’s what we based the deal on in the first place” – and is looking 
for “a seamless transition” involving English-born coaches who have operated 
outside the Premiership.

The RFU’s professional rugby director, Nigel Melville, hopes to liaise with 
the clubs to help give up-and-coming coaches more international experience, 
either with England’s age-group and Saxons squads, or overseas. “I think it’s 
been proved that just being a Premiership coach does not necessarily make you a 
good international coach,” Melville said. “We need to work together to develop 
the next generation of international coaches. There are some great young 
coaches out there who could be fantastic coaches in the future.”
 