
Bath say they will “ensure appropriate action is taken” after a supporter 
allegedly gained access to the officials’ dressing room and confronted the 
referee, Greg Garner, followingFriday night’s Aviva Premiership match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/01/bath-saracens-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 against Saracens.

Bath’s stance follows confirmation from the Rugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> that it has launched 
an investigation.

In a statement, Bath said: “Bath Rugby are aware of an incident involving the 
match officials which took place after the game againstSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> last night.

“In conjunction with the RFU and Premiership Rugby, the club is currently 
investigating the incident and will ensure appropriate action is taken.”

Garner had earlier sent off Bath’s England back Anthony Watson for a dangerous 
tackle on Saracens’ Alex Goode as the west country club crashed to a 30-10 home 
defeat.

It is understood that a male fan made his way into Garner’s room, which is 
situated close to the players’ changing rooms at the Recreation Ground.

“I can confirm that we are investigating,” an RFU spokesperson said.

Garner consulted television replays before showing a red card, but Watson was 
furious as he left the pitch, reacting in disbelief at the official’s decision 
and appearing to have words with the Saracens wing Chris Ashton, who had pushed 
him following his challenge on Goode and seemingly impeded him beforehand.

Speaking after the game, the Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> 
head coach, Mike Ford, said: “By the letter of the law, it is a sending off, 
isn’t it? He (Watson) got underneath Alex, and Alex landed awkwardly. You get 
underneath the guy jumping, take his legs away and he lands awkwardly like he 
did, it’s a red.

“Anthony is gutted. He was going for the ball, Ashton checked his run, and 
then all of a sudden he is underneath the player. It was an accident. We will 
have a look at it. We will fight his corner.”

And Watson also found an ally in the Saracens director of rugby, Mark McCall, 
who added: “The letter of the law says it is possibly a red card, but I feel 
sorry for Anthony because it was not intentional.

“His route to Alex was slightly disrupted by one of our players. He had to 
change course, he doesn’t time it well, but it was what it was. It didn’t 
change the course of the game.”

Ford and McCall, meanwhile, played straight bats to suggestions of two 
unconfirmed alleged gouging incidents during a second-half maul.

Ford said: “The mauls, if you have ever been in one, there are arms and 
fingers flying all over the place. I doubt very much there is anything untoward 
there.”

And McCall added: “I have come straight here (to the post-match press 
conference). I shouldn’t comment on something I haven’t seen.”
 