
Richard Cockerill, the Leicester director of rugby, has piled into the 
argument about the suitability of leading Premiership coaches for the senior 
England job, saying he has never received career-development advice from the
Rugby Football Union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> 
and claiming “knee-jerk” decisions are taken when a senior coaching vacancy 
arises at Twickenham.

England to select Nathan Hughes and Mike Williams for autumn Tests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/england-nathan-hughes-mike-williams-autumn-tests>
The RFU said this week that it would be reluctant to appoint a national head 
coach who has not worked abroad, prompting a strong reaction from several 
experienced Premiership figures. Cockerill also feels that those who achieve 
success in the intensely competitive world of English domestic rugby should not 
be seen as inferior operators. “I joined Leicester [as an academy coach] back 
in 2004 and I’ve had no help whatsoever from the RFU in terms of career 
development or coaching development,” Cockerill said. “I’ve just worked it out 
with my other coaches and players and found my own way to this point.

“I think there are quality coaches in the Premiership but it’s about how you 
help them. I don’t know if I can coach at Test level because I’ve never done 
it. But there is nobody within the RFU who is helping with that knowledge. 
Nobody from the union has spoken to me about it, ever. Nobody from the union – 
as far as I know – has every asked any of the coaches in the Premiership: ‘If 
an opportunity came in three years’ time, would you like to be part of the 
England set-up?’ Those conversations don’t happen. They just have a knee-jerk 
reaction when someone gets the sack, don’t they? Generally, that’s true.”

Cockerill, as it happens, has enjoyed a stint abroad with Clermont Auvergne 
but he is not convinced a southern hemisphere sojourn should be compulsory for 
aspiring coaches. “A lot of that stuff gets done by luck rather than judgment,” 
he said. “Do I have to go to Clermont or Toulouse or go and coach the Sunwolves 
to prove I can coach? I can understand the [RFU’s] preference is to have 
international experience but what exactly is international experience of 
coaching? [Sale’s] Steve Diamond should probably get it then because he’s 
coached Russia.”

Cockerill has no objection to the RFU appointing an Australian in Eddie Jones 
as national coach but he does wonder aloud if the RFU chief executive Ian 
Ritchie’s desire for an eventual successor to have overseas experience is 
entirely logical. “Ian Ritchie seems to have the question but he doesn’t seem 
to know the answer. He’s the chief exec of the union. Maybe he should have the 
answers,” Cockerill said.

“I don’t know what the RFU are doing to develop young English coaches, to take 
that next step. The impression I’ve been given is that, if you are an under-16, 
-18 or -20s coach at the RFU, from that group they will find the next person 
who will go through and coach England. But, generally, those are guys who have 
been sacked from the Premiership.

Premiership coaches unimpressed by RFU’s desire for overseas experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/premiership-coaches-rfu-overseas-experience>
“If it is purely results-based around the Premiership I have won the 
competition three times, so does that make me the right man to coach England? 
It might not. It depends what they want. Rob Baxter has done a great job 
coaching Exeter but does that mean he is the right man? We won’t know until he 
steps up into that role. The Premiership is so intense there’s not much time – 
apart from the odd summer tour – to take a Premiership coach and give them 
international experience. But what is international experience? I am dealing 
with international players all the time. We are all coaching international 
players.”

Northampton and Exeter will welcome back their respective England 
internationals Calum Clark and Jack Nowell when the two clubs meet in the 
Premiership at Franklin’s Garden on Friday evening. Saracens’s England lock 
George Kruis is also fit enough to return to his side’s second-row against 
Bristol at Ashton Gate.
 