
Richard Cockerill has joined the three-times European Cup winners Toulon’s 
coaching staff, just four days after being sacked byLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>. The former England hooker 
has joined the Top 14 giants on a deal to run until the end of the season, at 
the request of their head coach, Mike Ford.

Wales give Leigh Halfpenny deadline over national dual contract offer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/wales-leigh-halfpenny-deadline-national-dual-contract-offer-cardiff-blues-toulon-rugby-union>
Leicester sacked Cockerill on Monday, bringing to an end a six-year stint as 
director of rugby at Welford Road.

The former Bath coach Ford has moved quickly to secure Cockerill’s services 
despite Leicester’s board axing the 46-year-old to seek a fresh coaching 
figurehead.

A statement from Toulon said: “At the request of our manager Mike Ford and 
with the agreement of all the staff of the Rugby ClubToulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon>, Richard Cockerill will reinforce 
the staff of the first team of the club in the coming days as a rugby 
consultant until the end of the season.

“Richard Cockerill, who coached the Leicester Tigers from 2005 to January 2017 
as the forwards coach and then as the senior coach, will work under the 
authority of Mike Ford and in co-operation with forwards coach Marc Dal Maso 
and skills coach Steve Meehan.”

Toulon sit sixth in the Top 14 table and Ford has seized the chance to bring 
in Cockerill, in a bid to drive the Cote d’Azur club up the standings in France.

The owner, Mourad Boudjellal, will expect a higher league position from his 
side, and Ford will hope Cockerill can add a renewed impetus to their campaign.

Leicester have installed their head coach, Aaron Mauger, in interim charge at 
Welford Road until the end of the season while they hunt a new director of 
rugby. Former England bosses Stuart Lancaster and Martin Johnson are in the 
frame to take the Leicester helm, while the former South Africa coach Heyneke 
Meyer is also in the running.

England’s current head coach, Eddie Jones. earlier this week refused to rule 
out adding Cockerill to his backroom staff and immediate demand for the former 
Leicester front rower’s services have now yielded this Toulon switch.
 