
As recently as Christmas Eve Richard Cockerill was still convinced there would 
be a happy end to Leicester’s season. “I’m not sure it’s all doom and gloom,” 
he said, fixing his inquisitors with his trademark piercing stare. “We’re fifth 
at the halfway stage of the season and I’d back ourselves to be in the 
play-offs.” His latter prediction may yet come true but Cockerill will not be 
the coach who makes it happen.

It is always slightly depressing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-part-company-richard-cockerill>
 when a loyal club servant reaches the end of the road. Like dogs and their 
owners, rugby clubs and their coaches start to reflect each other over time and 
the Tigers may miss the faithful, boisterous “Cockers” more than they realise. 
It is almost exactly 25 years since the former England hooker first arrived at 
Welford Road as a player and barring a two-year stint with Montferrand in 
France, he has been loyal to a fault.

Richard Cockerill ‘sadness’ after being sacked by Leicester Tigers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-part-company-richard-cockerill>
If nothing else a Cockerill team would always be feisty, tough to beat at home 
and on their best days, capable of seeing off anyone. The problem for 
Cockerill, in the end, was thatLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> have been hitting those 
high spots sporadically. It is 15 years since they won the European Cup and, 
assuming they draw another blank in this season’s Premiership, they will have 
won the domestic title once in their past seven attempts. For a side with 
Leicester’s trophy-laden heritage, that is simply not good enough.

Anyone who witnessed the Tigers’ heavy defeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/munster-leicester-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 at Glasgow, Munster and Exeter this season could also hardly fail to notice 
the grim, thousand-yard stares of the club’s hierarchy at every final whistle. 
These are men who seriously hate losing, particularly against teams who have 
prospered lately while they have been treading water. No club in Europe has 
higher expectations and the expert manner in which a head coach likeEddie Jones 
has transformed England’s fortunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
 inside 12 months will also have hardened attitudes. Leicester is a wonderful 
location to coach when the home team win but it is an unforgiving place when 
results go awry.

In that regard Cockerill did well to survive for the amount of time he did. 
Neither Marcello Loffreda or Heyneke Meyer lasted long, unable to transform a 
setup that, for years, was allergic to change. Cockerill admitted as much to 
the Guardian last April: “Two or three years ago that probably was my mentality 
… this is what we do, this is how we do it and if you don’t fit in, tough.” The 
clannishness that made Leicester unbeatable in their heyday had started to 
become their achilles heel.

In fairness to Cockerill, he ceased to be a lucky general some time ago. The 
injury list has been grim, with high‑profile overseas signings Matt Toomua and 
JP Pietersen, and the talismanic Manu Tuilagi, among the most obvious 
casualties. Other English sides, notably Saracens, Wasps and Bath, have been 
splashing more cash and Tigers have won only one knockout match at the sharp 
end of Europe since the summer of 2009.

The board had already moved to remedy that situation by recruiting the more 
creative-minded Aaron Mauger but that marriage, promising on paper, has not 
worked out as hoped. There have been mutterings of mixed messages, not helped 
by the fact that a suspiciously high number of players have left Welford Road 
to prosper elsewhere. Cockerill can be great company but not every former 
employee posts him a Christmas card.

What happens next will be pruriently fascinating. Mauger has been placed in 
interim charge but what if results do not pick up swiftly? Leicester face Wasps 
in Coventry this Sunday and, with traditional Midlands’ certainties suddenly 
null and void, there must be at least a possibility of another flogging. 
European qualification feels highly unlikely and the Six Nations period will 
rob the club of key England men such as Dan Cole and Ben Youngs.

Maybe that is why the board acted slightly quicker than expected in parting 
company with Cockerill, in an attempt to buy everyone else a bit more time and 
avert total meltdown. Ironically, Leicester performed decently in several 
respects against Saracens, exhibiting no shortage of heart and effort, but 
there is little doubt they need an injection of fresh inspiration from 
somewhere.

It makes the club’s latest managerial rejig crucial: do they look abroad as 
Munster have successfully done with Rassie Erasmus or do they revert togot for 
another of their own? Paul Gustard, Graham Rowntree, Dean Richards, John Wells, 
Martin Johnson, Clive Woodward … the list of former local heroes with 
experience of top-level coaching is lengthy. While half of the above will not 
be remotely interested, it is a indication of the times that all options will 
be painstakingly sifted. Cockerill’s immediate coaching future is uncertain – 
Northampton anyone? – but the Tigers’ next move is even harder to predict.
 