
First, a confession: in principle, I’m not against right to buy. The idea as 
sold, to allow people to buy their homes and use the revenue raised to build 
more housing, seems a no-brainer.

But in practice, it is very far from a no-brainer and the implementation has 
been particularly brainless. From the start, the discount was too high, raised 
higher still by the Conservatives in the last term of parliament, and 
right-to-buy replacement has always been painfully low.

The way right to buy should work is to sell homes while building more council 
housing, resulting in a net increase in the overall homes in Britain; instead 
it has made no difference to how many houses we have for families to live in, 
while flogging off national assets at below market value.

But still the social housing fire sale continues apace, with the Conservatives 
pushing the extension of right to buy with housing association tenants. This 
week,analysis by the Local Government Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/11/right-to-buy-reform-urged-as-council-leaders-fear-for-social-housing>
 (LGA) showed that 12,246 council homes in England were sold to tenants under 
right to buy in 2015-16, but only 2,055 replacements were started by councils – 
a drop of 27% on the previous year. The appetite for buying homes cheap in the 
midst of a housing crisis is unsurprisingly strong, but Britain’s capacity to 
build isn’t, and with receipts from the forced sale of high value council homes 
going directly to the Treasury, rather than council coffers, it’s impossible to 
raise the money to build. The policy is now, more than ever, a stake in the 
heart of social housing.

Right-to-buy reform urged as council leaders fear for social housing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/11/right-to-buy-reform-urged-as-council-leaders-fear-for-social-housing>
In his last budget, former chancellor George Osborne made it clear that the 
focus for housebuilding would fall to the private sector: incentives for big 
developers to build homes for first time buyers were to take the place of 
revenue for councils and housing associations to build. Councils have long 
called for the cap to be lifted on borrowing for housebuilding, a policy Labour 
supports, but this is n0t how the government wants to see homes built.

The LGA report also points out the sharp fall in the number of people living 
in council housing: 2m properties have been sold by councils in England since 
the early 1980s, and the proportion of homes that are social housing has fallen 
from 31% to 17% – from one in three households, to one in six. Has this 
resulted in a big rise in homeownership? Not at all – last weeka report by the 
Resolution Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/home-ownership-in-england-at-lowest-level-in-30-years-as-housing-crisis-grows>
 revealed homeownership was at its lowest level for 30 years. In many areas 
private renting has boomed, offering a much more precarious and often expensive 
alternative to the long term stability and below market rents of council 
housing. This will only worsen as the great council housing sell-off continues: 
the LGA expects 66,000 council homes to be sold to tenants by 2020, and most 
will not be replaced by councils.

The government’s response is to continue claiming right-to-buy sales will be 
replaced on a one for one basis. But this has never happened, and is absolutely 
not happening now. The hurdles placed in front of councils, as well as the 
forced sale of high value homes for the Treasury’s gain, simply place councils 
over a barrel. The Conservatives know full well that right to buy depletes 
council housing stock and will not be replaced like for like: but their disdain 
for the concept of housing that isn’t for profit, and an ideological commitment 
to destroying social housing, means ministers are happy to continue claiming, 
against all evidence, that we are not, and will not see a net loss of social 
housing.

As with the bedroom tax, a policy that offers none of the gains proponents 
promised, but unleashes misery on poor, disabled and vulnerable people, the 
Conservatives won’t admit they were wrong: because this is an ideological 
battle. If, on the surface, the purported aims of a policy aren’t being met, 
that matters not one jot – behind the scenes, everything’s running swimmingly. 
Osborne preached austerity to the end, while time and again offering balance 
sheets that showed his policies weren’t going to plan. But ultimately we saw 
privileging of the interests of the top 1%, a group that encompasses many 
high-ranking Conservatives, while demonising and entrenching poverty. In the 
long term, both the bedroom tax and right to buy do the same – Theresa May’s 
leap to power may see the end of “compassionate conservatism”, at least on the 
surface, and the party admitting their aims instead.

Join the Guardian Housing Network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/>to read more pieces like 
this and follow us on Twitter@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing> to keep up with the latest social housing 
insight and analysis.
 