
Rob Baxter insists Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> must look 
at their Bath opponents on Sunday to see the ingredients missing from their own 
game this season.

Successive defeats in Europe have all but ended the Chiefs’ hopes of reaching 
the Champions Cup quarter-finals, while on the domestic front they have posted 
two victories in six outings.

Last season they reached the knockout stage of both competitions, but Baxter 
knows Exeter have lacked intensity this term. “Bath have a lot of resilience 
and that is a great quality to have – probably the quality we have lacked this 
season, if we are honest with ourselves,” he said.

Rugby connoisseurs yearning for perfect No10 are given hint of a renaissance | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/rugby-connoisseurs-perfect-no10-renaissance-beauden-barrett-owen-farrell-nick-evans>
“You can see they look very confident in themselves and that is often the best 
indicator of a team. They are happy to play effective rugby and don’t feel they 
have to play end-to-end stuff.”

A last-gasp 19-18 defeat by Ulster last Saturday has convinced Baxter, 
however, that Exeter are nudging themselves back on track. “We’re seeing the 
team improve bit by bit,” he said.

“As a team I want us to take lots of little steps over the course of this 
season and not talk about all of a sudden there needs to be some kind of 
miracle because sport is not like that. What we have to be prepared to do is 
work very hard and take lots of little steps, not just as individuals, but as a 
team.

“Ulster was an intense game of Champions Cup rugby, which it went right to the 
wire. That shows how close we are. You always want accuracy, but the key 
foundations of us being a bit angry and a bit intense were there whereas they 
weren’t the week before.”

Bath, the beaten Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> 
finalists in 2015, have been reborn under their new head coach, Todd 
Blackadder, and among the reasons behind their success has been the form of the 
wing Semesa Rokoduguni. “Rocco is one of those x-factor players, but he’s smart 
and intelligent as well,” Blackadder said. “He’s a mature guy so he’s not going 
to do anything erratic. He can stay within systems on attack and within systems 
on defence. Rocco’s lightning quick and he’s got the best feet I’ve ever seen. 
If you give him a little bit of open space he’s going to finish.”

In the two other fixtures on Sunday, Wasps host Newcastle and Sale visit 
Bristol. 
 