
Wales are not masters of disguise, but selling a profound shift in emphasis in 
their selection for the team to face Argentina in Cardiff on Saturday as a 
defensive move is subterfuge.

They have conceded 26 tries in their past five Tests, which all resulted in 
defeat, and their predictable attacking game has not been able to compensate. 
By dropping the centre Jamie Roberts and the flanker Dan Lydiate, two players 
who were central figures in Wales’s power game that took them to the World Cup 
semi-final in 2011 and a grand slam five months later, Wales’s interim head 
coach, Robert Howley, standing in for Warren Gatland, has taken a significant 
change in direction.

Wales’s style became known as Warrenball, a pejorative term they felt was 
simplistic. Roberts, an imposing midfielder with the height and weight of a 
second row not too many years ago, was central to it, storming his way over the 
gainline and taking out defenders. There was no subtlety and no desire to 
unlock his creative ability because it worked, at least against European sides.

The 2011 World Cup quarter-final against Ireland in Wellington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/08/rugby-world-cup-wales-ireland> 
showed how crucial Roberts and Lydiate were to the strategy, the former running 
hard straight lines, making particular progress from top of the line-out ball 
when he was able to get into his stride, and the latter tackling ball-carriers 
low and felling them before they could make ground.

Lydiate’s strength is seen as more of a weakness now with sides more prepared 
to off-load. Defence is his forte, rather than ball-carrying and passing, and 
as Wales look for multidimensional players as the international game speeds up 
and slowing down opposition ball at the breakdown becomes more hazardous, he 
and Roberts, having done all that was asked and expected of them, are victims 
of evolution.

While Howley pointed to the first half against Australia last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
, when Wales had little ball and even less territory, as the trigger for 
change, but events in Chicago a few hours later also had an influence.Ireland 
defeated New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 for the first time by taking the game to them rather than looking to grind 
them down and pointing the way for the Lions next year, in marked contrast to 
how the tourists won the series in Australia in 2013, Warrenball’s acme.

By replacing Roberts with Scott Williams, who started at 13 against Australia 
in the absence of Jonathan Davies, who is fit again, Wales will lose little 
physically in defence but they will have a midfielder with a softer touch in 
attack. The change will ask questions of the outside-half Dan Biggar, who with 
Roberts outside him rarely attacked the line, but stood deeper and when not 
kicking the ball, gave it to Roberts or a forward to charge up.

Greig Laidlaw warns Scotland not to focus on getting revenge on Wallabies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/greig-laidlaw-scotland-revenge-wallabies-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
If Wales’s attacking game is to bloom, Biggar needs to offer more of a running 
threat and hold a defender or two. Howley has made other tweaks with Liam 
Williams returning on the wing rather than at full-back from where he 
counter-attacked so productively in the first Test against New Zealand last 
June,, Sam Warburton replacing Lydiate to give Wales two open-side flankers 
against opponents who take risks in their own half, and at tight-head prop 
Tomas Francis runs with the ball more than Samson Lee.

Howley said it was a team for Argentina, implying a step back may be taken at 
the end of the month when South Africa are in Cardiff, but it is also about 
retaining the physical edge Wales have had for the past eight years while 
adding to it. It does not mean that Wales will look to take on Argentina at 
their own game but seize the moment by playing what is in front of them.

Warburton’s return, together with that of the second row Alun Wyn Jones, will 
add to the leadership of the side that was so lacking a week ago. As the game 
slipped from them and little worked, the players needed the refuge of the 
dressing room at the interval to work out how to solve problems.

Argentina should be looking to come up with the unexpected against a side that 
does not live off its wits, but they are wedded to the free-flowing style 
introduced by their head coach, Daniel Hourcade three years ago.

It has brought them notable successes, not least the World Cup quarter-final 
victory over Ireland in Cardiff last year, but it has cost them.

They lost to Australia in the semi-final after they were caught too often in 
possession in their own half and either being turned over or intercepted, a 
failing that cost them against the Wallabies last month at Twickenham. “We are 
capable of playing anywhere on the field, but we are taking some bad 
decisions,” Hourcade said. “That is down to a lack of experience, but I prefer 
to have those type of mistakes. It is only a matter of time before we get it 
right.” Wales would like to say the same.
 