
Being compared with Jason Leonard is not necessarily every young girl’s dream. 
For Rochelle Clark, though, there is no bigger honour than to draw up alongside 
the legendary prop as the most capped England rugby player, male or female, of 
all time. “It’s great to have my name associated with the ‘Fun Bus’,” 
acknowledges the 35-year-old Clark before her record-equalling 114th cap 
against France on Wednesday.

A few minutes with “Rocky” is an education. This is a woman who turned up 24kg 
lighter for her third cap than for her second – just think about that for a 
second – and has played Test rugby for 14 years with no sign of calling it a 
day. Few female athletes in their mid-30s would even contemplate turning 
professional, as Clark is finally doing this season.

In a perfect world she would continue playing loosehead prop for England until 
she is close to 40, win another World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/england-win-womens-world-cup-canada-match-report>
 and then go on to coach in the men’s game at a high level. Behind her glasses 
at the Hog’s Back hotel near Farnham on Monday, the competitive glint in her 
eye is unmissable: “They’ll have to take me away kicking and screaming 
probably. I’m still as hungry and passionate as I was 13 years ago. It’s still 
burning strong. I eat, sleep and breathe rugby.”

England’s Ben Youngs seeks overdue victory against bruising South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/england-south-africa-ben-youngs-south-africa>
The brilliance of Clark, in short, is twofold. She is a role model for every 
teenage girl who has ever stood on a touchline and thought about giving the 
sport a go. In Clark’s case a team in Beaconsfield were short of players and 
she found herself, aged 15, participating in a totally alien game. “I didn’t 
even know women’s rugby existed. I absolutely loved it and never looked back.”

Perhaps more significantly she is an inspiration to all in terms of 
self-discipline and commitment, having run on to the field for her first couple 
of caps in 2003 weighing 109kg, as opposed to her current 85kg. “I’d just sort 
of bumbled around before. I’d be eating a Caesar salad and thinking: ‘It’s 
salad, it’s healthy,’ but forgetting about the fried croutons, the sauce and 
the bacon.”

Sausages and mash were her favourite. “I used to love having four sausages and 
a massive mound of mash. I just liked volume then.”

Ah, the good old days. It makes the remodelled Clark the perfect individual to 
reflect on the cultural revolution sweeping through women’s rugby. For the 
first time 29 professional contracts have been awarded to England’s 15-a-side 
women’s players, following the example of sevens. It is a game-changer that 
should have a significant trickle-down effect on the women’s club game, both in 
terms of standards and interest.

Anyone who saw the Australia women’s sevens team’s exhilarating slaughter of 
New Zealandin the Olympic final in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympics-rugby-sevens-australian-women-win-gold-against-new-zealand>
 will already be aware of the spectacular ability of the world’s top female 
flyers. But therein lies the conundrum: sevens is a perfect promotional vehicle 
for women’s rugby, possibly to the long-term detriment of the 15-a-side game.

The Rugby Football Union opted to try to fudge the issue temporarily by 
sending its most experienced 15-a-side backs away to the sevens circuit. Sadly, 
when it came to it in Rio, the GB squad located few rainbows never mind pots of 
gold medals. Too many looked what they were: players not entirely suited to the 
shorter format. In their absence the England 15-a-side team regressed without 
their senior figures, prompting widespread muttering all round.

Hence this autumn’s much-trumpeted new era, with the national side rebranded 
as the Red Roses and Emily Scarratt, Katy McLean and Danielle Waterman back in 
the fold before the World Cup in Dublin and Belfast next August. Clark, for 
whom sevens was never a realistic option, could hardly be more thrilled. “I’m 
really happy I was part of the amateur era but so thankful I’m part of the 
professional bit now. Having to have a professional attitude has probably 
elongated my career. You can’t hide or just flop on to rucks. If you look at 
old team photos there were a few round edges back in 2003. Compared with 2016 
you struggle to recognise which one is me.”

In 10 to 15 years the chances are people will look back and be similarly taken 
aback. Clark, for one, reckons the women’s game is heading for a whole new 
level. “The game has already grown massively since I first started. You get so 
many players coming along now who have seen women’s rugby and are really 
inspired. For me the World Cup is bigger than the Olympics but that might be 
different for younger players coming through. The game is going to split and 
you will have sevens specialists, as the men do. I assume club rugby will 
eventually go professional as well. We’re probably 15 years behind the guys but 
I think we’re going to rise quite steeply.”

Extending her own playing career as a fully fledged professional will 
temporarily put a brake on Clark’s coaching ambitions with the mens’ team at 
Chesham Stags and Bucks New University in High Wycombe; she has also been 
driving from Buckinghamshire to Worcester two or three times a week to train 
and play club rugby. She has a degree in sports science, an MBE for services to 
rugby and is hoping to pass her level four coaching qualification; if and when 
she overhauls Leonard and the Scottish women’s world record-holder Donna 
Kennedy, who won 115 caps, it will be due reward for her remarkable 
perseverance. As Leonard rightly puts it: “She’s an inspiration to everyone in 
rugby, not just women and girls coming through.”

A penny for her thoughts, then, if she comes on as a replacement against 
France. “I’ll be reminded of running out for my 100th cap at Twickenham. That 
was so special. They put the lights on me, I ran out first and everyone in the 
crowd had these ‘Rocky’ masks which was pretty cool. But I’ll also be thinking 
of team-mates who have helped me get to where I have … unsung heroes like Amy 
Garnett, Sophie Hemming, Ness Gray and our former coach Graham Smith. I just 
want to do the jersey proud.”

And when Leonard buys her a drink afterwards, what’s her order? “It won’t be 
that exciting. Probably just a pint of lager. I’m a pretty simple girl.”

Born in the USA

The knock-on effects of Ireland’s outstanding win over New Zealand in Chicago 
will be fascinating. If Ireland were to complete a double over the All Blacks 
in Dublin on Saturday week, for example, selection for next year’s British and 
Irish Lions tour will assume a very different hue. CJ Stander, Devin Toner, 
Robbie Henshaw, Tadhg Furlong, Jack McGrath, Joey Carbery … on this evidence 
there could be plenty more Irish Lions to accompany certainties like Conor 
Murray and Johnny Sexton. Wales, in contrast, will need to bounce back swiftly 
against Argentina to disprove the theory they are a team who have suddenly hit 
a brick wall. Scotland and England, similarly, now have no excuse for kicking 
off their autumn campaigns sluggishly. Ireland have done the whole of world 
rugby a good turn.

And another thing …

The ejection of Andy Robinson from his director of rugby role at Bristol 
follows hard on the heels of Alex King’s departure as Northampton’s backs 
coach. There is increasingly little patience – or mercy – shown when 
Premiership sides fail to deliver, as Mike Ford also discovered at Bath last 
season. There is another recurring trend – if in doubt, go and recruit from the 
southern hemisphere. When was the last time a Premiership club appointed a 
young, innovative English coach to head up its operations rather than look 
abroad? With Dean Ryan no longer at Worcester, the only English-qualified head 
honchos left in the Premiership are John Kingston, Steve Diamond, Dean 
Richards, Rob Baxter, Richard Cockerill and Jim Mallinder. None of them are 
under the age of 45. The top three sides in the league are guided by an 
Ulsterman, a Welshman and a Kiwi. If Bristol simply look to South Africa for 
their next coach that is absolutely their prerogative but it will be a further 
blow to the increasingly battered esteem of English-reared coaching.
 