
Tupac Shakur’s election yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/20/tupac-shakur-yes-and-elo-join-the-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame>
 to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame was well deserved. Though only five rap acts 
had previously been inducted, Tupac not only deserved enshrinement, he deserved 
it more than any other rapper.

You can be sure, however, that there will be more complaints from the peanut 
gallery that rap doesn’t belong, like last year fromKiss’s Gene Simmons, after 
NWA gained entry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/12/gene-simmons-attacks-nwa-induction-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-led-zep>
. NWA member Ice Cube responded eloquently to this criticism, noting that 
“Rock’n’roll is a spirit … It’s been going since the blues, jazz, bebop, soul, 
R&B, rock’n’roll, heavy metal, punk rock and, yes, hip-hop.” The hall agreed 
with this sentiment enough to post it on theirinduction page 
<https://www.rockhall.com/inductees/induction-process>. 

Tupac Shakur, Yes and ELO join the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/20/tupac-shakur-yes-and-elo-join-the-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame>
Tupac’s election was even more worthy than NWA’s. His influence over the genre 
and his worldwide popularity are practically unmatched. He maintains arguably 
the most passionate following in hip-hop, two decades after his murder in a Las 
Vegas drive-by shooting.

Much of this is because his social message continues to resonate. In many of 
his songs, he sought to unify and uplift African Americans. His 1994 track Dear 
Mama, for example, glorified his mother – and black women everywhere, even 
those caught in desperate circumstances. “Even as a crack fiend, mama / You 
always was a black queen, mama,” he rapped.

Before Black Lives Matter, Tupac called out racism and police injustice on 
songs such as 1991’s Trapped about predatory cops. He also advocated for 
self-improvement in black communities. “Let’s change the way we live, let’s 
change the way we eat, let’s change the way we treat each other,” he said on 
his posthumous 1998 track Changes.

Born to two members of the Black Panther Party, he sympathetically portrayed 
African Americans in his music – not just obvious do-gooders, but gang members, 
thieves and even, famously, a 12-year-old girl who dumped her baby in a trash 
compactor after being impregnated by her cousin, in Brenda’s Got a Baby.

Tupac’s messages inspired millions: an entire generation of rap fans, and 
another after that. Today, many of his most fervent supporters weren’t yet born 
at the time of his death. His influence on other hip-hop artists, meanwhile, 
has been just as significant, making him perhaps the most widely copied rapper 
in history. His influence is most easily detected in hard-edged rappers with a 
conscience such as The Game, Freddie Gibbs and Kendrick Lamar. The latter is 
the leader of a new crop of west coast rappers, and his 2015 album To Pimp a 
Butterfly features a “conversation” between Lamar and Tupac, stitched together 
from an old interview.

Yet Tupac remains a divisive figure, largely owing to his association with the 
controversial Los Angeles record label Death Row. Its leader, Suge Knight, is 
accused of ratcheting up rap music violence – both on records and in real life 
– and is currently jailed oncharges of committing a 2015 murder in Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/02/suge-knight-murder-accident-straight-outta-compton>
. Death Row signed Tupac in 1995, one year before his death, helping secure his 
release from an upstate New York prison, where he was awaiting appeal on 
charges of sexual abuse.

And during his time with Death Row, Tupac’s music grew increasingly sinister. 
During this time he initiated the dispute known as the east coast-west coast 
beef, which ultimately culminated in his and Biggie Smalls’ still-unsolved 
murders. But this period of Tupac’s life shouldn’t overshadow his considerable 
achievements as an artist. Indeed, many members of the Rock and Roll Hall of 
Fame have engaged in unsavory behavior, from Jerry Lee Lewis’s marriage to a 
13-year-old to domestic violence allegations against James Brown.

New film reveals detective's findings in murders of Tupac and Notorious BIG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/27/tupac-notorious-big-murder-rap-documentary-police-investigation>
Yet even within hip-hop, Tupac is controversial. Fans of east coast rap – who 
applaud dizzying wordplay and formality of craft – tend not to pick him among 
the greatest of the genre, preferring instead New York artists such as Jay Z, 
Nas, Rakim and Biggie. Biggie, of course, is the rapper to whom Tupac is most 
often compared. Because they were popular around the same time, and killed 
within six months of each other, they’ve been pitted against each other in the 
popular imagination ever since.

Biggie will be up for induction in three years. From a technical perspective, 
he was magnificent. Nobody could spit a verse with more authority – and his 
timing, cadence and delivery were pitch perfect. For these reasons, he deserves 
induction to the hall of fame, too – just not as much as Tupac.

After all, music is about more than technical virtuosity. If it weren’t, then 
guitarist Yngwie Malmsteen or Rush drummer Neil Peart would be considered among 
the most important rockers. Tupac’s appeal lies in his lyrics, his artistry, 
his passion and the activism that spilled over from his real life into his 
music. His popularity has long outstripped that of Biggie – as well as the 
other New York rappers mentioned above – both in terms of record sales (he’s 
sold twice as many albums as Biggie) and passionate fandom worldwide. You’ll 
find Tupac’s music blasting out of shanty towns from South America to the South 
Pacific. The Democratic Republic of the Congo soldiers and Ivory Coast rebels 
have worn gear adorned with Tupac images, as did a Sierra Leone rebel army.

Tupac deserves mention among the most influential and enduring pop artists in 
history, in the same breath as Elvis, the Beatles, Bob Dylan, Madonna and 
Michael Jackson. And when it comes to inspiring struggling people around the 
world, he has absolutely no peer.
 