
British police have come under fire for their role in training Bahrain’s 
police force, which has been accused of ruthlessly suppressing public protests 
and dissent.

A confidential 27-page “agreement for the provision of services”, obtained by 
theObserver, was signed on 14 June 2015 by the UK’s College of Policing and 
Bahrain’s Ministry of Interior. It spells out the explicitly commercial nature 
of the relationship between the two parties, but omits any mention of human 
rights issues.

Since it was created in 2012, the college has earned more than £8.5m from its 
international work, but has faced questions about its remit. Parliament’s home 
affairs select committee recently criticised the college’s overseas training 
programme, claiming that “opaque” agreements with foreign governments, which 
have been criticised for human rights abuses, “threaten the integrity of the 
very brand of British policing that the college is trying to promote”.

Bahrain paying for Royal Navy base despite human rights criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/bahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism>
The committee attacked the Foreign Office’s refusal to divulge such contracts 
on the grounds of commercial sensitivity as “completely unacceptable”.

Now a law firm acting on behalf of a Bahraini activist allegedly tortured by 
the country’s security services has written to the Foreign Office, claiming 
that the nature of the agreement withBahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> raises concerns about the UK’s 
commitment to protecting human rights.

Daniel Carey, of DPG Law, said the government needed to give reassurances that 
the college was not providing assistance to the kingdom’s security forces that 
could undermine the UK’s commitment to human rights. “We know the college 
provides a wide range of training programmes domestically that are of potential 
concern, such as the use of communications data obtained by telecoms operators, 
the use of interception material, surveillance and undercover policing, and the 
scope of its courses to overseas customers is not limited in any accountable 
way," said Carey.

He also questioned whether the college was a legitimate entity. “The College 
of Policing is doing something unusual for government in selling services 
overseas. It is a company limited by guarantee set up by the Home Office. 
Whether government ministers have the power to set up bodies effectively 
external to their own department through which they then run profit-making 
activities is a difficult question of constitutional law. The much safer course 
is to get parliament’s authority, which didn’t happen here.”

The Foreign Office insists that all international work undertaken by the 
college is referred to the International Policing Assistance Board, which 
examines any potential impact on the UK’s commitment to human rights. It is 
understood that all sub-contracts governed by the umbrella agreement have 
built-in clauses referring to human rights.

If anything, abuses at the hands of Bahraini police have increased in 2016 
amid a culture of impunity
Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy 
A spokeswoman for the Foreign Office said: “It is not good enough to merely 
criticise other countries from the sidelines. Only by working with Bahrain are 
we able to bring about the changes we would like to see in the country. The UK 
is working closely with the government of Bahrain to provide extensive reform 
assistance focused on strengthening human rights and the rule of law. We see 
this support as the most constructive way to achieve long-lasting and 
sustainable reform in Bahrain.”

But Carey said the omission of human rights in the agreement was significant: 
“The agreement cedes a lot of control to the Bahrain government to pick and 
choose the areas it would like training on. It provides for all of the other 
controls you would expect: freedom of information;force majeure; 
confidentiality; intellectual property; termination; bribery. Why not human 
rights? Saying that this will be slipped into a subcontract does not seem to be 
an effective way to protect against human rights risks, especially after 
resisting disclosure of any of these details to a parliamentary committee.”

Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, director of advocacy at the Bahrain Institute for Rights 
and Democracy, called for the UK to end the commercial relationship between the 
college and Bahrain’s Ministry of Interior. “We have continued to document 
widespread and systemic rights violations committed by the Bahraini police 
throughout this training, which started in 2013,” he said.

“If anything, abuses at the hands of the police have increased in 2016, amid a 
culture of impunity and a lack of transparency from both British and Bahraini 
institutions. As a result, the training has done little more than legitimise 
the status quo. Over the past few months, Bahrain has let go of all pretences 
of reform by cracking down on peaceful demonstrations, torturing detainees and 
arresting anyone with a critical voice.”
 