
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> has 
appointed the senior City lawyer investigating the Conservative party's 
cash-for-access scandal to review its anti-corruption procedures following 
bribery allegations involving the aircraft engine manufacturer in Indonesia and 
China.

Lord Gold, a conservative peer and former head of litigation at City law firm 
Herbert Smith is to lead a review of the industrial group's compliance 
procedures after claims about its conduct in emerging markets. Lord Gold has a 
track record in scrutinising allegations of illicit practices at organisations, 
having been appointed by David Cameron last year to investigate the 
Conservative party's fundraising methods after the then party co-treasurer, 
Peter Cruddas, was filmed boasting that senior donors could dine with the prime 
minister.

Rolls-Royce's guidelines are in the spotlight after the group admitted last 
month that it was investigating allegations of malpractice in China,Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> and other unspecified overseas 
markets. The allegations were first brought to the attention of the Derby-based 
group by the Serious Fraud Office.

At the time of the announcement Rolls-Royce emphasised its co-operation with 
the SFO, pointedly condemning any "improper business conduct of any sort". 
However, a former Rolls-Royce employee who blew the whistle on the Indonesian 
allegations, Dick Taylor, said the claims were "just one example" of corruption 
at his former employer, adding that some cases of malpractice took place as 
late as 2010.

Announcing the appointment of Lord Gold, Rolls-Royce said: "He is one of the 
UK's most senior litigators and has extensive experience working at the highest 
levels with corporations, governments and regulators around the world." Having 
left Herbert Smith after 37 years, including a spell as its senior partner 
between 2005 and 2010, Lord Gold set up David Gold & Associates, which is 
advertised on its website as a provider of "high-level strategic litigation 
advice, particularly in relation to settlement".

According to the website, Gold's pedigree includes working with the US 
Department of Justice as "corporate monitor" of BAE Systems, the UK defence 
contractor that has also faced corruption allegations in emerging markets.

Rolls-Royce said last month that it had appointed an external law firm, 
Debevoise & Plimpton, to conduct its own investigation into the concerns raised 
by the SFO. The group said the inquiry had found "matters of concern" in 
Indonesia,China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and other unspecified 
markets. The SFO has yet to declare whether it will launch a formal 
investigation.

However, in the meantime, allegations related to Rolls-Royce's conduct in 
China and Indonesia have emerged on the internet, comprised of postings by 
Taylor and an anonymous blogger operating under the pseudonym "Soaringdragon". 
Taylor had alleged that that Tommy Suharto, the son of the former Indonesian 
president, was paid $20m (£12m) by Rolls-Royce and given a Rolls-Royce car to 
persuade the Garuda airline to procure Trent 700 engines in 1990. Soaringdragon 
claimed that it paid that it paid bribes to an executive involved with two 
Chinese airlines, related to deals worth a total of $2bn (£1.25bn) with Air 
China in 2005 and China Eastern in 2010.

Speaking last month, the Rolls-Royce chief executive, John Rishton, said: "I 
want to make it crystal clear that neither I nor the board will tolerate 
improper business conduct of any sort and will take all necessary action to 
ensure compliance. This is a company with exceptional prospects and I will not 
accept any behaviour that undermines its future success."
 