
The chief executive of Rolls-Royce, which is under investigation by the 
Serious Fraud Office over bribery allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/sfo-expands-rolls-royce-inquiry-over-iraq-bribery-allegations>
, has said winning business ethically plays a key role in his plans for future 
growth.

Warren East said the Derby-based engineering group was focusing on securing 
contracts legitimately.

“We are spending time training people and making sure everyone understands 
there is a right way to do business,” he said. “We are keeping training up to 
date, and steps have been taken to ensure there is a zero tolerance policy to 
unethical behaviour.”

Rolls-Royce, which sells turbines and engines for passenger jets and military 
aircraft, has beenaccused of hiring a network of agents to help it land 
lucrative contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/rolls-royce-middlemen-may-have-used-bribes-to-land-major-contracts>
. East told the Guardian that the FTSE 100 company was committed to winning 
business by fair means.

“I think if we can win with really good products and good service and actually 
superior products and service, then we are winning sustainably and I am 
interested in winning sustainably,” he said.

A recent Guardian and BBC investigation uncovered leaked documents and 
testimony from insiders that suggest that Rolls-Royce may have benefited from 
the use of illicit payments to boost profits for years.

When asked whether he was ashamed of the allegations, East said: “It’s not a 
very desirable situation. But it is what it is, now we have to deal with it and 
the important thing is, we are dealing with it. I can’t do anything about the 
past. I can only do things about now and the future.”

He refused, however, to comment on the substance of the allegations but said 
the company was cooperating with the authorities.

Speaking at the group’s main Derby site where its flagship Trent XWB jet 
engine is assembled, he said it was wrong to claim that bribes were a 
legitimate cost of doing business in some regions and that to do so was “a 
little bit of an excuse”. The defence sector has been riddled with allegations 
of corruption because of the secrecy surrounding contracts and their high value.

In 2006 Tony Blair’s government halted a SFO investigation into defence firm 
BAE Systems, saying Britain’s security would be put in danger if it was allowed 
to continue.

But at Rolls-Royce, allegations of corruption were just one of the problems 
that have dragged the group down. It shares slumped almost 40% in 2015 and this 
year its first-halfpre-tax profit fell 80% to £104m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/rolls-royce-to-cut-400-senior-management-jobs>
 as governments and airlines reined in spending.

The airlines switched to smaller, more fuel-efficient, planes which tend not 
to use Rolls-Royce engines. The engineering group makes the lion’s share of its 
earnings from maintenance contracts related to its engines and it had not 
expected airline customers to mothball jets containing its engines earlier than 
planned.

Also its marine business, which services offshore oil rigs, has been heavily 
affected by the low oil prices. East’s transformation plan has involved 
stripping away layers of senior management and a raft of positions. More than 
5,000 workers have lost their jobs over the past two years. This includes 800 
who are set to go in the marine division.

When asked if this is now an end to the job cuts, East said the efficiency 
drive is a never-ending process.

“What we have done so far is a stage on the way,. There is no end result per 
se because we always have to improve as an organisation. It’s a never ending 
process of maintaining your competitiveness that’s why there is a bit of pace 
around the changes we have made so far and it will continue that pace through 
2017.”

But he drew the line at a breakup of the business. ValueAct, the San 
Francisco-based investor that has built a stake of more than 10% in 
tRolls-Royce, and recently won a board position as argued that there was more 
value in splitting it up.

East said he disagreed with that view, saying:. “I think my predecessors over 
multiple generations have worked hard to create the business that we have today 
and one of the aspects of that is we take our technology and deploy that in 
multiple sectors.

‘The advantages are in the financial robustness and technology transfer. Their 
interests [ValueAct’s] and our interests are aligned in terms of improving the 
competitiveness of the business.”

When it comes to manufacturing the economic footprint of Rolls-Royce in the UK 
is significant. Research by economic forecasting and modelling firm Oxford 
Economics shows Rolls-Royce supports a total of 135,100 jobs directly and 
indirectly in the UK – that equivalent of one in every 250 jobs nationwide.

Its also contributes more than £12bn to GDP (about 0.7% of the UK economy).

Rolls-Royce is vital to Britain’s economic health and while East welcomed 
government plans to shape a new industrial strategy he said it would only work 
if policies remain consistent.

“The bets we make in the aerospace sector are very chunky, they’re very long 
term and they transcend multiple governments, so having a strategy which 
support businesses like us is a good thing,” he said. “Consistency is important 
for us – what we can’t be doing with is industrial strategies that change every 
few years.”
 