
First there was Lionel Messi equalling his record of 26 converted free-kicks 
for Barcelona.The death of Graham Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-watford-rescued-paul-mcgrath-aston-villa>
 then brought his role inthat World Cup qualifier back into the spotlight and 
at Goodison Park on Sunday he will be reacquainted with his European Cup 
winning team-mate Pep Guardiola. The past has echoed for Ronald Koeman this 
week while he attempts to mould Everton’s future. It is one that he accepts 
must improve on the present.

Koeman and Guardiola meet regularly now they live in close proximity – 
Alderley Edge for the Everton manager, Manchester for City’s – and how the 
former must envy the latter’s problems. Manchester City,for all Guardiola’s 
angst and disappointments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/01/pressure-grows-on-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-toil>
, still harbour hope of the Premier League title, are still in the FA Cup and 
have secured a date with Monaco in the last 16 of the Champions League. Everton 
have commenced the January overhaul demanded by their manager –signing Morgan 
Schneiderlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
 and Ademola Lookman in deals that could total £35m, submitting a £10.4m bid 
for Ishak Belfodil, offloading Tom Cleverley to Watford and Oumar Niasse to 
Hull City – but their immediate horizon appears bereft by comparison.

Everton’s Morgan Schneiderlin aims to ‘overtake’ Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/everton-morgan-schneiderlin-overtake-manchester-united>
Defeat at home in the third round of the FA Cup against Leicester City last 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/everton-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
, following a loss at home in the third round of the EFL Cup to Norwich City, 
forced a manager recruited at great expense to admit the remaining aims for his 
debut season were to consolidate seventh place in the Premier League and 
implement changes required of the team. Humdrum prospects, possibly realistic 
prospects, but not what Koeman or Farhad Moshiri envisaged when the major 
shareholder paid Southampton £5m in compensation for his £6m per annum manager 
in the summer.

Koeman’s frustration with the pace of Everton’s “project” boiled over in the 
immediate aftermath of the Leicester defeat when he insisted everyone should 
“open their eyes” to the improvements needed. But he is not the only person at 
Goodison whose patience has been tested by a modest start to his tenure. “The 
disappointment was about the result,” the manager clarified on Friday “We 
dominated and lost the game in 10 minutes. I knew what we needed to change and 
at that time it was only about being more sure about what we needed to change 
and what decisions we need to take. If you come in a new situation as a 
manager, you start the season and we did with some good signings, and then 
little by little during that season you see what you don’t like and what you 
need to change. That is not done in two weeks, it takes more time and finally 
after this summer it will really be my team, and it will be a team the fans 
will like. We will be ready then to take the next step.”

There was understanding for the Everton manager’s message after the FA Cup 
exit, less with the timing, as his visible anger was channelled in the 
direction of the club’s board and, it seemed, director of football Steve Walsh. 
“I am really happy with the way it is working with Steve,” Koeman insists. “We 
have daily contact, we speak about the team, we speak about players, he is 
reorganising the scouting and I am on a very good line with Steve Walsh. I know 
the business. It’s not that you like a player, you put a bid in and then you 
get the player. No, it is business. Sometimes it is difficult and sometimes it 
is about money, and I have mentioned before I am not the man who will decide 
about transfers. On the technical side I will do my job with Steve Walsh and we 
will do the best for Everton. We will try to find the right player forEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> and the strongest squad we will 
have. And finally it is money and it is not my decision.”

The Dutch coach has been accused of not caring enough about Everton but, as 28 
team honours as a player and manager can attest, how much he cares about 
winning is beyond dispute. He also accepts that pressure to improve results and 
performances will intensify with every expensive signing delivered by Walsh and 
the board.

“Part of my job is that finally the responsibility is always with the manager 
and that’s normal,” said Koeman. “What I like is to bring the best team for the 
fans, and if we have that then we need to perform and we need success, but that 
is what I like and what I have had all my life in football. I was always most 
of the time working in clubs as player and coach to win titles. That is no 
different now.”

Paperwork rules Manchester City’s Gabriel Jesus out of Everton game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/manchester-city-gabriel-jesus-paperwork-ruled-out-everton>
In many respects Koeman’s blunt approach mirrors Moshiri’s designs on a club 
that has gone 22 years without a trophy and counting. A telling exchange came 
at Everton’s recent AGM, a night brimming with talk of a new stadium on the 
Liverpool waterfront and commercial deals totalling £75m, when the club’s new 
investor and business associate of Alisher Usmanov took the microphone from 
Bill Kenwright.

The Everton chairman had just given a glowing response to a video of the 
club’s 2016 highlights. The presentation ranged from numerous successful 
community projects to a toe‑curling Talksport survey that claimed Everton were 
the most likeable club in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>. “It’s great what we do 
but we’ve got to bring some silverware,” Kenwright said, before reminding 
Moshiri, Koeman, Walsh and all the other newcomers assembled on stage at the 
Philharmonic Hall they have joined “a special club”. Everton’s major 
shareholder asked for the mic. “It’s not enough to say you’re a special club 
and a great club,” said Moshiri. “We don’t want to be a museum. We want to be 
competitive and to win.” That prompted loud and sustained applause from 
re-energised shareholders.

A day later came confirmation that Usmanov’s USM Holdings had struck a 
naming-rights deal with the club’s Finch Farm training ground. “We do most 
things together,” Moshiri had told the AGM. And three days after the meeting 
came Leicester; another pedestrian performance coupled with a demoralising Cup 
exit.

The Everton manager has used 24 players this season in a so far elusive search 
for balance, penetration and aggression, with constant changes to the 
supporting cast around Romelu Lukaku confirming pre-season suspicions he lacked 
forwards suited to his style. Lukaku has scored an impressive 12 this term, but 
also dictates a direct approach from those around him, hence the desire for a 
striker to share the workload.

Schneiderlin, Koeman hopes, will be joined by “one or two” further additions 
this month and the manager has a lengthy list of inherited players he would 
happily let go. Of James McCarthy, he said: “There is no chance he will leave 
in January. After the summer, yes, but not now because the player has shown 
what I like.” As for the rest, Koeman stated: “Most of the players know the 
situation. Some players in the squad now don’t have a future for Everton.”

Everton are a team in painful transition with what appears a manager yet to be 
convinced by the club, and vice-versa.
 