
Northampton won at home for only the second time in six matches but their 
progress in Europe is more likely to be in the Amlin Challenge Cup rather than 
theHeineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup>. They cannot 
catch Ulster at the top of the group and go to Glasgow next Saturday chasing 
one of the two best runners-up positions.

On the evidence of Friday night, an uninspiring, tryless 80 minutes that 
matched the miserable conditions, few sides will be bothered about the prospect 
of facingNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> in 
the knock-out stage, even if the Saints have this season proved far more 
resourceful on the road than in front of their own supporters.

Northampton needed to take more points from their match than Ulster to retain 
a chance of winning the group. That effectively meant beatingCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> and securing a bonus point: the 
first target was secured only a couple of minutes from the end with the Saints' 
sixth penalty and a heatwave in the east Midlands this weekend was a more 
likely prospect than the second.

Castres have tended to capitulate on their travels at the end of the group 
stage but until three minutes from time they were a breakaway try from taking 
the lead and never lost their resolve. Northampton showed willingness to attack 
but they were mechanical and most of their moves were read by the defence with 
nothing lost in translation.

Despite having a man advantage for 10 minutes around half-time, when the 
Castres prop Anton Peikrishvili was sent to the sin-bin for collapsing a maul, 
and being awarded a glut of penalties in the second half, Northampton only 
twice threatened the Castres line.

The first, after 23 minutes, came when Soane Tonga'uiha, who was not the only 
front row player bemused at the welter of penalties awarded at the scrum – six 
in succession during the opening period –, took out his frustration on a 
non-existent defence on the fringe of a ruck. He would probably have made the 
line had he not tried to pass to Dylan Hartley inside him and ended up hanging 
on to the ball.

Five minutes after the interval Calum Clark, one of four England squad 
forwards playing in front of three members of the national management team, 
charged down a kick by the Castres' scrum-half Rory Kockott and, as the Saints 
moved right, Stephen Myler, Hartley, Ben Foden and Lee Dickson were all held up 
short.

Northampton had to rely on the boot of Myler, who kicked three penalties 
before giving way to Ryan Lamb after 56 minutes. It was an attacking move, with 
Northampton hoping that one try would prompt Castres to lose heart, but Lamb 
merely ended up kicking another three penalties.

What was most significant for Northampton, and England, was the form of 
Courtney Lawes. The second-row was making his seventh appearance since 
returning from injury and having felt his way back, he made an impact from the 
start, stealing lineouts, knocking opponents back in the tackle and providing a 
link in attack.

He may not displace Geoff Parling and Joe Launchbury from the England second 
row next month, but he will be an option for the bench. "I am not the sort of 
player who can be out for a long time and get straight back into it," he said. 
"My fitness is improving and I am reading the game better. I can push on from 
here, but I am not thinking about England: every time I do I seem to get 
injured."

Lawes was the leading figure in a tight first half that saw Myler and Kockott 
each kick two penalties. Northampton, playing down the slope after the 
interval, dominated territory but struggled to break down a defence that 
remained obdurate.

Castres started the evening second in the group, although with one of the 
smallest squads in the Top 14 they have never relished fighting on two fronts. 
They seemed content to be in bonus point territory and, when Saints stretched 
their lead to nine points just before the end, the French side summoned one 
last effort and a fourth penalty was the reward.

Northampton: Foden; Wilson, G Pisi, Waldouck (May, 63), Elliott; Myler (Lamb, 
56), Dickson (Roberts, 63); Tonga'uiha (A Waller, 65), Hartley (capt), Doran 
Jones (Mercey, 56), Manoa, Lawes, Clark, Wood, Dowson (Van Velze, 56; Sorenson, 
76).

Pens Myler 3, Lamb 3.

Castres: Dulin; Evans, Cabannes (Sanchou, 71), Lamerat (Bonnefond, 66), 
Garvey; Kirkpatrick (Bernard, 74), Kockott; Taumoepeau (Marmoiton, 63), Bonello 
(Mach, 52), Peikrishvili, Samson (Rolland, 71), Tekori (capt), Bornman, 
Caballero, Claassen (Wannenburg, 65).

Pens Kockott 4 Sin-bin Peikrishvili 36.

Referee G Clancy (Ireland) Attendance 11,891
 