
They might not use much footage of this one if ever they need to promote an 
Anglo-French Cup – or should it be a Franco-English one? – but this is the kind 
of thing we can expect. Brutal, relentless, nervy and, well, absorbing is the 
word people always end up reaching for when describing these ones.Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> take a bonus point away 
from the formidable home of the French champions – lest anyone should forget, 
or need to be informed, that is what Castres are these days.

The Saints did not look too happy about that bonus point, though, and nor 
should they. Although it would be pushing it to say they deserved the win, it 
was well within their grasp. Their set-piece dominance was significant, even if 
it wavered a bit at times. Courtney Lawes won a fistful ofCastres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> line-outs and was generally 
immense, and the scrum enjoyed an edge, albeit against Castres' reserve props. 
Things improved for the home side there with the introduction of Karena Wihongi 
for the final half-hour.

But what will really irk Northampton is the nature of the try they ultimately 
lost to, a length-of-the-field gallop by Romain Martial in the eighth minute. 
One of those annoying intercept tries that can so distort a scoreline. Mind 
you, the try that the Saints scored a similar interval into the second half was 
a gift from Castres, too, but at least it arose from a period of relentless 
Northampton pressure.

Every time Northampton got to within striking distance, though, up stepped the 
player who more than anyone has turned this lot into champions. Rory Kockott's 
penalty goals did the rest of the job for Castres – that and their ferocious 
defence at the breakdown and in midfield. Kockott is deadly precise in all that 
he does, and the South African scrum-half will no doubt be lining up for France 
just as soon as he qualifies.

Back to that start, though. Saints were quick to wrestle some sort of order on 
to proceedings, after a feisty opening few minutes from the home side. That 
set-piece dominance took hold, and they started to test out Castres' resolve 
with a few rumbles and some speculative hit-ups in midfield.

The trouble was, Castres handled it all quite robustly, and when Luther 
Burrell, Northampton's arch hitter-up, chose instead to flick a blind pass 
towards Ken Pisi it fell into the hands of Martial, a wing even taller than 
George North. The Saints had been pressing deep into Castres' 22, so the winger 
had some 90 metres to gallop, but those long legs kept him ahead of North's all 
the way to the posts at the other end. Despite their muscular industry, the 
visitors were seven points down for no obvious reason.

That margin would be maintained until Stephen Myler landed Northampton's first 
shot at goal on the half-hour. The Saints held a vice-like grip on the 
territorial battle, but their use of the ball was unsubtle, and Castres, who 
are a fearsomely muscled lot, never looked much stretched. They conceded that 
penalty on the half-hour, but almost immediately struck a blow back.

In Kockott, they boast a genius, too. He is so deadly a marksman that Toulon 
are thought to be lining him up as the only man capable of replacing Jonny 
Wilkinson. But he pulls strings too, and soon the relentless Rodrigo Capó 
Ortega was sent through on Ben Foden. Saints' last line of defence put him down 
admirably, but Foden then had a go at Kockott illegally and saw yellow for it. 
Kockott chose to tap the penalty, which was a bad decision, as Northampton 
handled the attack, but five minutes later he restored Castres' 10-point lead 
with a penalty from more than 50 metres, softly conceded by North.

Kockott stretched the lead again just after the break, but that was when 
Northampton struck. They set up camp in Castres' 22, kicking penalty after 
penalty to the corner and driving line-out after line-out. They had given up 
trying to unlock the home defence with something to please the promoters of 
whatever European set-to comes next. This was elemental and ferocious, but it 
was not enough. Castres were too cussed, too muscular.

The irony was that it was from a Castres steal at yet another Northampton 
line-out that the try materialised. Antonie Claassen tapped the ball back from 
out of Lawes's grasp, Brice Mach fumbled it, and Dylan Hartley scooped up to 
score.

But every time the score closed to within three, or to within one more shot at 
goal, Kockott stepped forward almost immediately to demand that Northampton 
score a try. It proved too big an ask.

Saints have played away matches at the English champions and the French in 
consecutive weeks. To take three points away from the carnage is more than most 
would have achieved, but they return home at last for next weekend's match 
against the Ospreys needing more.
 