
This victory may not take up too much room on Sheffield Wednesday’s 
end-of-season DVD, but its significance must not be understated.Derby’s defeat 
by Leeds on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/leeds-united-derby-county-championship-match-report>
 afforded the sixth-placed Owls the opportunity to open up daylight between the 
play-off places and the chasing pack – and although it was hard work on 
occasions, it was job done for Carlos Carvalhal’s side.

The desperation surrounding how close Wednesday came to a return to the 
Premier League seven months ago could have easily hung over them this season 
but, on this showing, they seem capable of winning even when they are far from 
their best: a hallmark of a side capable of going close again this season.

Chris Wood heads Leeds up to third with win over Derby County
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/leeds-united-derby-county-championship-match-report>
Wednesday have made wins over Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> a regular occurrence in 
recent years, including a crucial 1-0 win in West Yorkshire earlier this 
season. Yet given results elsewhere this weekend, this represents the biggest 
of the lot as the Owls opened up a five-point lead on the seventh-placed Rams.

The nine-point gap to the automatic promotion places may yet prove to be a 
bridge too far for Wednesday – but with second-placed Brighton their next 
opponents, this win keeps the Owls on the periphery of the hunt for the top 
two. “It’s a great win against a tough team, so of course, we’re happy,” 
Carvalhal said. “I don’t worry about the table too much – my focus is Brighton 
because that’s the most important game of our season.”

That David Wagner’s Huddersfield have remained in the race for promotion 
following their blistering start to the season last summer is commendable but 
this was an afternoon to forget for the Terriers. On another day they may have 
been two or three ahead by half-time after completely dominating the first 45 
minutes but ultimately they would live to regret their profligacy in front of 
goal and miss out on a glorious opportunity to go back up to third.

“We weren’t clinical enough and we’ve got to be honest about that,” insisted 
Wagner, who also pointed to a number of key decisions he believed cost his side 
dear, including the dismissal of Jack Payne midway through the second half. “We 
were the more dangerous side in the first half and until it was 11 against 11 – 
all the key decisions went against us.”

The smattering of boos at half-time from the crowd was no surprise following 
an insipid first 45 minutes from the hosts; the best chances all fell 
Huddersfield’s way, including for Nahki Wells, who headed straight at Keiren 
Westwood in the Wednesday goal.

It was clear Carvalhal needed to roll the dice and the introduction of Sam 
Winnall for his debut at half-time was a shrewd move. Just minutes after coming 
on, his movement afforded Ross Wallace a fraction of space to fire past Danny 
Ward from long range and turn the game on its head. From nowhere, Wednesday 
were ahead.

Wagner’s afternoon had, up until that point, been spent mostly with his hands 
on his head as he watched his side waste chance after chance – but as the 
second half wore on, both his and Huddersfield’s frustrations began to boil 
over, culminating in Payne’s red card on 69 minutes for a rash challenge on Sam 
Hutchinson. “It was probably a yellow – not a red,” Wagner said.

Huddersfield kept fighting despite that setback, going close late on via the 
makeshift strikers Michael Hefele and Mark Hudson before they were stung on the 
counter in injury time when Fernando Forestieri prodded in from close range, 
despite protests from Wagner and the Huddersfield bench that the striker was 
offside. A perfect performance? Far from it - but come May and the 
end-of-season shake-up, it may well prove to be priceless for the Owls.
 