
On Thursday, Rotterdam city council will vote on whether to replace 20,000 
affordable homes with 36,000 properties for middle- and upper-income households.

The vote is the latest step in the city’s focus on “improving” neighbourhoods, 
by combining gentrification with rules preventing some low-income households 
from moving into poorer neighbourhoods.

Rotterdam, the Netherlands’ second city, is an increasingly divided one: while 
many neighbourhoods around the centre are gentrifying and the city is a rising 
star on the international tourist map, it is also home to some of the country’s 
poorest neighbourhoods.

Late last year, a diverse grassroots movement emerged to oppose the city’s 
housing plans. A petition calling for a referendum obtained more than 13,000 
signatures, resulting in a vote on 30 November.

From Settlers of Brooklyn to SoDoSoPa: the best gentrification parodies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/dec/09/best-gentrification-parodies-snl-south-park-key-peele>
 But the odds were stacked against the referendum. While organisers wanted a 
vote on the potential disappearance of the 20,000 affordable housing units, the 
question they posed to Rotterdammers wasn’t clear. the vague nature of the 
question: “Are you in favour or against Rotterdam’s housing vision?” was likely 
to have discouraged many people from voting, because they didn’t fully 
understand what they were voting for.

The city also stipulated a 30% turnout to validate the referendum. Because 
those in favour of the housing vision could win based on a low turnout, there 
was little incentive for the yes campaign, including the city’s government, to 
encourage people to vote.

In the end, 72% voted against the housing vision. However, only 17% of the 
electorate voted, well below the required 30%. The council vote this Thursday, 
15 December, is expected to ignore the referendum and find in favour of 
adopting the housing plans as official policy.

The grassroots campaign offers several insights for those dealing with 
gentrification in cities around the world. Tenants’ associations, while active 
in initiating campaigns, need to do more to engage with people in their 
communities. Participation levels in these associations are very low in 
Rotterdam and a primary objective for this movement is better organisation of 
residents, particularly tenants in social rented housing.

Debates often focus on the positive side of gentrification, but it is a 
political issue over who has access to a city

However, on the positive side, because opposition and resistance was focused 
on a city-wide issue, rather than a specific development or estate, 
gentrification and displacement became major topics of conversation across the 
city.

Rather than it being an abstract academic or political debate about social 
justice or a fair city, the referendum was about specific housing plans which 
will affect tens of thousands of Rotterdammers for years to come. As a result, 
the question: “Whose city is Rotterdam?” was discussed in homes, community 
centres and cafes.

It was also a genuinely bottom-up initiative, spearheaded by local tenants’ 
associations. The campaign connected a diverse group of people who all had 
connections to the issue of gentrification.

This is important because the organisers of the referendum have announced that 
they will protest against every demolition project in the next 15 years. As the 
referendum created widespread attention, it will be easier to mobilise more 
people to stand with them.

Rotterdam’s housing referendum was initiated by those who rarely feature in 
mainstream and professional debates about the future of the city. Too often, 
these focus exclusively on the positive side of gentrification, but it is a 
political issue over who has access to a city.

As urban scholars who investigate the human cost of gentrification, we believe 
it is essential to connect diverse voices into coalitions to fight for a city 
that is open and accessible for all.

Brian Doucet is a senior lecturer at Erasmus University College. Marguerite 
van den Berg is an assistant professor of sociology at the University of 
Amsterdam.Gwen van Eijk is an assistant professor of criminology at Erasmus 
University Rotterdam.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 