
Rough sleepers are subjected to a “shocking and unacceptable” level of abuse 
by the public, including physical violence, sexual assault and theft, research 
has found.

The study by the homelessness charity Crisis found that street sleepers were 
almost 17 times more likely than the average person to have been a victim of 
violence, and 15 times more likely to have suffered verbal abuse.

Eight out of 10 rough sleepers reported being victims of a range of crimes and 
antisocial behaviours, from vandalism and intimidation to being hit, kicked, 
threatened or urinated on.

One in 20 rough sleepers reported having been the victim of a sexual assault 
while homeless.

The majority of the abuse was perpetrated by the public, and in more than half 
of instances the victims said they did not bother to report their experience to 
the police because they expected no action to be taken.

“Violent and abusive experiences can cause not only physical harm but can also 
undermine people’s attempts to seek help and move on from homelessness. Too 
many rough sleepers are left living in fear and isolation,” said Jon Sparkes, 
the chief executive of Crisis.


“The research shows that urgent action is needed by both the police and 
government. It is not acceptable that homeless people are put in harm’s way on 
a daily basis. The police must act to reassure homeless people that their 
safety is paramount and crimes against them will be fully investigated.”

Britain’s shame: the people who are homeless, even though they’re in work | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours>
Street sleepers told researchers the abuse tended to be random, mainly from 
strangers who were often in gangs or drunken groups. They reported being kicked 
in the head, having their sleeping bag burned, being urinated on, having stones 
thrown at them, and being called “dirty scumbag and scrounger”.

Some interviewees said they felt it was safer to bed down away from public 
areas, for example by sleeping on night buses, although one noted he had been 
assaulted in a quieter spot which did not have have CCTV cameras, and “this 
wouldn’t have happened” in town.

The study cites research published earlier this year by the St Mungo’s charity 
<http://www.mungos.org/press_office/2669_nowhere-safe-to-stay-homeless-people-told-to-sleep-rough-despite-extreme-dangers>
 which estimates that a quarter of the 97 people who had died while sleeping 
rough in England over the past five years had suffered a violent death.

The research was undertaken in response to growing concern among homeless 
charities about the treatment of rough sleepers. The study surveyed 458 recent 
or current rough sleepers in England and Wales.

Female rough sleepers were proportionately more likely than males to be the 
victims of violence and intimidation, sexual assault or verbal abuse and 
harassment.


The research was published as Crisis opens its centres on Friday to around 
4,000 homeless people for the three-day festive period, offering companionship 
and hot meals.

Rough sleeping has increased in England in recent years, with 3,569 sleeping 
out on any one night in 2015, according to official estimates. This is a 30% 
increase on the previous year, and double the levels of 2010. However, in 
London, where a separate and more robust counting mechanism is used, more than 
8,000 people were recorded as rough sleepers in 2015-16.

A spokesperson for the Local Government Association said: “Faced with rising 
demand, wide-ranging welfare reforms and falling social housing, councils are 
struggling to tackle the nation’s growing homelessness crisis.

“The government needs to give councils the powers and funding to resume their 
historic role as a major builder of affordable homes and to address the 
widening gap between incomes and rents. This is vital to end homelessness.”
 