
Ulster’s Springbok scrum-half Ruan Pienaar remembers arriving in Belfast six 
years ago vividly. He got out of the club car, looked up at a slate-grey sky 
and a crumbling stadium and gazed at his young wife incredulously. He had just 
enjoyed a beautiful South African summer by the Indian Ocean in Durban and his 
mother’s words were still ringing in his ears. She had heard that Belfast was 
one of the most dangerous places in the world and asked whether he should 
reconsider. “She was a bit concerned, but I told her there’s no need to worry – 
we’re South Africans. It’s funny looking back. My wife and I went in with the 
attitude that we had to make this work, and six years later we’re so glad we 
did.”

Pienaar settled into Northern Ireland quickly with his wife and young family. 
Ulster boasted a conveyor belt of talented South African players who helped him 
gradually find his feet in a new culture and climate, even if he never fully 
adjusted to the Belfast winters. Instead he found warmth in the local people, 
“I came here initially with two years in my mind maybe, but one big thing that 
kept me and my family was the people. People in this part of the world are 
similar to South Africans. They’re family-orientated and warm. The will do 
anything for you. That goes a long way when you are so far from home.”

Alongside his team-mates and some of the backroom staff, Pienaar helped set up 
a weekly club bible study and volunteered at churches and schools across the 
city. On the field, he built a reputation as a nerveless kicker, who often took 
control of games and won them in a moment of brilliance. He thrived on pressure 
and relished in the support and affection that he felt on Friday nights playing 
under the lights in Belfast. “I just wanted to come in to Ulster as a foreigner 
and make a difference in some way. I have always really believed in the jersey 
here. I would never have stayed as long as I did otherwise. It’s very emotional 
to think that it’s coming to an end.”

Due to the IRFU succession policy, Pienaar must leave Ulster at the end of the 
season. The player and club wanted his stay to be extended but the IRFU would 
not sanction the move, saying: “It is vital for both Ulster and Irish rugby 
that the province develop indigenous talent in this position and an extension 
of Ruan’s contract would further prevent Irish qualified Ulster players from 
maximising their developmental potential and becoming stars for both Ulster and 
Ireland.”

A stray boot blinded Ian McKinley in one eye but he's back playing top-level 
rugby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/sep/09/rugby-ian-mckinley-blind-one-eye-treviso-leinster>
Pienaar is trying to cherish every game he plays for Ulster, knowing his time 
in the white No9 jersey is limited. “I know that this is it. I got emotional 
when I heard the news, as did my wife, because we’ve been so happy here. We’ve 
made so many friends. I’ve been getting these lovely letters and people have 
been stopping me in the street saying such nice things. It’s meant a lot. But 
equally, it’s one of these things. I need to enjoy every last moment and focus 
on doing what I came here to do and win Ulster some silverware.”


Pienaar arrives at the new state-of-the-art facilities at the Kingspan Stadium 
every day with a smile. Times have moved on from when he first arrived at 
Ulster and used primitive bench presses. The club has changed and he has taken 
pleasure in seeing young academy players graduate to play with him. “I’ve built 
up a brilliant relationship on and off the field with Paddy Jackson and was 
delighted to see him play so well for Ireland in South Africa. He’s an example 
of what can be done. I like working with all of the young players here and I 
hope maybe they’ve picked something up from me. I just wanted to set a good 
example everyday and they know I’m happy to help them.”

Watching Pienaar play, he rarely shows emotion, whether annoyance or elation. 
He has the gift of appearing utterly calm in the most frantic of situations on 
the pitch. It will serve him well during the last emotional nights playing in 
Belfast. “I think that might be a trick of the camera,” he laughs. “Of course I 
get as angry and frustrated as the next guy, but every time the camera focuses 
on me, it just seems to show me looking calm and serene. Maybe it’s the gift of 
appearing one way, but a lot of the time feeling completely differently. It’s 
my job on the field to give others direction, so this appearing calm when 
feeling totally different is something I’ve learnt.”

Pienaar’s young daughter has started her first year in school and he will now 
have to think of his playing options at the end of the season away from 
Belfast. There will be no shortage of suitors, but he will think very 
carefully. “It’s going to be something for the end of the season definitely. I 
need to focus on the here and now at Ulster. After my playing career is over, I 
would love to come back to Ulster and Belfast, and give back in some capacity 
to a club that’s given me so much. Whether that is passing on my knowledge or 
whatever I can do to help. I know my family would love to come back here as 
well.”

Six years ago he arrived in Belfast for a temporary change of scenery and he 
stayed longer to enjoy the view with his young family. He is trying to focus on 
every moment at training and every game, mentally capturing his last few 
moments in an Ulster jersey. When he departs the field in Belfast the ovation 
will be long and rapturous, and he will have more than justified his humble 
wish to have been “a foreigner who made a difference”.

• This article is from Behind the Lines <https://jdrennan13.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Jonathan Drennan <https://twitter.com/jwdrennan> on Twitter
 