
England may not have reached the knockout phase of the Rugby World Cup last 
year but theRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> enjoyed spectacular 
success off the field. The RFU’s annual financial report shows the union 
doubled its revenues to £407.1m with record profits for rugby investment of 
£102.3m, an increase of 37%.

The highest turnover in the RFU’s history was boosted by World Cup-generated 
revenue of £228.1m, with the tournament exceeding expectations on all fronts 
bar the host nation’s performance. Total revenue increased by £199.2m on the 
previous financial year, allowing the RFU to post a retained profit of £3.9m 
compared with a loss of £6.7m in 2014‑15.

RFU hands out 48 women’s contracts and targets retaining 2017 World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/england-womens-rugby-rfu-plan-world-cup>
The figures will not be greeted with universal joy in the southern hemisphere, 
which is already struggling to compete financially with the world’s richest 
union. In the past year alone the RFU invested £89.8m into rugby and over the 
past four years has exceeded its own strategic plan target set for investment 
by £28m.

This dramatic upturn was made possible by underlying revenue growth in 
broadcasting (up 39%), sponsorship (up 8%), matchday hospitality and 
non‑matchday conference and events (up 3%) and travel revenues. England Rugby 
Travel, the official travel operator for RWC 2015, saw an eight-fold revenue 
increase.

Ian Ritchie, the RFU chief executive, described it as “a truly exceptional 
year” which would have a big impact on the grassroots game in England.

He said: “Despite the huge disappointment of England’s early exit from our 
home Rugby World Cup ... we have delivered significant investment into rugby 
both at home and globally. The legacy will continue to benefit our community 
clubs and the sport at every level.”

Stephen Brown, the chief financial officer, added: “The significant financial 
success of hosting theRugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-world-cup> in 2015, as well as 
underlying growth in our businesses, results in record rugby investment at all 
levels. Ultimately the union is in a very good place financially which enables 
the game as a whole in England to benefit directly from this success.”

The RFU has also confirmed that Andy Cosslett has been elected as chairman in 
succession to Bill Beaumont, who became chairman of World Rugby this year. 
Cosslett, who chaired the host organising committee for the World Cup last 
year, has enjoyed a successful career in business, including stints as chief 
executive at Fitness First and InterContinental Hotels.

The RFU Council has also approved proposals for a new domestic women’s club 
competition, backed and run by the RFU, which will replace the existing Women’s 
Premiership from next season.

Saracens, meanwhile, have confirmed that Owen Farrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell> will make his first appearance 
of the season in their Champions’ Cup fixture against Toulon on Saturday. 
Farrell, who has been troubled by a back and hip injury, missed Saracens’ 
opening six Premiership games but now has an opportunity to prove his fitness 
before England’s autumn internationals.

The England wing Jonny May is also on the comeback trail following 10 months 
out with a knee injury, having been named in Gloucester’s side to face Bayonne 
in the European Challenge Cup. May has not played since December, when he was 
hurt playing against Harlequins at Twickenham.

In contrast there is still no sign of England’s captain Dylan Hartley, who is 
missing from Northampton’s matchday squad for the home game against 
Montpellier. Hartley has been suffering from back spasms and has played only 
106 minutes of rugby this season.

There is more upbeat injury news at Bath, where the Wales internationals Luke 
Charteris and Rhys Priestland as well as the club captain, Guy Mercer, all 
feature in the starting line-up at Pau. “All three are experienced players who 
will give us a new energy going into the game,” the director of rugby, Todd 
Blackadder, said.

Kyle Eastmond is poised to make his first start for Wasps against Zebre while 
Henry Slade has been named on the bench for Exeter’s home game against Clermont 
Auvergne on Sunday.
 