
1) Spatial awareness puts Bath duo centre stage

It is still perfectly possible that Bath will not win the grand final; 
Saracens will be a tougher nut to crack than Leicester ultimately proved to be. 
What is certain is that the club’s firstPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> final since 2004 will see no 
dilution of the attacking ambition that produced such a memorable spectacle at 
The Rec. Give Bath’s backs an inch and they will run for miles; to score seven 
outstanding tries from eight visits to their opponents’ 22 also demonstrated a 
precision matched by few sides bar the All Blacks. The Bath captain, Stuart 
Hooper, was fascinating afterwards on the subject of Kyle Eastmond and Jonathan 
Joseph and what, in his view, makes them so good. “They see the game very 
differently to anyone I’ve ever played with. I think that gives them a very 
fresh approach. And when they see space it makes them a nightmare to play 
against.” With Brad Barritt, Owen Farrell, Alex Goode, David Strettle and Chris 
Ashton lining up against Eastmond, Joseph, George Ford, Anthony Watson, Semesa 
Rokoduguni and Matt Banahan, Saturday also promises to be a highly instructive 
day for the England management.Robert Kitson

• Match report: Bath 47-10 Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/23/bath-leicester-premiership-semi-final-match-report>


2) Mauger overhaul needed to restore life to Leicester’s backline

The rugby world stands still for no one, Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> included. As Richard 
Cockerill again ran down the long list of injured players – Allen, Tuilagi, 
Croft, Ghiraldini, Benjamin, Williams, Mulipola, Parling – who might have made 
life tougher for Bath he knew in his heart of hearts it is not that simple. 
Where are the backline players – Tuilagi included – with the pace, subtlety, 
craft and dexterity of Bath’s outstanding midfield? Where is a full-back to 
rival Anthony Watson’s promise? How on earth did the Tigers allow George Ford 
to slip from their clutches? Over the course of the regular season Bath scored 
72 tries compared with Leicester’s 37 and the gap was equally marked in 
Saturday’s 47-10 semi-final masterclass. “We know we have to play differently 
but it’s very difficult when you have so much disruption through injury,” 
suggested Cockerill. “We need to improve and evolve as a club and we’re going 
to but we’re doing that from third in the table, not seventh or ninth.” True, 
but simply seeking to dominate possession and territory is no longer enough if 
the Tigers, under their incoming coach Aaron Mauger, wish to make the play-offs 
next year, never mind win the title.RK

• Bath v Leicester – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/23/bath-leicester-premiership-play-off-semi-final-live>

3) Saints seem to have paid the price for standing still

Two defeats defined Northampton’s season: at Clermont Auvergne in the 
Champions Cup quarter-final when they were washed away in a deluge and on 
Saturday against the side that narrowly lost to Clermont in the European 
semi-final,Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>. The Saints 
chose not to materially strengthen their squad after winning the Premiership 
last season and if it seemed understandable given the way they had stealthily 
developed strength in depth, but they have missed a rival to Stephen Myler at 
outside-half and their options in the back five have been restricted. Injuries 
have not helped, but the lack of a tactical option outside Myler against 
Sarries hurt them as they too often played from deep rather than for position. 
A team that finished at the top of the table does not need a lot of fixing, but 
standing still in the current market is to go backwards.Paul Rees

• Match report: Northampton 24-29 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/23/saracens-northampton-premiership-semi-final-match-report>


4) Bogey men have timed their run just right this season

The wolf pack snarled at Franklin’s Gardens, but Bath will be different to 
Northampton. Wolf spelt backwards is flow and Bath have more footballing skill 
and pace than the Saints, although a Premiership final will be a step into the 
unknown. Sarries won atNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> despite struggling at 
times in the lineout and scrum and conceding a rash of penalties. They were at 
their most effective when not in possession, playing to a pattern that 
eliminated risk in their own half, but they are not a one-dimensional side. 
They tailor their game to their opponents, and while they were out on their 
feet this time last year, competing on two fronts through to the last day of 
the campaign, they have paced themselves this time. It has taken away their 
consistency, but made them more dangerous on the one-off occasion. They will be 
the bogey men again, but they thrive on that.PR

• Northampton v Saracens – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/23/northampton-saracens-premiership-play-off-semi-final-live>

5) No place for theatrical diving

Glasgow showed admirable composure in the final 10 minutes of a game they had 
spent largely on the back foot, but they owed the position from which they 
scored the winning try to a controversial penalty. This must go down as another 
game turned by the new mechanics of TMO protocol and the big screen. Not too 
mention the influence of the theatrical dive, which is creeping insidiously 
into rugby. To deal with the latter first, Niko Matawalu threw his arms up and 
fell to the floor, where he stayed a while to milk things further, after the 
hapless Ricky Lutton had thrown out an arm across his chest as Matawalu chased 
a loose ball. The referee had just awarded a scrum to Ulster for a Glasgow 
knock-on, from which they might have closed out the match, but when he watched 
Matawalu’s histrionics replayed from a variety of angles on the big screen, he 
decided to ask the TMO to check for foul play. There looked as if there had 
been some foul play, sort of, even though it happened in the blink of an eye in 
real time, even though it happened right in front of the referee who thought 
nothing of it first time round. On the advice of the TMO, the referee awarded 
Glasgow the penalty, from which they scored the winning try, but the “offence” 
would have gone unnoticed without the dive.

This gamesmanship of Matawalu’s will only become more common unless it is 
stamped out. Assuming we don’t want players going down at the slightest 
contact, as in another sport much criticised for it, there needs to be a new 
directive covering simulation. But further controversy in this case is that the 
incident occurred after the referee had blown his whistle for a knock-on. In 
other words, the ball was dead. The TMO described the offence to the referee as 
taking “a player down without the ball” – but if play has stopped already 
that’s no offence, unless it’s dangerous. The referee, though, deemed it a high 
tackle, which can be penalised after the whistle has gone. Was it a high 
tackle? It was more of a tug to the v of Matawalu’s collar. Certainly, it was 
nothing without the dive or the big screen. It all just feels very wrong. Two 
suggestions, then. Penalties should be awarded or reversed for acts of 
simulation. And referees should not be allowed to act on replays on the big 
screen, which are too easily taken out of context and owe much to the whim of 
the television director.Michael Aylwin


6) O’Connell’s Limerick farewell 

So he has basically admitted it. Paul O’Connell said after Munster’s victory 
over theOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> that it had been 
probably his last match at Thomond Park. He will play in the World Cup, and 
then, probably (maybe it is all a ruse to stoke up emotion for the final on 
Saturday), call it a day. What a career. There is a temptation to burst into a 
eulogy now, but it has all been said before and it will be again when he 
officially hangs up his boots. Who knows how inspirational he will have to be 
in Belfast when Munster take on Glasgow in the Pro12 final, because the three 
players who might have been hand-picked as Munster’s next most inspirational 
all went down with injuries. Conor Murray, Peter O’Mahony and Simon Zebo will 
this week be nursing knee ligament, hip flexor and sore head issues 
respectively. Murray’s seems to be the most worrying – and, let’s face it, he 
is the hardest of the trio to replace. So, they will be needing one last big 
game in the red shirt from Paulie.MA
 