
In a woodland clearing on the slopes of Mount Mashuk, which towers over the 
small town of Pyatigorsk in the Caucasus, the crowds were starting to gather. 
Mount Mashuk, two days by train from Moscow, is a traditional destination for 
hikers, and those taking the water at nearby spa resorts. It It was made famous 
in the writings of Mikhail Lermontov, who was killed in a duel on Mount Mashuk 
at the age of 26.

But these crowds were here for something else – the first-ever Womad Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Held just up the hill from where 
Lermontov died, the festival is markedly different from its British 
counterpart. Police with dogs patrolled the entrance and the perimeter fences. 
No alcohol was allowed on the site; even soft drinks were confiscated from 
festivalgoers – just in case something stronger was being smuggled through.

Womad – the World of Music and Dance – has a near-equal standing with 
Glastonbury on the British festival calendar, with a reputation for being an 
easy-going family affair that promotes music from around the globe. Its formula 
has been exported to 27 countries, from Abu Dhabi to New Zealand.

The first Russian Womad, held last weekend, involved long and complex 
negotiations about where it should be held, with some local authorities 
apparently fearing it could become a terrorist target.. But the project was 
finally given the go-ahead as part of a campaign to encourage tourism in the 
Caucasus, backed by £1m from the Development Bank of Russia.

But, with just one day to go, the festival very nearly didn't happen. The 
Kremlin had realised – after reading a newspaper interview – that Peter Gabriel 
was one of Womad's co-founders. Gabriel, an active supporter of human rights 
campaigns around the world, had previously spoken out about the jailing of 
Pussy Riot.

"At first it didn't sink in," said festival director Chris Smith. "I didn't 
believe it was happening."

Lengthy discussions followed in which Smith argued this would be a cultural 
exchange and a non-political festival, and that Peter Gabriel's views were his 
own. It was only on Friday afternoon – less than 24 hours before the concert 
was due to go ahead – that the event was given official approval.

On the day there was great music, and no politics – though Alexander 
Khloponin, Russia's deputy prime minister and presidential envoy to the North 
Caucasus, did drop in. Surrounded by security men, he stood at the front of the 
stage and clearly enjoyed watching Pelageya, a cheerfully flamboyant singer who 
is a big star in Russia, with a style that veered between folk-rock and rock.

There were bands from across the Caucasus and elsewhere in Russia, including 
Ayarkhaan, a remarkable female trio from Sakha, on the edge of Siberia, and 
five Cossack groups from across the country who provided a furious display of 
acrobatic dancing, as well as appearances by the Australian-based Tatar singer 
Zulya and Seun Kuti, son of the firebrand Nigerian legend Fela.

Most of the audience had come from the local region, attracted by the low 
ticket cost (around £6 for two days), and were keen to see foreign bands they 
knew nothing of.

Though much about the festival was different to Britain's Womad, some things 
never change: it rained for two days.
 