
Bath have risen to second in the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> courtesy of a convincing 
victory over a below-par Sale Sharks beneath the Friday night lights. In front 
of a record home crowd of almost 14,000, Todd Blackadder’s side claimed their 
fifth victory in six games, pulling confidently away from the visitors thanks 
to second-half tries from Kahn Fotuali’i and Kane Palma-Newport.

It was a pretty one-sided encounter by the end, with the Sharks never able to 
gain a sustained grip up front or behind the scrum. With George Ford running 
the show and kicking 15 points and Matt Banahan also having an excellent game, 
a defensively tightBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> team bore 
little resemblance to the side blown apart by Leicester at Welford Road less 
than a fortnight ago.

Anthony Watson joins England injury list after suffering broken jaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/anthony-watson-out-of-england-autumn-internationals-with-broken-jaw-bath-rugby-union>
Eddie Jones was in attendance along with all his three assistants Steve 
Borthwick, Paul Gustard and Neal Hatley, clearly hoping his England squad 
members Ford, Jonathan Joseph, Semesa Rokoduguni and Josh Beaumont would remain 
in one piece at the end of a bad week injury-wise.

Thankfully for club and country all survived intact, giving substance to the 
mischievous theory it is currently less risky playing in the Premiership than 
training with England. Bath still had enough firepower in the absence of the 
crocked Anthony Watson but Blackadder does not expect his England winger to 
return “for quite a while” following surgery to repair a fractured jaw. “It’s a 
serious one,” reported the director of rugby. “He’s eating through a straw so 
it can’t be good. I’m so disappointed for him… he’s absolutely gutted at the 
moment.”

Injuries have also disrupted Bath’s midfield this season but no one has 
responded more positively than Banahan, his side’s man of the match for the 
second successive weekend. Only two minutes had elapsed when Joseph made a 
half-break down the right and, from the next phase, his fellow centre hit a 
perfect angle to open the scoring.

Banahan does not always get sufficient credit for his versatility, with injury 
problems requiring him to fill the role of inside-centre between Joseph and 
Ford. He looks a better, more rounded player now than he did when he played for 
England and epitomises the fresh sense of purpose at Bath. Jones is generally a 
fan of centres who can get over the gainline without messing around, 
particularly in the continuing absence of Manu Tuilagi.

Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> could only hang on grimly 
and rely on Beaumont’s outstanding lineout work; the aerial contest between the 
England squad member and the omitted Dave Attwood was never less than 
close-fought. There was a bit of edge elsewhere, too; the opportunity to come 
south and ruffle the more genteel sections of the Rec always appeals to a side 
coached by Steve Diamond.

On this occasion, though, Sale’s tactical kicking game was not good enough to 
put consistent territorial pressure on their hosts. Will Addison, who has just 
signed a new three-year contract with the Sharks, did land a solitary 
first-half penalty but mostly it was a case of scrambling to stop Joseph and 
Banahan, as well as the lively Zach Mercer, from causing further damage.

Saracens’ Mark McCall hits out at RFU after England training camp injuries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/saracens-mark-mccall-england-injuries-rfu>
Bath, unbeaten at the Rec since April Fool’s Day, should probably have been 
further ahead than 10-3 at the interval. On a still, mild evening – Jones was 
one of only a handful of people wearing a woolly hat – they were guilty of 
turning the ball over too often but Sale did not have the wit to take 
advantage. The third quarter was a similar story, the occasional Bath break-out 
usually foiled by a frustrating knock-on or turnover. Ford, always influential, 
kicked two further penalties while Addison was guilty of missing a relatively 
straightforward kick that might have given the Sharks a foothold. When the 
referee Tom Foley was inadvertently flattened by Sale’s giant Russian 
replacement Andrei Ostrikov, it was among the few telling blows the Sharks 
landed all evening.

Things were about to get even worse for the visitors, the ball falling from 
the grasp of Ross Harrison 30 metres out and allowing Fotuali’i to scamper 
over. With the Sharks increasingly at sixes and sevens, Palma-Newport surged 
over following a close-range lineout to end any faint prospect of Sale, rousing 
winners over Leicester last weekend, staging a comeback.

With seasoned internationals such as Taulupe Faletau, Luke Charteris and Rhys 
Priestland sitting in the stands, Bath’s Premiership campaign could scarcely 
have started any better. Sale, whose away form is nothing like as impressive as 
their record at home, will need to be a whole lot better when Europe kicks off 
next week.

Bath: Homer; Rokoduguni, Joseph (Willliams, 68), Banahan, Brew; Ford (co-capt) 
(Hastings, 74), Fotuali (Cook, 62); Catt (Auterac, 58), Dunn (Batty, 58), 
Thomas (Palma-Newport, 62), Stooke (G Mercer, 58), Attwood, Garvey (co-capt), 
Ellis (Ewels, 50), Mercer.

Tries: Banahan, Fotuali’i, Palma-Newport. Cons: Ford 3. Pens: Ford 3.

Sale Sharks: McGuigan (Haley, 50); Addison, James, Leota; Odogwu; MacGinty 
(Mugford, 63), Phillips (Mitchell, 60); Lewis-Roberts (Harrison, 50), Briggs 
(Pearce, 60), Mujati (Aulika, 50), Evans, Mills (Ostrikov, 58), Neild, Seymour 
(Lund, 58), Beaumont (capt).

Pen: Addison.
 