
The Glasgow flanker Ryan Wilson does not believe Edinburgh are ready to topple 
Warriors off their perch just yet. The Murrayfield men can make it three wins 
in a row over Warriors if they succeed in Saturday’s 1872 Cup second leg. 
Wilson, however, reckons his team remain the best team in Scotland afterwinning 
last year’s Pro12 title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/glasgow-munster-pro-12-final-match-report>
.

Northampton Saints put the squeeze on Exeter Chiefs to earn tight win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/01/northampton-saints-exeter-chiefs-premiership-match-report>
Asked if Edinburgh could claim to have overtaken their inter-city rivals if 
they triumph in this match – moved back to Murrayfield with Glasgow’s Scotstoun 
pitch waterlogged – the back-rower said: “No, I wouldn’t say so. We won the 
league last year. We have a fantastic team, with strength and depth, and we’re 
looking to go out and win this weekend. It’s a long old season and we’ve still 
got a lot of games to play. We’ll see how we come out at the other end.”

Edinburgh ended Glasgow’s five-year reign of dominance when they came out on 
top in last season’s festive double-header. Alan Solomons’ side backed it up 
with a 23-11 win in the capital last Sunday as they secured a 12-point 
advantage before the 1872 Cup second leg – as well as fourPro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> points to move above Warriors into 
the top six – but Wilson has promised a backlash.

“It was gutting, frustrating and really disappointing,” said the Scotland 
international as he reflected on last weekend’s defeat. “The boys have had a 
long look at themselves and the game, and gone over a few things. We’re in a 
positive place now.

“You always get a reaction from things like that, though. It was a tough one 
to take but we will move on. There will be a reaction.

“We know we were not good enough. For the opening 20 minutes we showed how we 
can play then we took the foot off the gas but we know we are a better team and 
that we can get the win this week. We can definitely turn the 12-point 
advantage around. We just need to play a bit smarter and play the way we want 
to play.”

Wilson will clock up his 100th appearance for Glasgow on Saturday and admitted 
he was in no rush to call time on his stint at Warriors.

“I’ve been here six years now and had a few injuries but it’s good to reach 
this landmark,” Wilson said. “It’s a big thing for a player to play that many 
games. There’s been a few guys reach 100 caps for Glasgow, like John Barclay, 
Graeme Morrison and Al Kellock.

“That is testament to the club that there is such a strong bond here. People 
want to stay and make those milestones.”
 