
The Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saddam-hussein>, who was executed this 
morning at the age of 69, may not yield many general biographies - he was 
personally too uninteresting for that - but he will be a case study for 
political scientists for years to come. For he was the model of a certain type 
of developing world despot, who was, for over three decades, as successful in 
his main ambition, which was taking and keeping total power, as he was 
destructive in exercising it.

Yet at the same time, he was commonplace and derivative. Stalin was his 
exemplar. The likeness came from more than conscious emulation: he already 
resembled him in origin, temperament and method. Like him, he was unique less 
in kind than in degree, in the extraordinary extent to which, if the more 
squalid forms of human villainy are the sine qua non of the successful tyrant, 
he embodied them. Like Stalin, too, he had little of the flair or colour of 
other 20th-century despots, little mental brilliance, less charisma, no 
redeeming passion or messianic fervour; he was only exceptional in the 
magnitude of his thuggery, the brutality, opportunism and cunning of the 
otherwise dull, grey apparatchik.

His rise to power was no more accidental than Stalin's. If he had not mastered 
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> as he did, someone very similar 
probably would have, and very probably also from Tikrit. Saddam's peculiar 
fortune was that, on his political majority, this small, drab town, on the 
Tigris upstream from Baghdad, was already poised to wrest a very special role 
in Iraqi history.

Saddam was born in the nearby village of Owja, into the mud house of his 
uncle, Khairallah Tulfah, and into what a Tikriti contemporary of his called a 
world "full of evil". His father, Hussein al-Majid, a landless peasant, had 
died before his birth, and his mother, Sabha, could not support the orphan, 
until she took a third husband.

Hassan Ibrahim took to extremes local Bedouin notions of a hardy upbringing. 
For punishment, he beat his stepson with an asphalt-covered stick. Thus, from 
earliest infancy, was Saddam nurtured - like a Stalin born into very similar 
circumstances - in the bleak conviction that the world is a congenitally 
hostile place, life a ceaseless struggle for survival, and survival only 
achieved through total self-reliance, chronic mistrust and the imperious 
necessity to destroy others before they destroy you.

The sufferings visited on the child begat the sufferings the grown man, 
warped, paranoid, omnipotent, visited on an entire people. Like Stalin, he hid 
his emotions behind an impenetrable facade of impassivity; but he assuredly had 
emotions of a virulent kind - an insatiable thirst for vengeance on the world 
he hated.

To fend off attack by other boys, Saddam carried an iron bar. It became the 
instrument of his wanton cruelty; he would bring it to a red heat, then stab a 
passing animal in the stomach, splitting it in half. Killing was considered a 
badge of courage among his male relatives. Saddam's first murder was of a 
shepherd from a nearby tribe. This, and three more in his teens, were proof of 
manhood.

The small-town thug possessed all the personal qualifications he might need to 
earn his place in the 20th-century's pantheon of tyrants. And the small town of 
Tikrit, lying in the heart of the Sunni Muslim "triangle" of central Iraq 
furnished the operational ones, too. Orthodox Sunni Arabs are only a small 
minority, 15% at most, of Iraq's population, outnumbered by the Shias of the 
south, 60% at least, and the Kurds of the mountainous north. Yet they always 
dominated Iraq's political life.

Thanks partly to the decline of traditional river traffic, Tikritis had taken 
to supplying the British-controlled Iraqi state with a disproportionate number 
of its soldiers. With time and plentiful purges, they emerged within the army 
as a distinct group; a preponderance which had been fortuitous at first finally 
became so great they could deliberately enlarge it. A close-knit minority 
within the Sunni minority, they exploited ties of region, clan and family to 
seize control of the army, then the state. Saddam, perfect recruit to the 
sinister, violent, conspiratorial underworld that was Iraqi politics, 
positioned himself at the heart of this process.

He himself was never a soldier, but he used a formidable array of Tikritis who 
were, and Ba'athists to boot. Ba'athism was a radical, pan-Arab nationalist 
doctrine then sweeping the region. Though doubtless impelled in that direction 
by the extreme, chauvinist beliefs of his uncle Khairallah, who had been 
dismissed from the army and imprisoned for five years for his part in a 1941 
attack on an RAF base near Baghdad, it was mainly out of convenience, not 
conviction, that Saddam joined the party; strong in Tikrit and the Sunni 
"triangle", dedicated to force not persuasion, it readily appealed to a man of 
his ambition and temper.

In theory he remained a Ba'athist to his dying day, but for him Ba'athism was 
always an apparatus, never an ideology: no sooner was command of the one 
complete than he dispensed entirely with the other. For next to brutality, 
opportunism was his chief trait. Not Stalin himself could have governed with 
such whimsy, or lurched, ideologically, politically, strategically, from one 
extreme to another with quite such ease, regularity, and disastrous 
consequences, and yet still, incredibly, retain command to the end.

The Ba'ath, and other "revolutionary" parties, had come into their own with 
the overthrow, in 1958, of the "reactionary", British-created Hashemite 
monarchy. They quickly fell out with General Kassem's new regime and with each 
other, rivalries that expressed themselves mainly in streetfighting and 
assassinations. That was the way of life that Saddam fell into as a street-gang 
leader, after going, in 1955, to live with his uncle in Baghdad to study at 
Karkh high school.

Saddam first achieved national prominence in 1959 with a bungled attempt to 
kill Kassem. He seems to have lost his nerve and opened fire prematurely. But 
though his role was less than glorious, it became an essential component of the 
Saddam legend - that of the dauntless young revolutionary extracting a bullet 
from his leg with his own hand, and, with security forces in hot pursuit, 
swimming the icy waters of the Euphrates, knife between clenched teeth, before 
galloping to safety across the Syrian desert; eventually fetching up in Cairo, 
where his university law studies were terminated by the next political 
convulsion back home - Kassem's overthrow in February 1963.

Securing a share in the new regime, the Ba'athists lost it the following 
November when they fell out with the other parties. Pushed back into the 
underground, Saddam took what subsequently turned out to be his first, concrete 
step towards supreme office. In 1964, he formed the Jihaz al-Hunein, the 
Instrument of Yearning, the first, embryonic version of a terror apparatus of 
which, in its full fruition, Stalin would not have been ashamed.

It was an outgrowth of the party. That meant that, through it, Saddam, though 
not an officer, could now see his way to the summit. But at this stage his main 
asset was his collaboration with his fellow-Tikriti, Brigadier Ahmad Hassan 
al-Bakr. Thanks to a combination of Bakr's traditional military means and 
Saddam's new, "civilian" ones, the pair pulled off the "glorious July 1968 
Revolution".

At 31, as deputy secretary general of the Ba'ath party, Saddam was the power 
behind President Bakr's throne. But at first he assumed, like Stalin in his 
similar period, a disarmingly modest and retiring demeanour as he lay the 
foundations of what he called a new kind of rule; "With our party methods," he 
said, "there is no chance for anyone who disagrees with us to jump on a couple 
of tanks and overthrow the government." Gradually he subordinated the army to 
the party.

There was nothing modest about the Ba'athists' inaugural reign of terror; few 
knew it then, but it was chiefly his handiwork, and quite different from 
anything hitherto experienced in a country already notorious for its harsh 
political tradition. Saddam's henchmen presided over "revolutionary tribunals" 
that sent hundreds to the firing squad on charges of puerile, trumped up 
absurdity. They called on "the masses" to "come and enjoy the feast": the 
hanging of "Jewish spies" in Liberation Square amid ghoulish festivities and 
bloodcurdling official harangues.

That was the public face. Behind it were such places as the Palace of the End. 
So called because King Faisal died there in the 1958 Revolution, it was now 
more aptly named than ever. Saddam's first security chief, Nadhim Kzar, had 
turned it into a chamber of horrors. But Kzar, a Shia, nursed a grudge against 
his Sunni patrons; in 1973, he turned against them; Saddam, Bakr and a host of 
top Tikritis had a very narrow escape indeed.

Thereafter the badly shaken number two relied almost entirely on Tikritis; the 
more sensitive the post, the more closely related its incumbent would be to 
himself. Meanwhile, with guile and infinite patience, he worked his way towards 
his supreme goal. Purge followed judicious purge, first aimed at the 
Ba'athists' rivals, then the army, then the party, then influential, respected, 
or strategically located people whom he deemed most liable, at some point, to 
cry halt to his inexorable ascension.

When, in June 1979, all was set for him to depose and succeed the ailing Bakr, 
he could have accomplished it with bloodless ease. But he wilfully, 
gratuitously chose blood in what was a psychological as well as a symbolic 
necessity. He had to inaugurate the "era of Saddam Hussein" with a rite whose 
message would be unmistakable: there had arisen in Mesopotamia a ruler who, in 
his barbaric splendour, cruelty and caprice, was to yield nothing to its 
despots of old.

Only now did he emerge, personally and very publicly, as accuser, judge and 
executioner in one. He called an extraordinary meeting of senior party cadres. 
They were solemnly informed that "a gang disloyal to the party and the 
revolution" had mounted a "base conspiracy" in the service of "Zionism and the 
forces of darkness", and that all the "traitors" were right there, with them, 
in the hall. One of their ringleaders, brought straight from prison, made a 
long and detailed confession of his "horrible crime".

Saddam, puffing on a Havana cigar, calmly watched the proceedings as if they 
had nothing to do with him. Then he took the podium. He began to read out the 
"traitors'" names, slowly and theatrically; he seemed quite overcome as he did 
so, pausing only to light his cigar or wipe away his tears with a handkerchief. 
All 66 "traitors" were led away one by one.

Thus did the new president make inaugural use of that essential weapon of the 
ultimate tyrant, the occasional flamboyant, contemptuous act of utter 
lawlessness, turpitude or unpredictability, and the enforced prostration of his 
whole apparatus, in praise and rejoicing, before it. Those of the audience who 
had not been named showed their relief with hysterical chants of gratitude and 
a baying for the blood of their fallen comrades.

Saddam then called on ministers and party leaders to join him in personally 
carrying out the "democratic executions"; every party branch in the country 
sent an armed delegate to assist them. It was, he said, "the first time in the 
history of revolutionary movements without exception, or perhaps of human 
struggle, that over half the supreme leadership had taken part in a tribunal" 
which condemned the other half. "We are now," he confided, "in our Stalinist 
era."

But in one way he had actually surpassed his exemplar. Upon entering the 
Kremlin, the former Georgian streetfighter had at least kept himself fittingly 
aloof from his "great terror". Not Saddam. Newly exalted, he was to remain 
down-to-earth too; new caliph of Baghdad, but, direct participant in his own 
terror, very much the Tikriti gangster, too.

The "Leader, President, Struggler" now emerged as a regional and international 
actor with the disproportionate capacity for promoting well-being and order or 
wreaking havoc which Iraq's great strategic and political importance, vast oil 
wealth, relatively educated citizenry and powerful army conferred on him. With 
U-turns, blunders and megalomaniac whimsies, he chose havoc; he wreaked it on 
the region and the world, but above all on Iraq itself.

In September 1980 he went to war against Iran. It was known as "Saddam's 
Qadisiyah", after the Arabs' early Islamic victory over the Persians. His 
official, strictly limited war aims revolved round the Shatt al-Arab estuary 
and his determination to renegotiate the "Algiers agreement" he had concluded a 
mere five years before. A dire emergency had forced that humiliation on him: 
the Iraqi army had been close to defeat in its campaign to suppress the last 
great, Iranian-backed Kurdish uprising led by Mullah Mustafa Barazani. The quid 
pro quo for Algiers had been the American-inspired withdrawal of the Shah's 
support for Barazani.

His "Qadisiyah", first of his spectacular volte-faces, was now to avenge the 
humiliation. But he also had a higher, unofficial aim: to weaken or destroy the 
Ayatollah Khomeini's new-born Islamic Republic, or at least its subversive 
potentialities in Iraq itself. For Iraq's Shia majority now saw in their 
Iranian co-religionists a means of bringing down Sunni minority rule. Hitherto 
closely bound to the Soviet Union, Saddam now bid for the west's favour as the 
Shah's natural heir as the "strong man" of the Gulf.

In the terrible eight-year struggle that followed, the Ayatollah's Iran 
remorselessly turned the tables on the Iraqi aggressor, recovered all its 
conquered territory, and, in a series of fearsome "human wave" offensives, 
tried to conquer Iraq, and turn it into the world's second "Islamic Republic".

That would have been a geopolitical upheaval of incalculable consequences. To 
forestall it, the west, beneath a mask of outward neutrality, put its weight 
behind one unlovely regime because it found the other unlovelier still. While 
the frightened, oil-rich Gulf furnished cash, the west furnished conventional 
weapons, and the means to manufacture a whole array of unconventional ones: 
nuclear, chemical and biological. Almost miraculously, Saddam held out, until, 
in July 1988, Khomeini drank from what he called "the poisoned chalice" of a 
ceasefire.

Of course, Saddam hailed this, his "first Gulf war", as a victory. Though what 
possible victory there could have been in an outcome which, in addition to 
hundreds of thousands of dead, wounded and captured, immense physical 
destruction and economic havoc, left Iraq on a permanent war footing, still 
seeking to renegotiate the status of the Shatt al-Arab?

Even if he could not officially admit it, he had good reason to give his 
people some recompense for their sufferings. He made as if to offer them two 
things, material betterment and some democratisation. But he cannot have been 
serious about either. Thanks to the ravages of his "Qadisiyah", he had no money 
for economic reconstruction. And, in another great volte-face, he staged a 
virtual counter-revolution against the one ideal of Ba'athism, its socialism, 
which he had made a passable attempt to put into practice. Worse, the main 
beneficiaries of the economic revisionism were the Tikriti pillars of his 
regime, now corrupt as well as despotic.

With the fall of Nicolae Ceausescu, the east European dictator he most closely 
resembled, Saddam abandoned talk of "the new pluralist trends" he discerned in 
the world. Indeed, he persisted, more surrealistically than ever, in the 
despot's law: the more disastrous his deeds the more they should be glorified. 
His cult of personality expressed itself most overbearingly in monumental 
architecture, where the public - an amazing array of bizarre or futuristic 
memorials to his "Qadisiyah" - merged with the private (his proliferating 
palaces) in grandiose tribute to all the attributes, bordering on the divine, 
ascribed to him.

It reflected a degree of control that enabled him, amazingly, to embark, 
within two years of the first, on his "second Gulf war", and then, more 
amazingly still, to survive that yet greater calamity in its turn. It was a 
resort to the classic diversionary expedient, a flashy foreign adventure, of 
the dictator in trouble at home. He cast himself once again as the pan-Arab 
champion, boasting that, having secured the Arabs' eastern flank against the 
Persians, he was now turning his attention westwards, with the aim of settling 
scores with the Arabs' other great foe, the Zionists. He threatened "to burn 
half of Israel" with his weapons of mass destruction, thrilling large segments 
of an Arab public desperately short of credible heroes.

But instead of Israel, it was Kuwait which, on the night of August 2 1990, 
Saddam attacked, or, rather, gobbled up in its entirety. Hardly had he done 
that than, to appease Iran, he unilaterally re-accepted the Algiers agreement 
on the Shatt al-Arab. It was the most breathtaking of his volte-faces; even as 
he dragged his people into another unprovoked war, he was in effect telling 
them that, in the first, they had shed all that blood, sweat and tears for 
nothing.

The Kuwait invasion was the ultimate excess, whimsy and Promethean delusion of 
the despot: the belief that he could get away with anything. Yet nothing had 
encouraged this excess like the west's indulgence of his earlier ones. Sure, it 
had never loved him. But neither had it protested at his use of chemical 
weapons against Iran. It had contented itself with little more than a wringing 
of hands when he went on to gas his own people.

In March 1988, in revenge for an Iranian territorial gain, he wiped out 5,000 
Kurdish inhabitants of Halabja; then, the war over, he wiped out several 
thousand more in "Operation Anfal", his final, genocidal attempt to solve his 
Kurdish problem. In effect, the west's reaction had been to treat the Kurds as 
an internal Iraqi affair; exterminating them en masse may have briefly stirred 
the international conscience, but it tended, if anything, to reinforce the 
existing international order.

But now that he was so ungratefully, so shockingly threatening this order 
itself, the west finally awoke to the true nature of the monster it had 
nurtured. Before long, Saddam faced an American-led army of half a million men 
assembled in the Arabian desert.

He did not blench. And for a few months he won adulation as the latter-day 
Saladin, who, after Kuwait, would go on to liberate Palestine. He said his army 
was eagerly awaiting the coalition's great land offensive to reconquer Kuwait; 
in "the mother of all battles", Iraq would "water the desert with American 
blood".

But he stood no chance. For a month, allied aircraft rained high-tech 
devastation on his army, air force, economic and strategic infrastructure. He 
panicked, ordering his army's withdrawal from Kuwait. It was not enough for the 
allies. As their ground forces swept almost unopposed through Kuwait, then into 
southern Iraq, the withdrawal became a rout. They could have marched on 
Baghdad. He caved in utterly, accepting every demand that the allies made. Only 
then did they cease their advance.

They had shattered most of his "million-man army" except for its elite 
Republican Guards, held in reserve to defend the regime against the wrath of 
the people. And this time their wrath was truly unleashed. The two oppressed 
majorities, Shias and Kurds, staged their great uprisings. These began 
spontaneously, when a Shia tank commander, having fled from Kuwait to Basra, 
positioned his vehicle in front of one of those gigantic, ubiquitous murals of 
the tyrant and addressed it thus: "What has befallen us of defeat, shame and 
humiliation, Saddam, is the result of your follies, your miscalculations and 
your irresponsible actions."

But the uprisings foundered on the rock of Saddam's residual strength, western 
betrayal and, in the south, their own disorganisation, vengeful excesses and 
failure to distance themselves from Iranian expansionist designs. Exploiting 
the Sunni minority's fear that if he went, so would many of them, in the most 
horrible of massacres, Saddam sent in his guards. Dreadful atrocities 
accompanied the slow reconquest of the south. And when the Guards turned north, 
the whole population of "liberated" Kurdistan fled in panic through snow and 
bitter cold to Iran and Turkey.

The television images of that grim stampede caught the measure of western 
betrayal. Four weeks previously, President George Bush senior had urged the 
Iraqis to rise up. But when they did so, he turned a deaf ear to their pleas 
for help. "New Hitler" Saddam might be, but he was also the only barrier 
against the possible break-up of Iraq itself. Saudi Arabia, for one, could not 
tolerate the prospect. It told the US it would work to replace Saddam with an 
army officer who would keep the country in safe, authoritarian, Sunni Muslim 
hands.

Saddam was saved again. And for 12 more years he hung on, as his people sank 
into social, economic and political miseries incomparably greater than those 
which had propelled him into Kuwait. Tikriti solidarity continued to preserve 
him against putsch and assassination. And never again would the people stage an 
uprising without assurance of success. Only the west could provide that. But 
the West, preoccupied with other crises, was paralysed.

It would, or could, not withdraw from what, after the Gulf war, it had put in 
place, a curious, contradictory amalgam of UN sanctions that penalised the 
Iraqi people, not its rulers, a moral commitment to safeguard "liberated" 
Kurdistan, an ineffectual "no-fly zone" over the Shia south.

But it also feared to go further in and, completing the logic of what it had 
begun, join forces with a serious Iraqi opposition that could bring the tyrant 
down and keep the country in one piece thereafter. This was inertia, which, the 
longer it lasted, the more dearly it would pay for in the end. Every now and 
then confrontations erupted between the world's only superpower and this most 
exasperating of "rogue states"; they arose out of Saddam's attempts to break 
out of his "box", via some renewed threat to Kuwait, an incursion into the 
western-protected Kurdish enclave, or - most persistently - showdowns over the 
UN's mission to divest Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction.

In the last of them, in 1998, his elite military and security apparatus took a 
four-day pounding from the air. Heavy though this was, it proved to be the 
last, symbolic flourish behind which the Clinton administration acquiesced in 
what, with the expulsion of the arms inspectors, was a diplomatic victory for 
Saddam.

In the end, it was less his own misdeeds that brought the despot down, but 
those of the man who, for a while, supplanted him as America's ultimate 
villain, Osama bin Laden. Saddam had nothing to do with 9/11, but he fell 
victim none the less to the crusading militarism, the new doctrine of the 
pre-emptive strike, the close identification with a rightwing Israeli agenda, 
that now took full possession of the administration of George Bush junior. Iraq 
became the first target among the three states (with Iran and North Korea) that 
it had placed on its "axis of evil", and with the launch of the invasion by the 
US, UK and their allies in March 2003, Saddam's days were numbered.

However, three years passed between his capture and his execution yesterday. 
In December 2003, following a tip-off from an intelligence source, US forces 
found him hiding in an underground refuge on a farm near Tikrit, where his life 
had begun. It was the middle of the next year before he was transferred to 
Iraqi custody, and in July 2004 the former president appeared in court to hear 
criminal charges. Another year passed before the prosecution was ready to 
proceed with counts related to the massacre in the small Shia town of Dujail in 
1982. The trial at last opened in October 2005 and the proceedings were 
immediately adjourned. Saddam, who two months earlier had sacked his legal 
team, pleaded innocence. A second trial on war crimes charges relating to the 
1988 Anfal campaign opened on August 21 this year. He refused to enter a plea, 
and episodes of black farce, which characterised his earlier appearances in 
court, recurred, with the judge switching of his microphone because of his 
interruptions, and ejecting him from the court four times. The trial was 
adjourned on October 11, but on November 5 the court handed down a guilty 
verdict and sentenced Saddam to death by hanging.

Saddam married Saida Khairallah in 1963. Their sons Uday and Qusay 
(obituaries, July 23 2003) were killed by American forces; they had three 
daughters.

· Saddam Hussein abd al-Majid, politician, born April 28 1937; died December 
30 2006.
 