
Someone comes to your door and says: “We’re going to knock your home down, but 
don’t worry because you’ll get a better one.” What might you say in reply? Two 
words, the second of which is “off”, come quickly to mind. But maybe you don’t 
much care for where you live. Maybe your home is tatty, draughty or too small. 
Maybe its surroundings depress you. Maybe the thought of a brand new place in a 
nicer setting holds some appeal. So if you haven’t told your visitor to go 
away, your reply might well be “that depends”.

Sadiq Khan’s draft good practice guide to estate regeneration 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land/improving-quality/good-practice-guide-estate-regeneration>
 is at pains to address the “that depends” end of such an imaginary doorstep 
exchange. The 38-page document, aimed at London’s local authorities and housing 
associations, stresses the mayor’s wish for the support of residents to be 
secured for any plan to demolish where they live and build something else there 
instead; or to “infill” spaces around or between or even above the existing 
homes; or, at the least radical end of the regeneration scale, to substantially 
refurbish and repair them.

The mayor’s foreword frames his favoured approach in terms of conservation and 
upgrade. “We must protect and improve estates,” he writes, setting this goal in 
the context of maintaining neighbourhood diversity: “The social housing they 
provide is a foundation of our mixed city.” The introduction repeats his 
manifesto pledge that demolition of estates should only occur if all other 
options for fixing problems and enhancing them have been exhausted.

Chapter One, entitled the “aims and objectives of estate regeneration”, points 
out that demolition and rebuild is “a time-consuming, expensive and highly 
disruptive process” and says alternative ways of achieving the project’s 
desired goals and objectives should be considered before this most drastic 
route is chosen. It adds that it should only be taken “where it does not result 
in a loss of social housing” and that “this principle will apply” to schemes 
looking for funding from City Hall. In other words,London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> councils and housing associations, if 
your regeneration plan involves rebuilding with fewer social rented dwellings 
than there were before, you’ll get no money to assist you from the mayor. He 
also aims to bring his best practice views to bear throughout the planning 
system, including on schemes that don’t involve him directly.

Chapter Two looks at consultation and engagement with residents in depth. 
Unsurprisingly, people become angry and upset if they feel their wishes and 
fears about their homes and estates are not being respected and that 
consultations are meaningless formalities after big decisions have already 
effectively been taken, or even covert ploys for neutralising opposition. The 
guidance, recognising this, says that consultation and engagement “should be a 
process, not an event” and begin “at the earliest stages of a project”. 
Potential costs and benefits, financial and social - a kind of regeneration 
balance sheet - should be set out in transparent detail from the start, 
including “the cost of doing nothing”. Everyone affected should be engaged, 
including temporary tenants and owners of small businesses on estates, and that 
engagement should be ongoing. The drawbacks of one-off ballots are highlighted: 
“They can risk turning a complex set of issues that affects different people in 
different ways in to a simple yes/no decision at a single point in time.”

The third and final chapter looks at the vexed issue of the rights of tenants 
and leaseholders. What exactly is a fair deal and how can these be guaranteed? 
Residents have legal entitlements to financial compensation, though there are 
well-documented cases of leaseholders discovering that these fall well short of 
what they need to buy a new home in the same area. There’s not much the mayor 
can do about that, other than urge landlords to be as generous as possible and 
to negotiate before resorting to compulsory purchase. The draft guidance says 
that social housing tenants should always have a “right to return”, with 
overcrowded households offered a larger dwelling. The mayor acknowledges that 
many councils and housing associations offer these terms already.

City Hall is emphasising that the draft guidance, which is out for public 
consultation for three months, aims to “put local people at the heart of estate 
regeneration in the capital”. As you would expect, its default reluctance to 
favour wholesale demolition is consistent with theapproach preferred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/aug/07/estate-regeneration-the-king-square-solution>
 by his housing deputy, James Murray, when he was housing lead at Islington 
Council. Other Labour boroughs have had a big input too, notably Lewisham, 
Ealing and Hackney, whose own mayors or leaders have endorsed the draft. Like 
Khan, they argue that estate regeneration of whatever type done well and with 
the backing of residents can viably maintain and increase the supply of 
“genuinely affordable” homes of various types, improve the quality of housing 
and enhance neighbourhoods without betraying residents or harmfully disrupting 
communities that often have far more going for them than is appreciated by 
politicians who believe council estates to have become inherently undesirable, 
“sink” entities best expunged.

This draft guidance won’t satisfy everyone. Those who advocate a massive 
estate development programme across the capital will think it far too 
conservative. They, perhaps, should bear in mind that a recentCentre for London 
report <http://www.centreforlondon.org/publication/estate-densification/> found 
that most of the larger Inner London estates have already undergone some form 
of regeneration and that the theoretical potential for “densification”, though 
significant, is not as vast in London as is sometimes claimed. On the other 
hand, some will contend that the guidance should include an explicit ultimate 
power of veto for residents, while champions of stock transfers from councils 
to bespoke, community-led housing associations may be disappointed that their 
regeneration recipe is not acknowledged, though the driving impulse of such 
campaigners to align the evolution of estates, including any redevelopment of 
them, with the wishes of their residents seems not massively at odds with the 
mayor’s words. “Involving residents at the start helps build trust in the 
[regeneration] process,” writes Khan. “It also means residents can help shape 
the options that emerge”. It is a good principle. The success of future estate 
regenerations will depend greatly on it being honoured.

Sadiq Khan’s draft good practice guide to estate regeneration and ways to 
respond to the consultation can be readhere 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land/improving-quality/good-practice-guide-estate-regeneration>
.
 