
Denny Solomona may end up costing Sale up to £500,000 in compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/castleford-high-court-sue-denny-solomona-sale-switch>
 but increasingly he looks worth every penny. Two tries in anarrow 29-26 defeat 
at Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-sale-sharks-premiership-match-report>
 – the second of which involved a marvellous piece of skill – takes his tally 
to four in his first three Premiership matches. It can be only a matter of time 
before Eddie Jones comes calling.

Tim Swiel stars as injury-hit Harlequins rally to overwhelm Sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-sale-sharks-premiership-match-report>
Solomona really ought to have had a hat-trick, too – his first-half try was 
disallowed because of Rob Webber’s forward pass but the opportunity was so 
clear, and Solomona so quick, that it was needless to say the least. Instead, 
it was a costly error that neatly sums up Sale’s plight.

Nine successive defeats in all competitions is freefall, whichever way you 
look at it, but as Steve Diamond pointed out,Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> are not playing badly and they 
were perhaps worthy of the draw that suddenly looked possible after Solomona’s 
second score – picking up TJ Ioane’s crossfield kick on the half-volley with an 
ease that belied the difficulty of its execution.

Solomona’s switch of codes from Castleford Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sale-controversial-denny-solomona-deal-castleford-rugby-league-union>
 was certainly contentious but the continued legal wrangling is not affecting 
the 23-year-old’s displays, even if he will anxiously await the citing 
officer’s report after a shoulder-led tackle that prompted Nick Evans’s early 
departure.

Having arrived in the UK in early 2014, Solomona is eligible for England’s 
summer tour of Argentina, which may be the right time to blood the New 
Zealand-born wing, and after scoring a record 42 tries in 29 Super League 
matches last year, he is so far similarly prolific in union.

“He scored two today, he had one disallowed. He scores every time he plays,” 
Diamond said. “We need to get security in this competition ahead of recruitment 
for next season. We just need a little bit more control at nine and 10 and we 
need to get the ball to Denny, who certainly knows where the whitewash is. If 
we play like that, we won’t lose another game at home this season.”

It is clearly Sale’s home form that troubles Diamond most. Traditionally it is 
where they amass the vast majority of their points but they are missing Danny 
Cipriani’s mastery and Diamond will hope that the prospect of a relegation 
battle does not dissuade George Ford from a move back to the north-west next 
season.

Harlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru>, meanwhile, have 
no such troubles at fly-half. Evans was one of three players to go off injured 
in the first quarter – while Joe Marler was ruled out before kick-off – but 
enter Tim Swiel to score 24 points and seal Quins’ 10th successive home victory 
in all competitions.

“I’ve got a bit of experience coming on early in a few games and that has 
probably helped me as time has gone on, to do better each game,” said Swiel, 
who was flawless from the tee with seven kicks from seven. “Last year my 
kicking wasn’t as good, so I really worked on it during the off-season. 
Obviously, Nick Evans is there to help, he’s really been good to me, so I’ve 
kind of paid him back, coming on and getting the kicks.”

He was not alone in impressing as a replacement. Adam Jones began the day out 
of the squad, was summoned to stand in as forwards coach and when Marler was 
ruled out with a calf injury that will concern the England coach, he provided 
cover on the bench. Cue injuries to Evans, as well as the starting props Owen 
Evans and Will Collier, and the 100-cap Welshman was soon putting in an 
hour-long shift at loosehead.

Solomona’s first try came shortly after Jones’s introduction but Quins rallied 
with scores from Charlie Walker and Swiel just before the interval. Byron 
McGuigan crossed for Sale shortly after half-time but Swiel’s kicking kept 
Harlequins’ noses in front to move them up into seventh and looking upwards, 
even if their injury troubles – Chris Robshaw will discover on Monday the 
extent of his shoulder problem – show no sign of abating.

Harlequins Brown; Yarde, Alofa, Marchant (Hopper, 71), Walker; N Evans (Swiel, 
6), Care (capt; Dickson, 69); O Evans (Jones, 21), Buchanan, Collier (Sinckler, 
7), Merrick, Matthews, Wallace (Naoupu, 62), Ward, Chisholm.

Tries Walker, Swiel. Cons Swiel 2. Pens Swiel 5. 

Sale Haley; Solomona, Addison, Leota, McGuigan; James, Mitchell (Phillips, 
61); Harrison (Flynn, 68), Webber (Briggs, 61), Aulika (Longbottom, 58), Evans, 
Ostrikov (Mills, 61), Neild, Ioane, Beaumont (capt; Curry, 50).

Tries Solomona 2, McGuigan. Cons Addison. Pens Addison 3.

Referee JP Doyle. Attendance 14,148.
 