
Sam Allardyce left his imprint on Bolton, just as they shaped him, but as he 
returned to one club he both played for and managed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/bolton-wanderers-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
, he suggested he will instead borrow his blueprint from another. A decade ago, 
he threatened to take Bolton into the top four.Extricating Sunderland from the 
bottom three last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/sunderland-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 has more pertinence to his current plight, however, and he hopes history will 
repeat itself 300 miles further south and 12 months later.

Crystal Palace hang on for goalless draw after Bolton’s Josh Vela hits bar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/bolton-wanderers-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
January proved pivotal in his Sunderland salvage bid. Allardyce is again 
targeting upgrades atCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>, wondering how many ways 
he can split his budget without quantity replacing quality, and confounding the 
orthodox wisdom that striking additions are crucial at this time of year.

He issued a warning that those who do not buy regress. “In every window, if 
you don’t [spend] and the rest do, you are making your life even more difficult 
to stay in the Premier League,” the Crystal Palace manager said. “It’s that 
simple.”

The prospect of “astronomical” prices worries him. Fees may determine the 
number of incomings. “If it gets too expensive it may be two, if it can be 
spread to three it would be great,” Allardyce added. “It’s about the quality. 
They have to be better than what we have. Similar to Sunderland: we did four 
[deals] and it made all the difference to staying up.”

His crucial recruits then were the centre-back Lamine Koné and Jan Kirchhoff, 
the defender he deployed in front of the back four. They helped Sunderland end 
the season with four clean sheets in their final eight games. Now the 
priorities are similar. Allardyce will spend another winter window searching 
for solidity. He wants a central defender and a left-back.

“Zeki Fryers is only left-footed left-back in the club,” he said. “That’s a 
position we’ve identified. We only have three central defenders, so if one gets 
suspended and one gets injured it would be a struggle. This team hasn’t kept 
any clean sheets. If we can keep eight or nine in the next 18 matches we’ll be 
safe.”

Numbers underpin Allardyce’s logic. Palace have scored only one league goal 
fewer than Manchester United but have let in 15 more than Middlesbrough, the 
team immediately above them.

“We’ve got quality players who create chances,” he added. “We need to finish 
them but we have to start with clean sheets if we want to get out of trouble.” 
WhileWilfried Zaha is gone to the Africa Cup of Nations <http:>, his attacking 
armoury has nevertheless been boosted, courtesy of his predecessor.

Alan Pardew signed Loïc Rémy but injuries meant the Frenchman’s bow was 
postponed until Saturday’s 0-0 draw at Bolton.

Rémy struck a post and showed signs of sharpness in a display that may further 
encourage Allardyce to concentrate his recruitment drive on defenders. Even 
with his success recruiting them last season, Sunderland almost went down. It 
left Allardyce with few illusions about the scale of his task at Selhurst Park. 
“Tough as hell,” he said.

The Bolton manager, Phil Parkinson, is also looking to reinforce his squad for 
the promotion push from League One, having dropped to third on Saturday because 
of their cup involvement. “We have the transfer embargo which is a great 
frustration for us because we have a restriction on the numbers we can have in 
the squad, but there is a little bit of room for manoeuvre,” he said.

“Between myself and the chairman, by the end of the window we will move things 
around and make sure this squad is strong going into the second half of the 
season. The most important thing is we don’t want to lose our best young 
players like Zach Clough and Josh Vela, who we need to develop with the club 
and grow back with the club. That is as important as adding anyone to the 
squad.”
 