
The win I am most proud of was against England in 2013 in the Millennium 
Stadium. England were on for a grand slam, but we beat them 30-3. The 
atmosphere was incredible. I’ve never experienced anything like it.

I didn’t realise how many injuries I was going to have playing rugby. I’m 
sitting here now with six stitches in my eye after it was opened up last week.

I had my first surgery on my knee at 18. I burst out crying when the surgeon 
told me. Now if I am injured I think six months out is a great amount of time 
to let my body heal. It’s a way to take the positives from long-term injury.

I have to warm my knees up every morning. I can’t remember the last time I 
walked up or down stairs without using the bannister.

When the All Blacks do the haka it can really rile me up. I normally zone in 
on one player. As soon as it’s kick-off I go into him with everything I’ve got.

My dad is a massive heavy metal fan. When I was 16 I set up a gym in the 
garage. I used to train listening to Metallica. Now I’m into R&B and hip hop.

When my twin brother goes out in Cardiff he gets a lot of attention from fans 
who think it’s me. He is now a physio at Cardiff Blues, so when I was having 
rehab on my shoulder it was him who did it.

I grew up four doors down from my wife. Basically I stumbled out of the house 
and fell for the first girl I saw. We’ve been together since we were 17, so 
hopefully I’m doing something right.

I used to play in the same school football team as Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale>. He was snapped up by 
Southampton as a 10-year-old and wasn’t allowed to play rugby. He was head and 
shoulders above anyone else I ever saw play.

I’m a huge Spurs fan. My dad’s supported Tottenham from the age of five. He 
gave me my first Spurs kit with Sam 9 on the shirt. I’ve not looked back since.

My dog is called Ledley after Ledley King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/13/ledley-king-life-after-football>
,my favourite Tottenham player. It’s a labradoodle. My wife picked the breed, 
but I told her it had to be named Ledley. That wasn’t up for debate. We’ve had 
five dogs in our family and they are all called after Tottenham players.

I like to play golf in my time off. Realistically, I’m a 28 handicap.

I’m very tidy. I’m a bit anal around the house. I do a lot of hoovering. I 
like our bedroom to look like a hotel room. When I get back with the dog after 
a walk I carry him upstairs to wash his paws with warm water.

I used to have a terrible temper. When I was younger all you could hear was my 
mum on the touchline shouting: “Sam, stay calm!”

Flanker is a very hostile position. I’m in your face. I’m a pain in the 
backside. But I am careful not to take it personally when another player does 
the same to me. I try to walk away and never let them see they’ve got to me.

I don’t like to cry in front of my wife. But during that John Lewis Christmas 
advert, the one with the penguins, she spotted me welling up.

The RBS Six Nations starts on 6 February. Sam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> is a BT Sport ambassador

To read all the interviews in this series, go to theguardian.com/thismuchiknow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandhealth/series/thismuchiknow>
 