
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> will be fit to 
lead Wales against Ireland in Cardiff next week after a scan on his right knee 
revealed nothing worse than bruising but the Bath prop Paul James will miss the 
rest of the Six Nations after breaking a bone in his hand against France.

Warburton will train with Wales when they report back this week, along with 
his fellow flanker Dan Lydiate whose scan on a hip injury also revealed no 
damage. The 2013 champions, who lost their crown to Ireland last year, got back 
into the title race when their20-13 win over France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/28/france-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 was followed byEngland’s 19-9 defeat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/01/ireland-england-six-nations-match-report>
in Dublin.

Ireland are the only remaining unbeaten team in the tournament and they have a 
remarkable record in Cardiff, losing only twice in the Welsh capital in the 
championship in the last 32 years. They expect to have their fly-half and 
talisman Jonathan Sexton available for selection after he limped off against 
England having felt a twinge in his hamstring.

Ireland on Monday described the problem, which occurred as Sexton converted 
the only try of the match, as “minor”. The champions hope the flanker Sean 
O’Brien and the centre Jared Payne will be fit after suffering knocks to the 
head against England. They are both following the graduated return to play 
concussion protocols.

The Ireland wing Simon Zebo said the squad were not talking about the grand 
slam, a feat achieved by Ireland once since 1948. “Our focus is Wales. On their 
day can beat anyone and it will be a huge test for us. They’re an unbelievably 
dangerous side and it will be the biggest game of our season. We live in a kind 
of bubble and talk of the grand slam is for those on the outside.”

France will not win the title and their unhappy year got worse when the 
scrum-half Morgan Parra, who made his first Test start against Wales for nine 
months, was ruled out for 10 weeks after suffering ligament damage in his right 
knee. The centre Wesley Fofana is likely to miss both their final two matches 
having torn a thigh muscle but is likely to be back for Clermont Auvergne’s 
European Champions Cup home quarter-final with Northampton next month. His 
club-mate Parra has been ruled out until the middle of the following month.
 