
Sam Jones was one of the surprise inclusions in England’s squad for the autumn 
internationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/england-sam-jones-training-squad-autumn-internationals>
 but the Wasps flanker will not be making his Test debut this year after 
breaking his right leg in a judo session at a national training camp in 
Brighton.

Paul Gustard believes England can learn new skills from other code
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/paul-gustard-england-rugby-union-squad-defence-coach>
The 24-year-old Jones was being considered as a replacement for his injured 
club-mate James Haskell at openside flanker but his unavailability means Eddie 
Jones is likely to pick Chris Robshaw and Maro Itoje as the flankers against 
South Africa next month and operate them on a left and right basis rather than 
open and blind.

It is understood Jones and Maro Itoje were putting into practice what they had 
been taught by British Judo coaches JP Bell and Kate Howey when injury struck 
on Tuesday morning.

The players had been practising skills that England believe might prove useful 
at the breakdown and in the tackle.

Jones had an x-ray on his injured leg which revealed a fracture and he will 
have a scan on Friday to find out the extent of the damage and when he can 
expect to be back in action. “I feel for Sam,” said Dai Young, theWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> director of rugby. “He has 
worked his socks off for us and was deservedly called up by England.

“He has been one of the first names on my team-sheet this season and my 
biggest disappointment for him is that he has been playing so well. I am sure 
he would have made a good impression on the England camp and you cannot help 
but feel sorry for him. It’s too soon to know how long he will be out but our 
medics and physios will look after him and we look forward to having him back 
when he is ready.”

Jones is the third England back-row to be ruled out of the autumn campaign, 
after Haskell and Jack Clifford, and Eddie Jones also has concerns over the 
fitness of his captain, Dylan Hartley, and Owen Farrell, who has featured 
mainly in the centre for his country this year. Hartley has not played since 
coming off at half-time with a back problem during Northampton’s second match 
of the season at Bristol more than three weeks ago while Farrell has not 
featured since the summer tour to Australia because of back and hip problems 
that have left him unable to kick without pain.

England play South Africa on 12 November but Northampton do not know when 
Hartley will return to action. “He is improving,” said the club’s attack coach, 
Alex King. “He went to Brighton with the England squad and returned to us on 
Wednesday. He is responding well and I do not think he will be too far away. We 
have not set a date on when he will be back.”

King said that Luther Burrell, who was taken to hospital after suffering 
concussion during thePremiership defeat by Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/saracens-northampton-premiership-match-report>
 last month, is close to being available for selection again. The midfielder 
was knocked out after mistiming a tackle on Brad Barritt.

A series of concussions has ended the career of the South Africa and Saracens 
second-row Alistair Hargreaves, who has retired at the age of 30 after taking 
medical advice. “It was a very tough decision to take but after a number of 
concussions in the last two seasons I have come to the conclusion that the risk 
is outweighing the reward,” said the champions’ former captain.

“I have a young family and have to take decisions that are right by them. I 
feel this is the right one. Saracens have been amazing to me ever since I 
walked through the doors, but especially over the last 12 months when I have 
been suffering from injuries and concussion. They have been a constant source 
of support in a really emotional and difficult time.

“The first person I spoke to about this was Mark McCall [the director of 
rugby] and he was completely supportive. This club puts people first and their 
interests throughout have been ‘what’s best for me and my family’ and I’m 
extremely grateful for the way they have handled the matter.”
 