
Even for someone of Sam Warburton’s stature there was no tip-off or discreet 
wink. That is not Warren Gatland’s way. Instead, like the rest of the Wales 
players, Warburton endured an anxious wait for a text message that arrived over 
Sunday lunch. “Congratulations,” it read. “You have been selected for the 
autumn internationals. Please confirm you have received this text. Email to 
follow.”

Seven months after dislocating his right shoulder in the Six Nations victory 
against Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/15/wales-scotland-six-nations>, 
Warburton was back in the squad. During the summer, while he was running and 
rehabilitating like crazy and some were suggesting Alun Wyn Jones was a better 
leader, Warburton was asked by a random passer-by if he was the Wales captain. 
“Well, I was,” he said. “But I’m not sure now.”

Those doubts were eradicated when Warburton was reinstalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/warren-gatland-sam-warburton-wales-autumn-internationals>
 for Saturday’s game against Australia but such humility hints at why he 
remains so driven and successful. Even now – despite leading Wales to the World 
Cup semi-finals and a subsequent grand slam, and the Lions in Australia – he 
regards complacency as something to be attacked with the vigour of a loose ball 
at the breakdown.

“When I started playing for Wales, Warren Gatland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warren-gatland> gave me a good piece of 
advice: treat every international like it is your last,” he says. “That’s what 
I do. He can be quite ruthless with his selections. I’ve seen it happen to 
other guys. They come in, they take their spot for granted and maybe their 
behaviour in training isn’t quite right, and they are not in the squad again.”

Wales have lost their last nine against the Wallabies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/30/wales-australia-autumn-international-match-report>
 since beating them 21-18 in 2008, and their record against South Africa and 
New Zealand is even more sorrowful. With the World Cup less than a year away, 
Warburton admits his team need to make a statement after so many demoralising 
defeats.

“People often ask me about my worst experiences in rugby, and it’s not the 
sending off against France in the World Cup or necessarily the injuries, as 
they were out of my control,” he says. “It’s those narrow losses to the 
southern hemisphere sides. Every time it seems we have the gameplan, the 
belief, the attitude and the effort – only for a small mistake in the 79th 
minute to cost us.” Is that down to mental fragility? Warburton shakes his head.

“In every Wales changing room I’ve looked everyone in the eye and seen they 
believe they can do a job. Our players know how to see out games: they do it 
for their clubs all the time. But in the last five minutes of an international 
match you are absolutely spent. It’s our decision-making under extreme fatigue 
that has let us down.”

For the last fortnight Gatland has been pushing his squad to the brink with 
triple daily training sessions – something Warburton hopes will make the 
necessary slither of difference. “These teams keep on beating us, so obviously 
they are slightly better,” he says. “That’s the fact. And the players know 
that. So we definitely have still to find that other level. But we are striving 
for it.”

It was against Australia in the second Lions Test last year that Warburton 
played one of his finest games, dominating the breakdown before suffering a 
hamstring injury that ruled him out of the decider. Success in the messy, 
sometimes indecipherable, badlands between tackle and ruck, is – he explains – 
partly down to hours spent analysing video tape of his and his opponents’ 
performances but also about something more primitive: guts.

“I see guys who have the same attributes as myself – the same level of 
strength, fitness, flexibility – but a lot of it comes down to bravery,” he 
says. “It’s a pretty ugly place when you’ve got three 18-stoners flying in, 
trying to take your head off. You’ve got to be brave to get down there in those 
horrible positions and take a bit of a battering. Sometimes I’m struggling to 
shampoo my head the next day because my head is hurting so bad.”

At least Warburton’s shoulders, which have pained him since his late teens – 
he has had two operations as well as two instances of serious nerve damage – 
are better now. The dislocated shoulder was, he says, “a blessing” because it 
allowed surgeons to repair three separate problems.

Warburton’s body still bears the scars of battle. His hips need intensive 
physiotherapy and his knees also require 15 minutes on a bike every morning “to 
warm up”. While others are showering after training he goes through a separate 
stretching routine.

“I’m still struggling with my knees a bit,” he says. “It takes an extreme 
amount of physiotherapy and rehab to keep me fit. I don’t have the most durable 
body in the world – all the physios I have worked with will tell you that. I am 
probably durable enough to play football but not rugby.”

That said, Warburton points out his upper body is as strong as it has ever 
been and his performance levels have improved with every game in his comeback. 
“Statistics are like bikinis,” he says. “They look good but they don’t show 
everything. There are certain ones I look at, including tackle count, which 
shows your work-rate in defence, and ruck hits in attack but you have to look 
at the quality of those tackles and the quality of those ruck hits.”

Against Australia he will look to make three turnovers but, as he points out, 
that isn’t everything. “In a good game I might get in there 15 times to slow 
down the ball. And if you can win 20% of those and if the other 60-70% times 
you have at least slowed the ball down then you have done your job. A lot of 
back-rowers get disheartened if they don’t win a turnover but slowing down the 
ball is still a win because it gives your defence time to realign for the next 
phase.”

And is Warburton ready for the next phase of his career, starting with the 
autumn internationals and carrying over to next year’s World Cup? “Definitely,” 
he says. “Life is short and I’ve seen some players go through some bad injuries 
and experiences. That is why I’m going to enjoy every moment I have got. I 
still absolutely love it.”

Sam Warburton is an ambassador for Guinness. To view Guinness’ new Made of 
More campaign, celebrating the character and integrity of some of rugby’s 
greatest heroes, visit www.youtube.com/GuinnessEurope
 