
Mark McCall has advised Racing Métro to beware “the two best finishers in 
England” in Sunday’s European Champions Cup quarter-final in Paris.Chris Ashton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-ashton> and David Strettle are in 
prolific form for Saracens and the director of rugby believes the 28-year-old 
Ashton could yet make England’s squad for the World Cup.

Ashton has not played for England since last summer’s tour to New Zealand but, 
having seen him score two tries against Harlequins at Wembley, McCall feels his 
wing is now a more complete player. “I think he is better now than he was when 
he was last playing for England. He’s gone away and done the things they asked 
him to do … his defence is at a different level from where it was 12 months 
ago. I’m sure he will be there or thereabouts for the World Cup.”

Ashton and Strettle have already scored six tries between them in this 
season’s European pool games and, despite Stuart Lancaster’s preference for 
Anthony Watson and Jack Nowell, McCall anticipates another top-class double act 
against Racing, whose Argentinian wing Juan Imhoff has also been electric this 
season with five tries.

“I think we’ve got the two best finishers in England,” McCall said. “We’ve 
only got to give them half an opportunity – or in Ashton’s case at the weekend 
hardly any opportunity at all. They’re both on top of their game.”

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> have also been boosted 
by the return to fitness of the South Africa hooker Schalk Brits, who is in 
line for a place in the matchday squad for the first time since suffering knee 
ligament damage in October. It was feared Brits would be out for at least 
another month but McCall says he has made a remarkable recovery. “He is miles 
ahead of schedule which is a tribute to the medical team. He’s also a 
determined and competitive bloke and he’s always had this game as a target.”

The Saracens captain, Alistair Hargreaves, will also be in contention to face 
Racing if he passes the necessary concussion protocols, while Scotland’s Jim 
Hamilton is also available. Brad Barritt will have to wait a little longer for 
his latest comeback from injury. “We’re not going to push it because we have 
some important games left this season,” said McCall, hinting that the England 
centre would not be back for at least another week.

Ulster’s Nick Williams will be sidelined for rather longer, having been banned 
for eight weeks for striking Cardiff Blues’ Rhys Patchell. Despite receiving a 
reduced suspension because of his previously good disciplinary record, the 
back-row forward will not be allowed to play again until 1 September, his 
suspension also incorporating two pre-season games.

More encouraging long-term news for Ulster is the signing of the All Black 
wing Charles Piutau on a two-year contract. Piutau, 23, will not be arriving in 
Belfast until July 2016 as he looks to secure a place in his country’s World 
Cup squad. The former New Zealand full-back Mils Muliaina is leaving Connacht 
this summer to join the Italian side Zebre. Muliaina, now 34, played in 100 
Tests for the All Blacks.
 