
The message all week from Saracens, and repeated on virtually every page of 
the matchday programme, was that they were not getting ahead of themselves 
after the opening-roundvictory in Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, a feat that seemed to earn the club more attention than when they won the 
tournament last season.

The order was to stay grounded and so there was no liftoff against Wales’s 
sole representative in the Champions Cup, although they still secured a winning 
bonus point as the Roundheads indulged in the cavalier.

Munster honour Anthony Foley with emotional victory over Glasgow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
There was a time when the Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>
 were a force in Europe and Saracens were buried in the anonymity of the 
Challenge Cup, but it is nine years since the Welsh side made the knockout 
stage. Their opponents had won their previous 10 games and not lost a group 
match on their own ground for four years.

The Scarlets filled the role of underdogs admirably, but at no point did they 
look like winning. Saracens, even when indulging in attacking plays they rarely 
cover in the Premiership, were always in control. Their main concern was an arm 
injury to their England second-row,Maro Itoje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maro-itoje>, early in the second half that 
required an x-ray.

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> lost their captain, Brad 
Barritt, whose neck stiffened up in the warmup, but that did not explain a 
start as stuttering as it had been scintillating in Toulon. The Scarlets, who 
had won their previous four matches, took the lead with a seventh-minute 
penalty after Gareth Davies had got away with a knock-on as he contested a high 
kick.

Saracens’ fumbles were more conspicuous, and dropping became so catching even 
Itoje joined in. The double champions do not do complacency, but there was not 
the focus they had in France. Nick Tompkins wasted a break by overthrowing an 
inside pass, Alex Goode lost control of the ball when he was running with it, 
Sean Maitland was stripped of possession by Jonathan Davies as he struggled to 
find space on halfway, and Owen Farrell wasted a turnover by kicking the ball 
straight to Rhys Patchell.

They had by then taken the lead after Mako Vunipola sidestepped two defenders 
and broke the tackles of three others and, after Patchell and Farrell exchanged 
penalties, extended it with an even better individual try. Tompkins, Barritt’s 
replacement, had a wall of defenders in front of him when he received the ball 
40 metres out from a ruck but, after swerving away from one, he dodged the next 
two before jinking past a fourth.

The Scarlets, already missing their injured Wales centre, Scott Williams, who 
turned an ankle on the morning of the game, lost the full-back Liam Williams 
after 13 minutes, also with an ankle injury. They were muted in attack, but 
slowed down Saracens’ possession on the floor and competed strongly, initially, 
in the set pieces – although, by the end of the first half, a disintegrating 
scrum resulted in Farrell’s second penalty.

Northampton humiliated as David Smith inspires Castres in Champions Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/castres-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
There were too many mistakes for the game to flow. Saracens were surprisingly 
loose and, although they regularly forced their way over the gainline, too many 
passes failed to stick. The Scarlets were hanging on at times, but after 
Jonathan Davies had spearheaded their first meaningful attack two minutes 
before the break, Patchell’s fourth penalty made it 20-12 to the holders.

The Welsh region changed approach at the start of the second half, keeping the 
ball in hand and forcing stress fractures in the home defence.

Itoje, at the end of a week in which his club and England second-row partner, 
George Kruis, had an ankle operation, left the field grimacing after trapping 
his left arm in a tackle.

The Scarlets had hope, but within six minutes it had turned to despair. First, 
Vunipola set up a try for Marcelo Bosch and then Tompkins seized on a loose 
pass for Farrell to free Chris Wyles on the overlap and secure the bonus point. 
They were nowhere near their best, but still far too good.

The Scarlets caught out their opponents with some lineout moves and Aaron 
Shingler scored their first try from one with 21 minutes to go. Farrell 
responded with a penalty, but when Jonathan Davies’s strength took him through 
two tackles, the regions sighted a bonus point. Saracens were a man down, with 
Ben Spencer in the sin-bin for a deliberate knock-on, but Farrell spotted space 
and Michael Rhodes completed the scoring.
 