
The crackdown on dangerous tackles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/06/world-rugby-new-tackle-laws-what-are-they>
 yielded its first Premiership casualty after 11 minutes when the prop Richard 
Barrington was sent off for knocking out the Exeter second row Geoff Parling 
with a shoulder charge, but Exeter questioned whether the Saracens captain, 
Brad Barritt, should have seen red for a high tackle on the same player a 
second earlier.

The teams second and third in the table at the start of the day met in a 
repeat of last season’s Premiership final and the visitors, whoselast defeat on 
the road in the Premiership was in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/northampton-exeter-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
, were the less satisfied in a drawn with three players failing head injury 
assessments after going to low in the tackle and five in all treated for 
concussion.

“If we are not careful, we are going to make the game worse, not better,” said 
the Sarries scrum-half Richard Wigglesworth.

Tim Swiel stars as injury-hit Harlequins rally to overwhelm Sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-sale-sharks-premiership-match-report>
The planning of both sides lasted until Barrington’s high challenge on Parling 
left the hosts with 14 men. They were fortunate not to have lost Barritt, who 
made the first challenge on the second row who ducked into the tackle and the 
centre’s arm caught him in the face.

Barrington, standing behind Barritt, led with his shoulder. He made contact 
with the head of Parling who collapsed to the ground and was taken from the 
field on a stretcher having been treated for five minutes, later taking a seat 
in the dugout before the end of the opening half. The referee, Ian Tempest, 
watched the incident from various angles on the big screen before ruling that 
Barrington, who was making his 100th appearance for Sarries, had made contact 
with Parling’s head with force and that he had “little option” but to send him 
off.

Given the zero tolerance approach on high tackles by World Rugby, Barritt will 
probably be cited. His challenge was high and appeared to fail the control part 
of the new sanction. Tempest used his discretion, punishing the player who 
caused the injury while not ending the game as a contest at the outset.

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had already lost a 
player with concussion, perhaps because of the crackdown on dangerous 
challenges. The centre Marcelo Bosch went lower in his tackle on Henry Slade in 
the sixth-minute than he probably would have the week before and his head made 
contact with the England centre’s left hip. Why players have to refine their 
technique halfway through a campaign has not been properly explained and the 
risk is that the number of injuries prevented are wiped out by those caused: 
the Exeter second row Ollie Atkins’s match ended early in the second-half when 
he stooped to tackle Schalk Brits and his head made contact with the hooker’s 
hip.

Duncan Taylor followed after trying to stop Jack Yeandle and Barritt was 
treated for concussion after the match.

Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> took immediate advantage of 
Barrington’s dismissal when Gareth Steenson, who had earlier been wide from 45 
metres, kicked the resulting penalty. Sarries then took off the wing Sean 
Maitland to bring on the prop Titi Lamositele and Steenson wasted no time in 
exploiting his side’s advantage out wide, hanging a cross-kick with enough 
height for Jack Nowell to scoop the ball one-handed and score in the corner.

Harlequins’ Joe Marler becomes latest England forward to suffer injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-joe-marler-england-injury-six-nations>
Exeter were less assertive with a man advantage than they were before 
Barrington’s dismissal. They carried with less force and Sarries used their 
full complement of forwards to maintain the edge up front they had established 
at the first scrum, force turnovers and secure territory. They sought to follow 
the examples of England against the Argentina in November and Bristol at home 
to Worcester last week, when they won after having a player sent off in the 
opening minutes.

Alex Lozowski scored their first points on 23 minutes with a penalty awarded 
after a collapsed scrum and, frill free, controlled the tempo of the match. 
They went into the interval 10-3 down thanks to a tackle by Michael Rhodes that 
summed up the willpower and indefatigability of the champions. Don Armand saw a 
gap between Rhodes and Juan Figallo on the home 22 and ran through it. He 
looked to have made it to the corner, riding Chris Wyles’s tackle, when Rhodes 
arrived with his left arm outstretched and dislodged the ball from the Exeter 
flanker’s grasp.

Lozowski’s second penalty after 52 minutes roused the crowd, but Steenson 
replied 10 minutes from the end having earlier missed from 35 metres.

The Chiefs, though, had aimed low and paid for it five minutes from the end 
when Sarries used a penalty to force an attacking lineout, which finished with 
the replacement prop Vincent Koch emerging from the bottom of a maul.

Lozowski converted from the touchline to make a draw seem like a win as the 
champions returned to the top of the table.

SARACENS Goode; Maitland (Lamositele 13), Bosch (Tompkins 5; Taylor 52), 
Barritt (capt), Wyles; Lozowski, Wigglesworth; Barrington, Brits (George 50), 
Figallo (Koch 48), Itoje, Hamilton, Rhodes (Skelton 50), Brown (Burger 61), Wray
Sent off Barrington 11

Try Koch Con Lozowski Pens Lozowski 2

EXETER Dollman; Nowell, Hill, Slade (Whitten 62), Short; Steenson (capt), 
Chudley (Maunder 65); Rimmer (Moon 48), Cowan-Dickie (Yeandle 58), Holmes 
(Williams 48), Atkins, Parling (Lees 11), Armand, Johnson, Waldrom

Try Nowell Con Steenson Pen Steenson 2

Attendance 10,000

Game rating 6 Referee Ian Tempest
 