
It was not a complete performance by Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>, which makes their standing in 
Pool One all the more impressive. This four-try, bonus-point victory leaves 
them unbeaten and guaranteed, with a round still to go, a home tie in the 
quarter finals. In the unlikely event they should ever need some statistical 
small-print in their favour, they have a positive points difference of 136. 
That Ulster scored two tries will probably have them spitting feathers.

It may not have been complete, but it was still pretty one-sided. There was no 
lack of assurance at the outset, with Saracens patiently building their phases 
and testing the Ulster defence with the Vunipola brothers. Billy and Mako could 
report that the visitors were lining up big tacklers by the pair, but that the 
wall seemed no more impenetrable than usual. Owen Farrell slotted an early 
penalty to make it look like business as usual.

Almost immediately Ulster shattered the illusion. If they have an attacking 
threat every bit as formidable as the Vunipolas it is Stuart McCloskey in the 
centre. Having made a series of holes in the Oyonnax defence last week during 
Ulster’s stirring second-half comeback, he now proved he could do the same to 
the vaunted wolf-pack defence of Saracens.

Owen Farrell ‘has no problem’ with his father Andy’s move to Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/15/owen-farrell-england-andy-farrell-ireland>
McCloskey perhaps does not have the acceleration into contact of Jamie Roberts 
of Wales, but he is of similar dimensions and has the gift of a low centre of 
gravity, that enables him to keep going a couple of yards beyond the point of 
tackle. The first time he cut through he made more than a couple of steps 
through contact. He surged into clear space, initiating the movement that ended 
with Jared Payne threading a kick along the ground, for Luke Marshall to score.

It temporarily upset the Saracens’ composure. Billy Vunipola knocked on while 
heading for contact and Farrell missed a routine penalty shot at goal. On the 
day, he would miss three more times, but the watching Eddie Jones will have 
been pleased to see that the inaccuracy off the team in no way interfered with 
the outside half’s management of the game. Farrell was commanding.

There was a turning point on the half hour. Ulster was still in the lead and 
obviously very much in contention when they chose to kick a penalty, following 
a drop by the Saracens full-back Ben Ransom, to the corner. They lost the line 
out to Michael Rhodes – part of the very effective set of jumpers, Maro Itoje 
and George Kruis, both in the England squad – and then missed a simple penalty 
when they returned to a promising position.

A few minutes later Saracens did a similar thing by kicking for the corner. 
They did not score immediately but once in position they came away with a try 
by Billy Vunipola following an unstoppable drive from a line-out. It meant 
Saracens were in control at half-time, a position they would not surrender 
again, even if Jackson reduced the margin with a penalty after the break.

Five-try Bordeaux leave tenacious Exeter on the brink of elimination
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/bordeaux-begles-exeter-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Itoje became a principal runner now, not squat and pumping like the Vunipolas, 
but loping and deceptively elusive. He looks destined for a stellar career and 
crowned his day with a try. It was not quite as graceful as Duncan Taylor’s 
that preceded it, the centre staying in support of Farrell, who had spotted a 
mismatch of forwards before him and glided through. Farrell still likes to play 
from deeper than George Ford, but it does allow him to size up what lies ahead 
and he seems to have put on a yard of pace.

Another player to catch the eye was Schalk Brits, who replaced Jamie George at 
hooker. George did absolutely nothing wrong and was very much part of a 
collective that ruled the line-out and the breakdown. But Brits brings a real 
dash to the field. He had been on for only a few minutes when he sprinted away 
from a maul that was already going in the right direction and rolled over for a 
fine try.

Ian Humphreys intercepted a scruffy pass from a scrappy ruck to give Ulster a 
consolation try and cast a little light on their hopes to scrape through to the 
last eight as a best runner-up, but it was but a moment of inefficiency by 
Saracens to give away cheap score. They do not play with flashing extravagance 
and may be vulnerable to a side that may risk everything on a wide game of 
adventure.

On the other hand, they are superbly drilled and deeply committed to the 
common good. They tackle for each other and cover for their mistakes with never 
a hint of recrimination. Their set-piece is excellent and they play on the 
balls of their feet, even when on defensive duty.

Ulster had their moments but they were rocked on their heels. Even the mighty 
McCloskey ended the day losing the ball and watching Saracens swoop on it and 
run to the other half of the field. It is a question of confidence and being 
able to keep the tempo high when bodies are tired. Saracens are not yet in 
perfect form, but these are still early European days. They look brimful of 
potential, and if Saracens look good, then England will look good.
 