
It was comprehensive on the night and, although the weather was foul, it 
turned out to be the start of afine weekend for Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/scarlets-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
. Thanks toExeter’s defeat of the Ospreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/exeter-ospreys-european-champions-cup-match-report>
 and Bordeaux-Begles’ victory over Clermont, Northampton squeeze through to the 
last eight. The ramifications for the Welsh regions – for the entire Pro12, in 
fact – are contrastingly dire. Only French and English clubs remain in the 
Champions Cup.

There was a time, and not so very long ago, when Llanelli – affectionately but 
not yet formally called Scarlets – used to take their exit from Europe in the 
grand manner. They lost a semi-final to these very same Northampton Saints in 
2000 in a pulsating 31-28 contest, decided at the very end by a Paul Grayson 
penalty.Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> went 
on to win the Heineken Cup that year.

Northampton praying in Europe after North secures bonus at Scarlets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/scarlets-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Sixteen years on, Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> lost 
comprehensively to the one-time former champions. Saints put them through the 
mill at the scrum, lineout and maul and secured their attacking bonus point 
with most of the final quarter to go.

Their first try was a gift of an interception from Morgan Allen to Harry 
Mallinder, who brought pace and straight running to the midfield. The second 
involved the centre again as he took a flip off the ground and gave a pinpoint 
delivery – it had to go through analysis as a suspect forward pass – to George 
Pisi. The third came from a rumbling maul, not the first of the night, and the 
last was scored by George North, a player who left Scarlets and domestic Welsh 
rugby to go in search of bigger and better things in England.

The home team scored the final try, while Northampton were down to 14. Lee 
Dickson gave away a penalty and himself for 10 minutes to save a try, only for 
Scarlets to have the final say. It did nothing to alter the outcome, and it was 
difficult to see anything but further decline. After a performance in Paris 
that their captain Ken Owens called “embarrassing and disrespectful” this was 
even more doleful.

The final try perhaps made the point that even if the visitors were soon to 
have reasons to celebrate, they were not in the same class as the big guns – 
Racing 92 and Saracens for example. This has not been a vintage season for 
Northampton. They are improving but driving mauls will not carry them to the 
very top. North still needs to be released more often.

Toulon advance to Champions Cup quarter-finals with victory over Bath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/bath-toulon-european-champions-cup-match-report>
Still, there were encouraging signs. The pack was dominant in all aspects and 
everybody had a part to play in the display of collective might. Certain 
individuals had stories to tell too. Mallinder Jr does not yet feature in the 
thoughts of those planning wonderful things in the England midfield but Dylan 
Hartley and Courtney Lawes are among the national heavyweights. Lawes had a 
fine night, putting himself about in the fairest way until he drove a shoulder 
into the back of Maselino Paulino and was penalised.

Given the outbreak of strange incidents in the game lately, this might have 
been one more sin, but since Paulino had earlier swung an arm with much more 
intent into the face of Lawes, there was a sense of justified retribution. It 
was a break Northampton deserved, but it was not nearly as big a favour as 
Exeter and Bordeaux were about to do them. It was a grim weekend for Welsh 
rugby, but a fine one for the former champions. Their prize is an away trip to 
Saracens in the quarter-final, which is a sobering fixture but, given the 
improbability of them going much further than west Wales in the competition, 
nothing will dampen their spirits now.

Scarlets Collins (Hughes, 59); Williams, King, S Shingler, Van der Merwe 
(Lewis, 58); Thomas, G Davies (A Davies, 55); John (Evans, 58), Owens (capt) 
(Myhill, 64), Lee (R Jones, 56), Price, Paulino, A Shingler (Rawlins, 65), 
Boyde, Allen.

Try R Jones; Con Thomas; Pen Thomas

Northampton Foden; Elliott, G Pisi (Burrell, 60), Mallinder, North; Myler 
(Hanrahan, 69), Kessell (Dickson, 58); A Waller (E Waller 60) Hartley (capt, 
Haywood, 59), Hill (Denman, 63), Lawes, Day, Gibson (Fisher, 4), Wood, 
Dickinson (Paterson, 71)

Tries Mallinder, Pisi, Dickinson, North; Con Myler

Referee P Gaüzère. Attendance 6,823
 