
Two goals from Rory Loy and a second‑half strike from Paul McGowan gave Dundee 
a fine start to their season with a 3-1 win atRoss County. Mark O’Hara’s surge 
and cross set up Loy to strike low past Scott Fox. Loy then converted a penalty 
four minutes before half-time after O’Hara was fouled.

McGowan then connected with a precision pass from Michael Duffy on the 
counter-attack to put the game beyond the reach of County, who scored too late 
to be threatening through the substitute Craig Curran.

Partick Thistle began their campaign with an encouraging 2-0 win over Inverness
 at Firhill.

The midfielder Chris Erskine changed the tone of the tightly contested game 
with a wonderful curling shot after 36 minutes. The Jags striker David Amoo 
added a second in the 59th minute from close range to give Alan Archibald’s 
team their first three points of the season, although it was far from a feast 
of football between two teams who went into the game in fine form.

Kilmarnock were without their Charlton target Josh Magennis as they were 
beaten 2-1 at home byMotherwell.

The Killie manager, Lee Clark, said after the match that his club had turned 
down a third bid for the striker from Charlton.

Motherwell’s Lionel Ainsworth opened the scoring with a superbly executed lob 
in the 40th minute and Marvin Johnson headed in the second within half a minute 
of the restart.

Clark started with only three of his 11 summer signings but he is still 
looking for the right mix following their Betfred Cup exit, although Killie did 
make a contest of it after an 82nd-minute header from Martin Smith.

In the Championship Jason Cummings scored two goals as Hibs beat Falkirk 2-1. 
Hibs rejected a £1.2 million bid from Peterborough United this week and the 
21-year-old wasted little time in showing his ability at the Falkirk Stadium.

Cummings struck from inside the six-yard box with two minutes played in the 
contest and, although Craig Sibbald levelled the scores for the home side seven 
minutes later, a long-range shot from Cummings just a few minutes into the 
second half sealed the win.

Brendan Rodgers takes charge of Celtic for the first time in the Premiership 
againstHearts on Sunday but Tynecastle is a place he knows and likes. Rodgers 
took his former side Liverpool to Gorgie for a Europa League play-off tie 
against the Jambos in 2012, where the Merseysiders narrowly won 1-0 thanks to 
an Andy Webster own goal before drawing 1-1 at Anfield to go through to the 
group stages.

Rodgers, expected to tie up the signing of Scott Sinclair from Aston Villa 
over the weekend, was impressed with the noise made by the home support that 
night and expects more of the same against Celtic when the champions begin the 
defence of their title.

“The atmosphere was great when I was there with Liverpool in the Europa 
League, it felt as if there were many more in the stadium,” said the Northern 
Irishman, who took over from Ronny Deila in May.

“I really enjoyed it, we played well in the game. It was a tough game, the 
pitch is tight - you don’t see so much of that now in the stadiums in the 
Premier League - and the supporters passionate. I think it will be similar if 
not better, being the first game of the season as well.

“They will want to see their team do well and Celtic is always a big draw 
wherever they go and I am sure that will make it that bit more inviting for 
them. I am looking forward to getting under way. It is a tough start but we 
would expect that.”
 