
Aberdeen moved to within a point of Celtic at the top of the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a 
comfortable 4-0 win againstKilmarnock at Rugby Park.

First-half headers from Niall McGinn and Adam Rooney put Aberdeen in control, 
and Jonny Hayes made it 3-0 with just 16 seconds played after half-time.

Steven MacLean, top scorer for St Johnstone, missed a late penalty and a 
chance to catapult his team past 10-manHearts into third place. Hearts had been 
playing with 10 men since the 27th minute after Juanma Delgado was sent off for 
an attempted head-butt butSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> could not take advantage as 
the match finished goalless.

Dundee beat Hamilton 4-0 thanks to an inspired first-half hat-trick from Kane 
Hemmings. Greg Stewart scored a superb curling shot after Hemmings’ opening 
goal.

Partick ended a wait of almost 40 years for four consecutive top-flight wins 
after securing a narrow 1-0 victory overRoss County. The last time the Glasgow 
club achieved such a feat in Scotland’s top division was in 1977 – but they 
matched the record on Saturday thanks to an own goal by theRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> captain, Andrew Davies.

Lewis Horner’s injury-time equaliser for Inverness denied Dundee United a 
much-needed win and secured a 2-2 draw. Horner turned in Carl Tremarco’s cross 
in the second minute of injury time to cancel out Billy Mckay’s late strike, 
with the 27-year-old showing great opportunism to pounce on a goalkeeping 
mistake for what appeared to be the decisive goal.

John Rankin gave Mixu Paatelainen’s side the lead after 26 minutes, but a 
smart finish from Liam Polworth straight after half-time restored parity.

Rangers allowed Hibs to draw level with them at the top of the Championship 
after a controversial defeat toFalkirk. Willie Collum, who has been named as 
one of the referees for Euro 2016, twice incorrectly awarded penalties, one to 
each side, during a breathless 2-1 win for Peter Houston’s men. The Bairns made 
the most of theirs – awarded inside the first two minutes, despite Danny Wilson 
fouling Will Vaulks outside the area – with John Baird scoring. ButRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> blew the chance to snatch a 
point at the Falkirk Stadium when Danny Rogers pushed Martyn Waghorn’s 
injury-time spot-kick on to a post after Blair Alston was penalised for 
handball. Dominique Malonga’s headed late winner gaveHibs a 1-0 win against 
Queen of the South.
 