
Niall McGinn and Miles Storey scored Aberdeen’s first league goals of the 
season as Derek McInnes’s men overcamePartick Thistle 2-1 at Pittodrie.

McGinn powered a 25-yard free-kick high into the net to open the scoring 
before a Liam Lindsay defensive mistake allowed Storey to double the lead. Sean 
Welsh was sent off for the Jags, for whom Chris Erskine netted a late 
consolation with a stunning strike.

After the match, the Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 
manager, McInnes, emphasised the positives of a solid display. “I thought we 
were very good, with some moments of quality play, and we were the better team. 
The last 10 minutes were a wee reminder there is work still to be done, but I 
would like to concentrate on the first 80 minutes.”

Don Cowie, the Hearts captain, inspired his side to their first league victory 
of the season after scoring twice and setting up two more goals in a 5-1 
demolition of Inverness.

The former Caley midfielder scored either side of a Conor Sammon header before 
Sam Nicholson’s two well-executed late goals, the first of which was set up 
with a cute back-heel by new signing Bjorn Johnsen on his debut.

Caley got on the scoresheet three minutes from time through Ross Draper, 
despite Callum Paterson’s best efforts to keep the ball from going in the net. 
Cowie, the man of the match, left the pitch to a rapturous round of applause 
from the home fans when he was replaced by Robbie Muirhead. It was a return to 
winning ways for Robbie Neilson’s side against a Caley team that are still 
searching for their first point of the campaign.

Liam Boyce’s double set Ross County on course to a deserved 2-0 victory against
Kilmarnock in a disjointed game at the Global Energy Stadium.

County broke the deadlock in the 29th minute, when Boyce scored after he had 
played Michael Gardyne into space inside the area and his cut-back fell kindly 
for the Irishman, who converted his shot into the net from eight yards out.

The home side controlled the tempo of the match and they deservedly doubled 
their advantage in the 74th minute when substitute Alex Schalk ran on to a 
through ball from Woods and his cross was pushed into the net at the second 
attempt by Boyce.

In the Championship, two first‑half goals from Jason Cummings earned Hibs a 
2-0 win atSt Mirren. The 21-year-old converted a David Gray assist to break the 
deadlock and then Cummings pounced to take advantage of miscommunication in the 
Buddies defence to finish from a tight angle.

The league leaders, Raith Rovers, beat Dunfermline 2-0 in their derby to 
retain top position in the division, ahead of Hibs.
 