
Aberdeen soundly beat Motherwell 4-1 and delayed Celtic’s confirmation as 
Scottish Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>
 champions.

Kenny McLean set them on their way with a fifth-minute penalty, with further 
strikes from Niall McGinn, Adam Rooney and Jonny Hayes. Motherwell’s only goal 
came from Chris Cadden, who scored in the 64th minute.

The Dons were quick out of the traps, and the creative Hayes twisted and 
turned his way past Louis Laing before the defender hacked the Irishman down.

The referee, Bobby Madden, had no hesitation in pointing to the spot, and 
McLean was equally ruthless, rolling the ball low to Connor Ripley’s right.

For their part, Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> 
enjoyed good possession in the early stages of the match but failed to 
seriously test Aberdeen’s debutant keeper Adam Collin.

St Johnstone moved up to fourth place in the Premiership with a 1-0 victory 
overRoss County and also thanks to Motherwell’s defeat. It was an untidy 
contest at the Global Energy Stadium.

Steven MacLean grabbed the winner for the visitors just before the hour mark 
when he flicked a downward header from Joe Shaughnessy over the line from close 
range. There was little between the teams throughout although the visitors 
created more chances.Inverness beat Partick 4-1 at Firhill with goals from Carl 
Tremarco, Miles Storey, Josh Meekings and Jordan Roberts.

Greg Kiltie scored two first-half goals as Kilmarnock maintained their hopes 
of avoiding a relegation play-off by trouncing relegation rivalsHamilton 4-0 at 
New Douglas Park.Kilmarnock took the initiative with their higher work-rate and 
purposeful attacking play. Kiltie’s 11th-minute opener into the right-hand top 
corner was hotly contested as Accies appealed that the ball had gone out of 
play earlier in the move. Kris Boyd’s reverse pass played in Kiltie, who lifted 
the ball over the onrushing Michael McGovern for his second. Kris Boyd’s 
penalty made the score 3-0. Kiltie got in behind Gordon and cut the ball back 
for Magennis, whose shot deflected in-off Northern Ireland team-mate andHamilton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> keeper McGovern for 4-0. The 
result means Killie are four points off Accies with three games remaining of 
the season, and also ensures Dundee United will be relegated on Monday if they 
fail to win against rivals Dundee at Dens Park.

Dunfermline were presented with the League One trophy after their 1-0 home win 
againstPeterhead. This means Ayr, Peterhead and Stranraer are set to contest 
the promotion play-offs and with Forfar’s demotion sealed, Cowdenbeath face the 
relegation play-offs.

In League Two, champions East Fife were held to a 1-1 draw by relegated East 
Stirling and Annan just missed out on a place in the promotion play-offs on 
goal difference, withElgin, Clyde and Queen’s Park confirming their places.

East Stirling will seek to retain their place in the division against 
Edinburgh City from the Lowland League who defeated Highland League Cove Rangers
 4-1 on aggregate.
 