
Arnaud Djoum rescued a draw for Hearts as the Edinburgh side fought back to 
share the spoils in a 3-3 thriller withInverness in the Highland capital.

David Raven volleyed Inverness into the lead after 15 minutes and Lonsana 
Doumbouya hit the crossbar before he doubled the home team’s advantage.

Bjorn Johnsen gave Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> a 
foothold in the game before half-time when the home side appeared to switch off 
and six minutes after the break a speculative cross-shot from defender Faycal 
Rherras drifted into the goal for an equaliser. Doran put the hosts back in 
front with 35 minutes to go, but Djoum drilled a shot through a crowd of 
players to restore parity.

Dundee earned a vital 1-0 win at Hamilton courtesy of Paul McGowan. McGowan 
came back to haunt his old club as Dundee grabbed their first win in 12 games 
against an uncharacteristically poorHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> side.

An injury-time strike from Abdul Osman gave Partick Thistle a dramatic 2-1 
victory atSt Johnstone in the Premiership.

The contest seemed to be heading for a 1-1 draw after Kris Doolan’s first-half 
opener for the visitors was cancelled out immediately by Steven MacLean’s 
equaliser.

It was Thistle who were to enjoy a happy ending, however, as their captain 
fired in the winner with seconds to spare.

Motherwell recovered from midweek misery to beat Ross County 4-1 at Fir Park. 
The Steelmen lost 3-0 at home to Inverness on Wednesday, which left them with 
one win in 10, but Motherwell responded in fine style against County. Striker 
Scott McDonald headed in a Lionel Ainsworth free-kick after eight minutes 
before Louis Moult’s lay-off was deflected into his own goal by the Staggies 
defender Kenny van der Weg.

Right-back Richard Tait and Ainsworth added further goals after the break, 
with a fine strike by the County substitute Alex Schalk the only a consolation 
for the visitors.

In the Championship, Dundee United are in hot pursuit of the leaders, Hibs, as 
they continued their fine form with a 1-0 win overFalkirk at Tannadice. Mark 
Durnan helped his off-form strikers by chipping in with a goal eight minutes 
from full time.

Hibs beat St Mirren 2-0 at Easter Road. Martin Boyle’s right-foot shot opened 
the scoring and the former Norwich City striker Grant Holt added a second 
before half-time with a shot from outside the area.
 