
A late winner by the St Johnstone captain, David Mackay, earned all three 
points for the Perth side afterRoss County had fought back from 2-0 down to 
level at Victoria Park.

David Wotherspoon gave Saints an early lead after he closed down the County 
goalkeeper, Gary Woods, as he attempted to clear and the former Hibernian 
midfielder made it 2-0 just before the interval with a fine finish.

County fought back after the break and goals from Liam Boyce and Andrew Davies 
looked to have rescued a point for the Highland club.

However, with two minutes remaining, Mackay beat Woods with a free-kick from 
25 yards out to take the points back to Perth and push St Johnstone to within 
one point of third-placed Hearts.

Kilmarnock and bottom side Dundee United shared a 1-1 draw, with the home side 
playing most of the match at Rugby Park with 10 men. The returningKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> striker Kris Boyd scored in 
the third minute, when he met Josh Magennis’s cross into the box and lashed 
home a left-foot shot from close range.

It was the ideal start for Gary Locke’s side, who had been left reeling by 
last week’s 5-2 defeat at the same venue against Partick Thistle.

Killie went for a second goal and only the woodwork prevented midfielder Tope 
Obadeyi from increasing their advantage.

Kilmarnock were dominating a United side low on confidence and should have 
added to their lead – but, instead they found themselves pegged back and a man 
down after Stuart Findlay was sent off for a foul on Ryan McGowan.

Billy McKay scored from the consequent penalty to give the struggling Tayside 
club their first point in five games.

In the Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> third 
round, Lowland League sideEast Kilbride knocked out Stenhousemuir thanks to 
Jack Smith’s second goal of the contest. The League One visitors had Alan Cook 
sent off after 81 minutes of the replay.

Christopher Templeman scored a 77th-minute winner as First Division Forfar 
beat the Second Division’sQueen’s Park 2-1. Cove Rangers will play Motherwell 
in the next round of the Cup after beating their Highland league rivals
Formartine United 4-1 in their replay.
 