
A last-minute winner from Billy McKay gave 10-man Dundee United a 3-2 victory 
in a thrillingScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> 
quarter-final againstRoss County at the Global Energy Stadium.

Liam Boyce headed County into the lead midway through the first half but Henry 
Anier levelled after 57 minutes.

But United were reduced to 10 men on the hour mark when Mark Durnan was sent 
off for preventing Brian Graham a clear run at goal and, after the ex- United 
striker Graham put the home team ahead from the ensuing penalty, there looked 
as if there was only going to be one winner.

Patrick Roberts aims to ease Celtic fans’ frustrations against Morton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/05/patrick-roberts-celtic-morton-manchester-city>
Anier equalised again, though, to level the scores at 2-2 and United captured 
last-gasp glory when McKay met a Blair Spittal cross to head United through to 
the semi-finals.

Arnaud Djoum’s first half header was enough to beat Partick Thistle 1-0 and 
moveHearts to within six points of second-placed Aberdeen in the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>. 
Supporters witnessed a bizarre first half protest when a plane flew over the 
stadium carrying the message “No style, no bottle, Neilson out”. Boos rang out 
among sections of the capacity home crowd before Hearts fans started to chant 
“There’s only one Robbie Neilson”.

Following a period of concerted pressure from the home side, Djoum found the 
net from a Don Cowie corner in the 25th minute as Neilson’s side registered 
their third successive win in the league.

Louis Laing scored Motherwell’s first goal at New Douglas Park for seven years 
to give his side a 1-0 Lanarkshire derby win overHamilton.

Laing finished clinically from close range from a 45th-minute corner from 
Steven Hammell, as Motherwell moved up to seventh in the Premiership, one point 
off the top six and seven points above the play-off spot.

The Motherwell striker Louis Moult had an 81st-minute penalty saved during a 
nonetheless comfortable second half for the visitors.

Laing’s goal was Motherwell’s first at the venue since Lukas Jutkiewicz hit a 
late equaliser in November 2009, six months after their previous win in 
Hamilton, when Mark McGhee was in his first spell as Fir Park manager. They had 
failed to score in seven previous visits, including a Scottish Cup defeat by 
Albion Rovers.
 