
Dundee United boosted their chances of staying in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a vital 1-0 
win atSt Johnstone after playing with 10 men for the final half-hour.

Mixu Paatelainen’s team stoically defended a first-half lead secured by the St 
Johnstone transfer target Ryan Dow to narrow the gap on second-bottom 
Kilmarnock to five points, with a game in hand. The home side could not 
capitalise on the dismissal of Coll Donaldson on the hour mark.

Kilmarnock rued missed opportunities after a 0-0 draw against Partick Thistle 
at Firhill.

Marvin Johnson struck at the death to earn Motherwell a 2-1 win at Inverness.

Lionel Ainsworth’s 62nd-minute opened the scoring for Mark McGhee’s team, only 
for Iain Vigurs to level from the penalty spot eight minutes later. Johnson 
ensured Motherwell took the points with a strike four minutes into injury time.

Greg Stewart scored twice as Dundee moved above Ross County, the Scottish 
League Cup winners, on goal difference in the contest for a top-six finish with 
a 5-2 win at Dens Park.

Their successful afternoon was built on a superb start. Goals in the first 10 
minutes from Stewart and Kane Hemmings put Dundee in command before Andrew 
Davies pulled one back for Jim McIntyre’s men.

Rory Loy restored the home team’s two-goal lead but Alex Schalk struck for the 
visitors after 45 minutes to keep the contest in the balance.

Dundee sealed the points through substitute Craig Wighton’s 86th-minute effort 
and Stewart’s fine individual strike right at the end.

Rangers will have to wait a few days more to clinch their return to Scotland’s 
top flight after allowingRaith Rovers to delay them sealing the Championship 
title with a 3-3 draw at Starks Park.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> looked set to end their 
four-year lower-league stint after twice taking the lead in Kirkcaldy, but the 
win was snatched away from them in stoppage time when the Raith substitute 
Harry Panayiotou – who had just seconds earlier missed a penalty – scrambled 
home a injury-time equaliser, leaving the 5,000 travelling Light Blues 
supporters deflated.

Rovers had taken a shock lead through Louis Longridge but goals from Harry 
Forrester and Michael O’Halloran put Mark Warburton’s Rangers team in the 
ascendancy.

James Craigen’s volley just before half-time levelled the match again, Kenny 
Miller put Rangers on course for the title when he struck four minutes after 
the break and the scored stayed at 3-2 until Panayiotou restored parity. Title 
rivalsHibernian drew 2-2 at St Mirren ending their run of four straight defeats 
in the league. The three other Championship games also finished in draws.
 