
Two goals from Blair Spittal inspired Dundee United to only their third win of 
the season by thrashingKilmarnock 5-1 at Tannadice.

The impressive teenage midfielder scored two first-half goals and also 
assisted in goals for the substitute Mark Durnan and John Rankin during a 
first-half spree of four goals for the home side. Sean Dillon added a fifth 
after the break before a Josh Magennis consolation header for the visitors.

The Rugby Park side remain 11 points clear of Mixu Paatelainen’s rooted team 
but having conceeded four goals or more for the fifth time this season, manager 
Gary Locke will face new questions over his future.

Liam Polworth passed up a late opportunity to break the deadlock as Inverness 
andPartick shared a 0-0 draw in their Premiership clash.

The home side were trialling a “pay what you can” initiative for the first 
time but few spectators would have gone away enthralled by the contest. .

Jackson Irvine and Brian Graham were on target as Ross County beat Motherwell 
2-1 at Fir Park.

The Steelmen have now lost two matches back to back after last week’s 6-0 loss 
against Hearts.

Irvine showed composure to take a deep corner before shooting past Connor 
Ripley after 20 minutes and Graham sealed the points for the Highlanders with 
21 minutes remaining when he finished after Motherwell’s defence failed to 
clear a Stewart Murdoch cross. Stephen Pearson scored a late consolation for
Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell>.

In the Championship, Hibernian leapfrogged Falkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk>, and are now within two points 
of leaders Rangers, who visit Morton on Monday night, after a 3-1 victory 
againstSt Mirren at Easter Road.

Goals from Celtic loanee Liam Henderson’s free kick and a finish from John 
McGinn following good approach play by Jason Cummings put the home side two 
goals ahead before Stevie Mallan replied for the visitors before half time. 
Another Celtic loanee, Anthony Stokes added a late third goal to complete the 
scoring.

Falkirk could only manage a 1-1 draw at Livingston and are now four points 
behind the league leaders having played two games more.
 