
Hamilton cemented their Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> status with a 1-0 
win overDundee at Dens Park.

Martin Canning’s side secured victory courtesy of a clever Carlton Morris 
strike after eight minutes which moved them seven points above second-bottom
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>, who will face a 
relegation play-off.

Partick also retained their place in the top flight following a 2-0 win at 
Kilmarnock. The goals came from Steven Lawless, with a long-range strike in the 
first half, and Kris Doolan, who he kept his cool in a one-on-one to beat Jamie 
MacDonald.

St Johnstone moved closer to fourth spot in the Premiership by winning 2-1 
againstMotherwell at Fir Park. Steven MacLean and Danny Swanson struck in the 
first half for Saints to produce a third comeback win of the season for Tommy 
Wright’s side against Motherwell.

The win moved St Johnstone five points ahead of their opponents as they vie 
for fourth, which carries roughly £100,000 more in prize money than fifth place 
and the same amount again over sixth spot.

Ross County substitute David Goodwillie scored a late equaliser to prevent 
Hearts from beating the Staggies in all their Premiership contests this season. 
A dull contest came to life in the later stages when Juanma put the hosts in 
front after 84 minutes.

Hibernian will play Falkirk in the Premiership play-off semi-final after a 2-0 
win overRaith Rovers which took them through 2-1 on aggregate.

Raith led 1-0 from Wednesday’s first leg at Stark’s Park but goals from 
midfielder John McGinn and defender Darren McGregor after only 12 minutes 
turned the tie in favour of Hibs. Rovers shrugged off their lacklustre start at 
Easter Road and pressed forward for the goal that would take the game into 
extra-time but could not find a breakthrough goal leaving Hibs to host the 
Bairns, who finished second to champions Rangers, on Tuesday night before the 
return game on Friday.

A 1-0 second-leg victory was not enough to save Cowdenbeath from relegation to 
Scottish League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-two> 
following a 2-1 aggregate defeat toQueen’s Park.

Despite Greig Spence’s second-half winner, Cowdenbeath paid the price for 
losing Wednesday’s first leg 2-0.

Spence set up a nervy final 36 minutes when he converted from close range, his 
18th goal of the season.

But Queen’s Park held on and will now face Clyde in the play-off final for a 
place inScottish League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-one>.

Livingston were relegated to League One after Stranraer progressed to the 
Championship play-off final with an extra-time 8-6 aggregate win.Ayr United 
completed a convincing win overPeterhead to reach the Championship play-off 
against Stranraer. Ayr beat Peterhead 2-1 at Somerset Park following their 4-1 
midweek first leg success.

In League Two, Cowdenbeath succumbed to their second successive demotion 
despite a 1-0 victory atQueen’s Park. Queens Park progressed with a 2-1 
aggregate scoreline and will playClyde, who beat Elgin 5-1 on aggregate, in the 
play-off final.
 