
A late strike from substitute Scott Fraser sealed Dundee United’s place in the 
Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> quarter-finals 
at the expense ofPartick at Tannadice. Mixu Paatelainen’s bottom-of-the-table 
side enjoyed a welcome break from league duty courtesy of Fraser’s well-taken 
goal in the 85th minute, just when it looked liked this fifth-round tie was 
heading for a replay at Firhill on Tuesday night.

Championship side Dumbarton took top-flight Dundee to a replay at Dens Park 
after a goalless draw.

Stefan McCluskey scored a hat-trick as Morton eased into the next round with a 
4-1 win againstAnnan Athletic at Galabank.

Jordan Roberts scored his first Inverness goal as the winger’s spectacular 
injury-time strike sent the holders pastMotherwell and into the quarter-finals 
of the Cup.

Stephen McManus had put through his own net from Carl Tremarco’s 39th-minute 
cross before helpingMotherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell>
 equalise midway through the second half when his header set up Scott McDonald 
after a well‑worked corner.

But Roberts secured a 2-1 victory when he ran at the Motherwell defence and 
made space to hit a left-footed shot into the top corner from 25 yards out.Ross 
County beat Linlithgow Rose 4-2 at the Global Energy Stadium. The junior outfit 
did themselves proud with a spirited display that ensured the tie was in doubt 
until the closing stages.

County got off to a great start when Paul Quinn scored in the fourth minute.

But Rose were well in the tie and they drew level in the final minute of the 
first half when the ball came off County defender Jamie Reckord after a 
goalmouth melee.

The home side got themselves in front again just before the hour mark when 
Brian Graham headed home, and Alex Schalk doubled the lead with a close-range 
finish.

But plucky Rose pulled one back when Ruari MacLennan netted with a fine finish 
to set up a grandstand finish – only for another Graham goal to settle things 
with 12 minutes left.
 