
Motherwell eased their way into the fifth round of the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with a 5-0 thrashing of 
Highland League teamCove Rangers at Fir Park. Striker Louis Moult started the 
scoring in the first minute with a close-range header and further goals from 
the striker Scott McDonald, the winger Marvin Johnson and the midfielder 
Stephen Pearson had the home side 4-0 up by the interval. Pearson scored his 
second goal just after the hour mark, with a driven shot, but the visitors 
worked hard to prevent further damage against the Premiership outfit.

Despite being without a win in nine Scottish Premiership games, Dundee United 
managed to avoid a Cup shock by beatingAirdrieonians 1-0 with a Blair Spittal 
free-kick at the Excelsior Stadium.

The holders, Inverness, and Stirling Albion contested the only tie that 
finished goalless and must replay in Inverness a week on Tuesday.

A well-executed Craig Slater free‑kick means Kilmarnock reach the last 16 with 
a 1-0 win, at the expense of aSt Johnstone side that have now failed to net in 
their past four matches.

Brad McKay’s second-half equaliser earned Dunfermline a replay after he had 
given away a penalty in the first half, as the Pars battled out a thrilling 2-2 
draw withRoss County at East End Park.

The centre-half, who joined on loan from St Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> 24 hours earlier, found the 
net with a header after the break to reedeem himself for conceding the 
spot-kick which was scored by Brian Graham in the first half. County opened the 
scoring after three minutes through Alex Schalk but Dunfermline restored parity 
with a fantastic effort from Faissal El Bakhtaoui. Graham restored the 
Staggies’ lead in the 27th minute from 12 yards, despite being involved in an 
off-the-ball incident with Jason Talbot in the build-up to the penalty. 
However, McKay ensured that this tie will be decided in Dingwall after scoring 
the equaliser for the home side.

Meanwhile, 10-man Linlithgow Rose came from behind to share a 3-3 draw with 
Forfar.

In the ties wholly contested by Championship sides, Dumbarton beat Queen of 
the South 2-1 and Morton beat rivals Livingston 1-0, courtesy of a Thomas Ware 
header.

Two second-half goals gave Hibs a passage into the fifth round at the expense 
ofRaith Rovers. Darren McGregor opened the scoring after 61 minutes and a 
long-range shot from Dominique Malonga resulted in a second two minutes later.
 