
Ross County fought back from a goal down thanks to strikes from Craig Curran, 
Stewart Murdoch and Liam Boyce to beatHamilton 3-1 in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Accies took the lead through Gramoz Kurtaj after dominating for most of the 
first half at New Douglas Park.

However, Curran restored parity for County after the break, before late goals 
from Murdoch and Boyce allowed the visitors to take maximum points.

Partick Thistle continued their improved form with a 1-0 win over bottom club 
Dundee United at Tannadice. Alan Archibald’s side left Tayside with three 
points courtesy of Kris Doolan’s 50th-minute winner, which moved them to within 
two points of the top six in the league.

Two Iain Vigurs goals gave Inverness their first victory in more than a month 
as they saw off a poorKilmarnock 2-1. Vigurs opened the scoring after 15 
minutes after an error in defence by Killie and he doubled his tally in the 
32nd minute to put the home side in control. Mark Connolly pulled one back for 
the visitors, steering home Steven Smith’s corner, but they could not find an 
equaliser and Inverness climbed to seventh in the table.

Motherwell gave themselves a much-needed Premiership boost with a 3-1 win over 
Dundee at Fir Park. Scott McDonald gave the home side the lead in the fifth 
minute and his strike partner Louis Moult doubled their advantage with half an 
hour played, scoring with a header having earlier hit the post. The Taysiders 
shrugged off their first-half sluggishness and in the 68th minute substitute 
Gary Harkins, on for Rory Loy just after the break, reduced the deficit with a 
deflected strike.

But the points were clinched in the 90th minute when Well midfielder Stephen 
Pearson and hisDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> counterpart 
Paul McGowan fought for a cross from substitute David Clarkson, with the ball 
ending up in the net.

Well’s second win in eight games was also Mark McGhee’s first home win since 
taking over as boss for the second time in October and it took the Lanarkshire 
side above Kilmarnock into 10th place, nine points ahead of bottom sideDundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> with Dundee now 
eight games without a win.Rangers required a late equaliser from Martyn Waghorn 
to scrape a 2-2 draw at home toMorton. The Championship leaders grabbed the 
lead inside two minutes thanks to Kenny Miller’s header. But a James Tavanier 
own goal and Stefan McCluskey’s strike put them behind with seven minutes left.

Waghorn, though, saved the day a minute later with his 20th goal of the 
season. The point keeps the Light Blues three points ahead of their title rivals
Hibernian, who recorded a 1-1 draw with Falkirk at Easter Road despite having 
John McGinn sent off before half-time.
 