
Goals from Ally Love and David Hopkirk gave Annan Athletic a stunning 2-1 
victory at Ibrox asRangers, with the boos of their fans ringing in their ears, 
suffered a first home league defeat of the season. Andy Little pulled a goal 
back but it was a dismal day for the Third Division leaders, who were described 
by their chief executive Charles Green in midweek as the worst side in the 
club's history.

The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> players were jeered 
off with the score 0-0 at half-time, but it got worse as two minutes into the 
second half Annan made the breakthrough. Danny Orsi swept the ball in from the 
left and Love nudged the ball into the net to silence the home crowd.

Francisco Sandaza replaced Kal Naismith as Rangers chased an equaliser but the 
Galabank side doubled their lead after 54 minutes. Murray sent a deep cross to 
the far post and Hopkirk bravely dived to head the ball low beyond Alexander.

Four minutes later McCoist's team reduced their arrears. Barrie McKay floated 
in a corner kick and although Sandaza's shot was heading towards a packed goal, 
Little headed it over the line for his 22nd goal of the season. Although 
Rangers pushed for the equaliser, Annan refused simply to defend in numbers. 
They continued to move the ball around with confidence and held on for a 
deserved win.

Elsewhere in the Third Division, Stirling Albion thrashed East Stirling 9-1 at 
the Forthbank Stadium, with Jordan White scoring four times.

In the Scottish Premier League, second-half goals from Murray Davidson and 
Gregory Tade boosted St Johnstone's top-six aspirations in a one-sided 2-0 win 
overKilmarnock. In front of just 2,425 fans, McDiarmid Park's lowest weekend 
crowd of the season, the Perth side completed a hat-trick of victories this 
term overKilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>.

Aberdeen were held to a 0-0 draw for the sixth time at Pittodrie this season as
Motherwellbecame the latest team to frustrate the Dons. Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> have slipped down the table 
during a run that before Saturday had seen them score just three times in their 
previous eight games. The welcome return of striker Scott Vernon back to the 
team could not amend that statistic.

Dundee were left frustrated as Inverness struck late on through Billy McKay 
for a share of the spoils in a hard-fought SPL match at Dens Park. The home 
side's interim manager John Brown was set to celebrate his second victory in 
charge in the space of just a few days thanks to John Baird's first-half opener 
but Caley Thistle hit back through McKay's 82nd-minute header.

St Mirren and Dundee United had to settle for a share of the spoils after a 
goalless draw in Paisley, in which John Rankin was sent off for the visitors 
two minutes from time.

The hosts, in their last game before taking on Hearts in the League Cup final 
next Sunday, looked the more likely scorers in the first half, going close with 
efforts from Steven Thompson and Esmaël Gonçalves, set up by Gary Teale.

United were livelier after half-time with their two best chances of breaking 
the deadlock falling late on to the substitute Michael Gardyne.

Hibernian host Hearts in the Edinburgh derby at Easter Road on Sunday.
 