
Callum Paterson’s header for Hearts denied St Johnstone a win at Tynecastle. 
The 22-year-old Scotland defender jumped above the visiting defence to meet a 
corner-kick with just three minutes remaining.

Paterson’s sixth goal of the season restored parity following Chris Kane’s 
strike 60 seconds earlier, which had looked set to earn Saints three points.

Hearts opened the scoring through Prince Buaben in the first half before 
former Hearts midfielder Danny Swanson, who started just five matches in his 
spell at Hearts last term, came back to haunt the Jambos with a fine equaliser, 
and his 10th goal of the season, before half-time. Hearts are now two points 
behind second-placed Aberdeen and 12 behind the leaders,Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/scottish-premiership-celtic-inverness-match-report>
.

Kilmarnock and Hamilton shared a 0-0 draw in a uneventful contest that was 
sorely lacking in creativity.

Hamilton’s Ali Crawford passed up two chances to break the deadlock before the 
interval, while Killie’s Souleymane Coulibaly had opportunities to score early 
in the second half.

The teams were largely restricted to a series of half-chances thereafter, 
despite the attacking intent shown by both managers - although each side also 
had penalty claims turned down by referee Euan Anderson

Dundee beat Motherwell 2-0 at Dens Park in controversial circumstances as 
Cammy Kerr and Marcus Haber scored to move the home side off the foot of the 
table. The focus of the game was the decision of the referee John Beaton and 
his assistant Ross Haswell to play on despite theDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> goalkeeper David Mitchell 
back-pedalling over his goalline when catching a Scott McDonald cross in the 
21st minute. The whole of Mitchell’s body was inside the goal, but he recovered 
quickly enough to escape in what was an extraordinary let-off.

In the Championship, the leaders, Hibs, won 3-0 at Ayr with two goals from 
Martin Boyle and a long-range John McGinn strike. Hibs’ nearest rivals,Dundee 
United, beat Queen of the South 4-1 at Palmerston Park with goals from Mark 
Durnan, Alex Andreu, Simon Murray and Scott Fraser. Lowland League sideEast 
Kilbride celebrated their 27th consecutive win after beating BSC Glasgow 3-1 
breaking Ajax’s world record of 26 wins. The Dutch side of 1971/72 consisted of 
Johan Cruyff, Johann Neeskens and Piet Keizer and sent representatives to 
K-Park to present the club with crates of beer and a video presentation of 
Edwin Van Der Saar congratulating Martin Lauchlan’s side.
 