
A Liam Boyce hat-trick settled a thrilling Highland derby in Ross County’s 
favour as they beatInverness 3-2 in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Boyce scored two goals in the first half and once after the break, and 
although Scott Boden and Ross Draper replied for Inverness, County clung on for 
their first win of the season.

The game was played at a frantic pace throughout, with the Dingwall club 
dominating first-half proceedings and Caley Thistle ending the game by 
bombarding the Staggies’ box with long balls. However, Boyce’s fine performance 
left the home side with too much to do.

Kilmarnock fought back to beat Hamilton 2-1 away, at the SuperSeal Stadium.

The Accies midfielder Louis Longridge broke the deadlock in the 26th minute of 
a poor first half, which was edged by the home side.

Killie were not much better after the break and the game appeared to be 
drifting towards aHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> win. 
However, the striker Kris Boyd restored parity for Killie with a header in the 
70th minute before substitute Souleymane Coulibaly scored the winner three 
minutes later, with a fine curling effort high past the goalkeeper Remi 
Matthews to leave the Lanarkshire side beaten.

Steven MacLean took advantage of some poor goalkeeping by Craig Samson to earn 
St Johnstone a 2-1 win against Motherwell at Fir Park. The Motherwell 
midfielder Chris Cadden opened the scoring from close range two minutes after 
the half-time interval, but Danny Swanson hit a fine solo equaliser within nine 
minutes.

The Saints sealed their second comeback victory in four days – having beaten 
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> 3-2 in the League Cup – 
when MacLean headed in after Samson had clawed out Chris Kane’s strike from 
around 25 yards out.

Hearts striker Tony Watt missed two good opportunities to score in the second 
period as they battled out a 0-0 draw withAberdeen, whose best chance at 
Pittodrie was headed wide by Peter Pawlett.

Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> started the began the 
better of the two sides and went close after three minutes when Jayden Stockley 
met a Peter Pawlett cross wide to head wide. The pace of Wes Burns was also 
causing trouble for the Hearts defence as they started brightly but he blasted 
a chance wide of the target.

Hearts looked shaky and it took some composed defending from John Souttar to 
read a Niall McGinn pass to Stockley who would have been in on goal.

All this action was before the 10th minute and Aberdeen did not look like 
relenting.

McGinn nipped past both John Souttar and Callum Paterson with a nice bit of 
skill but Faycal Rherras got across from left-back to make the tackle.

Callum Paterson then fired a volley across the Aberdeen goal as the visitors 
looked to gain a foothold in the match.

It was a short-lived flurry forward for Hearts as Burns then hit the crossbar 
with a header as the game resumed its course.

The match was beginning to become more physical and with this Hearts began to 
settle into their stride.

When Watt flicked in Sam Nicholson he appeared to be brought down late by Shay 
Logan inside the box but the penalty claims were waved away. For his vociferous 
appeal, Robbie Neilson earned a talking to from referee Kevin Clancy on the 
sidelines. After the break, the stalemate remained and chances were few and far 
between.

But Hearts had the better of opportunities when Watt, who was in possession of 
the ball with options either side, had his shot blocked by Anthony O’Connor and 
it was collected by Joe Lewis. And with the last chance of the match Watt fired 
over with time on his hands from 12 yards.
 