
Dundee United improved their Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> survival chances 
with a comprehensive 3-0 victory over a lacklustreRoss County at the Global 
Energy Stadium.

The United captain, Paul Paton, headed the visitors into the lead with 10 
minutes played and two goals in six minutes midway through the second period 
from Billy McKay and substitute Ryan Dow wrapped up the points.

United started brightly and won a free-kick in a dangerous position in the 
second minute after Martin Woods brought down John Rankin. From Paton’s floated 
delivery, Coll Donaldson glanced his header wide.

Louis Moult’s double sent Motherwell on their way to a 3-1 victory over 
Partick Thistle which took them above their visitors in the Premiership.

Moult took his season’s goal count to 16 with a penalty and a clever finish 
either side of half-time and the on-form Marvin Johnson used his pace and guile 
to add a third goal on the counter attack. Connor Ripley handed Thistle a 
lifeline when he let in a weak looking Callum Booth effort butMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> held firm for their first 
three points at Fir Park in 2016.

The Kilmarnock goalkeeper Jamie MacDonald saved two penalties against his 
former club but still ended up on the losing side asHearts beat Killie in a 
hard-fought 1-0 victory.

A Jamie Walker goal after seven minutes was enough to see off a dogged 
Kilmarnock team, with the 22‑year‑old scoring from close range after MacDonald 
had superbly saved his spot-kick. The referee, Don Robertson, award a second 
penalty after the break and once again MacDonald prevailed, making an excellent 
low stop to deny Abiola Dauda from 12 yards. Sam Nicholson also hit the 
crossbar for the hosts, who ultimately withstood late pressure.

Kane Hemmings scored his 20th goal of the season to earn Dundee a 1-1 draw at 
Dens Park.Inverness took the lead in the first half through Ross Draper before 
Hemmings equalised with four minutes remaining.

Rangers extended their lead at the top of the Championship to 11 points with a 
narrow 1-0 home win againstSt Mirren. The substitute Harry Forrester scored the 
winning goal four minutes from time with a curling shot past Jamie Langfield.

A 3-2 defeat at Dumbarton further hurt Hibs’ automatic promotion hopes, after 
the Edinburgh side lost 3-0 to Morton on Wednesday. Goals from Kevin Crawley, 
Christain Nade and Darren Barr gave Hibs too much to do despite their rallying 
in the second half with goals from Liam Henderson and Farid El Alagui.
 