
Kilmarnock opened up an 11-point lead over the bottom club Dundee United 
following a 2-2 draw with third-placedHearts at Rugby Park.

Conrad Balatoni scored his second goal of the season against his former club 
two minutes before the break, making sure from close range after his initial 
backheel had been blocked, but the visitors went in level when Gavin Reilly 
netted his second goal in two games with a rebound from close range after Billy 
King had hit the post.

Callum Paterson smashed home a left-foot volley from 18 yards for the away 
side in the 55th minute, but Josh Magennis rose well to head his 10th goal of 
the season into the roof of the net with 10 minutes remaining. There was some 
frantic moments as the sides chased a winner but the points were shared.

Bragging rights in the 50th Highlands derby went to Inverness after John 
Hughes’ side beatRoss County 2-0 at the Caledonian Stadium. Miles Storey added 
to his impressive pedigree by scoring the opening goal, flicking in a James 
Vincent shot for his eighth of the season and midfielder Greg Tansey scored 
from a free-kick for the third time in four days to keep the home side in the 
top half of the table.

Tansey’s delivery, swung in from the left flank, beat everyone and crept in at 
the far post. Storey hit the crossbar from 25 yards later on and Inverness 
thoroughly merited the three points. They now sit two points behind County with 
a game in hand.

Hamilton snatched a share of the points against their own local rivals, 
Motherwell, in dramatic style as the Lanarkshire derby ended 3-3.

Just when it looked like Accies would suffer a fifth straight defeat, Ali 
Crawford converted from the penalty spot deep into injury time, as Keith Lasley 
saw red for the home side.

Scott McDonald scored twice for Well, finding the net either side of goals 
from Lucas Tagliapietra and Darian MacKinnon for the visitors. Louis Moult 
thought he had scored the winner with a diving header after 57th minute but the 
last-minute flashpoint ensured the match finished all square.

In the Championship, Rangers stayed three points clear at the top with a 
thumping 6-0 win at strugglingDumbarton. Kenny Miller turned back the clock 
with his first hat-trick for the club since November 2010, putting Mark 
Warburton’s side firmly in control before Martyn Waghorn, Andy Halliday and 
James Tavernier rounded off a convincing win. The Gers had to wait 42 minutes 
for their breakthrough after making an indifferent start to the game but 
clicked into gear after half-time.

Hibernian stayed in touch with a 1-0 home win over Raith Rovers, secured with 
a goal by Jason Cummings early in the second half.
 