
Rangers claimed their third win of the season after first-half goals from Niko 
Kranjcar and Andy Halliday sent them on their way to a 2-0 win at home to
Partick Thistle.

Kranjcar played a one-two with fellow midfielder Jason Holt before making room 
to smack a right-foot drive high into the net. With the pressure removed,Rangers
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> extended their lead five 
minutes before the end of the first period. Holt picked up a loose ball in 
midfield and fed Martyn Waghorn, who drove at the defence and set up Halliday 
to strike low past Ryan Scully. After the interval Alan Archibald’s men missed 
a gilt-edged opportunity to get back in the match through Chris Erskine. The 
win moves Mark Warburton’s team up to fifth place.

A 39-year-old man died and 18 supporters were taken to hospital after a coach 
transporting 36 Rangers fans to the game overturned in East Ayrshire.

Aberdeen moved above Hearts into second place with a commanding 4-0 win at 
Kilmarnock. The home goalkeeper, Jamie MacDonald, was adjudged to have upended 
James Maddison by the referee, Willie Collum, with the fans expecting the foul 
to be called the other way. Adam Rooney tucked the penalty away with 25 minutes 
played.

Lee Clark’s team looked sleepy as the Dons twice capitalised from set-pieces 
with strikes from Andrew Considine and Ash Taylor. Rooney sealed the victory 
with his second goal of the match with 18 minutes remaining.The Dons are now 
four points behind Celtic. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/celtic-dundee-scottish-premiership-match-report>

Liam Polworth’s last-gasp strike rescued a point for Inverness against Hamilton
 as a 1-1 draw stretched the visitors’ unbeaten run to five games in the 
Premiership. Hamilton took the lead when Alex D’Acol struck in the 18th minute, 
but Accies then surrendered an advantage for the second week running.

Martin Canning’s men have won once in the league this season and their chance 
to add to this was spoiled three minutes into stoppage time when Polworth took 
possession of the ball, ran inside and fired a low shot into the left corner to 
earn Inverness a point.

Danny Swanson pulled the strings as St Johnstone won 2-0 at Ross County. The 
midfielder opened the scoring three minutes before the break, converting a 
penalty after Chris Kane was hauled down by Jay McEveley. County put the 
pressure on in the second half, but Kane ran on to a Swanson through ball to 
seal victory.

A bad day became even worse for the home side when Northern Ireland striker 
Liam Boyce was taken off injured five minutes from the end of the match. In the 
Championship. league leadersQueen of the South remain two points clear after a 
0-0 draw at Dumbarton. Chances were at a premium in the first period and Lyndon 
Dykes and Jamie Hamill, with a free-kick, came closest to scoring for the 
Doonhamers after the break. Nearest challengers Hibs host Dundee United on 
Sunday.
 