
Tony Watt opened his goalscoring account for Hearts as his late winning goal 
snatched a 2-1 victory overPartick Thistle at Firhill.

Hearts’ right-back Callum Paterson, the subject of two failed bids from Wigan 
recently, proved his worth to the Tynecastle side as he headed home the 
17th-minute opener.

But Liam Lindsay provided the Jags with a deserved equaliser when he headed 
home from a Chris Erskine corner with 10 minutes played in the second half.

However, just as the match was heading for a draw there was a cruel blow for 
the hosts when Watt lashed a shot past Tomas Cerny to hand his side a second 
straight Premiership win.

Dougie Imrie was the hero as Hamilton recorded their first league victory of 
the season with a 1-0 win overRoss County.

Imrie pounced in the 76th minute to slam the ball into the net following good 
play by Darian MacKinnon during a goalmouth scramble, for his fourth goal of 
the season.

Motherwell and Dundee shared the points in a goalless encounter at Fir Park to 
leave both sides with just one win so far in this campaign. The Dundee manager, 
Paul Hartley, praised the debut display of Kevin Gomis after the French 
defender helped them to an away point. The former Nice centre-back and his 
fellow defenders restrictedMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> to few openings despite a 
dominant first-half performance from the hosts. And Hartley was hugely 
encouraged by the 27-year-old’s introduction to the Premiership.

The Dundee manager said: “I thought we were good second half. We controlled 
the game, we just missed that bit of quality and cutting edge. But I was really 
pleased with how we performed and the clean sheet. We don’t get many clean 
sheets so that was pleasing, and Gomis at centre-half was terrific. He was 
excellent for his first game, he has not played for a while. I thought he 
strolled it.”

A stoppage-time strike from Josh Meekings gave Inverness a first Premiership 
win under their manager, Richie Foran.

Meekings scrambled the ball over the line in the final moments of the game to 
earn Caley Thistle a 2-1 win overSt Johnstone, who had looked like they would 
take a point. Ross Draper opened the scoring for Inverness but a long-range 
effort from Richard Foster drew the visitors level with 10 minutes to go. When 
it looked like Inverness could not barge the door down, Meekings’ close-range 
finish sparked jubilation amongst the home support.

In the Championship, Hibernian moved clear at the top with a 4-0 home win 
againstMorton.
 