
Adam Rooney’s 51st minute strike sparked a second half revival as Aberdeen 
fought back from a goal down at home toRoss County to win 3-1.

Craig Curran had given County a 14th minute lead with a clinical finish after 
being set up by Liam Boyce, but the Dons responded with two goals in the space 
of two minutes after the break.

Adam Rooney netted his 10th of the season, finishing following good approach 
play from Niall McGinn, before a Jonny Hayes cross-shot looped over Gary Woods 
to give the home side the advantage.

McGinn also got himself on the scoresheet late on with a powerful low effort 
across the goalkeeper to moveAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> second in the league table, 
with Celtic to play Inverness in tomorrow’s lunchtime kick-off.

Two goals each for Kris Doolan and Robbie Muirhead contributed to Partick 
Thistle’s 5-2 defeat of Kilmarnock, who are now without a win in four games.

Doolan beat the offside trap in the seventh minute before finishing expertly, 
and doubled both his and his team’s tally eight minutes later with a free 
header at the back post.

The Northern Ireland striker Josh Magennis pulled a goal back for Gary Locke’s 
men, before Gary Fraser and Muirhead struck within 10 minutes to open up a 
comfortable margin.

Mark Connolly pulled a goal back for Killie with a header, but Muirhead 
restored the three-goal lead with a half‑volley and Killie had no riposte.

Ziggy Gordon’s late strike claimed the points for Hamilton, who produced the 
perfect comeback to beatDundee United 2-1 at Tannadice.

Billy McKay scored just before the half-hour to give Mixu Paatelainen’s side 
the half-time lead, as hopes increased amongst their supporters that the 
league’s bottom club were set to claim only their third victory of the season.

However, a Lucas Tagliapietra header restored parity in the 70th minute before 
Gordon was in the right position to score after Ali Crawford’s shot was blocked 
with 10 minutes remaining asHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> moved fifth in the table.

Dunfermline booked their place in the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> fourth round after a Andy 
Geggan goal in the 22nd minute gave them victory againstAyr United, as 
third-round replays beckon forQueen’s Park and Forfar Athletic, who shared a 
1-1 draw, along withCowdenbeath and Arbroath and Highland league sides 
Formartine United and Cove Rangers, and Huntly and Lothian Thistle Hutchison 
Vale.
 