
Scotland's tenaciously inspired performance to draw with the Group Four 
favourites France on Saturday should have convinced the other teams watching on 
hotel televisions that this tournament is by no means a three-cornered fight 
between the French, Australia and the All Blacks.

For three-quarters of the game the Scots, with a courageous display from their 
pack, notably the foraging of Paxton and Clader, presented France with all 
sorts of problems, and though they flagged towards the end, Scotland could 
still have won had Hastings converted Duncan's injury-time try.

"At time it got a bit frantic out there," confessed the Scots skipper Colin 
Deans, who agreed with the coach Derrick Grant "that it had all been about 
commitment and courage."

The French unexpectedly failed to establish authority in the line-outs and, 
more surprisingly, in the scrums, where Deans won three against the head. Yet, 
as the game moved towards the fourth quarter, the French, who had trailed 
16-6,lifted their game, though it was controversy rather than cohesion which 
brought them to 20 points.

Berbizier, the French scrum-half, had already reduced the deficit to 16-14 
with a try which underlined Scotland's fatigue in the later stages. Lagisquet, 
the French wing, was sent clear and seemed to have scored a perfectly good try, 
only to see it siallowed by the Christchurch touch judge Tom Doocey, who ruled 
that the Frenchman had touched down over the sideline.

Then came more drama. Berbizier took a knock and went off the field. Matt 
Duncan, the Scots wing, was also injured with a cut on the forehead and while 
Deans was attending to him Serge Blanco took the awarded penalty with a quick 
tap to himself and ran 60 yards through the stationary Scots for a cheeky try 
which was missed by most, including the television cameras. However, the Scots 
did not moan. As coach Grant admitted: "We were dreaming, we should have been 
alert."

The Scots' response was astonishing - a team exhausted by so much defending 
found a reserve of energy and scored a point-saving try after winning three 
rucks then sending the wounded Duncan on a desperate charge at the French line. 
There was a standing ovation for the Scots, with the Christchurch Caledonian 
bagpipes getting ready once again to play Scotland the Brave.

With the Sella try, two penalties and a conversion from the erratic Blanco, 
Berbisier's score - and the dramatic finale by Blanco, France had forced their 
way back into contention however. French teams of previous years might well 
have folded. This is no longer a weakness.
 