
Gary Harkins stole the show as Dundee romped to a 4-2 win over 10-man Partick 
Thistle in the Premiership at Firhill.

The visitors were ahead after seven minutes when Harkins was upended in the 
box by Liam Lindsay and Hemmings converted the penalty.

Harkins was on the scoresheet three minutes later. The Partick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> goalkeeper, Tomas Cerny, failed 
to deal with Nick Ross’s free-kick and Harkins was on hand to prod the ball 
into the back of the net.

It got worse for Partick when Greg Stewart cut inside from the left and let 
loose a fine shot beyond the grasp of Cerny.

Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> continued to attack in 
numbers and only the goal frame prevented them from extending their lead 
further as Kane Hemmings cracked a shot off the post.

Despite the bad start to the match, Partick managed to pull a goal back after 
23 minutes. Stuart Bannigan’s cross picked out David Amoo in front of goal and 
he nodded past Scott Bain.

But their hopes were shattered when Dundee struck again eight minutes before 
the interval. Harkins grabbed his second of the day in style with a curling 
shot from the edge of the area that left Cerny stranded.

Partick’s Liam Lindsay was sent off for a second bookable offence after 77 
minutes before the home side reduced the deficit to 4-2 when Doolan scored from 
close-range in stoppage time.

A thunderous volley from Craig Slater gave Kilmarnock a 2-1 win against 
Inverness at a snow-covered Rugby Park. Greg Kiltie opened the scoring for 
Killie but Ross Draper levelled before the break. Slater made his mark six 
minutes into the second half with a wonder strike and despite Inverness huffing 
and puffing, the points remained in east Ayrshire.

St Johnstone and Hamilton drew a blank in their match at McDiarmid Park. Tommy 
Wright’s men have now gone five games without a goal, while Accies restored 
pride after the Scottish Cup exit to Annan – although they have now won once in 
14 games following this 0-0 stalemate.

Rangers moved six points clear at the top of the Championship after a 4-1 
stroll againstLivingston at Ibrox.

With title rivals Falkirk and Hibernian not playing until Sunday afternoon, 
Gers took the opportunity to extend their lead with a crushing first-half 
display. Martyn Waghorn extended his goal tally for the season to 27 goals with 
two more and Danny Wilson and Kenny Miller also scored in the first half.

There was not the same spark from Mark Warburton’s team after the break and 
they allowed Liam Buchanan to restore some pride for second-bottom Livingston 
when he struck after 55 minutes.
 