
Aberdeen maintained their good vein of form by coasting to a 4-0 victory over 
10-manRoss County to stay second in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Goals from Jonny Hayes, Shay Logan, Niall McGinn and Jayden Stockley gave the 
Dons their fourth successive league win and fifth in a row in all competitions.
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> dominated play at 
Pittodrie, aided by the Ross County midfielder Tim Chow being sent off after 
just 22 minutes for a petulant challenge on Hayes.

The substitute Scott Boyd scored to reward Kilmarnock with their first three 
points in two months as they held on for an ugly 1-0 win overSt Johnstone at 
McDiarmid Park. The defender was brought into the action early in the first 
half, after Jonathan Burns suffered a broken nose, and ensured his side won a 
dour affair with his 76th-minute strike.

Killie’s crucial win meant they rose to ninth, with a three-point cushion over 
new basement boysDundee. Saints, however, missed out on the chance to move above
Rangers, as they remained in fifth.

Hearts beat Dundee 2-0 at Tynecastle and climbed above Rangers who won 1-0 at 
Inverness on Friday night. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/inverness-caledonian-thistle-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 Callum Paterson broke the deadlock with a header after 68 minutes and the 
substitute Bjorn Johnsen scored his first competitive goal with a powerful 
finish for the Edinburgh side to seal the win. Dundee lost the contest despite 
hitting the woodwork on four occasions and their goalkeeper, Scott Bain, 
putting in an excellent performance.

Eamonn Brophy came off the bench to score his first goal of the season and earn
Hamilton a 2-2 draw against Partick. Accies took the lead at Firhill when 
Massimo Donati headed home in the 14th minute, but the Italian was involved in 
a defensive mix-up which handed Ryan Edwards an equaliser eight minute later.

Both teams went for the next goal in a thrilling first half and it was the 
Thistle defender Liam Lindsay who succeeded in scoring, heading home his fourth 
goal of the season two minutes before the interval.

Accies pushed for an equaliser but struggled to create clear chances until 
Donati played an excellent ball into the left channel for Brophy, who finished 
just inside the far post.

In the Championship, Hibernian’s third-straight Championship draw was enough 
to see them move top of the table as they were held to a 0-0 draw byRaith at 
Stark’s Park.

Hibs started to enjoy the majority of possession early on as John McGinn’s 
near-post header was cleared off the line in their best first-half chance 
before team-mate Fraser Fyvie came close but sent Grant Holt’s cross wide of 
the mark before Paul Hanlon headed past the post.

Hibernian <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> were reduced to 10 
men seven minutes before the break as Marvin Bartley was sent off for a foul on 
Bobby Barr. Jason Cummings fired wide from outside the box for Hibs while,down 
at the other end – Barr and Ross Callachan had chances blocked before Kyle 
Benedictus’s late header was held out as Neil Lennon’s side went home with a 
point.Morton beat league leaders Queen of the South 5-0 with the in-demand Jai 
Quitongo amongst the goals for Morton at Palmerston Park.
 