
Alloa did their best to dampen the party mood before Rangers were presented 
with theScottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> trophy as they 
held on for a 1-1 draw at Ibrox.

Michael Duffy – on loan from Celtic – handed the relegated Wasps a shock early 
lead before Rangers blew a string of chances, including an Andy Halliday 
penalty, as they struggled to get into gear. James Tavernier eventually 
equalised with a header for Mark Warburton’s team just before half‑time but
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> could not put on the 
performance and score the goals they were hoping for in their final home game 
of the campaign.

The party did finally get started but only after the full-time whistle, with 
Lee Wallace raising the biggest cheer of the day as the captain raised the 
trophy to the delight of the 50,000 supporters in attendance.

The draw came after Wednesday’s 3-2 loss to Hibs and Warburton was forced to 
admit his side have suffered a Hampden hangover following the Scottish Cup 
shootout win against Celtic.

Warburton said: “After winning the league earlier this month, then the 
Petrofac Cup before what happened last Sunday, then maybe subconsciously it’s a 
natural reaction to be a bit flat.”

But Warburton is certain his side will be alert for the Scottish Cup final 
date with Hibs on 21 May. “We need to pick it up pretty quick – but we will do. 
It’s important to get the preparation right,” he said. “We’ll give the lads 
four days off. Any longer is dangerous as they get in holiday mode.”

Dumbarton secured Championship status with a 2-1 over St Mirren.

In the Premiership, Lionel Ainsworth struck his second goal in three games to 
moveMotherwell back up to fourth with a 1-0 victory over Hearts. The winger 
struck a powerful low shot past Neil Alexander in the 28th minute asMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> leapfrogged St Johnstone with 
a deserved win at Fir Park, their seventh in nine games.

St Johnstone’s victory over Aberdeen on Friday night had given Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> the chance to move five points 
off second place but they were flat for the opening half hour and struggled to 
get back in the game, with the hosts missing good chances to double their lead.

Kane Hemmings took his goal tally in the Premiership to 21 with a double in 
Dundee’s 2-1 victory at Partick Thistle. With both teams seeking to finish best 
of the rest in the bottom half of the table, the Dens Park forward gave the 
Taysiders the lead in the 34th minute with a near-post finish.

Kris Doolan restored parity for the Jags with a header in the 70th minute, but 
in the 81st minute Hemmings gaveDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> the advantage with a drive to 
take the seventh-placed Dees three points clear of their hosts.

Forfar lost 3-2 at Albion and will be relegated from League One while East Fife
 are champions of League Two andEast Stirling , who lost 3-0 to Elgin, finish 
bottom of the pile.
 