
The Scottish government has been accused of cutting nearly £330m from council 
funding to help pay for education and social care spending innext year’s draft 
budget <http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2016/12/6610>.

Opposition parties and the Scottish TUC said Derek Mackay, the Scottish 
finance secretary, was guilty of squeezing local councils rather than using 
Holyrood’s new powers to raise income tax to fund £170m of extra spending on 
schools in the poorest areas.

Scottish government officials rejected the complaints. They insisted the 
like-for-like cuts were in fact only £182m, but were more than compensated for 
by up to £180m in extra council tax income and £150m in more capital spending.

Mackay told MSPs that overall council spending power, boosted by new 
responsibilities for social care and improving attainment,would increase by 
£240m <http://news.gov.scot/news/a-budget-for-scotlands-future-1>. “This is a 
settlement that invests in education, invests in social care and invests in 
local services,” he said.

Backed by the Scottish TUC, Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, accused 
Mackay of spin. She said other tables in the budget paper showed that core 
council funding had fallen by £327m, which would see “the heart ripped out of 
public services”.

Willie Rennie, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, threatened to oppose the 
budget unless spending for education increased further, reducing the chances 
that Nicola Sturgeon’s minority government will win a final vote for the budget.

“The first minister said today that there were acres of common ground between 
the parties but can I tell the finance secretary that he has got miles to 
travel before we can reach an agreement,” Rennie said.

With an eye to next May’s council elections, when the Scottish National party 
hopes to win control of nearly all Scotland’s cities, Mackay was forced into 
two key reversals on policies that threaten to be central to that campaign.

He abandoned plans to use higher council taxes levied next year on the most 
expensive homes to fund a national £100m education investment policy, and 
offered £3m to help cut train fares after weeks of criticism over 
underperforming rail services.


While spending on social services, education and health increased, opposition 
parties identified further funding cuts to universities, the Scottish 
prosecution service, buses and bus fares, and the investment agency Highlands 
and Islands Enterprise.


Spending on arts, historic monuments and roads would increase, Mackay said. He 
also announced that the number of small firms and shops exempt from business 
rates would rise to 100,000 and there would be a 3.7% cut in the main business 
rates for other companies.

The budget also confirmed the Scottish government would lose at least £190m 
next year in extra borrowing from the Treasury for infrastructure, aftertighter 
EU rules forced them to include £932m worth of privately financed construction 
works in its budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/scottish-auditors-to-investigate-9bn-private-finance-bill>
.

Mackay acknowledged that this year’s draft budget was a historic one: he was 
the first finance secretary able to set income tax rates and bands wholly 
independent to those in the rest of UK.

But that new funding deal agreed with the Treasury in February also directly 
links the Scottish government’s income with Scotland’s economic performance and 
its tax receipts.

“This is one key reason why this draft budget is focused on growing a 
sustainable and productive economy, supporting more and better jobs”, Mackay’s 
budget report said.

Labour, the Scottish Greens and the Liberal Democrats have put him under 
intense pressure to increase income tax rates, including a new additional rate 
of 50% for those who earn over £150,000; the Scottish Tories urged him to cut 
taxes in line with a new £45,000 threshold for 40% taxpayers in the rest of the 
UK.

As already forecast by his predecessor, John Swinney, Mackay announced that 
the basic rate would be frozen in cash terms, with only modest changes to other 
rates.

The 40% rate threshold would rise from £43,000 to £43,430 next April, in line 
with forecast inflation but much less than the jump to £45,000 for other UK 
taxpayers.

The additional rate of 45% would also be frozen at £150,000, a decision likely 
to increase the number of the highest earners paying that rate if their 
salaries increase, and helping boost Scottish government revenues.

Mackay said this very centrist policy was designed to protect Scotland’s 
sluggish economy, which has been underperforming after the collapse in global 
oil prices hit North Sea industries.

Mackay had originally planned to use far higher council taxes on the most 
expensive homes, which would see rates on Band H homes rise by nearly 25% next 
year after eight years of a council tax freeze, to fund the £100m strategy to 
improve attainment among the poorest pupils.

Instead, councils would now be able to keep that £110m for local services, 
helping them stave off angry complaints from wealthier homeowners about higher 
council tax rates. However only a small number of wealthier council areas such 
as Edinburgh, Aberdeen and East Renfrewshire will benefit.

If other councils want extra money for local services, they will also have new 
powers to increase all council bands by 3% for the first time since council tax 
was frozen in 2008.

Opposition parties and council leaders admit higher rates for the most 
expensive homes is a more progressive use of the tax system but complain that 
this still forces them to charge families more for public services, while the 
Scottish government refuses to raise income tax rates.
 