
An expertly taken free-kick from Ali Crawford rescued Hamilton a 1-1 draw at 
Ross County.

County dominated possession for the majority of the contest. A Liam Boyce 
header gave the home side the lead they merited six minutes before the 
half-time interval, and the Staggies had further opportunities to put the match 
beyond the reach of the visitors. However, Crawford’s impressive breakthrough 
13 minutes from the end of the contest squared matters.

Bjorn Johnsen doubled his tally for the season with two goals for Hearts in a 
convincing 3-0 victory overMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell>.

The Hearts striker scored either side of the break before Jamie Walker 
completed the scoring as Robbie Neilson’s side collected their first win in 
five outings. Neilson would also have been delighted about keeping a clean 
sheet after conceding 10 goals in the four matches preceding the visit of the 
Steelmen. Hearts now go into Wednesday’s home game againstRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/partick-thistle-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 knowing they will climb back up to second if they beat Mark Warburton’s team.

Dundee moved off the foot of the Premiership table with a well-earned 2-1 win 
over 10-manInverness at Dens Park.

Wighton put the home side in the ascendancy with a fine 25th-minute finish and 
a Kostadin Gadzhalov header extended their lead after 60 minutes.

A Carl Tremarco header with nine minutes remaining gave the visitors a fillip 
until Lewis Horner was sent off in stoppage time for hauling down Craig 
Wighton. It means the Taysiders, who have won three of their last four league 
matches to leapfrog Inverness, are now sitting seventh in the table.

Six Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> 
third-round ties survived the freezing temperatures, with nine matches 
rescheduled. Highland League sideBuckie Thistle were knocked out 5-3 at home by 
Dunfermline, with Paul McMullan’s two goals settling the fixture in the Pars’ 
favour.

Junior outfit Bonnyrigg Rose earned a highly commendable 0-0 home draw and a 
replay with Championship teamDumbarton. Forrest Mechanics and Stenhousemuir 
will also replay after a goalless draw. Shane Sutherland scored four goals as
Elgin City trounced Lowland League side Hawick Royal Albert 8-1. Jamie 
Longworth’s long range strike allowedAlloa to progress to the next round at the 
expense ofPeterhead with a 1-0 win.
 