
The formula that has led the Seattle Seahawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/seattle-seahawks> to unmatched success over 
the past five seasons returned.

NFL wild card round: Seattle Seahawks v Detroit Lions – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/07/nfl-wild-card-seattle-seahawks-detroit-lions-live>
A healthy dose of Thomas Rawls rumbling on the ground. A few timely throws by 
Russell Wilson helped by some remarkable catches. And a defense that never 
allowed Detroit a sniff of the end zone.

Rawls rushed for a franchise playoff-record 161 yards, Paul Richardson made 
one of the catches of the year for his first career postseason touchdown, and 
the Seahawks beat the Lions 26-6 on Saturday night in an NFC wild-card game.

Seattle won its 10th straight home playoff game, continuing Detroit’s 
miserable conclusion to the season that finished with four straight losses. 
Detroit’s long playoff history without postseason success continued: no playoff 
wins since 1992. No road playoff wins since 1957.

Rawls was the workhorse as the run game the Seahawks became known for when 
Marshawn Lynch was in the backfield finally found consistency that was missing 
all season. Rawls bettered Lynch’s 157 yards in the 2014 NFC championship game 
against Green Bay. Rawls had runs of 12, 14, 26 and a 32-yarder late in the 
third quarter, when Wilson ended up being his lead blocker.

Rawls capped his night with a four-yard touchdown run that gave Seattle a 19-6 
lead. He was the first player with at least 150 yards rushing in a playoff game 
since Lynch’s performance against the Packers.

While Rawls did the grunt work, Richardson filled the highlight reel with a 
trio of catches. None was better than his four-yard touchdown in the second 
quarter to give Seattle a 7-0 lead.

Richardson went horizontal reaching out with his left hand to cradle the pass 
as he was being interfered with by Tavon Wilson. What wasn’t called on the play 
was Richardson’s right hand yanking on the facemask of Wilson as he reached to 
make the catch.

Richardson had another one-handed catch in the fourth quarter, and Doug 
Baldwin got into the act of amazing catches, pinning a 10-yard reception to the 
back of his leg late in the fourth quarter to continue a Seattle drive. Two 
plays later, Baldwin’s 13-yard touchdown reception put it away.

Wilson finished 23 of 30 for 224 yards, while Baldwin had 11 catches for 104 
yards.
 