
An ambulance pulled up outside the main entrance just before the kick-off and 
with nine of the remaining fit England squad players on display, the driver 
would not have been tempted to stray too far. The main casualty, though, looked 
like being Leicester’s pride as they fell 21 points behind early in the 
second-half, but the Tigers roused themselves and should have secured a bonus 
point.

Saracens were ruffled but go into the international period at the top of the 
table after what has become a customary home victory over Leicester who had 
tended to reserve their worst for the artificial surface here: four appearances 
and four heavy defeats with an average score of 37-10 to Saracens. They started 
with the resolve and force thathad seen off Racing 92 six days before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/leiceister-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, but needed more against the league and European champions.

Courtney Lawes adds to England’s injury woes ahead of South Africa Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/courtney-lawes-injury-england-south-africa>
Opponents have to seize the moment against Saracens and when Peter Betham 
picked up Mako Vunipola’s loose pass near halfway six minutes in he was, for 
once, not confronted by a wall of defenders. The Australian ran towards the 
home 22, looking around for support, but opted to pass long rather than short 
and Adam Thompstone was unable to hold on.Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> conceded a free-kick at the 
subsequent scrum, lost a lineout on their own throw after Sarries kicked to 
touch and were soon lining up under their own posts after Jamie George’s run 
off the ball created the space for Chris Wyles to score in the corner.

Saracens’ second try came after 23 when Owen Williams, standing near his own 
line, kicked weakly down field. The home side had not been afraid to put the 
ball dead when there was no opportunity to roll it into space, but the 
Leicester fly‑half seemed wedded to a gameplan as he gave Alex Goode ample time 
to launch a counterattack. Mako Vunipola gave the move impetus and when the 
ball was moved right, Goode came into the line at pace and although his pass to 
Sean Maitland lacked accuracy, the wing had time to pick up and twist out of JP 
Pietersen’s tackle to score.

It was Maitland’s fourth try of the season, evidence that Chris Ashton may not 
be missed. The Scotland international is more purposeful and alert than he was 
at London Irish last season, finishing moves smartly.

Leicester had purpose but they were too loose and their kicking strategy, 
which seemed to be designed to take play out of their half, lacked thought. 
Their evolution from route one to all-encompassing has been trying: while they 
are more creative, they have become vulnerable defensively, conceding 17 tries 
in five away matches this season.

They took play through 17 phases before Williams’s 14th-minute penalty that 
made it 7-3, but they struggled in the scrum, penalised five times even though
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> were without their two 
second-rows and had to conscript a flanker, Michael Rhodes, to fill in, and 
lost four of their lineouts with the hosts looking to put the thrower Tom 
Youngs under pressure from the outset.

The Tigers set out to win the physical battle, but there was the sight, and 
sound, of Rhodes thundering into Pietersen, Mako Vunipola flattening his 
England colleague Ellis Genge, a first quarter replacement for Marcos Ayerza 
who did not return after a head injury assessment, and Ben Youngs found himself 
driven back 15 metres by Billy Vunipola.

Harlequins enjoy routine win as Worcester’s Ben Te’o catches the eye
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/harlequins-worcester-premiership-match-report>
It was how the most successful team in the Premiership’s history used to 
overwhelm opponents, but Leicester are among the pack chasing Saracens, and 
from some way behind.

Saracens led 17-3 at the interval with Farrell supplementing his wings’ two 
tries with a penalty, although he hit the post just before the break. When 
Billy Vunipola scored his side’s third try after brother Mako won a penalty 
that Sarries turned into a lineout, it looked all over.

One feature that has not changed with Leicester is their determination, down 
but never out. They brought Freddie Burns off the bench, not to replace 
Williams but give them a second fly-half and a more creative hue. He had been 
one for six minutes when Mako Vunipola, in a surprising loss of control, 
shoulder-charged him off the ball and was sent to the sin-bin.

Suddenly, Saracens were hanging on. Burns broke out of his own 22, 
sidestepping out of two tackles and fragmenting the defence, the support play 
was incisive and when George Catchpole scored in the corner, the Tigers 
rediscovered their roar. It was not enough to clot the mistakes that had 
bedevilled their performance, such as knock-ons and misdirected passes, but 
they were on the front foot for the final 20 minutes and for once left here 
with something to cling on to.

Saracens: Goode; Maitland, Tompkins (Bosch 56), Barritt (capt), Wyles; Farrell 
(Lozowski 74), Spencer (Wigglesworth 52); M Vunipola (Barrington 74), George 
(Brits 50), Figallo (Du Plessis 61), Rhodes (Brown 61), Hamilton (Flanagan 78), 
Wray, Burger, B Vunipola.

Tries: Wyles, Maitland, B Vunipola. Cons: Farrell 3. Pen: Farrell. Sin-bin: M 
Vunipola 62

Leicester: Tait; Thompstone, Betham, Roberts (Burns 56), Pietersen (Catchpole 
64); Williams, B Youngs (Harrison 52); Ayerza (Genge 19), T Youngs (capt; 
McGuigan 59), Cole (Mulipola 59), Slater (Evans 64), Kitchener, Fitzgerald, 
O’Connor (Hamilton 70), McCaffrey.

Try: Catchpole. Con: Williams. Pen: Williams.

Referee: Wayne Barnes

Attendance: 9,734
 