
Even if Semesa Rokoduguni scores the decisive try for England at Twickenham 
next month he will struggle to improve on the late drama in which Bath snatched 
improbable victory from Exeter’s grasp, to the Chiefs’ horror. Halloween will 
produce no bigger nightmare in Devon than the Fijian‑born winger’s five‑pointer 
in the eighth minute of added time, which condemnedExeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> to the latest painful outcome of an 
increasingly tricky campaign.

The longer the game went on, with Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>
 camped on the home line and scrums going down on a regular basis, a twist in 
the tale grew steadily more probable and, sure enough, Exeter were unable to 
cling to the 10-6 lead they had chiselled out thanks to Mitch Lees’s 
70th‑minute try.

Tired Wasps ‘flattered’ by margin of victory over Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/wasps-newcastle-premiership-match-report>
George Ford, who, with Rokoduguni, now heads for England’s warm-weather 
training camp in Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/tom-wood-england-squad-autumn-internationals-eddie-jones-alex-lozowski-mike-haley>
, twice found his team-mate in space out wide and on the second occasion the 
powerful finisher shrugged off tired tackles from Gareth Steenson and Olly 
Woodburn to settle the outcome.

It was precisely the kind of coup de grâce Eddie Jones would love to see 
replicated against South Africa on 12 November. With Anthony Watson and Jack 
Nowell out injured, the 29-year-old is on course to add to the solitarycap he 
won against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/08/england-new-zealand-rugby-union-match-report>
 under Stuart Lancaster and there need be no worries about his form. Ford, 
despite a mixed day off the tee, also guided his team expertly around the field 
while another England hopeful, Henry Slade, was his side’s best player in the 
concluding round of matches before the Premiership goes into brief hibernation.

Bath, with one defeat in nine games this season, will go into the break nicely 
poised in third place in the table but the chance to reflect and regroup will 
be particularly welcome for the increasingly luckless Chiefs. Any kind of mangy 
victory would do for Exeter now but, to tell the brutal truth, they are not 
playing collectively well enough to make it happen. Their head coach, Rob 
Baxter, to his credit, resisted the temptation to blame the referee or the 
planets and will instead expect all concerned to dig a little deeper and 
develop “a bit of steel” to enable them to close out tight matches.

His side have now gone five games without a victory in all competitions and 
won only one of their past five home games, a far cry from last season when 
they reached thePremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> 
final. The suspicion persists that the concerted effort required to reach 
Twickenham, coupled with the involvement of several key figures on the Saxons 
tour in June, drained minds and bodies, and the subsequent loss of Dave Ewers, 
Don Armand, Luke Cowan-Dickie, Jack Nowell, Julian Salvi and Phil Dolman to 
injury has clearly not helped.

The answer looks simple enough on paper: be more patient, build field 
position, look after the ball better. Instead, the first half was a comedy of 
errors; neither side could string together many concerted attacking phases, 
although the defence of both sides was frequently outstanding.

Gavin Henson injury adds to Bristol worries in crushing defeat to Sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bristol-sale-gavin-henson-premiership-match-report-rugby-union>
The biggest cheer of the first half was reserved for a concerted period of 
Chiefs defence five minutes before half-time, with Bath’s failure to score 
prompting the kind of celebrations normally reserved for title-clinching 
moments. Had a smart interception by Slade just before the interval led to a 
try down at the other end, the outcome might have been very different.

Then again Ford missed two penalty chances he would normally kick in his sleep 
and the disruption caused by losing both Lachie Turner and Jack Yeandle to head 
knocks further undermined the home cause. Bath also had a potential try for 
Dave Attwood ruled out for a forward pass in the buildup and it was only in the 
final quarter that Exeter finally kept hold of the ball long enough to drive 
Lees over from 15 metres out.

When Steenson missed a subsequent penalty from almost directly in front to 
extend the gap to seven points, however, it offered Bath a glimmer of light. 
Their forwards could not quite force a try despite four penalty resets against 
the Chiefs, but ultimately it mattered not as Ford finally set Rokoduguni free, 
having spotted that Steenson was not the ideal defender to be patrolling the 
Chiefs’ left flank.

Bath’s joy was unconfined, with Attwood more than happy to salute the 
“razzle-dazzle” of Rokoduguni: “He’s an unbelievable talent … he can pretty 
much do everything,” the second-row said. “If I could pick one player to be it 
would probably be him.”

Exeter Turner (Devoto, 36); Woodburn, Whitten, Slade, Short (S Hill, 61); 
Steenson (capt), Lewis (Maunder, 47); Low (Rimmer, 44), Yeandle (Taione, ht), 
Williams (Francis, 47) Lees, Parling (J Hill, 54), Dennis (White, 76), 
Horstmann, Waldrom.

Try Lees. Con Steenson. Pen Steenson. Bath T Homer; Rokoduguni, Joseph, 
Banahan, Brew (Williams, 68), Ford (co-capt), Fotuali’i; Auterac (Lahiff, 58), 
Batty (Dunn, 53) Thomas (Palma-Newport, 68) Charteris (Stooke, 53), Attwood, 
Garvey (co-capt), Ellis (Mercer, 76), Ewels.

Try Rokoduguni. Con Ford. Pens Ford 2.

Referee I Tempest. Attendance 12,284.
 