
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has agreed to 
preserve the Senate’s landmark investigation into the CIA’s use of torture 
after 9/11, but his decision ensures that the document remains out of public 
view for at least 12 years and probably longer.


Obama’s decision, revealed in a letter from White House counsel W Neil 
Eggleston, prevents Republican Richard Burr, the Senate intelligence committee 
chairman who has been highly critical of the investigation, from destroying 
existing classified copies of the December 2014 report.

'A constitutional crisis': the CIA turns on the Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/cia-senate-investigation-constitutional-crisis-daniel-jones>
Daniel Jones, a former committee staffer who led the torture inquiry, 
criticized the preservation as inadequate.

“The bar for positive White House action on this is incredibly low. Preserving 
the full 6,700-page report under the Presidential Records Act only ensures the 
report will not be destroyed,” Jones said. “It does little else.”

The full Senate torture report, which documented brutality by the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/cia-senate-investigation-constitutional-crisis-daniel-jones>
 against at least 119 detained terrorism suspects, will be held out of public 
view at Obama’s presidential library.

Democrat Dianne Feinstein of California, Burr’s predecessor as chair and now 
the vice-chair of the Senate intelligence committee, said on Monday she was 
“pleased” Obama had placed the inquiry she spearheaded into his presidential 
record. Feinstein noted the document would “one day be available for 
declassification”.

But that day, according to secrecy and intelligence experts, is a long way off.

Eggleston wrote to Feinstein on Friday that the classified version of the 
report, over 6,700 pages in length, will remain restricted under a legal 
provision, the Presidential Records Act, for 12 years.

“At this time, we are not pursuing declassification,” Eggleston wrote. 

Under the act, the Senate torture report will be exempt from the Freedom of 
Information Act for a full 12 years. But expiration of the provision afterward 
does not mean that disclosure will necessarily follow.

“CIA or other agencies may contend that all or some of the classified 
information in the report is still classified 12 years from now,” said Steven 
Aftergood, an intelligence policy expert at the Federation of American 
Scientists. After 12 years, a declassification review of the torture report can 
proceed, “but the review may conclude that the information in it should remain 
classified”, Aftergood noted.

Through an investigation that lasted more than six years, the Senate 
intelligence committee found that the CIA’s torture was far more brutal than 
the agency had told the Bush administration or Congress, and that the agency 
had lied about the program’s contours and effectiveness. It found unequivocally 
that torture produced no valuable counter-terrorism intelligence. 
President-elect Donald Trump has repeatedly expressed a desire to make theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> engage in torture once again.

Obama came to the aid of the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/dan-jones-cia-torture-cover-report-senate>
 in its dramatic battle with its Senate overseers. The president defended the 
agency after its operatives surreptitiously spied on the emails and work 
product of the Senate’s lead investigator, Jones. Through the chief of staff, 
Denis McDonough, Obama’s White House fought for months throughout 2014 to 
ensure that the vast majority of the Senate reportremained classified and out 
of public view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/cia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation>
.

“The administration can, and should, be doing much more,” Jones said. 

“They have ignored requests from senators and others to declassify the full 
report. Worse, while the full 6,700-page classified report was delivered to the 
CIA, [office of the director of national intelligence], state, FBI, DOJ and 
DOD; we’re told individuals with the appropriate security clearances at these 
agencies have not been able to read the report and learn from the mistakes 
documented. It’s dumbfounding. The administration’s lack of support – and 
inaction – continues to be incredibly disappointing.”

Despite Obama’s decision, Senator Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat on the 
intelligence committee and an advocate of the report, pledged to build “a 
bipartisan coalition” starting next month to declassify the report as a measure 
to check Trump’s pro-torture impulses.

“The American people deserve the opportunity to read this history rather than 
see it locked away in a safe for twelve years. When the president-elect has 
promised to bring back torture, it is also more critical than ever that the 
study be made available to cleared personnel throughout the federal government 
who are responsible for authorizing and implementing our country’s detention 
and interrogation policies,” Wyden said.

Wyden urged Obama to designate the torture report an agency record, which 
makes it releasable under the Freedom of Information Act, adding: “Burying the 
study achieves nothing but to create an information vacuum that gets filled 
with uninformed and highly dangerous propaganda.”
 