
All 11 of the UK’s most senior judges will take their seats on the supreme 
court <https://www.supremecourt.uk/news/article-50-brexit-appeal.html> bench on 
Monday to decide whether parliament or the government has the authority to 
trigger Brexit.


The four-day hearing on the divisive constitutional issue will be broadcast 
live, testing the public’s appetite for intricate legal argument, arcane 
vocabulary and historical precedents.

The “justices”, as supreme court judges are known, may still be pondering 
their conclusions as they digest their Christmas puddings; their eagerly 
awaited judgment is not expected to be delivered until January.


Emotions are running high. Ukip has accused those behind the claim of being 
“arrogant federalists” intent on blocking Brexit, the Daily Mail has branded 
the high court judges who found against the government in the first round as 
“enemies of the people” and individual challengers – such as Gina Miller – have 
received death threats.

Article 50: what is the supreme court appeal about? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
Nigel Farage’s pledge to lead a protest march of 100,000 Brexiters to the 
doors of the court may have receded, but the high-ceilinged courtroom will be 
packed with senior law officers and QCs from Scotland, Northern Ireland and 
Wales as well as the rival claimants’ legal teams and interveners.


On Monday, Labour’s shadow attorney general, Shami Chakrabarti, said the 
political aspect of the case had been “hyped in parts of the media”. She said: 
“This is about process. It is not about outcomes.”


Chakrabarti told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “It’s not just about doing it 
or not doing it. There are lots of questions to be decided about what happens 
next – how we live after Brexit, what our relationship will be with the 
remaining states of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”

She said it was unfair for newspapers to delve into the personal lives or 
supposed opinions of the judges.

“They have to be referees of the constitution,” she said. “If we start 
dragging these people through the media or through politics, putting them 
through a kind of political scrutiny – people like me are fair game, but the 
judges are not fair game. They cannot speak up for themselves. We all need them 
in the end if we’re going to settle our disputes in a civilised way in a 
courtroom.”

The panel of 11 justices is the largest ever assembled for a single case since 
the law lords were created in 1876. Such judicial mass mobilisation is 
recognition of the constitutional significance and political sensitivity of the 
hearing.


The bench will be led by the president of the supreme court, Lord Neuberger, 
and his deputy, Lady Hale. There are 12 justices on the court but one has 
recently retired and is yet to be replaced. The court normally sits in panels 
of five; an odd number is always required to ensure there cannot be a tie.


The court is housed in the neo-Tudor exuberance of what was once Middlesex 
County Hall, Westminster, opposite parliament. Its proceedings are less archaic 
than most crown courts: wigs are no longer worn and hearings are routinely 
broadcast live online. Most documents will be in digital versions.Daily 
transcripts <https://www.supremecourt.uk/news/article-50-brexit-appeal.html> of 
the hearing will be published.

The legal dispute is over who has authority to notify Brussels formally that 
Britain is withdrawing under article 50 of the treaty on European Union (TEU) – 
parliament or ministers.


Article 50 states that any member state may leave “in accordance with its own 
constitutional requirements”, an undefined term that has allowed both sides to 
pursue rival interpretations. The case has opened deep rifts in the consensus 
over the UK’s unwritten constitution.


Having lost by a three-nil ruling at the high court, there was speculation 
that the government would switch its argument on appeal and tell the court that 
article 50, which triggers Brexit,can be reversed at a future date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/brexit-could-be-reversed-government-lawyers-may-argue>
 by parliament. That would enable ministers to say that once triggered, MPs 
would have a subsequent opportunity to control the process.

Acknowledging that Brexit is not irrevocable would, however, be politically 
awkward for the prime minister and could risk the case being referred to the 
European court of justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg, the EU’s highest court, for 
clarification of the treaty’s meaning.


Such a diversion – apart from handing European judges power over the most 
intimate working of the UK’s constitution – would delay Brexit for months. None 
of the main parties is eager for a referral to Luxembourg.


The justices are unlikely to want it either but may not be able to ignore the 
question entirely. Some of the appellants from Northern Ireland argue in their 
submission that “if the court feels that anything turns on this issue ... 
plainly it is an issue of EU law which should be referred to the court of 
justice of the European Union”.

Legal submissions are due to be opened by the attorney general for England and 
Wales, Jeremy Wright QC, who will outline the government’s argument that 
executive powers, inherited through what was once the royal prerogative, are 
sufficient to sign and authorise international treaties.


The industrious James Eadie QC, whose work as “Treasury devil” requires him to 
be present at innumerable cases involving the government, will pick up the more 
detailed line of reasoning along with Jason Coppel QC. The Brexit secretary, 
David Davis MP, formally the respondent in the case, is not expected to be 
present in court.

As well as Wright, who is a Conservative MP, other senior law officers taking 
part include the counsel general for Wales, Mick Antoniw, who is a Labour 
member of the Welsh assembly, Scotland’s lord advocate, James Wolffe QC, and 
the attorney general for Northern Ireland, John Larkin QC.


The original challengers have retained a host of successful QCs to develop 
their assertion that the government cannot arbitrarily remove rights 
established through domestic legislation by executive decree. Parliamentary 
sovereignty, they maintain, is supreme.
 