
Sergio Ramos again came to Real Madrid’s rescue as they snatched a dramatic 
3-2 victory overDeportivo La Coruña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> to stay six points 
clear at the top of La Liga and set a club record 35 games unbeaten.

Ramos, the scorer of Real’s 90th-minute equaliser the previous week against 
Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
, headed in Toni Kroos’ corner in the third minute of stoppage time to complete 
a stunning turnaround after the former Real forward Joselu threatened to 
unravel the unbeaten run.

Joselu struck twice in the space of two minutes to cancel out Alvaro Morata’s 
stunning second-half strike in the 63rd minute and gave Deportivo a shock 2-1 
lead in the 65th by knocking in a low cross from Florin Andone.

Lionel Messi at the double as Barcelona cruise to win over Osasuna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/osasuna-barcelona-lionel-messi-la-liga-match-report>
Mariano Díaz scored his first league goal to level in the 88th and preserve 
the unbeaten run but yet again Ramos had the final say.

“When you fight until the end things go your way. They penalised our errors 
but in the end when you work hard you get results,” Ramos said. “I’m happy that 
I keep scoring goals and above all we keep completing our objectives.“

Zinedine Zidane, who rested several players, including Cristiano Ronaldo and 
Karim Benzema, was also without Gareth Bale, who has an ankle injury – only the 
second time since the Wales forward joined that Real have been without any of 
their famous strike force for a league game.

The midfielder Luka Modric was also rested and Real struggled to control an 
end-to-end first half, which saw Deportivo’s Celso Borges hit the post and 
Real’s Colombia playmaker James Rodríguez spurn a glorious chance to put the 
home side ahead.

Morata opened the scoring with a wonderful curled shot from outside the area 
but Joselu, his old strike partner in Real’s reserve team, quickly put 
Deportivo level by capitalising after Casemiro was dispossessed by Andone.

Andone played a vital role in Joselu’s second goal, too, zipping down the 
right on a counter and cutting the ball back for the striker to knock through 
the legs of Keylor Navas.

Zidane turned to Dominica forward Mariano from the bench to get his side out 
of trouble and his gamble paid off when the 23-year-old scrappily knocked in 
the equaliser off his shoulder.

The unbeaten run was still alive but Real were not satisfied with the draw – 
least of all Ramos, who again demonstrated his astonishing heading ability and 
capacity to save his team’s skin.
 