
For Terry Farr, being cleared of rigging the Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> interest rate was just one reason 
to celebrate this week. It was also his father’s 70th birthday.

More than three years after the first arrests in the investigation, and after 
a trial lasting four months, the 44-year-old Farr celebrated the end of his 
ordeal by sharing a couple of drinks with his parent.

“I am happy it’s over, that’s I all I have to say at the moment,” Farr said.

The City broker returned to court the next morning; this time in a leather 
jacket and jeans rather than the suit he had worn throughout the trial. He had 
returned to watch Darrell Read become thelast of the six defendants to be found 
not guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/28/sixth-broker-found-not-guilty-in-libor-trial>
.

Brokers found not guilty of Libor fraud label trial a farce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/28/sixth-broker-found-not-guilty-in-libor-trial>
As the 12 members of the jury left the courtroom after delivering their 
verdict, at least two pumped their fists in the direction of Read.

It was a clear signal that the jurors had agreed with Farr, Read and the other 
defendants that they were just trying to do their jobs and were not at the 
heart of a global financial conspiracy that has forced banks to pay out 
billions of pounds in fines.

The verdicts, and the swiftness with which they were delivered, are a damning 
blow to theSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> (SFO). The organisation 
is battling for survival and it put its credibility on the line by pursuing 
Libor convictions.

Read had been the primary contact at Icap for the former UBS and Citigroup 
trader Tom Hayes,who is serving 11 years in prison for rigging Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/libor-trader-tom-hayes-loses-appeal-but-has-jail-sentence-cut-to-11-years>
. He even moved to New Zealand so he could be closer to the Tokyo-based Hayes.

The other brokers on trial were Danny Wilkinson and Colin Goodman, also of 
Icap, Noel Cryan, who worked for Tullett Prebon, and Farr and his colleague Jim 
Gilmour at RP Martin. After a lengthy trial, the jury cleared them of all 
charges in less than 11 hours of deliberation.

Barry Vitou, head of global corporate crime at Pinsent Masons, said: “This is 
a serious setback for the SFO. David Green [the SFO’s director] came in on a 
self-proclaimed ticket that the agency and he should be judged on the outcome 
of the Libor investigation.


“The not guilty verdicts this week will add fuel to the fire for those who 
have consistently and continuously called for the SFO to be closed down and for 
its operations to be take over by others.”

After Hayes was found guilty, Green wasted little time in admitting there was 
a “certain professional satisfaction” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/aug/06/sfo-chief-admits-agencys-future-is-in-doubt>
 over the conviction.


However, this time, Green declined to conduct interviews, instead issuing a 
bland statement through his media team. “Nobody could sensibly suggest that 
these charges should not have been brought and considered by a jury,” he said.

Green took charge of the SFO in 2012 and his contract will expire in April 
unless it is renewed by the government.

During his tenure, the SFO’s workforce has grown from roughly 290 to 500. 
However, about a fifth of its staff is dedicated solely to investigatingLibor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor>, showing the importance of the 
case to the SFO.

The verdict in the Hayes trial suggested that the much-maligned organisation 
was finally making a mark under Green, just at it stepped up investigations 
into some the biggest companies in Britain, including Tesco, Rolls-Royce and 
Barclays.

However, this progress has now been halted in its tracks by the Libor verdict. 
The timing is unfortunate, not just because Green’s contract is about to run 
out, but because earlier this month the SFO asked for an extra £21m in funding 
so that it could press ahead with its blockbuster investigations.


Sarah Wallace, head of regulatory and criminal investigations at Irwin 
Mitchell, said the SFO’s work on Libor has been hamstrung by government 
regulations about prosecuting companies.

She said: “They are often left with prosecuting peripheral individuals with 
the result, as in this case, that most have been acquitted fairly quickly by a 
jury, rather than looking at corporate criminal responsibility.

“One of the difficulties for the SFO in getting successful criminal 
prosecutions off the ground against corporates are the legal technicalities 
around the ‘controlling mind’ test [meaning an offence must have been committed 
by a senior individual].

“If the criminal law was changed to one of ‘vicarious liability’ for corporate 
criminal wrongdoing [where company is liable for offences committed by any 
employee], the SFO could focus their time and limited resources prosecuting 
more corporates where there is evidence of criminal activity, albeit not 
evidentially at the board level.”

Another Libor-related trial involving a group of former Barclays traders is 
scheduled to begin in February, and now becomes even more significant. The SFO 
is also pursuing six individuals for allegedly rigging Euribor, the European 
equivalent of Libor.


The defence of the six brokers in the latest case was that they either duped 
Hayes into thinking they were helping him, did not know they were doing 
anything wrong, or did not have the power to rig Libor in the way that was 
suggested.

The brokers themselves believe they are just “the bottom of the food chain” 
and should never have been put on trial. Speaking outside court, Read said: 
“There were things for me to answer and I answered them, but certain people 
standing here – and the guy on my left [Cryan] certainly – should never have 
been in court.

“There was no evidence, there was nothing. I think it was a sham, and I think 
they [the SFO] knew it was a sham. They didn’t investigate properly, they 
didn’t listen.”

When summing up the case, the judge told the jurors only to convict the six 
brokers if evidence showed that they had played a “significant” role in helping 
Hayes rig Libor.

The verdict may have ramifications for Hayes, who could potentially appeal his 
sentence again afterhaving his jail term cut from 14 to 11 yearsin December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/libor-trader-tom-hayes-loses-appeal-but-has-jail-sentence-cut-to-11-years>
. Hayes’ wife was in court to hear the verdicts and his father, Nick, said he 
was “thrilled” with the outcome. Hayes had refused to give evidence against the 
men.

“Tom is bewildered that he is now in a situation where he has been convicted 
of conspiring with nobody,” Nick Hayes said in a statement.

However, the ordeal may not be over for the six brokers. While Farr can 
celebrate with his father, the Icap trio of Read, Wilkinson and Goodman have 
been charged with wire fraud by the US Department of Justice.

These charges could lead to heavy jail sentences, and the US has issued an 
arrest warrant for Read, though the verdict at Southwark crown court makes 
their extradition unlikely. For now, it is the SFO that is back in the dock, 
rather than the brokers.
 