
The UK’s Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> has confirmed that it 
has opened a criminal investigation into allegations of fraud, bribery and 
corruption in the commercial airline business of Airbus, the defence and 
aviation firm. The investigation into potential criminal dealings in the sale 
of commercial planes was launched in July but revealed at the weekend by the 
European manufacturer.

The SFO said that the allegations related to irregularities with third party 
consultants.Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> said it had 
flagged up the suspect activity itself, effectively self-reporting to the SFO 
via UK export agencies, and was cooperating fully with the investigation.

In a statement issued on Sunday, Airbus said: “Airbus Group has been informed 
by the SFO that it has opened a criminal investigation into allegations of 
fraud, bribery and corruption in the civil aviation business of Airbus Group 
relating to irregularities concerning third party consultants. Airbus Group 
continues to cooperate with the SFO.” Neither Airbus nor the SFO would comment 
further on the details.

Earlier this year, a UK government agency suspended the issue of export 
credits to Airbus, due to discrepancies in declarations by the manufacturer on 
the use of outside intermediaries during jet sale negotiations. Airbus said it 
had flagged up the mistakes and omissions relating to applications for export 
credit financing for its customers.

The agency, UK Export Finance, had said it was referring the discrepancies to 
the SFO, which would decide whether to launch a criminal investigation. French 
and German agencies have also halted the plane-maker’s export credits, which 
support deliveries to airlines with limited access to commercial funds.

This month, Airbus’s group CEO Tom Enders said they were hopeful that export 
credits would be restored by the end of the year. Airbus itself has extended 
credit worth €587m to customers in the first half of 2016 – a tenfold increase 
on 2015 – to maintain sales.

Airbus notified investors of the potential issues in April, saying that the 
discovery of irregularities had emerged “in the context of its internal 
compliance improvement programme”. Offshoots and companies jointly owned by 
Airbus had come under investigation in the last two years in Germany, Greece 
and Turkey.

The Toulouse-headquartered aeroplane manufacturer’s global business sees 
contracts of staggering proportions, with its current order book valued at just 
under $1tn (£764bn) at the start of 2016. It claims in recent years to have 
edged US giant and great rival Boeing in the market for the biggest jets, 
although its flagship doubledecker superjumbo, the A380, has failed to find 
many new customers outside the Middle East.

While it has subsidiaries in the US, China, Japan, India and the Middle East, 
Airbus’s major aircraft design and manufacturing facilities are based in 
France, Germany, Spain and the UK, where wings are engineered.

Airbus to cut back production of A380 aircraft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/airbus-to-cut-back-production-of-a380-aircraft>
Third-party intermediaries have caused concern among firms in other sectors, 
as bribery legislation developed in the US and the UK have demanded higher 
levels of due diligence from firms in recent years. While the SFO investigation 
appears to be concerned with third parties, Airbus will be keen to avoid the 
reputational cloud that has settled over Rolls-Royce, an engine manufacturer 
for both Boeing and Airbus, which is also separately under an SFO investigation.


 