
Goethe once wrote that where there is much light, there is also strong shadow.

But for shop owners in Conegliano, a town in Veneto known for its dry 
prosecco, the emission of light – and shade – has taken on a meaning that is 
far less poetic and far more fiscal.

For two years now, small business owners in the town have been paying a local 
tax on shadow. The levy, about €100 (£87) per year, has been paid by 
shopkeepers – largely unbeknown to them – whose signs create shade on public 
walkways.

Related: Chiara Ferragni – how a ‘crazy blogger’ turned her life into a shop 
window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/29/chiara-farragni-blogger-the-blonde-salad-socia-media-style-posts-multi-million-pound-business>

Now, with the help of a business association that is opposed to the tax, some 
are fighting back and refusing to pay. The tax is not being charged to store 
owners for the shade created by their awnings or just for those who put tables 
or a chair outside their shop – there are other taxes on those – but for anyone 
who has a sign on their door or shop window that creates shade.

“It is not because of the money, it is the principle,” said Luca Ros, who 
heads the association of small shop owners.

The issue could easily be mistaken for farce: notoriously bureaucratic Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is taxing small business owners for 
light, or lack thereof. But there is a serious side to the levy, which to Ros 
and others is a symbol of the endless challenges facing struggling shop owners 
in the historic centre of Conegliano and a local administration that is 
desperate to prop up its coffers after years of economic stagnation.


“It’s not the right way to get the money they need. They can cut costs, or do 
it in a different way” Ros said.

The tax is not technically unique to Conegliano. It is being levied under a 
1993 law that Ros said could be implemented across Italy, but in this case is 
being applied very strictly by local officials.

He said business owners had not really considered the tax for the last two 
years, in part because it is a small sum, and because fighting the tax has been 
considered a far more arduous and possibly costly endeavour.

Asked if he believed the tax was like a pizzo – protection money that mafia 
clans have traditionally used to extort business owners – Ros said the payments 
were not all that different. “The only difference is that this is legal. We pay 
for nothing,” he said.

The mayor of Conegliano could not be reached for comment. A telephone 
recording at the town’s city hall said it was closed.
 