
The last British resident held at Guantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> has said he does not want 
to see anyone prosecuted over his imprisonment and alleged torture at the US 
military prison in Cuba.

In his first interview since returning home to London in October after being 
detained without charge for 14 years, Shaker Aamer suggested to theMail on 
Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3357700/Guantanamo-Briton-Shaker-Aamer-relives-14-year-nightmare-savage-abuse-including-agony-hog-tied-45-minutes-time-joy-finally-seeing-family-again.html>
 that Tony Blair and Jack Straw were aware that he was being tortured while 
they were in office.

“I do not want to prosecute anybody,” Aamer told the BBC in a later interview 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-35049397>. “I do not want anybody to be 
asked about what his role [was] in the past. I just want people to tell the 
truth.” He added: “I don’t believe the court will solve this problem. I don’t 
believe the court will bring justice because of what happened in the past.”

Shaker Aamer: the father who spent his son's life in Guantánamo Bay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/shaker-aamer-the-father-who-spent-his-sons-life-in-guantanamo-bay>
Alex Salmond, the former first minister of Scotland, told BBC One’s The Andrew 
Marr Show that “as with so many other things” Blair and Straw had a great deal 
to answer for. “They have to be asked the straight question of how could they 
possibly not have known about the fate that had befallen a British citizen,” he 
said.

Responding to Salmond’s comments, Straw said: “The British government was 
never complicit nor condoned torture or other ill-treatment of detainees 
wherever they were held.

“I spent a large part of my time as foreign secretary making strong 
representations to the US government to get British detainees out of Guantánamo 
Bay and the US government’s ill-treatment and torture of detainees remains a 
terrible stain on its record.”

Straw said that the only reference made to Aamer in the Gibson inquiry, which 
looked at allegations that the UK intelligence services were complicit in the 
torture of detainees, was in relation to representations made by Straw and 
David Miliband, who also served as foreign secretary, to get him out of 
Guantánamo.

Not all of Sir Peter Gibson’s interim report has been made public. His inquiry 
was shelved by the government and is now being completed in secret by 
Westminster’s intelligence and security committee.

A spokesperson for Blair said: “Tony Blair has always been opposed to the use 
of torture, has always said so publicly and privately, has never condoned its 
use and thinks it is totally unacceptable. He believes the fight against 
radical Islamism is a fight about values and acting contrary to those values, 
as in the use of torture, is therefore not just wrong but counterproductive.”

In his interview with the Mail on Sunday, Aamer alleged that he had about 200 
interrogations during the 14 years that he was held. He claimed to have been 
tortured using methods including sleep deprivation and being shackled to the 
floor in sub-zero temperatures.

He alleged that his head was banged against a wall at the US Bagram airbase in 
Afghanistan where he was first held and that a British intelligence officer was 
present at the time the “enhanced interrogation technique”, which had not been 
approved by the UK, was carried out.

In a later interview with the BBC’s Victoria Derbyshire show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-35049397>, Aamer said the British 
intelligence officer who witnessed his mistreatment did not participate, but 
did not attempt to bring it to an end. This man had previously introduced 
himself as a British intelligence officer and had given his name as John. “So I 
have no doubt he was an Englishman,” Aamer said, “the way he spoke to me, the 
questions he asked.”

Dominic Grieve, chair of the intelligence and security committee, said he 
hoped Aamer and other British former detainees would feel able to give evidence 
to his inquiry into UK involvement in torture.

Asked about the allegations that Straw and Blair would have known about the 
treatment of detainees at Guantánamo, Grieve said: “These are serious 
allegations and they are to be taken seriously and they are some of the issues 
that the intelligence and security committee will be asked to look into.”

Asked if he would call Straw and Blair to give evidence, Grieve said: “We will 
go where the evidence takes us ... all such things are possible, I want to make 
that quite clear.”
 