
Shaker Aamer’s return home is the final act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/shaker-aamer-lands-back-in-uk-14-years-in-guantanamo-bay>
 in one of the most shameful and ugly episodes in the history of Britain’s 
security and intelligence agencies. Ministers, including Jack Straw, foreign 
secretary at the time, still have a lot to answer for.

MI6, the Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defence were all dismayed when the 
Pentagon first flaunted the orange-suited prisoners atGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>. It was a propaganda gift 
to al-Qaida and their sympathisers, and encouraged much wider opposition to the 
US, and the west in general, in the Muslim world, British officials have 
privately admitted.

They said they were surprised by the US policy of secretly flying detainees to 
black prisons around the world in a series of “extraordinary renditions”, as 
they were called, and indulging in vicious abuse and torture. Aamer was one of 
a number of British residents – another was Binyam Mohamed – who were abused at 
the US base at Bagram, Afghanistan, before being flown to Guantánamo Bay.

The story behind the five-year delay in freeing Shaker Aamer from Guantánamo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/shaker-aamer-freed-guantanamo-the-story-behind-the-five-year-delay>
British officials claimed, too, that they were not told that CIA flights 
landed at Diego Garcia, the US base on the British Indian Ocean Territory. Yet 
MI5 andMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> and Labour ministers went along 
with it.

As early as January 2002, a month before Aamer was flown to the US military 
base on Cuba, an internal FO memo said, “Transfer of UK nationals held by US 
forces in Afghanistan to the US base in Guantánamo is the best way to meet our 
counter-terrorism objective by ensuring that they are securely held.”

A telegram sent to British embassies and signed “Straw” said there was “no 
objection to American plans to transfer UK detainees from Afghanistan to 
Guantánamo Bay”. It added that a “specialist [British] team is currently in 
Afghanistan seeking to interview any detainees with a UK connection to obtain 
information on their terrorist activities and connections”. Those, detainees, 
the FO memo said, should be transferred to Guantánamo “as soon as possible” 
after the interviews.

Yet the role of British officials in Afghanistan remains unclear. Aamer has 
said they were well aware of the way he was abused by US interrogators, 
including the way his head was repeatedly banged against a wall. In Mohamed’s 
case, the high court pointedly remarked that the relationship of the UK 
government to the US authorities “was far beyond that of a bystander”.

Britain’s complicity in rendition, willing or otherwise, also became clear 
when two British residents – Bisher al-Rawi and Jamil el-Banna – were seized by 
the CIA in Gambia in November 2002. AlthoughMI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> and MI6 urged the CIA not to take 
“executive action” against the men, they made clear that they suspected the 
men. The CIA flew them to Guantánamo.

British special forces in Iraq transferred suspects they captured in Iraq to 
US troops, in breach of British government undertakings. They included Yunus 
Rahmatullah, who in the supreme court later this month will take his claim for 
compensation and Britain’s admission of guilt, along with two leading Libyan 
dissidents. Belhaj and Saadi were rendered to Tripoli in 2004 in an MI6-run 
operation that led to their torture by Gaddafi’s secret police.

Aamer was the last of 16 British or British residents detained – all without 
trial – in Guantánamo. Most were released in 2005; Banna and Rawi were freed in 
2007, Mohamed in 2009. In 2010, all, including Aamer, were offered 
compensation, amounting in some cases to about £1m, in return for dropping 
their cases against MI5, MI6 and former British ministers. As a result, 
detailed evidence of Britain’s involvement in the renditions and torture was 
suppressed.

The parliamentary intelligence and security committee has admitted that it did 
not carry out adequate inquiries into British collusion in rendering detainees 
to Guantánamo. But on Thursday, the new chair of the committee, the former 
attorney general Dominic Grieve, announced: “Our longer-term priority is the 
substantial inquiry into the role of the UK government and security and 
intelligence agencies in relation to detainee treatment and rendition, where 
there are still unanswered questions.”
 