 'I don't want to tell any lies, but I cannot tell the truth,' says the young 
man, emaciated, sunken-eyed, and attacking his watery bean stew like a famished 
dog, his spindly hands shaking.
 This is lunchtime in the Omarska camp or 'investigation centre' operated by 
the Bosnian-Serbian police for Muslim captives, near Prijedor in north-eastern 
Bosnia.

 The internees are horribly thin, raw-boned some are almost cadaverous, with 
skin like parchment folded around their arms their faces are lantern-jawed, and 
their eyes are haunted by the empty stare of the prisoner who does not know 
what will happen to him next.

 The prisoners, or internees, emerge from a huge rust-coloured shed, 30 at a 
time, into the sun and heat.

 They are lined up by a prison guard, a civilian policeman, and then, as part 
of some pathetic camp drill, they run in single file across a courtyard and 
into the camp canteen, under the watchful eye of a beefy policeman with a 
machine gun in a glass observation post. There are no barked orders they know 
the drill only too well.

 In the well-kept kitchen they line up again and wait for their ration: a bowl 
of beans augmented with breadcrumbs and a piece of bread, which they wolf down 
in silence at the metal tables, before quickly and obediently forming another 
line by the door, and then running in line back across the yard, into the 
aluminium shed.

 The meal takes five minutes. It appears to be their only one of the day. If 
they ate even twice as much they would be only slightly less gaunt and 
withered. Some take their bread with them to eat later. Then the next 30 
appear, and jog across the yard.

 Omarska is an old iron mine and ore processing plant. It is now the most 
notorious on a list published by the Bosnian government naming 57 of what it 
calls 'concentration camps'.

 Neither the International Red Cross nor the United Nations - nor any press - 
had visited it before we arrived on Wednesday, although the international 
agencies have expressed acute concern about the Bosnian-Muslim allegations.

 The unexpected and unexplained access to Omarska was part of an invitation by 
the Bosnian-Serbian president, Radovan Karazdic, a challenge to the Guardian 
and Independent Television News to inspect 'whatever you wish to see' in 
response to the concentration camp allegations.

 'I'll eat my lunch first, then talk,' says Sebakoudin Elezovic. 

 'Every day is the same, like this, just doing nothing and waiting to eat. The 
old people and children move on, I don't know where.

 'I was in the defence force - but not caught in a fight. I tried to get to 
Trnopolje transit camp (a civilian camp) but the army caught me on the way and 
brought me here.'

 Sebakoudin, who shows no signs of beating, says: 'We are being investigated. 
Because I know that nothing can be hidden, I tell the truth and hope I will be 
OK. If I am guilty, then I'll have to face the consequences. I speak only of 
myself - personally, nobody touched me.'

 And with that, unwilling to discuss the matter any further as the soldiers 
approach the table, he rises to make way for the next lunch shift.

 Most of the inmates are too visibly terrified to talk. We decline to 
interview people selected by the authorities, preferring to try finding our own 
inmates to talk to, but we are bundled away upstairs for a briefing.

 Omarska , they tell us, is an 'investigation centre' for men suspected of 
being in the Muslim irregular army. They are rounded up or arrested, then 
'screened' to determine whether they are fighters or civilians.

 Apart from their under nourishment and the humiliation of the drill, none of 
the 80 inmates we saw showed signs of violence or beating.

 Those found to have 'prepared the rebellion' go into 'category A', explains 
the police chief's spokeswoman, Nada Balban. There have been 126. They are 
awaiting trial.

 Those found to be fighters are 'category B' and go eventually to a prisoner 
of war camp at Manjaca, to which the Red Cross has been admitted (and to which 
the Serbian military were eager to steer us, rather than Omarska ), and then to 
a military court. There have been 1,290.

 Others go to the Trnopolje camp down the road, about which refugees have made 
some serious allegations - this is the biggest group, 1,400 strong.

 Interestingly, Omarska and Trnopolje are run by the civil authorities, not 
the army.

 Ms Balban admits: 'No one is proud. There is shame here. If there is a place 
similar to this in Sarajevo, for our people, then let's change it . . . Yes, 
hostages of course, we do have some hostages for exchange. We have offered 
people since the first day of the war. But the other side does not want it.'

 Though this may be true of Omarska , it is generally untrue, since a camp we 
visited on the outskirts of Sarajevo has been established solely for the 
purpose of swapping Muslim captives for Serbs.

 After the briefing, Dr Karazdic's invitation to us collapses. We ask to be 
shown into the rust-coloured shed and to see the sleeping quarters, workshops 
or whatever.

 There is shooting in the woods near the camp (either a Muslim attack or a 
Serbian prank, it is impossible to tell), as there was around us as we arrived, 
and our safety is at risk, say the police.

 Suggestions that we are safer in the camp than outside it are overruled. 

 Then Ms Balban explains: 'The politicians are sitting on two chairs. They 
have their promises, but we have our procedures, and we cannot do everything. 
You must know we have orders. You have your reasons, we have others. He (Dr 
Karazdic) promised us something else.'

 So the aluminium shed conceals some secret. It is a secret the international 
agencies must uncover if the miasma of lies, propaganda, exaggeration, denial, 
comparisons with the Nazi Holocaust, claims and counter-claims about 
concentration camps, is to be more than partially penetrated.

 The International Red Cross and the UN have not been admitted, Ms Balban 
says, 'because this is not a camp, it is a centre.'

 She claims that 'there is no demand from them or anyone else to come here.' 
But, under pressure, she then promises: 'We would allow them to come here. Why 
not?'

 Back in the town of Prijedor, women line the pavement outside police 
headquarters, waiting for transit papers to leave the area. Some say their 
menfolk had been in Omarska for four months.

 Some of the inmates we were allowed to see had clearly not eaten properly for 
weeks or months. And although there was no visible evidence of serious 
violence, let alone systematic extermination, inside the aluminium shed is 
something it was worth them breaking Dr Karazdic's promise to avoid exposing.

 Omarska has been visited by the Serbian-run Yugoslav Red Cross, and given a 
clean bill of health. Dr Dusko Ivic, working at the Trnopolje camp, said on 
Wednesday: 'I have visited Omarska and my professional assessment about the 
health of the people is very good, apart from some diarrhoea.'

 Trnopolje camp, down another 10 miles of dirt road, is claimed by the Muslim 
government to be the second biggest 'concentration camp'. Here, Muslim doctors 
among the internees said people arrived from Omarska and another 'investigation 
centre' at Kereter in terrible condition. Evidence was passed to the Guardian 
and ITN in the form of a roll of undeveloped film.

 Here is complete confusion - political and physical. The camp is a ramshackle 
fenced-in compound around a former school. The men stand stripped to the waist, 
in their thousands, against the wire in the relentless afternoon heat the women 
and children seek shade upstairs in the crowded, smelly building. They wait, 
stare at nothing, sweat - and wonder what will happen next.

 One group has arrived from Kereter that morning, claiming that they had been 
beaten, but showing no signs of it. However, says pitifully thin Fikrit Alic: 
'It is worse than here. There is no food.' Others in the group looked better 
fed. Another boy, Icic Budo, says 'they killed 200 people' at Kereter and 'many 
more at Omarska '. He has seen no bodies himself, but another boy had seen one 
corpse near the main gate.

 Trnopolje cannot be called a 'concentration camp' and is nowhere as sinister 
as Omarska : it is very grim, something between a civilian prison and transit 
camp. The Yugoslav Red Cross has a small station here, and there are meagre 
cooking facilities.

 These boys had been rounded up in their villages. Some call Trnopolje a 
refugee camp, but Fikrit Acic says: 'It is a prison camp, but not a PoW camp. 
We are not fighters. They came to our village, Kozarac. (Now literally 
flattened by fighting.) I was near my house they put us on the buses and 
brought us to Kereter for a while, and then here.' Icic Budo adds: 'The fact 
is, they do not want us to live here any more. They want us and our families to 
go, if we can find our families. I don't know where mine is.'

 But some people have fled voluntarily to Trnopolje simply to avoid the raging 
battles in the villages around. Inar Gornic, clutching her crying baby in what 
was the school 'Foto Klub' room, says: 'I came alone, from the Trnopolje 
village.

 The conditions are very hard here, but there was terrible fighting and we had 
no food at all. It is safer here, but we don't know what kind of status we have.

 We are refugees, but there are guards and the wire fence.' 

 'No violence against us, just hot and smelly,' adds her husband, vacantly, 
among the sea of rugs, sweaty blankets and the odd mattress strewn along the 
floors and corridors, while primative bread ovens are set up outside.

 Stories in Trnopolje, more freely told than at Omarska , are brimful of the 
squalid violence and black absurdity of civil war. There is Sana, aged 13, who 
says: 'I was a fighter for the Muslims. They used to put us at the front when 
the fighting started. I was so scared that I ran away to the Serbian side of 
the village, to come here. I am still frightened, but I feel safer.'

 Then there is Igor, the Serbian soldier and guard whose uncle was killed last 
week, and who says: 'I have my old schoolfriends and my teacher in there,' and 
then introduces his old pal Azmir, a professional footballer, from behind the 
wire. 'I was taken here from Rizvanovici, after the fighting started,' says 
Azmir. 'There was some shooting from the Muslim side, then the police came and 
took the people away, to clear the village of Muslims and to do the fighting.'

 The situation is, says Azmir, that he can leave only if his family arrive to 
claim him, or if he can produce some sort of guarantee or transit papers. 'But 
how am I supposed to do that?' The authorities claim they are organising such 
papers, as they have done at other camps inside Serbia. (One 'concentration 
camp' on the Muslim list at Subotica is, in effect, a transit centre for 
issuing papers. Last Friday, it contained eight Turks charged with drugs 
trafficking.) But in the chaos, it could take time enough to turn Trnopolje 
into a swelling nightmare.

 'I do not know what to do, or where my mother and father are,' Azmir says. 
'It is not easy to think about what on earth we are doing here.'

 The landscape from which these people - in Omarska and Trnopolje - have been 
harvested is a desperate arena of war, destruction and human movement: 
prisoners and refugees from all sides. For 10 miles down the road from Prijedor 
to Banja Luka almost every Muslim house is gutted and empty.

 In Banja Luka, itself, buses are arriving, bringing Serbs from hostile Zagreb 
and the fighting in Sarajevo. They greet their relatives tearfully. 'I have 
come to bring my parents here,' says Drazna. 'Although I will go back to 
Zagreb. It is very difficult for us there now, but I have my job, and if I lose 
it I cannot feed my family and aunts and uncles back here.' Others had terrible 
stories of Muslim advances into their quarters of Sarajevo.

 The Serbs will take houses belonging to Banja Luka Muslims who have either 
left voluntarily or been moved out. The pathetic convoy from Zagreb has crossed 
the battle lines under the auspices of Unprofor, the UN peacekeeping force, as 
will the Muslims in the opposite direction.

 Jan Bolling, the UN official organising this move, is frank about the choices 
for those on both sides, between moving and the camps. 'We are not interested 
in any ethnic cleansing whatsoever. But now we face the situation where we must 
choose between either that or straightforward persecution, and our job is first 
of all to protect people.'

 As ever in this war, there are extraordinary elements that complicate any 
simple interpretation. Women flock into Prijedor, carrying their children, 
telling how their menfolk were rounded up and taken to Omarska , Kereter or 
Trnopolje, and never seen again. Some villages are completely destroyed.

 But down the road are other Muslim villages intact, peasants calmly bringing 
in the hay. Every house hangs a white flag - a piece of sheet or pillowcase - 
from the roof or from a tree: it is a guarantee against Omarska or Trnopolje.

 'These are the people who accept the Serbian republic,' explains Major 
Milovan Milutonic from Army HQ in Banja Luka. 'If they do that, we just leave 
them alone.'

 There are Croatian communities around Banja Luka too, exchanging their 
docility to the new order for a relatively quiet life.

 There are Serbian refugees on the move, too. Heavy fighting this week between 
the army and Croatians around Brcko - a Serbian town now reduced to virtual 
rubble - has shrunk part of the Serbian corridor through northern Bosnia to a 
network of dirt roads. And along those dirt roads last Tuesday, groups of 
refugees gathered with their few belongings in the dust thrown up by 
juggernauts, waiting for trucks and buses to take them back to their refugee 
camps in Serbia.

 Then there is the Serbian counter-argument to the accusations of 
concentration camps.

 Firstly, that of Milan Kovacevic, who, as president of the executive council 
of Prijedor, is technically responsible for Omarska and Trnopolje. He was born 
in Jasenovac, the Croatian Ustashe camp where 750,000 Serbs and Jews were 
killed between 1941 and 1945.

 'We know what is a concentration camp, better than the English,' he says. 
'Many of us passed through them, and what you will see here is not a 
concentration camp. We are accused of genocide. There is no genocide.'

 That was before the abrupt end to the visit to Omarska . 'And also please 
remember we are at war,' he adds. 'The civilians will be provided with 
documents and can leave. The soldiers will be investigated and tried.'

 The Serbs have their own list of 'concentration camps' where they claim their 
people are also being held and killed by Croatian and Muslim authorities.

 Private correspondence from the Serbian-Bosnian government to the 
International Red Cross refers to them as 'alleged detention centres'.

 However, the Serbian authorities complain that the Western media have made no 
attempt to discover what the conditions are like in camps on the other side.

 The principal camps on the Serb list are at Tarcin, near Sarajevo, various 
underground locations in Sarajevo, in the beseiged town of Tuzla still held by 
Muslims, the soccer stadium at Bihac and an underground camp at Zenica. The 
Serbian army in Sarajevo claims that its siege of Gorazde is held in check by 
the fact that the Muslims have 3,000 Serbs held hostage behind the defensive 
lines.
 