
At times over the past five seasons, it has seemed as if Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> have been weighed down 
by a curse. Whatever they collectively did in a previous life, their sentence 
was to forever remain in League One. Since relegation from the Championship in 
2011, four permanent managers (plus two caretaker spells by Chris Morgan) have 
tried and failed to break the curse, tried and failed to haul the Blades out of 
the third tier.

Danny Wilson, David Weir, Nigel Clough and Nigel Adkins managed three failed 
play-off appearances between them in five seasons, combined with assorted 
collapses, misfortunes and moments of incompetence. In these past five years, 
they have spent as much time in the third tier as they had in the previous 119, 
since they first played league football. So whenChris Wilder left Northampton 
to succeed Adkins in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/nigel-adkins-sack-sheffield-united>
, fresh fromwinning the League Two title under remarkable conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/northampton-town-promotion-chris-wilder-league-two-leaders>
, you feared another managerial career might be swallowed whole.

But – treading carefully here – Wilder may just have cracked it. Things are 
certainly looking up for United, three points off the automatic promotion 
places and unbeaten in 11, having recovered from a start that saw them take 
just one point from their first four games. Then, the sighs from Bramall Lane 
might well have powered a dozen wind farms, as Blades fans contemplated yet 
another season of disappointment and frustration.

Golden Goal: Brian Deane for Sheffield United v Manchester United (1992)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/12/golden-goal-brian-deane-for-sheffield-united-v-manchester-united-1992>
“We didn’t get off to the best start,” says the captain and top goalscorer 
Billy Sharp, employing considerable understatement. “We should’ve got a point 
from two of the games we lost. That could ruin teams and ruin confidence, but 
we stuck together and ground out a few results.”

Something seemed to click at the end of August, as United claimed their first 
win and clawed their way back into form, the significant turnover of players in 
the summer (13 in, 14 out) settling as the team meshed together. So what’s 
different this season under Wilder, to last under Adkins?

“Day to day, he’s very competitive,” says Sharp of the new manager. “He wants 
winners on the training ground so it breeds good habits for a matchday.

“Looking back on last season we didn’t have that – we sort of strolled through 
the week and hoped that we’d win on Saturday, and you can’t do that in 
football. You’ve got to work hard to be winners on a matchday. I’ve said before 
that a lot of the players last season let the manager down, but it is also up 
to the manager to get the best out of the players. I know the manager now is 
very good at that – if someone is low on confidence, he somehow gets them up 
again.”

Listening to Sharp and other United players talk about Wilder gives the 
impression of an old-school approach. Wilder has encouraged the team to go on 
nights out, to – gasp – have a beer or two in order to foster team spirit, an 
intangible but crucial element to any team.

“For me it’s refreshing,” says Sharp. “I’m old school myself, and though I 
know times have changed and you have to move on a little bit, football is an 
old school sport. I think the manager has struck a good balance, and that’s why 
the lads are enjoying it.

“It’s not always going out for a beer – it’s just doing things together. Going 
out for food after training, even if it’s for half an hour. You’re building up 
relationships, and doing things together outside of football that helps you do 
well on the pitch. Sometimes when you’re not having the best time on the pitch, 
you need that team spirit to help you get through.”

This might be the reason that, despite so many arrivals in the summer, these 
new individuals have formed a strong collective fairly quickly. Sharp singles 
out Jake Wright, who worked with Wilder at Oxford, and Ethan Ebanks-Landell, a 
loanee from Wolves, as two who have made a difference, and become favourites 
with the crowd.

“That’s what we didn’t have last season – we didn’t have too many players who 
the fans liked, so that always helps. One thing we try to do is win our home 
games to keep the fans happy, then when they travel away they can drive us on.”

It also helps that Sharp is in the form of his life. Given the captaincy – 
surprisingly, by his own admission – in the summer, this is Sharp’s third spell 
at the club he supported as a boy, and now aged 30 he believes he has a more 
mature, rounded game. Sharp has 10 goals from 15 starts – on course for the 
best scoring return of his career – but what backs up his theory about being a 
more complete striker is the variety of goals he has scored: headers, tap-ins, 
poacher’s goals and 25-yard screamers. “Long may it continue,” he says.

Wilder has spoken about Sharp having “unfinished business” at the club, and 
that is certainly something he agrees with.

“If I could, I’d have played for them all my career,” he says. “Hopefully I 
can finish my career here, but I don’t want to be remembered as just a fan who 
played for the club, but as someone who was successful for the club.”

Finally heaving the club out of League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> would certainly 
qualify on that score, and the early signs are that sixth time might be a charm 
for Sheffield United.
 