
Kafka could indeed have invented the indeterminate sentence for public 
protection (IPP), but it is even more iniquitous than described in your article 
(Defunct law that keeps thousands in jail is branded absurd by Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/30/absurd-defunct-prison-scheme-ken-clarke-james-ward-jail-mental-health>
, 31 May).

Not only are men, women and children spending years past the tariff imposed by 
the judge, but once released they are on licence for life. Last year 363 people 
were returned to prison after having served years in jail, only to serve more 
years to go through the whole parole process yet again.

Last week I met the family of a prisoner who had been given a tariff of one 
year. After 13 years, he is still in prison. When he is released, probably in 
another couple of years, he will be on life licence and subject to recall at 
any time. Only after another 10 years could he apply to have the licence 
lifted. As yet no one has done this, so we don’t know if it will ever be 
granted.

We have mass incarceration in this country, not quite on the US scale, but not 
so very far off. We have to learn from the Americans, who are addressing mass 
incarceration by cutting back on excessively long prison sentences. The IPP has 
been abolished, but is still with us – and will be for decades unless we not 
only get people released from prison but deal with the licence period imposed 
by legislation designed by Franz Kafka.
Frances Crook
Chief executive, The Howard League for Penal Reform

• The Guardian, the BBC, the Prison Reform Trust and Ken Clarke have performed 
an invaluable service in again exposing the injustice and inhumanity still 
being visited on the thousands of prisoners in England and Wales who have 
served the “punishment” period of their sentences, but are still being 
indefinitely punished for crimes they can’t prove they won’t commit in the 
future if released – a form of punitive, indefinite preventive detention surely 
unprecedented in a democracy in peacetime. Ken Clarke as justice secretary 
abolished indeterminate sentences for public protection (IPPs) in 2012. Figures 
on the Ministry of Justice website are either hopelessly out of date, or fail 
to distinguish between IPPs and (quite different) life sentences, or both, but 
the BBC says there are still about 4,000 with little hope of ever being 
released, and that nearly 400 have served more than five times the period for 
punishment in their sentences. The simple solution proposed by Ken Clarke 
before he was spinelessly sacked by David Cameron is to abandon the Kafkaesque 
condition for release that the IPP prisoner must satisfy the parole board that 
he or she will not reoffend (an inherently impossible requirement), and 
substitute a parole board obligation to order release at the end of the 
punishment period unless it has specific, published reasons for believing that 
the prisoner will constitute a serious threat to the public if released.

If enough MPs receive messages from constituents calling on parliament to make 
this simple and uncontroversial change forthwith, there’s an outside chance 
that a sickening injustice will at long last be ended. (Labour’s apparent 
silence on the issue is incomprehensible.)
Brian Barder
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 