
A gig might not be the first idea that comes to mind when planning an Auslan 
event, but in last week’s Summer Break Auslan Party in Melbourne, raising money 
forDeaf Basketball Australia <http://www.deafbasketball.org.au/ 
vhttp://www.deafbasketball.org.au/ http://www.deafbasketball.org.au/ 
http://www.deafbasketball.org.au/ http://www.deafbasketball.org.au/>, the 
entire program was built around making music more accessible to deaf people.

There are a few elements at play. Interpreters are on stage for each act, 
translating and performing the lyrics; the speakers are cranked for those with 
hearing impairments, and there’s plenty of bass. There are story slams in 
between the acts, told in both Australian sign language (Auslan) and the spoken 
word, and large numbers of interpreters in the audience.

The lineup is eclectic: four soulful solo artists with melodic acoustic and 
piano accompaniment, followed by hard rock and a DJ set. I corner an attendee, 
Alex Straub, and ask, through an Auslan interpreter, what it’s like attending a 
concert where you can’t hear the music.

“It’s great, I feel a connection to it that I normally wouldn’t – I can 
understand the lyrics and get a feel for it,” he tells me. “It lets me get a 
perspective on the feeling that goes with the music.”

During Cassandra Chin’s set, a new interpreter, Julia Murphy, takes the stage. 
While the other interpreters have been translating the performances live from 
what they’re hearing, Murphy is deaf and performs song lyrics she learned 
beforehand with the help of a second interpreter in the audience giving time 
cues.

“We’re all pretty excited about this one,” event organiser Ramas McRae tells 
me. “It’s a more fluent experience.”

The model might not work for live translation, but it’s perfect for scripted 
works – effectively, it’s another performer onstage.

At hearing concerts, it’s the duty of all punters to stand around awkwardly, 
practicing their I’m-enjoying-the-music face, because conversation is 
impossible. If you can speak sign language, it’s the opposite.

I love theatre and I’m blind. Here’s how that works | Ria Andriani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/10/i-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works>
“Deaf people are well-known for talking at events,” someone quips during a 
slam. It isn’t just chatting during the speeches, though. When the volume is 
up, the hearing are forced to lean in, pull out their earplugs and shout into 
each other’s ears, but those who speak sign language can have an entirely 
social experience.

There’s a role reversal implicit here: as an Auslan illiterate, and unable to 
hear anything over the music, I’m probably the least able person in this 
particular room. The venue is packed with Auslan speakers, chatting furiously – 
but as the music gets louder, I can no longer even hear what the interpreters 
are saying.

When the Suburban Prophets come on, the evening kicks into gear – the hard and 
dark rock three-piece have turned the bass up to 11. The buzz is so strong it 
thrums through the air and lands in the collarbone; even the cider bottle in my 
hand is vibrating. This is music for the deaf: vibration piped right into the 
bones, bypassing the ears.

Once their set is complete, it’s a handover to equally heavy progressive house 
dance tunes from DJ Lukas & The Brothers, and a few deaf punters get their 
dance groove on.Electronic music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/electronicmusic> is famously popular with 
deaf people; the bass beats are so heavy that hearing is almost optional, and 
the regular beat is easy to keep track of for dancing.

Despite the tasting-plate nature of the lineup, there is one common thread 
between all the performers at this event: they all, to varying extents, have a 
connection with the deaf community. Most speak fluent sign language; even the 
newest to the community, Sarah Carroll, has taken a few lessons.

It’s hard not to feel like a bit of a tourist as a hearing, 
non-Auslan-speaking attendee, but in a way, that’s inevitable at any event put 
together by a close-knit community. It’s also part of the point. One intention 
of the Summer Break Auslan Party is to bridge the gap between hearing and deaf 
communities through music, and it’s hard not to leave wanting to learn a few 
signs – if only just to chat with friends at the next gig.
 