
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> may be winning 
his 50th cap on Friday evening but in one sense the Wales captain will be 
stepping into the unknown. Rugby union at the top level, he feels, is going 
through another stage of evolution and he is not sure what to expect from 
England.

Since Warren Gatland took over as the head coach at the end of 2007, Wales 
have been the most successful team in Europe, with threeSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> titles and a fourth-place finish 
in the World Cup. When they moved into the Millennium Stadium at the end of the 
1990s, they tended to put out the welcome mat for visitors but in the past 
seven seasons they have lost only four championship matches in front of their 
own supporters while winning 14.

They are at full strength going into Gatland’s eighth Six Nations campaign, 
settled in selection and playing style, while England are beset by injuries and 
are without two of their leaders in defence, Brad Barritt and Owen Farrell.

Their back division has an atypically adventurous aura to it – Danny Cipriani 
and Nick Easter, players set in their own moulds, are on the visitors’ bench 
and bookmakers report that punters, anticipating an arm-wrestle rather than a 
talent show, are lavishing their money on a home victory.

Warburton does not believe the contrast in the style of the two sides will be 
marked. Irelandshowed last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/08/ireland-wales-six-nations> that 
one way to beat Wales was to play a no-frills territory game, forcing them to 
run from deep and holding ball-carriers in a choke tackle. New Zealandovercame 
them in the autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/22/wales-new-zealand-autumn-international-match-report-richie-mccaw>
 by chip-kicking behind the onrushing defence and winning the race for the 
ball. In Jonathan Joseph, Jonny May, Anthony Watson and Mike Brown, England 
have chasers with instant acceleration and in George Ford they have an 
outside-half who is more tactically astute than Owen Farrell.

“The game is slowly changing,” said Warburton. “Teams are kicking a lot more 
now. A couple of years ago, ball in play was a big factor but now the kicking 
game is among the top three aspects [that influence a match]: attacking kicks, 
turning the wingers and asking a team to get away from their five-metre line 
from a lineout as you apply pressure on the set piece.

“I remember watching England a couple of years ago against Australia and being 
impressed by the way they went into the contact area so fiercely that they 
forced the Wallabies to adopt a kicking game. When it comes to England’s style, 
we have to prepare for both and it is now about mixing things up.”

England will need to minimise the influence of the Wales centre Jamie Roberts. 
The pre-match talk of the Lion running through Ford’s channel ignores the mess 
he made of Luther Burrell’s defence last month whenRacing Métro defeated 
Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/northampton-racing-metro-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 at Franklin’s Gardens.

Roberts was largely a spectator in Dublin last year as, when Wales did manage 
to get into their opponents’ half, they had little set-piece possession, 
struggled to get the ball away quickly from the breakdown and were held up in 
the choke tackle.

The choke tackle is a speciality of the England flanker James Haskell whose 
Wasps side used the ploy to telling effect in their Champions Cup match at 
Harlequins last month.

“Three or four-second tackles are a win nowadays because you have slowed the 
ball down,” sad Warburton. “If you go for a low-leg chop and no one comes in 
over the ball, it will be away quicker than if you went higher and tried to 
choke someone. England are effective in that area, putting pressure on the 
scrum-half. It will be a big way for them to stop our possession and Haskell is 
an extremely strong guy. England are one of the most difficult sides I have 
played against at the breakdown: I find games against them extremely tough but 
I love that physical challenge.”

When Wales defeated England in Cardiff two years ago, they won an abundance of 
penalties at the scrum and the breakdown. Even though he was not the Wales 
captain that day, Warburton enjoyed the ear of the referee, Steve Walsh, far 
more than Chris Robshaw, who was treated dismissively.

A year ago at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/09/england-wales-six-nations>, the 
decisions went England’s way and the prop Gethin Jenkins was sent to the 
sin-bin for not scrummaging straight, the third time he had suffered the 
sanction in six Tests. England have picked two props who do not have a 
reputation for boring in and Friday’s referee, Jérôme Garcès, controlled their 
last Test, against Australia at the end of November, when Robshaw’s men won the 
penalty count 12-7.

“Robshaw is England’s most consistent performer and individual battles are so 
important in international rugby,” said Warburton. “There are three priorities 
for forwards: scrum, lineout and the contact area. Come out on top in two of 
those three, as we did two years ago, and you have a good chance of winning the 
game. In 2013, we came out with such intensity because it was a must-win game: 
we had to do so by eight points to retain the title.

“We have to treat this match with the same attitude as then: we are a tight, 
settled side, morale is high and we have worked hard. I am delighted to be 
winning my 50th cap at home, but I know how hard it is going to be; there is 
never much in it when we play England.”
 