
A detective who was branded a liar during the Birmingham Six appeal was also 
involved in a conspiracy to convict a burglar of armed robbery, the appeal 
court heard yesterday.

Detective Sergeant Michael Hornby, a former member of the now-disbanded West 
Midlands Serious Crime Squad, was one of the officers involved in doctoring 
statements which helped to convict 26-year-old Anthony Wellington, the court 
was told.

David Martin-Sperry, representing Mr Wellington, said: 'There is the clearest 
sign of a conspiracy among officers to implicate Mr Wellington.'

Douglas Draycott QC, for the Crown, conceded that officers had displayed a 
'cavalier disregard for the rules'.

But he suggested that they had been guilty of 'gilding the lily', rather than 
of attempting to turn a denial into a confession.

Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, intervened to say: 'It is something more 
than cavalier. It is a strange disregard of what one imagines a police 
officer's duty to be.'

Mr Draycott replied that officers had sought simply to 'amplify' what was 
said, adding: 'It was what a policeman might call tidying it up.'

Lord Lane retorted: 'It doesn't exactly engender confidence, does it ?'
The conspiracy had been discovered after electrostatic document analysis of 
his client's statement the only evidence against him for the armed robbery of a 
post office in Witton, Birmingham, in November 1986, said Mr Martin-Sperry 
Three pages of the eight-page, supposedly contemporaneous interview, had been 
added later, the analysis proved.

And while the rest of the statement dealt with more minor matters which Mr 
Wellington admitted the three pages in question were exclusively concerned with 
the post office raid, said Mr Martin-Sperry.

His client confirmed that his signature was on the appended pages, but claimed 
that the text had been hidden when he signed.

Tests on a statement made by Maurice Speid, who pleaded guilty to the armed 
robbery of the post office, showed that detectives had implicated Mr Wellington 
by subsequently adding his name where they could to Mr Speid's answers.

Det Sgt Hornby, who retired from the force through ill-health last year, had 
conducted the interview with Mr Speid, who could neither read nor write, said 
Mr Martin-Sperry.

Michael Mansfield QC, representing five of the Birmingham Six, had named Det 
Sgt Hornby as one of eight police officers who had lied about the circumstances 
of the men's arrest and questioning.

Another six had given evidence which was unreliable, said Mr Mansfield.
Mr Wellington, who was jailed for 10 years in January 1988 for the armed 
robbery, is the latest prisoner to appeal since the serious crime squad was 
disbanded 19 months ago. Three men have already been freed, and at least 15 
other appeals are in the pipeline.

Mr Wellington, who is presently held in Long Lartin prison in Worcestershire, 
received a six-year concurrent sentence for three other offences he admitted.

Detective Constables David Woodley and Alan Pickering had been interviewed by 
West Yorkshire detectives over their account of the interview with Mr 
Wellington, said Mr Martin-Sperry.

Det Con Woodley was one of the officers who interviewed John Edwards, a 
Manchester man freed from his armed robbery conviction by the Court of Appeal 
in January amid allegations that police had fabricated incriminating statements.

When documents went missing from Warwick crown court, Det Con Woodley was 
suspended but has since been re-instated, said Mr Martin-Sperry.
As he sought to defend the conviction, Mr Draycott said of Mr Wellington: 'He 
is a run-of-the-mill, low-grade West Indian, but I don't set anything by that.
'When you are dealing with DC Woodley and others, it is not surprising there 
are shortcomings, but in my submission that's all they are doing.

'They are taking a short cut instead of doing what they should be doing, 
adding separate addendums. They just put them in.'

The court will deliver its judgment on Monday.
 