
Six former Volkswagen executives are being charged over their alleged roles in 
the 2015 emissions scandal, as the company admits liability and is ordered to 
pay a record$4.3bn (£3.5bn) penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/volkswagen-confirms-43-billion-us-payment-over-diesel-emissions>
, US officials have said.

The men are accused of running a near decade-long conspiracy during their time 
at the firm and are being charged with conspiracy to defraud the United States, 
violations of the Clean Air Act, and wire fraud, the US attorney generalLoretta 
Lynch <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/loretta-lynch> said on Wednesday.

“These individuals all held positions of significant responsibility at VW, 
including overseeing the company’s engine development division and serving on 
the company’s management board,” she said, adding that they had “seriously 
abused those positions”.

Separately, Lynch said Volkswagen had pleaded guilty to conspiracy to defraud 
the US, to commit wire fraud and to violate the American pollution laws. It 
also admitted obstruction of justice and “importation of goods by false 
statements”.

Consequently, the firm has been told to pay a $2.8bn criminal fine and a 
further $1.5bn in a civil settlement, Lynch announced. Volkswagen will also 
spend three years on probation and an independent monitor will be sent in to 
“oversee its ethics and compliance program”.

The Volkswagen emissions scandal explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
The penalty against the company is the largest ever levied by the US 
government against an automaker, eclipsing the $1.2bn fine against Toyota in 
2014 over safety issues related to unintended acceleration.

Last month, it was reported that Volkswagen had already agreed to pay $17.5bn 
in the US to resolve claims from car owners, as well as regulators.


The settlements and penalties emanate from Volkswagen’s admission in September 
2015 that it had installed secret software in vehicles to make them appear 
cleaner in emissions tests than they actually were. Some, it emerged, were 
emitting up to 40 times the legally allowable pollution levels.


Announcing the indictments and plea deal on Wednesday, the US justice 
department detailed an elaborate and wide-ranging scheme to commit fraud and 
then cover it up. At least 40 VW employees were involved in destroying 
evidence, the government said.

It is alleged that, in one case, an assistant was asked to find and throw away 
a hard drive on which emails between two supervisors were stored.

The six executives charged were: Richard Dorenkamp; Bernd Gottweis; Jens 
Hadler; Heinz-Jakob Neusser; Jürgen Peter; and Oliver Schmidt.

According to the plea agreement, the executives and other employees agreed to 
deceive the Environmental Protection Agency and other regulators about diesel 
emissions starting in May 2006, when they realised the engines would not meet 
emissions standards that were going into effect the following year.

Under the direction of executives, Volkswagen employees designed engines with 
“defeat device” software that would reduce emissions only when the vehicle was 
undergoing a standard US emissions test. They borrowed the idea from the firm’s 
luxury division, Audi, which was developing different engines with similar 
software.

In November 2006, some employees raised objections to the defeat device to the 
head of VW brand engine development. That official directed the employees to 
continue and warned them “not to get caught”.

In August 2015, a Volkswagen employee ignored instructions from bosses and 
told US regulators about the “defeat devices”. A supervisor confirmed their 
existence the following month.
 