
It says much about Aston Villa’s recent decline that a goalless draw with 
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
would constitute an FA Cup shock. Not the greatest, but one nonetheless, and as 
this game drifted towards its conclusion it appeared as if they were going to 
achieve just that. The team chasing promotion from the Championship had 
defended with discipline against the one chasing the Premier League title and 
looked to have shut them out altogether only for two late goals to shatter 
their resistance and send a wave of relief through this stadium.

Ben Davies’s and Son Heung-min’s goals were neatly taken and on the balance of 
play Tottenham deserved to proceed to the fourth round at the expense of 
opponents who for so long had been top-flight rivals. Spurs dominated 
possession (71%) and had twice as many shots on goal as Villa – 20 compared to 
10 – yet having made nine changes to the team that beat Chelsea here four days 
ago, Mauricio Pochettino had to watch on as his men toiled. He looked as 
relieved as most in attendance when Son sealed victory, Tottenham’s sixth in 
succession, with 10 minutes remaining.

For Steve Bruce the overriding emotion was disappointment. The Villa manager 
said as much as he reflected on this contest and, in particular, the “big 
chance” that fell Villa’s way on 65 minutes as first James Chester and then 
Gabriel Agbonlahor had shots on goal blocked by Tottenham after Alan Hutton had 
diverted Jack Grealish’s free-kick into the area. Six minutes later Tottenham 
took the lead and never looked back.

“Overall I’m pleased with the way we have performed,” Bruce said. “The players 
have done as best they could and that’s all you can ask. What I’ve been 
reminded of is where we need to get to. Tottenham are a really good side and on 
a bit of roll.”

Of that there is no doubt yet during the first half in particular the 
eight-time FA Cup winners looked a shadow of the team that has swept aside 
all-comers sincelosing 1-0 to Manchester United  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
on 11 December. Their approach play was slow and disjointed and the overriding 
feeling was that the sweeping alterations Pochettino had made – understandably 
so on the back of a traditionally gruelling run of fixtures – were having an 
effect.

Only Toby Alderweireld and Eric Dier remained from the team that overcame 
Chelsea and while the starting XI remained strong, containing as it did eight 
internationals, they could not build attacking momentum.

One of the players rested was Harry Kane, whose absence was explained when the 
forward tweeted after the final whistle to say his partner, Kate, had given 
birth to a girl at 7.30am on Sunday. “Amazing feeling,” he wrote, with 
Pochettino later confirming that was the reason why the England international 
was left out of the squad altogether. “Congratulations to Kate and Harry,” the 
Argentinian said. “I think Harry was more tired than his wife. He spent all 
night in the hospital so we send him [to get] some sleep.”

Kane would have been on the bench had circumstance allowed it and ultimately 
it may have been he and not Dele Alli who came on for Vincent Janssen following 
another difficult match for the Dutchman. Positioned as the hosts’ lone forward 
he failed to make a telling impact and saw his attempt at scoring a first goal 
in open play for Tottenham following his arrival from AZ Alkmar in July come to 
an end on 60 minutes.

It proved something of a turning point as Alli’s arrival, along with that of 
Georges-Kévin Nkoudou 10 minutes later, injected energy and conviction into 
Tottenham’s display. And it was the pair who combined for the opening goal, 
exchanging passes before the latter sent a left-sided cross into the area that 
Davies directed past Sam Johnstone, on his Villa debut, with a glancing header.

It was the Welshman’s first goal for Tottenham since his arrival from Swansea 
in 2014 and given the cross was behind him, the full-back deserves credit for 
his reaction and technique.

Son, who was arguably Tottenham’s best player, struck nine minutes later with 
a sweeping finish following good link-up play between Moussa Sissoko and Kieran 
Trippier down Tottenham’s right.

“The FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> doesn’t understand 
about level, if you come from League One or the Championship, so I am pleased 
we showed a solid performance,” Pochettino said. “We can take positives from 
this game.”

As can Bruce. His team showed great togetherness, defending deep and in 
numbers prior to a burst of attacking intent in the second half that led to 
Chester and Agbonlahor’s chances, the latter snuffed out by a perfectly-timed 
sliding challenge from Alderweireld. With Villa’s focus firmly on returning to 
the Premier League at the first time of asking – they are 12th in the 
Championship, seven points adrift of the play-offs – it may also be a blessing 
for them to have been knocked out at the first time of asking.

“The club’s had a difficult time and we have to get it up and running again,” 
Bruce said prior to confirming he has made “an inquiry” about Nottingham 
Forest’s captain, Henri Lansbury. “I’ll do everything I can to make sureAston 
Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> is thought of in the 
same way as Spurs. Given a bit of time, I know I will.”

Tottenham Hotspur v Aston Villa: FA Cup third round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/08/tottenham-hotspur-v-aston-villa-fa-cup-third-round-live> 