
And then there were three. Not so long ago the Andrew Marr Show was the only 
Sunday politics TV game in town. Then came Peston on Sunday and now Sky has 
joined the party withSophy Ridge on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/uks-brexit-approach-is-not-muddled-at-all-says-theresa-may>
. Clearly the television bosses have worked out that in the current climate 
there are more than enough politicians willing to shoot their mouths off to go 
round. Or not in the case of Theresa May who has made a career out of saying 
nothing very meaningful in her first six months in charge of the country.

“We’ll be speaking to the prime minister later in the programme,” said Ridge 
at the start of the show, trying to make this sound as if she was saving the 
best till last and not that she expected it to be an uphill struggle and a 
futile encounter for all concerned. Getting the first live interview of the 
year with the prime minister is supposed to be a major coup. But for the 
Maybot, everyone makes an exception.

Instead, Ridge chose to warm up with a pre-recorded interview with Labour’s 
Tom Watson in a cafe in his West Bromwich constituency. “When’s the last time 
you spoke to Jeremy Corbyn?” she asked. “Ooh, let me think,” Watson smiled. “We 
did text one another yesterday about the death of the art critic John Berger.” 
Watson paused to smile some more. “And he did ring me last year to wish me 
happy Christmas.” Good to know that theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership has their fingers on 
the big issues of the day.

“So what’s Labour’s policy on immigration?” Ridge asked. Watson smiled and 
scratched his head before admitting that he didn’t really know. The next time 
he saw Corbyn – sometime in March, probably – he’d make a point of asking him. 
“Labour has a cauldron of ideas,” he said, his smile now veering towards a 
smirk. Though none that appeared to come readily to mind. He ended by singing 
his own version of the new Labour anthem: “Things can only get worser.”

After a quick roundup of the newspapers – a staple of every Sunday politics 
show – and another pre-recorded clip of Ridge looking thoroughly miserable 
trying to find anyone in Boston, Lincolnshire – the most pro-Brexit town in the 
country – to talk to her, it was time for the Maybot. Ridge immediately went on 
the offensive, observing that immigration had gone up while she was home 
secretary so why should anyone trust her on Brexit? Which was more important: 
reducing immigration of remaining part of the single market?

The Maybot whirred into inaction. We were going to take back control of our 
borders and get the very best deal for Britain because Brexit meant Brexit and 
the people had spoken. Understandably, Ridge looked a little puzzled by this 
and tried asking the same question again. This time the Maybot insisted the 
issue wasn’t that binary – which will have come as news to the other 27 members 
of the EU for whom it is precisely that – but that we were still going to take 
back control and get a deal that would be good for Britain as well as the EU.

“You seem to be saying that controlling immigration is more important than 
staying in the single market,” Ridge said, trying to make some sense of what 
she had heard. The Maybot looked horrified that any of her answers could have 
been clearly interpreted and was at pains to reiterate her confusion. This 
brought the interview seamlessly on to Sir Ivan Rogers’ resignation letter that 
claimed the government was muddled over Brexit. “Nothing could be further from 
the truth,” the Maybot rattled. Knowing you’re muddled is a sure sign that 
you’re not muddled.

Sensing, like so many before her, that she was getting nowhere, Ridge moved on 
to the crisis in the NHS.“There isn’t a crisis,” the Maybot snapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-denies-humanitarian-crisis-in-britains-nhs>
. People dying on trolleys in A&E were just scare stories. Clearly this was one 
issue that was binary. Ridge didn’t get much further with the prime minister’s 
new vision for the “shared society”. How was it different from David Cameron’s 
“big society” that got quickly dropped? Cameron’s society was big and hers was 
shared. The state would intervene when the state thought it was a good idea and 
not when it wasn’t. OK?

Then Ridge went for the unexpected. “How do you feel about Donald Trump 
talking of grabbing women by the pussy?” Ridge asked. The Maybot turned pale, 
her eyes narrowed and her head looked as if it was about to spin projectile 
vomit all over the studio. Bugger it. Marr and Peston would never have asked 
that question. She should have stuck with them, after all. It had been a 
struggle, but Ridge had got her money shot in the end.
 