
'It took up two and a half years of our lives," says David Dewaele 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2007/oct/22/3>, one half of Soulwax 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYNlFlF0iYM>, the electro-rockers who all but 
invented the mashup. "It affected my psyche," he adds. "I'd become depressed, 
aggressive."

"And then," picks up his brother and musical partner Stephen, "we'd look at 
all this work and realise there would be no financial reward."

The Belgian duo sound as if they are describing a spell in a forced labour 
camp. Actually, they're referring to something far more gruelling: a brand new 
Radio Soulwax app called that contains 24 hour-long mixes, each accompanied by 
its own hour-long film. These films are living and moving re-creations of 
whatever cover art accompanied each track used in the mix (of which there are 
an average of 70). The idea came to the boys after they put together an 
hour-long mix called Introversy for Radio 1, made out of nothing but song 
introductions – about 500 of them.

The brothers have always been restively creative – whether releasing records 
via the cover of Mixmag, surfing the early noughties mashup craze with their
2ManyDJs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e2gqkAls5dA> guise, releasing an album 
with 522 characters in the title, or capturing the spirit of the last decade's 
electro scene withPart of the Weekend Never Dies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FXDxA5MBJw>, a documentary that took in a 
whopping 120 gigs.

Right now, I'm in Soulwax's London pad, in Shoreditch, for a private demo of 
the app. Vintage record-players and old issues of Sounds lie around. But 
there's hi-tech gear, too, including a recording studio upstairs and the 
biggest flatscreen TV I have ever seen. It's on this that I get to play with 
the new app, as the brothers serve jasmine tea, grapes and brownies.

Of all the mixes, Into the Vortex, a collection of "weird, synthy" music in 
the vein of Tangerine Dream, best shows what a labour of love this was. "For 
the video, we had the idea we would remake all 27 sleeves in the mix – in real 
time. So we had a warehouse with a set builder and found people who looked like 
the people in the original covers."

Each time a new track surfaces, the screen shows these people assembling 
themselves into something resembling the original cover, as background and 
props do the same. Then, as the track fades, a "machine" takes a snapshot and 
appears to print out the original sleeve. The effect is more than a little 
mind-boggling. "You don't want to be on bad drugs when you see it," says David.

Filming each mix brought a new challenge. For Jack in the Box, an hour of 
Chicago-house tracks, the brothers were faced with an intriguing problem: most 
of the sleeves were white labels consisting of nothing but text. So they looked 
at early videos of how people danced to Chicago house, and then made dancing 
characters from those letters. The result is a joyous jumble of fonts, with Es 
turned on their sides to look like spiky haircuts.

Elsewhere, we have Blue (sad songs), Pin Ups (which uses a visual rather than 
a musical theme, namely any sleeve with breasts on it), and Hardcore or Die, an 
hour of 80s punk in which the covers scream along.

Realising that getting clearance for all the samples would be a headache, they 
found a loophole and applied for radio licences, becoming an internet radio 
company instead. The upside was no tussles with lawyers. The downside was they 
couldn't charge a bean: the app will be completely free.

The pair still think it's been worth it. After all, it showcases parts of the 
music-making process that are in danger of becoming extinct: the beauty of 
sleeve art, for example, or the idea of sitting down and listening to music 
without distractions. The whole project also chimes with the music tome of the 
moment,Simon Reynolds's Retromania 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/02/total-recall-retromania-all-rage>, 
which suggests that pop is now eating itself at such a pace that all we're left 
with is its regurgitations. The band agree with Reynolds's point that, over the 
last decade, innovative music has dried up, leaving the most groundbreaking 
developments to come from the technological side of things.

You imagine that, after all this work, the Soulwax boys are due a good rest – 
or at least a bit of time to work on something lucrative. But just as I'm 
leaving, David puts on Blue and glazes over as sad songs fill the room. "You 
know," he says, "I would really love to make a second volume."

The Radio Soulwax App can be downloaded for free from Monday 4 July at
radiosoulwax.com. It kicks off with six hours of content, with 18 more to follow
 <http://radiosoulwax.com>
 