
South Korea’s parliament has voted to impeach the president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-koreas-parliament-votes-to-impeach-president-park-geun-hye>
, Park Geun-hye, over a scandal involvingher relationship with Choi Soon-sil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/new-south-korea-pm-appointed-as-cronyism-scandal-widens>
, a close friend of 40 years who is being investigated on suspicion of exerting 
undue influence on the leader.

What happened in parliament?

A bill to impeach Park passed by 234 votes to 56, with nine invalid votes and 
abstentions. This means enough members of Park’s own Saenuri party had voted 
against her to bring about her impeachment – a measure of the damage inflicted 
on her reputation since the scandal surfaced less than two months ago. The bill 
needed the support of 200 of the assembly’s 300 members to pass.

Turmoil in east Asia: sensitive moment for region unsettled by Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/turmoil-east-asia-region-unsettled-trump>
What happens next?

Park’s executive powers have been immediately suspended and transferred to the 
prime minister, Hwang Kyo-ahn. But the vote doesn’t mean she will have to 
vacate the presidential Blue House immediately.


Her fate will lie in the hands of nine judges at the country’s constitutional 
court, who will have up to 180 days to rule on whether the impeachment vote is 
valid. Although the entire court bench was appointed by Park and her 
conservative predecessor, the strength of public anger towards Park means she 
would be wrong to believe they could save her presidency.

“I believe the judges will make a decision based on their love of the country 
and conscience,” said Kim Jong-dae, who served on the bench between 2006 and 
2012. “They are also people of the Republic of Korea, breathing the same air as 
all of us.”

The constitutional court will determine whether parliament followed due 
process and whether there are sufficient grounds for impeachment, a process 
that will involve arguments from both sides in public hearings.

If they ratify the vote, Park will formally resign and an election for a new 
South Korean president held within 60 days. It would be an ignominious end for 
Park, who would go down in history as the first democratically elected South 
Korean president to be forced out of office.

Who is in the running to become South Korea’s next president?

Moon Jae-in, a veteran lawmaker from the opposition Democratic party of Korea, 
leads the opinion polls. Moon has won plaudits for his uncompromising stance 
towards Park and his warning to constitutional court judges that overturning an 
impeachment vote would be a betrayal of the South Korean people. Moon, a former 
human rights lawyer, unsuccessfully challenged Park for the presidency in 2012.

The one-time frontrunner, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon, lies in second 
place, having suffered a recent dip in support due to his close association 
with Park’s Saenuri party – although he is not a member. The 72-year-old career 
diplomat served as South Korea’s foreign minister from 2004 to 2006. He has 
indicated an interest in returning to South Korean politics after he leaves his 
UN post at the end of the year, but has recently refused to comment publicly on 
the Park scandal.
There has been talk of Park’s predicament creating a “Trump effect” in South 
Korea, fuelled by public fury towards the political establishment and, as 
underlined by thecurrent cronyism scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
, its cozy ties with the country’s wealthy, and powerful family-owned “chaebol” 
conglomerates.

That new political environment could open the door to Lee Jae-myung, the 
liberal mayor of Seongnam and an ardent supporter of Park’s impeachment. The 
52-year-old, who could soon overtake Ban in the polls, has been a visible 
presence at the huge demonstrations that have sweptSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> in recent weeks, using them to 
call for a “revolution” in the country’s politics.

Other potential candidates are Seoul mayor and former civic activist Park 
Won-soon, and Ahn Cheol-soo, a software tycoon who ditched his 2012 run for the 
Blue House to form an alliance with Moon’s party. Ahn has been a vocal critic 
of the chaebol’s dominance of the South Korean economy.

What impact will the scandal have on South Korean politics?

Park’s future aside, the scandal has further exposed the unhealthy ties 
between establishment politicians and the country’s conglomerates. That 
arrangement was largely tolerated while the chaebol spearheaded rapid growth in 
the South Korean economy – Asia’s fourth-biggest – but the rising income gap, 
youth unemployment and high-profile problems affecting Samsung and other major 
companies, means voters’ patience is wearing dangerously thin.

There are fears that the political turmoil engulfing South Korea could have an 
adverse impact on the economy. The finance ministry said it was concerned about 
further risks to the economy from “domestic issues” that could harm consumption 
and investment, adding to the uncertainty arising from the state of the global 
economy.

The Bank of Korea said it would hold emergency meetings to discuss possible 
policy responses to any fallout from the impeachment vote, according to a 
central bank official.

Some analysts have described Park’s fall from grace as a rare victory for 
people power, withprotesters turning out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/30/south-korea-rasputin-like-friend-president-park-geun-hye-returns>
 in their hundreds of thousands in the biggest demonstrations South Korea has 
seen since the pro-democracy movement of the late 1980s.

Whether the recent scandal ushers in a new era of clean politics remains to be 
seen. Corruption and cronyism are nothing new in South Korea. Since its first 
democratic elections were held in 1987, every president has faced graft 
investigations after leaving office. One of them, Roh Moo-hyun, killed himself 
as a corruption investigation closed in on his family.

But while previous corruption scandals have often involved relatives who 
abused their links to the Blue House for financial gain, the figure at the 
centre of the latest controversy is none other than Park herself.
 