
An ambitious year-long programme of lectures, debates, music and performances 
examining the meaning of life and death will be launched at the Southbank 
Centre in London on Monday with a talk by the renowned physicistStephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/hawking>.

The Belief and Beyond Belief festival 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/festivals-series/belief-and-beyond-belief>
 is intended to explore what it means to be human in the 21st century with a 
wide range of participants from faith communities as well as those of no faith.


Hawking, whose speech will reference his 75th birthday on 8 January, will 
discuss some of his lifetime accomplishments and launch an app, Stephen 
Hawking’s Pocket Universe: A Brief History of Time. However, for health 
reasons, he will not appear in person; instead a pre-recorded speech will be 
broadcast at the Southbank Centre.


The festival, which runs until December, includes eight themed weekends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-belief-and-beyond-belief/2017/jan/09/southbank-centres-belief-and-beyond-belief-festival-top-20-events>
 on subjects such as the search for the meaning of life, religion and war, how 
we live with death, and science versus religion.


Keynote speakers throughout the year include Mona Siddiqui, AC Grayling, Colm 
Tóibín, Julian Baggini and Karen Armstrong. The London Philharmonic Orchestra 
will explore the festival’s themes in musical performances.

Jude Kelly, artistic director of the Southbank Centre, said the festival was 
“a landmark investigation into what it means to be a human in the 21st century. 
In a world of both secular and religious convictions, the current polarisation 
of faiths, deficit of happiness and rise of mental health issues suggests we 
are struggling with a wider discussion of spiritual and community life.”


A poll published on Thursday confirmed the generational shift in attitudes 
among the UK population towards religion. Commissioned by the Faith Research 
Centre, it found that 31% of 18- to 24-year-olds agreed that “Britain is a 
Christian country”, compared with 74% of those over the age of 65.

Four in 10 young Britons agreed that “Britain is a country with no specific 
religious identity”, compared with 20% of over-65s. However, a majority (52%) 
of young adults said it was important that UK politicians and policymakers had 
a good understanding of religion in the UK.

Kelly told the Guardian: “It’s not useful to refuse to grapple with the 
meaning that religion has in people’s lives. Even if you’re not religious in a 
conventional sense, there is a huge spiritual aspect in being human.”


For non-religious people, she added, there were few places in which to discuss 
the meaning of life and death, “to share doubts and sift through feelings”. 
Also, it was rare for believers and non-believers to come together to discuss 
such “profoundly important” themes.


The festival, which has taken 18 months to plan, incorporates poetry, film, 
dance and music as well as lectures and workshops, Kelly said. She hoped it 
would attract “a broad audience”, adding: “Not one of the speakers we 
approached turned us down because they felt [the festival’s themes] were 
inappropriate. Everyone agreed it was opportune.”


Belief and Beyond Belief launches on Monday 16 January and runs until December 
2017.

 