
South Korean prosecutors have said they will question the president, Park 
Geun-hye, this week over a snowballingcorruption scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
 involving a close friend that has triggered massive protests calling for her 
resignation.

The scandal centres on Park’s confidant, Choi Soon-sil, who is accused of 
using her ties with the president to strong-arm local firms into donating 
millions of dollars to two non-profit foundations Choi then used for personal 
gain.

“We need to question the president Tuesday, or Wednesday at the latest,” 
Yonhap news agency quoted an official with the Seoul prosecutors’ office as 
saying, adding they had sent a notice to her office and were waiting for a 
response.

Park could respond as early as Tuesday after she appoints a lawyer to 
represent her, her spokesman said, without elaborating further.

South Korea scandal explained: six key points on the cronyism claims engulfing 
the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
If Park agrees, she will be the first South Korean president to be questioned 
by prosecutors while in office. She had earlier vowed not to hide behind 
presidential privilege if required to give testimony.

Park faces allegations that she pressured the heads of the country’s powerful 
conglomerates to donate money to Choi’s foundations during a meeting with them 
last July.

Samsung’s vice-chair, Lee Jae-yong, and Hyundai Motor Group’s chair, Chung 
Mong-koo, were reportedly among those who attended that meeting.

Prosecutors interviewed Chung over the weekend and were questioning Lee, 
Yonhap said.

The “donations” from the firms allegedly amounted to nearly $70m, including 
20bn won (£13.6m) from Samsung and 12.8bn won from Hyundai – South Korea’s top 
carmaker.

Samsung, the world’s top maker of smartphones, is also accused of separately 
offering millions of euros to Choi to bankroll her daughter’s equestrian 
training in Germany.

Choi, whose father was an elusive religious figure and a longtime mentor to 
Park until his death in 1994, was arrested earlier this month for abuse of 
power and fraud. The 60-year-old is also accused of meddling in state affairs 
to the extent of nominating officials and editing Park’s speeches even though 
she has no official title or security clearance.

The scandal that emerged late last month has led to nationwide fury, with tens 
of thousands of protesters calling for Park’s resignation.

The latest rally on Saturday drew 1 million people, according to organisers, 
making it the largest public protest inSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> in nearly three decades.
 