
A handful of South Korean politicians have questioned the woman at the heart 
of the impeachment crisis surrounding the president,Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, inside the detention centre 
where she is being held awaiting trial on charges of extortion and abuse of 
power.

Choi Soon-sil, a longtime friend of the president, has repeatedly ignored 
summons to appear before a parliamentary committee investigating a corruption 
scandal that triggered Park’s impeachment this month.

So the politicians came to her, with the committee organising a special 
hearing on Monday morning – with TV cameras – inside the detention facility.

Choi initially refused to leave her cell, but eventually agreed to meet eight 
selected members of the committee behind closed doors.

Citing the politicians, the Yonhap news agency reported that Choi denied all 
her charges, including allegations that she colluded with the president and set 
up two dubious foundations that were later used for her personal gain.

For the sake of South Korea, President Park Geun-hye must go now | Aidan 
Foster-Carter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/park-geun-hye-go-now-south-korea>
Choi, however, said she was prepared to serve a life sentence and apologised 
to the public for “causing confusion”, according to Yonhap.

She said she was feeling “dizzy” both physically and mentally and refused to 
answer most of the politicians’ questions during the near three-hour meetings, 
Yonhap said.

Two former top presidential aides being held in a separate facility also 
refused to appear for questioning.

There are no legal grounds for forcing witnesses to attend a parliamentary 
hearing, although they can be held in contempt and face a maximum five-year 
prison term for not doing so.

South Korea impeachment vote: the key facts behind a presidential crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-korea-impeachment-vote-the-key-facts-behind-a-presidential-crisis>
The national assembly voted to impeach Park earlier this month, stripping away 
her substantial executive powers. She remains president in name, pending a 
decision by the constitutional court on whether to ratify parliament’s 
impeachment motion.

Earlier on Monday, prosecutors seized documents during a raid on the central 
Seoul residence of Kim Ki-choon, who served as Park’s chief of staff between 
2013-15.

Kim has a long association with Park’s family, having also served her father – 
the late military strongman Park Chung-hee who led the country for 18 years 
after seizing power in a 1979 military coup.

Those close ties have led to allegations that he must have been aware of the 
inappropriate influence that Choi – dubbed a “female Rasputin” by the local 
media – wielded over the president.

Park allegedly leaked confidential documents to her friend, and allowed her to 
meddle in state affairs – including the appointments of senior officials.





 