
South Korea’s opposition parties have filed an impeachment motion against 
scandal-hit president Park Geun-Hye as a fresh weekly protest was expected to 
draw a million protesters, organisers said.


The motion, backed by 171 lawmakers in the 300-seat legislature, will be put 
to a vote in the National Assembly on Friday.

South Korea scandal explained: six key points on the cronyism claims engulfing 
the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
The joint opposition commands the most seats in the legislature, but will need 
the support of nearly 30 members of Park’s Saenuri Party to secure the 
two-thirds majority needed to impeach the president.

“If the impeachment motion fails to get passed because of the lack of 
cooperation from the ruling party, it must take responsibility for all 
consequences”, the main opposition Democratic Party’s floor leader Woo Sang-Ho 
was quoted as saying by the Yonhap news agency.

Accused of colluding with a close friend who faces embezzlement charges, Park 
said last weekshe would be willing to step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/south-koreas-president-calls-on-parliament-to-arrange-her-exit>
 in the face of weekly mass protests that have seen millions take to the 
streets of Seoul and other cities.

But the opposition says Park’s offer, which put the manner and timing of her 
resignation in the hands of parliament, is an effort to buy time and avoid 
impeachment.

If passed, the motion would go to the Constitutional Court for approval – a 
process that could take up to six months.

The ruling party has called on Park to stand down voluntarily in April, 
allowing a presidential election to be held in June – six months ahead of 
schedule.

Party officials have given her a week to accept the timeline or face 
impeachment.

The scandal engulfing Park’s administration is centred around a long-time 
friend of the president, Choi Soon-Sil, who has been dubbed “Korea’s female 
Rasputin”.

Prosecutors say they have evidence that Park colluded in Choi’s efforts to 
coerce firms to “donate” tens of millions of dollars to two dubious foundations.

Park has been named as a formal suspect in the investigation, making her the 
first sitting president to be subject to a criminal probe while in office.

While she retains the presidency, Park cannot be charged with a criminal 
offence except insurrection or treason, but she would lose that immunity once 
she steps down.

Massive weekly protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/tens-of-thousands-march-demanding-south-korean-president-park-geun-hye-resign>
 have been intensifying over the past month, with organisers claiming up to 1.5 
million people braved freezing temperatures in Seoul last Saturday to demand 
Park’s resignation.

Activists have called for a sixth protest Saturday in central Seoul, despite 
Park’s announcement that she would be willing to cede power.

“About a million will come to the rally, more or less”, spokesman Ahn Jin-Geol 
of an umbrella group of activists organising the rally told AFP.

“The people have already impeached Park in their mind. They simply don’t want 
a criminal hanging around there as a president until April”, he said.

Park on Wednesday approved a lawyer recommended by the opposition-controlled 
parliament as an independent prosecutor.

The special prosecutor will interview the president and be given 120 days to 
follow up on the findings of state investigators.

Park has backtracked on earlier promises to make herself available for 
questioning in a judicial probe.
 