
The disgraced South Korean president, Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, has offered to resign and 
called on parliament to arrange her exit amid a corruption and cronyism scandal 
that has all but destroyed her administration.


Speaking in a nationally televised address on Tuesday, Park – whose single 
five-year term will not be officially over until early 2018 – asked the 
national assembly to set a new deadline for the end of her turbulent presidency.

“I will leave to parliament everything about my future including shortening of 
my term,” Park said in her third public address since the scandal broke.

“Once lawmakers come up with measures to transfer power in a way that 
minimises any power vacuum and chaos in governance, I will step down,” she said.

The offer by Park, South Korea’s first female president, came after another 
weekend of huge protests in Seoul and other cities calling for her immediate 
resignation over her role in aninfluence-peddling scandal centred on her 
longtime friend Choi Soon-sil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/choi-gate-south-korean-presidents-approval-rating-tanks-at-4>
.

Opposition lawmakers immediately rejected the offer, describing it as a 
last-ditch attempt to avoid the humiliation of impeachment.

South Korea scandal explained: six key points on the cronyism claims engulfing 
the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
South Korea’s three biggest opposition parties claimed they had won the 
support of enough lawmakers from Park’s ruling Saenuri party to push ahead with 
impeachment. Just before Park’s address on Tuesday local media reported that an 
impeachment vote could come as early as Friday.

Park Kwang-on, a lawmaker with the main opposition Democratic party, said: 
“(Park) is handing the ball to parliament when she could simply step down.

“She is asking the parliament to pick a date for her to resign, which she 
knows would lead to a discussion on when to hold the presidential election and 
delay everything.”

Park has twice publicly apologised over her close ties to Choi, a longtime 
confidante who has been arrested for fraud and abuse of power.

Choi, 60, allegedly used her relationship with Park to coerce donations from 
major South Korean companies, including Samsung – the country’s largest 
family-run conglomerate – to nonprofit foundations she set up and used for 
personal gain.

In an attempt to quell criticism of her conduct in the presidential Blue 
House, Park, who has resisted calls for her resignation and denied any criminal 
activity, had promised to submit herself to a special investigation.

This week, however, her lawyers rejected requests for Park to submit herself 
to questioning by the Choi prosecutors. Instead the 64-year-old Park will 
prepare for an investigation by a special prosecutor that is expected to begin 
in December, according to her legal team.

On Saturday hundreds of thousands of South Koreans took to the streets for the 
fifth weekend in a row to call for Park’s resignation. Organisers said the 
crowd totaled 1.5 million, though police estimated 260,000 attended.

No South Korean president has failed to complete a term since the current 
democratic system was introduced in 1987. If Park is impeached or resigns an 
election would be held in 60 days to nominate a new president to serve a 
five-year term.

Choi, who has never held public office and does not have security clearance, 
is also alleged to have influenced government policy, including in the economic 
and security spheres, and Seoul’s hardline stance towards North Korea.

Park acknowledged she was foolish to depend so heavily on Choi’s counsel but 
denied any role in pressuring companies to contribute money to her friend’s 
foundations.

Their friendship goes back to Park’s days as acting first lady following the 
assassination of her mother. Five years later, in 1979, Park’s father, the then 
South Korean leader Park Chung-hee, was killed by his own head of intelligence.

Now the scandal dubbed Choi-gate has shredded any last trace of political 
credibility Park enjoyed as the daughter of Park Chung-hee, who, despite human 
rights abuses, is credited with spurring the country’s transformation into an 
economic power, with living standards far exceeding those in the neighbouring 
North.

Last week Park Geun-hye’s approval rating fell to just 4% percent in a Gallup 
poll – an all-time low for any democratically elected South Korean president.

She would be the first South Korean leader to resign since the country’s first 
president, Syngman Rhee, quit and then fled to Hawaii amid a popular uprising 
in 1960.

Commentators said Park appeared to be deliberately complicating discussions 
over her future after weeks of daily criticism in the media.

“She doesn’t want the parliament to impeach her and she doesn’t think that the 
parliament can soon reach an agreement, so she is making things complicated and 
trying to shift some of her blame to parliament,” said Shin Yul, a professor of 
political science at Myongji University.

 