
Mikhail Barishnikov, the 26-year-old star of Leningrad's Kirov Ballet who 
vanished in Toronto early on Sunday morning after dancing with the Bolshoi 
Ballet touring troupe, is expected to appear before Canadian immigration 
officers tomorrow and apply for asylum.

No authorities would comment today on his disappearance. Calls to the Soviet 
Embassy here went unanswered and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police have been 
equally silent. Toronto Police have listed Mr Barishnikov as a missing person, 
but that is the extent of their public activity.

A main clue has come from the Federal Minister of Immigration, Mr Robert 
Andras. Campaigning for the federal election in his home constituency in 
Northern Ontario, Mr Andras said today that he would probably have a statement 
to make on Mr Barishnikov tomorrow. It is assumed that he is waiting for the 
outcome of the immigration hearings.

These hearings are technically public affairs - if you learn in advance when 
and where they are going to take place. But today the immigration authorities 
were saying nothing.

What is clear is that Mr Barishnikov prepared his defection with some care. He 
apparently made contact with a Toronto lawyer who advised him on immigration 
procedures, and he has found someone to hide him. Speculation surrounds an 
American friend, Miss Christina Berlin, who met him three years ago in London 
and was in Toronto last week. There are also suggestions that Mr Barishnikov 
may have discussed his move with members of the Royal Winnipeg Ballet, which 
toured the Soviet Union recently.

James Kennedy adds:

Mikhail Barishnikov was seen in London in 1970 when he and Makarova were the 
great attraction of a large group from the Kirov Ballet which performed at the 
Royal Festival Hall.

When he saw him here he had won the gold medal at the Warna competition in 
Bulgaria in 1966 and - a still greater distinction - the gold medal in the 
Moscow competition in 1969.

It begins to be noticeable that Kirov dancers defect whereas those of the 
Bolshoi Company do not. Excluding the Panovs, whose case is not quite one of 
defection, there have been three notable defectors from the Kirov: Nureyev, who 
has stayed in the West since1961, Makarova, who defected at the end of that 
London season of 1970, and now Barishnikov.
 