
Geneva, December 29 
Spain is mounting an increasingly aggressive campaign in support of its 
application to become an associate member of the EEC – it does not envisage 
full membership until it has reached a far more advanced stage of development. 
Two factors have so far acted againstSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, General Franco, and oranges.

Trade unions and Socialist parties in the Common Market have so far been 
opposed to EEC association with Franco’s Spain; and in the EEC Council of 
Ministers, it is Holland and Belgium which have held out against negotiations 
on political grounds.

Italy opposes negotiations with Spain on purely economic grounds; it does not 
want new competition in the EEC’s citrus market, and opposes any enlargement of 
the Community in the direction of the Mediterranean countries until it has also 
grown northwards towards Britain and Scandinavia, and a consequently enlarged 
appetite for oranges.

Spain’s principal champion is Germany. France, too, has been supporting the 
idea of Spain’s association, but rather less warmly.

Spain first applied for Common Market association in December, 1964. No 
positive reply has ever been received, although the Common Market Commission 
has studied the question, and recently submitted proposals to the Council of 
Ministers. The matter has been deferred until February.

Two stages 
The Spanish authorities are making no secret of their disappointment. They 
want integration withEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
both on political grounds and for economic reasons because they consider it 
essential to Spain’s development.

The Commission in its report to the Council of Ministers appears to have 
recommended a two-stage negotiation with Spain:

1. a commercial treaty aimed at the establishment of an industrial free trade 
area (and excluding agricultural products)

2. negotiations could open towards a Customs union, and further economic 
integration after 1972.

There would, however, be no commitment that the commercial treaty would 
necessarily lead to further negotiations. Alternatively, the Commission has 
also suggested that the EEC and Spain should study the problem together and 
make fresh recommendations.

 