
All too often, the only enduring legacy of beer is a pounding head, a 
rebellious gut and an imprecise yet nagging sense of shame.


For the 77 residents of the Spanish village of Cerezales del Condado, however, 
it has had far more agreeable consequences.

The late Antonino Fernández – who left the village for Mexico in 1949 and went 
on to become president of the Grupo Modelo brewing giant that produces Corona 
beer – spent millions of euros reversing the decline of his home town, 
resurfacing its roads and restoring its church. But this extraordinary largesse 
did not extend to leaving each villager €2m (£1.7m) in his will.

How embracing graffiti stopped one Spanish village going to the wall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/14/street-art-fanzara-spain-graffiti-artists>
The inhabitants of the village in León province awoke on Friday baffled by 
media reports that Fernández, who died in August, had made them millionaires 
overnight.

“He left money to his family in his will, but he didn’t leave any to the 
people in the village,” said a spokeswoman for the Fundación Cerezales Antonino 
y Cinia, which was set up by Fernández and his wife.

“We’ve read the articles but we’ve got no idea how it got around. We think it 
came from an article in the Diario de León after he died, which said he’d left 
more than €200m to his relatives.”

She added: “The village isn’t celebrating – it’s still in mourning for a 
much-loved neighbour.”

Maximino Sánchez, the owner of the village’s only bar, Cantina, also 
confirmed, a little ruefully, that neither he nor his neighbours were suddenly 
rich beyond their wildest dreams.


“Have all the neighbours been given a lump sum? No, that’s not true,” he said. 
“But we’re all very happy with all the work that’s been done to benefit the 
village and turn it around.”

According to those in Cerezales del Condado 
<http://www.aytovegasdelcondado.es/los-pueblos/cerezales-del-condado/>, his 
generosity over the years has helped reverse the village’s slow decline and 
dramatically improved the lives of its inhabitants.

“This is a really small village: there’s only two kids and just 30 of us here 
during the winter,” Sánchez said.

“There’s not much here – no industry – so it’s hard to make a living. But 
thanks to Don Antonino’s selfless gifts, we now have clean, running water in 
all our homes. All the roads in the village have been resurfaced, and the 
church, which was in a bad state, has been completely restored inside and out.”

Fernández’s munificence does not end there: the village square has been 
renovated; its Christmas nativity scene is attracting visitors from far and 
wide, and the cultural centre is thriving.

“Two new people have come to live here permanently – they wouldn’t have come 
if things weren’t the way they are,” Sánchez said. “That would have been 
impossible before.”

Fernández, who left school at 14 to help his family in the fields and 
eventually rose to the top of Grupo Modelo, appears never to have forgotten 
those he left behind.

“Don Antonino’s always been seen here with great respect and lot of 
affection,” Sánchez said. “He was a really humble, nice and good-hearted man. 
This was a powerful businessman, but when he came here he would hug all the 
kids and talk to everyone in the village about the way things used to be. There 
aren’t a lot of people like that.”

Asked what kind of beer Cantina offers its customers, Sánchez laughed: “Only 
beers from Grupo Modelo: Corona, Modelo black, blonde, and Pacífico.”
 