
Just when Fatima Bouchar thought it couldn't get any worse, the Americans 
forced her to lie on a stretcher and began wrapping tape around her feet. They 
moved upwards, she says, along her legs, winding the tape around and around, 
binding her to the stretcher. They taped her stomach, her arms and then her 
chest. She was bound tight, unable to move.

Bouchar says there were three Americans: two tall, thin men and an equally 
tall woman. Mostly they were silent. She never saw their faces: they dressed in 
black and always wore black balaclavas. Bouchar was terrified. They didn't stop 
at her chest – she says they also wound the tape around her head, covering her 
eyes. Then they put a hood and earmuffs on her. She was unable to move, to hear 
or to see. "My left eye was closed when the tape was applied," she says, 
speaking about her ordeal for the first time. "But my right eye was open, and 
it stayed open throughout the journey. It was agony." The journey would last 
around 17 hours.

Bouchar, then aged 30, had become a victim of the process known as 
extraordinary rendition. She and her husband,Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>, a Libyan Islamist 
militant fighting Muammar Gaddafi, had been abducted in Bangkok and were being 
flown to one of Gaddafi's prisons in Libya, a country where she had never 
before set foot. However, Bouchar's case is different from the countless other 
renditions that the world has learned about over the past few years, and not 
just because she was one of the few female victims.

Documents discovered in Tripoli show that the operation was initiated by 
British intelligence officers, rather than the masked Americans or their 
superiors in the US. There is also some evidence that the operation may have 
been linked to a second British-initiated operation, which saw two men detained 
in Iraq and rendered to Afghanistan. Furthermore, the timing of the operation, 
and the questions that Bouchar's husband and a second rendition victim say were 
subsequently put to them under torture, raise disturbing new questions about 
the secret court system that considers immigration appeals in terrorist cases 
in the UK – a system that the government has pledged to extend to civil trials 
in which the government itself is the defendant.

This year, the Crown Prosecution Service announced police had launched an 
investigation 
<http://www.cps.gov.uk/news/press_statements/joint_statement_by_the_director_of_public_prosecutions_and_the_metropolitan_police_service/>
 into the "alleged rendition and alleged ill-treatment" of Bouchar and Belhaj, 
and a second operation in which a Libyan family of six were flown to one of 
Gaddafi's prisons.

It appears inevitable that Scotland Yard's detectives will want to question 
the man who was foreign secretary at the time – Jack Straw.

Ten years before Bouchar's abduction and rendition, many of her husband's 
associates had been permitted to settle in Britain. These men were members of 
al-Jama'a al-Islamiyyah al-Muqatilah fi-Libya, the Libyan Islamic Fighting 
Group (LIFG), an organisation formed in the early 1990s and dedicated to 
Gaddafi's removal. The LIFG was not banned in the UK, and its members appear to 
have found the country a convenient place to gather and raise funds.There were 
even reports <http://cryptome.org/jya/mi5-flap.htm> – officially denied – that 
MI6 encouraged the LIFG in an unsuccessful attempt on the dictator's life.

But from 2002 the UK ceased to be such a safe haven for the LIFG. The US and 
UK governments were beginning to repair their relations with Gaddafi, a 
rapprochement that would soon see him abandon his WMD programme and open his 
country's oil and gas reserves to western corporations.

Held by armed police

One Thursday evening in November that year, a 36-year-old LIFG member who was 
living in London was arrested by armed police as he attempted to board a flight 
at Heathrow. He was told he was being detained under theAnti-terrorism, Crime 
and Security Act, 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200102/cmbills/049/2002049.pdf> a 
piece of legislation that had been rushed on to the statute books within weeks 
of 9/11, and which allowed the British government to detain international 
terrorism suspects without trial. From that moment the man was anonymised, by 
court order – in part to protect his relatives in Libya – and could be referred 
to only as "M".

When M had arrived in the UK as an asylum seeker eight years earlier, he had 
readily told Special Branch detectives that he was a member of the LIFG. On his 
arrest at Heathrow he insisted that the organisation had no connection with 
international terrorism and was concerned only with the removal of Gaddafi. 
After being detained at Belmarsh high security prison in south-east London, M 
appealed to the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC), a tribunal that 
allows the government to give evidence in secret, unseen by the appellant or 
the appellant's lawyers.
 Abdel Hakim Belhaj in Tripoli in August 2011 where he was the rebel military 
leader. He had been detained in 2004 in Bangkok and rendered to Libya with his 
pregnant wife Fatima Bouchar. Photograph: Francois Mori/AP 
In March 2004, M became the first and only person detained under the act to 
win an appeal at SIAC. The tribunal accepted that there were no links between 
LIFG and al-Qaida, andcriticised the Home Office 
<http://www.siac.tribunals.gov.uk/Documents/outcomes/documents/sc172002m.pdf> 
for its "consistent exaggeration" of M's alleged links with members of 
al-Qaida. As the law permitted only "international terrorists" to be detained 
without trial, and not domestic insurgents, M was set free. A few days after 
SIAC's decision, notice was passed to the Home Office and MI5, and Fatima 
Bouchar and her husband were detained in Bangkok.

Bouchar's husband made no secret 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/abdel-hakim-belhaj> of being a leading 
member of the LIFG. That year, the couple had left China, where they had been 
living in exile, and attempted to travel to the UK via Malaysia. When they were 
detained in Kuala Lumpur and questioned about Belhaj's false Iraqi passport, an 
acquaintance went to the British high commission to explain that the couple 
were attempting to reach London. Shortly after this, they were told that they 
would be permitted to travel to the UK on a BA flight, despite not having EU 
passports or UK visas. But when the aircraft stopped off at Bangkok, the pair 
were detained and taken to a US-run detention facility.

It was known that the CIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> had been 
operating a secret prison in Thailand since 9/11, but its precise location was 
unknown. Bouchar and Belhaj arrived there within minutes of being detained, 
suggesting that it was located within the perimeter of Don Muang international 
airport. They were immediately separated.

Belhaj says he was blindfolded, hooded, forced to wear ear defenders, and hung 
from hooks in his cell wall for what seemed to be hours. He says he was 
severely beaten. The ear defenders were removed only for him to be blasted with 
loud music, he says, or when he was interrogated by his US captors.

Bouchar says that when she was dragged away from her husband she feared he was 
going to be killed. "I thought: 'This is it.' I thought I would never see my 
husband again ... They took me into a cell, and they chained my left wrist to 
the wall and both my ankles to the floor. I could sit down but I couldn't move. 
There was a camera in the room, and every time I tried to move they rushed in. 
But there was no real communication. I wasn't questioned." Bouchar found it 
difficult to comprehend how she could be treated in this way: she was 
four-and-a-half months pregnant. "They knew I was pregnant," she says. "It was 
obvious." She says she was given water while chained up, but no food 
whatsoever. She was chained to the wall for five days. At the end of this 
period she was taped to the stretcher and put aboard the aircraft, unaware of 
where she was going or whether her husband was on board. At one point the 
aircraft landed, remained on the ground for a short period and then took off 
again. Only when it landed a second time did she hear a man grunting with pain, 
and realise her husband was nearby.

Belhaj says he had been shackled to the floor of the plane, with his hands 
chained to his feet in a manner that made it impossible either to sit or lie 
down. Sometimes his grunts would be met with a kick; on other occasions, he 
says, a cushion would be placed under his elbows, giving him temporary respite 
before it was taken away again.

The plane touched down at Tripoli with its cargo still trussed up; a gift, 
apparently, to the regime they had hoped to overthrow. The pair were driven 
separately to Tajoura prison, east of the city, and Bouchar was led to a cell 
where she would spend the next four months. Initially, she was interrogated for 
around five hours a day. "At one point a cot was brought in the cell along with 
some baby clothes, nappies, a bed cover and a baby bath," she says. "I really 
thought I was going to have to have my baby there, and that we would both be 
held there.

Bouchar was released shortly before giving birth to a son, apparently because 
word of her husband's capture had reached the outside world. Belhaj was brought 
to her cell for a few moments, and then she was set free, though not permitted 
to leave the country.

Two weeks after the couple were rendered to Libya, Tony Blair paid his first 
visit to the country <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/3566545.stm>, 
embracing Gaddafi and declaring that Libya had recognised "a common cause, with 
us, in the fight against al-Qaida extremism and terrorism". At the same time, 
in London, the Anglo-Dutch oil giant Shell announced that it had signed a £110m 
deal for gas exploration rights off the Libyan coast.

Three days after that, a second leading LIFG member, Abu Munthir al-Saadi, was 
bundled aboard a plane in Hong Kong and taken to Tripoli in a joint 
British-Libyan rendition operation. Saadi's wife and four children were also 
kidnapped and taken to Libya.The youngest was a girl aged six. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/oct/24/britain-family-gaddafi-legal> The 
family was incarcerated at Tajoura for more than two months before being 
released. Saadi and Belhaj were held for more than six years, however, and say 
they were subjected to torture throughout this time.

At one point, they say, early in their incarceration, they were interrogated 
by British intelligence officers after being tortured by the Libyan captors. 
These visitors wanted to learn more about LIFG members living in the UK. The 
two men saytheir torturers had made clear that their treatment would improve 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/libyan-rebel-leader-says-mi6-knew-he-was-tortured-2349778.html>
 if they told the British that these LIFG activists were linked with al-Qaida: 
something that SIAC had ruled, just weeks earlier, was not the case.
 The flight plan for the 2004 rendition operations found in Moussa Koussa's 
office. 
The role that MI6 played in arranging the rendition of these two Libyan 
dissidents and their families is now well known, thanks to a discovery made 
last September by Peter Bouckaert, a director with Human Rights Watch, inside 
the abandoned office of Moussa Koussa, Gaddafi's foreign minister and former 
intelligence chief. Bouckaert founda file containing hundreds of secret letters 
and faxes 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/09/08/usuk-documents-reveal-libya-rendition-details>
 that MI6 and the CIA had sent to Koussa during the early days of the 
rapprochement between Libya and the west. Among them were a series of documents 
detailing the 2004 rendition operations.

A close examination of those papers show that a great deal of planning went 
into the operations, withMI6 informing Koussa's office as early as November 
2003 that they wereseeking the assistance of Chinese intelligence officers 
<http://gu.com/p/36azy> in their attempt to deal with "the Islamic extremist 
target in China". When MI6 learned that Belhaj was being held in Malaysia under 
his nom de guerre, Abdullah al-Sadiq, along with his pregnant wife, they were
quick to tip off Tripoli <http://www.guardian.co.uk/p/36ap7>.

Notoriously, perhaps, one fax from Mark Allen 
<http://gu.com/p/36dax#document/p2>, then head of counter-terrorism at MI6, 
congratulated Koussa on the "safe arrival" of Belhaj – "the least we could do 
for you and for Libya" – and referred to an "amusing" request by the CIA that 
anything the dissident said under interrogation should be passed first to them.

"I know I did not pay for the air cargo," Allen says: but after all, the 
intelligence that led to the couple's rendition was British.

Another fax, sent by the CIA 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2011/sep/09/libya#document/p6> two 
days before Blair's visit, with a cover sheet marked "rendition of Abu 
Munthir", shows the US to be eager to join and finance that operation after 
learning that MI6 and Gaddafi's government were about to embark upon it. Also 
buried away inside the secret document cache is a fax that shows MI6 felt 
itself not to be bound by the anonymity order imposed after M had been detained 
under the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act in November 2002. The 
following January, the intelligence service sent Koussa what it described as an 
MI5 "intelligence resumé", detailing M's full name and date of birth and 
disclosing that he was an active member of the LIFG. The fax also listed the 
Libyan telephone numbers called by M. It was being sent, MI6 explained, "for 
research purposes and analysis purposes".

By piecing together records of air traffic control logs and matching them with 
a document found in the Tripoli cache, it is possible to trace the route taken 
by the aircraft that rendered Bouchar and Belhaj from Bangkok to Tripoli in 
March 2004. There are a couple of surprises along the way. The aircraft was a 
Boeing 737 with the tail number N313P, operated by a North Carolina company 
called Aero Contractors,which has been widely reported 
<http://www.law.unc.edu/documents/clinicalprograms/finalrenditionreportweb.pdf> 
to be a CIA front.

N313P is now known to have been used in a great many rendition operations: it 
was one of the aircraft that carried a shackled and hooded Binyam Mohamed, for 
example.

According to the records of the European air traffic management agency, 
Eurocontrol, and the Federal Aviation Administration in the US, N313P took off 
from Dulles airport in Washington DC at 2.51am on 7 March 2004, landing at 
Misrata inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> shortly after noon 
local time. When N313P departed from Misrata, it flew beyond Eurocontrol's area 
of responsibility, and disappears, temporarily, from its records.

But a flight plan had been prepared by the CIA the previous day, and faxed to 
Libya, where it was found among the secret cache of letters and faxes recovered 
from Koussa's office. This document shows that after leaving Libya, the 
rendition aircraft planned to stay overnight on the Seychelles before 
continuing to Bangkok. It was then due to leave Bangkok on the evening of 8 
March, the date that Bouchar and Belhaj were forced on board an aircraft.TheCIA 
flight plan <http://gu.com/p/36dvq> shows that the aircraft was then due to fly 
to Tripoli via Diego Garcia, where it would refuel during the early hours of 9 
March.

Any evidence that the rendition plane landed on Diego Garcia would be 
enormously damaging for the British government. Although the remote coral atoll 
in the Indian Ocean is operated as a US military outpost, it is a British 
Overseas Territory, and the UK is legally responsible for events there.

The last Labour government was highly sensitive to reports that Diego Garcia 
played a part in the global rendition programme. Both Blair and Straw insisted 
on a number of occasions that there was "no evidence" for this. Those 
assurances proved to be wrong: in February 2008, amid mounting evidence that 
rendition aircraft had landed on the atoll, David Miliband, one of Straw's 
successors at the Foreign Office,told the Commons 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200708/cmhansrd/cm080221/debtext/80221-0007.htm>
 that he was "very sorry indeed" to report that two rendition flights had 
refuelled there in 2002.

By way of reassurance, Miliband told MPs that no prisoners had been allowed to 
disembark while the aircraft were refuelled, and that "US investigations show 
no record of any other rendition through Diego Garcia or any other overseas 
territory, or through the UK itself, since then".

Diego Garcia question

When the CIA flight plan was recovered from Koussa's office, the Guardian 
asked the Foreign Office whether the plane carrying Bouchar and Belhaj had 
indeed stopped off on Diego Garcia, despite Miliband's assurances. The 
department sought initially to imply that the aircraft had been refused 
permission to land, but would not answer the question directly. Asked for a 
yes-or-no answer, a spokeswoman declined.

In any case, by the evening of 9 March, N313P had reappeared on the radar of 
Eurocontrol. The agency's records show the aircraft landed once more at Misrata 
airport: the exact place that the CIA flight plan said it would be.

On board were Bouchar, taped to her stretcher, and Belhaj, still shackled in 
an excruciating stress position at the end of their 17 hour flight.

With its prisoners rendered and the Libyan mission accomplished, N313P left 
for Palma de Mallorca. Hotel records from the five-star Gran Melia Victoria,a 
favoured destination 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/oct/26/usa.ciarendition> for rendition 
teams, show that the crew of 10 men and three women booked in for two nights of 
rest and recreation.

Curiously, however, when the aircraft left Palma on the evening of 11 March, 
it did not return to the US. Instead, it flew east to Baghdad. After less than 
two hours on the ground in Baghdad, it departed for Kabul. N313P remained in 
Kabul for 24 hours, then flew back to Washington via Larnaca on Cyprus and 
Shannon on the west coast of Ireland.

The flight to Kabul appears to coincide with another British-initiated 
operation, one that saw two more people being subjected to extraordinary 
rendition, this time from Iraq to Afghanistan.

Yunus Rahmatullah and Amanatullah Ali were two Pakistani men suspected of 
having travelled to Iraq to fight for al-Qaida.MI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> is understood to have tracked them as they 
travelled across Iran and into Iraq, and when they arrived at a house in 
southern Baghdad, a decision was taken to raid the building, a mission 
codenamed Operation Aston.

SAS troopers attacked the house in late February, shooting dead two men and 
capturing several others. After the detainees were handed over to the US 
military, Rahmatullah and Ali were held at a prison at Baghdad international 
airport, according to a British military source. Then they were flown to 
Afghanistan and taken to the US-run prison at Bagram, north of Kabul, a 
transfer that was in breach of the Geneva conventions. They remain at Bagram 
today,despite an attempt to secure the release of Rahmatullah 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/feb/23/yunus-rahmatullah-cannot-be-freed-habeas-corpus>
 by persuading the appeal court in London to grant a habeas corpus writ.

The SAS troops who took part in Operation Aston were members of a joint US-UK 
special forces task force that rounded up large numbers of people in Iraq 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/feb/07/iraq-death-secret-detention-camp>, 
missions in which the US was, on every other occasion, deemed legally to be 
detaining authority. But former members of the taskforce say Operation Aston 
was an all-British affair, and they were never sure why.

The Guardian has asked the Foreign Office on several occasions whether N313P 
flew Rahmatullah and Ali to Afghanistan, but the department has always failed 
to answer.

The following year, 2005, the LIFG was banned in the UK, and a number of its 
members, including M, were arrested. The Home Office said it had taken this 
step because it had come to the conclusion that the group was "part of the 
wider global Islamist extremist movement, as inspired by al-Qaida". To what 
extent this assessment drew upon intelligence provided by Gaddafi's government 
– including statements made by LIFG prisoners under interrogation – remains 
unclear.

What is becoming clear, however, is that the rendition of Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
and Abu Munthir al-Saadi had a number of unintended consequences.

By early 2005, the British government had been forced to conclude that the 
capture of the more moderate elements among the LIFG leadership, such as Belhaj 
and al-Saadi, had resulted in a power vacuum that was being filled by men with 
pan-Islamist ambitions. Among a number of documents found in a second Tripoli 
cache, at the British ambassador's abandoned residence, was a secret 58-pageMI5 
briefing paper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/oct/24/mi6-libya-rebels-rendition-al-qaida>
that said "the extremists are now in the ascendancy," and that they were 
"pushing the group towards a more pan-Islamic agenda inspired by AQ [al-Qaida]".

The realisation that MI6 had passed M's name and information about his 
contacts to Gaddafi's notorious intelligence agencies, despite the existence of 
an order seeking to preserve his anonymity, provoked outrage among lawyers who 
work within the SIAC system.

There was also dismay at the manner in which the rendition operations were 
mounted shortly after SIAC had ruled that there were no links between the LIFG 
and al-Qaida. M's lawyer, Gareth Peirce, believes that to be one of the reasons 
the two men were taken to Libya. "The UK's complicity in the renditions of 
Belhaj and Abu Munthir is sickening," Peirce says. "Their synchronisation with 
the obtaining of perceived missing 'intelligence' for domestic proceedings 
damns both enterprises equally."

Last December, the attorney general, Dominic Grieve, wrote to the head of 
Scotland Yard, Bernard Hogan-Howe, drawing his attention to the two rendition 
operations. A few weeks later the Yard announced it was mounting a criminal 
investigation, which is continuing.

Meanwhile, no attempt is being made to deny MI6 involvement in the renditions: 
instead, well-placed sources say the operations were"ministerially authorised 
government policy" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/feb/14/mi6-licence-to-kill-and-torture>. 
This hasled to reports 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/police-to-question-jack-straw-over-torture-in-libya-6289041.html>
 that police will need to interview Jack Straw.

The Guardian has repeatedly put a number of questions about the renditions to 
Straw, asking whether he authorised the operations and, if not, which minister 
was responsible; the former foreign secretary has repeatedly declined to answer.

A further consequence is that lawyers representing the rendition victims are 
suing MI6, MI5, the foreign office, and Mark (now Sir Mark) Allen. Belhaj – who 
was released from prison along with Saadi in 2010 – led the militia that drove 
Gaddafi's forces out of Tripoli last year, and is now settled in the city with 
Bouchar. Theyembarked on legal proceedings <http://gu.com/p/36ap9> only after 
the UK government declined to offer them an apology.

Bouchar appears to remain deeply traumatised by her abduction and 
imprisonment, and that of her husband. "The time around the birth of a first 
child should be among the happiest in a couple's lives," she says, "but it is 
very difficult for me to look back at that time because I wanted to die rather 
than be going through what I did."

Happily, she is now pregnant with the couple's second child.

Asked whether it wished to say anything that would help explain the UK 
government's role in the rendition operations, the Foreign Office declined to 
comment.

The justice ministry, meanwhile, is pressing ahead with proposed legislation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/mar/02/justice-and-security-green-paper-silence-in-court>
 that would introduce SIAC-style secrecy to any civil trial or inquest in which 
a minister has decided that some evidence is too sensitive to be aired in 
public.

Bouchar's lawyers condemn not only her mistreatment, but the plans to force 
litigation on her behalf into secret court hearing.

Sapna Malik, of the law firm Leigh Day, says: "Fatima's utterly barbaric 
treatment, and Britain's role in it, must come under the full scrutiny of an 
open court and not be condemned to a secret chamber."

Cori Crider of the legal charity Reprieve, which is also representing her, 
added: "It is bad enough that MI6 and the CIA had Abdel Hakim Belhaj tortured, 
when his only opponent was Colonel Gaddafi, but it is impossible to see what 
they hoped to achieve by kidnapping his pregnant wife, taping her up and 
forcing her on a plane back to Libya.

"Instead of saying sorry, the security services are busily trying to shunt 
Fatima's case and those like it into secret. Make no mistake: when Ken Clarke 
says a 'tiny' category of national security cases will be heard in closed 
court, it is Fatima, taped to the stretcher, he and those behind him have in 
mind."
 