
Obama and Raúl Castro thank pope for breakthrough in US-Cuba relations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/us-cuba-diplomatic-relations-obama-raul-castro>
Behind the faded doors of what once ranked among the grandest diplomatic 
buildings in Washington, a team of craftsmen have flown in from Havana to 
quietly restore the old Cuban embassy to its former glory.


Empty for two decades after the revolution and occupied since then by a “Cuban 
interests” section that is officially part of the Swiss embassy, the mission 
has been frozen in a cold war time warp as rigid and unforgiving as its 
government’s relationship with the US.

Ceiling fans, dark wood panels and the even darker coffee served to guests 
suggest hints of Havana. Yet the 110-year-old mansion on 16th Street flies no 
flag and its half-dozen Cuban diplomats are not even allowed US bank accounts, 
receiving only cash from home and rumoured surveillance from the Americans.

But Cuba is coming in from the cold. After this month’s historic meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/11/obama-castro-handshake-us-cuba> 
with President Raúl Castro in Panama, Barack Obama’s decision to remove the 
communist government from a US list of state sponsors of terrorism has 
dismantled the final barrier to normalising relations, clearing the way to 
finish a secret deal that wasfirst announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/us-cuba-diplomatic-relations-obama-raul-castro>
 to incredulous international onlookers in December.

To the shock, too, of some of those who work there, a rapid thaw in diplomatic 
relations could soon see the Washington embassy’s formal reopening – and by the 
look of the refurbished Ernest Hemingway bar, dusted-down chandeliers and 
polished new ballroom floor, it will be quite a party.

Yet as the dust settles from these tumultuous few months and both countries 
look forward to an opening up of trade and tourism that could transform bothCuba
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> and the reputation of the US in Latin 
America, several mysteries remain.


Why now, after so many years of false starts? How did negotiations that 
appeared deadlocked over US demands for the unconditional release of Cuba’s 
prisoner Alan Gross get resolved? Who persuaded two countries that once brought 
the world to the brink of nuclear war to trust each other again?

Partial answers began to emerge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/18/us-cuba-deal-a-marriage-18-months-in-the-making-blessed-by-pope-francis>
, largely from American sources, in December. There were glimpses of backroom 
pressure from Pope Francis and secret meetings in Canada, but little sense of 
how it all fit together, particularly as many tracks were made in parallel by 
participants sometimes unaware of each other’s progress.

Now, mounting optimism that the deal will hold has finally emboldened those 
involved to reveal a fuller picture, and a shift in US attitudes with 
far-reaching consequences.

A seminal moment
 A skylight at the Cuban embassy, Washington DC 
Though attention focused on the Cuban agreement to release Alan Gross from 
Havana, interviews conducted by the Guardian with half a dozen key players from 
both countries suggest the more significant concessions came first from the 
Americans.

It began with a phone call from Congress to the State Department, outlining 
one of the more bizarre requests in diplomatic history.

Tim Rieser, a senior aide to the Senate appropriations committee, wanted to 
know if US diplomats could help arrange for the collection of frozen sperm from 
a Cuban spy locked up in the desert outside Los Angeles, so it could be sent to 
a Panama clinic to inseminate his wife.

The spy in question, Gerardo Hernández, had been sentenced to two life terms 
for his role in a Miami espionage ring. His government claimed it was aimed at 
preventing terrorist attacks on Cuban soil, but it led to him being convicted 
of conspiracy to commit murder after the shooting down of two planes operated 
by a Cuban-American group that Hernández had infiltrated.

The “Cuban Five”, as the spies were quickly dubbed, were better known than 
Alan Gross – a State Department subcontractor who was imprisoned after he was 
caught supplying telecommunications equipment to groups in Havana – and their 
treatment was a major source of grievance long before Gross became a US cause 
célèbre.

During a peace-making trip to Cuba with his wife in February 2013, US senator 
Patrick Leahy – Rieser’s boss and a longtime advocate of rapprochement – was 
approached by Hernández’s 44-year-old wife, Adriana Pérez, with a very personal 
plea. Pérez was worried that she and her husband would never be able to have 
children if he stayed in US prison much longer.

A sympathetic Leahy saw a chance to turn a humanitarian gesture into something 
that could also help improve prison conditions for Gross, who had severe health 
problems, and the senator asked his aide to raise the matter with US officials.

Senator Leahy was trying to improve the way both governments dealt with each 
other
Tim Rieser 
“I asked the Bureau of Prisons about artificial insemination, and they were 
able to tell me that there was at least one case they were aware of when that 
had been done,” recalls Rieser, whose earlier suggestion of a conjugal visit 
was rejected.


“I didn’t get into the logistics. My job was to find out if there was 
precedent for this and to encourage the State Department and the Justice 
Department to explore it, knowing that it could potentially help Alan at a time 
when Senator Leahy was trying to improve the way both governments dealt with 
each other.”

Washington’s willingness to help, an unusual step that – after one failed 
attempt – eventually led to the birth of baby Gema Hernández, was the first 
clue that within a year US officials would be prepared to drastically relax 
their view of the prisoners still further.

“The breakthrough, in my view, was in April of 2014, when key officials in the 
administration for the first time agreed that not only did the Cuban Five issue 
need to be addressed, but that commutation of the Cuban Five sentences was 
appropriate and would be supported,” says Scott Gilbert, lawyer for Alan Gross.

“If there is a watershed moment, this was it, because I knew there was no 
possibility of a deal being done otherwise.”

Tim Rieser agrees: “Had we not been able to show [the administration] and help 
them recognise that the cases of the Cuban Five were flawed – that they had 
already served 17 years and some resolution of those cases was necessary to get 
Alan Gross out and to get to a new policy – if Senator Leahy hadn’t convinced 
them of that, then we would not be where we are today.”

Cuban sources also confirm that Leahy’s early move to ease prisoner conditions 
was seen in Havana as a vital first step in restoring trust.

Without doubt, it helped pave the way for the next stage: secret talks that 
began soon afterwards in Ottawa.

‘Very businesslike discussions’
 Deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes is a trusted confidant of 
President Obama. Photograph: Darren Mccollester/Getty Images 
The pair of White House officials dispatched in June 2013 to meet the Cubans 
in the relatively neutral territory of a ceremonial building in the Canadian 
capital were nonetheless still viewed with suspicion.

The more senior of the two, deputy national security adviser and Obama 
confidant Ben Rhodes, brought credibility: proof of a direct channel back to 
the Oval Office.

But the other, Ricardo Zúñiga, the national security council’s senior director 
for western hemisphere affairs, had a more troubling background, as far as some 
Cubans were concerned.

Born in Honduras to a family of prominent conservatives, Zúñiga had spent time 
in Havana as a human rights specialist at the US diplomatic mission and was 
suspected of attempts to undermine the regime.

“Zúñiga is a traveling salesman, distributing the most backward, anti-Cuban 
ideas wherever he lands,” wrote the state-run newspaper Granma when he was put 
in charge of White House relations with the country in 2012.

Despite this legacy, Zúñiga’s expertise gradually helped win respect, and the 
secret group made steady, if slow, progress at the start of what proved to be 
seven meetings in total, including one in Toronto.

“These were very businesslike discussions,” says one White House official. 
“They were not invective-filled. We had very different points of view and 
talked about our differences very openly … We tried to keep this as pragmatic 
as we could.”

It helped that neither the US State Department nor the Cuban foreign ministry, 
let alone anyone outside government, was aware of just what a major reset of US 
policy in the region was being attempted.


“These were off the beaten path in areas that the Canadian government helped 
set up in a discreet location away from public eye,” adds the White House 
official. “We wanted to do something that was going to remove this as a point 
of friction in our relationship with theAmericas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>.”

By December 2013, in what was the only sign of progress visible to the outside 
world, Obama and Castro acknowledged their newfound respect by shaking at hands 
at Nelson Mandela’s funeral in Soweto.

Yet something was still missing. Those close to him say Obama was keen to do a 
deal but did not feel compelled, or sure it would survive an inevitable assault 
from Congress.

Two men helped change that: the Pope and Alan Gross.

‘The pope and the president spoke at length’

The Vatican had long been keen to help restore Cuba to the international fold, 
particularly since the inauguration of reform-minded Argentinian pontiffPope 
Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> in March 2013.

Ahead of a planned meeting with Obama a year later in Rome, it was far from 
clear that the issue of Cuba was going to come up, however.

Boston cardinal Seán Patrick O’Malley, once a contender for the papacy himself 
and a close ally of Francis, had been asked to recommend suggested discussion 
topics for the Vatican to raise with Obama. He is said to have confided later 
that Cuba was not initially on his list.

But several sympathetic Americans believed that support from the Vatican could 
be vital in helping Obama overcome political resistance and persuaded O’Malley 
to write a second memo to the pope suggesting he bring it up.

One of these supporters was Tim Phillips, a Boston-based expert in conflict 
resolution who had been holding meetings with with Cuban Americans in Florida 
that gave him confidence change was possible.

“There was a shift going on in Miami,” says Phillips, whose group, Beyond 
Conflict, arranged for local community leaders to meet speakers from South 
Africa and East Germany who shared their experiences of reconciliation.

The older generation was passing away. There was a new generation who don’t 
have that same anger and attachment
Tim Phillips 
“The older generation was passing away. There was a new generation who weren’t 
born in Cuba who don’t have that same anger and attachment. Later generations 
of Cuban exiles came for economic, not political reasons, so they had a 
different mindset.”

Briefed on this by Philips and encouraged by a letter via Rieser from Senator 
Leahy, Cardinal O’Malley succeeded in getting the issue on to the Pope’s agenda 
for Obama.

“That was actually a really important meeting,” confirms a White House 
official. “We knew in general terms that the pope was supportive of an effort 
along these lines. At that meeting, the president was able to say we were 
trying to do something. The pope and the president spoke at length for most of 
an hour; it was a broad-ranging conversation, but Cuba featured heavily.”

After further letters of encouragement from the Pope, an even more significant 
meeting was hosted by the Vatican in October 2014, for the two delegations to 
finalise the deal they had been hammering out in Canada.

“The contrast between Ottawa and Rome was pretty remarkable,” adds the 
administration official. “When we did this meeting at the Vatican, there were 
portraits of past popes all around us. It was very ornate. It felt like 
history.”

‘Alan became an involuntary catalyst’
 Alan Gross, alongside his wife Judy, speaks at a press conference after being 
released by Cuba. Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images 
Cuba frees American prisoner Alan Gross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/cuba-frees-alan-gross-obama-officials>
Though theories differ on the relative contributions of Pope Francis and Alan 
Gross, there was no doubt that when Obama returned to Washington there was a 
newfound urgency and a recognition that the US had to give something up if it 
wanted to secure the release of the increasingly unwell State Department 
contractor.

The change of heart by the White House was also driven by deepening concern 
about whether Gross would survive much longer in captivity, especially after he 
went on hunger strike in 2014.

“Everyone was keenly aware that Alan had vowed he would not see his 66th 
birthday in 2015. This created a limited time window in which to get a deal 
done,” says Gilbert.

“Alan’s perspective, which was quite rational, was that he had served five 
years of a 15-year sentence and had no objective basis to believe he wasn’t 
going to have to serve the remaining 10, which he was unwilling to do.”

A decision by worried Cuban authorities to move Gross to a military hospital 
only worsened the problem, according to his US supporters.

He lost more than 110lbs in captivity, suffered from hip problems that made it 
difficult to walk or stand up, had a problem with his eyes and lost five teeth 
from suspected nutrition issues.

Everyone was keenly aware that Alan had vowed he would not see his 66th 
birthday in 2015
Scott Gilbert 
Gross’s arrest had helped choke off earlier progress in talks with the Obama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration>. And 
yet without the prospect of a prisoner exchange to drive negotiations forward, 
it is possible that Cuba and the US may never have resolved their differences.

“Alan [Gross] became an involuntary catalyst in the decision to change the 
policy,” concludes Rieser. “It was clear the Cubans were using Alan Gross as a 
bargaining chip for their own prisoners. And like it or not, we had to face 
that.”

Those who secured his release believe the key was indeed a recognition from 
Washington that it could no longer simply make demands on Cuba; it needed to 
offer the country’s communist leadership a way to evolve with dignity.

“This has probably been the most dysfunctional relationship between two states 
in world history: the level of emotional and historical baggage borne by both 
countries is staggering,” concludes Gilbert.

“I first sat down with the Cubans nearly four years ago and asked them to 
identify the one key thing they wanted from the United States, and they 
immediately said ‘respect’.”

The successful conclusion to one of the Cold War’s most intractable stand-offs 
suggests they finally got it.

The US-Cuba thaw: a timeline

 * December 2009: Alan Gross arrested

 * February 2013: Senator Patrick Leahy approached in Havana by wife of 
imprisoned Cuban spy

 * June 2013: US and Cuba begin secret talks in Canada

 * December 2013: Obama and Raúl Castro shake hands in Soweto

 * March 2014: Obama meets Pope Francis at Vatican

 * October 2014: Vatican hosts final meeting of two delegations

 * 16 December 2014: Obama calls Castro to finalise negotiations

 * 17 December 2014: Two leaders announce deal in televised addresses 
 * April 2015: Obama moves to remove Cuba from state terror list  