
A Danny Grainger free-kick rewarded Hearts fans for backing the club through 
their ongoing financial crisis and gave the Edinburgh side a much needed 1-0 
victory overSt Mirren in the Scottish Premier League.

The full-back scored the only goal of the game when he sent a lovely swerving 
effort past the grasp of Craig Samson and into the top corner after 63 minutes 
in front of a near-capacity crowd of 16,443 at Tynecastle, in what was the 
first home fixture since the full extent of the club's problems were revealed.
St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> have now lost six SPL 
games in a row and sit a single point above the bottom side, Dundee.

A Liam Craig own goal handed Ross County a 1-1 draw at St Johnstone. The 
Saints captain, Dave Mackay, put the hosts in front with a composed finish five 
minutes after the restart at McDiarmid Park, but Craig deflected Iain Vigurs's 
shot into his own net 20 minutes from full-time.

Kyle Benedictus set Dundee on their way to a fine 3-1 home win over Hibernian 
whose spell at the top of the SPL was brought to an abrupt end. The victory 
gave Barry Smith's side their third game without defeat and continued their 
improvement in form.

Benedictus scored 21 minutes into the first half with a fine shot from 20 
yards and that was followed by second-half goals from Steven Milne and Kevin 
McBride, which meant the former Dundee striker Leigh Griffiths's injury-time 
strike was nothing more than a consolation for the Hibees. However, the 
scoreline could have been 4-1 asDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> were denied a first half penalty 
after Milne was upended by Tom Taiwo.

In the Third Division, Rangers beat East Stirling 6-2 at Ochilview with two 
penalties from their captain, Lee McCulloch, and goals from Andrew Little, Lee 
Wallace, Kai Naismith and Kevin Kyle. Kevin Turner and a Paul Quinn penalty 
gave the home side their goals but they faced an uphill task after Philip Zufle 
was sent off in the first half, withRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> leading only 1-0.

Barrie McKay was particularly impressive as Ally McCoist's side went on to win 
at a canter.
 