
People without a home can spend as long as 36 years living in and out of often 
dilapidated hostels, B&Bs and refuges while waiting for help to find a 
permanent residence, a damning report reveals.


A system designed to aid the destitute is instead said to be abandoning those 
seeking stability while offering them unacceptably squalid conditions in which 
to live, according to a report by the IPPR thinktank.

Aiming to investigate the reality behind homelessness statistics, the report 
chronicles bloodstains, broken windows and even a lack of a bed or a bathroom 
in provisional forms of accommodation. During the three-year study of a cohort 
of 45 people in and out of temporary accommodation, five of those involved died.

In one case, the system failed a service user so badly that they ended up 
spending 36 years in such “temporary” accommodation, the report finds.

Families and disabled people 'hit worse by rising homelessness'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/23/families-and-disabled-people-hit-worse-by-rising-homelessness>
Government data shows that in the third quarter of 2016 a total of 74,630 
households, including 117,520 children, were recorded as living in temporary 
accommodation such as women’s refuges, temporary housing association or council 
sites and B&Bs.

This was an increase of 9% on the same period in 2015. Almost 32,000 more 
children were living in this kind of accommodation than in the same quarter of 
2010.

The data, published this month by the Department for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government, also 
shows 6,680 families had been placed by the local authority in bed and 
breakfast accommodation, which is supposed to be funded on an emergency basis 
while cases are examined. This was an increase of 13% on the previous year, and 
almost treble the number in 2010.

The IPPR report on hidden homelessness lays bare the conditions often endured 
by people in such accommodation, including a lack of locks on doors, hostile or 
greedy landlords, overcrowding, and contact with people misusing substances 
when others are trying to quit. One user told IPPR researchers of being covered 
in bites as a result of poor cleanliness of the accommodation.

The researchers say failings in the system mean that rather than using 
temporary accommodation as a stepping stone, users struggle to take sufficient 
steps towards more permanent housing, such as saving up a deposit.

Charlotte Snelling, the report’s author, said: “This time of year, minds 
rightly turn to thinking about people who face a Christmas on the streets. But 
we shouldn’t forget about the hidden homeless who face a Christmas in poor 
quality B&Bs or private hostels.

“So-called temporary housing all too often means a permanent reality of 
no-fault evictions and lack of the basics we take for granted: it’s hard to 
have the necessary security to move on to more permanent housing if you don’t 
even have a lock on your front door.

“We need to see councils setting up temporary accommodation boards to give a 
real voice to these people and help design housing services that move them from 
temporary accommodation into a decent and lasting home.”

The IPPR report recommends councils reallocate landlords’ letting fees into 
inspecting and enforcing basic standards on the quality of accommodation.

It also suggests there should be stronger controls on how landlords evict 
people so that they must state any grievance clearly and not misuse the system.
 