
In June 1986, in a squat off Walworth Road in south-east London, Mark 'Spit' 
Balcombe, a 19-year-old squatter who had spent much of his life in council 
care, was stabbed to death. Council workers found his body dumped in a disused 
laundry in the block of flats.

It was not the sort of murder that attracted much attention, being the type 
some police forces describe as an 'inter-slag' killing - where one 'low-lifer' 
has killed another.

Mr Balcombe had been asked to leave the squat by some other squatters, and was 
told he was not wanted there any more. A fight had developed and he was fatally 
stabbed.

Police traced the people in the flat with Mr Balcombe. Three of them, Kevin 
O'Neill, from Paisley in Scotland, and two young Frenchmen, Christophe 'KK' 
Makuch and Laurent 'No No' Dhainaut, were charged with murder.

At the Old Bailey trial in May 1987, Mr O'Neill was convicted of murder and 
sentenced to life imprisonment. His co-defendants were convicted of actual 
bodily harm and jailed for four years.

Mr O'Neill, who was born in 1965, had not done well at school, having reading 
and writing difficulties. At the age of 10 he was examined by a 
neurophysiologist in Scotland when it was thought he might have been 
brain-damaged at birth. He studied art and metalwork to junior certificate 
level in Scotland but left without further qualifications and found work as a 
painter and decorator and signwriter.

He was in trouble with the police from a young age and was convicted of 
assaults, including one on police, theft and taking and driving away. He was 
sent to a young offenders' institution for repeated offences.

At the age of 19, leaving behind unpaid fines, Mr O'Neill left for London, 
ending up living mainly in squats in the Elephant and Castle area. There he 
mixed with a hard-drinking, drug-taking crowd and took large quantities of 
alcohol, cannabis and pills, and some heroin and LSD.

He was sharing a squatted house with Mr Balcombe when the murder took place 
and was arrested soon afterwards in a cafe in Whitehall frequented by young 
squatters.

The confession he eventually made was the basis of the case against him.
He withdrew the confession, which, with his agreement, was made without a 
solicitor present, before the trial. He claims he had agreed to confess because 
he did not want his then girlfriend, who was expecting his child, to be 
implicated in the killing.

He agrees he struck Mr Balcombe but said he had not stabbed him. He also 
agrees he suggested how the body could be disposed of.

When the case came to court, Mr O'Neill and the two Frenchmen ran what is 
known as a 'cut-throat' defence, meaning that each side blames the other, and 
one side must be lying.

The psychological assessment of Mr O'Neill conducted at the time of the trial 
suggested he was suffering from a personality disorder and was under the 
influence of drugs, notably LSD. The report suggested he showed 'maladaptive 
behaviour in his relationships, his occupational career and his abuse of 
alcohol and illicit drugs'.

There was additional evidence from a police informer called Colin Warner who 
shared a cell with Mr O'Neill and claimed he had made admissions when taking 
part in a 'rehearsal' for the trial.

Faced with this evidence, the jury returned a guilty verdict. As the judge 
recommended that thought should be given as to whether Mr O'Neill should ever 
be released, his case might well have rested there.

But Mr O'Neill met a youth worker in Wormwood Scrubs in 1988 whom he gradually 
convinced of his innocence. She started looking into his case and examining the 
form of his confession, and became convinced he had not struck the fatal blow. 
The couple married in Hull prison in 1992 and Jenny O'Neill is now anxious to 
see the case referred back to the Court of Appeal.
She and Mr O'Neill's legal team contacted Dr Henry Chasty, director of the 
Dyslexia Institute, who carried out tests on Mr O'Neill and concluded he had 
'auditory memory difficulties which would lead to him misunderstanding and 
responding inappropriately to long questions'. He concluded: 'The acceptability 
of his statement is very questionable. I therefore conclude that there are 
serious dangers in the convictions of Kevin O'Neill on this evidence alone.'

Now Gisli Gujonson, a forensic scientist who specialises in analysing speech 
patterns, is to examine the confession made by Mr O'Neill. Dr Gujonson has been 
a crucial witness in a number of recent successful appeals, and the O'Neills 
hope the fresh evidence will lead to a reopening of the case.

The Home Office's annual statistics on criminal appeals, published last week, 
showed a significant increase in appeals and the number which were successful.

The findings come as discussions continue about the format of the new Criminal 
Cases Review Authority, which will have the power to re-examine alleged 
miscarriages of justice.

Some 31 2 years ago, the Guardian ran its first Justice on Trial series, 
looking at cases where there were doubts about the nature of the convictions.

The cases in early 1991 included those of Judith Ward, Wayne and Paul Darvell 
and the Cardiff Three - Yussef Abdullahi, Tony Paris and Steve Miller. All have 
since been released. But others whose cases we have highlighted since - men 
serving life for murder, such as Bob Maynard, Reg Dudley and George Long - 
remain inside, still protesting their innocence.

Successful appeals such as those of the Guildford Four and Birmingham Six, 
have fuelled expectations within prisons that wrongful convictions can be 
reversed - even although it may take many years.

The latest figures would seem to show their chances of success are increasing.

Last year, 314 people had their convictions for serious offences quashed at 
the Court of Appeal. That was 16 per cent of the 1,953 people whose cases were 
considered - a big increase on 10 years earlier when only 134, or nine per 
cent, won their appeals.

At a lower level, appeals from magistrates' courts to crown courts have 
doubled in the last 10 years, with 11,226 being heard in 1993, compared with 
6,420 in 1983. Those successful have increased from 1,888 to 4,237, with 38 per 
cent of those who appealed winning their cases last year, compared with 29 per 
cent in 1983.

The success of these appeals has encouraged people seeking to have their cases 
reopened. More than 180 have contacted the Guardian in the last three years, 
claiming they are innocent. Many cases have been taken up by organisations such 
as Justice, Liberty, Conviction and the National Association of Probation 
Officers, but only a small minority make it back to the Court of Appeal.

Some may have little merit and some are cynical try-ons by prisoners with 
nothing to lose. But over many there hangs a large question mark.
 