
The Stade Français <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stadefrancais> wing 
Josaia Raisuqe was sent off but that did not stop the French Champions 
inflicting a 27-7 defeat on Munster in Paris.

Raisuqe was sent off by the World Cup final referee, Nigel Owens, on the 
stroke of half-time for gouging theMunster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> captain, CJ Stander, as the pair 
wrestled for the ball.

Yet despite playing for 40 minutes with just 14 men, it was the hosts who ran 
out comfortable winners at Stade Jean-Bouin. And such was their dominance that 
only a try by Conor Murray five minutes from time prevented Munster suffering 
their first shut-out in 21 years of European rugby.

Paul Williams, Sekou Macalou and Hugo Bonneval all crossed as Stade halved 
Leicester’s lead at the top of Pool Four to four points.

Anthony Foley’s side are now all but out of the Champions Cup barring a 
miracle run of results after suffering three pool defeats in a row for the 
first time.

Munster were dealt a series of early blows with the loss of two players in the 
opening eight minutes and a third before half-time. BJ Botha, their tighthead 
prop, failed to recover after he was injured in a tackle in the opening minute. 
The full-back Andrew Conway then followed moments later after he came off worse 
from a collision with Stade’s talismanic captain, Sergio Parisse.

It only got worse for Munster as Ian Keatley narrowly missed out on a try 
after Julien Arias was caught ball-watching, before missing the posts with his 
first penalty attempt.

Francis Saili saved a certain try with a finger-tip tackle to deny Waisea 
Nayacalevu after the Stade centre benefited from Simon Zebo’s ill-judged pass.

Moments later and Nayacalevu made the burst that produced the game’s first 
try. Parisse provided support but Williams picked his angle between forwards 
Dave Kilcoyne and Dave Foley to score under the posts on 32 minutes. Morné 
Steyn converted and added a penalty for a 10-0 lead.

Munster then lost Tommy O’Donnell despite the flanker initially returning from 
a head injury assessment.

But Stade were reduced to 14 men when Raisuqe was shown by television replays 
on the stadium’s giant screens to put his hands in the face of Stander as they 
wrestled for the ball after Owen had blown his whistle.

The chorus of boos and whistles were deafening as Keatley kicked and missed 
his penalty and the noise only intensified as Welsh referee Owens walked off at 
half-time

Steyn added a second penalty before Munster saw Rory Scannell’s try ruled out 
for a forward pass. Stade flanker Macalou then tore clear for a try before 
full-back Bonneval beat Zebo to score a third.

Zebo and Scannell combined for Murray’s consolation try late on but the game 
had already been lost.
 