
A minister in Berlin’s city-state government has quit over revelations he 
concealed his East German Stasi past, leaving the ruling leftist coalition in 
turmoil.

Andrej Holm, an academic who had hidden the fact he served in the notorious 
communist police before the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, resigned as deputy 
housing minister on Monday after the mayor, Michael Mueller, called for his 
sacking.


 Holm had been appointed by the Left party, which along with Mueller’s Social 
Democrats (SPD) and the environmentalist Greens formed the first such three-way 
coalition at the state level only five weeks ago.

 The Left party has both former eastern communists and western radicals among 
its members. Some analysts believe it could join the SPD and Greens in a 
federal government after the next general election in September.

Border zones: 'Berlin in the 1980s was like an advert for hedonism'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/12/how-berlin-made-me-a-better-artist-chris-petit>
 “The SPD and Greens have made it clear to me that they won’t support me 
politically as deputy minister,” Holm said. “Mr Mueller has publicly demanded 
that I be fired and thus terminated possible cooperation in a coalition. The 
coalition itself is at a crossroads.”

 Holm had concealed details of his Stasi past in his application for a job at 
Berlin’s Humboldt University in 2005.

 When this became known he became a lightning rod for the Left party, which is 
strong in the formerly communist east. Demands he step down or be fired over 
his work for the Stasi as an 18-year-old split the city and its government 
coalition.

 Many leaders in the Left party were appalled that Mueller had attacked their 
junior minister.

 “There are many differences of opinion in the coalition and a need to clear 
certain things up,” said Katrin Lompscher, the Left party’s construction 
minister. “I regret his resignation and there’s a need for the coalition to 
talk about this.”

 The three leftist parties could have had a majority in the federal parliament 
after the 2013 election but the SPD and Greens ruled out such an alliance with 
the Left. That taboo has been gradually fading and Berlin is the first state 
where thethree-way coalition has been tested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/angela-merkels-party-suffers-slump-in-berlin-election>
.

With Reuters
 