
Law enforcement agencies are dramatically increasing their use of Opal card 
public transport data to track the movements of people inNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>, with approvals 
for data more than doubling this year.

Internal documents also reveal that police can be handed the information of 
“collateral cardholders”, or people who are not suspects, when their person of 
interest’s identity is unknown.

The details of collateral cardholders may be handed over when police request 
details of all travellers who have used their card at a particular time and 
place. That may occur, for example, when police have seen a suspect on CCTV, 
but do not know who they are.


Opal card data has been accessible without a warrant by police and other 
government authorities since mid-2014, Similar powers are used to access data 
from Go cards in Queensland, MyWay cards in the Australian Capital Territory 
and myki cards in Victoria.
interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-30T22:57:03/embed.html>
New Transport for NSW figures provided to Guardian Australia show law 
enforcement agencies tried to gain access to Opal data 327 times in 2015, and 
were successful 96 times.

The number dramatically increased this year. Law enforcement requests had 
already doubled on 2015 levels by September, with a total of 608 requests, more 
than a third of which were granted.

Transport for NSW would not say which agencies had requested the data, or how 
many of those requests came without a warrant. But documents obtained under 
freedom of information laws show that NSW police were responsible for the 
majority, while the Australian federal police made occasional requests.


More than half the access requests sought personal information rather than 
just the travel history of cardholders.

New Opal pricing: NSW public transport users can no longer 'beat system'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/new-opal-pricing-nsw-public-transport-users-can-no-longer-beat-system>
 An internal document setting out the department’s rules for releasing Opal 
data to police, seen by Guardian Australia, reveals that information on 
“collateral cardholders”, people other than the police’s person of interest, 
can be released in certain circumstances.

The document states that such requests would be inappropriate if they involved 
the disclosure of “personal information of a significant number of collateral 
cardholders without good reason (eg, more than seven)”.

Details of collateral cardholders can be released only after the ticketing and 
concession branch escalates the request to privacy specialists in another area 
of the department.

The document also states that vague or broad requests should be denied, and 
that Opal data is not to be handed to police for “general intelligence” 
purposes.


A Transport for NSW spokeswoman said there was a “rigorous framework” to deal 
with attempts to gain Opal card data, and it released information only where 
necessary to find missing people, comply with a subpoena or search warrant, or 
where it was “reasonably necessary to protect the public”.


“The protection of personal information is properly balanced with the need to 
ensure community safety and to assist NSW police in the search for missing 
persons,” she said.

“In any three-month period Transport for NSW rejects around 70% of requests 
from law enforcement agencies for Opal data, demonstrating the rigorous 
framework Transport has developed for processing requests.”

But critics have raised concerns about leaving the decision in the hands of 
the department, rather than a court.

The vice-president of the NSW Council for Civil Liberties, Pauline Wright, 
said the number of refusals showed that “inappropriate requests are surely 
being made”.

'Governments do not like freedom of information': the war on Australia's 
privacy and information watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/governments-do-not-like-freedom-of-information-the-war-on-australias-privacy-and-information-watchdog>
“Our view still is that requests for this kind of information should only be 
able to be made by warrant, rather than leaving it up to the discretion of 
Transport NSW,” she said. “Clearly there’s been a huge increase in two years in 
the number of requests, so one can only surmise that the circumstances in which 
those requests are being made are broadening.

“So as police realise how easy it is to get this, there’s a real potential 
that it’s being requested in completely inappropriate circumstances.”

Registered Opal cards contain first and last names, addresses, details of the 
preferred contact method, date of birth, and use and travel history. Concession 
card holders also have information about the identification they used to prove 
their entitlement.

The data is managed by a third-party contractor, Cubic Transportation Systems, 
and Transport for NSW has a formal agreement with NSW police about accessing 
the data. The process is subject to annual audits, the requirements of NSW 
privacy laws and the scrutiny of the privacy commissioner.

The internal rules warn department employees that: “Vague, non-specific 
intelligence gathering requests from law enforcement agencies are not 
considered to be legitimate law enforcement purposes for the disclosure of Opal 
information.”

It also cautions against providing volumes of data for a large window of time, 
except in special circumstances.
 