
Seventeen masterpieces valued at €17m (£14.3m) have been returned to Italy 
from Ukraine after beingstolen by armed robbers from a Verona art museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/art-masterpieces-stolen-gallery-italy-verona-rubens-tintoretto>
 last year.

Italian culture minister Dario Franceschini, who travelled to Kiev to retrieve 
the paintings – which included works by Rubens, Tintoretto and Mantegna – said 
the possibility of ever recovering them once seem remote. Still, the paintings 
returned with little more than scratches after their long ordeal, according to 
an art expert.

“It’s an important day, because the works are all returning to Verona intact,” 
Franceschini said. “It was an ugly story that became a beautiful story.”

Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko handed over the paintings to Franceschini 
in a ceremony in Kiev, saying “the theft of masterpiece paintings is akin to 
stealing part of the city’s heart”.

The paintings, wrapped in plastic bags, were recovered in May by Ukrainian 
border guards who intercepted them on a small island on the Dniester river 
during an attempt to smuggle them into Moldova.

They were stolen in November 2015 when three armed robbers entered the 
Castelvecchio Museum, located in a medieval castle, at closing time just before 
the alarm system was activated. The robbers calmly removed the paintings before 
escaping in a security guard’s car.

A guard at the museum, Pasquale Silvestri Riccardi, was convicted of armed 
robbery and sentenced to 10 years and eight months in prison earlier this 
month. Five others were also convicted, including Riccardi’s Moldovan 
girlfriend, who received six years, and his twin brother, who was sentenced to 
eight months.

Two Moldovans are on trial in their home country for the thefts.

Franceschini credited strong cooperation between law enforcement in the three 
countries for recovering the paintings and finding the thieves, giving 
particular praise to Italy’s carabinieri art squad. The culture minister also 
announced the government would introduce legislation this week making the theft 
or damage of Italy’s cultural heritage specific crimes with elevated penalties.

Curator Ettore Napione traveled to retrieve the paintings, studying them 
carefully with gloved hands before wrapping them for the homeward journey. The 
works were displayed in simple wooden frames made for them after they were 
recovered, because the thieves had cut the canvasses from their original 
frames, which they then discarded.

“They suffered scratches, nothing very serious,” Napione said.

The paintings are to be shown together at their home in the Castelvecchio 
Museum for about a month beginning Friday before undergoing restoration and 
reframing.
 