
High winds have brought travel chaos and power cuts to hundreds of people, as 
gusts of more than 90mph were recorded in parts of the country.

The Met Office issued severe weather warnings of wind and snow for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, the north of England and Northern 
Ireland on Wednesday.

 A gust of 93mph was recorded at High Bradfield in South Yorkshire, while 
Tiree was hit by a 77mph gust and South Uist by one of 73mph.

 The strong winds caused damage across the country overnight, with power cuts 
reported in Scotland and north-east England.

Northern Powergrid, which supplies power to homes in the north-east and 
Yorkshire, said it had 545 customers without power on Wednesday morning.

 The Forth Road Bridge near Edinburgh has been closed in both directions after 
a lorry was blown over at about 2am. No one was injured but the bridge is 
likely to remain closed for some time as the strong winds hamper recovery 
efforts.

The lorry driver has been charged. A Police Scotland spokesman said: “A 
54-year-old man has been charged following a collision on the Forth Road Bridge 
at around 2am on January 11. A report will be submitted to the procurator 
fiscal.”

 Northumbria police said trees and walls had come down overnight, with one 
street in Newcastle city centre closed because of wind damage, in which part of 
the roof of Debenhams in the Eldon Square shopping centre in Newgate Street was 
torn off. Debris was strewn across the normally busy city centre street, with a 
police cordon in place at either end.

 West Yorkshire police said there had been several road closures because of 
fallen trees.

 In Scotland, the ferry operator Caledonian MacBrayne warned of heavy 
disruption across the network, with some sailings cancelled for the rest of the 
day.

 Tricky driving conditions are expected on Wednesday as gusts of up to 75mph 
and wintry weather sweep across northern areas.

Several inches of snow could settle on higher ground in parts of Scotland, 
while lower areas will receive a dusting.

The forecaster Craig Snell said the snowfall could lead to dangerous 
conditions on the roads, and the strong winds could force bridge closures and 
cause lorry buffeting. He said the winds would drop off during the afternoon 
but pick up again by Wednesday evening, leading to a combination of wind and 
snow.

 There is also a chance of thunder and lightning, which could disrupt the 
power supply and bring “thundersnow”. Snell added that it would be “a very 
unsettled and cold day across the northern half of the country”.

 Temperatures may drop to -5C (23F) in parts of Scotland, but freezing 
conditions are possible elsewhere in England.

The forecaster said it might feel mild in the morning across the country, but 
people would notice the chill when they headed home after work. By Thursday, 
the stream of cold air will spread further south, bringing hazardous conditions 
to much of the UK.


Plummeting temperatures are expected last into the weekend due to a polar 
maritime airmass, with its origins over northern Canada, moving into northern 
Scotland and then south across the whole of the UK.


The Met Office’s snow warning extends to parts of north-west England on 
Thursday, with a risk of wintry weather in southern England, while strong winds 
and wintry showers will continue to affect Scotland.

 About 2cm of snow is possible in low-lying areas, while 10cm could fall on 
high ground.

 Snell said the next few days would be distinctly colder, with bitter weather 
across all parts of the country by Thursday. He added that it would remain 
windy and cold on Friday, with potentially large waves and coastal flooding 
down the eastern side of the country.

Freezing temperatures across Europe in recent days have led to more than a 
dozen deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/several-die-poland-european-cold-weather-snow-continues>
 and major disruption to power, water supplies and transport networks. 
Temperatures as low as -30C caused ice to form on the Adriatic Sea, the Danube 
and many small rivers, lakes and ponds.

Thousands of refugees are enduring freezing temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/greece-severe-weather-places-refugees-at-risk-and-government-under-fire>
 in flimsy tents across Greece, with reports that illness among elderly and 
infirm people have been rife.
 