
New research into heading a football has identified “significant” changes in 
brain function from routine practice.

Research reveals footballers are still heading for serious trouble | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/01/football-heading-brain-damage>
The study from the University of Stirling is the first to detect direct 
changes after players are exposed to everyday head impacts, as opposed to 
clinical brain injuries like concussion. The findings come after concerns that 
players’ brains are damaged by repeated head impacts.

The World Cup winner George Cohen has called for the game to tackle the issue 
of head injuries, saying old-style leather footballs were “nasty”.The former 
England and West Brom striker Jeff Astle died in 2002 at the age of 59, 
suffering from early onset dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/mar/22/jeff-astle-west-bromwich-albion-fa-head-injury>
 which a coroner found was caused by heading footballs and gave the cause of 
death as “industrial disease”.

A subsequent re-examination of Astle’s brain found he was suffering from the 
neuro-degenerative brain disease Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE). CTE 
can only be established following death and it has also been found in deceased 
American footballers, boxers and rugby players.

Astle’s daughter Dawn has been campaigning for more research into the matter 
and was told by the Football Association and the Professional Footballers’ 
Association in late 2014 that they were talking to Fifa. Now researchers have 
tested a group of 19 footballers by making them head a ball 20 times.

Long live The King: how the FA failed to address the case of Jeff Astle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/mar/22/jeff-astle-west-bromwich-albion-fa-head-injury>
The ball was fired from a machine designed to simulate the pace and power of a 
corner and scientists tested players’ brain function and memory before and 
immediately after the heading sessions. They were also tested after 24 hours, 
48 hours and two weeks.

Increased inhibition in the brain was detected after just a single session of 
heading. Memory test performance was also reduced between 41 and 67%, with 
effects normalising within 24 hours.

Whether the changes to the brain remain temporary after repeated exposure to a 
football and the long-term consequences of heading on brain health, are yet to 
be investigated.

The cognitive neuroscientist Dr Magdalena Ietswaart said: “In light of growing 
concern about the effects of contact sport on brain health, we wanted to see if 
our brain reacts instantly to heading a football. Using a drill most amateur 
and professional teams would be familiar with, we found there was in fact 
increased inhibition in the brain immediately after heading and that 
performance on memory tests was reduced significantly.

“Although the changes were temporary, we believe they are significant to brain 
health, particularly if they happen over and over again as they do in football 
heading. With large numbers of people around the world participating in this 
sport, it is important that they are aware of what is happening inside the 
brain and the lasting effect this may have.”

Dr Angus Hunter, from the Faculty of Health Sciences and Sport, added: “For 
the first time, sporting bodies and members of the public can see clear 
evidence of the risks associated with repetitive impact caused by heading a 
football. We hope these findings will open up new approaches for detecting, 
monitoring and preventing cumulative brain injuries in sport.

“We need to safeguard the long term health of football players at all levels, 
as well as individuals involved in other contact sports.”

Dawn Astle told the Mail on Sunday: “Would I be surprised if damaging effects 
of heading are found? No. The question is: what are they going to do about it? 
What are the authorities going to do to protect our children?”

Cohen told the Daily Telegraph in June: “You felt sick sometimes when it hit 
you. They started out at 14 to 16 ounces but, with rain, they were two or three 
pounds. Even if it hit you on the side of the head, a graze, it was really 
uncomfortable. Those early balls were really rather nasty.

“I remember sometimes being in a wall defending a free-kick and you have got 
to stand there. Some players put their head in the way. I never moved out of 
the way but I always thought: ‘This is going to bloody well hurt.’

“You are protected by your skull but what happens is [the brain] wobbles from 
side to side. And if the ball hit you from the sky when you were still on the 
ground, the feeling would go right through to your feet.”
 