
Nicola Sturgeon has again insisted she is not bluffing about her threat to 
hold a second referendum onScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> in the event of a 
hard Brexit.

The UK government “would be making a very big mistake if they think I’m in any 
way bluffing” about holding a second independence vote just as the UK quit the 
EU, the Scottish first minister told BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show.

“I’m not going to sit back while Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is driven off a hard Brexit cliff 
edge with all the implications for jobs and the type of country we are that 
that would have,” she added.

Sturgeon’s language echoed the language she and other leaders of Britain’s 
devolved governments used after a meeting with Theresa May at Downing Street in 
October. Thenshe said <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37757030>: “There is 
nothing I’m doing just now which is bluffing or game-playing; it’s not a game 
of chicken, it’s not a game at all. [I] don’t want to see Scotland driven off a 
hard Brexit cliff edge.”

Since then, Sturgeon has published a detailed paper asserting that Scotland 
would be able to maintain membership of the single market and see freedom of 
movement even if the rest of the UK were to leave the EU.

The first minister told BBC Radio Scotland on Friday that if the prime 
minister struck a soft Brexit deal with the EU, which kept the UK or Scotland 
within the single market, thenshe would put a second independence referendum 
“to one side” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/06/nicola-sturgeon-offers-shelve-independence-vote-for-soft-brexit-eu>
 for the foreseeable future. Sturgeon said she was genuinely seeking a 
compromise deal.

She insisted on the Marr show on Sunday that this proposition would allow May 
to honour her promise to English voters to quit the EU while allowing Scotland 
to keep the far closer ties to the bloc it voted for in the June referendum. It 
would mirror the deal being discussed to ensure open borders between the UK and 
Ireland post-Brexit, she added.

Sturgeon hinted she envisaged staging that snap independence vote within the 
two year deadline set by the EU once the UK triggers article 50 in March, but 
refused to set out a clear timetable or deadline on a decision to stage a new 
vote.

Constitutional experts and some within her own party, the SNP, believe 
Sturgeon’s options for a snap vote could be very limited because a final Brexit 
deal may not be clear until well into 2018 or even 2019.

With Scotland’s economy now far weaker than before the 2014 independence 
referendum, Sturgeon’s opponents believe she is using the threat of a second 
vote to press for far greater powers for the Scottish parliament as well as to 
placate her supporters.

All the opinion polls since October show Scottish voters are increasingly 
reluctant about a second poll being held before the UK leaves the EU, while 
overall support for independence has fallen back from a high of 53% immediately 
after the EU referendum to 45%.

With about a third of SNP voters opposed to EU membership, Sturgeon’s 
opponents say she faces a significant challenge to win a second independence 
vote.

But her strategists argue that level of support puts them in a strong position 
since they have not yet started a referendum campaign. The public consultation 
on a new draft bill empowering Holyrood to stage a fresh vote ends this week.

They doubt many anti-EU SNP voters would reject independence even if it meant 
EU membership. With 45% still in favour of independence, it suggests they only 
need to persuade another 210,000 Scots among the 4.1 million-strong electorate 
to vote yes to win.

Patrick Harvie, the Scottish Green party leader, told the Sunday Times his 
party would press Sturgeon to stage that second vote if there was a hard 
Brexit. His party now has six MSPs, giving Sturgeon the necessary Holyrood 
majority to pass a referendum bill.

SNP strategists believe their opponents are in a far weaker position than in 
2014, since the catastrophic collapse in Labour party support and the still 
substantial dislike for the Tories in Scotland makes it far harder to find a 
natural leader for the no campaign.

Sturgeon indicated on the Andrew Marr show that the SNP’s core message during 
a referendum would be the divisive prospect of Scotland’s fate being determined 
by rightwing Tories ruling from London for the next 20 years.

“If we’re in a position where we’ve a UK prime minister saying no compromise 
Scotland just has to shut up and like it or lump it, then the question for 
Scotland – and it’s a much more fundamental question than just the EU or Brexit 
– is are we happy with that?” she said.

“Are we happy to have no voice in the UK we simply have to accept the 
direction of travel that an increasingly rightwing UK government wants to 
impose upon us?”

Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, said the binary choice being 
offered by Sturgeon was far too rigid. Winning support from the shadow 
chancellor, John McDonnell, she said Labour’s counter-offer to reorganise the 
UK on a far more federal structure and give Holyrood far more autonomy would 
preserve the UK.

“With power returning from Brussels, it is now clear that we need a people’s 
constitutional convention and a new act of union to reform where power lies 
across the whole of our country,” Dugdale said.
 