
The temperature of European club rugby is traditionally taken twice per year, 
once in January and then again in May. This season the thermometer has been 
abruptly snatched from Celtic mouths and hurled clean across the ward. The 
presence of five English and three French clubs in the quarter-finals of the
Champions Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-rugby-champions-cup> 
has potential implications for everybody’s future health.

What does it all mean? Ireland have won the last two Six Nations titles but 
suddenly lack a single quarter-final European representative – aside from 
Connacht in the Challenge Cup – for the first time in 18 years.

Wales have drawn a blank once again, as have Scotland and Italy. No league has 
ever had five sides in the last eight as the Premiership now does. There is 
already guaranteed to be at least one English team in the final.

Scarlets look a shadow of Llanelli while Northampton go marching on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/scarlets-shadow-llanelli-northampton-champions-cup>
Dig slightly deeper, though, and the picture becomes less clear-cut. Which 
countries reared the head coaches masterminding Wasps andSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>? Why, Wales and Ireland. Who 
comprehensively beat one of the wealthiest teams in Europe, Racing 92, at the 
weekend? Glasgow Warriors.

And how come the vast majority of Challenge Cup pool winners, Grenoble 
included, have Irish coaches at the heart of their respective set-ups? 
Confusing, isn’t it?

In truth, this was always going to be an unusual season. The World Cup cut 
across everyone’s domestic preparations, for better or worse, and the early 
season cancellations because of the Paris terrorist atrocities caused further 
disruption. Squads also tend to ebb and flow to a greater degree in the season 
immediately after a World Cup;Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> and Clermont, to name but two 
previous giants, are clearly in rebuilding phases.

That said, there are plenty of warning signs flashing for the Pro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> teams. The Irish Times has already 
crunched down into the numbers and come up with some grim reading: Leinster, 
Ulster and Munster all lost home and away to English opposition for the first 
time in the same campaign, failing to pick up even a solitary losing bonus 
point in the process. The try aggregate was 23-6 in favour of the English and 
the average margin was more than 16 points.

The revised format of the 20-team Champions Cup, making it slightly harder for 
some teams to qualify automatically via the Pro12, has also complicated life, 
making it less easy to target Europe as specifically as they once did. Italian 
rugby, self-evidently, needs rebooting.

Such small things tend to accumulate over time but the knock-on effects could 
be profound. As Alun Wyn Jones observed on Sunday evening, after hisOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> side had been swept aside by Exeter 
Chiefs, playing on pure emotion will gain you the odd decent win but is hard to 
sustain over an entire campaign. And maybe therein lies the key: rugby never 
stands still and sides relying on tribal passion and what they did even a 
couple of seasons ago can swiftly come unstuck.

Strip away nationalistic flags and banners and who played the best, most 
dynamic rugby throughout the pool phases? Saracens, Wasps, Racing Metro and
Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter>, probably in that order, with 
an honourable mention for Glasgow this month. And guess what? The 
aforementioned quartet all topped their pools, averaging three or four tries 
per game in the process, while Leicester’s new, more free-flowing style was 
also rewarded.

Only Northampton and Toulon, who scored just nine tries in six games, have 
made it through on the back of slower-paced gameplans and, in both cases, were 
slightly fortunate to do so. Both could well emerge stronger in April and May 
but will only progress to the final if they actively seek to raise their games 
and attack with more precision.

The expensively-maintained elephant in the room, of course, is money.

The expansion of the salary cap in England and the increase in television 
revenue has closed the gap with the French, some of whom are less obsessed by 
Europe than others. In comparison the television revenue generated by the Pro12 
is modest and none of that league’s clubs has the luxury of being able to carry 
the £45.1 million worth of debt currently shown on Saracens’ most recent set of 
financial accounts.

It is certainly allowing the Premiership sides to put together deeper squads, 
although that failed to helpBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>, the 
best resourced of the lot and the only English side not to make the knock-out 
stages. Money alone cannot buy rugby happiness; it needs to be allied to clear 
thinking, forward-looking coaching and shrewd recruitment. Exeter are a 
testament to all three and are increasingly reaping the benefits.

Momentum also plays a part. The five English qualifiers are all in the top six 
of the Premiership. In contrast the three French contenders are lying first, 
fourth and 11th in the Top 14. But hold on. The Scarlets sit atop the Pro12 yet 
still lost all six of their European pool games. For the future collective 
well-being of European club rugby, that is perhaps the most worrying symptom of 
all.

Eddie’s ready

English rugby needed a dispassionate eye to sift through the post-World Cup 
debris and, inEddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones>, they 
have recruited a man prepared to tell it like it is on a daily basis. The Six 
Nations has not even kicked off and already Jones has put his finger on the one 
thing, above anything else, that needs to change if England are to become 
successful again.

“There is a big difference between playing for England and winning for 
England,” stressed Jones this week. “Maybe in the past it has been enough to 
win a cap without winning and the results would certainly indicate that. When I 
showed the players where we are ranked since 2003 (in terms of Six Nations 
titles) I think they were relatively shocked. At the moment we are in the 
bottom three teams of Europe.

“To change that is about 3% – but that 3% is hard because it is doing all the 
things you don’t want to do. Everyone does want they want to do, players don’t 
want to do what they don’t want to do. It’s about having the motivation, desire 
and sacrifice to do that extra 3%.” England’s reality check has only just begun.

Worth watching

Saracens v Bath: Some Six Nations men will be missing but, regardless of 
team-sheets, Bath are entering a precarious stage of their season. Out of 
Europe and stuck in the bottom half of the Premiership, they badly need to 
kick-start their season with immediate effect. Their league run-in is not the 
easiest and the wet weather has not suited their preferred style. Saracens, in 
contrast, are rampant and cannot be relied upon to drop the ball over the 
try-line as the unfortunate Owen Farrell did in Toulouse last weekend. This 
pre-Six Nations aperitif will reveal much about morale in both camps.
 