
Ile de Ré, France 


Holidays with toddlers are tough. We've tried it all, from self-drive in South 
Africa to house swaps in Savannah, but our fondest memories are reserved for 
the Ile de Ré. On our summer hols last year we camped at Les Amis de la Plage, 
a lovely site by the beach with none of the big holiday park fuss, just 
brilliant, clean facilities including child-sized sinks and toilets, a baby 
changing area and purpose-designed shellfish washing stations. On the beach, 
there were pools at low tide for the kids to play in and surprisingly passable 
surf for me at high tide. We stocked up each day at the local market in Le 
Bois-Plage-en-Ré and then headed back to camp to consume the vast quantities of 
delicious claret and shellfish we'd bought. In the evenings, we often headed to 
Saint-Martin-de-Ré for a sunset stroll and dark chocolate ice cream from La 
Martinière, absolute bliss.
• Pitches at Les Amis de la Plage (+33 546092401, les-amis-de-la-plage.com 
<http://www.les-amis-de-la-plage.com/>) cost from €22 (high season) 
Ben Colclough, director of tourdust.com <http://www.tourdust.com/>

Princes' Islands, Turkey
 Photograph: Alamy 
Burgazada, one of the Princes' Islands in the Sea of Marmara near Istanbul, is 
a weekend retreat that's sleepy the rest of the time. Keen for a relaxed, 
self-catering break but also hooked on Byzantine mosaics, the Hall family 
(including George, then two-and-a-half, and Harry, nine months) spent a 
blissful week here early last summer. After morning pastries, fresh juices and 
Turkish coffee by the harbour, a 45-minute ferry ride (£2) slowly brought the 
city into view before docking at Kabataş, on the European shore. 
Transport-obsessed toddlers will love that Hagia Sophia is a tram ride away, 
while Taksim Square can be reached by funicular. Locals loved our boys, and 
ferry journeys were unexpected fun with them both getting plenty of attention. 
Car-free Burgazada can be toured by horse and buggy, or you could do as we did 
and just hang out by the pool until it was time for dinner on the quayside.
• To rent the Serenity apartment on Burgazada for £650-£1,450 a week, see 
holidaylettings.co.uk <http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/istanbul/105721>
Tom Hall, Lonely Planet 

Mull
 Calgary Bay, perhaps Scotland's best sandy beach. 
The Isle of Mull is second only to Skye in the Inner Hebrides for size and 
population, and it's a wonderful place for a family holiday. Just getting here, 
usually via the beautiful ferry ride from Oban, is an adventure – and if the 
weather's right the views from the breezy upper deck are a wonderful way to 
leave the real world behind. The ferry docks at Craignure, from where a 
45-minute drive brings you to journey's end at Calgary Bay, arguably Scotland's 
best sandy beach. The former Calgary Hotel is a collection of self-catering 
properties – a week at Limetree Cottage costs £515 – £615 and makes the perfect 
base if the weather's fine – and a cosy retreat if your luck's out. Close by, 
Tobermoray – the setting for the television series Balamoray – has a great fish 
and chip van on the harbour wall. Mull has plenty of lovely short walks which 
can easily be tackled with small people in backpacks.
• Limetree Cottage (+44 (0)1688 400256, calgary.co.uk/limetree.html 
<http://www.calgary.co.uk/limetree.html>) costs from £405-£615 to rent for a 
week
Tom Hall, Lonely Planet 

Lanzarote

It was a bit of a surprise to find that fly-and-flop holidays are still 
possible with baby in tow. We took Lola, then six months, to Lanzarote for an 
autumn break at Casa Katharina, a smart but affordable house on a peaceful, if 
nondescript, estate near Playa Blanca on the island's south-eastern side. Big 
hits included Sky TV and an outdoor pizza oven/bbq (dad), the garden's giant 
cacti (Lola), the absence of almost anything to do (mum) and the private heated 
pool (everyone).

The Canarian air was magically soporific, even for a teething baby, but if 
you're likely to bore of a relaxed swim-read-snooze routine, there's a wide, 
buggy-friendly promenade a five-minute walk away. In one direction you'll find 
crashing waves and solitude, in the other an unpretentious resort with a small 
play park and relaxed beach bar where grinning waiters coo at children while 
parents drink beer with toes in the sand.
• See Lanz Luxury Villas (+44 (0)121 275090, lanzluxuryvillas.com) 
<http://www.lanzluxuryvillas.com/>
Emily Mathieson, Word of Mouth editor at Condé Nast Traveller

Cabo Cope, Murcia, Spain
 Photograph: Alamy 
I'd never heard of the Cabo Cope before, but was immediately intrigued by the 
prospect of unspoiled Spanish Mediterranean coastline. And realising that it is 
threatened by yet another concrete resort project, we decided to go down and 
see it for ourselves. This was as close as I could get to Laurie Lee's 
experience when he first arrived on the Costa del Sol, I thought: arid 
mountains cascade unhindered by man towards the sea. It was perfect for driving 
along dirt tracks to find private beaches of crystalline water – shallow enough 
for toddlers, but with excellent snorkelling opportunities for adults too.

We stayed at the Mayarí Hotel, in Calabardina, a pleasant oasis overlooking 
the sea, run by a child-friendly couple; a babysitting service was available 
and they were soon treating our little one as though he were part of the family.
• Doubles at Mayari Hotel (+34 968 419748, hotel-mayari.com) 
<http://www.hotel-mayari.com/en> from €76.50 
Jason Webster, author of five books on Spain, including Or the Bull Kills You 
(Chatto & Windus) a detective novel set in Valencia

Isola d'Elba, Tuscany, Italy
 Photograph: Atlantide Phototravel 
One of the joys of holidaying with under-fives is that you're not bound by the 
tyranny of the school calendar. Elban beaches that are unvisitable during 
Italian school holidays in August are quiet in May, when the island's wild 
flowers bloom, and even June. Perfect white-sand crescents at Fetovaia and 
Cavoli, on the island's south-west, make a great photo, but Sant'Andrea on the 
north coast is a tiny rock-pooler's dream. Away from the crystal waters, my 
little ones love the open, boneshaker cable car ride to the 1,019m summit of 
Monte Capanne, for views as far as Corsica and right up the Tuscan coast. Just 
remember to hold on to their hands, and your hats … ours are still up there 
somewhere.

There's plenty of seafood on every menu, but at informal La Bussola, in 
Portoferraio, we can sample some serious flavours, such as the signature dish 
of steamed salt cod on shredded leeks and chickpea puree – and the kids share a 
pizza. The island's best family accommodation is the boutique complex of 
affordable, spacious apartments at Casa Campanella, near Capoliveri. Ask them 
to book your ferry crossing from Piombino, to guarantee the best fare.
• Apartments at Casa Campanella (casacampanella.it 
<http://www.casacampanella.it/>) cost from €560 a week for two to three people
Donald Strachan, author of Tuscany, Umbria & Florence With Your Family 
(£12.99), published this week by Frommer's

Wind in the Willows caravan, Wales

 Wind in the Willows, Wales. 
This gorgeous Romany caravan, made for a recent film of Wind in the Willows, 
is hidden away on top of a hay meadow in stunning Monmouthshire countryside. 
The caravan itself is compact – there's just one large double bed – so it can 
only furnish a holiday for a small family: my husband, my six-year-old daughter 
and I squashed in happily enough. I'm not generally a fan of camping, but this 
was more comfortable than the usual, because a touch of luxury is provided by 
the off-grid cabin just a few feet away – the interior is worthy of an 
interiors magazine, with a sofa, large oven, dining table and a shower. But the 
most magical part was cooking meals over an open fire, with wood from the 
nearby copse, then getting tucked up inside the caravan at night and falling 
asleep to the occasional hooting of owls.
• Prices range from £168- £258 for a two-night stay (+44 (0)844 500 5101, 
underthethatch.co.uk/willows) <http://www.underthethatch.co.uk/>
Harriet Green, editor of the Guardian's Family section 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/family?INTCMP=SRCH>

Brittany, France

 La Maison des Lamours, Brittany 
Ten minutes inland from the seaside town of Binic, La Maison des Lamour is a 
collection of four cottages and five B&B rooms set on a former farm. The decor 
is stylish country – a sleek combination of modern furniture and accessories 
(free-standing baths, a chandelier of tea lights, slate-tiled walls) and 
antique finds (old picture frames and books decorate the bedrooms), with 
splashes of Cath Kidston-style floral cuteness. All of which will appeal to 
design conscious parents, though just as important is the kids' paraphernalia – 
cots, high chairs etc, which make this a hassle-free family retreat. Breakfast 
(for B&B guests) of local breads, pancakes and jam will please adults and 
children alike. Outside there's a large wooden fort for kids to let their 
imaginations run wild, along with a slide and swings, tunnels, a wooden horse, 
and a field full of ponies to ride in summer – and a river with pedalo hire. 
With a restaurant and farm shop on site, you could easily while away your days 
without getting into the car once, but the Lamours will happily recommend 
places to visit and eat in the area.
• B&B from €75 (high season); cottages from €580 per week (peak season) (+33 2 
96 74 13 63,lamaisondeslamour.com <http://www.lamaisondeslamour.com/>)
Jane Anderson, author of Brittany with Kids, published in May by Footprint 
<http://www.footprinttravelguides.com/live/index.php>

Osea Island, Essex
 Osea Island, Essex. 
The Essex commuter belt is not the obvious place to look for a secret island 
untouched by time, but that's what makes Osea so exciting. Until last year, 
this private island in the Blackwater Estuary near Maldon was run as an 
exclusive rehab clinic and recording studio. In January, it opened to the 
public for the first time in more than 100 years as a low-key holiday retreat 
offering self-catering accommodation in a collection of stylish weatherboarded 
18th century cottages, a couple of beach houses and a grand Edwardian manor 
house which can sleep up to 20. Sailing and fishing trips can be organised, but 
the emphasis is on simple pleasures: beachcombing, foraging for berries and 
samphire, swimming, birdwatching and nature walks. Young children will love the 
chance to collect eggs from the hens, pick fruit from the orchard and visit the 
island's two resident donkeys. Osea can be reached by road just twice in every 
24 hours, when the waters recede to reveal a causeway built by the Romans 
across the rocky river bed. Although you are really just a 90-minute drive or a 
40-minute train ride from London, when the tide comes in and the causeway 
disappears, the sensation of being cut off from the rest of the world is 
complete.
• Prices range from £263-£512 for a week at the Sweet Shop, a one-bedroom 
cottage (07810 753226,oseaisland.co.uk) <http://www.oseaisland.co.uk/> 
Joanne O'Connor, travel writer

Kent 
 Fishermen's Huts in Whitstable. 
Kids love the novelty factor of the Fishermen's Huts in Whitstable, Kent. 
They're like supersized versions of Dad's garden shed, but with bedrooms, 
kitchenette and a bright green wooden front door that opens directly onto the 
beach. The paved beachside path is ideal for cycling, tricycling, scootering, 
toddling, or purposefully pushing a toy pram back and forth all day long – and 
it's just a few car-free steps away. Let the kids explore while you sample some 
of the best oysters in England and take in the picturesque pebble beach and 
striking fishing boats. The huts may not be glamorously furnished and the 
stairs are a bit steep for young ones, but it's the perfect seaside crash pad 
for beach-bound boys and girls.
• The Fishermen's Huts can be booked through the Hotel Continental, Whitstable 
(01227 280280,hotelcontinental.co.uk) <http://www.hotelcontinental.co.uk/>; 
family huts from £115 per night. The world-renowned Royal Native Oyster Stores (
whitstableoystercompany.com <http://www.whitstableoystercompany.com/>) can be 
found along the path. For cycle hire, including children's bikes, child 
trailers and tag-alongs, contactwhitstablecyclehire.com 
<http://www.whitstablecyclehire.com/>
Jonathan Knight is editor of Cool Camping <http://www.coolcamping.co.uk/> and 
Cool Places <http://www.coolplacesguides.com/> guides

This article was amended on 21 April 2011 correcting the price for Casa 
Campanella, Elba, from €1,900 a week to €560 a week.
 