
Keep it simple, Umbria, Italy


Tuscany and Umbria have a reputation for being stuffed to the salami-hung 
rafters with braying, posh types in raspberry chinos, but it's easy to steer 
clear of the Chianti-quaffing crowds. The solar-powered Locanda della Quercia 
Calante on the Umbria/Tuscany border is a peaceful, eco-friendly agriturismo. 
The emphasis is on the simple things in life: good food (home cooked and mainly 
organic); wellbeing (Iyengar yoga in the onsite studio), and chilling. Even the 
wine is biodynamic, which must be good for you, surely? Owner Fausto makes much 
of the fact that the property is built on leylines and the rooms are free of 
magnetic fields, which he claims makes for a better night's rest. We were 
sceptical until my insomniac partner slept longer and deeper than he had in 
years. By day you can mooch around nearby towns – historic Orvieto is 18km away 
– and spookily quiet medieval villages. Evenings are for wining and dining in 
the cosy restaurant. We made the mistake on the first day of accepting second 
helpings of the fantastic meat-free lasagne, only to realise it was just a 
starter. Perhaps it's not the leylines that ensure a good night's kip.
• Doubles from €60B&B; +39 0763 627199, querciacalante.com 
<http://querciacalante.com/>
Isabel Choat, Guardian online travel editor 

Very fine dining, Copenhagen, Denmark
 Christian Puglisi at Relae 
Unless you're the kind of person who precision-plans their leisure time, you 
probably won't book a holiday in Copenhagen sufficiently far in advance to get 
a table at Noma, namedBest Restaurant in the World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/18/noma-copenhagen-worlds-best-restaurant>
 for the second year running. But at Relæ (restaurant-relae.dk 
<http://www.restaurant-relae.dk>), former Noma head chef Christian Puglisi 
cooks in a way that's just as surprising and inventive, and a good deal 
cheaper. And Geranium (geranium.dk <http://www.geranium.dk>; this year singled 
out by Michelin as a rising star) is equally brilliant, in more of a polished, 
big-night-out way. Aamaan's Etablissement (aamanns.dk <http://www.aamanns.dk>) 
was our favourite lunch spot, mainly for its steak tartare and citrus-and-spice 
marinated salmon. And for mornings after, the great coffee and the brunch menu 
(plus the cosy sheepskin-covered chairs) at café/deli Gourmandiet (
gourmandiet.dk <http://www.gourmandiet.dk>) made our hangovers almost 
pleasurable.
• Doubles at 71 Nyhavn, a converted, canal-side spice warehouse, cost from 
£110 (+45 3343 6200,71nyhavnhotel.com <http://www.71nyhavnhotel.com/>)
Jenny McIvor, food writer

Romantic retreat, Carswell Farm, Devon

 beach hut 
Arrive in daylight and wear sensible shoes, the instructions from Carswell 
Farm advised. We pulled up after midnight after the long drive to south Devon. 
The directions from the farmhouse to the impossibly secluded Beach Hut were 
clear, but scrambling across cliff tops with bags and very unsensible footwear, 
we had only an inadequate torch and the alarming sound of crashing waves to 
make sure our romantic holiday didn't start with the wrong sort of splash. Once 
there we just climbed the little ladder to our bed in the eaves, so the next 
morning, we were unprepared for the picture-book adorableness of our 
surroundings. The Beach Hut is fairly basic, but no less lovely for that: 
there's no electricity, but a woodburner and gas hob – and a wood-burning hot 
tub outside (everything is eco, including the loo)! And then there's the view – 
this beach hut gives new meaning to the idea of a private beach. Nestled in a 
cove, unreachable except by that rocky footpath, this is as hidden-away a 
hideaway as you could dream of. It isn't cheap, but you could travel the world 
and not find such a romantic retreat. If the sun shines it is bliss, and if it 
rains it is bliss too.
• Two nights at the Beach Hut costs £450 (optional organic dinner hamper £45); 
+44 (0)1752 830020,carswellcottages.com/thebeachhut 
<http://www.carswellcottages.com/thebeachhut/>
Lisa Allardice, editor of Guardian Review

Life after children, Sicily

 Photograph: Alamy 
"Why've we stopped?" whined our eldest, then 14. "There's nothing here!" 
"Here" was a quaint Italian riverside village with a bar with Prosecco on tap, 
but this was when we realised we'd have to put more effort into holidays with 
teens. So for a few years it was activities (rafting, canyoning) and cities 
(they loved Amsterdam). But teenagers grow up, go to university, and suddenly 
mooching around Europe is possible again. And cheap. Term time in Sicily and 
not only were hotel rooms almost half the summer price, half-board was 
sometimes thrown in. We stayed at friendly Pensione Tranchina in Scopello, an 
hour from Palermo, and ticked off all the things our offspring would have 
moaned about. No pool, tiny rocky beach, no shops, nothing to do after dinner 
except sit chatting with the owner over adigestivo. Worst of all, the rugged 
Zingaro natural park stretches for 7km up the coast, with footpaths for long 
bracing walks. There were even – horror! –wild flowers. Some things the 
youngsters would have liked: the fantastic food, and especially our cute black 
hired Fiat Cinquecento. But that's the sort of iconic vehicle only the 
child-free can bomb around Italy in. No room in the back for long teenage legs. 
Shucks, kids.
• Pensione Tranchina (+39 0924 541099, pensionetranchina.com 
<http://www.pensionetranchina.com>) offers half-board from €55pp per night
Liz Boulter, travel writer

Canaries in style, Lanzarote
 v 
Forget the sun, sand and sex-on-the-beach stereotype; there's another side to 
Lanzarote. Away from the big resorts, the easternmost of the Canaries is a 
heady mix of wild volcanic landscapes, surfer-friendly beaches, theatrical 
modernist architecture and vineyards made up of volcanic stone circles that 
could have been designed by Andy Goldsworthy. You can reach them all easily 
enough from the coastal resorts with a hire car, but a much better idea is to 
base yourself at Caserío de Mozaga, an 18th-century country house in the centre 
of the island that's been turned into a very stylish boutique B&B with 
restaurant. Or you could book into a luxury yurt and cosy up under canvas at 
Finca de Arrieta on the north-east coast.
• Doubles at Caserío de Mozaga cost from €63 (+34 92 852 0060, 
caseriodemozaga.com <http://caseriodemozaga.com>). Yurts at Finca de Arrieta 
cost from £385 a week (lanzaroteretreats.com <http://lanzaroteretreats.com>)
Rhiannon Batten, travel writer

Grecian splendour, Kefalonia

Along a rambling road near Fiscardo in the north of Kefalonia lay our cottage, 
Villa Trizoni. It had all the ingredients for a romantic break – the bare 
minimum, but done in style. We had three gorgeous bedrooms at our disposal, an 
airy open plan living space of white sofas, and an infinity pool surrounded by 
funky day beds. There was almost nothing to do, but that was fine by us – all 
we wanted was to loll around in the sunshine and spend time together. Then it 
poured with rain all week. Instead of languorous afternoons in the pool our 
memories are of drinking Mythos beer behind a rain-splashed plastic awning, 
paddling in the drizzle at beautiful Daf Noudi beach, and getting caught in a 
dramatic storm while half-way across to the neighbouring island of Ithaca in 
our rented motorboat. There, we were revived at the magical Polyphemus 
restaurant by an inebriated communist chef who fed us Che Guevara rum and 
sun-dried octopus for hours, then insisted he drive us back to the harbour. We 
even made up a silly song about Polyphemus which make us feel like teenagers 
recalling their first kiss when we sing it now.
• Villa Trizoni has weeks available in May, July and August, from £1,239 a 
week, withholidaylettings.co.uk <http://holidaylettings.co.uk/>. Villa 
Zouzouni, next door, sleeps two from £885 a week, and has weeks left in August
Gemma Bowes, Guardian Travel editor

Mountain highs, Slovenia 

 Nebesa Slovenia 
We'd seen photos of the Soca Valley, and read reviews about the chic mountain 
retreat called Nebesa. But nothing prepared us for the staggering Alpine beauty 
of the region – flower-filled meadows, crystal-clear rivers and lakes – nor the 
views from Nebesa's chalets; snow-capped mountains to the east, endless valleys 
to the west, trailing down to the Adriatic. Four glass-fronted chalets are the 
base from which to soak up these views. From our terrace, we watched a storm 
come in, then get chased away by glorious sunshine. We hiked up the mountain 
one day and white-water rafted down the turquoise Soca the next. In the evening 
we took at taxi toHisa Franko <http://www.hisafranko.com>, Slovenia's answer to 
The Fat Duck, for a sublime gourmet feast. The X factor at Nebesa isn't the 
luxuriousness of the hotel – it's actually fairly simple. What makes it so 
special is the setting and the isolation: it's a perfect place to hole up with 
a partner.
• Two-night stays from €255 for two including breakfast and use of bikes (
i-escape.com/nebesa.php <http://www.i-escape.com/nebesa/overview>) 
Liz Simpson, deputy editor, i-escape

Surf and city, Biarritz, France

I thought a trip to Biarritz would be ironically glam: pink cocktails and 
discotheques, that kind of thing. But at some point since the 1980s, it had 
morphed into a quietly hip surfing mecca. My then-boyfriend suddenly looked 
interested. We camped under the pines in the main surfie site at Anglet and 
walked down to the beach every morning. Compensating for the lack of kitsch, 
the boyfriend even serenaded me with Elvis Presley on the sand. Surf by day, 
cosmopolitan comforts by night: we ate outside at pretty old clifftop 
restaurants, drank wine from Gérard Dépardieu's nearby vineyards, and wandered 
along the pier that juts from the spectacular coastline out through the 
breakers. A little black dress and a surfboard are all you need in this town 
wherela bonne vie meets Endless Summer.
• Biarritz Camping (+33 5 5923 0012, biarritz-camping.fr 
<http://www.biarritz-camping.fr/>) charges from €23 for a pitch in summer. 
Hotel Alcyon (+33 5 5922 6460,hotel-alcyon-biarritz.com 
<http://www.hotel-alcyon-biarritz.com>) has doubles from €105 in summer
Sophie Cooke, novelist

Beers and pintxos, San Sebastián, Spain 

 Photograph: Alamy 
We took the Eurostar to Paris and the sleeper train to Hendaye. When we woke, 
it was a short hop over the border to San Sebastián – or Donostia, as it is 
known by its Basque inhabitants. We chose from one of scores of affordable 
pensions in the beguilingparte vieja (old town). We spent lazy days on the 
city's beautiful beaches, and late nights bar-hopping. The city specialises in
pintxos, simple Basque tapas: we wandered from tavern to tavern, greedily 
sampling as many as we could. For a once-in-lifetime meal, try to get a table 
at legendary restaurant Arzak (arzak.info <http://www.arzak.info>), ranked 
eighth in the world 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/interactive/2010/apr/26/worlds-50-best-restaurants-2010>
. We relaxed at La Perla (la-perla.net <http://www.la-perla.net>), a beachside 
spa; visited Eduardo Chillida's wave-lashed sculptures in La Concha Bay; and 
climbed Mount Urgull for the castle, enormous Jesus Christ statue and panoramic 
views. We bought a couple of beers just as the basic hilltop bar was closing 
and sat alone by the fig trees, watching the sun set over the bay.
• For travel details see seat61.com/Spain.htm <http://seat61.com/Spain.htm> 
Rachel Dixon, travel writer

I left my heart in San Francisco

I'd been obsessed by San Francisco since reading Armistead Maupin's Tales of 
the City series – the rolling hills, the smell of marijuana, the glamorous 
casualties of a life lived as though every day was 1969 – but it wasn't until 
my 27th birthday that I finally visited, a surprise present from my boyfriend, 
who'd been choking on the secret for months. It was San Francisco I'd had in 
mind when I chose to move to Brighton for university, where the lovely gayness 
and scattered vintage shops charmed me, briefly. But it took a week in a budget 
downtown hotel – queuing for breakfasts at Dottie's True Blue cafe, taking shy 
photos outside the house Maupin was inspired by – an afternoon in Alcatraz, and 
various second-hand clothing purchases along Haight Street, for me to convince 
my boyfriend that this, one day, should be our home. Plans are in motion ...
• Hotel Majestic (+1 415 441 1100, thehotelmajestic.com) has period styling 
and doubles from $115; at the other end of the aesthetic spectrum Hotel Tomo 
(+1 415 921 4000,jdvhotels.com/tomo)  <http://www.jdvhotels.com/tomo> offers 
brightly coloured Japanese pop art and doubles from $129
Eva Wiseman, columnist, Observer magazine
 