
1 What the royal prerogative is

Fundamental to the government case is this prerogative conferring ancient 
royal powers, including to make treaties, on politicians. The government argues 
that it is these powers that allow ministers to trigger article 50 without 
parliamentary legislation.

2 The government could have saved itself a lot of trouble if it had legislated 
for what would happen in the event of a vote for Brexit

The European Referendum Act 2015, which determined that a vote would take 
place, was silent on what would happen next. By contrast, legislation on the 
2011 alternative vote referendum obliged the government to change the law 
accordingly if a “yes” vote occurred.

3 Contrary to what some would have us believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/may-must-disassociate-herself-from-vitriolic-abuse-of-judiciary-by-daily-mail>
, the supreme court justices are not intent on defeating the will of the people

 Two justices, including the court’s president, Lord Neuberger, even suggested 
that the parliamentary motion – subsequently carried – to trigger article 50 
might preclude the need for legislation. Lawyers for the respondents insist 
that an act of parliament is necessary.

4 The case has highlighted the importance,  in the absence of a written 
constitution,of the supreme court

As well as interpreting the scope of the royal prerogative, it is being asked 
to tackle questions about the devolution settlement.

Brexit: article 50 supreme court hearing final day – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/08/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-four-live-updates>
5 Interpreting law can be as much about what it does not say as what it does 
say

The government contends that because the European Referendum Act 2015 made no 
provision preventing the use of its prerogative, it follows it can use it to 
trigger article 50. But the other side claims that because there was nothing in 
the act about the legal effect of the referendum, it was only advisory and so 
parliamentary legislation is required.


6 Scotland is not seeking to veto Brexit

 James Wolffe QC, the lord advocate representing the Scottish government, 
confirmed this. But given the impact on Scottish citizens, he said the UK 
government should seek a legislative consent motion from Holyrood, which 
requires the Scottish parliament to approve any changes in its powers and 
responsibilities.


7 What a Henry VIII clause is

This is a provision added to a bill to enable ministers to repeal or amend it 
after it has become an act of parliament. Article 2(2) European Communities Act 
1972 allowed ministers to amend UK law to comply with EU acts.


8 Constitutional law does not make great television

As befitting such an important case, both Sky and the BBC broadcast most of 
the opening day’s proceedings on their news channels but coverage tailed off as 
the case progressed. Intricate legal argument, arcane vocabulary and historical 
precedents have not proved to be riveting viewing.


9 Lawyers have a special kind of humour

 There was much mirth over the pronunciation of De Keyser, the most important 
historical case on the royal prerogative, which culminated with Lord Pannick QC 
quipping: “You say DeKeezer, I say De Kaiser.”


10 And they are not averse to making sartorial statements

Lord Sumption wore a piano keyboard design tie on one day and on another a 
colourful 2012 Olympic Team GB tie, interpreted by some as a reassurance of his 
patriotism or a gesture of support for the master of the rolls, Sir Terence 
Etherton, formerly an Olympic fencer, one of three high court judgesbranded 
“enemies of the people” by the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
.

 