
The window of my room here looks south-west, over the rooftops of a Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> suburb draped over the foothills of 
the Pennines, and through it I watch the endless traffic of the sky all day; 
the fleets of clouds steaming past on their journey from coast to coast, the 
planes etching contrails that wobble tipsily in the winds.

Recently, the sky has seemed muted, in the way it often does when the light is 
at its leanest and the weather settles for grey neutrality. But a marvel of 
midwinter is how even the most austere, threadbare days can give rise to the 
most lavish of sunsets.

At this time of year, the sun sets directly before the window, often inducing 
me to leave my desk and walk a few streets to where, in that typically 
Sheffield way, the city abruptly terminates, and clean-scrubbed streets of 
bungalows give way instantly to expanses of high-raised farmland.

Northern lights illuminate the Pennine skies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/27/northern-lights-illuminate-pennine-skies-northumberland-country-diary>
From here, long arms of land slope down into the city, beyond which the only 
things interrupting the flat horizon are distant cooling towers. A huge feeling 
of space pervades; the sky can seem so big up here it produces a sort of 
inverted vertigo.


The strangest example of a surprise sunset happened a few days ago. All day 
the sky had been white noise, as if nature had decided it was not worth filling 
in the space. But shortly before the day died, luridly bright streaks of pink 
and purple began appearing, then spread like a bright bruise until a whole half 
of the sky was soaked in neon.


It was a sunless sunset, as if it emanating from within the cloud itself. 
Abstracted from its source, the glow had an eerie, almost lifelike 
phosphorescence, and perhaps even something of the arctic magic of the aurora.

A living smoke of starlings curled above the treetops, and an owl swooped on 
something in a dark fold of field. After 15 minutes, the furnace-glare of the 
Sheffield sky breathed its last and the long, cold night descended again.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>







 