
The Swedish government wants the issue of the rights of EU citizens in the UK 
and British people settled elsewhere inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to be resolved urgently and 
removed from the Brexit negotiating table as quickly as possible.

Ann Linde, the Swedish minister for EU affairs and trade, said she was shocked 
by the uncertainty and xenophobia experienced by Swedes in the UK since the 
referendum.

She said the future of an estimated 100,000 Swedish people in Britain and 
30,000 British people inSweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>, had 
to be urgently dealt with. She said: “This is one of the very most important 
issues and we have to solve it in a very constructive way in the first part of 
the negotiations.”


German neuroscientist also told to leave UK after residency rejection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/german-neuroscientist-told-to-leave-uk-residency-application-rejected-monique-hawkins>
She was speaking in central London following a meeting with Swedish citizens 
and ahead of a meeting withDavid Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>, the Brexit secretary. The 
British government has said it would like to guarantee EU citizens the right to 
live in the UK but it cannot unless the guarantee is reciprocated by the other 
27 member states.

Asked if she could give assurances to British people in Sweden, Linde said 
that was an EU-wide issue and not something her country could offer 
unilaterally. “I don’t offer anything. This is part of the EU negotiation that 
is conducted by the EU commission,” shesaid. “What I hope is we have a 
negotiation result where the Swedes who live in Britain can continue to do so 
and the Brits who stay in Sweden continue to do so.”


Swedish citizens at the Scandinavian Kitchen cafe in central London told her 
of the anxieties about their future and xenophobic abuse they had experienced 
since the referendum.

One woman working in the City told how her chief executive had to send an 
email to all employees to tell them xenophobic behaviour was not acceptable 
after she was told by a colleague that the country had voted to get people like 
her to “get out”. Another told her how she felt that she and other Swedes would 
end up being “collateral damage” in negotiations.

Caroline Brodde, who is studying political economy at King’s College London 
told her: “Before you came here you had plan A; now you have to have plan B, C 
and D. “I was always quite sure why I wanted to come here. Now you have to 
consider a multiple of outcomes, you have to realise that you may not be able 
to live in London and have to consider, do I live in Berlin or somewhere else?”

She said she didn’t in any way feel threatened, but felt Swedish people had to 
take control of their own futures because they were not part of the political 
mix. “It’s not like they are going to throw us out. It’s not like there is open 
animosity, but it’s that we are not on the cards. The fact is we are going to 
be collateral damage,”

Another woman told Linde how she was currently being headhunted for a major 
job in London but had been asked to sign a contract guaranteeing her rights to 
permanent residency in the UK, something she said she could not do.

Linde said: “I am astonished at what I heard. What is worrying is that they 
are giving me evidence that they are not being treated like normal EU members, 
that they have to sign specific contracts if they want to continue with new 
work.” She said this was discriminatory under EU law.

“It is probably some years before the UK will leave the EU, but still Swedish 
are experiencing treatment of this kind and I find that rather shocking I must 
say,” she said. “It’s a kind of discrimination you are speaking about that is 
not allowed if you are EU members and Britain is still an EU member.”
 