
One day earlier this month, I opened The Oxford Companion to Food 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/oxford-companion-to-food.html>, for so long a 
bible to me, and looked up sugar. The entry ran to several pages, taking me 
from its composition (carbon, hydrogen, oxygen) to the various forms it takes 
(dextrose, fructose and so on), and then to its sources in nature (honey, cane, 
beet). Finally, there was a section titled “Sugar as a Food”. This dealt, in a 
way that already seems rather old-fashioned (the book, edited by the late Alan 
Davidson, was published in 1999), with the difference between white sugar and 
brown. The latter, the writer stressed, is not healthier than the former; and 
while overconsumption of both kinds may lead to obesity, this is not the fault 
of sugar, but of those who eat too much of it.

It’s been a long time since I heard anyone suggest that brown sugar is 
healthier than white; it’s the kind of thing my granny might have said in 1979. 
But it wasn’t this that caught my attention. What surprised me was the writer’s 
firm placing of the blame for sugar-related weight gain on human beings rather 
than on, say, the industriesthat relentlessly push sugar our way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin>
 in the form of fizzy drinks and ready meals. Nor had he mentioned the now 
well-established connection between the overconsumption of sugar and type 2 
diabetes, cancer and even, it is thought, Alzheimer’s disease. Having 
registered this, I was then surprised by own surprise. Once, I would have read 
the words “the fault of the people who eat too much of it” and nodded my head. 
Now I was shaking it instead.

Is sugar the world’s most popular drug? | Gary Taubes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/is-sugar-worlds-most-popular-drug>
My mantra used to be: all things in moderation. But I have to accept that this 
is no longer the case. Thanks to the American journalistGary Taubes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/the-case-against-sugar-gary-taubes-review-compelling-attack-diet-myths>
, a long-time opponent of the old dietary advice that insisted healthy eating 
involves avoiding fat, and to those others who’ve since taken up his cause, 
I’ve grown, slowly but surely, ever more anxious about sugar. Thanks to my 
mantra, I never believed fat was bad in the first place. Even as everyone began 
spreading St Ivel Gold on their toast, I stuck doggedly with butter. But when, 
more than a decade ago, Taubes set out to prove it was sugar and refined 
carbohydrates that were doing people the most harm – a heresy in public health 
circles – it was impossible not to listen. You had only to visit a supermarket 
to see how bodies were changing. You had only to open a newspaper to read what 
a deleterious effect this mutation was having on the nation’s health.

Taubes’s latest book (the reason why I looked up sugar in the Oxford Companion
) takes his argument one step further. InThe Case Against Sugar 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/case-against-sugar-464344.html>, he has no 
time for my enduring conviction that a calorie is a calorie, irrespective of 
where it comes from. Sugars, he believes, have a “unique physiological, 
metabolic and endocrinological effect” on our bodies. They trigger “insulin 
resistance”, the condition that leads to diabetes and other diseases, for which 
reason we should avoid them. I thought about this quite a lot as I finished the 
last of the season’s Roses. I eat relatively few processed foods, a happy 
by-product of the fact that I like to cook, and I’ve never been one for fizzy 
drinks. Still, I’m a sucker for cake, that very British treat, and I often add 
sugar to things to make them taste better: a dash in salad dressing, a pinch in 
tomato sauce. Plus, I eat fruit, which I gather Taubes regards as an indulgent 
treat. (I won’t ever give up fruit: eating has as much to do with pleasure as 
with health.)

It’s not all about me, though, is it? I used not to be able to picture it, the 
white stuff that was going down people’s necks in such seemingly vast 
quantities. Then I began reading labels.Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar> is in everything, from stock cubes 
to roasted peanuts to salami (I won’t ever give up eating salami, either). If 
I’m eating this much hidden sugar, what are others consuming? Quite a lot, is 
the answer. Perhaps you had the misfortune, last week, to watch ITV’s egregious 
reality show,Sugar Free Farm. As the series began, one of those who was 
consuming the most sugar was the actor Peter Davison, a charming, 
sensible-seeming man who did not appear to me to be vastly overweight. He eats 
(or ate – we shall see) 52 kilos of sugar a year. Just imagine it. Piled up, it 
would fill your downstairs loo. Two days into cold turkey, it was Davison, 
rather than, say, Gemma Collins from Towie, who came over all dizzy. The 
paramedics took him away in an ambulance, just another pitiful, trembling 
addict.
 