
T in the Park <https://www.theguardian.com/music/t-in-the-park>, the huge 
music shindig that has been Scotland’s answer to the Reading and Leeds 
festivals, is to take a year off, its first break since being founded in 1994.

The organisers say the move was forced by increasing pressure from the 
authorities. In 2015, the festival was forced to change sites from Balado 
airfield to Strathallan Castle, and since that move, it has been subject to 
greater planning regulations.

“The constraints – logistically and financially – that the resulting planning 
conditions put upon us are simply not workable,” said DF Concerts.

T in the Park review – Stone Roses piped onstage as T parties through its 
troubles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/10/t-in-the-park-review-calvin-harris-dizzee-jamie-xx-stone-roses>
However, it was reported yesterday that the team behind T in the Park may be 
planning a new festival in Glasgow Green, in conjunction with the city’s 
council. Scottish politicians had asked the T organisers to confirm the 
original festival would still go ahead, because of the financial benefits it 
brings to Perthshire.

“Every year, the local economy benefits from millions of pounds of income 
generated by the event organisers, businesses and the tens of thousands of 
music-lovers who attend the festival,”John Swinney MSP told the Daily Record 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/local-news/local-politicians-call-answers-rumours-9319134>
.

“It is bitterly disappointing to find out secondhand, via reports from 
‘industry insiders’ and ‘sources close to DF Concerts’ that the two events 
cannot run simultaneously and T in the Park may be called off,” he added. 
“Geoff Ellis [head of DF Concerts] now needs to make a full and urgent official 
statement explaining what DF Concerts’ plans are for next year and the future.”

Police investigate two deaths at T in the Park festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/08/police-investigate-two-deaths-at-t-in-the-park-festival>
According to the Courier newspaper, DF has said the cancellation of T is 
nothing to do with the potential Glasgow Green event.

The full T in the Park statement

For over 23 years, T in the Park has been at the heart of Scotland’s music 
scene – with you by our side. But for now, sadly, we need to take a break.

We launched T in the Park with one aim: to give Scottish music fans an 
unforgettable weekend with their friends, enjoying the best acts from around 
the globe. And to say we achieved this together is an understatement. T in the 
Park has become one of the best known, biggest and most loved festivals in the 
world.

When we launched back in 1994 there were only two music festivals in the UK – 
now there are many and T in the Park paved the way for all that have come and 
gone inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> since. We created 
more than just a festival; we created a family and decades of wonderful 
memories.

However, the last couple of years have had their challenges. Against our will, 
and despite a prolonged fight, we were forced to move from Balado, Kinross in 
2015. This move was a mammoth task for the event and one that was compounded by 
a series of onerous site restrictions placed upon us as preparations for the 
event in 2015 took place.

As the build-up to the festival was well under way we were informed by 
Scottish government ministers that we would have to apply for full Planning 
Permission due to the presence of an unregistered, but protected in law, 
osprey’s nest. The constraints – logistically and financially – that the 
resulting planning conditions put upon us are simply not workable.

We tried our best to work with the pressures placed upon the site by bringing 
in an additional team and fixing the first-year traffic issues, but ultimately 
we’re not in control of the overall site layout and the continued restrictions 
means that the negative impact on our fans and the limitations placed on their 
experience is too great.

We now need to take stock and take a year out to try to resolve the issues so 
that we can once again deliver the kind of camping festival you are used to and 
deserve.”
 