
Taliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> militants have killed at 
least 30 people in a twin bombing near the Afghan parliament in Kabul, injuring 
more than 70 others, according to the ministry of public health.

The attack during rush hour on Tuesday appeared to have targeted a bus 
carrying government personnel leaving a building close to the parliament.

The first explosion was triggered by a suicide bomber on foot, followed by a 
car bomb. An injured security guard told Agence France-Presse the car had been 
“parked on the other side of the road and flung me back when it detonated”.

The Taliban, which claimed responsibility for the attack, said it had targeted 
members of the Afghan security forces. But government officials claimed most 
victims had been civilians.

Taliban ​facing financial crisis as civilian deaths deter donors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/afghan-taliban-facing-financial-crisis-as-civilian-deaths-deter-donors>
The interior ministry spokesman Sediq Sediqqi said: “The bus was carrying the 
administrative staff of the parliament. They were all civilians.”

However, he said a local intelligence chief and four police were among the 
dead. After the first explosion, police and intelligence officials rushed to 
the scene, and were then caught in the car bomb blast.

Western security reports appeared to dispute the government claim, indicating 
that the bus had been carrying intelligence personnel. According to a western 
official, the local intelligence unit is believed to provide security for the 
parliament.

A female parliamentarian, Rahima Jami from Herat, was among those injured. It 
is the third time in recent weeks that an Afghan politician has been hurt in 
attacks in the capital.

In late December, militants stormed a house in Kabul belonging to a prominent 
politician from Helmand. A week later, a bomb in the west of Kabul targeted an 
MP from Bamiyan province.

The latest attack was the bloodiest in the Afghan capital since November, when 
an alleged Islamic State suicide bomberkilled more than 30 worshippers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/kabul-mosque-hit-by-deadly-suicide-bomb-attack>
 at a mosque.

On Tuesday, another bomb blast occurred at a guesthouse in the provincial 
governor’s compound in Kandahar, killing between five and eleven people, 
including several members of the United Arab Emirates diplomatic mission, the 
governor’s spokesman said.

Fourteen others were wounded, among them the governor, Humayun Azizi, and the 
ambassador of the United Arab Emirates, who was visiting the province. 
Kandahar’s police chief, Abdul Raziq, was present at the meeting but unharmed.

In a third incident, the Taliban killed seven people in Lashkar Gah, the 
capital of Helmand province, in an attack targeting a guesthouse used by 
intelligence officials.

The southern province has grown increasingly volatile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/26/taliban-helmand-opium>, with the 
Taliban poised on the edge of the provincial capital.

Last week, US officials announced that about 300 marines would be deployed to 
Helmand for the first time since 2014. According to the US military in Kabul, 
the troops are expected to arrive in the spring.
 