
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook 

As a general rule, the further out of step with the betting market you find 
yourself, the more wrong you are likely to be, or the more likely you are to be 
wrong. I hope that doesn’t sound defeatist and of course I believe it’s 
possible to beat the market, or I wouldn’t be doing this, but the market 
represents a lot of wisdom and a lot of knowledge and that requires respect.

Horse racing tips: Monday 16 January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/horse-racing-tips-monday-16-january>
All that being said, I’m surprised to be getting 6-1 about Itoldyou (3.05) at 
Plumpton, having reconciled myself to the idea that he’d be favourite by this 
morning. From the Linda Jewell yard that had a winner at the last meeting here, 
this chestnut has dropped more than a stone from his last winning mark, having 
clearly lost his form last season, but is now threatening to win again.

Around here in November and then at Fontwell last month, he ran well to be 
second under a 7lb claimer who has just one win over fences to his name this 
season. He was beaten only by an unexposed type last time and finished well 
clear of the third.

The going today is a lot more testing than on those occasions, which ought to 
help, given that he’s at the bottom of the weights. Conditions must have been 
similar when he won the Sussex National here a couple of years ago. Tom Cannon, 
who rode that day, is back in the saddle and the tongue tie is back on for the 
first time since March.

Jewell and Cannon also team up for Clonusker (4.10), an 11-2 shot for the 
closing handicap hurdle. Heavy going around Plumpton has brought out the best 
of him in the past and he is now down to a very beatable mark, having hinted at 
a revival on good to soft here in November.

Freddies Portrait (2.45) is the interesting one at Ayr. A winning pointer in 
Ireland, he should win some races with his jumping, judged by his chasing debut 
at Carlisle last month. He got run out of it that day but may have more to 
offer on this step up in distance and bearing in mind that that was his first 
outing for a year. He’s 9-2.

Lady Bacchus (5.00) is understandably popular at 5-2 for one of the sprint 
handicaps at Wolverhampton. She was stuffed on Fibresand last time but put up 
much better efforts in her two five-furlong runs on Tapeta, both at Newcastle, 
winning once and running second in the other. She’s still on a good mark and 
should get a good tow into this from the pace-setters.
 