
Following a postponement in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/racing-92-glasgow-warriors-champions-cup-postponed-paris-attacks>
 and ahome defeat to Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/glasgow-northampton-european-champions-cup-match-report>
, Glasgow scored six tries to win their latest European game at Scotstoun 
Stadium. With the return fixture to come next Saturday, qualification for the 
quarter-finals now looks beyond Scarlets, who have lost all three games.

“Not only was it a satisfying win but it was a better game than I had 
anticipated in what were quite heavy conditions,” Gregor Townsend, the Glasgow 
coach, said. “We saw a very good first-half performance. The forwards had set 
the platform and we were knocking on the door several times. We came very close 
twice and Stuart Hogg dropped the ball on a certain intercept score – we could 
have had at least another 14 points.”

It was a shock that Glasgow ended up winning by so many, given that they took 
a while to get going and led just 10-3 at the break. Duncan Weir converted his 
own try and added a penalty, while Steve Shingler kicked a penalty forScarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>. Another three-pointer from 
Shingler cut the deficit to four points but then it was all Glasgow.

Hooker James Malcolm got over on his starting debut from close in and a 
spectacular hat-trick for the giant winger Taqele Naiyaravoro followed. The 
replacement lock Tim Swinson closed the match with the sixth Glasgow try. Weir 
converted the first of these scores and his replacement, Finn Russell, the next 
pair and the final one.

The pitch that had been unplayable last week looked very soft in certain spots 
on a fine midwinter afternoon and the home side made a flying start with a try 
in the sixth minute from Weir.

Scarlets, who enjoyed their fair share of possession in the first half, 
replied five minutes later through a penalty from Shingler.

Glasgow passed up on three good chances to forge ahead. The first was the 
clearest when, following a clever kick from centre Alex Dunbar that put the 
visitors’ defence in a daze, the full-back, Stuart Hogg, failed to hold a 
simple interception seven metres out. Naiyaravoro caught a Scarlets clearing 
kick and squeezed in, but was judged to have gone out of play by the TMO. 
Finally, a charge down by Adam Ashe bounced behind the Scarlets’ line.

In the last minute of the half Mike Blair’s quick tap led to a penalty that 
Weir struck home to give Glasgow a seven-point half-time lead.

Scarlets made a smart restart and a move started with a break by their winger 
Mike Tagicakibau ended with a simple penalty for Shingler. But the visitors 
remained haunted by conceding penalties. After 51 minutes Weir put one to the 
corner and the lineout drive ended with a try for Malcolm, with Weir converting.

Five minutes later the outcome was decided. From a standing start Naiyaravoro 
knocked two Scarlets aside as he finally got his try and in the 70th minute he 
was all on his own on the right wing to collect, and run in for the bonus 
point, a cross-kick from Russell.

Four minutes later he secured his hat-trick, from an interception, that went 
unconverted, and Swinson ended the scoring.

The Scarlets coach, Wayne Pivac, said: “When down by 17-6 we had a chance that 
we were unable to finish off. Then we fell off too many tackles, and in the 
last half-hour they put us away.” 
 