
“What’s the right tax system that will generate the revenue that we need to 
build schools, to build hospitals, to educate our children? What’s the system 
that’s fit for the future?”

These are perfectly fair questions, of course, but the odd eyebrow might arch 
at the identity of the man posing them. Yes, those are the words ofKevin 
Nicholson, PwC UK’s head of tax, who was accused by parliament earlier this 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/08/pwc-kevin-nicholson-tax-scheme-mps-luxembourg>
 of flogging “mass-marketed” tax avoidance schemes on an “industrial scale” – 
following November’s revelations of aggressive tax avoidance by PwC clients in 
Luxembourg, published globally by theGuardian and more than 20 other news 
outlets.

Anyway, Nicholson’s words were uttered during a promotional video to puff the 
accounting firm’s latest PR wheeze. The PwC Paying for Tomorrow Prize for 
Students is asking for 2,000-3,000-word essays on the topic of “a country’s 
taxes can change its fortunes, and those of its people”, for a top prize of 
£20,000, presumably on condition they loan the loot to a parent at a vast rate 
of interest.

The closing date is early January, so the students will be beavering away this 
week, before retiring for the Christmas break. At which point they can consider 
a related story of a humble working man and his pregnant wife who travelled 70 
miles on a donkey in order to, er, pay their taxes.

RBS may play Bad Santa


So, is Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> planning to 
hand 50 of its former and current staff a surprise Christmas “present”?

After reaching settlements with “certain regulators” in November following its 
foreign exchange misdeeds, RBS said: “The bank continues to undertake a 
thorough investigation, which to date is reviewing the conduct of over 50 
current and former employees that had direct involvement in the area of the 
corporate and institutional banking division in question. The investigation has 
so far analysed millions of documents and the bank is currently considering six 
employees within disciplinary proceedings, three of whom are currently 
suspended. The bank will make a public statement before the end of the year on 
the progress of the investigation.”

There has been no news so far, and the bank has very few days left in which it 
could make an announcement while not appearing to be attempting to bury bad 
news. The last statement made it sound as though some members of staff are 
facing the clawing-back of bonuses while others face the bullet – cheery issues 
now all neatly timed for a festive update.

Dairy Crest to get shot of milk round


Last month Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> 
milkman Shaun Dadds, plus his wife Anne-Marie, appeared on ITV’sJeremy Kyle Show
during an episode called: “Is my husband cheating on his milk round?”

You’ve probably already worked out that the answer was affirmative, but Shaun 
still underwent a series of lie-detector tests to see if he’d taken part in a 
range of activities, including “passionate kissing” with another woman.

Assuming this was real, it was all even more unfortunate as a) it’s a horrible 
cliche; b) Dadds had called in sick from his job that morning, was spotted on 
the telly by his employer, so was swiftly relieved of his duties; and c) Dairy 
Crest’s milk delivery business is called, er, Milk&more. A disappointed 
Anne-Marie even used the brand name when explaining to her husband how he might 
have let his family down.

Still, the good news for staff in Dairy Crest’s PR department is that they 
won’t have to handle this type of story for much longer. The company is selling 
its milk business to Müller for £80m, providing shareholders vote to approve 
the deal at a general meeting on Tuesday. The deal will leave Dairy Crest with 
brands such as Cathedral City cheese and Clover spread, which are far trickier 
to make jokes about.
 