
There are groups you love as a teenager, and whose music becomes a memory, 
something entwined in your life, but no more directly relevant to it than old 
episodes of Grange Hill or drinking cider in churchyards. There are records 
that soundtracked a distant part of your life, but which you still love, that 
you can sing every word to as you drive some godforsaken A road through the 
world’s dullest landscape. And there is the rarest kind of musical love: the 
group you loved when you were young, but who grew old with you, without turning 
into a caricature, or going through the motions – the kind of group whose songs 
pinpoint your life at different points – first love, becoming independent, 
settling down, becoming a parent.

Teenage Fanclub are that group, for me at least. I don’t think they’re my very 
favourite group – would that be the Ramones? The Hold Steady? I don’t know; it 
changes from week to week – but they’re the one I’ve returned to most 
frequently for the best part of a quarter of a century now. I sometimes use the 
metaphor of a cardigan to describe certain bands, and the Fanclub are the model 
of a cardigan band: you look at your wardrobe and you’re distracted by clothes 
that are smarter, cooler, brighter; but as soon as you put the cardigan, all 
you can think is how warm and comfortable it is.

Teenage Fanclub – 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/09/teenage-fanclub-10-of-the-best>
Every time I listen to Teenage Fanclub I marvel at how good they are. Their 
new album, Here, arrived in the post the other week, on a day of particular 
irritations. It went straight on, and the cares of the world began to float 
away, from the moment the opening track, I’m in Love, began. Now you can see 
the video for the song – the group’s new single – for yourself.

It’s now 26 years since the Fanclub released Everything Flows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/14/teenage-fanclub-everything-flows>
 – their first single, and the song that still closes their sets – and they’ve 
changed. It’s still the same three songwriters – Norman Blake, Gerard Love and 
Raymond McGinley – but they’ve grown up as musicians, writers and people. Their 
early recordings were a cheerfully melodic shambles (their debut album, A 
Catholic Education, was packed with instrumentals seemingly because no one got 
round to writing any words). Its “proper” follow up, Bandwagonesque, showed 
they could write very good words when they wanted to. Album No 4 (I’m excluding 
The King from the tally), Grand Prix, was the best album of the Britpop era.

Since the album after that, Songs From Northern Britain, it’s as if the 
Fanclub have been taking a single piece of marble and approaching it anew with 
each album: the work still has roughly the same shape, but has been subtly 
changed and altered, and has aged and weathered in the five or so years that 
pass between each album. Blake remains the perkiest writer of the three; 
McGinley the most enigmatic; Love, who used to be the one who was both the 
rockiest and the one with the sweetest tooth for pop, has gradually become the 
most introverted writer, as if he’s trying to find the quietest possible way to 
express emotions.

It’s not that everything is perfection – I do sometimes wish that when the 
group play live McGinley and Love could look as if they were pleased to be 
there; I once got irrationally annoyed when Blake chewed gum all the way 
through a show at the Scala in London. But that’s a little like complaining 
that you don’t like the washing instructions label on the one pair of trousers 
that make you look slim, isn’t it?


But I will offer one serious gripe: does it have to be five years between 
albums? Come on Fanclub, we need you more often.

 * Here is released on PeMa on 9 September. Teenage Fanclub have just 
announced a tour of the US and Canada:details here <http:// teenagefanclub.com>.
 