
A teenager being held in a maximum security Victorian adult jail has been 
denied bail despite a judge acknowledging that his human rights have been 
contravened.

The teen, who cannot be named for legal reasons, will continue to be held in 
the Grevillea unit at Barwon Prison despite two courts ordering that young 
offenders be moved to more suitable facilities.

The teenager allegedly trashed the unit three days before he applied for bail 
in the Victorian supreme court on Friday.

Rehousing youths unlawfully moved to adult jail a 'wicked question', say police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/rehousing-youths-unlawfully-moved-to-adult-jail-a-wicked-question-say-police>
Justice James Elliott said the teen – who is facing charges of armed robbery 
and has been on remand for two months – was an unacceptable risk to the 
community.

But he also said the Grevillea unit was “far from ideal” as a rehabilitation 
centre for young offenders.

“I continue to have misgivings about the conditions under which the applicant 
is detained,” Justice Elliott said on Friday.

The teenager’s lawyer, Paul Smallwood, said his client’s human rights had been 
contravened, in line with a previous supreme court ruling.

Justice Elliott said he had to operate on the assumption that the teenager’s 
human rights had been infringed upon, but also said the bail application was 
not the place to determine whether that was the case.

The court heard that the teenager allegedly went on a “rampage” through the 
unit on 3 January, damaging two clothes dryers, two washing machines and a flat 
screen TV.

“What’s he capable of if he isn’t being monitored and constantly supervised?” 
the crown lawyer Cameron Gauld asked the court.

Marcel Jacques, the head of operations at the Grevillea unit, described it as 
“chaotic” when it first opened in late November.

Youths to remain in adult jail despite ruling their transfer was illegal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/keeping-juveniles-in-adult-jail-is-unlawful-victorian-judge-rules>
But he said the unit had improved and juvenile offenders were able to get the 
five hours a day of schooling required.

Smallwood said there might have been improvements at the unit, but it remained 
far from ideal.

There are 17 youths in Barwon, and most were sent there after riots damaged 
the Malmsbury and Parkville youth detention centres in November.

Lawyers challenged the transfer in December in the supreme court, which found 
the government had acted unlawfully.

The government appealed and lost, and the court of appeal ordered that the 
teenagers be moved, but the government instead rebranded the Grevillea unit as 
a youth facility.

The teenager will appear in the children’s court on 10 January.
 