
It was impossible to ignore the sense that this deserved success for Rangers 
had a deeper meaning than would be usual for a run-of-the-mill fixture in 
Scotland’s second tier. If the Ibrox club are finally to haul themselves back 
into the top flight come May,Hibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> will have provided the 
sternest resistance. So far the pair have slugged at each other in intriguing 
fashion – in words as well as actions, that is.

A frantic, gripping match more akin to a cup tie witnessed six goals and a red 
card. The intensity of atmosphere contradicted league level. Mark Warburton, the
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager, staunchly 
refused to admit the visit of Hibs was more significant than, for example, next 
weekend’s trip to Dumbarton but all the evidence is to the contrary.

Rangers have now edged three points in front of Hibs at the summit of the 
Championship but, crucially, may have earned themselves a vital momentum shift. 
“There have been a few comments about the spine of our team,” Warburton said. 
“I was told this team lacked a spine by a certain [media] outlet during the 
last week.

“I think we answered all the questions out there today, without a doubt. We 
kept quiet going into this game, our focus was only on Rangers. Overall, I 
thought that was a tremendous performance.”

And yet, things had started so differently. The Hibs striker Jason Cummings, 
who is rightly being courted by a string of English sides, produced a 
wonderfully composed finish after Liam Henderson’s shot had deflected into his 
path. Hibs, who had entered this match unbeaten in 17 outings, had silenced 
Ibrox.

The visitors played an integral part in their own subsequent downfall. Fraser 
Fyvie gifted possession to Rangers, 30 yards from his own goal and two passes 
later Jason Holt was in position to blast an equaliser low past Mark Oxley. 
Fyvie’s error was even more woeful on the basis that the simple finding of a 
team-mate would have provided Hibs with an excellent attacking position.

Holt gave his team the lead before the interval, albeit with the unwitting 
assistance of Paul Hanlon. Holt’s attempt spun past Oxley via the defender’s 
boot, completing a turnaround which had seemed so unlikely just 10 minutes 
earlier.

For a team in such good form and retaining attacking menace, Hibs’ second 
period showing was glaringly ineffective. Kenny Miller had squandered an 
opportunity to send Rangers further in front before a substitute, Nicky Clark, 
did precisely that when meeting Andy Halliday’s cross.

It was to be Halliday’s last positive intervention. The midfielder needlessly 
reacted to a challenge from Fyvie, firstly by aiming a kick and then barging 
into his opponent with a shoulder. Rangers will appeal any suspension on the 
legitimate basis that Fyvie clearly embellished the situation – making it look 
like a headbutt – but Halliday still will not win any Brain of Britain awards 
for his antics. “Why did Andy Halliday put himself in that position?” asked the 
Hibs manager, Alan Stubbs. This was fair comment.

Hibs stirred, Dominique Malonga stooping to head over the line after some 
shocking Rangers defending from a Fyvie cross, but it was to be a brief 
flirtation with hope for the Edinburgh side. Holt lofted a crossfield pass to 
Martyn Waghorn, who cut inside Fyvie before notching number four.

“I thought we could have done better for at least two of the goals today,” 
Stubbs added. “Listen, congratulations to Rangers. They have won today and got 
three points. But as we spoke about before the game it’s just three points. We 
move on. Today is not going to affect anything.

“We have been fantastic, going 17 games unbeaten. This was going to happen 
eventually. It has happened today, but I’m sure it’s not going to affect us. We 
have literally just touched halfway and if you had given me this situation 
before the season I would have snapped your hands off.”

Hearts come back twice against Celtic, Osman Sow’s screamer making a point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/27/hearts-celtic-osman-sow-draw-match-report> 