
'It was supposed to take a month," sighs Eric Welles of the New York record 
labelLuaka Bop <http://luakabop.com/>. "That was five years ago."

He is talking about Who Is William Onyeabor?, the first compilation dedicated 
to the cult Nigerian musician adored by the likes ofDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn>, Caribou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/caribou> and 2 Many DJs. The title wrily 
refers to the label's long search for information about the man. Five years 
ago, all that fans knew was that Onyeabor released eight albums of 
exhilaratingly strange, synthesiser-led Afrobeat, laced with religious and 
political messages, on his own Wilfilms label between 1977 and 1985. The 
records remained obscure outside his hometown, the south-eastern city of Enugu, 
and only two songs had since been revived on compilations. Oft-recycled online 
claims that Onyeabor had studied cinematography in the Soviet Union and owned a 
flour mill could not be confirmed. He was a complete mystery.

Then, in 2008, the Nigerian writer Uchenna Ikonne, who runs an African music 
blog calledComb & Razor <http://combandrazor.blogspot.co.uk/>, told Luaka Bop 
he could track Onyeabor down in Enugu and license a career-spanning 
compilation. The label leaped at the chance but it took Ikonne nine months to 
meet Onyeabor and another two years to secure his signature. When Luaka Bop 
commissioned Nigerian poet and novelist Chris Abani to write the sleevenotes, 
Onyeabor said he wouldn't be interviewed. Ikonne told him the album couldn't be 
released without more information. "Well," shrugged Onyeabor, "I guess it will 
never come out then."

"At the beginning we thought it was a way of negotiating," says Eric Welles. 
"Maybe he wanted more money. But he said, 'I don't need the money. I'm not a 
hungry man.'" Welles became obsessed, scouring blogs, YouTube comments and 
social media for any biographical information and finding nothing. Whenever he 
phoned Onyeabor's house there was either no answer or someone hung up. It was 
driving him crazy. He even began dreaming about Onyeabor.

"It just didn't make sense," says Welles. "How could someone have done all 
these things and there be no information available?" He became fixated on a 
lyric from 1982's The Moon and the Sun: "If you treat me bad I'm going to run 
away and you'll never find me again." Was this what had happened? "Eventually I 
thought, 'Shit, I just have to go see this guy', y'know?" says Welles.

The Oscar-winning documentary Searching for Sugar Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147796/searching-for-sugar-man>, which 
chronicles two South African fans' mission to find the 1970s Detroit 
singer-songwriter Rodriguez, is one kind of narrative: a heart-warming tale 
that satisfies music fans' desire to believe that talent will out and neglected 
musicians will, however belatedly, find the recognition they deserve. But there 
are many cult musicians who, despite years of effort, cannot be found or who, 
once located, refuse to revisit their past. How do you bring back someone who 
wants to remain in the shadows?

"For every happy ending there's 10 that I just have to let go," says Eothen 
Alapatt, whose LA-basedNow-Again <http://www.nowagainrecords.com> label 
specialises in soul, funk and psychedelia. "There's a shitty part of this, 
where you spend a whole bunch of money, time and effort to convince someone 
that you could do something great with something that got lost and still be 
told no. It's a lot of fucking frustration."

Alapatt often approaches musicians who, like Onyeabor, recorded and released 
their own records. "It's a special type who does that," he says. "I could be 
talking about a record that might only have been distributed within a 20 to 30 
square mile radius and they're like, 'Well it must be worth tons of money, 
otherwise you wouldn't be here.' Or, 'Oh you're going to screw me over like 
everyone else.'"

'William is successful in his life and he doesn't feel he needs this 
recognition. Maybe he doesn't want to go back to that period in time. Sometimes 
he would say he suffered a lot during those years'
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
"It's always an uphill battle," says Matt Sullivan of eclectic Seattle label 
Light in the Attic. "It often takes years to gain people's trust because we're 
dealing with artists who have had some awful experiences in the music industry. 
You realise you're pulling some ugly ghosts out of the closet."

Alapatt has been negotiating with one musician, Texan saxophonist and label 
owner Leon Hutchison, for a decade now without closure either way. "Every time 
I talk to him he's like, 'OK man, I want to play for Barack Obama. Or, I need 
to meet Simon Cowell.' He's always got something." Another tricky character, 
Indianapolis studio owner Les Ohmit, was so stubborn that Egon eventually gave 
up. When he tried to get in touch again last month, he found that Ohmit had 
died and his archive was untraceable. "It just gutted me," he said. "That's 
what I'm most scared of. These guys will go to their graves and all the stuff 
that they consider so dear will be dispersed by people who have no idea what 
they're dispersing. Unless I persevere then only a few people will ever hear 
this music and that's a fucking shame."

Only the truly obsessed, however, persevere. The reissue business is a niche 
which becomes less lucrative every year. "If you were doing it for the money 
you definitely wouldn't be in this business," says Matt Sullivan. "It rarely 
makes any sense whatsoever."

When Welles arrived in Enugu this summer, the mystery of William Onyeabor 
deepened. The address he had been given was a dark, disused shop where a 
suspicious woman asked, bafflingly, "Are you from Russia?", before agreeing to 
escort him to Onyeabor's house on the outskirts of town. To his surprise, it 
was a three-storey white mansion with a fountain and a 30-year-old silver 
Mercedes out front. The house was like a time capsule of 1980s luxe, decorated 
with paintings and chandeliers and containing assorted keyboards and mixing 
desks. The staircase was lined with paintings of Jesus and photographs of 
Onyeabor, in traditional Igbo attire, shaking hands with local dignitaries. He 
was told the house even had its own heliport, though he never saw it.

He found Onyeabor, an imposing, muscular man close to 70, on a couch watching 
Christian television, and they began to talk. He ended up staying in Enugu for 
a week, by the end of which Onyeabor was calling him "my American son". From 
offhand comments and talking to people who knew Onyeabor, Welles got a sense of 
the man's unusual story. Onyeabor was a wealthy, well-travelled local 
businessman who ran a semolina factory. He was a generous, if sometimes 
irascible, employer. He had built a film studio, recorded and pressed all the 
records himself, and even paid the local TV station to broadcast his 
promotional videos. But many mysteries remained because Onyeabor refused to 
answer direct questions.

He wouldn't confirm the existence of Crashes in Love, a 1977 movie that was 
mentioned on a record sleeve but which nobody appeared to have seen. He kept 
referring to "the people from Russia" but wouldn't say who they were, or 
discuss his rumoured years of study in the Soviet Union. In paranoid moments, 
he accused his guest of attempting to copy his signature or snatch a 
surreptitious photograph. "We have a lot of secrets in this house," he said 
solemnly.

"I went there with so many things I wanted to ask him," says Welles. "I still 
don't know how he was able to do what he did. He's successful in his life and 
he doesn't feel he needs this recognition. Maybe he doesn't want to go back to 
that period in time. Sometimes he would say he suffered a lot during those 
years."

The highlight of the trip came when Onyeabor was looking at a copy of 1983's 
Good Name and began singing and playing air keyboards with evident pride. 
Welles, at last, had his moment of closure: "That was like, 'Yes! This is him! 
This is him right here!'"

It's the kind of moment reissue specialists live for, when the decades peel 
away and the old man momentarily resembles the young musician, aglow with 
self-belief. But sometimes the dogged fan has to accept that crucial facts will 
never be known. Several years ago, Matt Sullivan became "possessed" by UFO, an 
obscure 1969 album by LA singer-songwriter Jim Sullivan (no relation), and 
tried to track him down. It transpired that the singer had disappeared while 
driving through New Mexico in 1975, leaving behind his car, motel room and all 
his possessions. Months of painstaking amateur detective work led nowhere.

"At the end of the day we had so many unanswered questions," says Sullivan. 
"As a fan, I want to know everything but one reason so many of those old 
records are so captivating is because there wasn't an iPhone in the room, there 
wasn't a Twitter feed. I'm not going to know all the answers and that's what 
makes it so beautiful and pure and genuine. Not knowing makes me want to keep 
listening and digging deeper. But the music should be shared. That's what it's 
about."

Who Is William Onyeabor? is out on 15 Oct on Luaka Bop. Now-Again's latest 
release, Song of a Gypsy by Damon, is out on 22 Oct. Walk In Africa by National 
Wake is out now on Light In The Attic
 