
Whether you're a fan or not, the massive outpouring of grief this week in 
response to the news that minimalist rock band the White Stripes were to split 
up might seem puzzling. In their exit statement on Thursday, the Detroit duo 
said they hoped the news would not be "met with sorrow by [our] fans", 
emphasising that the split was not due to health issues or artistic 
differences. Prolific singer/guitarist/songwriter Jack White will continue to 
write, perform and record with his other groups the Raconteurs and the Dead 
Weather, and is indeed likely putting the finishing touches to another such 
project as you read this. And if rock history has taught us anything, it's that 
bands only stay split up until the first date of the lucrative reunion tour.

Yesterday, however, fans registered their dismay in countless threads on 
the internet, while others went shopping – according to Amazon, the White 
Stripes' 2010 live album and documentary Under Great White Northern Lights have 
seen an increase in sales of 2,644% on the site. And I understand why, because 
Jack and Meg White's decision to call time on the Stripes' 13-year career 
formally marks the end of one of the most memorable groups in recent memory.

I first saw the White Stripes almost a decade ago, at the Texas music industry 
showcase South By South-West in March 2001, playing an afternoon barbecue party 
in a parking lot across from a tattoo parlour. Their songs were great – wild 
and alive with subtle weirdness and ageless riffs – and they played a cover of 
Dolly Parton's Jolene that was anything but ironic, delivering its tale 
of heartbreak with a captivating sincerity. I couldn't take my eyes off them, 
the atmosphere between Jack and Meg was electric, as he hollered into a 
microphone next to her drum kit, holding eye contact with her at all 
times. They arrived at a moment when rock'n'roll was experiencing one of its 
periodic lulls in inspiration; there seemed to be no real icons, no 
personalities, no larger-than-life heroes left. But the White Stripes filled 
this void with incomparable style.

Jack White, an inveterate record collector, understood the pleasures of being 
a fan better than most other musicians. With the White Stripes, he and Meg 
created a band alive with the myth, ambiguity and idiosyncrasy that legends are 
hewn from and fans adore. The first time I interviewed him, back in spring 
2001, Jack told me, "Success won't change us, or the way we do things." It was 
this very idiosyncratic way of doing things that helped win them their success, 
made them a band people believe in, and a phenomenon they identify with.

Later that summer, their first UK tour became the unlikely subject of 
mainstream press attention: front-page stories in the music press, copious 
coverage in both the tabloids and the broadsheets, even a feature on Radio 4's 
Today programme that quoted their earliest champion, DJ John Peel, declaring 
Jack "the most exciting guitarist since Hendrix". In their red, white and black 
livery, they were instantly iconic: you could dress up as the White Stripes for 
Hallowe'en, and they were recognisable even when rendered in Lego, as Michel 
Gondry did for the video to their breakthrough single, Fell in Love With a Girl.

The duo made for great copy, especially after evidence surfaced of their 1996 
marriage and subsequent divorce in 2000, putting the lie to the brother/sister 
myth they'd propagated since their first record. At the dawn of the internet 
age, Jack was a man from another era: he bemoaned bad manners and the death of 
the gentleman, and bad-mouthed modern technology, especially the motor car. He 
might have seemed curmudgeonly, if not for the verve with which he declared his 
passions: the Delta bluesmen he covered, such as Son House and Blind Willie 
McTell, and his forlorn hometown's rich garage-rock heritage. Meg said little 
in interviews; all you needed to know about her you could glean from watching 
her perform, the glee with which she pounded skins and cymbals, the way she 
drained the bottle of whiskey next to her kit over the course of a show. She 
was the heart of this group, the engine, the inimitable groove.

Success only amplified all the qualities that made the White Stripes unique, 
bank-rolling their grander ambitions, and they continued to do things not as 
rock musicians typically did them, but the way Jack and Meg wanted them done. 
Despite their then-newfound success, 2003's Elephant album wasn't recorded in 
some lush modern studio, but in a pokey garage in Hackney, while their 2004 
concert movie, Under Blackpool Lights, was filmed on retro Super 8mm film. 
Even the merchandise they sold at their gigs was unusual, and of a piece with 
their aesthetic: there were White Stripes-branded Holga cameras, and hand-made 
phonographs (called Triple Inchophones) designed to play special 3" White 
Stripes vinyl records.

In the summer of 2005, I travelled across Brazil with them on their first 
South American tour, which they booked after a Peruvian fan named Claudia wrote 
to the Stripes' record label, begging them to finally perform below the border. 
Before the week was out, Jack had stroked the belly of a baby crocodile while 
travelling up the Amazon river, unwittingly started a small riot at an opera 
house deep in the jungle, and married Oldham-born supermodel Karen Elson three 
weeks after first meeting her. Resembling a Mexican mariachi as imagined by Tim 
Burton, he sat backstage at the opera house, pondering the possible mortality 
of the White Stripes.

"Sometimes, things are only supposed to exist within a certain space in time, 
and they don't make sense outside of that," he mused. "It's hard to know when 
to stop. Your friends are too polite to tell you, maybe you should stop and do 
something else. You have to be really self-aware to know that what you're doing 
isn't relevant any more."

"I think we'll know when to stop," laughed Meg, and maybe they did. Maybe the 
White Stripes' final flourish of genius lies in quitting before they made a bad 
record, before they sold out or bought in, and while their fans still love them 
enough to be heart-broken by their exit.

Ewen Spencer, photographer: 'Jack's a pain to photograph'

I was a huge fan of the Go, a Detroit garage band Jack used to play guitar 
with, and so I got the first couple of White Stripes albums. Then someone put 
White Blood Cells [their breakthrough third album] on a tape for me, and I just 
listened to that all the time; it was magic, the way it drew on the past, but 
gave us something new. I emailed a few editors I knew and said I wanted to 
shoot this band; Alex Needham, then at NME, sent me out to Bristol, and I began 
photographing shows from their first UK tour onwards.

The theatrical nature of the group, and how they dressed, was absolutely 
integral to their appeal. That had been lost in rock'n'roll; things had gotten 
dowdy post-Oasis, a bit soccer hooligany, but the White Stripes were theatrical 
in their performance, like a great 60s garage-rock band. And they were a bit 
cryptic: you weren't sure who they were, what exactly their relationship with 
each other was. That mystery, that ambiguity, is so important to rock'n'roll.

People always love "behind the scenes" rock photography; with 
Annie Leibovitz's classic photos of the Stones, the ones of Mick on stage are 
fine, but the ones of Keef asleep in a hotel corridor, they're what you really 
want to see. Whenever the Stripes weren't wearing their red-and-white clothes, 
Jack would say, "The pictures have to stop now." And I totally respected that; 
it was like, the charade is over, the curtain has been closed. But pictures I 
got of Jack and Meg backstage, just hanging out, it was like they were 
completely unaware I was there. I'd been with them for so long, it was like 
I was invisible.

They trusted me to do something worthwhile with the photographs. They 
approached me to shoot the sleeve for [their 2005 album] Get Behind Me Satan. 
Jack called me before I flew out to his house in Detroit; I thought he'd want 
to discuss the concepts for the sleeve, but he just wanted to chat about the 
more technical, scientific side of photography, strange old cameras with 
multiple lenses and weird mechanics. Anything quirky and retro, he loves it. He 
became art director for the four or five days we worked on it, and was 
excellent, because he's genuinely a very creative person, he had a vision. 
He gave me a lot of room, but he'd debate with me if we disagreed on something. 
It was a real collaboration.

Jack's a pain to photograph, though. He can't stand still, he wouldn't give 
you more than five minutes before he'd bugger off, and I'd have to track him 
down. He'd be at the piano, improving a middle eight or something. It was 
lovely to see and be a part of. I think I started smoking again because of Meg; 
we smoked together, just to kill the time while Jack was off indulging his 
creativity. She seemed wise beyond her years, a drummer with a lot of soul and 
a massive knowledge about music.

I went out on tour with the group in Brazil in the summer of 2005; they played 
an opera house in the Amazon jungle in Manaus, and the gig was incredible. 
Their tour manager, John Baker, had called me first thing that day and said 
Jack was going to get married to his girlfriend Karen [Elson] that morning, and 
that he wanted me to photograph the wedding. I'd never wanted to be a wedding 
photographer, but I jumped in the shower, and off we went, up the river and 
into the jungle. They were married on a boat, where the Ponta Negra and the 
Solimones merge into the Amazon river. It was wonderful, a really beautiful day.

A year later, they were playing Alexandra Palace, and I went and took Jack 
a bound copy of all the photos from the wedding that I'd made for him. I walked 
backstage, and he was sat in what looked like a throne, talking to Alice 
Cooper. I thought, things have moved on; he's become an epic rock star, an 
icon, in that way.

How do I feel now they've split? Satisfied. Jack was obviously distracted, 
involved in his other projects. That's the nature of Jack, he's restless, 
always off working on another idea, putting it down on tape or on paper. He 
doesn't hang around, and I don't see why he would dwell on the White Stripes 
any longer.

He'd done what he wanted to do with them, and now we can look back at a decade 
of the White Stripes. No one's died, they've just finished, and it was a great 
career that they had.

Three's A Crowd, the first in a series of poster books containing Ewen 
Spencer's photography of the White Stripes, is available from ewenspencer.com
 