
BLUES’ BLUEPRINT

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are expected to 
discover if their planning application to remould Stamford Bridge into a 
60,000-seat stadium will be approved on Wednesday. Hammersmith and Fulham 
council’s planning and development control committee should announce its 
verdict after the meeting, which is due to begin at 7pm. The council has 
recommended the application be approved but the complexity of the project means 
it would just be one significant step in the transformation of Chelsea’s home .

KNOCKOUT FRENZY

After the weekend binge of the FA Cup third round, another flurry of cup 
action arrives this week with the semi-final, first legs of theEFL Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup>. On Tuesday, Manchester United 
host Hull City and on Wednesday Southampton welcome Liverpool (both Sky Sports 
1, 7.30pm). Although much devalued these days, the League Cup as was could 
provide José Mourinho with his first silverware at Old Trafford, while Hull’s 
new manager, Marco Silva, – Mourinho affectionately calls him the kid – is 
getting his bearings in England. Liverpool will have plenty of Southampton old 
boys at St Mary’s even with Sadio Mané otherwise engaged (see below). The 
second legs follow on 25-26 January, the winners meeting at Wembley on 26 
February.

MURRAY’S DRAW

On Friday, Sir Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> – 
newly elevated in the New Year honours list –will discover his opponent in the 
opening match of the 2017 Australian Open, when the first-round draw takes 
place. The first grand slam of the year will be the first time Murray enters a 
major as world No1. The Scot will be aiming to end a disappointing run at 
Melbourne, having been the beaten finalist five times, stretching back to 2010. 
His main rival, Novak Djokovic, beat him in straight sets in last year’s final 
and the Serb will be looking to recover his form on the hard court after 
parting company with his coach, Boris Becker, late last year. Eurosport will 
provide live coverage of the tournament, starting a week on Monday. The BBC is 
showing highlights.

STAYING IN EUROPE

After this Saturday’s rearranged game between Racing 92 and Munster, 
originally delayed by the untimely death of Anthony Foley, theEuropean Rugby 
Champions Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-rugby-champions-cup> 
returns properly next weekend. The pick of the action is in Pool 2, where 
Wasps, Toulouse and Connacht are tied on 13 points – Wasps face Toulouse on 
Saturday and Connacht take on bottom-placed Zebre (Sky Sports Mix, 1pm). 
Castres could also boost their qualification chances in Pool 4 with a win over 
Northampton on Saturday (Sky Sports 2, 1pm).

LOOK OUT FOR … A TOP-FLIGHT EXODUS

Where’s everyone going? China? A few are – Oscar’s £60k-a-day Shanghai SIPG 
deal turned a few heads last month. But China isn’t the biggest overseas winter 
destination: it’s Africa Cup of Nations time again, and domestic managers 
aren’t happy.

What’s their beef? Losing their assets at a season-defining time. This year’s 
tournament runs from next Saturday to 5 February. It’s almost as if Africa’s 
climate doesn’t respect the might and glory of the Premier League.

So which clubs are hit hardest? Some are feeling very relaxed: seven teams 
including Chelsea, Manchester City and Tottenham won’t lose anyone. But five 
lose three players each, including the already right-up-against it Sunderland 
(Gabon’s Didier N’Dong, Tunisia’s Wahbi Khazri and Ivory Coast’s Lamine Koné) 
and Leicester (Algeria’s Islam Slimani and Riyad Mahrez, and Ghana’s Daniel 
Amartey). Among others going are Liverpool’s Sadio Mané (Senegal), Manchester 
United’s Eric Bailly (Ivory Coast), Everton’s Idrissa Gueye (Senegal), and 
Palace’s Wilfried Zaha, who was unmoved by Gareth Southgate’s last-minute 
flirting and chose Ivory Coast. And it’s not just a top-flight problem: 
Newcastle lose three, Aston Villa and Fulham two each – while League One 
Northampton lose DR Congo’s Gabriel Zakuani.

What are the consequences? Twofold. 1) Plenty more sweaty spending this month 
to fill gaps; and2) potentially some fine football in Gabon. Ivory Coast are 
the favourites, but it’ll be close-run, with Senegal and Algeria among the 
contenders. It’s a 16-team, four-group structure – refreshingly unbloated.

So when will clubs get their players back? Players have to be released the day 
after their nation is knocked out. That makes the earliest return date 22 
January, while the latest is the day after the final on 5 February. So if 
Senegal go all the way Mané will miss seven Liverpool games in total, while 
Ivory Coast making progress would mean Lamine Koné misses five for Sunderland. 
“When you sign players from Africa you know that this is all part of the 
equation,” said David Moyes last month. “But I still find it hard to accept.”

And what’s that picture? It’s the official Africa Cup of Nations 2017 mascot 
and stuff-of-preteen-nightmares “Samba” – a sharp-toothed leering panther whose 
name means “welcome” in the local Bantu language. He’s a symbol of “strength, 
power, party and fun”, say organisers.
 