
The release of Shaker Aamer, the last British resident held without charge in 
the American prison camp in Guantánamo Bay, is cause for celebration. But 
relief at this welcome news must not deflect attention from the many serious 
questions raised by his treatment and that meted out to other detainees. With 
no case to answer, Aamer is free at last. But the case against the US 
authorities that perpetrated this travesty of justice, and British ministers 
and security service personnel who allegedly colluded with them, should now be
vigorously pursued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/shaker-aamer-to-seek-damages-over-guantanamo-bay-incarcaration>
.

The particulars of Aamer’s ordeal are appalling. Picked up in Afghanistan in 
2001, soon after the US invasion that followed the 9/11 attacks, he says he was 
beaten repeatedly by American interrogators at the Bagram base near Kabul. 
Aamer claims British officials were present during one of the beatings, a claim 
rejected by the Foreign Office. He alleges that while at Bagram he was deprived 
of sleep, chained in excruciating positions for hours and doused in freezing 
water.

Aamer’s 14-year nightmare began in earnest when he was transferred to 
Guantánamo in early 2002. No charges were brought against him. He was allowed 
no trial. And despite being cleared for release in 2007, his incarceration 
continued, unjust, unreasonable and apparently indefinite. During this time, 
Aamer says he nearly gave up hope. He went on hunger strike and was force-fed. 
He was thrown into solitary confinement. His callous guards treated him as 
something less than human. For years, he was addressed only as “239” – his 
prison number.

Aamer’s health has suffered. He will need time to recover with his family. He 
is also due compensation. Aamer will in time pursue his allegations against the 
security services. But even if he, like other released Guantánamo detainees, 
accepts some kind of out-of-court deal, disturbing evidence suggesting the 
complicity of Labour ministers and British security service officials in 
illegal US abduction and rendition programmes must not be ignored any longer. 
It should be thoroughly examined. Given parliament’s sorry failure to provide 
adequate oversight, ajudge-led public inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/shaker-aamers-guantanamo-detention-is-a-shameful-episode-for-britain>
 is preferable.

What, for example, was the basis for highly specious US claims that Aamer was 
close to Osama bin Laden and was a high-ranking al-Qaida operative? Is it true 
this information was obtained through torture? Was Aamer himself tortured at 
Bagram with British knowledge and involvement? And what aboutAamer’s testimony 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3258996/They-don-t-want-sun-Shaker-Aamer-Briton-held-Guantanamo-Bay-gives-searing-account-14-year-ordeal.html>
 that he witnessed the torture at Bagram in 2001 of another detainee, Ibn 
al-Sheikh al-Libi, and that two British intelligence officers were present? 
Libi’s forced “confession” that Saddam Hussein had supplied chemical and 
biological weapons to al-Qaida – a notoriously false claim – was nevertheless 
subsequently used by George W Bush and, indirectly, by Tony Blair to help 
justify the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

A public inquiry should also consider the Metropolitan police file, now with 
the Crown Prosecution Service, on evidence ofMI6 involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/straw-mi6-libyan-renditions-belhaj>
 in the rendition and torture of two prominent Libyan anti-Gaddafi dissidents 
and their families in 2004. A civil suit bought by the Libyans will be heard by 
the supreme court this month. In all, it is alleged the security services were
complicit with the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/19/police-claims-shaker-aamer-torture-mi5-complicit>
 in the torture of more than 20 terror suspects during this shabby, murky 
period. The truth or falsity of these claims must be publicly established once 
and for all.

Aamer’s case highlights wider concerns. Why has Barack Obama failed to honour 
his 2008 pledge to close Guantánamo? The camp is a shameful affront to the 
principles of human rights and dignity enshrined in the US constitution. Why 
have ministers tolerated this disgraceful behaviour by our closest ally? And 
why should taxpayers stump up £1m in out-of-court compensation – in effect, 
hush money – to save ministerial blushes?

The bottom line here is clear. The activities of ministers and government 
employees involved in counter-terrorism, like momentous government decisions to 
wage war and the extent of government snooping in a free society, are all 
matters that rely on public trust. The treatment ofShaker Aamer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shaker-aamer> breached that trust. So, too, 
has the continuing, inexcusable delay in releasing the Chilcot report into the 
Iraq war. If the government hopes to pass its mooted investigatory powers bill, 
which would give it draconian new surveillance powers, it needs to demonstrate, 
against a mountain of evidence to the contrary, that it can be trusted.
 