
Elvis Presley died as he lived, an enigma to the end. Not just in his personal 
life behind the closed gates of the mansion inElvis Presley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley> Boulevard, Memphis but in his 
professional life as the greatest rock 'n' roller of them all (if briefly, and 
many years ago), and as one of the two American entertainers of the post-war 
period to have acquired a truly mythical status.

The other was Monroe and it is no coincidence that Warhol chose her - along 
with Presley - as the subject for his best known two-dimensional pop art. 
Disposable and untouchable. He leaves behind that image and leaves with it 400 
songs and sales of over 260 million records that vary almost ridiculously in 
quality and style, but have left the myth and enigma intact.

There are currently 35 Presley albums available in this country (including two 
boxed sets) and with re-releases he has had 117 singles on sale here. The first 
his record was 22 years ago and his latest album was released only this month. 
It included a single, Way Down, currently 46 in the charts (and doubtless in 
the Top Ten next week) which may not be the greatest recording he has made by a 
long way, but shows he certainly wasn't finished at the end, as some have 
suggested.

His recorded output falls into four loose categories. There are the earliest 
recordings made for Sam Phillips at Sun Records in Memphis. There are the songs 
from the period of his most massive success in the later fifties, when Colonel 
Parker sold him to RCA and sent him wiggling across an America just discovering 
the hysterical froth of a growing youth culture. There are the often 
disappointing songs from the sixties, when after a period of national service 
(1958-60) he was re-packaged as Wholesome family entertainment, first quite 
successfully through films like Wild In the Country, and then appallingly when 
he was paid ridiculous sums to churn out dreadful films with dreadful songs.

The fourth, most uneasy period has been since he again ventured out for live 
performances, starting in Las Vegas in 1969 and daring to tackle New York's 
Madison Square Garden in 1972. His new live recordings vary from the edge of 
self-parody to occasionally slick and powerful singing when he rediscovered the 
ballads and the aggressive, exhilarating styles which once earned him the 
undisputed title of King.

For me the greatest of his recordings are the earliest of all, now available 
on the album The Sun Collection (RCA HY 1001). These are the songs of the son 
of a poor sharecropper, a boy who wore flashy clothes, drove a truck and almost 
by instinct fulfilled what Phillips knew the public wanted - "a white man who 
had a Negro sound and a Negro feel". It is the sound of Memphis in the 
mid-fifties - black music that had moved up and down the Mississippi being 
interpreted by a young white with a natural gift for distinctive phrasing, and 
roots in country music.

The "rockability" or "western bop" style Presley helped to pioneer is more 
natural and relaxed than in the famous recordings of a couple of years later, 
when he piled on the hysterics and grunting emotion to meet public demand. The 
album includes such black material as Arthur "Big Boy" Crudup's That's All 
Right Mama and country songs such as Blue Moon of Kentucky and I'm left, You're 
right, She's gone. All are treated with a a new vitality, a natural 
inventiveness and excitement and a lightness of touch that was to be lacking in 
later recordings.

Presley's most famous tracks later on in the fifties when the crowds screamed, 
parents were disgusted and Ed Sullivan would have Elvis on his television show 
only if he was shot from the waist up, are available on a number of compilation 
albums. Songs such as Heartbreak Hotel, Jailhouse Rock and I Got Stung will 
always be classics and as much because of Elvis's unique vocal style and 
phrasing as for his boldly intense sexuality and emotion.

If your singles have worn ou the best way to replace them is through two boxed 
sets, Worldwide 50 Gold Awards Hits Vol 1 and 2 (RCA Victor LPM 6101/2). Vol.1 
contains the "A" sides, Vol. 2 the "B" sides and the set runs from Heartbreak 
Hotel in 1958 to Kentucky Rain in 1970. It includes the best of the tracks that 
Elvis recorded among all the mediocre output of the sixties from Return to 
Sender to In The Ghetto with such horrors as Viva Las Vegas thrown in.

As an alternative - if you can find it - there's a new boxed set of Presley's 
16 No. 1 British singles covering a 13 year period. The set came out in April, 
and the singles came in special sleeves and were enclosed with unhappy irony in 
a black box. This has become an instant collector's item.

Elvis's most recent work has been covered by a series of variable albums with 
live tracks from Live at Madison Square Gardens (RCA SF8296), a recording of 
his June 1972 show, to the patchily impressive Live in Memphis (RCA AFLI 0605) 
in which he mixes old hits with songs by Kris Kristofferson and Mickey Newbury, 
and the brand new Moody Blue (RCA PL12428). Some of the songs here are recorded 
at home and some "on tour" (no details are given). The live tracks are 
unimpressive, kicking off with a particularly unremarkable version of Unchained 
Melody (of all things). But at least there's the single to show that Presley 
could sometimes bother to do well at 42.

His death will lead to the usual morbid successes - religious albums such as 
his 1971 set, His Hand In Mine (RCA SF8207), are likely to start selling again, 
and his recently deleted album of stage chat (or rather mumbles), Having Fun 
With Elvis On Stage (RCA APM 10818 if you can get it and really want it), is 
likely to be made available once more. He didn't have that much to say because 
he was not rebel or spokesman or innovator - at least in the last 10 years. He 
deserves to be remembered not for his unhappy private life or his recent patchy 
output, but for those exhilarating and extraordinary years before 1958, and a 
talent that remains as enigmatic and unknown as the man because it was never 
fully tested.
 