
For a few days over Christmas, a massive effort by charities such as Crisis 
and the volunteers they recruit tries to offer something like festive cheer for 
thousands of people who might otherwise have been sleeping out on the cold, wet 
streets of Britain’s cities.Crisis at Christmas 
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/pages/christmas.html> – Europe’s largest 
volunteer-run event – last year mobilised more than 10,500 volunteers and 
helped over 4,500 homeless people in centres in London, Birmingham, Coventry, 
Edinburgh and Newcastle. This year, they expect even more people to need their 
support. The generosity of individuals on this scale is a fine thing. But it is 
no answer to the perfect storm that now howls round housing policy, driving the 
surge in homelessness and the number of families in temporary accommodation.

There is an easy, obvious, explanation for why this perfect storm has built 
up; and there is a less obvious but more immediate one. The easy, obvious 
explanation is the catastrophic shortage of new homes. That drives up prices 
while at the same time banks demand deposits of at least 5%. That often means 
upwards of £7,500, a fortune out of reach to many potential buyers. So they 
swell the demand for renting.

The less obvious but now most pressing reason for the storm is this: since 
2010 there has been a ferocious squeeze on welfare. By March 2016 almost £15bn 
had been cut out of the work and pensions budget. Not all of the cuts fall on 
direct support for housing. But people are often tipped into homelessness by, 
say, a benefit sanction or rent arrears. Forthcoming changes are likely to make 
the situation worse. Single under-35s will only be entitled to support at the 
shared accommodation rate, and in many parts of the UK housing support would 
probably not be enough to be able to afford somewhere to rent. Child benefit 
will be restricted to the first two children, and for out-of-work families all 
benefits have already been capped at £23,000 in London, £20,000 in the rest of 
the country. Families who have three children and can’t find a job, according 
to the Chartered Institute ofHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing>, will by next April be likely to 
struggle to find social housing they can afford anywhere in England. The gap 
between what benefits will pay for, and what rents cost, has grown so large 
that in many places only about a 10th of homes in the private rented sector are 
within reach. Meanwhile, for many people in work, pay has barely increased 
since 2008.

In a notorious passage in his memoir of the coalition government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/nick-clegg-george-osborne-cut-welfare-poorest-boost-tory-popularity>
, the former Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg claimed that George Osborne 
once said: “I don’t understand why you keep going on about the need for more 
social housing – it just creates Labour voters.” Even if the story is 
apocryphal, there are pages of statistics showing how severe, and how 
predictable, is the cumulative consequences of the cuts. Theresa May’s 
government has slowed some changes, but the trend remains the same. A backbench 
bill – most unusually sponsored by all the MPs on the cross-party communities 
and local government committee – that will put more obligations on local 
councils to intervene earlier with help and advice for people at risk of 
homelessness, now has government support. But a third of all those who end up 
in temporary accommodation are people who were just about managing until they 
got to the end of their tenancy and the landlord wanted to put the rent up. 
Ending assured tenancies in the private sector is the single biggest factor 
behind families seeking help. Meanwhile, homelessness charities report lettings 
agents gathering wannabe tenants together and going round the room looking for 
the highest bidder. Some inner-London councils with families facing 
homelessness send them miles away: Westminster council was recently criticised 
by the supreme court for sending a family to Milton Keynes, without making any 
attempt to find out if they would be able to manage.

This is a crisis that won’t go away after Christmas. In the short term, the 
solution may be less difficult than it first appears. There is a hint that the 
government sees this, in a new £50m fund to encourage agencies to work together 
locally. However sceptical voters are about the old mantra of joined-up 
government, when the cost of renting is driving up the cost of housing support, 
and trying to cut the cost of housing support is becoming a trigger for 
homelessness, it is time all the departments with a responsibility – Treasury, 
Work and Pensions andCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government – sat 
down together, and fixed it.

• This article was amended on 22 December 2016 to correct and clarify details 
about restrictions on benefits.
 