
Hull has announced its programme for its year as UK city of culture 2017 
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/>. The city that brought the world everything from 
Mick Ronson to the Hull Truck Theatre, from the Housemartins to Philip Larkin, 
will be awash with events. The elegant Ferens art gallery will reopen after a 
£4.5m renovation and host exhibitions including the Turner prize and a show of 
Sienese old masters. There will be a chance to admire, atthe new Humber Street 
gallery 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/new-art-gallery-to-open-in-humber-street-for-hull-city-of-culture/story-29742379-detail/story.html>
, the work of COUM Transmissions, a collective founded in Hull by Genesis 
P-Orridge and Cosey Fanni Tutti in the 1960s. The Hull-born playwright Richard 
Bean – writer of National Theatre dramas such as One Man, Two Guvnors – will 
premiere The Hypocrite, a play about the local aristocrat who set in train the 
violence of the English civil war. The year will start as it means to go on – 
with fireworks.

Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> is the second city, after 
Derry in 2013, to be accorded the title UK city of culture. The scheme was 
established as a homegrown way of emulating the European city of culture 
programme, whose crown Glasgow and Liverpool wore in 1990 and 2008 
respectively. In the UK version, there is no central government funding to help 
the winner, which is accorded the title after a bid process. Instead, the 
accolade is used as a lever to attract investment and partners, such as the BBC 
and Tate.

For all the fun and excitement, these years of celebration for cities can be 
problematic. The glamorous artists and performers may arrive like bright exotic 
creatures – and then depart, leaving a place much as it once was. Vast sums of 
money can be spent on cultural programmes and improving physical 
infrastructure, without a long-term difference being made to citizens’ lives. 
Art projects can attract the people whom art projects usually attract, without 
really penetrating into the hard-to-reach places of a community. There can be 
unrealistic expectations of what such a year can achieve, with councils 
desperate to fill hotel rooms, cut unemployment and attain that elusive goal of 
“cultural regeneration” without a nuanced view of the subtle manner in which 
art, encountered in the right way, might just shift the arc of a person’s life. 
The 2012 London Olympics is a case in point. Though the bid, which put culture 
at its centre, was obsessive about the importance of “legacy”, it has often 
felt unclear in what that legacy has actually consisted – and whether it has 
been squandered.

Early signs are that Hull will make a success of its year in the spotlight. 
Crucially, its programme involves not only big-ticket events that visitors will 
want to come to see, but projects that will start in communities: an estate 
that will throb with a colourful light installation; mini-festivals that will 
break out in residential areas; and, all around the city, free outdoor events. 
The Humber bridge itself will resonate with a sound installation featuring the 
voices of Opera North. For the year to work, it has to feel as if everyone is 
invited – visitors, of course, but more importantly residents. People must have 
a stake in it: to feel that it is theirs to make, rather than something that is 
being done to them. Two thousand people from Hull have already offered 
themselves as volunteers. Sixty thousand children are going to be involved in 
education projects. That is a brilliant start. The city of culture tentacles 
need to reach absolutely everyone.
 