
It's a picture you know best in Technicolor form, painted in lurid yellow and 
blue on the cover of the Flaming Lips' 1999 breakthrough LP The Soft Bulletin. 
As they prepare to perform it in its entirety, the band'sWayne Coyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/flaming-lips-interview> and 
photographer Lawrence Schiller explain the origins and enduring appeal of the 
shot …

The black-and-white original is an enigma: a scruffy figure stands by an 
illuminated wall, transfixed by his own shadow. "I'd seen it in a Life hardback 
I picked up at a thrift store maybe 10 years earlier, and I always thought it 
would be a cool album cover," remembers Coyne. "I think I was actually making 
music that sounded like that photo, or what I thought the photo sounded like, 
anyway."

The photo's title, The Acid Test: Neal Cassady, reveals that this anonymous 
figure is one of the most iconic – if elusive – figures in 20th-century 
literature. A teenage dropout who fell in with the young Jack Kerouac, Cassady 
became the inspiration for perhaps the quintessential Beat generation figure, 
Dean Moriarty, the restless, superhuman drifter of Kerouac's 1957 novel On The 
Road. By the early-60s, following a meeting with the author Ken Kesey, Cassady 
had become the amphetamine-fuelled driver for Kesey's Merry Pranksters, a 
troupe of Californian hippies who piled into a brightly painted bus and set out 
to introduce the mind-expanding properties of LSD to the stuffy straights of 
middle America.

By this time, Schiller was a photojournalist of some renown, and with a batch 
of good-quality LSD finding its way into counterculture circles and talk of 
so-called Acid Tests – musical events fuelled by Kool-Aid laced with 
psychedelics – taking place along the west coast, he set out to document the 
new scene. Through acid guru Timothy Leary, Schiller made contact with Kesey, 
who told him the Pranksters were due to hold an Acid Test on Sunset Boulevard. 
Mid-trip, they skipped down the block to pose for portraits. "Cassady was 
there," Schiller recalls. "At one point I went over, and he started dancing 
with his silhouette. It had a certain poetry to it."

The Cassady photo ran as part of a feature in Life magazine. "Can any law keep 
the awesome drug away from reckless hands?" screamed the caption. Yes, as it 
turned out. Moral panic ensued, followed by legislation.

"I saw a dark side to it," says Schiller. "Runaways, 16 or 17 years old, 
dropping acid and sitting in a supermarket staring at the breakfast cereals. 
Under the right circumstances it led to very positive experiences, but some 
ended up with full-blown psychosis."

The Acid Test: Neal Cassady was published in Schiller's 1966 book, LSD, but 
languished in relative obscurity until the late-90s. Schiller was pleased it 
saw the light of day again. "It wasn't a Pulitzer Prize-winner, but it says a 
lot with a little," he says.

Coyne's attachment to the photo is similarly intangible. "To me, the photo 
represents a person going into the unknown – the unknown within themselves …"

The Flaming Lips play The Soft Bulletin at Alexandra Palace, N22, Friday. 
Lawrence Schiller is represented bydiggallery.com <http://diggallery.com>
 