
Rugby sevens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-sevens> seems to fit the 
Olympics. The sport has, to a greater or lesser degree, the physicality of 
judo, the skill of rhythmic gymnastics, the athleticism of the 400m dash, the 
aggression of sprint cycling, and the gut-busting endurance of rowing. It’s 
fast and funky and fun. And it’s ready to bust out all over.

 Sevens athletes range from amateur to semi-professional. They are among the 
fittest people at the Games. They mix sub-optimal endurance with high-octane 
effort. They need mental clarity under high fatigue. They train so hard they 
vomit. They run and run and run.

'Rugby is our religion': Fiji erupts in celebration of Olympic sevens gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/12/rugby-is-our-religion-fiji-erupts-in-celebration-of-olympic-sevens-gold>
 You wonder why it’s taken so long to be an Olympic sport. (And then you 
think, oh yes - the IOC.) Rugby, in one form or another, is played in 121 
countries. There’s a sevens world series contested by 19 countries in 10 cities.

 And did not Matthew McConaughey turn up to watch New Zealand play USA? And 
art met sport, and Twitter went bat-crazy. And the game went everywhere. For in 
America and by extension the world, star power has cachet. Star power is money.

 Look at Australia’s best player, Charlotte Caslick, tearing about in her 
pig-tails, blowing hard around a mouthguard, all skinned knees and dirt and 
sweat. And that try-saving tackle against flying US winger Victoria Folayan – 
how about that? To the kids she’s Tank Girl, she’s girl power in 
green-and-gold. She’s fit, cool and a winner. Kids want to be her.

 Fiji, too, were winners, capturing the country’s only medal of any colour 
ever. If Fiji was going to win an Olympic medal, it was going to be in rugby 
sevens. And even Great Britain,flogged in the final 43-7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/fiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final>
, appreciated the story of it, and their place in it.

 The women’s sevens team has arguably been Australia’s greatest success at 
these Games. Unless the nation’s expectations were too high, their swimmers 
under-achieved. Rowers and cyclists were tipped for big things. A fancied long 
jumper didn’t make the final. Hockey was hopeless.

 Little wonder that ARU chief executive Bill Pulver waxes so lyrically about 
the women, describing them as “wonderful, athletic, articulate, intelligent 
young Australians” who are “just extraordinary role models for any young girl 
thinking about picking up a rugby ball”.

 Sure, the CEO would say that. But you can forgive the man for being bullish. 
Outside of the Rugby World Cup, the game’s been in the doldrums, somewhat, a 
clear third behind fellow professional football codes rugby league and 
Australian rules. And if the ARU can stake a flag in the ground on the back of 
sevens, well, they will.

 “Rio will have a game-changing effect on the entire landscape of women’s 
sport,” reckons Pulver. “As a young girl considering what sport to play, not 
only is there an established world series in sevens rugby, there is now the 
ultimate carrot of becoming an Olympian and having a chance to compete on 
sport’s ultimate stage.”

Olympics rugby sevens: Australian women win gold against New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympics-rugby-sevens-australian-women-win-gold-against-new-zealand>
 Whatever else you say about the maggoty old sports carnival infused with 
drugs, corruption and political malarkey, there is cachet in the Games. 
Tax-payer-funded cachet. And rugby sevens funding will be secure right up to 
Tokyo. Because: gold medal.

 It’s the same for other countries. Since rugby was announced at the Olympics, 
super powers like the USA and China have increased funding and playing numbers. 
Governments and national Olympic committees have invested in the game. Rugby is 
being taught in schools for the first time. Rio is a game changer for the sport.

 World Rugby points to record participation growth since sevens was awarded an 
Olympic place seven years ago. Player numbers have doubled, according to WR, 
with 7.73 million players in 121 member unions worldwide. Women are the 
fastest-growing area, with 2 million players – up from 200,000 seven years go – 
representing 30% of that total.

 And if Australian rugby is smart, the women will be everywhere. Rugby needs 
to capitalise on their talent and effectively sell them as the face of the 
game. Caslick, Ellia Green, Sharni Williams, Emma Tonegato, Chloe Dalton, need 
to be launched. And money will follow. Endorsements. All sorts of stuff. 
Caslick has a deal with Nike. You’ve got to think there’s more coming.

 Few years ago when James O’Connor was just busting out and running around for 
the Wallabies, this tousle-haired 20-year-old, equal parts Justin Bieber and 
Tim Horan, Inside Sport put him on the cover, the first rugby union player in 
four years. Six months later he was the face of Swisse, the vitamin mob, heir 
apparent to Ricky Ponting. Perhaps it was coincidence…

 But you can bet the Australia-centric Australian Football League – which 
kicks off an eight-team women’s competition next year – and the National Rugby 
League – which owns touch football – is watching. Caslick and a few of her 
team-mates came from touch footy. And they chose rugby sevens because, as 
Caslick says, they’d “done everything there was in touch”.

Aussie rules, rugby league and touch footy, by dint of their limited global 
appeal, have a ceiling. And rugby sevens has theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>.

 If there’s a criticism of rugby in Rio, and it’s a valid one, is that the 
15,000 capacity Deodoro Stadium never looked full, even for the gold medal 
matches. Pre-Games, organisers proclaimed that 70% of tickets had been sold. If 
that was true, some didn’t turn up. There was good noise made by those who were 
there. But the matches didn’t have that “thick” or “close” atmosphere big games 
can. You could put it down to Brazilians going through their worst recession 
since 1901. But it wasn’t a good look.

 There’ll be a better look – and a better idea of where sevens rugby stands in 
the Australian sports-consumption market – when ARU hosts its Sydney Sevens in 
February 2017. Last time it was almost sold-out for two days, with nearly 
80,000 party people dressing up and drinking down and watching footy in the hot 
Aussie sun.

 And then, of course, there’s Tokyo, and the Games of the XXXII Olympiad in 
2020. And they’ll just about fill the 45,000-seat Tokyo Stadium every day. The 
Cherry Blossoms (XVs) beat South Africa in the last World Cup. Millions of 
Japanese watched their sevens team beat New Zealand in Rio. These are the two 
biggest things to ever happen in Japanese rugby. Eddie Jones’s head was put on 
billboards 30m high. Japan is mad for it.

 And rugby sevens is coming.
 