
One of the quotes I have used most often since the Scottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> referendum in 2014 
is from the American author Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr who wrote: “Every now and 
then a man’s mind is stretched by a new idea or sensation, and never shrinks 
back to its former dimensions.”

And it’s true. Scotland experienced a major political campaign that, for the 
most part, wasn’t designed or curated by political insiders or professional 
campaigners. Rather, it was put together by a mass movement of grassroots 
activists who were drawing ideas from whatever inspired them.

For about 18 months we talked not about the priorities of the financial 
services or corporate retail sectors, but about who we are, what we value, how 
we want to live and what kind of society we aspire to be.

It was undoubtedly intoxicating. I met many people who told me that it had 
never occurred to them that politics could be something they were interested 
in. The aftermath saw established politics punished. The SNP swept to power on 
the back of these new hopes.

Delegates to the SNP can get a drink in the 'lounge' – a private franchise 
deal the SNP has with Heathrow

The problem is that, outside of exceptional moments like the independence 
referendum, politics exists in its own ecosystem – and that ecosystem is 
populated mainly with ideas and analyses that have money behind them.

This is for the simple reason that getting heard in professional politics 
requires sustained promotion and the ability to get the ear of the mainstream 
media. I have worked as a professional political strategist for the past 20 
years and I know just how much resource that requires.

So we end up with a system where what matters is who has money and wisdom is 
defined by wealth.

In this world, it is wise to pay three times as much for a school built by 
private finance initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/11/serious-defects-two-more-edinburgh-schools-built-using-pfi>
 rather than a publicly funded one. Expecting domestic businesses to pay all 
their taxes – but not the multinationals they are competing with – is “just 
life”.

But moderate, people-centred policies on housing or banking or transport or 
economic inequality are seen as wild-eyed and beyond common sense.

This ecosystem harms everything it touches. I am writing this in the cafe of 
theGlasgow Science Centre <http://www.glasgowsciencecentre.org/>, across the 
river Clyde from the SNP’s annual conference.Common Weal 
<http://www.allofusfirst.org/>, the think and do tank of which I’m the 
director, has always had a stall at the SNP conference. But this year, the 
costs quadrupled. We simply couldn’t justify the expense.

So, about 40 organisations created IdeaSpace 
<http://www.thenational.scot/culture/profile-ideaspace---a-festival-of-ideas-and-thinking.23213>
, a “festival of ideas” that is open to the public and coincides with the SNP 
conference. We have people talking about a national investment bank, land 
reform, a transformation in early years education, feminist economics, a new 
approach to housing, a different kind of monetary policy, divestment from 
fossil fuels – it’s a long list.

Nicola Sturgeon challenges May with second referendum bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
But if you are a delegate to the conference and you don’t cross the bridge, 
you’ll be limited to a quick drink in the “lounge 
<http://heathrow-lounge.qmeeto.com/>” – a private franchise deal the SNP has 
with Heathrow. Or you could go to a fringe meeting by the lobby group for the 
large corporate retailers, or perhaps grab some leaflets promoting the benefits 
of cheap alcohol to the economy.

I wonder what lessons mainstream politics is learning from the democratic 
shocks of recent years. Did the SNP win a landslide on the back of a campaign 
to create a different nation, and conclude that what its voters really wanted 
was for it to parrot Heathrow propaganda?

Is the conclusion from Brexit that what people are crying out for is old 
politics, and the old paternal certainties of an era where the role of a 
citizen was to be governed on someone else’s behalf?

For good or ill, on many issues and in many ways, ordinary people’s minds are 
being stretched by a new idea. The idea is that they might matter, that what 
they think and feel should be shaping their society, their community.

It is an intoxicating idea. If mainstream politics cannot keep that idea 
alive, others will. And it may not be the hope-filled optimists who right now 
are busily talking about a better future here in the Science Centre.

One thing is for sure: hoping that people’s imagination will regain their 
previous dimensions would be a very risky strategy.

• This article was amended on 20 October 2016 to correct the wording of the 
quote from Oliver Wendell Holmes, and the description of him from civil rights 
activist to author.
 