
In the June referendum, majorities in England and Wales voted to leave the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, while majorities in 
Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain. English people account for 
around 85% of the population of the UK. So one way of reading the result is 
that England (and Wales) is forcing Scotland (and Northern Ireland) out of the 
EU against their will. The referendum arithmetic makes that claim hard to deny. 
But it is not the only truth about the Brexit vote, and some Scottish 
nationalists go much further. They say that the vote should be seen as an 
expression of a growing and specifically English, not British, nationalism. The 
hard evidence for that is much less convincing, however much it may suit other 
nationalists.

Even today, English nationalism remains the dog that does not bark in British 
politics. Inthe words of  
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n22/neal-ascherson/england-prepares-to-leave-the-world>
Neal Ascherson, the distinguished Scottish commentator who recently described 
the 23 June decision as an English independence vote, Englishness has long 
“dozed quietly under the cloak of Great Britishness,” but has now awakened and 
thrown off the cloak “in a sour temper”. The problem with accepting this view 
is that, while it may become true one day, but there is not much sign of it 
right now. It is true that more English people than in the past now 
self-identify as English rather than British. That is a significant change. But 
it doesn’t mean their votes in the referendum can be interpreted as expressions 
of resurgent English feeling, let alone make them English nationalists. Nor 
does it automatically mean they want to leave the EU or break up the UK. Ukip, 
which is often portrayed as an English nationalist party, doggedly refuses to 
self-identify as one most of the time. Nigel Farage greeted the Brexit win as 
the United Kingdom’s“independence day” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36613295>, not England’s. 
Maybe that will change. But in its current confusion, it is hard to know 
exactly what Ukip actually stands for about anything.

Organised English nationalism remains stubbornly marginal too. The extreme 
racist right is real, shows signs of post-referendum revival and should not be 
underestimated, but English racism is a mix of pathologies in which militant 
Englishness still plays second fiddle to hatred of people of colour and 
foreigners. In electoral politics, the constitutional campaign for an English 
parliament, which has no overlap with the extreme right, remains very much a 
minority concern. An explicitly English nationalist candidate polled a mere 52 
votes in the recent Witney byelection. In the upcoming byelection in Sleaford 
and North Hykeham, an area sometimes depicted as a hotbed of English 
nationalism, there is a Lincolnshire independence candidate but not an English 
independence one.

After the Scottish referendum in 2014, David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> infamously appeared outside 
10 Downing Street to announce that Scotland’s vote meant that English concerns 
needed to be addressed. This came as news to most English and Scottish people 
alike. It was provoked more by the Conservative party’s nagging irritation over 
the so-called West Lothian question, which asked why Scottish MPs could vote on 
bills affecting England while English MPs could not vote on matters that were 
devolved to Scotland. Mr Cameron’s answer was to bring in a programme of 
English Votes for English Laws (Evel) at Westminster, which was formally 
adopted in October 2015. Evel gives English MPs (or English and Welsh in some 
circumstances) the opportunity to veto bills or parts of bills that apply 
exclusively to that part of the UK.

A year on, a detailed evaluation of the working of Evel suggests that the new 
system still lacks cross-party legitimacy but is working in a generally less 
provocative way than critics feared. Monday’s report from the Edinburgh-based
Centre on Constitutional Change 
<http://www.centreonconstitutionalchange.ac.uk/centre> says parliament still 
needs to enhance England’s voice at Westminster, and suggests new specialist 
committees to achieve this. It warns that the new system still retains the 
potential to be much more divisive (this would become a problem in the event of 
any sort of Labour or Labour-led government without an English majority). None 
of this is to underestimate either the reality or the potential of the English 
question in British politics. England dominates the UK and more than 50 million 
people live there. The case for greater procedural as well as economic and 
social equality between the nations and regions of the UK is as strong as it 
has always been. This will be especially urgent and may take sharper shape if 
and when Brexit finally becomes a reality. The English dog has had a bit of a 
stretch and a growl, but claims that it is barking and biting are not currently 
in line with the facts.
 