
Is topless sunbathing over? It certainly is in France, according to French 
Elle, if the coverline on its new summer issue is to be believed: "La Fin Du 
Topless Sur La Plage?" – which translates, verbatim, to "Is this the end of 
toplessness on the beach?"

 According to the magazine the answer is "yes", and the reasons are threefold. 
First, an increased concern over health and the dangers of skin cancer; second, 
the "pornified" perception of topless women (indeed Elle suggests the death of 
the monokini – ie swimming briefs – was linked to the idea that topless women 
are seen as "loose"); and third, the rise of breast-affiliated activism – 
chieflyFemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/20/femen-activists-uk-branch-feminism>
, who use their naked breasts as a means of attracting attention to various 
causes, andFree the Nipple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/31/scout-willis-topless-instagram-protest>
, a recent campaign that encourages women to go topless to end the stigma 
surrounding female bodies. "Topless sunbathing was seen by women as a new 
freedom in St Tropez in the 1960s," says Elle. And now that they're covering 
up? It's a "worrying sign of a regression in the place of women".

Ever since Brigitte Bardot <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brigitte-bardot> 
took off her top on the French Riviera in the 1960s, the correlation between 
topless sunbathing and women's liberation has been entrenched in French culture 
as a sign of true equality. Many others followed suit and the breast and beach 
were reclaimed. News that so few women are now going topless (just 2% of women 
under 35 said they did) seems extraordinary – and depressing.

 But, according to two French women, it's more than a fear of skin cancer and 
political activism that has kept them covered up.

Alice Pfeiffer, a 29-year-old Anglo-French journalist (who, incidentally does 
sunbathe topless in Biarritz, Guéthary, Monaco and surfing resort Hossegor), 
thinks the decline is inextricably linked to social media: "Young women in 
their 20s do it less because they are aware that ... you can end up topless on 
your own Facebook wall."

 Pfeiffer blames "pop-porn culture – Miley Cyrus to American Apparel, ie 
aggressive naked imagery of young girls" – for the shift in perception of going 
topless.

"Globalisation and Americanisation of women's portrayal and sexiness in France 
has pushed away gentle (and generally harmless) French eroticism towards porno, 
frontal, hyper-sexualised consciousness," she says. "Nudist, beach-like freedom 
is not what it used to be ... breasts no longer feel innocent or temporarily 
asexual."

 Though probably universal, this attitude towards topless sunbathing has had 
the biggest impact in France. It is still the norm in Germany, according to one 
recent survey, which suggests almost a third of Germans and Austrians sunbathe 
naked. A straw poll in the UK also suggests it's equally de rigueur: one in six 
women we asked said they have or would sunbathe topless: "I don't think about 
skin cancer or being photographed or activism when I go topless," says Jess, 32 
of north-west London. "I just want an all-over tan."

 Valeria Costa-Kostritsky, a Paris-based writer, is 32 and sunbathes (not 
topless) in Britanny and Côte d'Azur. She says the change hasn't happened 
overnight: "I've never seen young women doing it loads. But some women over 50 
do."


 Pfeiffer agrees that the shift has been generational: "Family albums here can 
be a strange thing, as you flip through three generations of bourgeois bra-less 
women." But she maintains that "French women of most ages have, as far as I can 
remember, sunbathed topless."

What of the links between breasts and activism? Nudity as a political 
statement is no new thing – indeed, proverbially speaking, the personal has 
always been political – but, thanks to the internet, it has become a mainstay 
in the world of political activism: in France "showing your breasts wisely (a 
dodgy street will always be a dodgy street, so you have to act responsibly) can 
be a political statement," says Pfeiffer.

Costa-Kostritsky thinks the decline could be linked to health concerns, but 
these are less about skin damage and more about vanity: "Women of my generation 
have always been told that the sun was bad for our skin. But add sun damage to 
gravity and the fear is you won't have pretty breasts."

Pfeiffer agrees: "The ones who do it all look the same – slim and small 
breasts, which contributes to keeping a social order and aesthetic norm in 
place."

But both agree that the issue is not one of self-consciousness. "[French 
women] feel comfortable doing it!" says Pfeiffer. The real reason French women 
cover up, says Costa-Kostritsky, is because "it makes uncovering them for a 
lover more interesting".
 