
Balancing symbolism and substance has long accompanied the European project. 
The EU’s star-studded flag as well as its choice of anthem (Beethoven’s Ode to 
Joy) point to an era when federalist views once held sway. That era is gone. 
This week’s informal summit in Bratislava – preceded, today, by European 
commission president Jean-Claude Juncker’sstate of the union speech 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-16-3043_en.htm> before MEPs – is 
likely to be remembered for realism rather than idealism. Europe is struggling 
with so many crises that it is hard to dispute the need to get back to some 
basics – which means restoring public confidence in the EU’s ability to deliver 
for citizens.

Today’s symbolism is crude enough: on Friday, just six months away from the 
ceremonies due to mark the 60th anniversary of the treaty of Rome, all but one 
of the EU’s leaders will gather in Bratislava to take a long, hard look into 
the future. Not invited is the UK. The message, with regret, is thatEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is going one way, Britain is 
going another.

For the EU 27 there are many unknowns – not least because losing Britain is a 
big blow. So it is no surprise Mr Juncker tried to boost morale by saying “the 
EU is not at risk since Brexit”. But if the message is that Europe must not be 
written off, there is still the challenge of making sure it gets heard outside 
the offices of EU institutions and in the average citizen’s home.

Mr Juncker’s proposals are wide-ranging, from a near doubling of an EU-wide 
investment plan, to deploying more border guards and enhancing anti-terrorism 
cooperation, as well as efforts towards common EU defence policies (which UK 
membership of the club has long impeded). It is unlikely any of this will lead 
to any significant announcements in Bratislava – if only because forging 
consensus takes time.

Mr Juncker and others want to frame a more positive narrative for the EU, at a 
time when it is under severe attack from populist forces that have been buoyed 
by Brexit. It was striking that he insisted that nothing Europe does is meant 
to erode the nation state, nor is it meant to blend separate identities into a 
single homogeneous bloc.

This may read like an overture to Poland’s nationalist government, which had 
been criticised for backsliding on democratic norms. But it is not. Mr 
Juncker’s point was about trying to bridge the differences that emerged last 
year over the vexed issue of refugee quotas. Next month Hungary is set to vote 
in a referendum on the quota scheme. A resoundingnem is expected. That 
Luxembourg’s foreign minister has just suggestedHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> should be kicked out of the EU for 
its refugee policies will have done nothing to help restore a sense of unity.

Some simplistically see Europe’s dividing lines reduced to an east-west clash. 
The wider picture is that populist forces are on the upsurge almost everywhere, 
exerting significant pressure in the Netherlands, France and Germany, where key 
elections will be held next year. With this backdrop, there are now increasing 
calls for a more social Europe to emerge.

Mr Juncker made that case, reminding Poland and other new member states along 
the way how much they benefit from EU funds sent to poorer regions. Increased 
investment plans are meant to favour growth and jobs. This is a welcome 
development and recognition that European economics are not just about deficits 
and austerity. There is backing from EU civil society, parts of which want to 
go further.A group of 177 European NGOs and trade unions 
<http://www.youthforum.org/assets/2016/09/Common-statement-A-new-Europe-for-people-planet-and-Prosperity-for-all.pdf>
 wants more “social and sustainable” policies aimed at defusing far-right 
politics. Adopting a degree of flexibility in interpreting eurozone deficit 
rules for Portugal and Spain helps cast Europe as pro-growth. Similar leniency 
should be considered to deal with looming problems in Greece and Italy.

What Europe’s annus horribilis – which ran from the refugee crisis to Brexit – 
has shown is the need for citizens to see the benefits they can draw from the 
EU. The question must be asked why political leaders do not highlight Europe’s 
fight on behalf of ordinary citizens – for example, as when the commission 
forced Apple to repay a record-breaking €13bn (£11bn) in back taxes. Instead, 
as Mr Juncker put it, all too often “success is national, and failure 
European”. Social and economic factors, along with security and a better sense 
of collective control in the face of globalisation, must surely be a key part 
of the EU’s survival strategy.

While Europe stares ahead, Britain remains entangled in our own uncertainties; 
outside but looking in.
 