
The problem with affordable housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/feb/03/affordable-housing-meaning-rent-social-housing>
 in London and the south-east today is two-fold: first, it is rarely genuinely 
affordable in the first instance and, second, it is almost never structurally 
affordable over time. But there is a way of overcoming this, and that is why 
Boris Johnson's announcement at an old derelict psychiatric hospital called St 
Clements in Mile End last week was so very important.

The time has come to change the way in which we calculate what affordable 
housing actually means to people in terms of pounds and pence, and to link that 
cost to earnings, rather than a percentage of the open market rate.

Back at the time of the October spending review in 2010, this government – in 
what has since stood the test of time of becoming its most Orwellian 
masterstroke to date – introduced what it called its newaffordable rent 
programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/feb/03/affordable-housing-meaning-rent-social-housing>
, which allows social housing providers to charge "up to a maximum of 80% of 
market rent" to tenants each week. Social landlords, it said, should have the 
freedom to offer "affordable rent" properties on "flexible tenancies tailored 
to the housing needs of individual households". But in many parts of London and 
other cities across the south-east this has very quickly simply translated into 
much higher rents, no requirement to offer lifetime tenancies, and shorter 
leases.

Take an area like Mile End, in east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/london>, for example. Never 
salubrious – Pulp's Jarvis Cocker even wrote a song about his time there in 
which he simply repeats the lines "Oooh – it's a mess alright – it's Mile End" 
over and over again. But having spent the past five years living and working 
there, while I can assure you its not that bad, what I can also assure you of 
is that it is not £350 a week good. Especially if that £350 is on a new tenancy 
in some of the borough's poorest and most blighted social housing stock.

And yet that is what new tenants can expect to pay. The average rent in the 
area today is £439 a week. 80% of that market rent is £351.20 a week. (The 
average house price in the area now stands at £422,839.)

Supply alone cannot be the answer. The vast majority of large scale brownfield 
sites have been identified; building upwards and, crucially, to a better 
quality, as well as the great new hope of Ebbsfleet are part of the answer – 
but housing now simply has to be viewed as a public good once more, in the same 
way that the provision of healthcare and education is, and invested in 
accordingly. It cannot be left to the market alone. Because if it is, it will 
continue to fail. In fact, it has always failed. The only semblance of 
equilibrium we have ever neared in housing supply and demand was after the war, 
and that was thanks to the biggest public investment in housing we have ever 
seen.

In fact, the problem is so acute in London that nine councils brought (and 
lost) a high court challenge against Boris Johnson in a bid to protect their 
right to charge genuinely affordable rents for local people. Typically, in 
inner London that used to be around 30-40% of market levels. But why do we even 
accept the premise of the market rate at all, in our calculation of what is 
affordable? That is not the way, for instance, the Living Wage – a similar 
anti-poverty measure – is calculated. We don't say: "Let's pay people 40% of 
the average wage". Instead, it starts with a shopping basket of what people 
need in order to be able to live and survive. And we could do the same for 
housing too. And in fact, we are starting to.

Last Thursday, the mayor of London, Boris Johnson, was in Mile End in order to 
help break ground on London's first and the UK's largest to date community land 
trust. The community-run scheme – initiated by campaign groupCitizens UK 
<http://www.citizensuk.org/> – is set to build just 23 homes there that link 
the cost of a mortgage to the area's average median wage.

It's quite simple in essence. You take the median wage in the borough in which 
the homes are built, which is published every year by the office of national 
statistics. You then apply the principle widely accepted elsewhere around the 
globe – that no family should be forced to spend more than one third of their 
income on housing. And then you multiply this figure by a standard 25-year 
mortgage at an average of 5.5% and add a 10% deposit. And this then gives you a 
price that local people can genuinely afford to pay for new homes going up in 
their local area. The only catch being, if they ever chose to move, they are 
bound to simply reapply the formula and sell the homes in the same way – 
meaning that house prices rise with wage inflation rather than on whims of 
foreign investors or buy-to-leave landlords.

At St Clements this will means one-bed properties within the community land 
trust will be starting at £150,000 and three beds for less than £250,000 – 
about half the current market rate. The market has ceased to be of any 
relevance to working people in that part of town, but these homes will be 
genuinely and permanently affordable.

Dave Smith is the executive director of the East London Community Land Trust
 