
One of the least controversial lines in the Conservative party’s 2015 manifesto
 <https://www.conservatives.com/manifesto> was that “Britain has a long history 
of protecting human rights at home and standing up for those values abroad”. 
Theresa May stood for election on that manifesto, as did her cabinet colleagues.

This may come as a surprise to Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/british-iranian-woman-jailed-five-years-in-iran-nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe>
, who was detained upon her arrival at Iran’s Khomeini airport back in April 
this year. She was simply going on holiday,making a routine visit with her 
daughter Gabriella to visit her parents living in Tehran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/25/nazanin-zaghari-richard-ratcliffe-iran-imprisoned>
. For that, she has been treated as a criminal.

British woman jailed for five years in Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/british-iranian-woman-jailed-five-years-in-iran-nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe>
Now facing a five-year jail sentence, following charges brought by a secretive 
Iranian court, her welfare is under dire threat. Those campaigning for her 
swift release have been dealt a huge blow, but we remain undeterred in fighting 
for her safe return to Britain.

Long periods of Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s detention have taken place in solitary 
confinement in the high-security wing of the notorious Kerman and Evin prisons. 
Unsurprisingly, this has resulted in serious consequences for her physical 
condition. She has become increasingly frail and unable to walk. By preventing 
regular contact with family and legal representation, those holding her in 
Kerman have met the UN criteria for torture, and in doing so are breaching 
internationally accepted means of detention.

This horrific contempt for Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s human rights is compounded by 
the treatment of Gabriella. At just two years old, she was put through the 
trauma of being forcefully separated from her mother and has since had her 
passport confiscated.

In June we celebrated Gabriella’s third birthday outside the Iranian embassy, 
leaving a symbolic card and a balloon for Gabriella on their doorstep. She 
faces the prospect of being separated from her parents until she reaches at 
least seven years of age. This is no way for a child to grow up.

Given that two British citizens, Nazanin and Gabriella, are being held captive 
in a foreign land, one would assume that the UK government is acting with 
urgency. It is not.

The Foreign Office has provided little in the way of tangible action, mostly 
offering vague comments suggesting they are doing “everything possible”.

Tobias Ellwood, the Middle East minister, offers verbal reassurances, and the 
previous foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, told the House he had “raised the 
case a number of times, and (…) subsequently followed that up with a letter”. 
It is hardly the kind of action this case requires. It is not good enough.

In light of the recent resumption of consular relations between Britain and 
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, it is surely fair to expect that 
the government will make full use of those services. They could begin by 
securing consular rights for all British citizens to stop this happening to 
innocent families in the future. But the specific circumstances surrounding 
Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s prosecution requires immediate clarification.

The British family destroyed by the Iranian government: ‘They’re always 
looking to find a foreigner to frame’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/25/nazanin-zaghari-richard-ratcliffe-iran-imprisoned>
The government must call for regular consular access to Zaghari-Ratcliffe to 
check on her welfare. It is not enough for Iran to claim she is Iranian when 
they are clearly holding her as a bargaining chip in a developing relationship 
with Britain. Upgrading relations and encouraging more trade and visits without 
solving this issue of consular access and how dual nationals are used by Iran, 
clearly risks more families suffering Nazanin’s fate. Our government must 
ultimately call for Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s immediate release, or at the very least 
to face charges of an internationally recognisable criminal offence, and the 
ability to defend herself in fair proceedings.

Hundreds of thousands of people have joined the call for Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s 
swift release, and from debates in the Commons it is clear that there is a 
coalition of politicians willing to support the government in taking action to 
redress cases such as hers. A crowded timetable means it can be difficult to 
give specific cases the parliamentary platform they deserve, but following her 
sentencing, the severity of her situation means we will continue to push for 
her plight to be heard.

An appeal beckons, but given the secretive manner in which the Iranian 
judiciary conducts its affairs, any real hope for Zaghari-Ratcliffe lies in the 
British government deciding to stand up for one of its citizens. By remaining 
dormant in the face of this abuse of individual liberty, the government is 
failing to meet the standards that it regularly advocates to the international 
community at large.
 