
London theatres: the West End has been having a quiet time this week - perhaps 
the beginning of the pre-Christmas lull.

Tomorrow a successful "thriller" - Murder Mistaken - transfers to the 
Vaudeville theatre from the Ambassadors, where, on Tuesday, another play of the 
same sort - The Mousetrap - opens.

Hammersmith has John Wright's puppets at the Lyric and Ram Gopal's dancers at 
the King's, both from tomorrow.

On Tuesday there is The House at Bury Hill at the Q and, on Wednesday, Jack 
Hylton presents A Kiss for Adele at the Royal Court - a translation from the 
French by Talbot Rothwell and Ted Willis.

And on Thursday The Marriage of Figaro is revived at the Royal Opera House.

The Mousetrap: as the snow piles up around the isolated guesthouse in The 
Mousetrap at the AmbassadorsTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>
, the false clues drift across the stage, deluding the less alert in the 
audience and appearing to deceive characters in the play who ought to know 
better.

Agatha Christie's comedy-thriller, like a more expensive production which Miss 
Tallulah Bankhead once commented on, has "less in it than meets the eye".

Coincidence is stretched unreasonably to assemble in one place a group of 
characters, each of whom may reasonably be suspected of murder in series.

One killing happens in a black-out at the rise of the curtain, another at the 
end of the first act, and the third is unconvincingly forestalled in time for 
the end of the second (and last) act.

Yet the whole thing whizzes along as though driven by some real dramatic 
force, as though the characters were not built entirely of cliches and 
situations not all familiar.

There is the masculine young woman (Jessica Spencer); here as her foil is the 
effeminate young man (Allan McClelland); and all over the place are the comic 
major, by Aubrey Dexter, and the suspiciously articulate foreigner (Martin 
Miller).

Richard Attenborough plays an unconventional police sergeant on skis, and 
Sheila Sim's character is a guesthouse keeper in a leopardskin skirt, a good 
looker but a bad cook - almost too true to life to be borne by anybody who has 
ever stayed in a quiet hotel.

John Paul and Mignon O'Doherty, the strong silent host and the voluble doomed 
guest, round off a company which makes the most of a middling piece.
 