
There is no need for us to leave the EU with all the consequent complications. 
We can achieve the objectives of the referendum (sovereignty and immigration) 
in a much simpler way: (1) Remain in the EU. (2) Declare that the European 
court of justice no longer has jurisdiction in the UK – UK law is supreme. (3) 
Say that because of the crowds at the frontier and the increasing danger of 
terrorism, we are obliged, as a temporary measure, to introduce visas for EU 
citizens travelling to the UK.

Then wait and see how the EU reacts. There will be a lot of huff and puff. 
Some member states may follow and do the same. If, finally, some penalties are 
imposed they will surely cost a lot less than Brexit. We can set and vary the 
visa conditions later, maintain the requirement or remove it at any stage – and 
some countries could be quietly exonerated.
Francis Farley
Visiting professor, University of Southampton 

• You report (13 December) the House of Lords committee on Brexit’s argument 
that the process of withdrawal from the EU will be hard and damaging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
, but focus mainly on tariffs. Philip Hammond and Peter Lilley did the same in 
answering questions on the Radio 4 Today programme on Tuesday morning. But the 
difficulty does not lie with tariffs so much as with regulations and product 
standards, which pro-Brexit politicians have either ignored or been naively 
over-optimistic about. We need a carefully managed trade relationship with the 
EU during and after any transition period. This means product standards not 
just for final products (cars, washing machines, electronic goods, machine 
tools) but for all the stages of the supply chain. Mutual recognition between 
the UK and EU will deal with some of this; but only some. Tariffs threaten 
relatively small increases in costs, except, as your figures show, in 
agriculture. Scrapping agreed product standards risks unpicking supply chains 
built up over 40 years which are now the core of much of our industry.
Chris Farrands
Nottingham

• Your editorial (12 December) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/guardian-view-on-brexit-and-ireland-special-relationship-special-solution>
 addresses the problems that Brexit has brought to Northern Ireland and the 
Irish Republic. There is a very simple solution that sane people in the UK and 
Ireland would embrace. Northern Ireland, which voted to remain in the EU, 
should join the Irish Republic. This gets rid of the border problem. To allow 
citizens of “New Ireland” to travel and work freely in the UK, as now, they 
could be given dual citizenship with a UK passport as well as an Irish 
passport. The UK could also give them tariff-free trade. All the Irish people 
would get everything they want. A few people might miss having the Queen as 
head of state, but this is surely a small price to pay for all the benefits, 
including peace. If it really worries them, they could go to the New UK to live.
Trevor Randall
Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 