
This great match was the perfect advertisement for international rugby. After 
the plethora of one-sided games in this World Cup, the first semi-final between 
Australia and France at Concord Oval in Sydney on Saturday was just what the 
organisers had been hoping would be seen by millions on television all over the 
world.

It had everything - great skill, challenges offered and taken up, the lead 
fluctuating, and a dramatic finish. The scores were level at 24-24 in injury 
time when the French made one last supreme effort which brought Serge Blanco 
the winning try. I later found only one man who would not say it was the best 
game of rugby he had ever seen.

That man was the French captain, Daniel Dubroca, who rated it the second best. 
His favourite was France's 24-19 victory over the All Blacks at Auckland in 
1979. But then that match took place on a special day for the French - July 14, 
Bastille Day. France, who combined hard, driving forward play with sleek, 
effervescent back play, will now meet the All Blacks in the final at Eden Park, 
Auckland, next Saturday.

Their coach, Jacques Fouroux, has prepared them meticulously for this 
occasion. As long ago as last November, after the French forwards had hammered 
the New Zealanders to defeat at Nantes, Fouroux said: "We had an important 
point to make today. With the World Cup coming up, it was vital for us to beat 
the All Blacks today at their own game."

On Saturday, the Wallabies coach Alan Jones said the French had "heralded the 
regeneration of the European game." Asked what he thought of France's chances 
in the final, he said: "The team that did it today can do it again."

The Wallabies did not play at all badly, especially in the first half. They 
won a lot of primary possession through their tall line-out forwards and their 
tactics then were to use the punting of Michael Lynagh to keep themselves in 
the French half. Lynagh duly dropped a goal and kicked two penalty goals for a 
9-0 lead.

However, the Wallabies could never match the vigorous driving play of the 
whole French pack in the loose. It was this that enabled the French first of 
all to keep themselves in the game and then to strike back. That France secured 
four tries to two speaks volumes for the combination between their forwards and 
backs.

The French did not lose heart when Didier Camberabero, who had been brought 
into the side for his goal-kicking, failed with his first two efforts. What 
mattered was that he succeeded with all his other six kicks at goal, two of 
them from near the left touchline and one from the right. He converted all the 
four French tries and kicked two penalty goals.

He also showed the coolest of nerves. His conversion of the first try - by 
Lorieux round the front of a line-out - was from the right touchline, and it 
meant that France were only 6-9 down at half-time. When the score had reached 
21-24 Camberabero was shaken by a late tackle, but he pulled himself together 
and kicked the penalty which made it 24-24. Finally he converted Blanco's 
last-minute try from the left touchline.

The other French tries were scored by Sella, with a devastating 
inwards-scything run, and by Lagisquet, after the irrepressible Blanco had 
drawn the last two defenders. The Wallabies' points of the second half came 
from tries by Campese, after a blindside run by Lynagh, and by Cooley, from 
short range. Lynagh converted both and kicked a penalty goal, ending with a 
success rate of five out of seven.

Colley was a replacement for Bill Campbell, who went off in the first half 
with a knee injury. The Wallabies also lost Papworth in the first half with a 
similar injury. His place was taken by Anthony Herbert.
 