
One of the pleasures of Christmas radio lies in sneaking off from the family 
to complete a domestic task in the other room while listening to some strange 
old music show. This festive edition ofBarry Humphries: Barry’s Forgotten 
Musical Christmas (Christmas Day, 6pm, Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2) will hit the spot. If you’ve 
never heard this before it’s a good opportunity to try Humphries’s very 
specific aesthetic, which lives on the border of cosy and spooky. He remembers 
his mother boiling the sixpence pieces prior to putting them in the pudding in 
case they’d been in the pockets of common people. The music comes from the 
Comedian Harmonists, Gene Autry, Jack Hylton and beyond. It’s a mix that slips 
down well with advocaat, or indeed any brightly coloured drink that has spent 
months in a cupboard.

Peter Kay has been a fan of Johnnie Walker so long he felt he ought to write 
him a letter to let him know. This led toJohnnie Walker Meets Peter Kay (
Friday, 5pm, Radio 2) in which the pair drive around Manchester discussing old 
records, the contexts in which they first heard them and the equipment through 
which they were played. Their conversation ranges across such topics as the 
days of five-CD auto-changers in the boot, records with good fades, borrowing 
Dad’s headphones with the volume controls on either ear and the curious power 
of spoken bits on records. In between, they play music by the Everly Brothers, 
Gary US Bonds, the Beatles and many others. It’s a congenial listen; proof, if 
more proof were needed, that there are few things more sentimental than old 
blokes talking about old records.

It has been scientifically proven that Christmas reaches a benign peak in that 
short period just before lunch when even the most laggardly adolescents have 
got up and nobody has over-indulged enough to make them quarrelsome. Into this 
interlude of harmony somebody has wisely insertedJust A Minute Does Panto! (
Christmas Day, 1.15pm, Radio 4) in which Paul Merton, Sheila Hancock, Katherine 
Ryan and Rufus Hound seek to get away with as much as they can under the 
chairmanship of Nicholas Parsons.

In the second part of Tommy Steele At 80 (Boxing Day, 10pm, Radio 2) Bill 
Kenwright talks to the Bermondsey boy who survived being Britain’s first 
rock’n’roll star, became a major musical comedy star and still has a few 
stories to tell. And the dependableJohn Finnemore’s Souvenir Programme (
Tuesday, 6.30pm, Radio 4) starts its sixth season with a seasonal special.

I trust there have been no attempts to improve A Festival Of Nine Lessons And 
Carols (Christmas Eve, 3pm, Radio 4) from King’s College Chapel, Cambridge. As 
ever, there’s a freshly commissioned carol and we’re promised carols in French, 
Spanish and German, but the essential shape of one of radio’s great annual 
dramas remains untouched.
 