
"Speramus meliora; resurget cineribus" - the motto of the city of Detroit 
translates as "We hope for better things; it will rise from the ashes". 
Uttered, legend has it, by Father Gabriel Richard, co-founder of the University 
of Michigan, as he surveyed the destruction wreaked by a dreadful fire in 1805, 
these words have rung true for successive generations.

Not least for the inhabitants of today's Detroit, still living with the legacy 
of the 1967 race riots. In the aftermath, big business and the white middle 
classes fled to the suburbs, rendering the city centre a ghostly museum to the 
American way, its abandoned buildings home only to the homeless.

But out of adversity comes a certain pride. The White Stripes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thewhitestripes>, the most exciting rock 
band in the world, come from Detroit, still live in Detroit, and are keen to 
proclaim the fact. When they first toured the UK, little more than 18 months 
ago, the duo's stage backdrop was the city of Detroit flag, complete with 
Father Gabriel's Latin oath.

"The city has never come back from the riots," says Jack White, one half of 
the White Stripes. "It's sort of grey and desolate, a very unmodern American 
city. Really behind the times. A lot of people in the richer suburbs will say, 
'I've never been below 10 Mile Road'; 8 Mile's the border between downtown and 
the suburbs, and it keeps going all the way up to 30 Mile, but some of them 
won't come farther south than 10 Mile. Never come into the city. I used to work 
various jobs and people'd go, 'Where do you live?' 'Oh, I live in south-west 
Detroit, the Mexican neighbourhood', and they'd be like, 'You live down there?! 
Are you insane?!' I'm like, 'Well, I've lived there my whole life.' The 
animosity between the city and the suburbs is huge. It's like two different 
worlds." Eminem grew up on the wrong side of the same tracks, as portrayed in 
Curtis Hanson's film 8 Mile.

"The city still looks as it did 30 years ago," says Meg White, the other half 
of the band. "Basically, there is no downtown. There's nobody on the streets. 
Downtown Detroit has more vacant buildings over 10 storeys than any city in the 
world. Tons of skyscrapers with nothing in them. [The flag] is the idea of 
rooting for the underdog, because Detroit has such a bad reputation."

The White Stripes are behind the times, too. While their home town's 
calamitous social problems have produced some of the most ground-breaking and 
significant music of the modern era (most obviously the lavish production-line 
pop of Motown and the futuristic sounds of techno pioneers such as Derrick May 
and Jeff Mills - the Detroit Historical Museum recently opened an exhibit 
entitled Techno: Detroit's Gift To The World), Jack and Meg White have become 
the rock'n'roll phenomenon of the day by going back to basics: two people, 
guitar, drums, voice.

They don't so much make a virtue of simplicity as treat it like a religion. In 
a sleeve note to their second album, De Stijl (named after the post-first world 
war modernist art movement which included among its followers Piet Mondrian and 
Gerrit Rietveld), Jack wrote: "When it is hard to break the rules of excess, 
then new rules need to be established." The De Stijl credo favoured straight 
lines and primary colours. The White Stripes are never seen dressed in anything 
other than red or white, with black accessories, and apply a strict minimalist 
ethos to their art, which in Jack's mind all revolves around the number three.

"The first time it hit me, I was working in an upholstery shop. There was a 
piece of fabric over part of a couch. The guy I was working for put in three 
staples. You couldn't have one or two, but three was the minimum way to 
upholster something. And it seemed things kept revolving around that. Like, you 
only need to have three legs on a table. After two, three meant many, and that 
was it, you don't have to go any further than that: the three components of 
songwriting, the three chords of rock'n'roll or the blues - that always seemed 
to be the number."

Jack has never been tempted to introduce a third member to the band, however; 
a keyboard player, say, or a bassist. "That would break up the thing of vocals, 
guitar and drums. Somebody else there would bring this fourth component." He 
looks bewildered. "If you're going to have four components, you might as well 
have 20, y'know?"

The White Stripes' production values are deliberately rudimentary. Computers, 
the tool with which almost every record of any description is created today, 
are strictly forbidden. Jack is proud of the fact that the new album, Elephant, 
features no equipment made after 1963. It makes things sound more honest, he 
says.

"If we can't produce something that sounds good under those conditions, then 
it's not real to begin with. Getting involved with computers is getting 
involved with excess, especially when you start changing drumbeats to make them 
perfect or make the vocal melody completely in tune with some programme - it's 
so far away from honesty. How can you be proud of it if it's not even you doing 
it?" Try telling that to S Club 7.

By configuring the band so singularly and adhering to such an austere musical 
aesthetic, the White Stripes were bound to stand out even among their own peers 
in Detroit's garage rock scene. In a mainstream context, however, at a time 
when hit records are mediated and contrived as never before, Jack and Meg are a 
breed apart. The impact of that first UK tour in July 2001, followed by further 
shows towards the end of the same year, suggested there was a massive, 
disaffected constituency, waiting to hear something it could relate to.

Initially feted by the music press and John Peel, who said they were the most 
exciting band he'd heard since Jimi Hendrix, the White Stripes became the 
subject of a media frenzy unlike anything since the first fulminations of punk.

There are silly seasons, and then there is Radio 4's Today programme regaling 
its listeners with the feedback squalls and impassioned screaming of a band 
whose music was at that point available only via imported copies from the US.

Within the space of a week, and without a record contract, lawyer, manager or 
publicist, the White Stripes became the world's most sought-after musical 
commodity. Record companies were all but folding blank cheques into paper 
planes and throwing them on stage. After existing all but unnoticed since 1997, 
releasing a series of singles and three albums on the fiercely 
anti-establishment Californian label Sympathy For The Record Industry, no one 
was more perplexed than they.

"We'd been doing what we wanted to do for so long," Jack says. "Because we'd 
heard that the English press would blow people up to 'saviours of rock'n'roll' 
level, then throw them away three months later, we thought this is what would 
happen to us. So we had to decide, are we going to let this destroy us or are 
we going to jump in head on and manipulate it so it works for us - and not let 
people push us around and destroy what we've been doing? We were forced to do 
that."

These days, the White Stripes don't give many interviews. Not that they did 
that many before they became rock's present, past and future all rolled into 
one, but that was more a function of being an underground, as opposed to 
mainstream, concern. The difference now is that the White Stripes are in 
demand. Sales of their third album, 2001's White Blood Cells, have reached a 
respectable 1m, which is also the figure in dollars they were alleged to have 
received in return for signing to London-based label XL two months after the 
insanity of that first visit.

White Stripes fever is no less fervent now. On the internet auction site eBay, 
advance promotional copies of their new album are changing hands for £150. A 
ticket for the forthcoming UK tour (sold out within hours of its announcement) 
could set you back £80. Meanwhile, a vintage AirLine guitar, the same model and 
colour as that played by Jack, has been on offer for more than $1,000 (£638). 
It purports to have been autographed by Jack. In fact, according to the band's 
spokesperson, Jack signed only a detachable generic scratch board presented to 
him after a gig. The scratch board was then fixed to the guitar. As a result, 
the White Stripes now refuse to autograph anything that isn't a piece of paper.

Such mania becomes comprehensible, however, once you've heard their music and 
witnessed the startling chemistry that flows between the pair when they play. 
Elephant, the new album, isn't fundamentally different from its three 
predecessors, it's just better and more consistently realised: the performances 
are more powerful, the collection of songs more varied, while Jack's voice has 
matured from the callow, sub-Robert Plant shriek of 1999's eponymously titled 
debut into something warmer and more vulnerable. Plus Meg takes a break from 
her primal drumming to sing lead vocals for the first time.

In essence, the White Stripes make pop music that is rooted in a love of blues 
and delivered with the passion of people for whom every note has a profound 
emotional resonance. They deliver melody, rhythm, storytelling - Jack's three 
elements of songwriting - and the sense that it means something to them.

The on-stage interaction is so intuitive that they don't use set-lists, don't 
rehearse, and can switch from one song to another and then back again without 
even an exchange of looks. When they do look at each other, it's invariably for 
dramatic amplification, as on the nursery school romance of We're Going To Be 
Friends or their tormented version of Bob Dylan's Love Sick. No wonder, then, 
that such telepathy should lend spice to the puzzle over the precise nature of 
the relationship between Jack and the woman he calls "my big sister Meg".

Officially, the pair are the youngest two of 10 children. Alternatively, one 
John Anthony Gillis and Megan Martha White were married in 1996, then divorced 
four years later. Once this rumour seeped from the Detroit grapevine - fuelled 
by a story in the Detroit Free Press that casually mentioned the "fact" of the 
pair's marital status, along with documents that appeared on the internet, 
purporting to be the Whites' marriage and divorce papers - it was all anyone 
wanted to ask them about.

Jack and Meg initially responded with obfuscation, claiming it was they who 
had started the marriage/divorce story to ridicule a journalist they didn't 
like. But this merely fanned the flames, and today, wearied of hearing the same 
gossip about their personal life for two years, Jack obliquely states that it's 
no one's business but theirs.

"There was a lack of information coming from us, but a lot of need for copy," 
he says. "The one thing the fucking media hates is not being able to dissect 
someone, so that every little part of their existence can be written as a 
soundbite in a paragraph. What they want is, 'Jack White, 26 years old, likes 
race cars and soccer, grew up in the inner city of Detroit and is now top of 
the world. Can't stand chocolate ice cream.' Everyone wants the inside scoop. 
No, that's not what you need to know about, that's got nothing to do with the 
music we make. What we create, you can talk about. What the songs are, how we 
present them live, and what the aesthetic is, art-wise, to what we're creating. 
It's the same thing as asking Michelangelo, 'What kind of shoes do you wear?' 
It doesn't really have anything to do with his painting."

We're sitting in the downstairs restaurant of a wannabe-swanky hotel in 
London, the sort of establishment where, if you happen to be drinking cola from 
a McDonald's cup - as Meg was - the staff will politely insist on decanting it 
into a glass, and this is the one time in our interview that Jack's unfailingly 
courteous demeanour shifts even slightly.

The intrigue would be less if the two didn't look so alike: pale skin, black 
hair (Jack's is dyed from a nondescript brown), very similar facial bone 
structure. But the weight of anecdotal evidence, coupled with the very real 
on-stage sexual frisson, makes the spouse theory extremely persuasive - and 
even a seemingly innocuous inquiry as to what mealtimes were like in such a 
large family brings a slight chill to proceedings.

Both seem naturally shy, Meg especially so, although she does volunteer a 
comment on the subject of whether people really do care about the private lives 
of public figures. "I don't want to know about my biggest idols. I don't want 
to read their autobiographies, I don't want to find out what they're really 
like."

"Last night, we went and saw [seminal psychedelic rock band] Arthur Lee and 
Love," adds Jack. "And we were asked if we wanted to go backstage afterwards. 
And I said no. I don't want to be disappointed with my idols, because I like 
him, and I read an interview he did in the NME and I was already kind of 
disappointed! In the end, it doesn't really matter, because I always think, in 
20 years' time, the only thing that's going to be left is our records and 
photos. If we're doing something meaningful with those, that's what will live 
for ever, so that's what's really important."

It's instructive that Jack should afford the White Stripes' visual 
representation equal prominence with their music, a stance quite unusual for a 
band belonging to the alternative milieu, where preoccupation with image is 
deemed frivolous. However incongruous they might appear in the context of the 
hotel's upmarket business clientele, Jack and Meg have the indisputable aura of 
stars.

Small wonder Jack was given a part as a deserting soldier turned wandering 
minstrel in Cold Mountain, the forthcoming American civil war film directed by 
Anthony Minghella, starring Nicole Kidman and Jude Law. The role came about 
through country singer T-Bone Burnett, who was producing the soundtrack and 
knew that Minghella wanted to introduce music more directly into the film via 
one of the characters.

"I was flattered that T-Bone Burnett knew I had this love of American folk 
music, enough to recommend me. And, of course, the songs in the film, like 
Wayfaring Stranger and Sitting On Top Of The World, are songs I love. Sitting 
On Top Of The World is the first blues song I learned how to play. So I just 
felt this huge calling, that this part was for me. The funniest part was, we 
were recording White Blood Cells in Memphis, long before any mainstream 
success, and listening to the O Brother, Where Art Thou? soundtrack, which 
T-Bone Burnett did. And I remember saying to Meg, 'It would be so cool if we 
had gotten famous and this movie had come out a year from now and maybe we 
could have gotten on the soundtrack somehow.' And a year later, it happened! It 
was a lot of work. I don't think I could ever be a full-time actor - I don't 
know how those people do it."

They might not do film-star "good-looking", but both Jack and Meg never look 
less than good, dressed inevitably in the red, white and black colour scheme 
that has been de rigueur ever since the band's inception. Meg explains this as 
"like a uniform at school, you can just focus on what you're doing because 
everybody's wearing the same thing". More tellingly, given the sibling/spouse 
debate, Jack says: "When we're doing something with the band, it's another way 
to keep us together, to keep us solid as a unit."

The White Stripes' version of colour blindness is a facet of the war on excess 
that Jack proclaimed on De Stijl. He talks incessantly about "breaking things 
down", self-imposed limitations and codes. This process could even be seen as a 
wilful defence mechanism against potential criticism; as if the fact of making 
art in such an idiosyncratic fashion were its own justification.

"Even when you have the ability to do something, let yourself not do it," Jack 
says. "Like I've made the rule in my life that I'm never going to learn how to 
play the harmonica. Even though I love the sound of the harmonica. It's good, 
because it keeps me boxed in, it gives yourself character and meaning. It keeps 
you centred on what's important, instead of being distracted. All of this - the 
band, the aesthetic, revolving around the number three, the limitations - 
revolves around the most important thing about art to me, which is knowing when 
to stop. We set up this box where we created an idea of this band, the White 
Stripes, we sort of forced ourselves to live inside of it. It was getting in 
tune with ideals that are heading towards truth and honesty, which in music, to 
me, is really the blues."

Dedicating their first two albums to blues legends Son House and Blind Willie 
McTell, the White Stripes have relocated the mores of punk back to their 
fundamental source. A fan of Nirvana in his teens - like Nirvana, the White 
Stripes have covered songs by Leadbelly - Jack's musical epiphany came at 18 
when he heard Grinning In Your Face by Son House, the Delta blues pioneer who 
died in Detroit in 1988. He subsequently became obsessed with both the music 
and lives of Robert Johnson and Charley Patton, strange voices from a distant 
past which to this impressionable and lonely young man spoke with far more 
distinction than any contemporary sounds.

"At that point I was like, what have I been doing? Why have I not been paying 
attention to this music? It was that honesty, bare bones, to the minimum, 
truth. The more I thought about it, it was the pinnacle of songwriting. Easily 
accessible because of the repeating lines you could sing along to, very easy to 
play for the performer, extremely emotional at the same time. You could go to 
see a glam rock band and say, 'This is really exciting', but that's far from 
honesty. If a musician listens to Charley Patton and doesn't hear anything at 
all, I don't think they should call themselves musicians, because they're 
obviously just looking for fun and kicks and a good time out of it."

For someone raised a Catholic, Jack is quite the puritan. He disdains 
drug-taking - a London-based record company owner was once shamed into leaving 
a White Stripes dressing room for offering around a joint - while his attitude 
towards women could be charitably termed "old-fashioned", not to say 
condescending. The song I'm Finding It Harder To Be A Gentleman on White Blood 
Cells sees its protagonist expressing annoyance at having constantly to 
reaffirm his love for his partner: "I feel comfortable so baby why don't you 
feel the same?/Have a doctor come and visit us and tell us which one is sane."

You sense that his immersion in the blues is in part a yearning for a time 
when the division between the genders was a good deal more rigidly demarcated. 
On one level, Jack is so obsessed with the fast lives of the Deep South 
bluesmen - the 1930s equivalent of rock'n'roll stars - that he imagines himself 
to be one, until he remembers he's actually far too civilised to make anything 
other than a pathetic gesture towards that life.

"I was saying, 'These are my idols', yet I probably disagree with their 
lifestyle a lot: wife-beating, drinking and carousing, sick behaviour like 
that. I'm respecting the notions they're conveying in their music but I'm not 
really respecting the people they are. But Michelangelo was probably a complete 
egomaniac jerk, too, y'know? There wasn't equality between sexes and races in 
the 1930s, but there were a lot of things involving feminine and masculine 
ideals that were closer to one's own nature. This kind of opinion can be taken 
as sexist, but it's the same as saying a female can give birth but a male 
can't. Are we all heading towards this androgynous society where everyone wears 
the same clothes and we all shop at the same mall? Culture is dying because of 
mass communication, malls are springing up in third world countries, and we're 
all striving for the same sort of success, but we're missing out on a lot of 
things about what a family is. What a male is, what a female is."

There's a song on the new album called Girl, You Have No Faith In Medicine 
that, by Jack's own admission, borders on misogyny. "It's about the irritation 
I was constantly getting with females arguing about headache medicine. Like, 
'Oh, I can't take Tylenol, it doesn't work.' Whereas a guy would just take 
anything, he doesn't even think about it. It seemed like this tiny thing was a 
big, telling sign of feminine behaviour. In my eyes. A guy can just put his 
coat on and run out the door, but a girl has to take 25 minutes waddling around 
looking for her purse or whatever. Not that one's better than the other, but 
they're different."

Not even Meg can remain mute in the face of this. "I don't know about that 
song," she sighs. "Makes me wanna smack him. A lot."

"But is it true?!" 

"I don't know, Jack. Maybe you're just hanging around with the wrong women." 

Jack laughs. "You might be right about that, Meg." 

Ultimately, the reason the White Stripes have touched such a nerve with so 
many people is that their songs pick at the ineffable nature of human 
relationships with real acuity. Elephant, an album mostly comprising songs 
about the compulsion of love, is dedicated not to a musical icon, but to the 
notion of "the death of the sweetheart".

The fact that, when Jack sings his lacerating version of the Burt Bacharach 
classic I Just Don't Know What To Do With Myself - as rendered by Dusty 
Springfield, one of Meg's favourite songs - he could be thinking of his 
(alleged) ex-wife, just a few feet away playing the song with him, makes the 
well of emotion that much deeper. For all the dissembling and ambiguity and 
mythos, it's at such moments that the White Stripes live up to the grand ideals 
of truth and honesty they so vehemently declare.

"All music and art comes down to love," Jack says. "You just find out how to 
tell that story. You know how it is when you lose something, and you try your 
best to hold on to it, but no matter what tricks you come up with, it's over? 
You wish it was the way it was before, when you had someone completely in your 
grasp. And they can just walk away any time because of this free will everybody 
has. It's depressing, because it feels like if love is true, and two people at 
one point can say how in love they are, and then one day one of them just 
decides, 'No, I don't feel that way any more', and leaves, this person is left 
thinking, 'Well, I still feel that way, I thought we both did.' That's the 
oldest story in the book."

The world outside should make the most of Jack and Meg White and the contents 
of their box while it can, because the White Stripes are almost over. They 
estimate that, with so many self-imposed rules and limitations, they will 
eventually exhaust the possibilities available to two people playing primitive 
rock'n'roll, and that day will come sooner rather than later. "We like to take 
the pessimistic notion, it's easier to live with," Jack says. "But it's good to 
feel there's an end to things." And that, of course, is the key - knowing when 
to stop.

· Elephant is released by XL on Monday.
 