
War used to be described as the continuation of politics by other means. But 
decades of effort have ensured that some tactics are no longer just a brutal 
form of diplomacy, but are defined as crimes. In recent years, the noble goal 
to protect humanity has been hollowed out by the despicable attacks on 
hospitals and schools carried out with apparent impunity in the wars across the 
Middle East. This deliberate targeting has to stop.In Yemen more than 140 
people attending a funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/saudi-led-coalition-airstrike-hit-yemen-funeral-officials-say>
 in the country’s capital Sana’a were killed in an air strike by Saudi-led 
coalition forces prosecuting a bloody war against Iranian-backed Houthi rebels. 
Russia allies itself with a state that uses chemical weapons against its own 
civilians. Russian and Syrian warplanes above Aleppo appear to be intentionally 
targeting civilians. Below them, hospitals, UN aid convoys and schools are no 
longer safe.

This week the quarter of a million trapped and starving people in Aleppo were 
told by Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, backed by Moscow and Tehran, that 
he had to“keep cleaning this area and to push the terrorists to Turkey to go 
back to where they come from, or to kill them” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/no-mercy-children-assad-vows-9046927>. 
International diplomacy pays lip service to the idea that such actions are, if 
proven, war crimes. In meetings, the UN security council “strongly condemns” 
such violations of international humanitarian law. Yet four of its five 
permanent members support coalitions that attack hospitals in Syria, Yemen and 
Sudan.

On Saturday, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and the US secretary of 
state, John Kerry, will meet in the Swiss city of Lausanne to consider steps 
toward settling the Syrian conflict. There is little expectation that anything 
will come of it. Russia is keen to win the Syrian war for Mr Assad at any cost 
– sending signals to the region’s authoritarian regimes that it will fill the 
vacuum left by a weakened US. Egypt, which backed a Russian resolution in the 
security council that removed the demand for an end to air strikes on Aleppo, 
is apparentlyin talks to site an Russian airbase on its soil 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-egypt-russia-military-idUSKCN12C2E0>. 
The argument of power is winning over the power of argument.

Such actions undermine the spirit and break the letter of international law. 
Despite the concept of universal jurisdiction, western governments prefer 
realpolitik.In 2014 the Foreign Office granted temporary diplomatic immunity to 
Tzipi Livni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/israel-tzipi-livni-diplomatic-immunity-uk>
, then Israel’s justice minister, to protect her against arrest for alleged war 
crimes. How can justice be seen to be blind when of the nine countries that the 
international criminal court hasopened inquiries into, eight are in Africa 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/upfront/2016/03/icc-biased-african-countries-160311140721768.html>
? Little wonder African countries threaten to withdraw when they watch states 
in the Middle East commit crimes against humanity with impunity.

Yet the answer to this is not despair. It cannot be. The construction of 
international humanitarian law represented real progress for humanity and it 
must not be abandoned. The evidence of war crimes must still be gathered, and 
their victims remembered.The Commission for International Justice and 
Accountability 
<https://justiceinconflict.org/tag/commission-for-international-justice-and-accountability-cija/>
 has already begun collecting material on the Assad regime’s actions with a 
view to potential prosecutions. If, in the future, the politics of Russia or 
Syria change, perhaps the leaders of those nations, who have blood on their 
hands, could have their day in court. This might yet happen. It has already 
happened once, to Chile’s General Pinochet, who died under house arrest facing 
hundreds of charges of human rights abuse in 2004. This is a history lesson 
that Mr Putin and Mr Assad do not want to repeat but should be compelled to 
learn.

The west, too, faces a chance to demonstrate that it does respect the 
constraints of international law. Soon western-backed Iraqi forces will aim to 
retake Mosul, Islamic State’s last major stronghold in the country. The conduct 
of the battle will determine whether victory comes at an unacceptable 
humanitarian cost. The UN predicts that 1.2 million people could be displaced. 
Safe passage needs to be ensured to the refugee camps, set up by agencies like 
Save the Children, outside of the battlefield. The Iraqi army has already 
bombarded civilian areas – and their Shia militias need reining in. Although 
Iraq is responsible for a judicious application of force, it is backed by 
London and Washington. Earlier this month, the foreign secretary, Boris 
Johnson, made the case for Britain’s “soft power” to defend values enshrined in 
the UN charter. Mosul offers a chance to turn words into action and show that 
there is a better way to win a modern war.
 