
There is a contradiction in the argument that more prison officers will mean 
less trouble inside (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/guardian-view-birmingham-prison-riot-editorial>
, 19 December). The history of modern prison disturbances in England and Wales 
– from Parkhurst in 1969 through to Strangeways in 1990 – indicates that they 
occur for complex reasons. These prisons, and the others where disturbances 
have taken place in the last four decades, had their full complement of staff. 
Other disturbances occurred in prisons that were neither overcrowded nor 
privatised, and well-resourced financially. It is therefore crucial to get to 
the root of why prisoners revolt when they know, in Liz Truss’s cliched phrase, 
they “will face the full force of the law”. Prisoners knowing they faced the 
same consequences have not been deterred from revolting during this time. The 
point made by Frantz Fanon, cited by Black Lives Matter, can be applied to the 
prisons here: “We revolt simply because, for many reasons, we can no longer 
breathe”. Responding to what happened at Birmingham as a law and order issue, 
seeking retribution and dismissing critics as being pro-crime and anti-victim, 
will undoubtedly fail and have potentially catastrophic consequences for 
everyone inside.
Professor Joe Sim
School of Humanities and Social Science, Liverpool John Moores University

The Guardian view on the Birmingham prison riot: a call for action | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/guardian-view-birmingham-prison-riot-editorial>
• Prisons are shameful places, often violent, dangerous and squalid. So of 
course they are a problem. But the real problem is not prisons but 
imprisonment, one endpoint in the criminal justice system. Prisons have no 
control over their own business. They simply have to do what they can with what 
the courts send them, and the courts send them what sentencing policy requires. 
Brave new thinking is needed. What is imprisonment supposed to achieve? If we 
know, are there better ways of achieving it? If sentences are needed, how long 
should they be? Liz Truss’s only response so far has been to recruit more 
prison officers, but doing that (even if she can) will address none of the 
confusions around imprisonment.
Michael Sheldon
Norwich

• Our prisons are full and the prospect of recruiting enough staff to properly 
look after prisoners is months, if not years, away. So we need to reduce the 
numbers in prison in England and Wales. Scotland has already succeeded in 
reducing numbers, but it needs political will. One issue to address is 
ever-longer prison sentences – in England and Wales we have fewer people going 
to prison, but their prison sentences are longer than 10 years ago for the same 
crimes. Yet there is no evidence that these longer sentences are either more 
effective or a deterrent. The reasons for sentence inflation are complex, but 
sentencing guidelines, the decline of sentence appeals and punitive rhetoric 
may all be to blame. The government could take action on all these without 
endangering public safety in any way.
Penelope Gibbs
Director, Transform Justice

• The Guardian was strangely muted at the time Chris Grayling was pushing 
through the privatisation of the probation service, as if you too were 
convinced it was failing and indifferent to its fate as a respected and 
necessary public body. It is good to see you acknowledge that this was a 
foreseeable catastrophe (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/the-guardian-view-on-probation-another-grayling-casualty>
, 16 November).

The service was not failing, and many of the problems it had were the 
consequence of sustained government mismanagement and misguided target-setting, 
rather than internal incompetence. There is a clear evidence base for doing 
probation well, and there were, back in 2014, a cohort of managers and officers 
perfectly capable of delivering this, although many have now left their broken 
and demoralised profession.

The community rehabilitation companies that took over the probation trusts 
have been short-changed, literally, by Grayling, who brazenly overestimated the 
numbers they would get to supervise in order to attract their business. 
“Payment by results” is a fiasco, and the companies cannot afford to keep their 
third-sector partners on board. They are not coming clean about all that is 
going wrong, some may break their contracts, and the Ministry of Justice is 
doing its level best to silence critics.

Could the Guardian now throw the weight of its investigative resources into 
exposing this catastrophe in full? Public safety has been jeopardised by it, 
but beyond the specifics of that, exposure would reveal – all cost-efficiency 
rhetoric apart – how cynical the motives and wasteful the methods of 
privatisation actually are.
Mike Nellis
Emeritus professor of criminal and community justice, University of Strathclyde

• Your otherwise excellent editorial outlining the disastrous consequences for 
offender rehabilitation of Chris Grayling’s political decision-making for 
ideological purposes falls into the trap of suggesting that probation was 
widely considered to be failing in 2012. This is not true, as the Ministry of 
Justice’s own 2013 report highlighted that the performance of the then 35 
probation trusts was either good or excellent against the national target 
framework. Indeed, many trusts had also received national and international 
recognition for their business excellence. The truth is that from the creation 
of aNational Probation Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/national-probation-service> in 
2001, which retained its strong local accountability through local boards and 
then trusts, Labour and then the coalition administration were concerned with 
central control and the move to privatisation. As early as 2003, the Carter 
report recommended the segmentation of service delivery so that privatisation 
and central control of what remained could be facilitated. It is Labour’s 2007 
Offender Management Act that has provided the basis for the folly of the Tories’
Transforming Rehabilitation 
<http://www.clinks.org/criminal-justice-transforming-rehabilitation/what-transforming-rehabilitation>
.

Every single home secretary and justice secretary since 2001 has taken the 
opportunity to attack probation, whether it was John Reid describing it as not 
fit for purpose or Ken Clarke suggesting that the 2011 riots were the 
consequences of failed offender rehabilitation. The real issue is not one of 
supposed failure but why a public service with a proud 107-year history, 
respected and emulated across Europe and beyond, has been regularly attacked. I 
can only conclude that decency, compassion and humanity towards those who 
commit crimes and the belief that with sustained assistance people can turn 
their lives round is now too old-fashioned and stands in the way of profits for 
global businesses.
Steve Collett
Chief probation officer, Cheshire area 2001-10

• While I agreed with the majority of your editorial, it was, like the 
Grayling agenda which it criticised, based upon a false premise. It stated that 
“in 2012 the probation service was widely considered to be failing. Few 
questioned the need for reform”. This is completely incorrect on both points: 
firstly the majority of probation trusts in England and Wales had been 
performing extremely well, indeed had achieved standards of excellence at that 
time, and secondly there were large numbers of people and organisations, the 
majority experts in the field, questioning the need for the so-called 
Transforming Rehabilitation agenda, which Grayling bulldozed through without 
any evidence base.

Community sentences managed by probation services had achieved a lower 
conviction rate than custodial sentences. It was the short-term prison 
sentences which resulted in the highest reconviction rate, and at the time of 
Grayling’s intervention probation services had no remit, except in the 18-21 
age group, to manage these on release. Grayling spoke of a “revolving door” of 
custody and destroyed probation for not reducing reoffending in a group that 
they were not tasked to work with. Probation services were carved up by 
Grayling and a large section sold off to private companies. He and his team 
also had no understanding of the dynamic nature of risk, and those assessed as 
low and medium risk of causing harm are placed with the private companies, and 
high risk with the civil service section of probation. Statistics show that the 
majority of serious further offences come from the low- to medium-risk groups, 
and serious case reviews have counselled against increasing the number of 
agencies involved with risky individuals and the communication problems caused. 
Several private companies have disposed of professionally trained staff, seeing 
them as too expensive.

Having worked as a probation officer from 1981 to 2014, I have been 
heartbroken to see the shambles that the world of probation has now become. 
Most of my contemporaries have now also left their jobs as workloads have 
increasingly become untenable. Younger colleagues have either left to work in 
new fields or are currently struggling on in very difficult circumstances. 
Workloads across the board have now become unmanageable. This is both due to 
high numbers and the nature of the caseloads, coupled with convoluted systems 
of communication between public and private sector.

Grayling has destroyed a high-performing service and a profession. The 
revolving door he spoke of between short-term prison sentences and reoffending 
just got faster.
Jan Clare
West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 