Police recaptured Mexican drug lord Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán in ­January. It 
then emerged that the ­actor Sean Penn had recently farted in his presence. 
Describing the incident, Penn said the fart had:  A subtle brume.  An odorous 
whiff.  A pungent reek. In February, Russian MPs accused Ukraine of trying to 
insult Russia with its choice of:  Miss World contestant.  Eurovision entry.  
Male synchronised diving team at Rio 2016. Seif Eldin Mustafa, an Egyptian 
forger, hijacked a Cairo-bound plane in March because he wanted to:  Crash the 
plane into the pyramids.  See whether it would land on water.  Visit his 
ex-wife in Cyprus. In April, the head of the ­Chilean branch of ­Transparency 
­International, a corruption watchdog, resigned because:  He had set up the 
meeting between El Chapo and Sean Penn.  He had bribed a traffic warden to let 
him park on a double-yellow.  He was implicated in the Panama Papers corruption 
scandal. In May, outspoken South African opposition leader Julius Malema 
­described the South African president, Jacob Zuma, as “umakhandakhanda”. This 
means:  Ignoramus.  One who walks like a chicken.  Big head. In June, British 
and Italian police claimed they had caught the most-wanted people-smuggler in 
north Africa. But doubts were soon raised when the smuggler:  Looked nothing 
like the man in custody.  Said on Facebook that he wasn’t the man in custody.  
Both of the above. During the failed attempt to oust him in July, the Turkish 
president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, appeared on television via which means 
of communication?  WhatsApp voice call.  FaceTime.  Viber. The president of the 
European commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, revealed in August that he keeps a 
record of his enemies in a notebook he affectionately calls:  Big Maurice.  
Little Maurice.  Little Malcolm. For most of 2016, about 50,000 ­refugees have 
been stranded in roughly 50 refugee camps in Greece. In September, the EU set 
aside €14m to make those camps ready for winter. By the time snow fell in 
December, how many had been properly “winterised”?  All of them.  22.  Eight. 
In October, the Nigerian president, Muhammadu Buhari, responded to criticism 
from his wife, Aisha, by ­saying that she belonged in:  His kitchen, his living 
room and “the other room”.  Just the kitchen.  Just the “other room”, whatever 
that is. About 100 people gathered in ­Adelaide in November to discuss ­alleged 
sightings of the thylacine, which is:  A rare form of plasticine, made from the 
thyroid gland, that is only available on eBay.  A Tasmanian tiger that was 
­declared extinct in 1986.  A small sub-species of ­kangaroo that lives in the 
cellars at the Australian parliament. Adama Barrow, who was elected president 
of Gambia in December, previously worked in London as:  A security guard at 
Argos.  A waiter at Nando’s.  A cook at the Dorchester.  You got…  Terrible.  
Oh.  Bad.  Poor.  Not great.  Middling.  OK.  Decent.  Not bad.  Good job.  
Nice.  Impressive.  Stupendous.  Challenge your friends Submit answers 
This article was modified on 22 December 2016, to correct the value of aid to 
refugees in Greek camps and to clarify when it was given.
 