
 What is the ‘great repeal bill’ proposed by Theresa May?

The aim of the legislation will be to end the authority of EU law by 
converting all its provisions in British law on the day of exit from the bloc. 
At the same time, the 1972 European Communities Act giving direct effect to all 
EU law will be repealed.


What is the point of leaving the EU if we are transposing its laws into 
British law?

May says there will be an opportunity to scrutinise, amend, repeal or improve 
any aspect of EU law in the future. There will almost certainly be a huge 
number of requests for changes from MPs, peers and third parties with vested 
interests in getting rid of EU provisions. However, it is not entirely clear 
whether this will happen during the passage of this bill or ministers and 
parliament will be given powers to throw out bits of EU legislation at a later 
date.

Brexit: Theresa May to trigger article 50 by end of March 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
Will it pass through parliament unchallenged?

The bill would probably make it through the House of Commons as it would have 
the overwhelming support of the Conservatives, and Labour would find it 
difficult to oppose. But it might have a trickier ride through the House of 
Lords and the process could be lengthy given the number of amendments likely to 
be demanded.


When will it happen?

The legislation will be introduced in the next parliamentary session, which 
starts with the Queen’s speech next May. It would need to be ready by the day 
the UK leaves the EU, which is now likely to be before March 2019.


How does it fit in with the article 50 process?

May has just confirmed the EU will be informed that Britain formally wants to 
leave the EU before the end of March 2017. That is called triggeringarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
, starting up to two years of negotiations with Brussels – which can be 
extended by mutual agreement.
The examination of the “great repeal bill” will be an entirely separate 
process for the UK alone, as the legislation will be prepared by Whitehall, 
brought forward by ministers and debated by MPs and peers.


Could it mean a weakening of workers’ rights, environmental standards and 
other protections governed by the EU?

This is a possibility that has long been warned about by pro-remain 
campaigners in Labour and the trade unions. During the parliamentary process, 
the government says it will be possible to amend, repeal or improve any law 
after appropriate scrutiny and debate. However, David Davis, the Brexit 
secretary, has insisted this is not the aim. “To those who are trying to 
frighten British workers, saying, ‘When we leave, employment rights will be 
eroded,’ I say firmly and unequivocally, ‘no they won’t’.”


Are there any other implications?

The legislation will end the jurisdiction of the European court of justice in 
the UK. One argument against the EU made by leave campaigners was the EU law 
had become sovereign over British law.
 