
I don’t think it says much for my news sense that I have been scooped on this 
blog’s coming demise!

The Press Gazette’s editor, Dominic Ponsford, rightly reports today that I am 
to stop writing the Greenslade blog at the end of this month. 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/roy-greenslade-to-end-daily-guardian-media-blog-after-ten-and-half-years/>

It has been more than 10 years since I wrote the first posting in what now 
seems like a different world. Many newspaper editors, if not their owners, were 
still confident that newsprint would survive the digital revolution.

Then came social media. At the time of my first posting, Facebook was in its 
infancy, as was YouTube. Twitter had only just been invented. There was no
Instagram <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> or WhatsApp. Since 
their arrival and their success in attracting millions of users, newspaper 
revenues, from both advertising and sales, have been so badly hit.

The drama of new media’s impact on mainstream media has been one of the major 
themes of this blog. One of the other running stories has been the aftermath of 
the phone-hacking scandal at theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>, which led to the Leveson 
inquiry and the continuing row over how the press should be regulated.

On a global scale, I have sought to highlight the risks taken by journalists 
in trying to carry out their mission in countries where the rule of law and 
press freedom hardly exist. Recording the deaths of reporters, photographers 
and bloggers has been this blog’s saddest, but most important, content.

I will continue writing for the Guardian although no longer on a daily basis. 
I have also agreed to increase my university teaching commitments. Here is what 
I told Press Gazette:

“I am sad to be giving up the blog, but I think the work of holding newspapers 
– their owners, controllers, editors and journalists – to account remains vital 
because they still set the daily agenda and therefore remain hugely influential.

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has given me 
enormous freedom to do that, both with the self-published blog for the past ten 
years and in the 16 years before that when I wrote weekly for the paper. 
Journalism has been the central focus of my life for 53 years and I hope it 
remains so. Therefore, l am delighted that I will be able to maintain my 
relationship with the paper.

Without wishing to employ the cliché about taking up new challenges, that’s 
exactly what I am proposing to do. I cannot talk about the specific project in 
which I’m involved – which has nothing to do with news media – but it is real 
and exciting. I am also increasing my teaching commitment at City, University 
of London.”

I regard media commentating as a vital journalistic task at present because I 
am concerned about journalism’s survival into the next decade.

My central worry is about a potential failure by UK media to hold power, 
meaning political power and business power, to account.

I proclaimed at the start of my blogging career that I was a digital 
revolutionary. I did so as something of a wake-up call to fellow journalists 
who were sceptical about the radical effect of online media.

A decade on, I joke about being a counter revolutionary. I still regard 
media’s future as digital, of course. But I want us all to wake up to the 
implications of losing big media. Can we achieve that task without the scale 
and reach of a media that, for good or bad, is the locus of our national 
conversation?
 