
Jeremy Irons Reads TS Eliot (New Year’s Day, from 9am, Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4) is like being treated to the 
sound of a symphony orchestra after weeks of listening exclusively to mouth 
organs. He warmed up last year with the Practical Cats. Now he’s on to the 
heavy stuff. He starts with Prufrock and works his way through the poems at 
points during the day. At each interval, presenter Martha Kearney is joined by 
an interested guest. She begins with Jeanette Winterson, who remembers getting 
Murder In The Cathedral out of the library because her mother liked a good 
whodunnit.

The dictates of forward planning (and the feeling that the radio audience 
stand in need of some kind of intellectual roughage following Christmas) often 
means that programmes in the early part of the new year tend towards the 
improving rather than the indulgent. However, this is often no bad thing. In a 
series of essays yoked together under the nameThe New World (Weekdays, 9am, 
Radio 4), thinkers and writers take on the big issues of our time – many of 
which have all come home to roost in the last few months. It begins on Monday 
with Jo Fidgen asking what it means to live in a post-truth world and continues 
on Tuesday with Gideon Rachman on the axis of power. On Wednesday John Harris 
does Us Vs Them, on Thursday it’s David Willetts on demography and Friday sees 
Jim O’Neill tackle globalisation. Such an initiative can’t help but have a 
touch of the stable door about it: at the same time next year, the same people 
may well be exploring the topics that the thinking classes missed while 
catching up with these.

Before then, a New Year’s Eve Soul Party (New Year’s Eve, 8pm, Radio 2) in the 
company of Tony Blackburn. As foretold exclusively in this column some months 
ago, the BBC has come to its senses and re-engaged the presenter, who hosts 
four hours of tunes from the likes of the Supremes and the O’Jays leading up to 
the new year. Hot on his heels (and no doubt on far higher ones) comes Ana 
Matronic at 11pm to take the carousing through to 2017.


In Cameron Mackintosh From A To Z (New Year’s Day, 5pm, Radio 2), Graham 
Norton talks to the man who confesses that his key skill is to get the best out 
of other, more creative, people. Plus, there’s music from the shows that have 
played a part in his story, from Les Misérables and Half A Sixpence to Mary 
Poppins and Martin Guerre.

Rob Brydon is not merely an Elvis Presley fan. He also does a terrifyingly 
exact impression of him, making him the ideal compere forElvis Dream Concert (
Monday, 12noon, Radio 2), featuring extracts from the King’s best live 
performances from across his career. Also celebrated his week are REM, with 
singer Michael Stipe and co reuniting to mark the 25th anniversary of their 
breakthrough record inREM: Out Of Time (Monday, 10pm, Radio 2).
 