
“Benidorm for £37” trumpeted the Thomson holiday brochure in the 1970s, and 
the price included “a choice of menu” in the restaurant and even dancing twice 
a week.

But the era of glossy brochures selling holiday dreams is almost over: leading 
package holiday brands Thomson <http://www.thomson.co.uk/> and First Choice 
<http://www.firstchoice.co.uk/> are to ditch their traditional brochures by 
2020, as customers demand increasingly sophisticated interactive digital 
experiences to help them choose and book their breaks.

Millions of brochures will be phased out over the next four years. The racks 
of paper will be replaced with digital screens and new technology in the 
group’s 600 UK travel agencies.

The first brochure was launched in 1953 for Skytours, which later became part 
of Thomson and still exists as a sub-brand.

Announcing the move, the group’s managing director, Nick Longman, said it 
would undergo itsplanned UK rebrand – the Thomson brand is set to disappear and 
be replaced by the name Tui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/13/thomson-travel-sun-tourist-tui-britons>
 – next year. The UK and Ireland arm of the Germany-based business is the UK’s 
largest tour operator, with more than 10,000 employees serving more than 5.5m 
customers every year.

Tui Travel reports strong UK demand despite terrorism and weaker pound
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/tui-travel-reports-strong-uk-demand-despite-terrorism-and-weaker-pound>
Longman said the decision to scrap brochures had been triggered by the change 
in the way holidaymakers research and book holidays: “As a leading travel 
company it’s essential we adapt to these changes to make sure our website and 
retail shops stay relevant to holidaymakers. People used to visit an agency and 
spend hours flicking through the brochure and decide where they wanted to go. 
Things have moved on.”

Beyond the physical stores, the group will be investing in video content and 
technology for its online channels to bring its holidays to life and serve each 
customer with personalised content, with the aim of tailoring holiday offers to 
holidaymakers’ needs and budget.

It is considering introducing virtual reality headsets across its travel 
agency network – allowing customers to experience 360-degree virtual tours of 
hotels and resorts – and even technology that recognises a customer as they 
walk into a shop.


The group, which prints 4.7m brochures a year across 58 themed titles, said it 
planned to publish a “lifestyle-related” magazine but on a much smaller scale. 
Thomson’s newest concept stores – calledHoliday Design Stores 
<http://www.thomson.co.uk/blog/2015/02/introducing-biggest-holiday-design-store/>
 – have already done away with brochure racks in favour of technology such as 
interactive maps and video walls.

Despite the popularity of online booking, Longman insisted there was still a 
need for high street travel shops. “We believe there will always be customers 
who want the expertise, knowledge, assurance and the personal experience 
received in retail shops from our people. We need to give our retail advisers 
the tools that customers are demanding to help them continue providing 
excellent service and content. People still want reassurance. As a leading 
retailer we need to adapt and stay relevant. When we decided to get rid of the 
coloured ‘deal cards’ from our windows seven or eight years ago there was an 
outcry, but that was the right decision.”

Longman said the Brexit vote had so far had little impact on the company’s 
business as it planned ahead for the long term. But with UK customers’ spending 
money squeezed due to exchange rate volatility he expected all-inclusive 
holidays – which account for 60% of First Choice’s business – to enjoy a surge 
in popularity.


 