
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City will deploy 
sand-filled trucks and thousands of police officers as part of a plan to 
protect revelers at this year’s New Year’s Eve celebrations in Times Square, 
mindful of two deadly truck attacks in Europe this year.


 As many as 2 million people are expected to gather on Saturday to welcome the 
new year, and authorities said on Thursday they were aware of no credible 
threat to the annual festivities at the famed Manhattan crossroads.

 Even so, officials have redoubled efforts to prevent attacks like those in 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/berlin-truck-crashes-into-christmas-market>
and France this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/several-killed-after-lorry-drives-into-crowd-in-nice-reports>
 in which suspected Islamic militants intentionally drove trucks into holiday 
crowds, killing dozens of civilians.

Christmas market truck attack: terrorism fears darken Germany’s mini-utopias
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/berlin-truck-crash-terrorism-fears-darken-germanys-mini-utopias>
 “People will be safe,” the New York City police commissioner, James O’Neill, 
said at a news conference, aiming to allay any security concerns about the 
Times Square celebration, where a giant crystal ball will descend from a tower 
to mark the start of 2017.

 “We’re going to have one of the most well-policed, best-protected events in 
one of the safest venues in the entire world given all the assets that we 
deploy here.”

The New York police chief, Carlos Gomez, said the truck attacks in Europe were 
taken into consideration in preparing New York’s security plan.

 A truck attack at a holiday market in Berlin days before Christmas killed 12 
people and injured 56, while a similar incident in Nice, France, on Bastille 
Day this summer killed 86 and injured more than 400.

 Revelers in New York City on Saturday will find 65 large sanitation trucks 
filled with sand placed in strategic positions to block potential truck 
attacks, as well as about 100 other smaller “blocker” vehicles, officials said.

 More than 80 sand trucks were used to protect the Macy’s 90th Thanksgiving 
Day Parade in New York after Islamic State militants encouraged followers to 
target the event, which drew an estimated 3.5 million people to the streets of 
the largest US city.

 For New Year’s Eve, the nearly 2 million visitors expected to gather in the 
hours before midnight may notice heavily armed police teams, bomb-sniffing 
dogs, helicopters and bag searches in subways. Coast guard and police vessels 
will patrol the waterways surrounding Manhattan.

 Officers also will make sweeps of area hotels, theaters and parking garages 
and monitor checkpoints where they scan for radiation and weapons, police said.

 Other less visible layers of security include plainclothes officers, hundreds 
of security cameras, the removal of trash cans, sealed manhole covers and 
rooftop observation points.

 All told, the NYPD has assigned nearly 7,000 police to Times Square and 
throughout the rest of the city on Saturday, officials said.

 Umbrellas, large bags and alcohol are banned and portions of 57th and 59th 
streets will be closed to traffic.
 