
Through on goal straight after kick-off, Timo Werner scuffed his shot, then 
instinctively took his second chance – albeit in less style. He arched his 
back, let out a cry and threw himself to the ground, creating the impression 
that the Schalke 04 keeper Ralf Fährmann, who had actually done well to pull 
out of the challenge, had brought him down. The referee Sebastian Dankert fell 
for the phantom foul and awarded a penalty. The irate Fährmann was booked. 
Werner himself stepped up to slot home the spot kick coolly to putRB Leipzig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/red-bull-leipzig> 1-0 ahead. They 
eventually won 2-1 to stay both unbeaten and top, as well as firmly at the 
bottom of the popularity ratings.

Werner’s tumble wasn’t quite the worst dive in the history of the Bundesliga – 
Andy Möller still rules supreme in that respect 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Et2nazK7r7s> – but it caused a stir unlike any 
other act of simulation in recent years. This being Germany, much of the 
discontent was playing out at meta-level, in complaints about the complaints. 
Wouldn’t all this public anger (“Der Falsch-Flieger”, the false flier, Bild 
called the winger) have been better directed at the (alleged) tax fiddling by 
football superstars, as exposed by Der Spiegel and others, rather than at a 
minor sporting misdemeanour by a 20-year-old, 21 seconds into a game, some 
observers wondered.

RB Leipzig restore lead at top amid controversy after beating Schalke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/rb-leipzig-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
The answer is probably yes. But then again, the highly complex schemes 
concocted by accountants in Spain and Portugal might yet turn out to have been 
perfectly legal. On top of that, financial engineering of the morally dubious 
kind is necessarily a far more abstract, less exciting form of misconduct than 
making a fool of the referee and opposing players by feigning contact in the 
box, especially if it’s done in a manner so blatant that one of the victims 
feared his elevated stress levels would cause blisters. “I have to be careful 
not get herpes tomorrow, I’m so upset,” Fährmann cried out.

Strictly speaking, Fährmann was more enraged by referee Dankert than Werner, 
as the official’s decision to point to the spot was only one half of the 
controversy. A contrite Werner, Fährmann revealed, had quickly confessed to the 
Schalke keeper that he hadn’t touched him. “He also told the referee, too,” 
Fährmann alleged.

Dankert denied that version of events, however. Speaking to the media after 
the final whistle, the official said that he had asked Werner about the foul 
but not received any answer. Maybe Werner had secretly hoped that Dankert had 
overheard his conversation with Fährmann. He could not quite muster the courage 
to admit to his dive directly to the referee nor did he realise in the heat of 
the moment that he had yet another chance to right the wrong: by shooting the 
penalty straight into touch, for example.

Matters were further complicated by a slight tug of Werner’s arm by the 
Schalke defender Naldo in the run-up to the fall. In the aftermath of the final 
whistle, Werner at first insisted that he hadn’t in fact dived, but rather 
reacted a little late to the earlier foul from Naldo. “It was not a dive,” the 
RB sporting director, Ralf Rangnick, insisted, too, the next day. “Timo could 
have gone down earlier. Then there would have been no debate.”

Surprisingly the Leipzig manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl, passed up a chance to 
further his credentials as Arsène Wenger’s possible successor. Yes, he had seen 
the incident. No, “it wasn’t a penalty,” the Austrian said. On Sunday, Werner 
at last admitted to diving as well. He had already apologised to the Schalke 
players in their dressing room following the end of the match.

Werner will not be banned retroactively. The German FA could have become 
involved only if he had expressly lied to Dankert on the pitch. That 
unsatisfactory state of affairs should soon be alleviated by the introduction 
of a video referee, but whether Dankert will personally be allowed to benefit 
is doubtful. His failure to probe Werner a little harder will be held against 
him. Werner, for his part, is hopefully young enough to learn from his 
mistakes. No one, with the exception of Superman, is born a hero. You grow into 
it. He’ll surely think twice before going down again.

In the meantime, Leipzig sponsors Red Bull – whose online magazine Red 
Bulletin publishes columns by yours truly – might well beforced to alter their 
slogan <http://redbull-brand.blogspot.co.uk/p/about-red-bull.html> for fear of 
sending the wrong message.

“No, maybe, “yes, we can!” (geddit?) could be the new claim, as the team 
continue to go strong. “The debate [about the dive] doesn’t change the fact 
that Leipzig performed impressively,” Süddeutsche Zeitung wrote. What’s more, 
the manner of the success against a well-motivated but ultimately inferior 
Schalke side will speed up the process of normalisation. Leipzig, we know now, 
can win just as dirty, cynically, as any other topBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> team.

Talking points

• Hurrah for the White Shirts (and red shorts)! Hamburger SV have won a league 
game, their first in 204 days. Michael Gregoritsch and Matthias Ostrzolek 
scored to defeat completely demoralised Darmstadt 2-0 at the Böllenfalltor on 
Sunday. Was the ban on mobile phones in the training camp wot won it? Markus 
Gisdol had told his players not to check up on their bad reviews, “but they’re 
allowed to read them again on Monday,” the HSV manager laughed. Getting beaten 
by the Dino was the final straw for Norbert Meier. The 58-year-old manager of 
the Lilies was relieved of his duties following the fifth league defeat in a 
row.

• At the other end of the food chain, Carlo Ancelotti can breathe a little 
easier. The Spielerversteher – a coach who understands and accommodates his 
players – has started listening to the team’s wishes and finally changed the 
formulaic 4-3-3 system to a more dynamic, fluid 4-2-3-1 formation that provided 
a much needed attacking impetus. Bayern Munich duly turned in one of their best 
performances this season, beating Mainz 3-1 away with considerable style and 
ease.

• The Borussia Dortmund manager, Thomas Tuchel, too, staved off all crisis 
talk thanks to a 4-1 win over Borussia Mönchengladbach that showcased the 
welcome return of Marco Reus to the Bundesliga. The Germany international made 
two goals, one each for Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Ousmane Dembélé, as BVB 
outpaced André Schubert’s enduringly lame Foals.

• Julian Nagelsmann had asked for “more masculine football” before 
Hoffenheim’s home game v 1. FC Köln, perhaps in an effort to prove that he can 
mix innovative methods with some non-PC, old-school rhetoric. His team, led by 
the reassuringly manly, confident Sandro Wagner up front, certainly responded 
well enough: Köln suffered their heaviest defeat of the season, 4-0, at the 
Wirsol-Rhein-Neckar-Arena. “I’ve been the best German striker for a while by 
some distance,” Wagner claimed after scoring two goals, his 16th and 17th in 
the calendar year. The 29-year-old’s lack of humility is almost as remarkable 
as his scoring rate, but fourth-placed Hoffenheim undoubtedly benefit from that 
kind of arrogance. Nagelsmann has managed to transform last season’s relegation 
strugglers into one of the league’s most impressive collectives.

• VFL Wolfsburg are the opposite. They have plenty of big names in the squad 
but not much of a team. On Saturday, they lost their heads, too. A late 
dismissal for Paul Seguin paved the way for a silly Daniel Caligiuri foul on 
Hertha’s Marvin Plattenhardt; Salomon Kalou converted the penalty to snatch a 
3-2 win at the Volkswagen Stadion. Hertha’s win was another one of these 
low-key, hard-work triumphs that make up their excellent run but Wolfsburg 
appear like a club at odds with itself at the moment. Sporting director Klaus 
Allofs is under increasing pressure, Valérien Ismaël’s inexperience on the 
bench is a worry, and Julian Draxler is now being singled out for abuse by the 
supporters. The Germany international is very much for sale this January.

Results RB Leipzig 2–1 Schalke 04, Mainz 1–3 Bayern, Dortmund 4–1 Gladbach, 
Hoffenheim 4–0 Köln, Leverkusen 1–1 Freiburg, Bremen 2–1 Ingolstadt, Wolfsburg 
2–3 Hertha, Darmstadt 0–2 Hamburg, Augsburg 1–1 Frankfurt.
 