
Dai Young conceded Wasps were nowhere near their best despite picking up a 
bonus-pointPremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> 31-6 win 
at home to Newcastle. It took two late tries to secure a 14th consecutive 
victory at the Ricoh Arena.

The Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> director of rugby 
said: “It was a bit of a tired and flat performance and the scoreline flattered 
us. We didn’t show much control and were fortunate to get a bonus-point win. I 
never thought we were going to lose the game but it could have gone to the 
wire. We’ve had a lot of big games lately and some of our players badly need 
next week off to recharge their batteries.”

Semesa Rokoduguni strikes late to give Bath derby victory over Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/exeter-bath-premiership-match-report>
Wasps were indebted to Jimmy Gopperth for his crucial contribution to the win 
as the player emphasised his versatility by appearing in three positions during 
the game. Gopperth scored two tries, converted four and added a penaltyfor a 
match tally of 21 points. Frank Halai’s effort and a penalty try completed the 
scoring for Wasps.

Young added: “Jimmy is worth his weight in gold as he is totally comfortable 
wherever he plays and makes my job a lot easier.”

Young was also full of praise for the captain, Joe Launchbury, who was voted 
man of the match. Young said: “I thought the media’s choice was right for a 
change as Joe was outstanding as he always comes up with big moments in the 
game. He’s coming into form at the right time and with injuries to the squad 
there’s a real opportunity for him to get his England jersey back.”

One of few drawbacks for Wasps was the loss of the prop Marty Moore, who was 
who carried off in the first half causing the game to be delayed for 13 
minutes. Young said: “He experienced neck pain and has gone to hospital. There 
are no symptoms in his arms and legs and one can’t be too careful in these 
situations but hopefully there is no real damage.”

For large parts of the game Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> matched their opponents 
but they lacked an attacking spark and had to rely on two penalties from Mike 
Delany for their points. The turning point came in the 17th minute when Simon 
Hammersley was sent to the sin-bin for a deliberate knock-on and, in the 
full-back’s absence, Wasps took control.

Dean Richards said: “It was another questionable TMO decision. I spoke to 
Simon at half-time and he said that he just went for the tackle and therefore 
it’s a little bit disappointing.” The Newcastle director of rugby added: “The 
scoreline doesn’t reflect the effort we put in as our defence was outstanding 
to make it a difficult game for them. We created as many chances as they did 
but we didn’t take them and a little bit more accuracy would have made a big 
difference.”

Wasps Miller; Wade, Daly, Eastmond, Halai; Gopperth, Simpson; Mullan, Johnson, 
Moore, Launchbury, Myall, Rieder, Thompson, Hughes.

Tries Penalty, Halai, Gopperth 2. Cons Gopperth 4. Pens Gopperth.

Newcastle Hammersley; Watson, Waldouck, Socino, Sinoti; Delany, M Young; 
Lockwood, Sowrey, Welsh, Green, Olmstead, M. Wilson, Welch, Chick.

Pens Delany 2.

Referee C Maxwell-Keys.
 