
Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4’s Today programme will 
have an all-female cast of guest editors for the first time over Christmas, 
when it will also break with tradition by broadcasting a guest-edited programme 
live from Hull on New Year’s Eve.

Olympic gold-winning boxer Nicola Adams will join actor Carey Mulligan, 
businesswoman Helena Morrissey and the chief medical officer, Dame Sally 
Davies, for a week of programming starting the day after Boxing Day.

Today assistant editor John Shields said: “After 13 years the guest editors 
have become as much of a Christmas tradition for us as mince pies and 
indigestion. 2016 has been a momentous year so it’s fitting that we end it with 
some breakthroughs of our own – a fantastic all-female line-up as well as the 
first city to run the show.”

Adams, who in 2012 was the first woman to win a boxing title at the Olympics, 
will oversee the programme on 29 December with segments on combat sports and 
women’s boxing. Contributors will include Gordon Ramsay discussing his love of 
martial arts and boxer Ricky Hatton talking about his experiences of depression.

It is the 13th time Today has brought in guest editors over Christmas but the 
first time all have been women and the first time the Christmas guest series 
will leave the London studio.

Mulligan is planning to cover issues including dementia and the impact of the 
war with Isis on Iraq’s children, while Davies will look at science, global 
health, and “great women”.

Morrissey, who spent 15 years as chief executive of Newton Investment 
Management and also spoke out in favour of Brexit, said she would be “exploring 
the theme of ‘power to the people’ in a year when democracy reasserted itself 
and disruptive forces were unleashed, leaving many of us scrambling to work out 
what happens next”.

Last Christmas, actor and Unicef UK ambassador Michael Sheen and lawyer Miriam 
González Durántez, who is married to former deputy prime minister Nick Clegg, 
were among those taking over the programme. Other previous guest editors 
include Prof Stephen Hawking, Sir Lenny Henry and Sebastian Coe.

The guest editors are responsible for about half of each programme’s content, 
with regular editors on hand to ensure it meetsBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> editorial guidelines.

The Hull show will talk to local politicians and cultural figures about the 
city’s city of culture plans for 2017 and visit locations including a pub and a 
school to talk to local residents.
 