
A significant period of Wasps’ life has come to a close but an encouragingly 
bright future could yet await on the evidence of their farewell fling in High 
Wycombe. Professional rugby operations prefer to look ahead rather than 
backwards and there will be no shortage of fans queuing up to followJames 
Haskell’s team in Coventry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/dec/13/wasps-ricoh-arena-coventry-rugby-union>
 if they attack like this every week.

Wasps supporters, old and new, can certainly prepare for a major European 
occasion in the new year when Leinster travel to a potentially well-populated 
Ricoh Arena for a fixture which may determine who tops Pool Two. Two successive 
bonus-point victories overCastres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres>, 
the French champions of two seasons ago, have not just restored control of 
their own qualifying destiny but stoked a rising belief in their ability to 
perform consistently regardless of surroundings.

Victory over Quins at The Stoop next month will still be required to set up a 
winner-takes-all showdown with the Irish province but few sides anywhere are 
taking their attacking chances with Wasps’ current aplomb. Only the news that 
Joe Launchbury’s recovery from a neck problem is not progressing smoothly and 
may yet keep him out of action for club and country during the Six Nations 
diminished the buzz as the players said their goodbyes to Buckinghamshire after 
12 years in residence with a seven-try parting shot, Tom Varndell and Ben 
Jacobs scoring two apiece.

To call it genuinely emotional might be stretching things but anyone who has 
swapped a dingy but fondly remembered bedsit for something slightly bigger will 
appreciate how Wasps’ long-time supporters feel. Their new pad also happens to 
be 90-odd miles away in a different city; not everyone will be in a position to 
follow the team up the M40.

Then again, cheering on Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> 
has always been more a state of mind than a matter of geography. This is a club 
which has prided itself on re-homing waifs and strays and making them feel 
wanted, wherever it happened to be training or playing. Anyone who spent time 
at Repton Avenue in Sudbury, Wasps’ unglamorous home before they decamped to 
Loftus Road, will know fond memories are based more around people than bricks 
and mortar.

Either way, there were few visibly tear-stained faces among the 6,507 members 
of the loyal Adams family who made the final trip up Lane End Road, past the 
biscuit factory and the slightly weather-beaten industrial units. Most 
preferred to reminisce about the good old days; during their dozen years in 
Wycombe Wasps won eight trophies including two Heineken Cups.

The knockout wins over Gloucester, Northampton and Leinster were among the 
highlights of their European glory days and the list of good players who served 
them faithfully makes evocative reading. Lawrence Dallaglio, Alex King, Will 
Green, Trevor Leota, Fraser Waters … some seriously strong characters have 
elevated this narrow stretch of turf into a field of rugby dreams which yielded 
144 home wins and five draws in 196 games.

It was also the best stadium in the Premiership for those who enjoy tree-lined 
sporting venues in autumn; it was not unheard of for partridges to wander 
around in the 22-metre area.

There will be fewer of those at the Ricoh but attractive game birds do not pay 
the bills. There will be more people watching Sunday’s game against London 
Irish in Coventry – almost 23,000 tickets have already been shifted – than the 
aggregate of Wasps’ first four home games this season.

As every chief executive knows, it also helps considerably if your teams are 
a) winning and b) playing a brand of rugby people will pay to watch. On both 
fronts Wasps are delivering and this au revoir to the home counties included 
some wonderful offloading they would dearly love to transport to the Midlands.

In Nathan Hughes they also have the most dynamic No8 in the Premiership at 
present, while Varndell continues to finish tries with a nonchalant ease 
totally at odds with his recent haul of Test caps. Bradley Davies and Kearnan 
Myall were also prominent as Wasps wrapped up a try bonus point before 
half-time courtesy of scores by Jake Cooper-Woolley, Hughes, Varndell and 
Jacobs.

Castres did manage three tries of their own, their No8 Jannie Bornman doing 
his best to counter the physicality of Wasps’ in-form back row, but it was the 
home side who finished the stronger, Varndell, Guy Thompson and Jacobs 
rewarding the deft interpassing and support play which have become an 
increasing feature of Wasps’ play this season. Andy Goode did not have his best 
day with the boot but the promising Alex Lozowski, son of the former England 
centre Rob Lozowski, had more joy in the final quarter.

With Launchbury, Christian Wade, Elliot Daly and Alapati Leiua to re-enter the 
mix, it is small wonder Wasps’ director of rugby, Dai Young, looks as happy as 
at any time since he joined the club. Launchbury is due to see a specialist 
this week to investigate why his neck is not healing swiftly but otherwise the 
mood heading for Coventry is collectively upbeat.

“It’s goodbye to Adams Park but hopefully it’s not goodbye to all our 
supporters,” said Young, willing the club’s die-hard followers not to give up 
on them. “We’re doing everything in our power to encourage them to follow us to 
the Ricoh Arena. I’ve got a full car-load anyway.”

Wasps Miller; Tagicakibau, Jacobs, Masi (Bell, 65), Varndell; Goode (Lozowski, 
65), C Davies (Simpson, 55); Mullan (McIntyre, 58), Shervington (Lindsay, 58), 
Cooper-Woolley (Cittadini, 65), B Davies, Myall (Gaskell, 65), Johnson 
(Thompson, 56), Haskell (capt), Hughes.

Tries Cooper-Woolley, Hughes, Varndell 2, Jacobs 2, Thompson. Cons Goode, 
Lozowski 2.Pen Goode.

Castres Dumora; Evans, Combezou, Palis, Grosso; Kirkpatrick (capt), Garcia 
(Dupont, 64); Taumoepeau (Houerie, 64), Rallier (Mach, 55), Montes (Fa’anunu, 
h-t), Faasalele (Whetton, 46), Desroche, Diarra (Babillot, 42), Caballero, 
Bornman.

Tries Rallier, Diarra, Houerie. Con Palis.

Referee J Lacey (Ire). Att 6,507.
 