
The decision of Tony Blair and Jack Straw to order British forces to invade 
Iraq was arguably our worst foreign policy mistake for at least 200 years. 
Blair’s ex post-facto justification suggests that their case was built on 
hypothesis, rumour and speculation, rather than solid fact (Blair defiant on 
Iraq ahead of Chilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/blair-camp-readies-its-defence-to-chilcot-report>
, 7 June). Saddam Hussein was undoubtedly one of several vile dictators dotted 
around the world, but in 2003 he posed no greater threat to Middle East peace 
than Iran (in Syria) and Saudi Arabia (in Yemen) do today. As the result of the 
invasion Iraq is now a sad, violent country, the lives of millions of its 
citizens shredded and its ancient biblical heritage all but destroyed. Blair 
and Straw stood haplessly by while George Bush and Donald Rumsfeld ordered the 
torture of Iraqi detainees. Had all this been sanctioned by international law 
it might have had some justification. But UN resolution 1441, under which 
action was taken against Iraq, cannot reasonably be construed as having 
authorised this ill-advised war.
Robin Wendt
Chester

• It seems unlikely that many of us will read the whole Chilcot report. But I 
hope there will not be an oversimplified campaign to label the invasion of Iraq 
a war crime. Personally, I supported it at the time because of my disgust at 
the horrors perpetrated bySaddam Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saddam-hussein>, rather than concern that 
any weapons of mass destruction would seriously threaten the UK (which never 
seemed likely) and certainly not because I trusted anything said by Tony Blair. 
I had probably been reading too much Frederick Forsyth.

As far as the aftermath is concerned, Syria shows only too plainly what 
happens if you don’t intervene while Libya shows what can happen if you do. On 
the other hand, the whole Iran negotiation would not have been possible if 
Saddam had still been in power. Bottom line: rampant instability in the Middle 
East and northAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> suggests that 
we don’t have the knowledge or ability to intervene successfully and raises at 
least the possibility that intervention may make things worse. In other words, 
those who condemn Blair had better come up with better alternatives than they 
have so far.
Jeremy Cushing
Exeter

• Your report of Tony Blair’s likely defence of the invasion of Iraq, on the 
grounds thatIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> was “capable of 
developing weapons of mass destruction”, reminds me of Henry Kissinger’s 
enunciation of the doctrine of “anticipatory retaliation” to justify a first 
strike against the Soviet Union because of the threat of a potential Soviet 
surprise attack. The implications are obvious. It could potentially justify any 
attack by any country on another. Indeed, if Saddam Hussein had actually 
possessed weapons of mass destruction the threat of a British invasion would, 
using Blair’s reported logic, have justified using them in an attack on the UK.
Declan O’Neill
Oldham

• How dare Tony Blair persist in claiming that the only alternative to bombing 
Iran to smithereens and deposing Saddam by force was to do nothing, leaving 
Saddam with untrammelled power? First, note again that regime change was always 
specifically denied as the aim; Saddam just had to come clean over his 
(non-existent) WMD and all would be well. Many other options were put forward 
by, among others, a group of Iraqi exiles (War is not the way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2002/sep/05/guardianletters1>, 
Letters, 5 September 2002), Hans von Sponeck, former UN humanitarian 
coordinator, and, with due modesty, myself. Saddam could have been indicted for 
war crimes and crimes against humanity. (Of course, he was only one of many in 
that respect.)

The presence of the weapons inspectors alone limited his scope for oppressive 
domestic policies, apart from the weapons issue itself. The removal of 
sanctions and aid to rebuild the infrastructure that was destroyed by the first 
Gulf war would have helped to develop civil society. UN humanitarian monitors 
could have been imposed to reinforce the work of the weapons inspectors. Then 
the people of Iraq could have been trusted to find their own way to a peaceful, 
democratic future.
Frank Jackson
(Former co-chair, World Disarmament Campaign) Harlow, Essex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 