
Such is the contrary way in which sport sometimes works that at the time Wales 
are trying to replace the power game that brought them success in Europe with 
something more refined, their most naturally talented back languishes in 
international isolation just over the border inGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>. James Hook won the last of 
his 81 caps during the 2015 World Cup when, despite a three-quarter line 
depleted by injuries, he played the role of an extra, there but not noticed.

If that marked the end of his Test career, and at the age of 31 the three-year 
contract he signed withOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> from 
next summer will probably be his last, it will be an anticlimactic way for him 
to go. For he was one of the few players in the game’s dark age a couple of 
years ago – when the ball spent far more time chasing clouds than it did 
through hands – who carried a torch, an instinctive individual who resisted 
attempts to programme him.

It was a moment of inspiration from Hook that set Wales on their way to the 
grand slam in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/mar/17/rugbyunion.sixnations8>, Warren 
Gatland’s first campaign in charge, whenhe made space for himself at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/feb/03/rugbyunion.sixnations> to create 
a try for Lee Byrne, and for a while the coaches felt they had to have him in 
the team, whether at fly-half, inside-centre or full-back, because of his 
ability to create something out of nothing. Once the emphasis changed from 
looking to win to setting out not to lose, his role diminished and his decision 
in 2011 to leave Ospreys for Perpignan provided an excuse to marginalise him.

Rugby union: Scouting report
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/mar/14/rugbyunion.sport> 
Wales have spent much of the past three years cursing their inability to 
finish opportunities, due not least to lamentable skill levels under pressure. 
So why continually ignore a player singled out 10 years ago by Nigel Melvillein 
his then column for theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/mar/14/rugbyunion.sport> after he 
watched an under-21 international between Wales and England? “Hook,” he wrote, 
“was the architect, always looking for opportunities to run the ball, looking 
for space and playing what he saw, not some prejudged game sent on from the 
sidelines. He was prepared to back himself, recognise opportunities and take 
them. It was most refreshing.”

While Wales were fumbling through November, winning three matches in laboured 
fashion after beingrun off the Principality Stadium by Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/05/australia-ominous-form-wales-southern-hemisphere-hoodoo>
, Hook was with Gloucester, never expecting the phone to ring. “Maybe I would 
have had a chance if Wales had changed their style a few years ago, but maybe 
not,” he says while preparing for today’s meeting with Northampton, another 
club yet to put together a winning run.

“Wales were successful with the way they played and you can see why they want 
to become more expansive, because that is the way the game is going, but it may 
have come too late for me. Who knows whether going back to Wales will salvage 
my international career. Rugby is a funny game but I am realistic and recognise 
I am getting on a bit now. All I can do is stay fit and play well. Everything 
else is out of my control. I do not have any regrets: I have enjoyed my career 
and it is not over yet.”

Hook was in Cardiff to watch Australia set light to Wales on bonfire night. 
“It was not the result I wanted but it was a joy to watch Australia playing the 
game the way it should be played,” he says. “It is good that rugby is changing 
from kicking and chasing: people pay a lot of money for tickets and want to see 
excitement. The Wallabies had ball-playing forwards and so many options when 
they went to the line. It is the way Wales are trying to play but at some point 
they are going to have to change the personnel.”

When Hook returns to Ospreys he will be considered primarily at inside-centre, 
covering at full-back and at outside-half when the region’s two No10s, Dan 
Biggar and Sam Davies, are on international duty, a pair who sum up a dilemma 
facing the Wales interim head coach, Rob Howley, going into the Six Nations. 
Biggar is an expert kicker who prefers to stand deep to give himself time while 
Davies is in the mould of Beauden Barrett, Bernard Foley and George Ford, 
standing close to the line to maximise his attacking options.

“Dan was the man with the kicking game but Sam takes the ball flat with 
runners either side of him,” says Hook. “When you have a 10 like that, you want 
to run off him and it puts defenders on their toes. Dan has done well for Wales 
and it comes down to selection. Wales do need a distributor at 10 or 12: Jamie 
Roberts has been a big player in the centre over the years but is it time for 
Scott Williams who is suited to an expansive game? England have a ball-playing 
12 in Owen Farrell but that has not been the way Wales have wanted to play.

“Everyone knows Wales’s performances in November were far from perfect but 
they would have taken three wins from four at the start. They are aware they 
have to be better in the Six Nations given the way England and Ireland are 
playing and the improvement made by Scotland. They will need to up their 
performances and they have the talent, although there is a need in Wales for 
more skill-based coaching at the younger age levels.”

Hook says he has no issue with Gatland or Howley. “Coaches have their opinions 
and Jamie and Jonathan Davies have been hugely successful for Wales,” he says. 
“It started to fizzle out for me after the 2011 World Cup, picking up caps but 
not playing a major part. I am the size I am and sometimes it is frustrating 
but I fitted into their philosophy early on and they gave me opportunities. 
After that I spoke to them about what I needed to do to get into the team but 
really there was not much I could have done.

“I have had a wonderful career which has another chapter to run. Joining 
Perpignan was a lifestyle change for someone who had not often been out of the 
west of Glamorgan and I made friends f or life there. Gloucester was another 
career move I cherish; Kingsholm is so much like Welsh grounds of old, like 
Pontypridd and Neath, blessed with an atmosphere generated by people who know 
and enjoy their rugby. I would advise any player to give moving to another 
country a go: it did not work out for me in international career terms but it 
has been worth it.”
 