
A reported 55% of the Syrians who have been given protection in the UK under 
the Syrian resettlement programme are torture survivors, according to the 
National Audit Office.The NAO report 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/The-Syrian-Vulnerable-Persons-Resettlement-programme.pdf>
, a review of the progress of the Syrian Vulnerable Persons Relocation Scheme 
(VPRS), highlights concerns of human rights charity Freedom from Torture that 
these vulnerable people are not able to access specialist help so that they can 
begin a journey of rehabilitation and rebuilding their shattered lives. Freedom 
from Torture provided input to the report after raising repeatedly with the 
former minister for Syrian refugees the need to ensure that all of those 
resettled under this scheme can access specialist support including torture 
rehabilitation.

Without these services it can be difficult for survivors to address the trauma 
they have faced and to access other opportunities that are being provided, such 
as English language lessons. Since the launch of the scheme we have received 
only a few referrals for resettled Syrians and we are concerned that many more 
are being resettled in areas where they cannot access support. Our concerns are 
shared by local authorities, which highlighted that those refugees with 
physical or mental health needs require substantial support, especially in the 
long-term, which is not covered by existing funding arrangements.

We welcome the UK’s commitment to provide sanctuary to torture survivors and 
other vulnerable Syrians through this programme and to meet its arguably modest 
goal of accepting 20,000 Syrian refugees by 2020. As the only UK-based human 
rights organisation dedicated to the treatment and rehabilitation of torture 
survivors, we know that torture is widespread in Syria. This scheme’s objective 
is to help the most vulnerable, so we are surprised not to have more being 
referred to our centres. Torture survivors risk being either identified too 
late or missed entirely. The government needs to immediately improve its 
coordination with specialist voluntary sector providers. The amount of funding 
given to local authorities to support each refugee will be reviewed after the 
programme has been in operation for a year. We strongly recommend that mental 
health services are included in the programme without delay so that torture 
survivors coming in the next wave of the refugee resettlement scheme get the 
vital support and services they need and deserve.
Susan Munroe
Chief executive, Freedom from Torture <https://www.freedomfromtorture.org>

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 