
Conservative MPs have called on the chancellor to reconsider welfare cuts 
ahead of the autumn statement, after a backbench motion to pause the planned 
cuts passed unanimously in the House of Commons.

No MPs voted against the motion to stop the planned cuts to employment and 
support allowance (ESA) and universal credit, with 127 voting in favour. 
However, the motion is purely symbolic, intended only as a method of sending a 
message to government.

During the debate, called by the SNP’s Neil Gray, MPs across the house called 
forPhilip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> to 
pause a planned £29-a-week cut to ESA, which applies to those not in employment 
through illness or disability but who have been judged fit to prepare to return 
to work.

The universal credit cuts will also mean a reduction in the amount people are 
able to earn before their benefits are withdrawn.

Employment support cuts could affect 45,000 disabled jobseekers, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/24/employment-support-cuts-could-affect-45000-disabled-jobseekers-says-report>
Heidi Allen, the Conservative MP who has led calls for a rethink on welfare 
cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/20/heidi-allen-mp-tory-tax-credit-rebel>
, said she could think of no other issue “so regretted by colleagues on my side 
of the house”.

“I have a guiding principle in life,” she went on. “Always listen to the 
loudest voice in your head. You might choose to ignore it, you might try and 
drown it out with distractions and other arguments. But you know it’s there. In 
fact, you can sometimes see it when you look in the mirror.

“I think we all know what that voice is saying. Let’s just pause these cuts. 
The £30 represents 29% of the weekly income of some half a million people. It’s 
big money for relatively few people. Let’s just pause. The risk of damage is 
high. The financial cost to pause is low. What kind of a government do we want 
to be?”

Peter Aldous, the Tory MP for Waveney, said he was concerned there “has not 
been a full and proper impact assessment of the proposed changes”.

Jeremy Lefroy, another Tory MP, spoke about his own father, a vicar, who 
became disabled when he was 34 but continued working until retirement with help 
from welfare schemes. Lefroy said he took issue with the cut, which brought 
down ESA to the same level as jobseekers’ allowance, because ill or disabled 
people preparing to return to work often had higher costs of living.

“There’s the additional costs for heating ... additional costs for food, some 
of the diets involved are expensive,” he said. “The cost of transport is 
expensive as one goes frequently to hospital and doctor’s appointments.”

Corbyn urges May to see I, Daniel Blake to gain insight to life on welfare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/corbyn-urges-may-to-see-i-daniel-blake-to-gain-insight-on-life-on-welfare>
The MP for Enfield Southgate, Tory David Burrowes, praised colleagues for 
supporting the motion but said he did not consider them “particularly brave” 
for speaking out on the issue. “The people who are brave in this debate, 
though, are those who are trying to make ends meet. They’re the brave people we 
care about and we have to do more for them,” he said.

The Department for Work and Pensions has pledged that a new package of support 
to give practical help for re-entering the workforce will be in place by the 
time the cuts come into force in April.

The work and pensions minister, Penny Mordaunt, replying to the debate, said: 
“Proof we have listened and understood will be in our actions and a person’s 
experience of the system and support they receive is the only thing that will 
assure confidence in that system.”

Speaking to the Guardian after the debate, Allen said she had detected a 
change of tone. “I think they are listening, and I do get the sense the door is 
more open than we might have thought, even if it is not a U-turn on the cut, 
but an extra fund to make up the difference.”

However, the DWP stressed there were no plans to unpick previously announced 
cuts in Hammond’s autumn statement or beyond. “Our reforms are increasing the 
incentives for people to move into a job rather than staying on benefits, while 
keeping an important safety net in place for those who are vulnerable or unable 
to work,” a department spokesman said.

On Wednesday, Tory MPs voted down a Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> motion to scrap the cuts. The 
opposition motion also called on the government to reveal its distributional 
analysis ahead of the autumn statement – a breakdown of how hard various income 
brackets are hit by spending cuts.

No figures have been published since 2015, but the motion was defeated by 24 
votes.
 