
Toshiba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toshiba> shares dived more than 
20% on Wednesday in their second straight double-digit plunge as the company 
said it may book a one-time loss of several billion dollars over its US nuclear 
business.


Toshiba’s stock price dropped by 20.42% to 311.60 yen, the largest fall 
allowed for a single day, about 30 minutes after the opening bell, as the 
company failed to remove investor worries over the potential risk.

On Tuesday the Tokyo-based conglomerate said costs linked to the acquisition 
in 2015 by its US subsidiary of a nuclear service company would possibly come 
to “several billion US dollars, resulting in a negative impact on Toshiba’s 
financial results”.

The exact figure of the potential writedown was still being worked out, 
Toshiba president Satoshi Tsunakawa said after the announcement, apologising 
for “causing concern”.

The company statement suggested the figure would be released soon, citing an 
end-of-year deadline.

Toshiba shares had closed nearly 12% lower on Tuesday on media reports about 
the potential loss.

Analysts said uncertainty was fuelling investor anxiety.

“Concerns have yet to be cleared away as they said they didn’t know the 
figure,” Yukihiko Shimada, senior analyst at SMBC Nikko Securities, told AFP.

SMBC Nikko credit analysts Yutaka Ban and Kentaro Harada said in a report that 
investors “can’t be optimistic about the situation” even though the total 
writedown may not end up as big as the 500 billion yen (US$4.3bn) reported by 
local media.

Nomura Securities analyst Masaya Yamasaki said in a report issued late on 
Tuesday that the expected loss “is negative for the company as its financial 
standing is fragile”.

Tsunakawa answered in the affirmative when asked if Toshiba was considering 
boosting capital.


Its chief financial officer, Masayoshi Hirata, said that after the figure was 
confirmed the company would “explain and seek support” from financial 
institutions.

Toshiba said the possible loss was related to the valuation of the purchase by 
subsidiary Westinghouse Electric of the nuclear construction and services 
business of Chicago Bridge and Iron.

Westinghouse and Chicago Bridge and Iron turned to an independent accountant 
to resolve a dispute over differences in asset valuations, Toshiba said earlier 
in 2016.

Toshiba said Tuesday that the potential writedown would “far exceed” the $87m 
first expected, resulting in a “far lower asset value than originally 
determined”.

Toshiba’s latest full-year forecast is for annual net profit of 145bn yen 
(US$1.24bn), up 45% from an earlier estimate, on sales of 5.4tn yen.

But on Tuesday it said it would release a revised earnings forecast as soon as 
possible to reflect the coming writedown.

Toshiba’s nuclear business woes are the latest blow to the once-proud pillar 
of corporateJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>.

It has been besieged by problems, most notably a profit-padding scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/18/toshiba-confirms-sec-investigation-as-accounting-woes-spread-to-us>
 in which bosses for years systematically pushed subordinates to cover up weak 
financial results.

In an intensive overhaul the company has been shedding businesses and 
announced the sale of its medical devices unit to camera and office equipment 
maker Canon.

Investors had welcomed the makeover, with Toshiba shares having climbed 77.3% 
this year through Monday.

Tsunakawa was appointed president during 2016 to steer Toshiba past the 
accounting scandal that has hammered its reputation.
 