
Gregor Townsend admitted too many handling errors cost his Glasgow Warriors 
side as they lost 12-9 toToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> 
in Pool Four of the European Champions Cup.

The game came down to penalties, with the Toulouse scrum-half Sébastien Bézy 
landing two in the first half and two more after the break. Finn Russell was 
not so clinical for Glasgow, spurning a pair of decent chances, and it took a 
pair of late penalties from the replacement Duncan Weir to make it a tense 
finish.

Townsend felt his side failed to get to grips with the occasion, as they lost 
to the Frenchmen for a second successive weekend. The head coach said: “The 
effort was there in a game that never really kicked off. However, a mixture of 
the quality of the opposition, their excellent defence and our errors, 
particularly handling, left us just short.”

Pressed about the on-field decision to kick for goal with what was to be the 
final penalty with eight minutes remaining, rather than kick to the corner in a 
quest for a try that would have put Glasgow ahead, Townsend defended the 
decision of the captain, Josh Strauss.

“There was still plenty of time to get back into the Toulouse half,” Townsend 
said. “And the way the game was going I sensed there weren’t going to be many 
tries scored.”

Toulouse are away and clear at the top of the pool, with Glasgow battling Bath 
for second position. “We have to win the last two games to qualify – that is 
the challenge ahead,” Townsend said. “And now we have to switch the focus 
quickly to the next league game.” Glasgow return to Scotstoun and the Pro12 
next Saturday afternoon when they host Munster.

There was much satisfaction in the Toulouse camp after their narrow win, which 
puts them six points clear at the top of the pool. Their forwards coach, 
William Servat, said: “Glasgow are a very good team and it was amazing to 
manage to get a win in a very balanced match. Glasgow did not play with the 
same rhythm as last week. Today they wanted to make war. They were really 
aggressive in the rucks.”

Servat played down any suggestion that Toulouse now have a straightforward 
path to the quarter-finals. He said: “We saw last night how well Bath played in 
beating Montpellier and we were lucky to beat them in game one.

“We know the quality of the players and staff at Montpellier and when they 
sort out their current problems that match will be really hard. Indeed, the 
last two games will be harder than the four up to now.” 
 