
Toulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> got up and running in this 
season’s European Champions Cup but were far from convincing as they began in 
bullying mode before retreating into their shells. They resisted a spirited 
second-half showing from Sale Sharks, who recovered from shipping two early 
tries yet never truly possessed the quality to topple the three-times winners.

A week after losing a European Cup fixture at Stade Mayol for the first time, 
when they werehumbled by the holders and pool three rivals Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, the French club were, in theory, vulnerable on Friday night at the AJ Bell 
Stadium. That theory was blown to smithereens, along with Sale’s defence, in 
the opening quarter-hour, when tries from Charles Ollivon and Leigh Halfpenny 
suggested a sound beating was in prospect for the Sharks. If a 32nd-minute try 
in reply by Paolo Odogwu prevented a procession, a second half that passed 
scoreless revealed Sale’s limitations yet also those, if only on the night, of 
the strangely subdued collection of star names in opposition.

The home team found themselves down to 14 men after six minutes when a late 
shot by Magnus Lund on Juan Martin Fernandez Lobbe landed theSale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> flanker in the sin bin, and it 
proved costly. Lund’s colleagues were scattered by Mamuka Gorgodze, Toulon’s 
bear of a lock, who broke from a ruck and opened the door for Ollivon, the 
blind-side flanker, to help himself to five points.

Saracens make history by downing Toulon in clash of the heavyweights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
On the restart, when Gorgodze’s man-mountain second-row partner, Romain 
Taofifénua, pirouetted out of a tackle and linked with Bryan Habana on the left 
flank, François Trinh-Duc sent a high kick towards the giant standing flush 
against the touchline. Byron McGuigan, the Sale wing, tapped it from 
Taofifénua’s clutches to Habana, who let Halfpenny claim the second score.

Hope for Sale was self-generated. Sam James chipped the advancing white shirts 
and panicked Duane Vermeulen into tripping him, earning a yellow card. While 
the South African No 8 was absent, a clearance was fielded on halfway by Mike 
Haley and went through James and Mark Jennings, the centre, to release Odogwu. 
His explosive pace took him to the tryline and the Sharks were almost in touch.

The sight of Halfpenny missing with a very gettable penalty attempt early in 
the second half suggested all was not entirely as it should be with the Top 14 
team; so did a lack of cohesion out wide. When the penalty count began to 
swing, however, Will Addison could only strike an upright for Sale, who passed 
up three further shies at the posts in favour of battering a Toulon rearguard 
that refused to budge

“I suppose we could’ve kicked penalties in front of the posts,” said Steve 
Diamond, the Sale director of rugby. “If we had got over from one of those 
drives it would have made things interesting.”

Sale Haley; McGuigan, Addison (Mugford 80), Jennings (Bedlow 72), Odogwu; 
James, Stringer; Harrison (Lewis-Roberts 52, Harrison 80), Briggs (Seymour 46), 
Mujati (Aulika, 51), Evans, Ostrikov (Mills, 61), Neild, Lund (Briggs 57, Curry 
71), Beaumont.

Try Odogwu. Sin-bin Lund (6min)

Toulon Halfpenny; O’Connor, Bastareaud, Nonu, Habana; Trinh-Duc, Escande 
(Tillous-Borde 63); Chiocci (Delboulbes 59), Guirado (Etrillard 68), Chilachava 
(Van der Merwe 59), Gorgodze, Taofifénua (Suta 64), Ollivon, Fernandez Lobbe 
(Manoa 65), Vermeulen.

Tries Ollivon, Halfpenny. Con Halfpenny. Pen Halfpenny

Sin-bin Vermeulen

Referee B Whitehouse (Wales)
 