
Steffon Armitage scored a hat-trick as Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> secured top spot in Champions Cup 
Pool 3 with a game to spare thanks to a 60-22 bonus-point win over Ulster.

Eight tries – from Nicolás Sánchez, Bryan Habana, Mathieu Bastareaud, Martin 
Castrogiovanni, Mamuka Gorgodze and three from Armitage – ensured the reigning 
champions are the first team to qualify for the knockout stages.

They have never been beaten in the Champions Cup at the Stade Felix-Mayol and 
they can now look forward to a home quarter-final.

Toulon made a blistering start and scored their first try with less than three 
minutes on the clock when Maxime Mermoz put the outside-half Sánchez under the 
posts.

Leigh Halfpenny kicked the conversion and a first penalty shortly before 
Ulster forced their way back into the contest with a try from their fly-half, 
Paddy Jackson.

Halfpenny added a second penalty before Ulster grabbed their second try when 
the flanker Mike McComish touched down from a driving lineout.

Ulster were then dealt a double blow when Jackson suffered a shoulder injury 
and, with the visitors temporarily down to 14 men, Bastareaud found Habana for 
Toulon’s second try.

Bastareaud then got on the scoresheet when he rolled his way over from five 
metres just before half-time, to give Toulon a 17-point advantage at the break.

Toulon sealed the bonus point on 49 minutes when Castrogiovanni went over near 
the touchline and it sparked a superb final half-hour from the home side.

First, Armitage grabbed the fifth try before a wonderful passage of play 
between forwards and backs was finished off by the replacement Gorgodze with a 
contender for try of the season.

Armitage got his second when he was driven over from a set piece with 15 
minutes to go before Ulster salvaged a bit of pride with a third try from Jared 
Payne.

There was still time for Armitage – fighting to be named in England’s Six 
Nations squad after the injury suffered to Gloucester’s Ben Morgan – to secure 
his hat-trick when he crossed with two minutes to play as Toulon condemned 
Ulster to their heaviest European defeat.
 