
It would be cruel on Bath to say that Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> arrived with a toothpick in their 
hand, rather than a heavy manual of set-plays, but there was definitely a 
feeling about the most successful club in the history of European competition 
that they knew exactly what they needed to do to win and could afford to be a 
little distracted. When they absolutely had to, they put the toothpick down and 
gave the game their full attention.

Whenever they conceded a penalty, or a beautifully struck drop goal by George 
Ford, they hit back immediately with a try – three of them as it turned out, 
enough to leave them unbeaten in Pool 4. Perhaps it was just an impression; 
perhaps Toulouse are simply very good at looking unflustered.

That could well be the case. They have had plenty of practice this season at 
disguising concern. They spent the first two months of the Top 14 season 
dropping towards 14th position, but have turned themselves around, inspired by 
a victory over Toulon before going into the cross-border Champions Cup. Here, 
at times, they looked back to their very best: imperious and disdainful; kings 
of Europe with a little bit of meat stuck in their teeth.

Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>, braced for a heavyweight 
assault up front – Yoann Maestri and Patricio Albacete in the second row are 
not exactly butterflies – threw everything into a scrummaging counterpunch, and 
were remarkably clear winners at the set-piece. Having gone backwards against 
Wasps not so long ago, Paul James, Rob Webber and David Wilson were now 
marching forwards This advance allowed them to stay in the game, gain some 
territory and put points on the board.

As long as they enjoyed such an unlikely stream of ball on the front foot, the 
home team could launch their immensely talented backs. Ford, Anthony Watson, 
Jonathan Joseph and Semesa Rokoduguni all had individual moments to shine, 
although it was telling that none of their shimmies and half-breaks led to 
anything approaching a try.

Toulouse, on the other hand, carved openings whenever they went into full 
attacking mode. Apart from one run in the second half by lock-turned-blind-side 
Dominic Day, Louis Picamoles looked the most effective forward on the charge – 
until the wonderfully percussive Joe Tekori came on – and once the outside 
backs felt themselves being hauled in the right direction by their No8s, they 
purred into motion.

Toby Flood looked positively at home in this very French environment, not so 
much as a place-kicker, but as a mover and passer. Being in the company of – 
and quite possibly being in competition for a place with – Luke McAlister, 
Flood seemed armed with a larger repertoire than in his Leicester days. With a 
switch of play, he opened up acres of space for Maxime Médard to release 
Vincent Clerc, the all-time top try scorer in Europe.

Imanol Harinordoquy, at the heart of Toulouse’s recovery in the past few 
weeks, scored the second after a surge by Tekori. Médard scored the third, the 
full-back one of several players with an open run to the line once sustained 
pressure had emptied Bath’s .

By the turn of the hour, Bath’s scrum had ceased to be dominant, Ford’s kicks 
from hand were being read by little Sébastien Bézy, and the gifted home runners 
were being stopped in their tracks. All credit to them that, nine points 
adrift, they mounted a comeback. Dave Attwood, tireless and productive in every 
area, led the charge and Olly Woodburn nearly scored in the corner. Ross Batty 
did score from a driving maul shortly afterwards.

Toulouse, with a sigh, had to remove the toothpick and defend their two-point 
lead. They did so powerfully and now face Glasgow in the back-to-back rounds of 
December. They will be keen to give an altogether different impression, but 
Toulouse may have to give the unbeaten Scots their undivided attention.

Bath Watson; Rokoduguni, Joseph, Devoto (Henson, 66), Agulla (Woodburn, 71); 
Ford, Cook (Stringer, 46); James (Auterac, 70), Webber (Batty, 55), Wilson 
(Thomas, 59), Hooper (capt), Attwood, Day, Sisi (Mercer, 52), Ewels.

Try Batty. Con Ford. Pens Ford 3. Drop goal Ford.

Toulouse Médard; Clerc, Fritz, McAlister, Huget (Matanavou, 45); Flood 
(Vermaak, 66), Bézy; Steenkamp (Baille, 45), Flynn (Marchand, 77), Johnston 
(Pulu, 60), Maestri, Albacete (Tekori, 43), Dusautoir (capt; Nyanga, 71), 
Harinordoquy, Picamoles (Maka, 45).

Tries Clerc, Harinordoquy, Médard. Cons Flood 2, McAlister. Referee Nigel 
Owens (Wal).Attendance 13,360.
 