
Take me there: La Graciosa, Canary Islands

Why go? A half-hour ferry hop from Lanzarote, this is the Canary isle that 
tourism forgot. There's just one village, sleepy little Caleta del Sebo, with a 
smattering of whitewashed houses and sandy lanes (there are no surfaced roads 
on the island) and in winter the glorious beaches, volcanic peaks and dive 
sites are virtually empty.

What to do There are no "sights" as such: people come here for the sunshine, 
silence and sense of escape. Take a water taxi or Jeep to the white-sand 
beaches of Playa de las Conchas or Playa de la Cocina – among the most 
beautiful in the Canaries – or explore Europe's largest marine reserve on 
a dive trip (buceolagraciosa.es <http://buceolagraciosa.es/>).

Where to stay There are no hotels – just a handful of private apartments and 
simple pensions. Casa Rio in Caleta del Sebo is a bright, well-equipped 
two-bedroom apartment with sea views from the roof terrace (from €560 per week,
graciosagetaways.com <http://www.graciosagetaways.com/>).

Where to eat Cafe Mesón de La Tierra has the best views of the harbour and the 
menu del día is great value at €7 (00 34 679 955 969). El Girasol (Calle la 
Popa 2) is the place to go for fresh seafood – the "vieja", or parrotfish, is a 
local speciality.

Insider tip Adrian Fisk, owner of Casa Rio, recommends taking a boat to Playa 
del Risco on Lanzarote – a long stretch of fine, golden sand that lies under 
the spectacular cliffs of Famara. "The only access is by boat or walking down 
the cliffs," says Fisk, "and most days you will have the beach to yourselves. 
Take a picnic and spend all day there. The old salt fields are great to 
explore."

Hotspots for 2014: Portugal and Greece to be this year's top destinations
 In recovery: Greece is predicted to be one of the star destinations this 
summer. Photograph: Jon Arnold/Getty 
Having waded through the annual glut of Where's Hot for 2014 lists, one could 
be forgiven for assuming we'll all be spending our summer holidays cheering on 
England in Brazil or taking advantage of Burma's more relaxed political 
situation to take a river boat cruise up the Irrawaddy. A far better indication 
of where we'll actually be going on holiday this year comes from a peek at the 
Post Office's annual Holiday Money report.

Based on a combination of factors including currency performance, new flights 
and cost of living, the Post Office is predicting that the star short-haul 
holiday destinations in 2014 will be Portugal – prices in the Algarve have 
dropped by 18%, making it Europe's cheapest holiday destination – and Croatia, 
whose star continues to rise thanks to new low-cost flights, investment in its 
hotels and the increasing popularity of its music festivals.

But the news I found most cheering was the remarkable recovery of Greece, 
after its "annus horribilis" in 2012. My first proper experience of "abroad" 
was an island-hopping trip around the Cyclades 25 years ago and I've had a soft 
spot for the place ever since.

The launch of British Airways' first direct flights from Heathrow to the 
islands of Santorini and Mykonos in May (ba.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/globalgateway.jsp/global/public/en_>), 
and the introduction of a network of seaplanes connecting mainland cities such 
as Athens, Thessaloniki and Patras with Crete, Santorini, Kos and Mylos in 
April (hellenic-seaplanes.com <http://hellenic-seaplanes.com/index.php/el/>) 
look set to further the country's comeback.

For rolling hills and sleepy villages, head for... The Cotswolds
 Westley Farm, near Chalford. 
Westley Farm, near Chalford This collection of traditional stone holiday 
cottages on a working hill farm represents great value in an area not exactly 
known for its choice of budget accommodation. No fuss, no gimmicks, just simple 
country-style with flagstone floors, woodburners and uplifting views across 
Gloucestershire's Golden Valley. Cottages sleep between two and six. From £300 
a week (westleyfarm.co.uk <http://www.westleyfarm.co.uk/>)

The Five Alls, Filkins, near Lechlade The food is the major draw at this 
18th-century village pub. The earthy but intriguing menu, best described as 
modern British with a nod to Italy, ensures the cosy restaurant is packed with 
locals and guests on a Saturday night. Sleep it off in one of the four snug 
bedrooms upstairs and try to leave room for the full English breakfast next 
morning. Doubles from £90 (thefiveallsfilkins.co.uk 
<http://thefiveallsfilkins.co.uk/>)

The Porch House, Stow-on-the-Wold This ancient Cotswold inn reopened last 
autumn after a complete overhaul and early indications are that it's hitting 
all the right spots. Cosseting bedrooms, a cosy low-beamed bar with roaring 
fires, a crowd-pleasing menu and a selection of local ales - what more do you 
need for a romantic winter break? Standard doubles from £99 (porch-house.co.uk 
<http://www.porch-house.co.uk/home>)

131 The Promenade, Cheltenham This brand-new bolthole from the owners of the 
wonderful Wheatsheaf Inn in Northleach looks set to become the spa town's 
sexiest hangout. Expect a strong emphasis on local, seasonal produce in the 
Crazy Eights restaurant and bar, while upstairs 11 light-filled bedrooms have 
been kitted out with contemporary art, antique furnishings and hi-tech 
gadgetry. From £170 (no131.com <http://www.no131.com/>)
 