
The Steelers needed to hold off a last-ditch threat by the Chiefs before 
advancing to face New England next Sunday night for a spot in the Super Bowl. 
The Patriots won at Pittsburgh 27-16 earlier this season, but Ben 
Roethlisberger was injured and didn’t play.


Spencer Ware’s one-yard touchdown run took Kansas City within 18-16. The 
Chiefs at first converted the 2-pointer to tie it, but tackle Eric Fisher — the 
first overall selection in the 2013 draft — was penalized for holding. The next 
try, from 12 yards, failed.

Maybe just this once it's OK to feel sorry for the Cowboys' Jerry Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/16/dallas-cowboys-green-bay-packers-jerry-jones-playoffs-nfl>
Chiefs tight end Travis Kelce was furious at the call after the game. “Referee 
No 51 shouldn’t even be able to wear a zebra jersey ever again,” Kelce said. 
“He shouldn’t even be able to work at fucking Foot Locker.”

“For it to end like that, with the referee literally taking it out of our 
hands, that hurts,” Kelce added. “You try to play this game with integrity, to 
the end of the whistle, and when the refs want to take over the game and make 
it their own platform, there’s nothing you can do about it. That wasn’t a hold 
on my guy Eric Fisher. I hope [Fisher] doesn’t go the entire offseason thinking 
it was his fault. That was horseshit, flat out.”

Quarterback Alex Smith agreed with Kelce: “I’ve seen a lot worse not called,” 
he said.

With 2:43 remaining, Justin Gilbert misplayed the kick return and was tackled 
at the Pittsburgh five. Roethlisberger hit Antonio Brown for seven yards on 
third down and Pittsburgh then ran out the clock, securing a ninth straight 
victory for the Steelers. The Chiefs have not won a home playoff game since 
1994, losing five in a row.

The scoring started furiously in the opening minutes, then the game became a 
kicking exhibition by Boswell, who also had six field goals in the regular 
season against Cincinnati. And Bell put on a virtuoso running performance, 
patiently finding holes and then exploding through them. He added a team-record 
170 yards rushing to the 167 he had in a win over Miami last week.

Green Bay Packers beat Dallas Cowboys on final play in NFL playoff thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/green-bay-packers-dallas-cowboys-nfl-game-report>
The Steelers became first team to win a playoff game without a touchdown since 
eventual Super Bowl champion Indianapolis in the 2006 AFC divisional round at 
Baltimore.

Using a no-huddle attack almost to perfection early on, the Steelers drove 
deep into Kansas City territory. But they bogged down inside the five and 
Boswell made a 22-yard field goal. The Chiefs were just as efficient on a 
six-play march capped by receiver Albert Wilson lining up in the backfield, 
then slipping uncovered into the end zone for a five-yard score.

Pittsburgh’s answer came on a 52-yard heave to All-Pro Brown, who somehow was 
covered by linebacker Justin Houston. That led to Boswell’s second field goal, 
a 38-yarder. He added a 36-yarder to cap a 14-play drive on which Pittsburgh 
again barely huddled.

A clean game up until then turned to turnovers, on successive series. Bud 
Dupree hit Smith, whose pass shot high into the air and was caught by 
linebacker Ryan Shazier. The Steelers got to the Kansas City five, where Frank 
Zombo leaped to deflect Roethlisberger’s throw, and All-Pro safety Eric Berry — 
burned for 26 yards on the previously play — picked it off in the end zone.

Boswell’s fourth field goal, from 45 yards, made it 12-7 at the half. His 
43-yarder, setting the franchise record for a postseason game and tying the 
league mark of five, came on Pittsburgh’s first series of the second half. A 
43-yarder midway in the fourth quarter gave Boswell theNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> record.

Kansas City’s Cairo Santos got in on the kicking act with a 48-yarder to make 
it 15-10. At that point, 10 seconds from the end of the third quarter, the 
Chiefs were outgained 333 yards to 150.
 