
Choi Soon-sil, the woman at the centre of a corruption scandal that triggered 
the biggest political crisis for a generation inSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>, has denied all charges at the 
opening of her fraud trial.

During the preliminary hearing at the Seoul central district court on Monday, 
her lawyer countered prosecution allegations that Choi had conspired with the 
country’s now impeached president,Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, and the former presidential 
aide Ahn Jong-beom to strong-arm “donations” from major conglomerates.

South Korea impeachment vote: the key facts behind a presidential crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-korea-impeachment-vote-the-key-facts-behind-a-presidential-crisis>
“A major focus today was on collusive relations. We stressed that there was no 
collusion between the defendant, Ahn or the president,” the lawyer, Lee 
Kyung-jae, told reporters afterwards.

It was the first public appearance since October for Choi, who has been 
nicknamed Korea’s “female Rasputin” for the alleged influence she wielded over 
Park.

Wearing a surgical mask that obscured her face, Choi, who has been in custody 
for the past seven weeks, was brought to the court in a special prison bus. 
Television footage showed her handcuffed and wearing a blue-grey prison outfit 
with a serial number on the chest as she was taken off the bus and led into the 
court building by a female guard.

Minutes later she entered the courtroom – minus the mask and handcuffs – and 
sat down next to her lawyer.

Choi, who was in Germany when the corruption scandal broke, said she had felt 
“willing to be punished” when she returned to South Korea. “But now, I think I 
must clarify myself,” she said in court. Asked by the judge whether that meant 
she denied all the charges, Choi said: “Yes.”

The 60-year-old is being tried for coercion and abuse of power – largely 
related to the corporate funding of two dubious foundations she controlled and 
allegedly plundered. A long-time friend of Park’s, Choi is accused of 
leveraging her relationship with the president to strong-arm large companies 
like Samsung into handing over tens of millions of dollars.

The accusations that Park colluded with Choi formed the basis of an 
impeachment motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/south-korean-president-park-geun-hye-to-face-impeachment-vote>
 against the president that was passed by parliament earlier this month. The 
motion is now being considered by the constitutional court which has up to 180 
days to make a ruling on whether to endorse or reject the president’s ouster.

The last time Choi was seen in public was in late October when she attended a 
summons at the Seoul prosecutor’s office and lost a Prada shoe in the media 
scrum outside the building.

Choi was not obliged to turn up for the hearing on Monday, which was largely 
procedural and focused on preparing the way for the trial proper. But her 
lawyer said she had volunteered to appear. “She has expressed a willingness to 
participate sincerely in the trial,” Lee was quoted as saying by the Yonhap 
news agency.

Choi was criticised for refusing to attend ongoing hearings of a parliamentary 
committee investigating the scandal.

Park is also accused of ordering aides to leak state documents to Choi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/choi-gate-prosecutors-accuse-south-korean-president-of-collusion>
, who has no official title or security clearance, and allowing her to meddle 
in some state affairs, including the appointment of top officials.

Choi’s late father was a controversial religious figure called Choi Tae-min, 
who was married six times, had multiple pseudonyms and set up his own cult-like 
group known as the Church of Eternal Life.

Choi Tae-min befriended a traumatised Park after the 1974 assassination of her 
mother – whom he said had appeared to him in a dream. He became a mentor to the 
future president who subsequently formed a close bond with his daughter that 
persisted after Park’s 2012 election victory.
 