 YUGOSLAVIA's worsening civil war spread to Croatia's two biggest cities and to 
towns across the embattled republic yesterday, despite the passing of the noon 
deadline for the latest ceasefire brokered by Lord Carrington.
With the guns refusing to fall silent, talk of armed intervention by European 
forces receded. Lord Carrington, the chairman of the European Community peace 
conference on Yugoslavia, John Major, and Ruud Lubbers, prime minister of the 
Netherlands which currently holds the EC presidency, all ruled out any 
substantive military intervention.

However, France and Germany suggested that the United Nations should become 
involved, possibly in tandem with the Western European Union (WEU), the 
European arm of Nato, which will discuss the crisis today. A French 
presidential spokesman said the foreign minister, Roland Dumas, would seek 
Security Council backing next week for sending a UN peace force if European 
ministers failed to agree on their own force. But Lord Carrington said last 
night it was difficult to see what the UN could do.

Europe's reluctance to send troops appeared to be reinforced by the first 
casualty among the small band of EC observers inCroatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/croatia>. A Danish monitor was slightly 
wounded when Croatian national guardsmen opened fire as he left the Yugoslav 
army's headquarters in the Croatian capital, Zagreb, early yesterday.

After a night that saw the violence erupting for the first time in Zagreb, 
navy and army units were involved in fierce clashes with Croatian forces in the 
main Adriatic port of Split.

The Yugoslav navy's blockade of Split and six other Croatian ports, which 
should have been lifted under the terms of the truce, remained in place, with 
tourists stranded in Dubrovnik. The mayor of Zadar appealed to Italy for help 
against the Yugoslav military.

Zagreb was drawn further into the war yesterday. Yugoslav aircraft strafed 
parts of the city and army bases shelled nearby areas. The din of explosions 
and machine gun fire rocked the centre near the railway station, hours after 
the truce was supposed to come into effect.

At a group of tower blocks next to the city's Marshal Tito federal army 
barracks, where thousands of Serbs lived and hundreds still remain, Croatian 
militiamen began what they called a 'clean out'. 'The hunt is on,' one 
militiaman said as he toured the flats for alleged Serbian snipers.

Last night Zagreb was blacked out and the streets deserted as anxious 
inhabitants anticipated more fighting.

In a move that suggested some disarray over how Croatia should seek to 
prosecute the war, the republic's defence minister, Luka Bebic, resigned last 
night. He was replaced by his deputy, Gojko Susko, a former Canadian 
businessman.

On Tuesday night, Mr Bebic ordered Croatian forces to lift their siege of army 
facilities in the republic and comply with the new ceasefire. He appears to 
have come under pressure from hardliners in the ruling Croatian Democratic 
Union.

In addition to spreading to the coast and to the capital, the past two days 
have seen the battle moving north for the first time, with fierce and 
protracted fighting at Varazdin.

An air force MiG fighter was shot down by Croatian forces over Petrinja, south 
of Zagreb, the Yugoslav news agency Tanjug reported. Croatian radio claimed 
that several aircraft had been shot down. The Croatian media also claimed to 
have taken control of all army facilities in the eastern town of Dakovo. 
Croatian television last night showed federal tanks and armoured vehicles 
destroyed or seized in attacks.

As usual, the warring parties blamed each other for breaking the truce or 
opening fire first. General Andrija Raseta, the army's second-in-command in 
Croatia, charged the Croatian forces with starting the hostilities in Zagreb, 
while the Croatian defence ministry contended to the contrary.

Lord Carrington told the BBC he did not expect the truce to be observed 
instantly, but that the next 24 hours would be critical. He predicted the 
'bloodiest civil war for some time' if the truce failed .

'There is such animosity and such a build-up of bitterness that it is very 
difficult to see what we can do other than to encourage them to believe, as I 
genuinely do believe, that this is the last chance,' he said.

European Community countries remained divided over how to respond. Most of the 
12 EC members, nine of whom are also members of the WEU, seem likely to approve 
at least the setting up of a limited military contingent today. They are, 
however, certain to set political conditions which will make any early 
deployment highly unlikely.

Speaking after a meeting with the Dutch prime minister, Mr Major appeared to 
rule out any immediate decision to send troops. 'I can see no immediate 
likelihood of sending such a force,' he told journalists.

The Government's strategy at today's meetings will be to slow down any moves 
to create a full-scale military force. Instead, the Foreign Secretary, Douglas 
Hurd, will appeal to his colleagues to concentrate on backing Lord Carrington's 
peace mission.
 