
Donald Trump’s first foreign trip is to be to Iceland for a summit with the 
Russian president, Vladimir Putin, according to reports.

In a move that echoes Ronald Reagan’s cold war meeting in Reykjavik with 
Mikhail Gorbachev in 1986, Trump and his team have reportedly told British 
officials that the summit will take place within weeks of him becoming US 
president.

The Icelandic capital is thought to be the most likely place host the talks as 
it did three decades ago,according to the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/trump-wants-putin-summit-in-reykjavik-rc909n9t0>
.

Saturday Night Live: a stream of Trump jokes but more misses than hits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/15/saturday-night-live-a-steady-stream-of-trump-jokes-but-more-misses-than-hits>
The summit would be an attempt to rest reset western relations with the 
Kremlin, with the agenda thought to include a deal limiting nuclear weapons. 
The news comes as Trump continues to face claims thatRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> holds material which could be used 
to blackmail him.


On Saturday the president-elect said he would consider dropping sanctions 
against Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/trump-suggests-he-may-drop-russia-sanctions-if-moscow-helpful>
 if Moscow helped tackle terrorism and worked with the US on other goals, 
although they would remain in place “at least for a period of time”.

He also said he was willing to meet Putin. “I understand that they would like 
to meet, and that’s absolutely fine with me,” he said.

A source who discussed the plan with Trump and officials at the Russian 
embassy in London told the Times: “The idea of a summit with Putin is 
definitely on the cards. The Russians are also keen on it.”


A Trump adviser confirmed the president-elect’s intention to meet Putin very 
soon and said that Reykjavik was under active consideration.

“What does Putin want?” the adviser said. “Prestige, centre stage at the 
sum­mit, the one-on-one meet­ing, the hand on the back from Trump. That gives 
the US tremendous leverage. Mr Trump is master of the photo op and he will use 
that skill.”

From Marilynne Robinson to Richard Ford, six writers in search of Trump's 
America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/writers-in-search-of-trumps-america-marilynne-robinson-richard-ford-walter-mosley-lionel-shriver>
The news is unlikely to be welcomed by senior figures in the British 
government, who fear a deepening relationship between the US and Russia under 
Trump risks leaving Britain out in the cold. It is understood Downing Street 
expects Theresa May to visit Trump at the White House in the second half of 
February.


Britain has called for sanctions against Moscow over Putin’s aggression in 
Ukraine and Syria. It is understood that British intelligence has sought 
reassurance from the CIA that UK agents in Russia will be protected when 
intelligence is shared, the Times reported.

A British intelligence source with extensive transatlantic experience said US 
spies had labelled Trump and his advisers’ links to the Kremlin problematic. 
“Until we have established whe­ther Trump and senior mem­­bers of his team can 
be trusted, we’re going to hold back,” the source told the Times. “Putting­ it 
bluntly, we can’t risk betraying sources and methods to the Russians.”

Russia has caused further alarm by announcing plans to move thousands of tanks 
and tens of thousands of troops to Nato’s borders this year in a development 
that has caused concern among the Baltic states.

Trump’s claims that he has “nothing to do with Russia” appear to have been 
contradicted by his son Donald Jr, who reportedly said in a speech in 2008 that 
“Russians make up a pretty disproportionate cross-section” of a lot of the 
Trump Organisation’s assets.

The Russian embassy in London referred calls to the foreign affairs ministry 
in Moscow, which did not comment­.

 