
Related: Will Trump’s business plans avoid presidential conflicts of interest? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>

The Trump Organization will press ahead with multimillion-dollar plans to 
expand one of the president-elect’s golf resorts inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, despite its apparent pledge to halt 
new investments overseas.


Trump officials said the plans for the Trump International Golf Course 
Scotland in Aberdeenshire – likely to immediately involve extending its 
boutique hotel and building a second 18-hole golf course – did not conflict 
with his promise not to pursue new or “pending” deals outside the US.


“Implementing future phasing of existing properties does not constitute a new 
transaction so we intend to proceed,” a Trump Organization spokeswoman told the 
Guardian.

The expansion plans could see the resort grow substantially, with a new 
450-room five-star hotel, timeshare complex and private housing estate. This 
would greatly increase the value to the Trump Organization of an investment on 
which Trump originally boasted he would spend up to £1bn.

Richard Painter, a former White House chief ethics adviser to George W Bush, 
said this extra investment was a “perfect example” of the clear conflicts of 
interest between Trump’s newfound power as president and his family’s business 
interests.


“He’s using language which is ambiguous. It clearly illustrates that around 
the world, he will just simply expand around the various holdings and as they 
continue to expand, the conflicts of interest expand,” Painter said.


“It’s like [the board game] Monopoly: if you have one house on Boardwalk, it’s 
not a new deal to go for three hotels on Boardwalk.”


At a contentious press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
 on Wednesday, the president-elect announced that his organisation would no 
longer pursue foreign investments as part of hiscontroversial plans to avoid 
conflicts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>
 between his substantial business interests and his presidency.

In a document issued by the Trump team later that day, the president-elect’s 
lawyers Morgan, Lewis & Bockius wrote that his new pledge “prohibits – without 
exception – new foreign deals during the duration of President-Elect Trump’s 
Presidency”.


Related: Will Trump’s business plans avoid presidential conflicts of interest? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>

Trump and his legal adviser Sheri Dillon said control of his property, hotels 
and golfing empire – which includes two golf resorts in Scotland and one in 
Ireland – would pass to his sons Eric and Donald Jr, and Trump executive Allen 
Weisslberg, before his inauguration as president on Friday 20 January.

There is speculation that Eric Trump will fly to Scotland next week, as that 
transfer of power takes place.
 Trump International Golf Links, Aberdeenshire, Scotland. Photograph: Mapbox, 
OpenStreetMap 
Crucially, President-elect Trump has not agreed to sell or transfer his shares 
in the golf resorts, which means he retains ultimate ownership and stands to 
benefit from increases in the value of those investments. He owns 100% of the 
shares in the Aberdeenshire course, which has consistently made heavy losses. 
He has personally loaned it nearly £40m, and it lost £1.1m last year.

The so-called “white paper” released 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>
 by Trump’s legal advisers on Wednesday, setting out the new management 
arrangements and announcing a new trust to be run by his sons and Weisselberg, 
also said the agreement “prohibits the Trump Organization from entering into 
any new transaction or contract with a foreign country, agency [or] any state 
or local government or any agency or instrumentality thereof, other than normal 
and customary arrangements already undertaken before the president-elect’s 
election”.

Related: Donald Trump has lost tens of millions on Scottish golf courses, 
accounts show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-scotland-golf-course-resort-losses>

Trump’s legal advisers claim this structure will prevent Trump from breaching 
foreign bribery rules because any profits earned by allowing foreign 
dignitaries and leaders to stay at his two Scottish hotels, and his large Irish 
golf resort and hotel at Doonbeg there, would be passed to the US Treasury.

Walter M Shaub, director of the US Office of Government Ethics, said 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3280275-Remarks-of-W-M-Shaub-Jr.html> 
Trump’s plan “doesn’t meet the standards that the best of his nominees are 
meeting and every president in the past four decades has met”.

Painter added that this structure was not legally enforceable. “This is 
meaningless language, because what is the definition of a new deal? When you’re 
a real estate developer, you are constantly entering into new contracts, 
expanding existing facilities, refinancing leases.”

The phrase new deal “is subject to such wide range of interpretation that it 
can easily be worked around”, he said.


Trump’s executives in Scotland argue that his new agreement to halt overseas 
investment cannot affect the Trump International Golf Course Scotland in 
Aberdeenshire course, which lies 10 miles north of Aberdeen, since its 
expansion plans predate Trump’s election victory on 9 November. A spokesperson 
for the Trump transition team did not immediately return a request for comment.

The expansion proposals are partly derived from the resort’s masterplan, which 
was approved against fierce opposition from environmentalists by the Scottish 
government in 2008.

The largest of his two Scottish hotels is the 149-room five-star hotel at 
Turnberry, which Trump bought with its associated Open championship course in 
2014. He has since spent some £60m developing the resort, adding a new 
ballroom, a £3,500-a-night presidential suite and an ostentatious fountain.

Related: Donald Trump faces wall of opposition as he returns to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/donald-trump-faces-wall-of-opposition-as-he-returns-to-scotland>

Aberdeenshire council’s planning department has recently approved plans to 
expand Trump’s boutique hotel at the resort north of Aberdeen, which he bought 
in 2006, and is processing a live planning application for the second golf 
course.

On 2 November, a week before Trump stunned his opponents by winning the 
presidency, it gave listed building consent to extend the resort’s boutique 
hotel, a converted early Victorian country house called Macleod House in memory 
of the president-elect’s Scotland-born mother Mary Macleod, to include a 
banqueting hall and six new bedrooms.

On 22 December, the council published a further official report on water 
management plans for the second 18-hole golf course, which is also being named 
in honour of Trump’s mother. The course was a central part of the 2008 
masterplan and this application has been in the planning system since September 
2015.

The boutique hotel was not included in the masterplan approved by Scottish 
ministers in 2008 but it has been in use as a hotel for several years. Trump’s 
critics in Aberdeenshire argue that its expansion raises substantial questions 
about the future of Trump’s ultimate plans for the resort.

The Trump Organization had tried to dilute the original masterplan proposals 
last year by setting out plans for a new 850-home private housing estate and 
1,900 “leisure accommodation units”, thought to be timeshares. Those plans were 
incorporated in Aberdeenshire’s draft local plan, although the council said he 
would also have to build a new primary school and affordable homes for local 
residents in return for planning consent.

Related: Planners reject Donald Trump's revised plans for Scottish golf resort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/planners-reject-donald-trump-revised-plans-scottish-golf-resort>

But in December government planning inspectors threw that proposal out and 
insisted the Trump Organization stuck to the original 2008 plan which requires 
it to first build the 450-bed luxury hotel, and associated sports facilities, 
as a prerequisite for approval to build highly profitable private homes.

They said that if he built a new housing estate, he must also provide hundreds 
of affordable homes, the new school, community facilities and pay for a new 
roundabout, alongside “robust” environmental checks during construction.

David Milne, a local resident and vocal critic of the resort, said the 
decision to press ahead with expanding the boutique hotel suggested the Trump 
Organization had dropped plans for a five-star hotel at the resort.

“I would question whether or not there’s any valid reason why the plans are 
compatible,” Milne said. “If you’re going to be required to do a 450-room 
hotel, why are you messing around with adding a six-bedroom extension to a 
boutique hotel?”
 