
Tui is continuing to dispose of unwanted parts of its business by announcing 
the sale of the travel group’s specialist adventure and education operations.

The move follows last month’s announcement of the €1.2bn sale of its Hotelbeds 
business, and forms part of its restructuring in the wake of 2014’s merger of 
London-listedTui Travel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tuitravel> and 
parent group Tui AG. The group also plans to sell its near 12% stake in 
shipping group Hapag-Lloyd.

It said the specialist brands did not fit with its main holiday and cruise 
business which account for around 85% of its revenues. The proceeds of the sale 
and the Hotelbeds disposal will be invested in growth opportunities and to 
strengthen its balance sheet. Analysts said disappointment that there would be 
no cash return to shareholders helped sent Tui’s shares down 23p to £10.45 
after the news.

Meanwhile half year turnover rose 2.7% and earnings climbed 16.3%, with the UK 
business and cruises doing particularly well. It said summer bookings were in 
line with expectations, although it has seen a shift away from Turkey to other 
destinations.

It confirmed it expected full year earnings growth of at least 10%.

UBS said the revenues were lower than expected but earnings were better, which 
was also likely to be putting pressure on the shares:

The shares have been strong into the results and [we] expect the lower revenue 
result could cause some softness, although EBITA is better than expected.

Shore Capital’s Greg Johnson said:

Having recently announced the disposal of its Hotelbeds division for €1.2bn 
the group has today announced its intentions to dispose of its Specialist 
Group, which made a profit of €56m last year. Net debt at the period end was 
€1.5bn, which broadly marks the seasons low point for cash flow and is 
effectively covered by the disposal of the Hotelbeds and the likely proceeds 
from the Specialist Division.

The current trading backdrop, interim performance and outlook are encouraging. 
We would expect to maintain our 2016 pretax profit estimate of €1,019m ( 
earnings per share €1.14) – pre any adjustment for the Hotelbeds disposal. The 
stock trades on a 2016 PE of 12 times. However, back-out Hotelbeds, cruises and 
hotels and the core tour operator trades on a mid-single digit. Obvious 
concerns remain over the ability to cover the shortfall of demand to Turkey but 
the rating looks highly attractive.
 