
An outspoken Tunisian feminist who scandalised the country by posting topless 
photos of herself online has been arrested and may be charged for conducting 
"provocative acts" at a religious centre where police prevented hardline 
Islamists from holding their annual conference, the interior ministry has said.

Amina Tyler, 19, describes herself as a member of the Ukrainian feminist group 
Femen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen>, which uses nudity in protests. 
On Sunday she went to the central Tunisian city of Kairouan, where police 
prevented the hardline Ansar al-Shariah group from holding a conference after 
it was deemed a threat to public order.

Tyler allegedly scrawled Femen on the wall near the main mosque and may have 
intended to hang a banner on the building before an angry crowd gathered and 
started shouting at her to leave.

Video posted by the Tunisian online Nawaat news site shows Tyler, with dyed 
blonde hair, clutching a banner and being hustled away by police and put into a 
van as residents chased her.

A local resident shouts at the camera: "She is dishonouring us. We will 
protect our town, but a dirty girl like her shouldn't come among us."

In March, Tyler posted pictures of her topless body with the phrase "my body 
is my own" scrawled on it, and she went into hiding after receiving death 
threats. Her family took her to stay with relatives outside the capital before 
she escaped and hid with friends.

Last month she said she wanted to do one more dramatic protest before leaving 
for France to study journalism.

Mohammed Ali Aroui, the spokesman for the Tunisian interior ministry, 
described her acts as provocative and said she was under investigation and may 
be charged for her behaviour on Sunday. He added that he understood the angry 
reaction of local residents to her appearance.

The ministry had banned Ansar al-Shariah's annual conference, citing it as a 
threat to security and public order, and sent 11,000 soldiers and police to 
prevent hardline Muslims, known as salafis, from entering Kairouan.

There were minor clashes in the central city, but it was in a Tunis suburb 
that the most severe violence involving hundreds of protesters, burning tires, 
rocks and tear gas took place. The state news agency said one person was killed.

Aroui said Tyler was able to make it into Kairouan through multiple police 
checkpoints because she had been wearing a veil and they did not recognise her.

Tunisia was ruled with an iron hand for 23 years by dictator Zine El Abidine 
Ben Ali until he was overthrown in a popular uprising in 2011 that sparked the 
Arab spring across the region. With his fall,Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> has witnessed an explosion of new 
groups and movements from across the political spectrum.
 