
The UK government wants the inquests into the deaths of 30 British tourists 
killed by a gunman on a Tunisian beach to be held partly in secret over fears 
certain material could be used by terrorists to plot further atrocities.

Security measures at hotels and resorts and details of how the UK and Tunisian 
governments work together to protect travellers are among the evidence that the 
government deems too sensitive to be discussed in public.

Families of the victims of the massacre, which was claimed by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/02/treatment-programme-tunisian-terrorist-attack-witnesses>
, will be able to see all information shared with the court and it is 
understood they have agreed it would be inappropriate for some material to be 
aired publicly.

Clive Garner, a lawyer at Irwin Mitchell, which is representing 20 of the 
families who lost loved ones, said: “The government is applying to have some 
evidence heard behind closed doors and while we recognise the need to safeguard 
information critical to national security, this needs to be balanced with the 
families’ right to a transparent and open hearing.”

The inquests into the deaths of 30 British victims shot dead by Seifeddine 
Rezgui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/28/tunisian-gunman-seifeddine-rezgui-breakdancer-islamic-radical>
 in the popular resort of Port El Kantaoui, near Sousse, in June 2015 will 
resume next month. A total of 38 people were killed in the attack and a similar 
number were injured.


The government made the application to hold part of the hearings behind closed 
doors at a pre-inquest review hearing at the royal courts ofjustice on 
Thursday. Judge Nicholas Loraine-Smith will make a ruling on the application 
later.

Loraine-Smith told the hearing nothing would be kept from the families of 
victims, adding: “As far as possible everything will be in public.”

He said “the last thing in the world” that families would want to do is to 
assist anyone planning a future attack.


Tunisia welcomes first cruise ship since last year's terror attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/07/tunisia-welcomes-first-cruise-ship-since-2015-terror-attacks>
Andrew O’Connor QC, for the government, told the judge it was “in the 
interests of national security” to keep some material out of the public domain, 
adding: “This risk is assessed by security experts to be a very real one.”

Andrew Ritchie QC, representing 20 families, said it iwas their view that a 
“full and fearless” investigation was required to remain in keeping with the 
principle of open justice.

He said that was particularly important in the context of the case, adding: 
“UK citizens travelling abroad face this sort of risk not only inTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> but around the world.”

Ritchie said that “at the heart of the open justice principle”, it was the 
coroner’s role to bring the full facts to light.

At a hearing in September, Ritchie said many families feared the Foreign 
Office may have failed in its responsibilities to thousands of British tourists.

He said the families were also potentially concerned about the FCO “having 
cosy chats” with travel companies interested in running profitable businesses 
“in light of FCO then-current advice that there was a high risk of terrorist 
activity, including in tourist areas”.
 