
Turkey’s parliament has begun debating a controversial new draft constitution 
aimed at expanding the powers of the presidency underRecep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>.

The new constitution, which is expected to be put to a referendum by the 
spring, would replace the basic law drawn up in 1982 after Turkey’s military 
coup. It seeks to establish for the first time a presidential system for ruling 
the modern republic created from the ashes of the Ottoman empire.

Critics have claimed the move is part of a power grab by Erdoğan – Turkey’s 
prime minister from 2003 to 2014, and president ever since – for one-man rule 
in the wake of a failed coup in July.

Turkey in grip of fear as Erdoğan steps up post-terror attack crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/turkey-fear-as-crackdown-follows-terror-attack-istanbul-new-years-eve>
But Erdoğan and the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) say the 
presidential system would bringTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>
 into line with countries such as France and the United States and is needed 
for efficient government.

The debates on the 18-article new constitution began after the draft was 
agreed by a parliamentary commission. The two readings are expected to last 
between 13 and 15 days.

There were protests from some quarters as parliament began its deliberations. 

According to the private Doğan news agency, Selahattin Demirtaş, the jailed 
co-leader of the Peoples’ Democratic party, said the arrest of 11 members of 
the party for alleged ties to the outlawed Kurdistan Workers party (PKK) had 
stripped them of their chance to challenge the draft constitution and “makes 
the debate and the vote controversial from the very start”.

A rally outside the parliament building in Ankara against the change descended 
into violence after riot police used teargas and pepper spray on the 
demonstrators. Police also fired water cannons to disperse protesters, pushing 
back with their shields those who returned to the fray.

“We don’t want a system where only one man leads,” demonstrator Abdullah 
Sundal told Agence France-Presse TV, adding that protestors will do everything 
they can to stop the draft becoming law.

The Guardian view on Turkey: multiple traumas, immense courage | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/the-guardian-view-on-turkey-multiple-traumas-immense-courage>
The AKP needs more than 330 votes - a three-fifths majority - for the bill to 
be submitted to a referendum for voters’ approval.

However, the November 2015 election left the AKP short of a super majority in 
parliament and it is relying on the support of the opposition rightwing 
Nationalist Movement party, the fourth largest in the legislature.

The new constitution is opposed by the biggest opposition party, the 
Republican People’s party (CHP), whose deputy chairman Bülent Tezcan said it 
would restore powers “to the palace”, where they were taken away from the 
Ottoman Sultan a century ago.

“There’ll be no censure motions, no vote of confidence, no parliamentary 
inquiries,” fellow CHP lawmaker Deniz Baykal warned.

But on Monday, AKP’s parliamentary group deputy chairman Mustafa Elitaş said 
he was expecting at least 20 deputies from the opposition CHP to cross the 
aisle to vote with the government.

If the measure is approved by parliament, a referendum is expected to take 
place within 60 days, indicating a date in late March or early April.

Pro-government newspapers have predicted a thumping victory for the ruling 
party although other commentators have been more cautious about the results of 
a plebiscite.

AKP politician İbrahim Halil Fırat, who helped draw up the proposed new 
constitution, said it would make clear the roles of government and president 
and ensure “stability”.

The proposed constitution is expected to lead to the creation of the posts of 
vice presidents and the abolition of the office of prime minister.

'They throw you into a hole': celebrated Turkish novelist reveals detention 
ordeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/turkish-novelist-asli-erdogan-reveals-detention-ordeal>
There would no longer be a formal cabinet but there would be ministers, whom 
the president would have the power to appoint and fire.

The president would be elected for a five-year term and serve for a maximum of 
two mandates.

If Erdoğan’s existing time as president is not counted, it would mean in 
theory he could stay in office until 2029.

Parliamentary elections would be held every five years – not four as at 
present – and on the same day as presidential polls.

Both elections would be scheduled to take place on 3 November 2019.

Along with a slew of terror attacks, the political uncertainty has been one of 
the factors pressuring the Turkish lira, which has lost 18% in value against 
the dollar over the last three months.

The currency slumped to a new record low on Monday, a situation LCG senior 
market analyst Ipek Özkardeşkaya described as “alarming”.

She warned the upcoming constitution referendum “could push the country toward 
a greater chaos and further weigh on its currency”.
 