
Doctors should stop providing life support treatment to a former police 
officer and British army veteran who was left in a minimally conscious state 
after a road accident, a judge has ruled.

The wife of the Gulf war veteran Paul Briggs had asked the court of protection 
to allow her husband to die, saying he would have seen living in his current 
condition as torture and hell.

Briggs, 43, has been in a minimally conscious state since a motorcycle crash 
while serving with Merseyside police in July last year. The father of one, who 
is being treated at the Walton Centre in Liverpool, suffered a bleed on the 
brain, five fractures in his spine, bruising to internal organs and several 
other severe injuries in the collision.

Mr Justice Charles announced his decision on Tuesday after analysing evidence 
presented at a hearing in Manchester last month in the court of protection, 
where judges consider issues relating to people who lack the mental capacity to 
take decisions.

The judge agreed that it was not in Briggs’s best interests for treatment to 
continue, and that it was lawful to withdraw treatment. He recommended that 
Briggs be moved to a hospice to be given palliative care for the final weeks of 
his life.

Lawyers acting for Briggs through the government-appointed official 
solicitor’s office have asked for permission to appeal against the decision, so 
his treatment is likely to continue until the new year, when a decision will be 
made on whether the appeal can go ahead.

After the ruling, Briggs’s wife, Lindsey, said the court case had been the 
hardest thing she had ever had to do and that the past 18 months had been 
“extremely distressing and traumatic”. She thanked the judge and said he had 
been able to “place himself in Paul’s situation, and for that we will be 
forever thankful”.

“All our lives have been turned upside down,” she said, referring to their 
families, including five-year-old daughter, Ella. “We have been living in 
darkness and despair, from when Paul had the crash in the first place, through 
all the uncertainty, having to watch him suffer and be in pain, and all the 
endless procedures and complications.”

She said the family was dismayed to learn that the decision may be appealed. 
“We feel overwhelming despair and sorrow, but we know we have to try to somehow 
cope and continue for Paul,” she said. “Given this continued uncertainty, 
Christmas will now not be a peaceful occasion for us.”

Doctors had told the judge there was potential for Briggs to emerge from his 
minimally conscious state, but that the life expectancy of people in his 
condition was estimated to be nine to 10 years. Medical experts told the court 
that even in a best-case scenario, Briggs would remain severely physically 
disabled.


Lindsey Briggs told the hearing on 28 November that he did not recognise her 
or respond to her when she went to see him. “I think he would see it as 
torture, just as hell, that everything he believes in and he lives for would 
just be taken away from him. He would be living for no reason.”

She said that when she looked into his eyes she saw “at best, nothing there, 
or at worst, distress or suffering”.

Conrad Hallin, representing the Walton Centre NHS foundation trust and the 
Wirral clinical commissioning group, told the court doctors had noticed some 
signs of improvement in Briggs’s condition.

Normally, patients at the centre of court of protection litigation are not 
identified because judges aim to protect their privacy. But Briggs’s accident 
was widely reported and no one involved in the litigation had asked for him to 
remain anonymous so the judge allowed him to be named.


Chelsea Rowe, 26, received a 12-month prison term in July after admitting 
causing serious injury to Briggs by dangerous driving. Liverpool crown court 
heard Rowe was driving a Nissan Micra that was in a head-on collision with 
Briggs’s motorcycle on the Birkenhead flyover.

 