
The UK’s ambassador to France has said his embassy will not be forging links 
with far-right presidential candidateMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> because the UK government has 
a policy of not engaging with her party, the Front National (FN).

Migrants are not to blame for Britain’s problems | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/10/migrants-are-not-to-blame-for-britains-problems>
Ed Llewellyn, who was formerly David Cameron’s chief of staff in Downing 
Street, told MPs that although his staff were making contacts with other French 
presidential candidates, they did not have relations with the FN leader.

“With respect to the Front National, we have a policy of not engaging, there 
is a longstanding policy,” Llewellyn told the foreign affairs select committee. 
“That is the policy, which has been the policy for many years.”

Expressing surprise, committee chair Crispin Blunt asked Llewellyn: “If it is 
clear she is polling in second place so will make the run-off, shouldn’t that 
be … ?” Llwellyn said any change would be a “matter for ministers”.

Le Pen is widely expected to make the final round runoff in May against one of 
the other leading candidates, most likely either François Fillon, a 
centre-right Republican, , or Emmanuel Macron, an independent, barring an 
unlikely last-minute revival for the socialist candidate, who has not yet been 
selected.

Current polls show either Fillon or Macron is on course to beat Le Pen in the 
runoff as a result of of tactical voting by moderates.

Earlier Llwellyn confirmed that his team in Paris were in touch with the other 
mainstream candidates. “We know who the candidate is on the centre-right, the 
candidate is Monsieur Fillon, obviously we have contacts with him and his 
team,” he said.

“On the left we don’t know who the candidate is going to be. We will know the 
answer on 29 January after the second round of primaries … my team [is] in 
touch with people across the picture on the left.”

The UK’s ambassador to Washington, Sir Kim Darroch, and other members of the 
UK government faced criticism after the election of Donald Trump for being 
insufficiently prepared for the Republican’s victory, which the government 
denied.

Trump’s team raised concerns with Ukip’s Nigel Farage about the hostile 
comments made about his presidential campaign by members of the British 
government, including Boris Johnson, according to Farage.

Le Pen, who has long championed Trump, has led efforts to detoxify her 
far-right party of the antisemitic and homophobic language that was commonplace 
under her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen, in the 1990s.

Though she now focuses on French protectionism, including a desire to quit the 
Euro and the EU and anti-immigration policies, her anti-Muslim remarks have 
seen her charged with hate speech. A court acquitted her in 2015, however, 
saying her comparison between seeing Muslims praying on the streets and the 
Nazi occupation was permitted under free speech laws.
 