
The UK government has abandoned its long-standing claim that relations with 
Washington would suffer if a Pakistani citizen who claims he was tortured by 
British and American troops was allowed to sue for damages in court.

Yunus Rahmatullah says he was tortured over a 10-year period after being 
captured by British special forces inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and handed over to US troops in 2004. 
He was released by the US without charge in May.

The British government made the concession as a former American ambassador 
roundly dismissed the government’s case.

“It is highly unlikely the US government would limit intelligence cooperation 
with the UK if British courts heard Rahmatullah’s or similar claims,” Tom 
Pickering told the Guardian.

“The UK government’s position is based on a misconception of US national 
security strategy and the importance the US government accords the rule of 
law”, he said.

The senior American diplomat, who served under presidents Reagan and Bush, 
added: “To sever, or somehow restrict, the intelligence relationship with the 
UK would simply be contrary to US national security.”

He said allegations of mistreatment by US forces in Iraq and Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> had already been acknowledged 
by the US government. “Ventilating them once more in a court of law is highly 
unlikely to cause any harm to US-UK ties. It makes little sense for the US 
government to be offended by allegations that are already public,” Pickering 
said.

US sanctioning of activities that amounted to torture and cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment in violation of US and international law led to serious 
abuse in Iraq and Afghanistan, including in Rahmatullah’s case, he added.

It was American mistreatment of detainees that had a negative impact on US 
relations with its allies, Pickering said. “Foreign militaries, including the 
UK, limited cooperation with the US military as a result.”

Pickering has intervened in the Rahmatullah case heard before Mr Justice 
Leggatt in the high court on Tuesday. He has signed an expert witness statement 
challenging claims about damage to UK‑US relations made by Foreign Office 
officials.

Lawyers for the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> and Foreign Office made 
their concession following a recent appeal court ruling rejecting a similar 
argument made by MI5 and MI6 in the case of Abdel Hakim Belhaj and his Moroccan 
wife, Fatima Bouchar, who were abducted and secretly rendered to Tripoli in a 
joint MI6-CIA operation. The couple say they were tortured by Muammar Gaddafi’s 
security forces.

The court of appeal ruled last month: “There is a compelling public interest 
in the investigation by the English courts of these very grave allegations. The 
risk of displeasing our allies or offending other states … cannot justify our 
declining jurisdiction on grounds of act of state over what is a properly 
justiciable claim.”

Government lawyers indicated on Tuesday they would challenge that judgment in 
the supreme court.

Kat Craig, a director of the legal charity Reprieve, said: “The government’s 
desperate attempts to duck responsibility for its role in rendition and torture 
are fast becoming a national embarrassment.

“Seemingly no one – not even a former senior US ambassador – sees their claims 
that this case would damage UK relations with the US as at all credible.”

Sapna Malik, of the law firm Leigh Day, which is representing Rahmatullah, 
said: “Given the gravity of the allegations raised in Mr Rahmatullah’s case, it 
is right that the British government has today conceded that it is bound by 
this principle.

“What is frustrating for our clients, however, is ... there is yet further 
delay as the government insists on appealing [against] the decision and 
pursuing its untenable position all the way up to the supreme court.”

Last year the supreme court described Rahmatullah’s treatment by UK and US 
forces as unlawful and a possible war crime. “The, presumably forcible, 
transfer of Mr Rahmatullah from Iraq to Afghanistan is, at least prima facie, a 
breach of article 49 [of the fourth Geneva convention],” it said.
 