
A UK government fund that supports conflict prevention meets some of the 
criteria for effectiveness and value for money, but is not performing well and 
has struggled to demonstrate strategic impact, according to anindependent report
 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/2012/07/13/icai-reports-on-the-conflict-pool-and-asian-development-bank/>
 (pdf).

The conflict pool, which had a budget of £256m in 2011-12, is managed jointly 
by the Foreign Office (FCO), the Department for International Development 
(DfID) and the Ministry of Defence (MoD). Combining official assistance and 
non-aid money, the fund was created to provide a "joined-up" approach to 
conflict prevention, drawing on the expertise of the three departments.

The fund has fallen short of such laudable aims in practice, according to the 
Independent Commission for Aid Impact (Icai) 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/2012/04/25/icai-evaluation-of-dfids-electoral-support-through-undp/>
, which was set up by DfID last year to review the impact and value for money 
of UK aid. Icai assesses the fund as amber-red, indicating that it needs 
significant improvements.

The conflict pool has delivered some useful, if localised, results, said the 
report. However, it lacks a clear strategic framework and "robust funding 
model", and its governance and management arrangements are cumbersome. It has 
little capacity for measuring results.

Icai said the task of administering the conflict pool by consensus across 
three departments is so challenging that those responsible for managing it 
"have tended to shy away from harder strategic issues". While describing the 
fund as a useful and important mechanism, Icai said significant reform is 
required for the fund to fulfil its potential.

The conflict pool, which evolved from funds set up in 2000-01, covers Africa, 
the Middle East and north Africa, south Asia, Europe, and Afghanistan – which 
absorbs 38% of the fund's resources (£75m in 2010-11). The objective of 
promoting a coherent and multidisciplinary approach to conflict prevention was 
novel and ambitious, but has been only partially achieved, said Icai, partly 
because the pool operated without an overarching strategy document until the 
adoption of theBuilding stability overseas strategy 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/News/Latest-news/2011/New-strategy-to-build-stability-overseas/>
 in July last year.

Even then, there has been a tendency for the three departments to divide the 
resources between them, rather than work together. "We saw few examples of 
activities that were genuinely multidisciplinary in nature. We also found only 
limited contribution by the conflict pool to improving overall strategic 
coherence across the departments," said Icai.

More recent developments have superseded the conflict pool's attempts at 
governmental coherence, such as the creation of the national security council 
and joint delivery plans for strategically important countries. "With the 
conflict pool no longer the sole or even primary instrument for conflict 
prevention, it needs to be clear about its role and comparative advantage and 
to concentrate its resources accordingly," said Icai.

On the difficulty in reaching agreement between the FCO, DfID and the MoD, the 
report said one option is for a single department to lead on the management and 
implementation of specific activities. "Were the FCO to be selected (in the 
light of its increasingly prominent role in conflict pool management and DfID's 
increasing disengagement from a direct spending role) it would have to increase 
significantly its investment in both management capacity and technical advisory 
resources," said Icai. Money is allocated initially from the Treasury to DfID, 
then divided between the three departments. DfID's share of the conflict pool 
had shrunk to 5% by 2010-11, while the FCO absorbed 60%.

Icai highlighted the conflict pool's weaknesses in two case studies: Pakistan 
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Icai said its work in Pakistan 
supporting activist groups which campaign against political extremism is 
relevant and worthwhile but far too small-scale to have a real prospect of 
countering radical forces. Nonetheless, Icai credited the pool's efforts to 
promote unofficial dialogue between MPs in India and Pakistan as contributing 
to a resumption of official dialogue in 2011 following a breakdown in relations 
after the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai.

In DRC, aid has focused on financial and material support to the UN 
peacekeeping mission (Monusco) on disarming and reintegrating foreign armed 
groups, reform of the army – particularly payroll management, and a project to 
improve living conditions of soldiers and their families to reduce abuses of 
the population by the army. But the prospects of significant conflict 
prevention gains from the strategy are slim asfighting continues in eastern DRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/09/africa-rwanda>.

"The report finds that the pool has proved effective at identifying and 
supporting worthwhile conflict prevention initiatives and has delivered some 
useful results," said Andrew Mitchell, the international development secretary. 
"It recommends key reforms, many of which are already being addressed with the 
work to implement the building security overseas strategy."

Positive influence on ADB

In a separate report on DfID's involvement with the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/ICAI-The-effectiveness-of-DFIDs-engagement-with-the-Asian-Development-Bank-FINAL1.pdf>
 (pdf), Icai said the UK has a positive influence on ADB strategy, policy and 
internal reform. However, this is yet to result in ADB achieving its own impact 
targets. To improve ADB's delivery of outcomes, DfID needs to influence the 
bank to improve project management and real-time monitoring. Icai gives DfID's 
engagement with the bank a green-amber assessment. DfID has invested $113m 
(£73m) in the ADB and committed to a further $53m, making it a 2% shareholder.
 