
UK businesses will have to deal with 60m more pieces of paperwork each year if 
Britain leaves the customs union as it departs the EU, according to research 
from a group campaigning to keep trade links with the bloc after Brexit.

According to Open Britain, a hard Brexit could spark an “avalanche of 
paperwork” if thousands of importing and exporting businesses were forced to 
fill out similar forms to those required in moving goods and services beyond 
the union.

The claim comes as the government faces another potential legal challenge to 
its Brexit plans, this time from two campaigners who are seeking a judicial 
review in the high court to keep Britain in the single market.

Under the EU customs union, which deals with rules relating to trade, unified 
tariffs are levied on imports to the whole area, meaning no new charges or 
associated paperwork are needed for goods shipped between members.

Poll suggests public will not accept a Brexit that leaves them worse off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/10/poll-public-will-not-accept-brexit-worse-off-tim-farron-ukip-lib-dem-yougov>
According to Open Britain <http://www.open-britain.co.uk/>, which has support 
from remain MPs in the three main Westminster parties, customs data shows that 
last year the UK made 70.5m import declarations and 6.5m export declarations 
over trade in non-EU goods.


The group says that if leaving the customs union involved a similar level of 
customs paperwork, it would require businesses to complete more than 45m import 
declarations and 15m export declarations every year.

This contradicts the arguments of pro-Brexit campaigners made before the June 
referendum, namely that leaving the EU would save businesses from EU-related 
bureaucracy, said the Labour MP Chris Leslie, who backs the group.

“Brexit isn’t a liberation from red tape but the beginning of an avalanche of 
paperwork for businesses trading withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” he said. “Ministers should 
commit to publishing a full cost-benefit analysis of the consequences of 
leaving the customs union, rather than just airily asserting that it will 
benefit our trade and our economy without any evidence for those claims.”

Jo Carberry, of Open Britain, said leaving the customs union would result in 
“a bombshell of Brexit bureaucracy for British businesses”.

Meanwhile, membership of the single market, the EU’s wider agreement on free 
trade as well as the movement of people, services and money, could now be 
argued in the high court, the Sunday Times has reported.

As the supreme court considers the article 50 legal challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/lawyer-supreme-court-brexit-article-50-vote>
, a new case hinges on whether the government would have to trigger another 
legal measure to quit the single market.


Claimants in the new case argue that the government has no mandate to withdraw 
from the single market because it was not on the ballot paper on 23 June and 
was not included in the Conservative party manifesto for last year’s general 
election. They argue that the government would have to triggerarticle 127 
<http://article127.org/> of the European Economic Area agreement.

However, the former attorney general Dominic Grieve – one of Open Britain’s 
supporters in parliament – cast doubts on the legal basis for the new challenge.


“It’s possible that the argument is that the way we leave the single market 
has to be separate from leaving the EU itself,” he said, speaking on Sky News’ 
Murnaghan programme on Sunday. “I have some doubts as to whether that would 
work.”

Asked if the article 50 challenge was simply “the first legal spanner” in the 
government’s plans and other legal challenges would follow, Grieve said there 
was “undoubtedly a very large number of legal complexities”. He added: “It’s 
going to be complicated; it’s 50 years of enmeshed legal obligations and 
rights.”

The new case comes after it emerged that another legal challenge to Brexit 
will go ahead in Ireland <https://www.crowdjustice.org/case/brexit-for-the-100/>
 after crowdfunding hit a £75,000 target within 48 hours. Specialist tax 
barrister Jolyon Maugham said he was bringing the case to address two issues: 
whether a notification under article 50 can be revoked and whether Britain 
would automatically leave the EEA when it left the EU.

Maugham argues that the European council and the European commission may have 
breached EU law on the grounds that if article 50 cannot be revoked then the 
government will be forced to accept whatever Brexit deal the EU offers. As an 
EU nation needs to be named in the legal action, the case will be heard in 
Ireland’s high court but is likely to be referred to European courts.

The single market court challenge is being brought by remain voter Peter 
Wilding, chairman of pressure group British Influence, and Adrian Yalland, a 
Conservative lobbyist who voted to leave.

They have informed Downing Street of their intention to seek the judicial 
review. Wilding said: “This is not stopping Brexit, this is shaping it. The 
country demands a win-win, smart Brexit; not a lose-lose ideological hard 
Brexit which will damage the UK, damage Europe and for which there is no need 
and no mandate.”

The supreme court spent four days last week hearing arguments over whether the 
government’s prerogative powers are sufficient to trigger article 50, or if 
this needs approval from parliament.

A judgment in the case is expected in early January. The government was 
granted an early appeal direct to the supreme court after the high court ruled 
last month that it was up to parliament to launch the formal process of exiting 
the EU.

That decision prompted much angry comment from some newspapers and 
Conservative MPs that the courts were trying to overturn the decision of the 
Brexit referendum in June.

However, those behind the article 50 case insist they are simply seeking to 
ensure that the process happens in accordance with constitutional protocols.

Helen Mountfield QC, representing the crowdfunded People’s Challenge group at 
the supreme court, said on Thursday that the government was as good as making 
up the perceived scope of its prerogative powers as it went along.

“It’s much like attempts to catch the Loch Ness monster,” she said. “Because 
no one has caught it, it is said to be assumed to still roam free.”

The case was not an attempt to “persuade the court to undertake judicial 
law-making”, she added.
 