
The intelligence services have routinely been intercepting legally privileged 
communications between lawyers and their clients in sensitive security cases, 
according to internal MI5, MI6 andGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> 
documents.

The information obtained may even have been exploited unlawfully and used by 
the agencies in the fighting of court cases in which they themselves are 
involved, theInvestigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT) <http://www.ipt-uk.com/> has 
been told, resulting in miscarriages of justice.

Exchanges between lawyers and their clients enjoy a special protected status 
under the law.

The Conservative MP David Davis, a former shadow home secretary, said past 
practice was to delete such material immediately if it was ever picked up. 
Amnesty International said the government was gaining “an unfair advantage akin 
to playing poker in a hall of mirrors”.

Their comments come after 28 extracts of internal intelligence policies 
showing how legally privileged material is handled by security officials were 
released to lawyers pursuing a claim through the IPT. The tribunal considers 
complaints against MI5,MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> and GCHQ.

The claim has been brought by two Libyans, Abdel-Hakim Belhaj and Sami Al 
Saadi, and their families after they were abducted in a joint MI6-CIA operation 
and sent back to be tortured by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi’s regime in 2004.

Belhaj has been given permission to sue the government for his mistreatment. 
Following revelations by the US whistleblower Edward Snowden, Belhaj’s lawyers 
feared their communications with their client could have been compromised by 
GCHQ’s mass surveillance of telephone and online communications.

Responses given by lawyers for the government at the IPT imply that there has 
already been one unidentified case, handled byMI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5>, where “the potential for tainting was 
identified” – suggesting that lawyers pursuing litigation may wrongfully have 
benefited from intercepts.

Until Thursday’s hearing, government lawyers had argued that releasing the 
internal intelligence agency guidance would compromise national security.
 A claim that MI5, MI6 and GCHQ have been listening in to legally privileged 
communications between lawyers and their clients has forced the intelligence 
agencies to release extracts of internal policy documents. The 28 re-typed 
“exhibits”, attached underneath the government’s legal response, show 
guidelines in force at various times on how intelligence officers might use 
such sensitive material. The investigatory powers tribunal, which is 
considering the claim, hears complaints about the intelligence services and use 
of surveillance by other government bodies. 
Dinah Rose QC, for Belhaj, said the documents also appeared to show that the 
agencies had hidden from the courts the fact that they held legally privileged 
material relating to security cases.

“There’s a real risk, if these matters are not fully explored, that confidence 
in our justice system could be undermined,” she told the tribunal. “These 
policies raise a strongprima facie case that there’s been abuse of process and 
that real injustices may have been done.

“Even the most recent policies do not adequately provide for proper 
information barriers [between] those handling litigation and those who received 
the intercepted legally privileged material.”

Among cases that may have been affected are highly sensitive hearings at the 
security immigration tribunal Siac, control order hearings and those who have 
brought claims following revelations by Snowden.

Rose said: “This [Belhaj] case is the tip of the iceberg. It raises questions 
about a large number of cases and about the integrity of judgments reached by 
courts in civil and criminal cases. We have a situation where the policies, on 
the face of it, appear to permit lawyers to be involved in practices that are 
unlawful and unethical.”

James Eadie QC, for the government, resisted calls from Belhaj’s lawyers for 
the original documents, showing the redactions, to be released. He said: “The 
claimants will have the content … the exact words used to the extent that they 
can be disclosed in open.”

The new chief of GCHQ, Robert Hannigan, sought earlier this week to justify 
the extent of surveillance powers by arguing that jihadis and criminals are 
becoming increasingly sophisticated in the way they exploit the internet.

One of the intelligence agency documents acknowledges: “Material subject to 
LPP is amongst the most sensitive sorts of information that may be obtained by 
the security service. The confidentiality of lawyer-client communications is 
fiercely guarded by the law and any departure from it in the national security 
context must be narrowly construed and strictly justified.”

The full hearing of Belhaj’s claim is due to be heard by the IPT in January.

Cori Crider, director at the legal charity Reprieve and US counsel for Belhaj, 
said: “It’s now clear the intelligence agencies have been eavesdropping on 
lawyer-client conversations for years. Today’s question is not whether, but how 
much, they have rigged the game in their favour in the ongoing court case over 
torture. The documents clearly show that MI5’s and GCHQ’s policies on snooping 
on lawyers have major loopholes. And MI6’s policies are so hopeless they appear 
to have been jotted down on the back of a beermat. This raises troubling 
implications for the whole British justice system. In how many cases has the 
government eavesdropped to give itself an unfair advantage in court?”

Davis, who attended the hearing, said: “Lawyer-client confidentiality is a 
foundation stone of our legal system, and historically has been absolutely 
respected by government agencies. In the past, when a bug or intercept on a 
criminal accidentally picked up a conversation with the criminal’s lawyer, the 
rule was that it was immediately deleted. Today’s hearing shows that is no 
longer the case.

“Each of the three main agencies are clearly keeping records of legal 
privileged material, and have explicit policies to handle it. In the case of 
MI5 that policy includes concealing from the court that they have the material, 
including the secret courts and security cleared special advocates paid by the 
state.

“This change has been carried out without changing the law or telling 
parliament. This is an enormous breach of defendants’ judicial rights. Indeed, 
one dreadful possible consequence is that it could lead to historic convictions 
being quashed in serious cases, including terrorism cases.”

Richard Stein, a partner at Leigh Day who represents the Belhaj family, said: 
“After many months’ resistance, the security services have now been forced to 
disclose the policies which they claim are in place to protect the confidential 
communications between lawyers and their clients. We can see why they were so 
reluctant to disclose them. They highlight how the security services instruct 
their staff to flout these important principles in a cavalier way. We hope the 
tribunal will tell the government in no uncertain terms that this conduct is 
completely unacceptable.”

Hugh Tomlinson QC, for Amnesty International, who are involved in the case, 
said: “The guidance [revealed in the documents] contemplates the systematic 
invasion by state agents of a right in English common law which is absolute.”

Rachel Logan, Amnesty UK’s legal adviser, said: “We now know that the 
government sees nothing wrong in routinely spying on the confidential 
communication between lawyers and clients. This clearly violates an age-old 
principle of English law : that the correspondence between a person and their 
lawyer is confidential. It could mean, amazingly, that the government uses 
information they have got from snooping on you, against you, in a case you have 
brought.”

Officials believe the documents set out safeguards to ensure legal privilege 
is respected by the intelligence agencies. The government says the Interception 
Code of Practice requires that an additional level of scrutiny should be 
applied in cases where that legally privileged communications might be 
intercepted.

The government said: “We do not comment on ongoing legal proceedings.” 

Elizabeth Knight, legal director of the Open Rights groups, said: “We already 
know that Ripa [Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act] allows the security 
services to intercept all ‘external’ communications, breaching our right to 
privacy. By undermining journalistic and legal privilege, Ripa also threatens 
our rights to free speech and a fair trial. The government cannot keep 
defending these abuses. We need urgent reform of this broken law now. This 
disclosure demonstrates the need to introduce judicial authorisation.”
 