
British judges can continue to impose "whole life" prison sentences in the 
most heinous cases of murder, the court of appeal has ruled.

The appeal judges confirmed that a European court of human rights ruling last 
year (pdf) <http://t.co/ZGXUQoSiHS> that such whole life sentences needed to be 
reviewed at some stage does not prevent murderers being sent to prison for the 
rest of their lives in the most serious cases.

The appeal court judges, led by the lord chief justice, said the European 
human rights judges had been wrong to say British law did not clearly provide 
whole life inmates with any possibility of release and said that such a power 
clearly existed in exceptional circumstances.

The ruling (pdf)  <http://t.co/RrDlR3nYO2> increases the 40-year sentence on 
Ian McLoughlin, the murderer of Graham Buck, to a whole life prison term after 
an appeal by the attorney-general, Dominic Grieve, that it was unduly lenient.

The appeal court also dismissed a challenge in a second case brought by killer 
Lee Newell against his whole life order for the murder of Subhan Anwar.

The ruling clears the way for sentencing in a number of high-profile murder 
cases that had been put on hold pending its outcome. They include the prison 
terms to be handed out toMichael Adebolajo and Michael Adebowale, who were 
convicted in December of killing Fusilier Lee Rigby in Woolwich, south-east 
London, in May last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/19/lee-rigby-murder-michael-adebolajo-adebowale-guilty>
.

The justice secretary, Chris Grayling, welcomed the decision. He said: "Our 
courts should be able to send the most brutal murderers to jail for the rest of 
their lives. I think people in Britain will be glad that our courts have 
disagreed with theEuropean court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights>, and upheld 
the law that the UK parliament has passed."

The attorney-general welcomed the court's decision to declare the 40-year 
sentence passed on McLoughlin, aged 55, as "unduly lenient" for such a heinous 
crime and impose a whole life term instead: "As someone who has killed three 
times, Ian McLoughlin committed just such a crime, and following today's 
judgment he has received the sentence that crime required.

"I asked the court of appeal to look again at McLoughlin's original sentence 
because I did not think that the European court of human rights had said 
anything which prevented our courts from handing down whole life terms in the 
most serious cases.

"The court of appeal has agreed with me and today's judgment gives the clarity 
our judges need when they are considering sentencing cases like this in the 
future."

The lord chief justice, Lord Thomas, said McLoughlin and Newell were two 
exceptional and rare cases of second murders committed by people who were 
already serving life sentences for murder: "It is likely to be rare that the 
circumstances will be such that a whole life order is required. Our decision on 
each case turns on its specific facts and cannot be seen as a guide to any 
similar case."

The need to clarify the legal status of whole life sentences followed the 
sentencing of McLoughlin last October at the Old Bailey when Mr Justice Sweeney 
imposed a minimum sentence of 40 years. The Old Bailey judge said he had to 
take account of the European court of human rights ruling last July that the 
whole life sentences passed on three killers, Douglas Vintner, Jeremy Bamber 
and Peter Moore, amounted to inhumane and degrading treatment because it lacked 
any formal review mechanism that would give any prospect of release. They said 
such sentences had to be reviewed at some stage, and suggested 25 years, but 
said that it was up to national authorities to decide.

The lord chief justice said it was clear the Old Bailey judge had been in 
error in thinking that he did not have the power to give a whole life order.

The five appeal court judges, including Thomas, ruled that Strasbourg had been 
wrong to state that whole life prisoners had no hope of release. They pointed 
to section 30 of the Crime (Sentences) Act, which provides for the "possible 
exceptional release of whole life prisoners", saying it did provide that 
prospect.

"In our judgment the law of England and Wales therefore does provide to an 
offender 'hope' or the 'possibility' of release in exceptional circumstances 
which render the just punishment originally imposed no longer justifiable," 
said the lord chief justice.

He said it was consistent with the rule of law that such requests should only 
be considered on an individual basis. However, the judges said they found it 
difficult to specify what such exceptional circumstances might be.

The effect of the appeal court ruling is to restore the position before the 
Strasbourg ruling last July. Justice ministers are expected to use it to back 
their argument with the European human rights court that they will not grant an 
automatic right of review of the whole life sentences currently imposed on 53 
of the most heinous killers in jails in England and Wales.

Jill Lorimer, a criminal law specialist at Kingsley Napley, said although the 
appeal court might face criticisms of judicial lawmaking it had found a 
solution that might allow the UK to comply with the Vinter ruling without a 
protracted political wrangle.

A spokesman for the Council of Europe, which oversees the European court of 
human rights, confirmed that there was now a disagreement with the British 
judiciary over whether the existing law clearly provided for the release of 
whole life prisoners in exceptional circumstances.

"The UK court of appeal has agreed with the ECHR that whole life sentences are 
not incompatible with the [human rights] convention, but disagreed that the 
existing laws allowing for release in exceptional circumstances are unclear and 
sought to clarify what the law is."

He said that the Council of Europe's committee of ministers was now overseeing 
the implementation of the original Vinter judgement. The British government had 
submitted "an action plan" to do that on 9 January and said it would provide 
further information as soon as possible.
 