
A week after “alt-right” figurehead and Breitbart editor Milo Yiannopoulos 
landed a lucrative $250,000 (£203,000) book deal with publisher Simon & Schuster
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/30/breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos-claims-deal-autobiography>
 in the US, the UK division of the publisher has walked away from the 
opportunity, confirming it will not publish his controversial book.

A Simon & Schuster UK spokesperson confirmed to the Guardian that it would not 
be publishing Yiannopoulos’s memoir, titled Dangerous, which is due out in the 
US in March.


Senior editors at many of the UK’s biggest publishing houses told the Guardian 
they were unlikely to offer for the book should it come on to the market. “It 
will be a toxic book to try and sell here,” one publishing insider said.

A publishing director at a nonfiction imprint, who also asked not to be named, 
said: “A lot of semi-toxic books do go to large publishers, but I wouldn’t 
touch this if it was offered to me and don’t think anyone else will.”

Publishing Milo Yiannopoulos’ book is wrong. My magazine is fighting back | 
Adam Morgan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/simon-schuster-alt-right-hate-breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos>
Only Iain Dale, from small independent Biteback, showed an interest, but said 
Yiannopoulos’s reputation as a mouthpiece for the hard right might create 
problems selling the book through bookshops. “It would be a difficult book to 
push in the sense that some bookshops will be very wary of it,” he said. 
“Persuading Waterstones to take a book like that may be a difficult task.”

Dale has previously published rightwing commentators and politicians who were 
turned down elsewhere. Biteback, which is jointly owned by former Conservative 
party deputy chairman Michael Ashcroft, picked up Brexit mouthpiece Nigel 
Farage’s memoir The Purple Revolution after it was rejected by corporate 
publishers. In 2016, the imprint also published Leave.EU backer Arron Banks’s 
The Bad Boys of Brexit, which is reportedly currentlybeing considered for a 
film adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/02/brexit-the-movie-warner-bros-set-to-option-ukip-donors-memoirs-aaron-banks>
.

According to Dale, both books had struggled to get distribution through the 
high street, but had sold well through the publisher’s website and on Amazon. 
“The Bad Boys of Brexit has been an amazing seller – apart from in Waterstones, 
because they only take one or two copies,” he said.

“In the US there is a massive market for right-wing writers through talk radio 
stations, and they also do events where they can sell 2,000 to 3,000 copies at 
a time. We don’t have that market here, so it makes it harder to sell.”

Asked how much he would be willing to pay for Yiannopoulos’s book, he said: 
“Not a huge amount because it’s a risk: four figures rather than five.”

Major publishers insisted their reluctance to take on Yiannopoulos had less to 
do with his opinions than that, outside media and rightwing circles, he was 
relatively unknown in the UK. “He doesn’t have a platform in Britain,” said 
one. “We have a history of publishing toxic books here that have done well, but 
this won’t be one of them, he’s just not that well known.”

London publishers also feared a similar backlash from their authors as had 
been experienced by Simon & Schuster in the US, which is to publish 
Yiannopoulos under its Threshold imprint. Earlier in the week, comedian Leslie 
Jones joined a chorus of discontent over the book, accusing the publisher of 
helping the likes of Yiannopoulos “spread their hate”. Yiannopoulos had 
allegedly encouraged a harassment campaign towards Jones that eventually saw 
him permanently banned from Twitter.

Leslie Jones accuses Simon & Schuster over Milo Yiannopoulos book deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/03/milo-yiannopoulos-250000-book-deal-fury-leslie-jones-simon-schuster-breitbart-alt-right>
In the US, Yiannopoulos has built his reputation through the popularity of 
Breitbart. Though the rightwing site invested heavily in a European service, 
headquartered in the UK, it has failed to make a significant impact. Publishers 
said this reflected the differing tastes between the right wing in the UK and 
US.
 