
Ulster delivered the first victory of their European Champions Cup campaign at 
a vital time in their bid to avoid early elimination, with a try bonus point 
win moving them off the bottom of Pool Three and setting them up nicely for 
next Sunday’s return fixture atScarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>.

First-half tries from Darren Cave and Ruan Pienaar – who was making his first 
appearance of the season for Ulster and also ended up in the sin bin late on – 
were supplemented by scores in the second period by Tommy Bowe, with the 
captain, Rory Best, delivering the try that clinched the bonus point.

The 24-9 defeat now leaves Scarlets – who had two players shown a yellow card 
– bottom of the group after going into the game in second place.

The visitors got things going with a penalty after three minutes from Rhys 
Priestland and Ulster’s cause was done no good at all when Ian Humphreys missed 
his first two shots at goal in the sixth and ninth minutes.

But a late hit on Humphreys by the Scarlets flanker James Davies saw him sent 
to the sin bin in the 11th minute and the home side then got going with 14 
unanswered points.

Cave crossed the line just before the end of the first quarter from a Tommy 
Bowe assist which Humphreys converted and then in the 18th minute Pienaar 
marked his comeback with a well-taken try after a Cave break.

Again Humphreys converted and Ulster were 14-3 ahead when Davies returned. 
Priestland narrowed the deficit with a 29th-minute penalty but the Scarlets 
then finished the half with 14 players again after Liam Williams was shown a 
yellow card for tipping Louis Ludik up in the tackle.

The Scarlets then won a penalty for offside in the last minute of the first 
half but Priestland was wide with the long-range shot and it ended with the 
home side leading 14-6. But when substitute Stuart McCloskey was penalised for 
not rolling away, Priestland made no mistake with his third penalty – which 
came in the 55th minute.

Bowe touched down in the right corner in the 59th minute after smart work from 
Pienaar at a scrum. Humphreys missed the difficult conversion but the home side 
now led 19-9 and were one score short of a try bonus point.

The sight of Nick Williams hobbling off, however, while McCloskey also left 
injured, was not a promising one with the return game just a week away. Still, 
a great maul over the Scarlets line brought the bonus try on 68 minutes, with 
Best making the score under a pile of bodies – although Humphreys was again 
unable to convert.

Yet Ulster looked secure and even with Pienaar sent to the sin bin for a 
deliberate knock-on, they held their line in the face of several waves of 
Scarlets attacks.

Ulster Ludik; Bowe, Cave, Olding (McCloskey 36; Allen 65), Gilroy; Humphreys, 
Pienaar; Black (Warwick 75), Best (Herring 75), Herbst (Fitzpatrick 47), Tuohy, 
Van der Merwe (O’Connor 47), Diack (Marshall 76), Wilson, Williams (Ross 65).
Sin binPienaar (74). Tries Cave, Pienaar, Bowe, Best. Cons Humphreys 2.

Scarlets L Williams (Owen 60); Robinson, King (S Shingler 71), S Williams, 
Tagicakibau; Priestland, A Davies (R Williams 64); Evans (John 71), Phillips 
(Myhill 71), Lee (Jones 64), Ball (Earle 63), Snyman, A Shingler, J Davies 
(Rawlins 65), Pitman.Sin bin J Davies (12), L Williams (35). Pens Priestland 3.
 