
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> exited the 
European Champions Cup with barely a whimper until it was too late on Saturday 
night, undone by an Ulster side playing for pride and a 43-minute hat-trick for 
Darren Cave, a centre who is very much looking for a place in Ireland’s Six 
Nations starting XV.

For England the news got worse, Geoff Parling – recently called up with 
Courtney Lawes and Joe Launchbury injured – becoming yet another lock in doubt 
for the opening game in Cardiff.

Leicester were overburdened by the pressure of needing to score tries and were 
just too loose to improve their dismal record in Belfast.

They arrived at Ravenhill 12th in the pecking order for qualification needing 
a whole pack of cards to fall their way. Wasps’ draw against Leinster had come 
as another knife in the ribs of a side with a points difference of one.

But in the end they failed to clear the first hurdle, beating Ulster at home, 
something they had never previously managed, even in the glory seasons which 
followed back-to-back European titles. In theory Leicester also needed to score 
four tries and only two sides have managed that in Europe and no team had done 
it in almost five years.

On top of that, Ulster were smarting, having been beaten 60-22 by Toulon, when 
the reigning champions qualified for the quarter-finals with a game to go last 
week. Ulster’s head coach, Neil Doak, responded with eight changes, recalling a 
raft of internationals.

Leicester’s director of rugby, Richard Cockerill, had no choice but to gamble. 
“We needed to come to play and we got what we deserved in the end,” said 
Cockerill but the bad news started immediately when Parling limped off with a 
damaged left knee.

“It’s too early to know,” said Cockerill when asked whether Parling’s Six 
Nations was at risk.

However, things were getting worse on the field when one of those 
internationals returning to Ulster ranks, Tommy Bowe, popped up twice to build 
pressure which pulled Leicester left and then right where fly-half Ian 
Humphreys had the simple task of putting Cave over.

Humphreys failed with the conversion, but it was a full 30 minutes before 
Leicester exerted any concerted pressure and even then Ulster seemed 
comfortable in their defence. An ability to deny the the English quick ball and 
Leicester frustration combined and which the siege was raised and the lead 
extended.Alan O’Connor pounced on a loose ball and Humphreys and Cave repeated 
their double act, the fly-half making the break and drawing the cover which put 
the centre over and the home side 12-0 up at half-time.

Three minutes into the second half Cave completed his hat-trick, stepping 
inside Mathew Tait after Bowe had joined Humphreys in the buildup. Then 
Leicester’s Vereniki Goneva was sent to the sin-bin for the mildest of high 
tackles.

Four minutes later and down to 14 men, the side which had been looking for a 
try bonus point conceded one when Craig Gilroy made the best of the reduced 
numbers and Ruan Piennaar converted from wide out on the left to put Ulster 26 
points in the clear.

Adam Thompstone got one back, but three tries in 25 minutes was far too big an 
ask, although Leicester did stir themselves for a decent onslaught which saw 
Callum Black and Wiehahn Herbst in the sin-bin for some desperate Ulster 
defence and Bowe shift from wing into the back row at scrum time.
 