
Ulster guaranteed themselves a home tie in the quarter-finals of the Heineken 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> with a scrappy 9-8 victory 
over Castres at Stade Pierre-Antoine. Although not at their best, they came 
from behind to win, courtesy of three Ruan Pienaar penalties.

Castres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> had led thanks to a 
well-worked try from Piula Faasalele but it was Mark Anscombe's side who took 
home the points.

Ulster made six changes to the team who beat Glasgow at Ravenhill last Friday, 
with Neil McComb, Roger Wilson, Ruan Pienaar, Paul Marshall, Craig Gilroy and 
Michael Allen coming into the side. Castres, made eight, including an entire 
new back row.

Last season's finalists made a strong start but it was first blood to Castres 
after fantastic work by Scotland's Max Evans. The 29-year-old managed to keep 
the ball in play as he was tackled on the wing. He offloaded to Faasalele who 
then passed inside to No12, Rémi Lamerat, who jumped over the line for the 
first score of the match. Rory Kockott missed the conversion.

Shortly after the restart, Castres' Mathieu Babillot was penalised at the 
breakdown, and Pienaar – who has stated he wants to sign a new contract with 
the club – kicked Ulster's first points of the match.

Despite conceding a penalty shortly after the restart, Castres continued to 
press and were awarded a penalty when Paddy Wallace was penalised for a 
swinging arm.

Unlike his conversion attempt, Kockott made no mistake with the penalty, 
firing between the posts to give Castres an 8-3 lead.

Top spot and qualification to the quarter-finals was already assured for 
Ulster but they knew that a win would guarantee them a home tie.

Although they were sloppy for the majority of the first half, they were 
awarded a penalty for obstruction with four minutes of the first half 
remaining. Pienaar made no mistake and brought Ulster some much needed momentum.

Pienaar had the chance to put Ulster into the lead when his side were awarded 
a penalty after a scrum but the Springbok missed and Castres led 8-6 at the 
break.

The second half got off to a scrappy start, with Ulster again failing to 
execute their lineout. Paul Marshall spilled the ball and Castres were awarded 
the scrum.

After an uneventful opening 10 minutes, Castres were awarded a penalty in 
their own half and Kockott went for the posts. The kick had the length but not 
the direction and the score remained 8-6 to the home side.

Anscombe introduced Paddy Jackson on the hour mark in the hope of giving his 
team a much needed spark. Ulster were improving and when a penalty was awarded 
in front of the posts after Mihaita Lazar was punished for being in an offside 
position, Pienaar kicked it to edge Ulster ahead for the first time at 9-8.

Ulster seemed to be buoyed by Pienaar's kick and enjoyed a much healthier 
share of the ball for the remainder of the game.
 