
Ulster’s European Champions Cup campaign roared back to life with a stunning 
five-try bonus-point thumping ofToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> at the Kingspan Stadium.

Les Kiss’s side simply overwhelmed the French visitors – the first time the 
four-times European champions have been held pointless in the competition – 
with tries from Nick Williams, Andrew Trimble, Luke Marshall, Stuart McCloskey 
and Chris Henry.

Paddy Jackson added four conversions and a first-half penalty while 
replacement Ian Humphreys also slotted a conversion as Ulster wrapped up an 
unlikely 38-0 scoreline. The victory saw the home side move up from bottom to 
second place in Pool One ahead of next week’s return match in Toulouse.

Ulster led 17-0 at half-time in an opening 40 minutes that saw three players 
sin-binned, Sébastian Bézy and Yacouba Camara for the French, and Williams for 
the hosts.

It was a nervy start for both sides but Toulouse, whose campaign could now be 
over after suffering a second defeat in three games, had the first significant 
scoring chance only for Toby Flood’s 13th-minute penalty attempt to drift wide.

Ulster certainly had most of the territory and ambition while the sight of 
Louis Picamoles departing early with an arm injury did the French cause no good 
at all.

The home side made their dominance pay in the 22nd minute when, from a penalty 
which they put in the corner before winning the lineout, they drove up the 
blindside and then opened it out.

Robbie Diack’s assist gave Williams a chance which he took, dragging Gaël 
Fickou and Bézy with him before grounding the ball just to the right of the 
posts. Jackson made the straightforward conversion and Ulster were 7-0 up.

That became 10-0 a minute before the half-hour after Jackson’s strong surge to 
the French line was held up short, with Bézy being shown yellow by referee 
Wayne Barnes for deliberate offside, and the Ulster fly-half slotted the 
penalty. Flood had another penalty chance soon after but, again, he missed.

Both sides were then reduced to 14 men when Williams was yellow-carded after 
smashing Vincent Clerc at a ruck but Ulster struck again just on half-time.

This time Ruan Pienaar’s pass saw Trimble burst through before chipping and 
collecting past Clerc to score near the posts. Jackson’s conversion took it to 
17-0 at the interval, with Toulouse picking up another yellow when a deliberate 
trip by Camara on Pienaar saw him binned just as Bézy returned.

Ulster started the second half strongly and came close to scoring two minutes 
in when Craig Gilroy had the ball knocked from his grasp by Clerc as he dived 
for the line.

Shortly afterwards, though, Ulster got their third when Pienaar’s audacious 
cross-kick off his weaker left foot was perfectly weighted for Marshall to 
score. Jackson again added the extras and the home side had a 24-0 lead.

The bonus point seemed inevitable and duly came in the 53rd minute when 
McCloskey surged through out on the right and, after dotting down under the 
sticks, Jackson’s fourth conversion took the score to 31-0.

Toulouse nearly got off the mark when Jean-Marc Doussain lunged for the line 
only for Trimble to hit the replacement scrum-half and dislodge the ball.

Ulster’s fifth try arrived with less than 10 minutes to go when Henry was on 
hand to finish from the back of an irresistible driving maul, which Humphreys 
converted to cap a superb victory.
 