
The UN human rights chief has asked Philippine authorities to launch a murder 
investigation after the president,Rodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte>, claimed to have killed 
people in the past, and to examine the “appalling epidemic of extrajudicial 
killings” committed during his anti-drug crackdown.

Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein said the country’s judicial authorities “must 
demonstrate their commitment to upholding the rule of law and their 
independence from the executive” by investigating the president. He said it was 
“unthinkable for any functioning judicial system not to launch investigative 
and judicial proceedings when someone has openly admitted being a killer”.

Since taking office in June, Duterte has overseen a crackdown on the illegal 
drug trade that has left more than 6,000 people dead. Government officials have 
defended police actions during the crackdown.

Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte says he personally killed criminals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
Duterte has claimed in recent speeches that as a mayor in southern Davao city 
in 1988, he killed three suspected kidnappers in a firefight where he was 
backed up by three police officers. He later said he was unsure whether it was 
the bullets from his M16 rifle that killed the suspects.

Duterte has also suggested that he used to roam around Davao on a motorcycle 
looking for criminals to kill so that police would emulate him. “In Davao I 
used to do it personally. Just to show to the guys that if I can do it, why 
can’t you?” Dutertesaid last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
. “I go around in Davao with a motorcycle, with a big bike, and I would just 
patrol the streets and looking for trouble also. I was really looking for an 
encounter to be able to kill.”

Hussein, the UN high commissioner for human rights, said Duterte’s acts 
“directly contravene the rights” enshrined in the Philippine constitution and 
“also violate international law”. He said Duterte’s encouragement of others to 
kill may constitute incitement to violence, and expressed concern about 
Duterte’s assurances that police officers who committed human rights violations 
would be immune to prosecution.

“The perpetrators must be brought to justice, sending a strong message that 
violence, killings and human rights violations will not be tolerated by the 
state and that no one is above the law,” he said.

The Philippine justice secretary, Vitaliano Aguirre II, has defended Duterte, 
saying the president often exaggerates tales of killing criminals to send a 
warning to lawbreakers. Aguirre said Duterte may have been resorting to 
hyperbole in his description of his motorcycle tours of Davao.

Duterte has previously threatened to withdraw the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> from the UN for its criticism 
of his drug crackdown, describing the world body as powerless in the face of 
genocidal killings in other places.
 