
US armed forces and the CIA may have committed war crimes by torturing 
detainees inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, the 
international criminal court’s chief prosecutor has said in a report, raising 
the possibility that American citizens could be indicted even though Washington 
has not joined the global court.

“Members of US armed forces appear to have subjected at least 61 detained 
persons to torture, cruel treatment, outrages upon personal dignity on the 
territory of Afghanistan between 1 May 2003 and 31 December 2014,” according to 
the report issued by prosecutor Fatou Bensouda’s office on Monday.

The report adds that CIA operatives may have subjected at least 27 detainees 
in Afghanistan, Poland, Romania andLithuania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lithuania> to “torture, cruel treatment, 
outrages upon personal dignity and/or rape” between December 2002 and March 
2008.

Most of the alleged abuse happened in 2003-04, the report says.

Prosecutors said they would decide “imminently” whether to seek authorisation 
to open a full-scale investigation in Afghanistan that could lead to war crimes 
charges.

Elizabeth Trudeau, the spokeswoman for the State Department, said the US did 
not believe an ICC investigation was “warranted or appropriate”.

“The United States is deeply committed to complying with the law of war, and 
we have a robust national system of investigation and accountability that more 
than meets international standards,” Trudeau said.

A Pentagon spokesman, Navy Capt Jeff Davis, said officials were awaiting 
further details about the ICC findings before commenting.

Established in 2002, the international criminal court is the world’s first 
permanent court set up to prosecute war crimes, crimes against humanity and 
genocide. More than 120 countries are members, but superpowers including the 
US, Russia and China have not signed up.

The former US president Bill Clinton signed the Rome treaty that established 
the court on 31 Deember 2000, but President George W Bush renounced the 
signature, citing fears that Americans would be unfairly prosecuted for 
political reasons.

Even though the US is not a member of the court, Americans could still face 
prosecution at its headquarters in The Hague if they commit crimes within its 
jurisdiction in a country that is a member, such as Afghanistan, and are not 
prosecuted at home.

So far, all of the ICC’s trials have dealt with crimes committed in Africa.

Prosecutors say investigations also are reportedly under way in Poland, Romania
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/romania> and Lithuania, which are all 
signatories to the Rome statute, into possible crimes at CIA detention 
facilities in those countries.

The abuse allegations came in a wide-ranging annual report into the 
prosecution office’s preliminary examinations, which involve studying reports 
of possible crimes to establish if they fall under the court’s jurisdiction.

The same report says that Taliban and Afghan government forces also may have 
used torture and committed other atrocities in that country’s long and bitter 
conflict. The report says the Taliban and its affiliates killed thousands of 
people and are suspected of committing war crimes including murder, recruiting 
and conscripting child soldiers and attacking civilians and humanitarian 
workers.

Referring to the alleged US war crimes, the report says they “were not the 
abuses of a few isolated individuals. Rather, they appear to have been 
committed as part of approved interrogation techniques in an attempt to extract 
‘actionable intelligence’ from detainees”.

The report adds: “The information available suggests that victims were 
deliberately subjected to physical and psychological violence, and that crimes 
were allegedly committed with particular cruelty and in a manner that debased 
the basic human dignity of the victims.”

Before deciding to open a full-scale investigation, ICC prosecutors have to 
establish whether they have jurisdiction and whether the alleged crimes are 
being investigated and prosecuted in the countries involved. The ICC is a court 
of last resort that takes on cases only when other countries are unable or 
unwilling to prosecute.

The report notes that US authorities have conducted dozens of investigations 
and court martial cases and says ICC prosecutors are seeking further 
clarifications on their scope before deciding whether any American cases would 
be admissible at the ICC.

After the 9/11 attacks, George W Bush’s administration allowed the use of 
waterboarding, which simulates drowning, and other enhanced interrogation 
techniques against suspected terrorists. President Barack Obamabanned such 
practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jun/16/senate-passes-torture-ban-republicans>
 after taking office in 2009.

During the presidential campaign, the Republican nominee Donald Trump 
suggested that as president he would push to change laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-ohio-rally-isis-torture-tpp-rape>
 that prohibit waterboarding and other harsh interrogation techniques, arguing 
that banning them put the US at a strategic disadvantage against Islamic State 
militants.
 