
The director of the US government’s ethics agency has criticised Donald 
Trump’s plan to maintain his business empire by turning it over to his sons.

Will Trump’s business plans avoid presidential conflicts of interest?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>
Walter Shaub took the rare step of commenting publicly about a presidential 
ethics decision, saying that Trump’s solution to the potential conflicts of 
interest caused by his global business holdings broke 40 years of precedent.

Shaub, an Obama appointee who also worked at the agency during the George W 
Bush administration, urged Trump to reconsider his plan before his inauguration.

He said Trump should commit to “divestiture” – selling his corporate assets 
and placing the profit in a blind trust administered by a neutral trustee 
approved by the ethics agency.

Emails between the agency and the Trump transition team obtained by the 
Associated Press show that Shaub repeatedly tried to persuade the 
president-elect and his cabinet choices to agree to divestiture as the cleanest 
way to avoid potential ethical conflicts posed by their investments and 
businesses.


But while lawyers for several Trump picks, including prospective secretary of 
state Rex Tillerson and senior adviser Jared Kushner, have worked closely with 
the agency in shaping divestiture plans, Trump’s own lawyers and aides gave the 
federal agency no official advance notice of his plan to turn over his global 
empire to his sons, according to an official familiar with interactions between 
the two sides.

The official said that Shaub met once with Trump’s prospective White House 
counsel, Don McGahn, in recent weeks, but only to discuss ethics plans for 
several of Trump’s picks, not for the president-elect.

One of Trump’s advisers, Sheri Dillon, a partner at the global law firm 
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, said on Wednesday that Trump plans to have his 
companies’ operations directed by his two sons, but they would pursue new deals 
only in the US, not abroad.

Dillon said Trump would put his business assets in a trust but would hand over 
management of his international real estate firms to a management company based 
in New York.

Shaub said during a rare appearance at the Brookings Institution that he was 
“especially troubled” by Dillon’s comment that Trump’s liquid assets from stock 
and investment sales he made in recent months before the presidential election 
would be placed in a “diversified portfolio of assets” approved by his agency.

“No one has ever talked to us about the idea, and there’s no legal mechanism 
to do that,” Shaub said. He added that the only approved method is the 
government-qualified blind trust set by theEthics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethics> in Government Act.

Shaub said his agency’s unusual Twitter comments last year complimenting Trump 
for considering divesting his assets was his decision, made to “use the 
vernacular of the president-elect’s favorite social media platform to encourage 
him to divest.”

He said he now worries that Trump has no intention of going through 
government-approved divestiture, a move that risks “creating the perception 
that government leaders would use their official positions for profit.”

Shaub said he had been initially encouraged by a Trump tweet last year that 
“no way” would he allow any conflicts of interest. “Unfortunately,” he said, 
“his current plan cannot achieve that goal.”
 