
US law enforcement officials on Saturday expressed outrage over the release 
from prison of the Mexican drug lord Rafael Caro Quintero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/09/mexican-druglord-rafael-caro-quintero-released>
, and vowed to continue efforts to bring to justice the man who ordered the 
killing of a US Drug Enforcement Administration agent.

Caro Quintero was sentenced to 40 years in prison for the 1985 kidnapping and 
killing of DEA agent Enrique Camarena but a Mexican federal court ordered his 
release this week, saying he had been improperly tried in a federal court for 
state crimes. The 60-year-old walked out of a prison in the western state of 
Jalisco early on Friday, after serving 28 years of his sentence.

The US Department of Justice said it found the court's decision "deeply 
troubling". In a statement, it said: "The Department of Justice, and especially 
the Drug Enforcement Administration, is extremely disappointed with this 
result."

The Association of Former Federal Narcotics Agents in the United States said 
it was "outraged" by Caro Quintero's early release and blamed corruption within 
Mexico's justice system. "The release of this violent butcher is but another 
example of how good faith efforts by the US to work with the Mexican government 
can be frustrated by those powerful dark forces that work in the shadows of the 
Mexican 'justice' system," the organization said in a statement.

The DEA said it "will vigorously continue its efforts to ensure Caro-Quintero 
faces charges in the United States for the crimes he committed".

Mexican authorities did not release a full decision explaining the reasoning 
of the three-judge panel, but some experts said the ruling may have been part 
of a broader push to rebalance the Mexican legal system in favor of defendants' 
rights, from both law-enforcement officials and the independent judicial 
system. Mexico's supreme court has issued several recent rulings overturning 
cases while saying due process wasn't followed.

However, Mexican and current and former US officials alike expressed deep 
skepticism that correct procedures were followed in the decision to free Caro 
Quintero. The Mexican attorney general, Jesús Murillo Karam, said the first 
appellate court had "completely ignored" supreme court precedent in dismissing 
the case, instead of referring it to the state courts that appellate judges 
believe should have heard it in the first place. He said his office would get 
involved in the case but offered no details.

Former DEA officials familiar with the Camarena case said they doubted that 
Caro Quintero had walked free simply due to a legally well-founded 
reexamination of his case. They noted a history of bribery inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> and a continuous need for US 
pressure on Mexican authorities to keep Camarena's killers behind bars.

Edward Heath was the DEA's regional director for Mexico at the time of the 
Camarena killing and was present during the identification of the agent's body 
from dental records. He said Caro Quintero's release reflected a broader lack 
of cooperation with the US from the new Mexican government, a contrast with the 
policy of former president Felipe Calderón.

"You had a president that was working very close with our government in a 
quiet way," said Heath, who is now a private security consultant. "These people 
come in and so, boom, the curtain comes down. It means a disrespect for our 
government … this is only six, seven months into their tenure and all of a 
sudden things are happening, not necessarily for the good."

Heath said he was skeptical of the explanation that there was a justifiable 
legal rationale for Caro Quintero's release. "There's some collusion going on," 
he said. "This guy is a major trafficker. This guy is bad, a mean son of a gun."

Caro Quintero was a founding member of one of Mexico's earliest and biggest 
drug cartels. He helped establish a powerful cartel based in the northwestern 
Mexican state of Sinaloa that later split into some of Mexico's largest 
cartels, including the Sinaloa and Juarez cartels. But he wasn't tried for drug 
trafficking, which is a federal crime in Mexico. Instead, Mexican federal 
prosecutors, under intense pressure from the US, put together a case against 
him for Camarena's kidnapping and killing, both state crimes.

"What we are seeing here is a contradiction between the need of the government 
to keep dangerous criminals behind bars and its respect of due process," said 
Raul Benitez, a security expert at Mexico's National Autonomous University. 
"The United States wants Mexico to comply with due process but it is likely 
that due process was not followed when many criminals were caught 10 or 15 
years ago."

Mexican courts and prosecutors have long tolerated illicit evidence, such as 
forced confessions, and have frequently based cases on questionable testimony 
or hearsay. Such practices have been banned by recent judicial reforms but past 
cases, including those against high-level drug traffickers, are often rife with 
such legal violations.

Mexico's relations with Washington were badly damaged when Caro Quintero 
ordered Camarena kidnapped, tortured and killed, purportedly because he was 
angry about a raid on a 220-acre (89-hectare) marijuana plantation in central 
Mexico named "Rancho Bufalo" that was seized by Mexican authorities at 
Camarena's insistence. Camarena was kidnapped in Guadalajara, a major drug 
trafficking center at the time. His body and that of his Mexican pilot, both 
showing signs of torture, were found a month later, buried in shallow graves. 
American officials accused their Mexican counterparts of letting Camarena's 
killers get away. Caro Quintero was eventually hunted down in Costa Rica.

Caro Quintero still faces charges in the US, but Mexico's Attorney General's 
Office said it was unclear whether there was a current extradition request. The 
US Department of Justice said it "has continued to make clear to Mexican 
authorities the continued interest of the United States in securing Caro 
Quintero's extradition so that he might face justice in the United States".

Samuel Gonzalez, who was formerly Mexico's top anti-drug prosecutor, said the 
US government itself has been promoting, and partly financing, judicial reforms 
in Mexico aimed at respecting procedural guarantees for suspects, an approach 
Gonzalez feels has weighted the balance too far against prosecutors and victims.

"This is all thanks to the excessive focus on procedural guarantees supported 
by the US government itself," Gonzalez said.
 