
USA are out of the Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> following a dramatic penalty 
shootout defeat against Sweden, led by the champions’ former coach Pia Sundhage.

The Swedes emerged 4-3 winners in the first ever shootout in Olympic women’s 
soccer, with the scores 1-1 after extra time in a keenly contested 
quarter-final in Brasilia.

Alex Morgan, who levelled for the US in regulation, and Christen Press missed 
the crucial spot-kicks before Lisa Dahlqvist ignored Hope Solo’s glove-changing 
histrionics to end the USA’s bid for a fourth consecutive gold medal and a 
fifth straight final. Solo took defeat badly,calling Sweden ‘a bunch of 
cowards’ after the defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
.

Hope Solo calls Sweden 'a bunch of cowards' after USA falter at Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
Substitute Stina Blackstenius had given the Swedes a shock second-half lead 
with a goal on the counter-attack, before Morgan struck with 13 minutes 
remaining. Both nations found the net in a dramatic ending, but Carli Lloyd’s 
header was correctly ruled out for a foul before Lotta Schelin’s strike was 
incorrectly ruled out for offside.

During regulation play Sundhage, who guided the US to gold in the 2008 and 
2012 Games, had frustrated the favourites with a deep-sitting, well-organised 
line-up that often threatened with pace and power on its rare excursions 
forward.

Despite dominating possession, the US spurned a number of openings and can 
have few complaints over their elimination following an underwhelming 2016 
campaign.

Jubilant Sweden, who stuttered through the group stages to quality as a 
third-placed team, will now face a semi-final against Brazil or Australia – who 
meet later on Friday – in Rio next Tuesday.

Jill Ellis’s side, who welcomed back centre-back Julie Johnson from injury and 
preferred Mallory Pugh to Crystal Dunn in attack, had started quickly with 
Morgan’s deft header cleared off the line.

The Swedes created the best of early opening but Schelin selfishly cut inside 
with Elin Rubensson unmarked in the centre – a warning the US failed to heed.

Sweden remain unbeaten against the US in four games since since Sundhage took 
charge. They replicated the approach that earned them a scoreless draw during 
last year’s World Cup finals, despite the US dominating possession.

After 22 minutes, Linda Sembrant made a fabulous block from Morgan’s goalbound 
effort. The striker then skipped around keeper Hedvig Lindahl, crossing for 
Lloyd, whose toe-poke was pushed away by the recovering stopper. Lloyd had 
another sight of goal just before half time, but was incorrectly called offside.

However, it was the Swedes who took a shock lead on the hour mark when 
Blackstenius finished coolly in a textbook counter their coach had been banking 
on all along. A defence-splitting pass sent the substitute clear and she made 
no mistake in evading the lunge of Johnston to slide past Solo.

The US attacks became more and more desperate on a poor surface at the Mane 
Garrincha Stadium, where the Swedes had remained after their final group game.

Morgan’s equaliser, her fifth goal in Olympic competition, came with just 15 
minutes left – but it also came with more than a little fortune.

Substitute Megan Rapinoe declined to put the ball out with a Swedish player 
down injured, and drilled over a cross that struck Jessica Samuelsson in the 
face and fell perfectly for Morgan, who finished clinically.

Ellis’s side pushed for a winner, seeking to avoid extra time following 
Tuesday’s exertions in the humidity of Manaus, the Amazonian venue deemed a 
curse for teams playing there during the 2014 men’s World Cup.

A fine run from substitute Dunn fed Lloyd, whose effort was deflected 
agonisingly wide, before Tobin Heath forced Lindahl into a fine save after with 
a curling effort. Still, Ellis’s side couldn’t avoid the extra 30 minutes.

Morgan had the best chance in the first period of extra time, but her shot was 
well saved from the tightest of angles.

In a dramatic final five minutes Lloyd wheeled away in celebration but her 
close-range header was ruled out for a foul on the defender, before Schelin’s 
strike overruled for offside, despite the Sweden skipper clearly level with the 
last defender.

Morgan crashed a shot into the side netting in the last action before 
penalties.

The goalscorer’s opening penalty was well stopped by Lindahl, before Solo 
restored parity with a save from Sweden skipper Caroline Seger. However, Press 
blazed over with the final US penalty before Dahlkvist sealed the upset with 
aplomb.

The Americans’ bid to become the first team to win the World Cup and Olympic 
Games in consecutive years is over.
RioRun <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/marathon-promo-full/>  