
The US has promised to “sharpen its military edge” in Asia Pacific 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> in order to remain the 
dominant power in a region feeling the effects of China’s rising military 
might, defense secretary Ash Carter said.

Carter made the pledge on Thursday in a speech aboard the aircraft carrier USS 
Carl Vinson in San Diego.

The Pentagon chief described what he called the next phase of a US pivot to 
Asia — a rebalancing of American security commitments after years of heavy 
focus on the Middle East.

His speech, aimed at reassuring allies unsettled by China’s behavior in the 
South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/g20-obama-warns-beijing-against-south-china-sea-aggression>
, came three days after he made remarks at a nuclear missile base in North 
Dakota about rebuilding the nuclear force. Those comments prompted a strong 
reaction from the Russian foreign ministry, which issued a statement saying it 
had interpreted Carter’s statement as a declared intention to lower the 
threshold for using nuclear weapons.

Obama’s failed ‘Asian pivot’ leaves China ascendant | Simon Tisdall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
Carter said the Pentagon will make its attack submarines more lethal and spend 
more to build undersea drones that can operate in shallower waters off limits 
to submarines.

“The United States will continue to sharpen our military edge so we remain the 
most powerful military in the region and the security partner of choice,” he 
said.

He added that there would “a few surprises as well”, describing them only as 
“leap-ahead investments”.

With a broad complaint that China is “sometimes behaving aggressively,” Carter 
alluded to Beijing’s building of artificial islands in disputed areas of the
South China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

“Beijing sometimes appears to want to pick and choose which principles it 
wants to benefit from and which it prefers to try to undercut,” he said. “For 
example, the universal right to freedom of navigation that allows China’s ships 
and aircraft to transit safely and peacefully is the same right that Beijing 
criticizes other countries for exercising in the region. But principles are not 
like that. They apply to everyone, and every nation, equally.”

Carter’s speech was meant to set the scene for a meeting Friday in Hawaii with 
his counterparts from the 10 member countries of the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations, or Asean. The association focuses mainly on trade issues, but in 
recent years, with US encouragement, has sought to engage in a range of defense 
and military issues. The US is not a member of the organisation but has sought 
to use it as a forum for further developing security partnerships amid regional 
concern about China’s military buildup.

On Carter’s flight from San Diego to Hawaii later on Thursday, a senior 
defense official aboard the plane told reporters that Carter expects to hear 
concerns from some south-east Asian ministers, including those from Singapore, 
Indonesia and the Philippines, about the threat they perceive from an expected 
return of extremists who have been fighting for the Islamic State group in 
Syria and Iraq.

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity under ground rules set by 
the Pentagon, said “hundreds” of IS fighters already have returned to Southeast 
Asia from Syria and Iraq and said up to 1,000 more may return as the Islamic 
State group faces increased military pressure.

Carter has described Pentagon efforts to execute a “pivot” to Asia by 
shifting, or rebalancing, US forces and attention toward the Asia-Pacific 
region after years of more Middle East-focused strategies and operations.

The devastation of Syria will be Obama’s legacy | Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/syria-obama-us-president-putin-russia>
In April, he said he was putting “the best people and platforms forward to the 
Asia-Pacific” by increasing the number of U.S. military personnel in the region 
and by sending and stationing advanced weapons system there. He said that 
includes F-22 and F-35 stealth fighter jets, P-8 Poseidon maritime surveillance 
aircraft, continuous deployments of B-2 and B-52 strategic bombers and the 
newest surface warfare ships like the amphibious assault ship USS America.

Among the Asia problems that have arisen for the Pentagon since Carter last 
met with the region’s defense ministers is a sudden and steep deterioration in 
relations with the Philippines.

When Carter visited the Philippines in April, he praised the strength of the 
partnership. He said his visit had inaugurated “a major new era in a 
longstanding alliance”. He was referring to the US-Philippines Enhanced Defense 
Cooperation Agreement. “I’m proud to say this alliance is as close as it’s been 
in years.”

That seeming closeness took a sharp downturn when Rodrigo Duterte was elected 
president in June. In early September, President Barack Obama cancelled a 
meeting with Duterte after the Philippine leader publicly called him a “son of 
a bitch.” Later, Duterte said he regretted the comment. But Duterte has said 
joint military exercises of Filipino and American troops scheduled for next week
will be the last such drills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/rodrigo-duterte-to-end-joint-us-and-philippine-military-drills>
, although his foreign secretary quickly said the decision was not final.

Even so, Carter said in his speech Thursday that the relationship with the 
Philippines was “ironclad.”
 