
The earliest image of one of the most romantic lost buildings of England, a 
fairytale castle bristling with towers and spires built by Henry VIII, then 
demolished after 130 years to settle the gambling debts of a royal mistress, 
has been acquired by the V&A museum for £1m.

The palace in the watercolour, painted by the Flemish artist Joris Hoefnagel 
in 1568, was built as a spectacular hunting lodge to outshine Fontainebleau, 
the French palace of Henry’s contemporary and great rival François I. The 
village of Cuddington, near Cheam in Surrey, was moved and its medieval parish 
church flattened to make way for the palace, which was named Nonsuch, as it was 
regarded as beyond compare with any other building.

Although it was unfinished when Henry died in 1547, the beauty of the building 
and the spectacular carved decoration, described by one contemporary as “the 
living image” of plants, heraldic animals and Roman gods and goddesses covering 
the walls, were already famous.

The watercolour shows its glittering towers rising above the trees of the 
hunting forest. The painting was acquired by a Victorian collector, and has 
only been exhibited twice – once briefly on loan to the V&A. It was sold to an 
overseas collector earlier this year, but the government put a temporary bar on 
its export, and the museum managed to match the price, with major grants from 
the Art Fund charity and the NationalHeritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> Memorial Fund.

The palace itself was sold by Henry’s daughter Mary, then came back into royal 
ownership when her sister Elizabeth acquired it to settle a debt. It became one 
of her favourite residences, and Thomas Tallis’s heart-stopping composition 
Spem in Alium, a motet for 40 voices, is said to have been first performed to 
mark her 40th birthday by choirs singing from the towers.

The diarist Samuel Pepys saw Nonsuch in 1665, and wrote that “all the house on 
the outside is covered with figures of story … and most of the house is covered 
with lead and gilded”. Within a few years it was rubble: Charles II gave the 
building to his lover Barbara Castlemaine who pulled it down and sold off 
anything worth salvaging.

Mark Evans, a senior curator at the V&A, said the painting, one of the 
earliest surviving English landscape watercolours, brought to life one of the 
greatest monuments of the English renaissance.

 “Painted in 1568 by the last of the great Flemish illuminators, and a 
foremost topographical artist of the day, this is a rare and beautiful work of 
outstanding importance.”

Stephen Deuchar, director of the Art Fund, said: “Given the exceptional rarity 
of this work and its depiction of such a celebrated architectural monument, it 
would have been very sad to see it sold abroad.”

The painting has gone on display in the British Galleries of the V&A 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/page/b/british-galleries/>.

 