
The Denver Broncos have appointed Miami Dolphins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/miami-dolphins> defensive coordinator Vance 
Joseph to replace Gary Kubiak as their head coach.

Joseph, 44, had been linked with the head coach vacancy at the San Diego 
Chargers, but performed well at his first interview in Denver on Tuesday and 
met Broncos GM John Elway for a second time on Wednesday. The Broncos made the 
announcement on Wednesday afternoon.

In a statement, Joseph said: “Becoming head coach of the Denver Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/denver-broncos> is a dream job for many 
reasons. The Broncos have an unbelievable winning tradition and great fan 
support. But what makes this even more special is it’s a place that’s ready to 
win. This is not a rebuilding situation – it’s a reboot. There is a culture of 
winning here, and the standards around here won’t change – those are to win 
championships.

“I am very thankful to John Elway and Joe Ellis for this opportunity. It’s 
incredibly humbling to be part of an organization like the Broncos with so much 
history and success, especially when you see all the great things this 
franchise has accomplished.”

Joseph, who has signed a four-year deal, becomes the sixth active black head 
coach in theNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>. Mike Tomlin 
(Steelers), Marvin Lewis (Bengals), Hue Jackson (Browns), Jim Caldwell (Lions) 
and Todd Bowles (Jets) are the other five.


Elway said on Wednesday: “For us, Vance Joseph is the best fit to become the 
head coach of the Denver Broncos.

“Vance is very good football coach and teacher who is ready for this 
opportunity. His leadership qualities, his vision for building a championship 
team and his ability to get the most out of players are off the charts.The 
culture that he believes in and the culture of our organization are closely 
aligned, and focused on one thing: winning. He understands the high 
expectations this franchise has always had under Pat Bowlen, and he embraces 
them.”

Kansas City defensive coordinator Dave Toub and Atlanta offensive coordinator 
Kyle Shanahan were also in the running for the Broncos’ top job, but Joseph got 
the nod. The LA native was said to be a big part of Miami’s turnaround from a 
6-10 record in 2015 to a 10-6 record and a first playoff appearance since the 
2008 season.


“He brings a leadership quality that you really love about him,” said Miami 
head coach Adam Gase. “He has such a great personality and such a strong 
personality – that alpha-type personality where he demands a lot from players 
and they give him everything he has.”

Dolphins cornerback Byron Maxwell said: “VJ brought great leadership and 
taught us the intangibles of being a leader, what all of that entails and how 
you have to bring it every day with the guys looking at you.

“His leadership qualities will make him a good head coach. He knows how to 
talk to you. He knows how to communicate to guys in the generation. He’s a 
leader of men and he understands that.”

Joseph becomes the Broncos’ 16th head coach in franchise history. He will be 
introduced at a press conference on Thursday.

Kubiak, who played eight seasons with the Broncos between 1983 and 1991 and 
won a Super Bowl as head coach in 2016, resigned on 2 January, saying it was 
“time to step away”.

Joseph worked under Kubiak for three seasons in Houston, between 2011 and 
2013. He also spent two seasons with the Bengals as their defensive backs coach.
 