
Video replays for referees could be given a trial in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> from next season after the game’s 
law-making body decided to recommend large-scale live experiments.

Proposals to introduce video assistance for referees has gained rapid traction 
since the then Fifa president Sepp Blatterperformed a U-turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/11/sepp-blatter-video-challenge-managers-fifa>
 and endorsed the idea in 2014, two years after the introduction of goalline 
technology.

The English Football Association has been a big supporter of the idea and 
following a meeting of the International FA Boards in London, the chief 
executive, Martin Glenn, said trials could begin as soon as next season if the 
idea was rubber-stamped at the Ifab AGM in March.

A brief guide to … the FA Cup third round, where even the minnows have their 
day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/fa-cup-third-round-field-notes>
“I’m very happy for things within my direct control – the English FA’s direct 
control – to be part of that,” said Glenn. “We are big supporters of the use of 
technology. So, what do we control? We control the FA Cup.”

The Scottish FA will also hold talks about experimenting with the technology 
in next season’sScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>
. If the live trials go ahead next season and are deemed successful, video 
assistance could be introduced worldwide in time for the 2018-19 season.

In terms of the Scottish Cup, the Scottish FA chief executive, Stewart Regan, 
said: “It’s one that we would certainly discuss as a board. As a personal 
preference, it’s something I’d like to see push forward.”

Big questions remain about the extent to which it might affect the flow of the 
game and the practicalities of ensuring that every ground was kitted out with 
cameras.The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa>, however, is keen to 
be in the vanguard of testing the technology. The trials would be limited to 
decisions on goals, red cards, penalties and cases of mistaken identity.

They would involve different kinds of experiments, such as video only being 
used when the referee asks for assistance or, alternatively, where the video 
assistant would be allowed to flag up errors.

So-called “coach challenges” – which could result in each dugout being allowed 
to challenge a set number of decisions in every match – are not likely to be 
part of the first wave of trials.

Video decisions would be time limited and, unlike rugby, contentious decisions 
would not be replayed on big screens for the crowd to see but information 
relayed to the referee via an earpiece.

If introduced in the FA Cup, the idea would be to experiment in every match in 
which it was possible to do so – essentially those grounds equipped for 
television broadcasts. Ifab wants the tests to be as competition-wide as 
possible, ideally an entire season of a league or cup competition.

Jonathan Ford, chief executive of the Football Association of Wales, said that 
use of the technology would be limited to “very important, game-changing 
moments”.

He added: “The decision is to put a very strong recommendation to the AGM that 
this is accepted, that experimentation does happen.”

Ford said that they remained a long way from finalising how any future video 
refereeing system could work.

“The fluidity of the game is all important as is the ultimate authority of the 
referee,” he said. “Whatever system is finally adopted, assuming it eventually 
is, must reflect both of those principles.”

In February, Ifab ruled that it would delay trials of video technology for at 
least 12 months. The Dutch FA was keen to give a trial to the concept in Cup 
matches but Fifa said the decision should be put off for the time being. There 
is believed to be a stronger chance that at its AGM in Cardiff in March Ifab 
will decide to press ahead with the trials.

The board consists of four representatives – one from each of England, 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland – and four from Fifa, each of which has 
equal voting rights.

David Elleray, the former Premier League referee who sits on Ifab’s technical 
subcommittee, said: “The main objective is to try to eliminate clear errors by 
the referee. You will never eliminate all errors from the game but this is a 
major step forward in reducing those errors.”

Ifab approved the use of goalline technology in 2012 and since then there have 
been an increasing number of calls from players and managers to use video 
technology in other aspects of the game.
 