
Charities working with women released from prison say that some are breaching 
their parole conditions or committing further crimes so that they will be 
returned to jail – because their lives on the outside are so bleak.

Many of the women seek a return to prison because they have nowhere to live, 
fear an abusive partner or have unmet mental health needs.

The trend – which is particularly notable around Christmas – highlights what 
campaigners say is a chronic lack of concern for the women’s welfare upon 
release.

“Christmas is a really difficult time if they haven’t got family,” said Joy 
Doal, who runs theAnawim <http://www.anawim.co.uk/> project in Birmingham, 
which helps female prisoners. “Many have come from care and have been in and 
out of prison. For some, prison is a place where they will feel safe. They get 
three meals and a bed for the night.”

The disastrous decisions behind troubles in prisons and probation | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/19/the-disastrous-decisions-behind-troubles-in-prisons-and-probation>
Many of the women released from prison have served short sentences for 
non-violent crimes that often they had committed to pay for a partner’s drug 
habit.

When they emerge from prison, an increasing number are struggling to access 
benefits or find accommodation because of cuts to support services. A report by 
HM Inspectorate of Probation published this year said dedicated funding for 
women’s services has virtually disappeared under the government’sTransforming 
Rehabilitation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/transforming-rehabilitation-a-strategy-for-reform>
 programme.

“Homelessness is one of the biggest contributing factors behind why many women 
are in prison,” said Claire Cain, policy and campaigns manager atWomen in Prison
 <http://www.womeninprison.org.uk/>. “It can be a direct cause, when sleeping 
rough breaks an antisocial order for example, or indirectly, when women reach 
such a point of desperation that they will commit an offence to get a roof over 
their head. Around 60% of women leave prison homeless and it is a near 
impossibility out there to find even safe temporary accommodation.”

Cain said her organisation regularly supported women for whom prison was a 
preferable option. “We support women all the time where their only options are 
to stay in an abusive and exploitative flat, surrounded by drugs and alcohol 
that they are trying to keep free from, end up on the streets, or reoffend and 
go back to prison in the hope that there will be more options and a different 
path to take on release next time,” she said.

There are about 3,900 women currently in prison in England and Wales – 2,300 
more than in 1993. Figures show that nearly half (48%) of them – , compared 
with just over a fifth of men – said they had committed offences to support 
someone else’s drug use. More than half (53%) of female prisoners have 
experienced emotional, physical or sexual abuse.

Cain said the fact that some women were attempting to return to prison 
underlined the desperate nature of their situations. “It must be understood, 
the risk women are taking in seeking refuge in prison. Prisons are harmful: 22 
women have died in prison this year, the highest on record certainly since 
1990. Most of these women took their own life.”

The issue of women being returned to prison has become a mounting cause for 
concern among penal reform campaigners.

The number of women recalled to custody while under supervision following 
their release has increased by more than 80% since the end of 2014, when the 
Transforming Rehabilitation programme was introduced. Almost 1,400 women were 
recalled in the year to June 2016.

Under the programme, any offender who breaches their licence within 12 months 
of release is returned to prison for two weeks. Charities say this means an 
offender will be returned to prison simply for missing an appointment with 
their probation officer. The stipulation makes it easy for vulnerable women to 
end up “choosing” a prison cell over an often chaotic life outside.

A Ministry of Justice spokesman said: “This increase coincides with changes 
that mean we are now monitoring more offenders than ever before and providing 
them with the support they need to turn their back on crime. The justice 
secretary has been clear that we must simplify the probation system, with 
specific outcome measures such as getting offenders off drugs, improving 
educational standards and getting offenders into apprenticeships and work.”

Jenny Earle, director of the Prison Reform Trust 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/>’s three-year programme to reduce women’s 
imprisonment, said the criminal justice system was failing to support women 
leaving jail. “It’s a sad indictment of society that women seek refuge in 
prison because the services they need in the community are so under-resourced 
and over-stretched,” she said.
 