
The man in the hard hat put his fingers to his lips and whistled. "All right, 
lads," he shouted, "down tools." Newspapers were ditched, trousers hitched back 
up over gaping cracks, and cigarettes stubbed out. The cranes that towered over 
the half-built arena, a gigantic white elephant seating 75,000, ceased swinging 
and the men in blue pants stopped what they were doing. Ten kilometres inland 
at Paterna, you could be forgiven for thinking that the men in the grey 
training kits had already done likewise. The twenty-fifth of February and
Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> admitted that work had 
stopped on their new stadium. Barely a fortnight later and their coach admitted 
that his team had hit "rock bottom".

It is no coincidence. The same crisis that stopped Valencia building their new 
stadium had already stopped them paying their players. And since Valencia's 
players stopped getting paid, they've stopped winning matches.

At the start of the year Valencia were second having just defeated an Atlético 
Madrid side who were unbeaten in nine. Nine games later, they're out of Europe 
and unlikely to get back into it too.

Down in eighth, the same number of points separate them from relegation as the 
top and they've won just once in their last nine matches, not at all since 
payments ceased six weeks ago. Yesterday, second bottom Numancia, a team who 
had scored two goals in eight matches scored two more in 12 minutes to beat 
them 2–1. In just over a month, they've been defeated by Numancia, Mallorca and 
Osasuna – three of the bottom four.

And yet Unai Emery was wrong. The most depressing thing about Valencia is that 
they could yet fall further – and not just because David Villa, scorer of 
almost 50% of their goals, is injured. That's merely the latest, seemingly 
inevitable setback for a club in crisis. After all, as the Spanish phrase has 
it, all a skinny dog attracts is fleas. And Valencia are one mangy mutt. With 
an eejit for an owner.

Valencia CF should be one of Spain's great institutions. Instead, it is a 
football club that hasn't hit the self-destruct button so much as bludgeoned it 
into submission with a sledgehammer. Between 2000 and 2004, Valencia reached 
two Champions League finals, won two league titles and the Uefa Cup. Then along 
came Juan Bautista Soler, football's very own Brian Potter. Four years later, 
Valencia had boasted five sporting directors, three director generals, three 
medical chiefs, three ostracised footballers, a day in court against their own 
captain, and no trophies. The club's debt had risen from €125m to over €400m, 
€17m each had gone on Nikola Zigic, Manuel Fernandes, and Ever Banega and over 
€30m was spent paying off Claudio Ranieri, Quique Sánchez Flores and Ronald 
Koeman. But there was always thepelotazo – develop the land upon which the 
training ground and Mestalla stood. Valencia would sell up, move somewhere 
better, and make a fortune. "We're going to be the envy of Spain," Soler said.

There was just one tiny flaw in the plan: it was rubbish. The property bubble 
that propped up the Spanish economy burst; economic crisis hit harder than 
anywhere else, leaving three million unemployed, two million new homes empty, 
hundreds of thousands of buildings half-finished, and Spanish football clubs 
owing the taxman over €600m. Soler had little choice but to walk; as if to 
prove a point, Valencia won the Copa del Rey within a month of his departure.

Liberation came at a price. Valencia hadn't so much been left with an 
albatross round their necks as a whole bunch of the beaky blighters. If 
embargoed Atlético Madrid thought they had it tough when they only received 
half the fee for Fernando Torres, Valencia are completely screwed – saddled 
with a bloated squad, a midfield with an average age of 72, two training 
grounds and two stadiums, one they couldn't sell and one they couldn't afford 
to build. It wasn't just the albatrosses either, there was a circle of vultures 
too. Since Soler's departure Valencia have had four new presidents, each as bad 
as the last. In six months they've had six sporting directors. Within three 
weeks of becoming coach, Emery had worked under more bosses than in his entire 
career.

First came Agustín Morera, a figurehead appointed by Soler. Then it was Juan 
Villalonga, former prime minister José María Aznar's bosom buddy and the man 
who helped make Telefónica what it is today – the world's most useless 
institution. He claimed that being president of Valencia was his destiny – 
which is why he's going to run for the presidency at Real Madrid – and promised 
the world. He also promised to buy Soler's shares for €76m, sack Emery, bring 
in Luis Aragonés and sign loads of stars. Sixteen days later he departed 
clutching the €10m fee Soler paid him for a fortnight running the club.

Next up was the club's second largest shareholder Vicente Soriano, who 
promised to pay €80m for Soler's shares and find someone to take Mestalla for 
€300m. He did neither. Soler threatened to take the club back, only he doesn't 
really want it. A €50m a year television deal with Medipro followed but it was 
a drop in the ocean. The fleas leapt on board. Nike abandoned them and so did 
the regional government; Bancaja refused to extend their credit. The debt 
spiralled. Valencia owed €14m to FCC and Bertolín, the companies constructing 
the new stadium, and €14m to the players. Eventually, Soriano admitted that he 
couldn't pay. "It's been lie after lie," complained Edu.

Last week, Bancaja decided they'd had enough. Owed €240m, they took over the 
club with the backing of Soler (still the majority shareholder), appointing 
Javier Gómez as executive director and going over the head of Soriano, whose 
10% share package leaves him impotent and soon to be replaced. Gómez has 
already announced a policy of austerity. In short, administration without the 
administrators. Cutbacks and sales are guaranteed; payment for the players 
still are not forthcoming and nor is a buyer for either stadium. Far from 
hitting rock bottom last night, Valencia's troubles might have only just begun. 
Losing Villa for three weeks is no big deal; losing him for good most certainly 
is. And even that might not be enough for them to win their fight for survival.

Results: Barcelona 2–0 Athletic [Barcelona should have got 15 against 
Athletic's boys – most of whom were still drunk from Wednesday night's Copa del 
Rey semi-final success.], Real Madrid 1–1 Atlético [And Atlético really should 
have ended their 10-year wait for a derby win], Villarreal 1–0 Espanyol, 
Mallorca 3–3 Betis [from 3-0 down, Mallorca get a draw], Osasuna 1–2 Sporting, 
Deportivo 5–3 Racing. [How the hell did that happen? "The two dullest sides in 
Spain meet, 0-0 guaranteed".], Numancia 2–1 Valencia, Sevilla 2–1 Almería, 
Getafe 1–2 Málaga [Víctor Muñoz in trouble].
 