
A family court judge has criticised “serious and systemic flaws” in how West 
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> police and Wakefield 
council handled a case in which a girl and her mother were wrongly identified 
as appearing in a child sexual abuse video.


The police and council have paid £20,000 in damages and Wakefield council 
apologised for the “horrendous” allegation, after the girl and her brother were 
kept in care for more than nine months.

It emerged that the police had known for months that the video did not show 
the girl and her mother before the children were returned.

Judgments in the family court are usually private, but Mr Justice Cobb decided 
to make his ruling, issued this week, public on the condition that the family 
involved was not identified.

The two children, a boy and a girl, were removed and placed in foster care in 
February 2015 after their parents were arrested in relation to an investigation 
into child sexual abuse content.

During the search, police found a video that they believed showed the mother 
engaged in a sex act with the daughter and a photograph they believed showed 
the daughter.


The children were kept out of any contact with their parents for several days 
after being taken into care, despite expressing “very considerable distress”, 
the judge wrote, and a lack of coordination between the police and safeguarding 
authority meant that the girl was medically examined twice in three days.

Forensic experts told the officer leading the investigation, DS Hudson, in 
late March that video analysis had “eliminated” the mother as a possible 
candidate for being the woman in the video. In June, evidence emerged showing 
the video had been shot in the US, rather than West Yorkshire and that it 
conclusively did not show either the woman or her daughter.

But West Yorkshire police did not share this crucial evidence with social 
workers or anyone else involved in the case for almost five months. Even the 
police lawyers were only told of the new evidence in passing in August and were 
only made aware of how crucial it was in November.

In the meantime, the police continued to investigate, interviewing the parents 
under caution and showing them the photo of the girl in the video despite 
knowing it was not their daughter.

DS Hudson “struggled to shake off” his conviction that the video showed the 
mother and daughter, the court found. At a meeting in August, the judge found, 
he “misled the local authority” by encouraging them to spot similarities 
between the woman in the video and the mother. “At that time, he knew that the 
mother had been definitively excluded from consideration,” Cobb wrote.

The children’s father pleaded guilty to having downloaded images of child 
sexual abuse in August and was later sentenced to jail. The mother did not 
learn that she had been cleared until November and her children remained in 
foster care until mid-December. The authority later accepted “without 
reservation” that she neither abused her daughter nor allowed her daughter to 
be abused by the father.

“The damage has been significant; for a period of many months, two children 
were separated from their mother against whom allegations of the most serious 
form of abuse were levelled, while all the while, evidence was available which 
served to exonerate her,” Cobb wrote.

Wakefield council and West Yorkshire police acknowledged a series of failings 
in their handling of the case. The judge found that although it had been 
correct to take the children into care when their parents were first arrested, 
the way the investigation was handled led to the authorities “profoundly and 
obviously” breaching the human rights of the mother and her children. Among the 
failings, he said, was “a casual regard, and in some respects total disregard, 
of ordinary principles of good professional practice”.
 