


A measure of the respect Wales have for Ireland in the buildup to Saturday’s 
Six Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> match at the 
Millennium Stadium is that there has not been the slightest hint of a mind 
game: no baiting over a closed roof at the ground, no suggestions of a 
conservative gameplan and every opportunity taken to compliment the champions 
and leaders.

The Wales head coach, Warren Gatland, who once held the same position with 
Ireland, has in the past tried to unsettle the men in green verbally. Not this 
week, before a match his side need to win to remain in contention for the 
title, against the only opponents he does not have at least a 50% record 
against in the Six Nations since he took charge in 2007.

Gatland has named an unchanged side from the team against France in Paris in 
the last round, deciding not to delay his selection until Thursday when Ireland 
will be announcing their team, one which will probably include the Lions 
Jonathan Sexton, Jamie Heaslip and Sean O’Brien who were passed fit on Tuesday.

“The two sets of players know each other well and there is great rivalry,” 
Gatland said. “They play against each other often and it is like going up 
against your brother in the back yard: you want to beat him as often as 
possible. Last weekend was the first time since 2010 that our four regions all 
beat Irish provinces and that gave us a big boost.

“Ireland have a settled side and they play a game that’s been very successful 
which is why they are third in the world having won 10 games in a row. We are 
under no illusions about what we face and we have to be able to cope with the 
pressure they put on us. It is a massive game because if we win we are still in 
the competition going to Italy on the final day.

“In the past when we have played Ireland we have not always been on the edge 
enough and the challenge is to make sure the players are mentally prepared for 
what will be an incredibly tough game. We were a bit surprised by the way 
Ireland played last year and we have to impose our game on them. We have to 
cope with their aerial threat and discipline will be important.”

Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> will lead 
Wales for the 34th time, breaking Ryan Jones’s record. “It has never been a 
motivation of mine but it is a nice accolade to have,” he said. “My focus is, 
as always, on the team and I would rather a win over Ireland than any record.”

George North retains his place on the wing having been told by the coaches 
before the start of the Six Nations to improve his work rate. His only try in 
his last seven Tests was against Fiji.

“It’s never good if the head coach is not happy with you,” he said. “That’s 
when you start getting dropped. I felt that Paris was a step forward for me and 
I hope to reward his trust.”

Wales are in the same World Cup pool as England and Gatland was not impressed 
by a tweet this week from the chief executive of World Rugby, Brett Gosper, who 
remarked after England’s elimination from the Cricket World Cup at the group 
stage he hoped the same did not happen in rugby. “It is his personal view but 
we were a bit surprised by it,” Gatland said. “Probably the head of World Rugby 
does not need to be doing that. If England are guaranteed to be one of the 
sides going through I hope we are the other.”

Wales team

L Halfpenny (Toulon); G North (Northampton), J Davies (Clermont Auvergne), J 
Roberts (Racing Métro), L Williams (Scarlets); D Biggar (Ospreys), R Webb 
(Ospreys); G Jenkins (Cardiff Blues), S Baldwin (Ospreys), S Lee (Scarlets), L 
Charteris (Racing Métro), AW Jones (Ospreys), D Lydiate (Ospreys), S Warburton 
(Cardiff Blues, capt), T Faletau (Newport Gwent Dragons).

Replacements R Hibbard (Gloucester), R Evans (Scarlets), A Jarvis (Ospreys), J 
Ball (Scarlets), J Tipuric (Ospreys), M Phillips (Racing Métro), R Priestland 
(Scarlets), S Williams (Scarlets).
 