
Jamie Roberts has made his reputation as one of the leading midfielders of his 
generation by confronting problems head on. That was his approach when he was 
told last week he had been dropped to the bench by Wales for the first time in 
seven years following an uncharacteristically diffident display in a crushing 
defeat against Australia.

It was Roberts’s 30th birthday when he was told he would not be present in the 
starting team against Argentina last Saturday. He remained on the bench andit 
will be Japan at the Principality Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/wales-rob-howley-lions-japan-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
 on Saturday who will feel the controlled fury of the powerful Lions centre who 
would stand out among their forwards.

Rugby union autumn internationals: what to look forward to this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/18/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-england-fiji-ireland-all-blacks>
“I could think of a few four-letter expletives to describe how I played 
against Australia,” said Roberts, who characteristically chose to face the 
media and talk about one of the lowest days in his long and successful career. 
“The hardest thing was probably trying to find a reason why, but it was nothing 
more or less than a bad day for someone who prides himself on consistency of 
performance, especially defensively.

“I did not deserve to play against Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/wales-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. We have a competitive squad and if you don’t perform, you don’t keep the 
jersey. I fully respected the decision of Rob Howley [the Wales interim head 
coach] and my responsibility was to help the team prepare. It was an alien 
feeling, I had sleepless nights as I did some soul-searching but one I learned 
a lot from. I am ready to go this weekend and keep hold of the 12 jersey.”

Roberts has played in Tests for the Lions on their past two tours and knows 
there will be no hat-trick unless he retains his place in the Wales team. He 
has been a core part of Wales’s gameplan this decade, running straight and 
hard, and tackling harder, but as Test rugby speeds up so multitasking becomes 
desirable.

“It was important not to overthink the reasons for my performance against 
Australia,” he said. “By nature I am a thinker but it’s professional sport and 
you move on. I’ve been playing well enough for Harlequins this season. This 
week is not about redemption, which would be selfish, but an opportunity to 
show that what happened was an anomaly. It is about Wales winning and playing 
my part in that.

“I wouldn’t say [I’m] unfairly bracketed in terms of style: it is what I do 
and it hasn’t served me too badly in the game. I’m working on my weaknesses and 
different parts of the game. But what are the strengths that I have 
traditionally brought to this team? That’s been the nature of my thinking since 
Australia. People can write what they like.”

Asked if he felt being dropped could have a positive effect on his career, he 
replied: “I’d like to think so. Things happen that give you an extra bit of 
motivation. The Lions is not a factor for me, Wales is my driving force. The 
Lions will be there at the end of the season. I have always thought that 
selection for Tests and tours takes care of itself if you are doing the right 
things.”

While Roberts will be winning his 85th Wales cap, the 18-year-old wing Keelan 
Giles hopes to make his Test debut from the bench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/keelan-giles-wales-japan-ospreys-rugby-union>
. “I can’t remember a guy as evasive as Keelan since Shane Williams,” Roberts 
said. “We’ve had a drill in training when we’ve put up one on one with Keelan 
and it’s been quite embarrassing. He’s a frightening prospect and I hope he 
gets a chance to come on. His pace is frightening and he is very agile. He has 
got his head screwed and he has the potential to cause carnage.”

Wales have opted for a mix of experience and potential against opponents who 
defeated them in Tokyo three years ago when they were without 16 Lions. Five of 
the Japan lineup started last year’s World Cup win over South Africa.

“I’m a realist and I know it’ll be difficult but we’ve got a couple of plans 
and I think we can create some pressure,” said Jamie Joseph, who succeeded 
Eddie Jones as the coach of Japan. “If we’re able to do that the boys will 
score some tries: people do some funny things under pressure. Ideally we’ll 
play an expansive game.”
 