
Wales are on course for a Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> title decider against England at 
Twickenham next month after coming from behind to defeat Scotland in Cardiff. 
The Welsh face unbeaten France here in the next round before returning to 
Twickenham where five months ago they delivered a fatal blow to England’s World 
Cup hopes.

“We had to dig deep against Scotland and it showed there are no easy games in 
this championship,” said Warren Gatland, whose side are unbeaten after two 
rounds following a draw in Dublin.

The Wales head coach added: “The six‑day turnaround for us showed and it was 
tough. We know that if we beat France we would then potentially be playing 
England for the championship. It is early days for the French under a new 
coach, but they’ll be confident after beating Ireland.

“We have a couple of weeks off before then and there are things we need to 
improve on.”

There were two key moments in the game. The first came after seven minutes 
when the Wales scrum-half, Gareth Davies, picked up the ball in what Scotland 
felt was an offside position and ran 45 metres to score the game’s first try.

The second was the decision of the Wales captain, Sam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton>, to opt for a scrum under 
Scotland’s posts on 62 minutes when his side trailed 16-13 – rather than kick a 
guaranteed three points. The outcome was a Jamie Roberts try, and a lead that 
was quickly added to by George North.

“It was a risky decision, but I just had a feeling,” said Warburton.

“We’d not had much of an attacking platform in the half and a penalty would 
only have tied the scores. We would have had to get back up the field and as we 
were going well at the scrum, I thought it was worth the call.”

Scotland were eliminated from the World Cup after one of their players was 
ruled offside against Australia and, after watching on the big screen a replay 
of Davies standing in front of Jamie Roberts and then picking up the ball when 
the centre tapped it back, they started trotting back towards halfway for what 
they expected would be a penalty for them – only for the referee, George 
Clancy, to award the try.

Scotland belie their 100-1 odds but are doomed by a cruel twist of fate | Paul 
Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/18/scotland-100-1-vern-cotter-australia-gavin-hastings>
“You could see what we thought from our body language as we moved up for the 
penalty,” said the Scotland scrum-half, Greig Laidlaw. “We thought the 
scrum-half was offside.”

So did Laidlaw’s head coach, Vern Cotter (left), but while Scotland made much 
of the decision at the end of their World Cup quarter-final, which ended with 
the referee that day, Craig Joubert, sprinting from the field, this time they 
played it down.

“I thought it was offside,” said Cotter. “Everyone makes mistakes and we have 
no excuses. We were disappointed not to win and parts of our game were much 
better this week. We will keep working.”
 