
Wales’ hopes of bouncing back from their defeat by New Zealand in the first 
Test have suffered a serious set-back with the news that George North will miss 
the rest of the tour because of a hamstring injury he picked up during the game 
at Eden Park on Saturday.

The Northampton Saints wing was hurt in the final move of the 39-21 defeat by 
the world champions as he tried to stop the replacement hooker Nathan Harris 
scoring the All Blacks’ fifth try.

Rhys Patchell, the Scarlets utility back, and the Wales Under-20 wing Keelan 
Giles have been flown out to act as cover. North follows Dan Lydiate, Paul 
James and Lloyd Williams as the latest injury victim from the original tour 
squad.

Wales face the Waikato Chiefs in Hamilton on Tuesday night and then complete 
their three Test series against the All Blacks in Wellington this weekend and 
in Dunedin on 25 June.

Sam Warburton, meanwhile, has said Wales will not be put off by having yet 
another potential victory in the southern hemisphere snatchedfrom their grasp 
in the final quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/11/new-zealand-v-wales-first-test-live>
 as they prepare to face the All Blacks again.

Far from being downhearted at his side’s surrender of a 21-18 lead on the hour 
against the All Blacks in Auckland, a ground where they had not been beaten in 
35 games since 1994, the Wales captain demanded his team stick to their guns 
and stay on the attack.

Wales scored two tries on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/new-zealand-wales-first-test-match-report>
, could have had at least two more and made more line-breaks, 14, than New 
Zealand. Better accuracy in key moments could have seen them cause even greater 
problems for Kieran Read’s new-look side, who eventually triumphed 39-21.

Southern comfort as England and Ireland turned rugby world on its head | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/12/england-wales-ireland-southern-hemisphere-eddie-butler>
“I’m hoping that the way we are playing here we can take back to the northern 
hemisphere, back our skill level and put the ball through the hands more in the 
future,” Warburton said.

“Every time we train we start every session with handling skills. We’re doing 
that four or five times a week and we are encouraging players to play like 
that. We haven’t played like that in the past, not because the coaches haven’t 
wanted us to but because we haven’t been prepared to take those risks 
ourselves. As players, we have to take a bit of responsibility.

“Out here we just thought we’ve got to take those risks and we’ve got to go 
for it. That has been the message from the coaches since we got here and the 
players have taken that on board.

“It is definitely more enjoyable to play and it was great to see Toby 
[Faletau] scoring within five minutes. It is just a case of doing the simple 
things well.

“I think we have taken some steps forward in our attacking game and they are 
the positives we will take into the next game. We still think we’ve got a 
chance in the series and until it is definitely taken off the table the 
attitude I will always have is that anything is possible. We definitely want to 
get one win, but you don’t want to come over here and just settle for that. You 
want to aim your sights higher than that.”

Scoring more tries via their new, more expansive style is one thing but 
finding a way to shut up shop in the closing stages and halt the alarming flow 
of points against them is just as pressing. In their past seven games against 
Wales the All Blacks have scored 89 points, including 12 tries in the final 
quarter compared to Wales’s 34 and three.

A second try from the remarkable Waisake Naholo, the captain Read and the 
replacement hooker Nathan Harris provided the final nails in the Welsh coffin 
as New Zealand upped the tempo and intensity and took Warburton and co into 
very uncomfortable areas.

Warburton believes his team will be better for experiencing first hand what it 
is like to play against the world champions in their own back yard. But he must 
also be aware that they will only get better as the series develops.

Meanwhile, Luke Charteris will captain a Wales side that features seven 
players who played in the first Test defeat when they take on Waikato Chiefs on 
Tuesday night on Saturday.

Warren Gatland has been forced to play Scott Williams, Gareth Davies, Rob 
Evans, Scott Baldwin, Tomas Francais, Jake Ball and Ellis Jenkins against the 
two-time Super Rugby champions, and has also asked Bradley Davies, Ross 
Moriarty and Gareth Anscombe to possibly double up off the bench.

Wales XV (v Waikato Chiefs, Hamilton): M Morgan (Bristol), E Walker (Ospreys), 
T Morgan (Newport Gwent Dragons), S Williams (Scarlets), T James (Cardiff 
Blues), R Priestland (Bath), G Davies (Scarlets), R Evans (Scarlets), S Baldwin 
(Ospreys), T Francis (Exeter), J Ball (Scarlets), L Charteris (Racing 92), 
J Turnbull (Cardiff Blues), E Jenkins (Cardiff Blues), J King (Ospreys).
Replacements K Dacey (Cardiff Blues), A Jarvis (Ospreys), R Jones (Scarlets), B 
Davies (Wasps), R Moriarty (Gloucester), A Davies (Scarlets), G Anscombe 
(Cardiff Blues), R Patchell (Cardiff Blues).
 