
The last time South Africa lost all their autumn Tests they at least went down 
swinging. A50-point defeat by England in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2002/nov/25/rugbyunion.englandrugbyunionteam>
 was brutal, nasty even, and left Clive Woodward irate at the injuries incurred 
by the Springboks’ strong-arm tactics. Today it is only the Springboks licking 
their wounds.

A record eighth defeat in a calendar year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/wales-south-africa-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, and only the third in 110 years by Wales, has proved the final straw and the 
South African Rugby Union has promised root-and-branch reform. Allister Coetzee 
looks likely to lose his job after he reports to his employers in mid-December 
butto suggest the buck stops with him is risible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/quotas-just-the-start-of-turmoil-as-south-africa-arrive-amid-a-crisis>
. Political interference – it was the sports minister who labelled the 
Springboks “a bunch of losers” after the defeat by Japan last year – outdated 
domestic infrastructure and the ever increasing player drain renders this South 
Africa’s lowest ebb.

Wales and Tipuric boost Howley to leave South Africa and Coetzee gloomy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/wales-south-africa-autumn-internationals-match-report>
“We have a passionate nation, the Springboks stand for excellence,” Coetzee 
said. “We have to make sure that, whatever systems we put in place, we give the 
players a platform to achieve excellence. We will definitely not lower the 
expectations. If you look at Springbok level alone, it’s not just where the 
problems are. It is the right time to start working together and fix things in 
South African rugby. We’ve spoken about the skill level.

“I don’t think the international level is where you hone skills. It is not 
just the job of the Springbok coach to upskill the players but also a 
collective effort from all coaches [at the franchises].”

At the top of the agenda for the review process is to address a failing Super 
Rugby franchise system – six is currently too many and spread the talent too 
thinly – and arrest the player exodus that has taken several hundred South 
African players to Europe or Japan. Private ownership within the franchises may 
also help offer incentives for players to stay.

“I’m pleased that there will have to be a firm decision on what we’re doing 
with our overseas-based players v the home-based players,” Coetzee said. 
“That’s going to be part of the policy. We will have clear policy and guidance 
around that. I still feel South Africa can be competitive but we have to be 
creative. It’s difficult to compete with the pound and the Euro.”

It felt like a valedictory team selection against Wales but in picking four 
backs that helped the Lions tothis year’s Super Rugby final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/hurricanes-claim-maiden-super-rugby-title-with-victory-over-lions>
 – and a team with only 260 caps and 14 starters who will be based in South 
Africa in 2017 – Coetzee was at least trying to look ahead. The irony was that 
with a few more experienced heads they might just have squeezed past a Wales 
side short on confidence themselves.

As it was, South African indiscipline allowed Leigh Halfpenny to kick Wales 
into a 12-6 lead and, shortly after Faf de Klerk’s yellow card early in the 
second half, Ken Owens was shoved over for the opening try. Uzair Cassiem’s 
debut score brought South Africa back to within seven points but Justin Tipuric 
put the result beyond doubt with the try his performance deserved.

It was Wales’s best showing of the autumn and their record win over the 
Springboks but evidence of the attacking intent Rob Howley is trying to 
introduce was in short supply and the interim head coach wil surely have to 
remedy that during the Six Nations if he is to replace Warren Gatland on a 
permanent basis after the 2019 World Cup.

“To beat both Argentina and South Africa in an autumn series, I deem that as a 
success,” a satisfied Howley said. “We set ourselves goals of bettering our 70% 
home record. We’ve beaten South Africa for only the third time, by a record 
margin. We’ll take it.”

Progress for Wales since the World Cup is not particularly evident but 
elsewhere in Europe it patently is. England have won 13 matches on the trot and 
Ireland have become the first northern hemisphere side to beat New Zealand, 
Australia and South Africa in the same year since Woodward’s World Cup winners 
in 2003. England and Ireland are the visitors to Cardiff in next year’s Six 
Nations and the scrum-half Gareth Davies acknowledges Wales must improve 
against the defending champions.

“We’ve already spoken about the Six Nations. The next game at the Principality 
Stadium is England. I think we have got another couple of gears in us, and for 
us to beat England we are going to have to go through those gears,” he said.

“If we can get up to that top gear, I think it will be a hell of a game. We 
have been under a bit of pressure the last couple of weeks but we came away 
with a comfortable win against South Africa. We will review the autumn series 
and I am sure there will be a few points to work on going into the Six Nations.”

Wales Halfpenny; North, J Davies, S Williams (Roberts, 79), Liam Williams (S 
Davies, 59); Biggar, G Davies; Jenkins (capt; Smith, 67), Owens (Baldwin, 60), 
Francis (Lee, 68), Charteris (Hill, 79), Jones, Lydiate (Faletau, h-t), 
Tipuric, Moriarty.

Tries Owens, Tipuric Con Halfpenny Pens Halfpenny 5.

South Africa Goosen; Combrinck, Venter, Van Rensburg (Mapoe, 67), Ulengo; 
Jantjies (Lambie, 59), De Klerk (Van Zyl, 65); Mtawarira (Kitshoff, 59), 
Strauss (capt; Marx, 72), Adriaanse (Nyakane, 68), Du Toit (Mostert, 68), 
De Jager, Carr (Du Preez, 78), Cassiem, Whiteley.

Try Cassiem Con Lambie Pens Jantjies 2.

Sin-bin De Klerk 42.

Referee Romain Poite (Fr) Attendance 55,122.
 