
Lacking control, confidence and at times the slightest clue, Wales stumbled 
over the line thanks to a last-gasp drop goal from Sam Davies against an 
inspired Japan side who came agonisingly close to another giant-killing on 
their return to British soil.

But for Davies’s late intervention Wales were staring down the barrel of a 
draw against Japan – thoroughly deserved by their exhilarating visitors who 
produced the kind of speed and accuracy that felled the Springboks last 
September and of which Rob Howley’s side can only dream.

Amanaki Lotoahea came off the bench to finish a wonderful try for Japan five 
minutes from the end, and when the excellent fly-half Yu Tamura slotted the 
wide conversion it was 30-30 and anyone’s game. Davies, winning just his second 
cap from the bench, must take enormous credit for keeping his cool but the same 
cannot be said for most of his team-mates.

“I thought Japan were the better team and deserved to win,” said Howley. “As I 
said to the players, whilst we come away with a win, it certainly felt like a 
loss. Japan deserve the accolades they will get but we’re past the winning 
post, for the second game on the trot. It’s relief more than frustration. The 
players are disappointed by the performance. We used our get our jail card.”

England register record win against Fiji but defence is cause for concern
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Wales were on something of a hiding to nothing. Try and grind their way to a 
comfortable victory and they win no admirers, play with the kind of abandon 
that is increasingly expected of them and they would be doing so into Japan’s 
hands. Truth be told, they managed neither and they would have lost here save 
for the unerring boot of Leigh Halfpenny.

The former Bath No8 Amanaki Mafi was superb throughout for Japan, who came to 
play from the word go. Under Jamie Joseph they are in transition and they have 
been impacted by the loss of Steve Borthwick and Marc Dal Maso just as much as 
Eddie Jones – in the first half their set piece came under increasing pressure 
– but their ability to put the ball through the hands at pace can be 
spellbinding.

“I’m a little bit disappointed because it was great match, a first for many of 
our players to put ourselves in the position to win the match,” said Joseph. 
“Losing the match in the last 20 seconds is a little bitter but I’m very proud 
of the players. You witnessed belief in the game-plan and in each other.”

Tamura set the tone for Japan with some shrewd kicking for his wingers and 
gave them a 6-0 lead with his second penalty after Liam Williams was shown an 
early yellow card for impeding Akihito Yamada. Wales’s response was immediate, 
however, and, considering their numerical disadvantage, ominous for Japan. Dan 
Lydiate does not usually crop up on the right wing but once the ball was in his 
hands he could not fail to register his first try in 62 Tests.

Italy celebrate famous first win over sorry South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
Halfpenny nailed the conversion and by this stage Jonathan Davies was purring 
for Wales. One grubber was perfectly placed, with a combination of neat 
footwork and brute force he consistently found a way over the gain line, and it 
was his break and popped pass that provided Jamie Roberts with a cathartic try, 
having been dropped seven days previously.

Still Japan stuck to their principles, throwing dummies behind their own 
posts, and but for a forward pass, they would have been away down the left 
through Kenki Fukuoka – a reminder of the threat they pose from deep. That 
Wales could not turn the screw, despite their dominance up front, demonstrated 
their shattered confidence, and when Yamada was on hand to pick off a dreadful 
pass from Anscombe and streak clear, Japan were back to within a point at 14-13.

Halfpenny was on target with a penalty soon after the break but still Wales 
were casting envious glances at their opponents’ superior skill-set. Alun Wyn 
Jones and Sam Warburton soon combined to send the latter over, but, just as 
against Argentina, their opponents hit back with a quite breathtaking score as 
the ball was whipped through the hands to Fukuoka to score at the left-hand 
corner; Tamura landed the tricky conversion.

Another Halfpenny penalty from straight in front gave Wales a seven-point 
cushion, but again, indiscipline brought about by the sheer speed with which 
Japan can attack, enabled Tamura to trim it to four. He missed another, easier 
opportunity minutes later and that looked as if it may prove costly, but after 
Halfpenny registered another penalty, a counterattack, started by the full-back 
Kotaro Matsushima, was finished by Lotoahea. Tamura bisected the posts with the 
conversion to bring Japan level but Sam Davies was on hand to spare Wales’s 
blushes.

“Personally I just had a job to the end and thankfully I did it,” said the 
23-year-old. “I’m just thankful to get the opportunity – hero or villain – 
today, and thankfully I was the hero.”
 