
It may go some way to earning Rob Howley the job permanently, but this was a 
victory for Wales straight out of the Warren Gatland playbook. All power and 
physicality, putting concerns of a lack of Welsh wizardry to one side, they 
fully warranted this comfortable win, albeit against a South Africa who 
continue to plumb new depths.

Ken Owens and the excellent Justin Tipuric scored the tries, but Leigh 
Halfpenny was metronomic from the tee and a youthful South Africa so redundant 
throughout. It was not plain sailing for Wales – it never is these days – but 
it was their best performance of the autumn.

And while Howley now has the Six Nations to try to introduce some attacking 
nous, and advance his claim to take over from Gatland in 2019, the game may be 
up for Allister Coetzee.

Keith Earls seals Ireland win over Australia to complete big-three sweep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Within minutes of full time, the president of SA Rugby, Mark Alexander, issued 
a damning statement, promising a review process, major overhaul and what 
amounted to a stay of execution for the current coach. “It has been a 
profoundly disappointing season in terms of results and we are acutely aware 
that we have failed to live up to the Springboks’ proud heritage,” said 
Alexander. “We are all feeling very raw and let down and it would be easy to 
make knee-jerk decisions. But we must resist that.”

Under Coetzee’s watch South Africa have now made history by losing eight Tests 
in a calendar year and they have failed to win on their autumn European tour 
for the first time since 2002. It was a third win over the southern 
hemisphere’s big three in 33 attempts for Wales, but it is a group the 
Springboks may not be part of for long.

Howley expressed his sympathy for Coetzee. Had South Africa won here, and they 
did rally to within a score, he would have had his own deluge of criticism to 
deal with; instead he can lay claim to guiding Wales to three autumn wins in 
Cardiff for the first time.

“I’ve loved every minute of it. I wouldn’t change the last five weeks for the 
world. It’s not a stressful job, it’s an enjoyable job,” said Howley. “I don’t 
tend to read or listen to anything. It’s that external and internal perception 
and the internal perception is that we’re a very good team. All the white 
noise, we just concentrate on performing as best we can.”

England and Owen Farrell dig deep to win 14-man battle with Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Truth be told, South Africa’s problems go well beyond Coetzee, even if he may 
be the fall guy. There has been a mass exodus of players leaving South Africa 
to line their pockets in Europe or in Japan and the domestic infrastructure is 
horribly outdated. All of which was addressed in Alexander’s statement and 
Coetzee hopes a line has now been drawn in the sand.

“It is a very difficult time for us, as management staff and players. We live 
in a country where results are important for the national team and I’m 
definitely not proud about the way the season has gone,” Coetzee said. “But 
maybe in hindsight, if you look at this year, it’s not ideal, way below what is 
expected of the Springbok team, but hopefully the start of a greater time and 
place to get SA Rugby back on track again. Not fix the cracks but make sure 
that fix it from the core.”

Barring the full-back Johan Goosen, the Springboks’ starting XV was comprised 
of players who will be based in South Africa next year – it was undoubtedly a 
side with an eye on the future. The half-backs Faf de Klerk and Elton Jantjies 
tried to bring some energy early on but in what seemed like it could be a sign 
of things to come, South Africa celebrated a penalty at the first scrum with 
more gusto than all-conquering Springbok sides of yesteryear may have done a 
victory.

It yielded a penalty for Jantjies nonetheless but as indiscipline increasingly 
crept into South Africa’s performance, so Halfpenny was on hand to ruthlessly 
punish them from the tee, doing so three times in quick succession.

South Africa were struggling to get out of their half. Caught between the need 
to gain territory and a desire to play, they conceded another penalty, from 
which Halfpenny kicked Wales into a 12-6 lead after Jantjies registered his 
second. It was billed as a cup final by Wales and at this stage it seemed to 
have gone straight to penalties.

Stuart Hogg stars with two tries as rampant Scotland see off Georgia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/scotland-georgia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Shortly after the break Halfpenny added another – albeit with a little help 
from the post – after De Klerk’s deliberate knock-on resulted in a yellow card. 
Another Wales penalty soon afterwards was accurately kicked to the corner by 
Dan Biggar and South Africa were simply powerless to stop the relentless 
driving maul, at the back of which was Owens, who barrelled his way over. 
Halfpenny’s missed conversion drew gasps from the crowd.

South Africa were floundering and they would have been out of it had Biggar’s 
drop goal put Wales more than two converted tries ahead. It sailed just wide 
and when South Africa kicked a penalty to the corner with a little more than 10 
minutes to go it felt like now or never. Eventually Uzair Cassiem was barged 
over for a debut try. Pat Lambie knocked over the conversion and they were back 
to within seven. Wales almost threw away a similar lead against Japan but, to 
their credit, did not go into their shells, and after a neat offload from 
Taulupe Faletau, on at half-time after Dan Lydiate’s nasty looking knee injury, 
Tipuric finished his try with a flourishing sidestep to put the result beyond 
doubt.
 