
Warren Gatland <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warren-gatland> could not 
bring himself to watch the final few minutes of his Wales side’s landmark 12-6 
win over South Africa. Leigh Halfpenny’s penalties brought about a first win 
over South Africa, Australia or New Zealand since November 2008, bringing an 
end to an unwanted run of defeats to the three southern hemisphere giants of 
world rugby.

Asked how he felt as the clock ran down in Cardiff, Gatland said: “The same as 
I’ve been feeling on other occasions – they don’t make it easy on the coaches, 
I tell you that. I couldn’t watch the last couple of minutes. I was just 
watching it in the box on the television, standing up. ”

Reflecting on the captain Sam Warburton’s pre-match message, Gatland added: “I 
don’t think it’s a relief. Sam made a good point before the game that it wasn’t 
a case of ‘if’, but ‘when’ it was going to happen. We deserved that win today. 
In terms of the relief, and the pressure people talk about, you thrive on that 
at this level. That’s what it’s all about.

“The autumn series is about playing the best in the world. There are no 
competition points at stake. For us it’s about the Six Nations and preparing 
for that. We’ve tried to communicate in this campaign that we’re looking at 
these matches as World Cup camps in terms of preparing for that next year.

“That’s the focus we’ve had and we’re very happy with how the whole autumn 
campaign transpired. We’ve pushed the three best teams in the world right to 
the end. In two games we were leading but couldn’t finish it off. Today we made 
it a little bit hard for ourselves again but we deserved to win it.”

Wales’s triumph was only their second in 30 attempts against the Springboks, 
and a first for 15 years, as they bounced back from losing to the world 
champions, New Zealand, last weekend. It will send them into February’s Six 
Nations opener against England with topped-up confidence, while they also 
gained a slight psychological edge ahead of a possible World Cup quarter-final 
appointment with South Africa next October.

Warburton savoured the moment, telling BBC1: “It’s amazing. I said before, I 
wish people could see the effort we’ve put in in the last five weeks. We’ve 
been getting up at six in the morning and altitude training, and doing all 
sorts, we were just so desperate to get this win. You get out what you put in 
and that was the case here.

“It’s awesome. We’ve been desperate to do this for so long and we’ve been 
knocking on the door for ages. I’ve been in the setup since 2009 and we haven’t 
achieved it. This is right up there with the best achievements I’ve had in the 
Wales jersey and hopefully the team can kick on from this now.”

The Springboks’ coach, Heyneke Meyer, was philosophical in defeat but left to 
lament a “quite worrying” kneecap injury to his captain, Jean de Villiers.

“Obviously it’s very disappointing,” Meyer said. “We knew our character and 
depth would be tested so we knew it was going to be tough. I just thought there 
were too many mistakes and there were two big turning points. Usually in the 
last 20 minutes the game opens up and we play some of our best rugby and in 
their two previous games, Wales have lost it in the last 10 minutes. When Jean 
got injured it was a big setback. Not just because he’s our captain but it took 
about seven or eight minutes to get him off the field and we lost our 
continuity.” 
 