
There was a time when it took something special to win in Paris but now all a 
team need are the basics. Wales sorted out their set pieces – which they used 
to get their hard-running backs over the gainline – tackled with relish and 
kicked their penalties in claiming a victory that put them back in the title 
race after the opening night defeat to England.

France huffed without puff. Beating them, even here, means little in the wider 
context any more. Ireland in Cardiff next week will ask considerably more of 
Wales who could hardly believe their fortune when France started running from 
deep early, moves foundering through sloppy passes, poor handling and a lack of 
understanding. It was sad to see, like a boxer well past his prime trying to 
revisit past glories, the fight getting more distant from them with each 
attempted blow.

Philippe Saint-André said his players lacked basic skills, which begged two 
questions: why he picked them and what has happened to the standard of coaching 
throughout France? The team, making their final appearance of the campaign in 
Paris, did a circuit of the pitch at the end, a lap of dishonour that 
attracted, from those who remained, jeers and whistles.

“People will be asking what is going on and they are right to put the 
question,” said the France scrum-half, Morgan Parra. “We lacked fluency 
throughout.” Wales went 12 years from 1982 without beating France home or away 
but they recorded a fourth successive victory for the first time since the 
1950s. They talked about having a tilt at the title but the bruises inflicted 
by England have still to fade and they remain a side competent at dealing with 
the expected but vulnerable when they are exposed to uncertainty.

However, they have developed a gem of a player in their scrum-half, Rhys Webb. 
He created his side’s try on the hour with characteristic awareness after 
Mathieu Bastareaud had sabotaged a France counterattack by losing the ball. 
Webb spotted dozing guards at a ruck and shot through a gap: the flanker Dan 
Lydiate read the play, receiving and giving the ball to Dan Biggar in one 
graceful movement and the fly-half had the room to see off Brice Dulin.

Wales need to replicate that reflexive play more if they are to start 
regularly beating those above them in the world rankings. They were tactically 
outwitted in Dublin last year and their record against Ireland in Cardiff since 
1983 is wretched – with only two victories in that period. Their main concern 
at the start of this week is the knee injury that forced off their captainSam 
Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> 11 minutes from the 
end. He will be assessed when the swelling subsides.

Warburton was among Wales’s 2013 Lions who were at the heart of the victory, 
pivotal at the breakdown. Alun Wyn Jones seemed to take criticism of Wales’s 
recent forward displays personally, driving himself into the loose turf; Gethin 
Jenkins, while still struggling up front, is a prop like no other in the loose, 
although his opposite number Eddy Ben Arous did a passable impression; Jamie 
Roberts thrived on lineout possession and the visitors used the width of the 
pitch to involve Jonathan Davies and George North.

Their overt superiority should have produced a more emphatic victory, but 
Wales are not given to cutting loose. “We always seem to want to do it the hard 
way,” Roberts said. “We played all the rugby in the first half but our defence 
secured us an ugly victory in what was a great team effort. We have improved 
every game so far this year and will have to continue that to beat Ireland.”

Wales are at least looking up even if they do not yet look up to winning the 
title. Blue is meanwhile the colour for the 2011 World Cup finalists who are 
locked in another scrap in the basement. “We do not play like France,” bemoaned 
one supporter on a train to Gare du Nord hours after the latest home defeat. 
“We are like South Africa, big and direct. We want our rugby back. What 
happened to French flair?” Flare-ups even. It is time for unreconstruction.

France Dulin; Huget, Lamerat (Bastareaud, 16), Fofana (Tales, 69), Guitoune; 
Lopez, Parra (Tillous-Borde, 52); Ben Arous (Debaty, 52), Guirado (Kayser, 52), 
Slimani (Atonio, 52), Taofifénua (Suta, 60), Maestri, Dusautoir (capt), Le 
Roux, Chouly (Goujon, 73).

Try Dulin. Con Lopez. Pens Lopez 2.

Wales Halfpenny; North, J Davies, Roberts, L Williams; Biggar (Priestland, 
75), Webb; Jenkins (James, 69), Baldwin (Hibbard, 69), Lee (Jarvis, 79), 
Charteris (B Davies, 69), AW Jones, Lydiate, Warburton (capt; Tipuric, 69), 
Faletau.

Try Biggar. Pens Halfpenny 5.

Referee J Peyper (SA). Attendance 80,000.
 