
Not a national coach’s job to teach basic skills

November has come to mark the start of the shooting season. Wales face South 
Africa in Cardiff on Saturday with both coaches under fire and France’s Guy 
Novès can hear the sounds of chambers clicking open after his sidelost to a 
nowhere near full-strength Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/wallabies-question-scrum-tactics-despite-bruising-win-over-france>
.

Rob Howley, Wales’s interim head coach, has been widely criticised after 
Saturday’slast-minute victory over Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wales-japan-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 that came two weeks after a heavy defeat to Australia. He is standing in for 
Warren Gatland for the second time in four years: in 2013, Wales lost all four 
Tests in their autumn series but this year they could win three for only the 
second time, and the previous occasion in 2002 was made up of tier two and 
three victims.

So much for the business being results driven. South Africa’s Allister Coetzee 
is looking for a first victory on tour after a draw with the Barbarians was 
followed bydefeats to England and Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
. Never before have the Springboks lost eight matches in one year but they will 
reach that figure if they go down to Wales for the third time in 110 years.

Rugby union autumn internationals: talking points from the latest action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points>
There is a panicky feeling in South Africa that he should go, less than six 
months after his first Test in charge, even if the Springboks beat Wales. 
Similarly, the pressure will barely ease on Howley in victory given the recent 
performances of his side’s opponents. Wales have in the past found sacking 
coaches an easy but unreliable fix: they used to do so in the run-up to a World 
Cup.

How would they like to have Steve Hansen in charge? He has been in charge of 
New Zealand for nearly five years and 66 Tests, a mere four of which have ended 
in defeat. He was their coach between 2002 and 2004, told he would be sacked if 
a run of defeats continued. Interestingly, Wales spoke to Dave Rennie, the 
coach of the Chiefs, during their summer tour to New Zealand, to see if he 
would be available should Gatland be offered the Lions job and take the year 
off: at that stage, Gatland’s appointment looked a formality but Scotland’s 
Vern Cotter made a late pitch and a decision was delayed, creating a vacuum 
Glasgow filled and Rennie will start work with them next year.

Hansen’s experience in Wales would suggest the problems they face are not 
confined to the coach. Some of the media there leading the attack on Howley 
were obsequious when it came to reporting on the previous Welsh Rugby Union 
regime, one that focused on the elite and showed little concern for the levels 
below. It never questioned or debated policies that threatened to damage the 
fabric of the game in one of the few countries in the world that could claim 
rugby union as its national sport. So why just holler at Howley when Wales’s 
attempts to play with more pace and width as the Test game becomes more fast 
and dynamic are undermined by a lack of skill and an inability of players to 
react to the unexpected?

It should not be the job of a coach to teach basic skills and there was a time 
when Wales spawned intuitive players who did not need to be told at half-time 
where they were going wrong. They solved problems themselves, if not always by 
the rule book; a gameplan was an outline, not written in indelible ink. They 
took responsibility.

There was a thriving club system in Wales, one fed by a school system in which 
teachers dealt with the rudiments of the game. Education was continued by 
playing reserve team matches, learning by experience. Today it is about 
academies and gyms, information absorbed; there is a world of difference 
between reading about something, or watching it on video, and actually 
undergoing it. Was it any wonder against Australia and Japan there were 
occasions when Wales tried to go through with the gameplan even when it should 
have been obvious that a move was not on, such as when the Japan defence fanned 
out wide but still the ball was shovelled out and lost? Ten years ago Lyn 
Jones, then in charge of Ospreys, lamented that players looked to the coaching 
box when things were going wrong.

Eddie Jones challenged his England players after last weekend’s victory over 
Fiji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 to make his job redundant by reacting to events and not interpreting a 
gameplan as the only way. In other words, not to have to wait until half-time 
or the Monday review to be told where they were going wrong. Intelligence is a 
word he uses often, recognising Test rugby is no longer just about power, 
although it remains an essential quality, but pace, athleticism and 
understanding.

Wales are nowhere near making their coach redundant by dealing with the 
unexpected, far more so by their slow reactions. Their former prop Adam Jones 
said this week: “Wales look like a side that is being told by the coaches to 
play in a certain way, a more open style, but for one reason or another it is 
not working.” There were more than 800 caps in the starting lineup against 
Australia, yet between them they could not find a reason for why things were 
going wrong until they went in at half-time to be told.

Is that the fault of Howley who, as he looks for a playmaker at 12, sees three 
of the four players in that position for the Welsh regions out of his reach 
because they are foreign? He is accountable, not least for selection where it 
seemed cruel to expose Alex Cuthbert again last weekend, but Wales were falling 
away before he took over. Their best victory in the last 18 months was against 
England at Twickenham in the World Cup and that was a happy accident.

Gatland had only been in charge of Wales for a couple of years when he said 
one of the marked differences he had found between the game in his native New 
Zealand and his new country was that when he tried to give the Wales players a 
freer rein and involve them in tactics and gameplans, they became 
uncomfortable. They preferred to be told what to do.

Nigel Davies, a footballing 12 of the kind once so regularly produced by 
Wales, said exactly the same thing after he had been part of the management 
team in the 2007 World Cup which ended at the group stage after defeat by Fiji. 
Gatland made a difference by devising a gameplan that was destructively simple 
and it worked, in Europe anyway, at a time when teams were rarely willing to 
run from their own half for fear of conceding a penalty.

The signs were there then because they struggled against the southern 
hemisphere’s big three; not in conditioning or fitness but the ability to 
create when it mattered or keep their heads in the final 10 minutes when 
fatigue kicked in. They are having to react because the emphasis at Test level 
is on scoring tries rather than not conceding them and it is a problem for the 
whole of the Welsh game, not just Howley. The difference now is that the WRU 
recognises that.

• This is an extract taken from the Guardian’s weekly rugby union email, The 
Breakdown.To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-breakdown>.
 