
Wales want Leigh Halfpenny to decide by the end of the month whether to accept 
a national dual contract and return toCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> next summer or remain at 
Toulon, where the full‑back has spent the past three years.

Leicester board at crossroads as old ways start to look like the wrong ones | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/the-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads>
The Welsh Rugby Union group chief executive, Martyn Phillips, revealed the 
governing body had made its maximum offer to Halfpenny, who has been offered a 
reported £700,000 a year byToulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon>.

If the British & Irish Lions full-back, 28, remains in France he would join 
the group of Welsh exiles who are classified as wild-card players, with only 
four able to be named in the national squad from next season, a number that 
will halve in the year before the 2019 World Cup.

“Leigh is a match-winner and as an ambassador for rugby he is a hell of a nice 
guy,” Phillips said. “You would want him in your mix, not at a distance. When I 
go around clubs and ask little kids who their favourite player is, loads of 
them chirp up with his name. Leigh is someone we think a lot of and we have 
made him the best offer we possibly can.

“We all hope he comes back but he is his own man. I am sure there is a bit of 
head and heart for him to go through and I will respect his decision. It is 
difficult for him and if he does not come back, I would understand that. The 
clock is ticking and there is a point at which Toulon will need certainty. We 
can pick him anyway but I am sure Leigh knows he has to make a call on it in 
the next couple of weeks.”

Phillips said he did not expect the wild-card policy to be reviewed, even 
though George North, Jamie Roberts and Taulupe Faletau could be joined in the 
category – which applies to players who have rejected the chance to join one of 
the four Welsh regions to play in England or France – in the coming seasons by 
Halfpenny, Ross Moriarty and Tomas Francis.

“There was a lot of deliberation to get to the policy in the first place and I 
would rather see it out now,” Phillips said. “There are so many other things we 
are trying to do and it could confuse things if we blink on it now. There is a 
potentially better way but what will make Wales successful and sustainable is 
not the selection policy. There are bigger things we need to wrestle with.”

One is the future of the regions, whose playing budgets are considerably below 
rivals in England, France and Ireland. Newport Gwent Dragons are seeking 
private financial backing and a lack of progress has cast uncertainty over 
their future. The Cardiff Blues chairman, Peter Thomas, said this week that he 
felt the regions were heading for a car crash. “The Dragons are in a difficult 
spot,” he said. “They are looking for new investment, which is always a tough 
place to be.

“We are working very closely together but the nearer next season comes, the 
more urgent it is. I am meeting with them again next week and part of my job is 
to help them become a well-run, successful professional team.”

Asked whether the WRU would consider taking over the region, he replied: “You 
could not say no. There are 73 clubs in Gwent, a region with a rich history 
that has always produced amazing players. There is no way I could not have a 
professional club in Gwent without knowing I had done everything I could. If it 
came to it, we would look at it and ask if we could afford it.

“Going forward, I think the regions will have to have a combination of union 
funding and private investment. Given some of the money that has been spent in 
England and France, it would be difficult for professional clubs to be 
competitive without both those investment streams. It is not all about the 
money: you need a vision and an identity.”

Phillips said he had no regrets about allowing the Wales head coach, Warren 
Gatland, totake a year’s sabbatical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/warren-gatland-confirmed-as-head-coach-of-2017-british-irish-lion-wales-rugby-union>
 to plan forthis year’s Lions tour to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/09/british-irish-lions-tests-eden-park-new-zealand>
 or about the interim head coach, Robert Howley, joining him on the trip 
instead of leading Wales on their tour of the Pacific islands and fixtures 
against Samoa and Tonga, the latter likely to be played in Auckland.

“They will learn more as coaches on the Lions tour rather than be on 
diminishing returns in the South Seas,” Phillips said. “It is unlikely that 
they will not learn a bunch of stuff and we have relatively few opportunities 
to grow these guys.”
 