
Wales’s need for Leigh Halfpenny to rejoin Cardiff Blues from Toulon next 
season increased on Monday when Saracens confirmed that Liam Williams would be 
joining them from theScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> in 
the summer on a three-year contract.

Williams, who joined the Scarlets in 2011 and has made 100 appearances, had 
long been expected to turn down an offer from the region and move to London, 
where his partner lives. The 25-year-old joins the list of exiles categorised 
as wildcards by Wales whose head coach may pick no more than three of this 
season.

World Rugby ‘disappointed’ with Northampton over George North injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/world-rugby-disappointed-northampton-george-north-injury>
That number rises to four next season but will be down to two in the year 
leading up to the 2019 World Cup. Wales have Taulupe Faletau, George North and 
Jamie Roberts as their current wildcards, but if Halfpenny remains in France, 
the number will be five next season with Williams atSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>.

A potential further problem for Wales is that if Ross Moriarty and Tomas 
Francis, who play for Gloucester and Exeter respectively, receive a contract 
offer from a Welsh region when their current deals are about to end and opt to 
remain in England, they would become wildcards and further reduce the options 
for the national head coach.

Halfpenny, who is in his third season at Toulon but has missed more than a 
year through injury, has been offered a contract of more than £700,000 a year 
by the Top 14 club. The Welsh Rugby Union and the Blues cannot match that and 
hope that compensation for a lower wage in the form of playing fewer matches 
and having a potentially longer career by being better looked after will 
persuade the Lions full-back to return home.

Williams’s contract means he will be outside Wales until at least the summer 
after the 2019 World Cup. His preferred position is full-back, but Halfpenny 
was chosen ahead of him there at the end of Wales’s autumn series, when 
Williams moved to the wing, the position Saracens see him occupying in place of 
the Toulon-bound Chris Ashton.

The Saracens’ director of rugby, Mark McCall, not one given to hyperbole, 
described the signing of Williams as a coup, saying: “Liam’s arrival next 
season is fantastic news. He is only 25 and has his best years of rugby ahead 
of him. He is arguably one of the most talented backs in Europe and we look 
forward to welcoming him in the summer.”

It promises to be the late summer as Williams, one of Wales’s players who 
enhanced his reputation during the November series of internationals at the 
Principality Stadium, is in line to be chosen by the Lions for the tour to New 
Zealand next summer.

“I am excited about having the opportunity to challenge myself in the Aviva 
Premiership,” he said. “The reputation of Saracens speaks for itself and I am 
looking forward to the next chapter of my career. I wouldn’t be the player I am 
without the incredible support from the Scarlets’ management, players, 
back-room staff and passionate supporters. I will be giving my all for the 
remainder of the season and hope to finish on a high.”

The Scarlets, who lost another wing, North, to Northampton in 2013, said they 
did everything they could to keep Williams, with the WRU able to provide 
assistance through the national dual contract scheme, but it was not just about 
money, with geography a deciding factor.

“We fought hard to retain Liam, but having taken everything into account, 
including his personal circumstances, he has decided to pursue new challenges,” 
said Jon Daniels, the general manager of rugby at the Scarlets.

“We respect his decision totally. He has been an asset to the region and will 
be missed both on and off the field. He will always be a Scarlet and we thank 
him for his total commitment and passion for the region.”
 