
Wales have delayed their team announcement for Saturday’s match against 
Australia by 48 hours to give injured players more time to recover, especially 
the full-back Liam Williams, who is receiving treatment for strained ankle 
ligaments.

Wales are already without two of their Lions back row through injury. The No8 
Taulupe Faletau has been out since the opening weekend of the season with 
knee-ligament damage while the national captain,Sam Warburton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton>, who had an operation on a 
fractured cheekbone in September and had his comeback delayed by a neck 
problem, was released back to his region Cardiff Blues last weekend.

Wales hope Warburton will be available to face Argentina at the Principality 
Stadium next week and will decide in the next two days who will take over the 
captaincy on Saturday. The flanker Dan Lydiate did so when Wales played England 
at Twickenham in May while the forwards Alun Wyn Jones and Gethin Jenkins have 
also led their country.

“Sam should be fit for Argentina and we have released him to the Blues so he 
can get some game-time,” said Shaun Edwards, the Wales defence coach. “We will 
leave it until the last minute to decide on Liam’s fitness. He has improved 
since last week and we hope he will play against Australia. He will definitely 
play some part in the series.”

Wales have lost their past 11 matches against Australia in a run stretching 
back to 2008 and have never won more than two of their four games in a November 
series. They have set themselves the target of finishing the month in the top 
four of the world rankings before next May’s World Cup pool draw.

“Since the rankings started we have only been in the top four for 4% of the 
time,” said Edwards. “Australia are a good side and should not be judged 
against New Zealand, who are some way ahead of everyone at this moment. They 
have players of real quality and I do not think I have seen such an outstanding 
performance in defeat as the one Bernard Foley gave against the All Blacks the 
other week.”

Wales have tended to start campaigns slowly as players adjust to the step up 
from the regional game and they have tweaked their training regime to be ready 
for the Wallabies. “We are not training for as long as we have in the last 
couple of years but we are still getting an increase in intensity,” said the 
centre Jonathan Davies. “It’s about us going into Saturday fresh.”

Sam Warburton: ‘You watch Sky with everyone else to see if you’re in Lions 
squad’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/sam-warburton-world-cup-wales-british-irish-lions-new-zealand> 