
We have seen arguably the most complete team of the modern era. These 
supercharged Wallabies combine a remarkable gift for seizing scoring 
opportunities with a dreadnought defence that conceded only three tries in the 
tournament, two in the first game against Argentina. But above all Australia 
were worthy winners of the 1991 World Cup because they translated the theory 
and practice of their positive vision of rugby into six successive victories 
culminating in a memorable final.

England need feel no dismay at losing a final that forced them to play an 
enthralling brand of catch-up football for much of the afternoon. Two scores 
behind within half an hour, Will Carling's men always carried the game to 
Australia with a fearless and enterprising spirit. On Saturday the lion roared 
with pride.

The final highlighted the gap between northern and southern hemispheres - 
England, of course, also lost to New Zealand - yet it is not a substantial gap, 
more of a difference in methods of coaching and organisation. Man for man, 
England's players are every bit as talented as Australia's and in the case of 
the forwards, better in one or two positions.

It will be a great pity if the current England side do not have one more crack 
at the Five Nations championship, which surely would be enriched by the wide 
range of skills they displayed at Twickenham. The manager Geoff Cooke has asked 
the senior players to make a statement about their future plans within the next 
fortnight or so, but clearly their tantalising whiff of glory will give the 
"old men" pause for thought.

As for the Wallabies, they can look forward to an upsurge in the game's 
popularity at home, where league, Australian Rules and soccer have largely 
dominated. When the world champions tour Wales and Ireland next year, not to 
mention South Africa, their progress will attract massive public interest, 
especially as all those nations are themselves in the throes of a rugby 
transition.

Meanwhile, England and the also-rans can start to study the techniques and 
back-room support that produced the best rugby footballers in the world.

Certainly England must resolve the problem of their split personality which 
surfaced first with a highly conservative set-piece strategy against Scotland, 
followed only a week later by an astonishing desire to run with the ball 
against Australia. A more consistent version of Saturday's high-pressure 
pattern should be developed with the quality ball supplied by the forwards 
being used to exploit the pace and power of the backs in every game, not just 
occasionally.

Paul Ackford, the England lock, took the view that his team "should have 
kicked the leather off the ball" but that sounds like an effective forward 
venting his frustration on backs who were unable to convert pressure into 
points - albeit against the best defence in world rugby. Against any other 
team, the inventive way England used Guscott and Halliday to switch the point 
of attack would almost certainly have produced scores.

As Carling, who proved an inspirational leader, said: "I think we did the 
country proud. It's sad it ended this way but I am very proud of all the 
players. It was so close and we'll never get the chance again with this group 
of players. I was thrilled at the way the team battled away at a very good 
Australian defence."

Dwyer pointed out that this frantically paced contest was well refereed by 
Derek Bevan, who applied the advantage law with more good sense than any other 
official in the tournament. But there was a strong whiff of controversy about 
Bevan's decision in the closing stages to punish the deliberate knock-on by 
Campese with a penalty rather than a penalty try. This act of what was viewed 
in some quarters as cheating by the great Australian wing was booed.

Two points are relevant to the incident. Firstly, Bevan took a very long time 
tomake up his mind before opting for a penalty (which Webb kicked to reduce the 
deficit to 12-6). Secondly, Underwood, the potential recipient of 
Winterbottom's pass, did not necessarily have a clear run to the line as the 
full-back Roebuck was already moving across to cover.

Afterwards Brian Moore, the England hooker, said: "Campese has gone through 
this tournament telling everyone he is the saviour of rugby but he proved today 
he is as cynical as the rest of us when it comes down to it. There is no way 
that Rory would not have scored."

However, England's disappointment should not be allowed to overshadow the 
sense of satisfaction they can derive from having raised the final to 
exhilarating heights. Rob Andrew gave a revelatory performance, often 
sidestepping tackles, making positive 10-metre breaks and passing the ball a 
total of 26 times (against Lynagh's four). It was heartwarming stuff.

Clearly the England three-quarters could have done with more practice under 
competitive conditions than they were allowed in this tournament. On three 
occasions laser-like passes to Underwood failed to stick when he had the left 
corner within striking range. Guscott, too, ran out of midfield support on 
occasions.

Apart from his knock-on, little was seen of Campese after he carelessly failed 
to finish off a 40-metre chip and chase with a try in the right corner. But all 
too predictably Lynagh gave Australia the lead in the 26th minute with a 
towering penalty goal after England offended in the lineout. Four minutes later 
the Queensland fly-half kicked a splendid conversion, after a try credited to 
Daly, which put his side 9-0 in front.

The try, which with hindsight was the turning-point, developed from a 70-metre 
counterattack down the touchline which produced a line-out in the right corner. 
When the hardworking Ofahengaue leapt high to take clean catch, the props Daly 
and McKenzie drove smartly round the tail to smuggle the ball across the line 
between them. It was a brilliant short-range manoeuvre.

In the following 35 minutes the match was effectively won and lost as England 
failed to turn their intense pressure into points. At last Webb kicked a simple 
goal from the edge of the box but, with 12 minutes left, Lynagh restored that 
nine-point cushion with a marvellous penalty goal from 42 metres after Dooley 
killed the ball.

Eight minutes from the end Webb at last added a second penalty goal but by 
that stage England desperately needed a try - which Campo and Mr Bevan were not 
ready to grant. England had given everything, as the Australian captain Nick 
Farr-Jones acknowledged: "Afterwards I just lay in the bath for 30 minutes 
absolutely exhausted." Nursing the Webb Ellis Trophy, no doubt.
 