
There are no neighbours and the views are stunning, and if you can live 
without heating, running water, electricity and internet, then why not apply 
for a job as a hermit? Such is the position that Saalfelden near Salzburg in
Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> is seeking to fill, 
inhabiting alone one of central Europe’s last hermitages, built into a cliff 
above the town.

“Since its creation 350 years ago, the Saalfelden hermitage was inhabited 
every year. But we don’t have a successor to the last hermit,” said priest 
Alois Moser.

According to the job description, the successful candidate should have a 
“connection to Christian belief” and be “at peace with themselves” at 1,400 
metres (4,600 feet) above sea level.

'If you choose to be alone you can't be lonely': meet the modern-day hermits | 
Guardian readers and Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/modern-day-hermits-share-experiences>
Applicants should not expect complete seclusion, however. The hermitage gets a 
steady stream of visitors coming to “enjoy the view, to pray and to talk,” the 
advert on Saalfelden’s website cautions. “The applicants need to know that the 
Saalfelden hermit does not lead a lonely life. Many people come and want to 
confide in someone. He has to be there for them,” said Moser.

The previous hermit, former priest and psychotherapist Thomas Fieglmueller, 
returned to Vienna after just one season – the hermitage is only open from 
April to November – to write.


“Life in the hermit’s cell is spartan, but the nature is very beautiful. I met 
lots of nice people and had good conversations,” he told the Salzburger 
Nachrichten daily. “But there was also criticism from apparently 
arch-conservative Catholics because I didn’t have a cowl or a beard … Maybe I 
was the wrong person.”

Another thing to bear in mind for those applying – by post only; no emails – 
in time for the March 15 deadline: the job is unpaid. “We have already had 
several inquiries, but no formal candidates so far,” Moser said.
 