
Wasps thwarted Toulouse in the 2003‑04 European Cup final with a try by a 
scrum-half two minutes from time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6CQz_gCzJw> 
but left it even later here in making history repeat itself. There was less 
than a minute to go when Dan Robson, his side four points down and pushed to 
their limits by opponents who were as resourceful as they were powerful, tapped 
a penalty a couple of metres out and dived for the line so low that anyone who 
challenged him would have risked being sent off for making contact with his 
head.

It was one of the few times in a game they largely controlled when Toulouse 
were taken by surprise, but they were made to pay for their lapses. They 
appeared to be unsure where Robson would take the penalty from as the referee, 
John Lacey, had played a long advantage and the scrum-half crossed virtually 
unopposed to take his side to the verge of the knockout stage with their final 
matchat Zebre next Sunday a virtual five-point banker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup-northampton-castres-connacht-zebre>
.

Related: Francis Saili try edges Munster past Glasgow and into quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/glasgow-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

Elliot Daly’s try 18 minutes earlier had also been an opportunist’s one, the 
centre sprinting through a gap between two forwards that was not markedly wide, 
but generallyWasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> were 
careless in possession having been denied a platform up front. The manner in 
which they wasted two prime try-scoring opportunities in the opening five 
minutes, missing the equivalent of football’s open goal, seemed to drain their 
fluency and the hope that a big pack, backed up by six replacements, would lose 
its legs in the second half, did not become reality.

The Wasps of not so long ago would have found a way to lose but they responded 
to going behind 11 minutes into the second period after a first half high on 
chances but low on points, by replying with Daly’s try when they had Christian 
Wade in the sin-bin. They were also a player light when Robson scored with 
Danny Cipriani a victim of one of several debatable refereeing decisions.

Cipriani was deemed to have entered a maul from the side as it rumbled its way 
to the Wasps line nine minutes from time. As the replacement prop Vasil Kakovin 
detached himself from the moving mass of forwards and put his head down for the 
line, Cipriani did remarkably well to turn a player somewhat heavier than 
himself and strip him of the ball. Lacey ran under the posts for a penalty try, 
telling Cipriani that he had entered a rolling maul from the side and doubled a 
harsh punishment by showing the fly-half a yellow card. “It was the wrong 
decision, one of many,” said the Wasps’ director of rugby, Dai Young.

It was not just the referee who made bad calls. The game was three minutes old 
when Wasps launched a typically flourishing counter-attack: Jimmy Gopperth 
chipped out of his 22, Christian Wade gathered the ball inside his own half and 
passed to Kurtley Beale on theToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> 22. The full-back looked set for a 
run-in under the posts, but seemed slightly off balance and as he was collared 
by Sébastien Bézy.

A few minutes later, Josh Bassett flicked on a pass that Thomas Young would 
have turned into a try after Joe Simpson’s break but for a call for a forward 
pass and a team that had scored 62 tries in 10 home matches this season 
struggled to find its way over the line.

Thierry Dusautoir was part of their undoing. He is now in the veteran category 
but if his legs do not respond in the way they once did, his head does. He 
scented opportunity at the breakdown, contesting for possession when a 
ball-carrier had gone to ground early or lacked support, forcing either a 
penalty for holding on or one for a support player going beyond the line of the 
ball. He won three penalties in the opening half and although he was one of the 
players bisected by Daly on the hour, and taken off shortly after, he left an 
indelible mark on the match.

Related: European Champions Cup roundup: Northampton take revenge on Castres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup-northampton-castres-connacht-zebre>

Toulouse used their heads as well as their bodies and had Jean-Marc Doussain 
not missed two kickable penalties from close to in front of the posts in the 
opening period, they would have achieved a victory that would not have been 
unmerited. They were, surprisingly for a French team playing away, on the right 
side of most of the close refereeing decisions, and they engineered openings, 
kept their shape and were clever at slowing down the game at the moments Wasps 
tried to lift the tempo.

They were so strong in the scrum, where the third in line for the England 
loosehead prop shirt, Matt Mullan, did not have the most fluent of auditions in 
front of the forwards coach, Steve Borthwick.

Nathan Hughes had few opportunities to surge over the gainline and set up 
quick ball. It forced Wasps to rely on their opportunism after their 3-0 
interval lead was wiped out by Yoann Huget’s try at the end of a fluent move, 
Daly restored the lead.

Then came the penalty try and a yellow card that would once have finished 
Wasps. They were dismissed as a team of fancy Dans then and it was a Dan who 
saved them by doing nothing more fancy than keeping his head.

Wasps: Beale; Wade, Daly, Gopperth, Bassett; Cipriani, Simpson (Robson 43); 
Mullan (McIntyre 63), Johnson, Moore (Swainston 71), Launchbury (capt), Myall 
(Symons 48), Young, Thompson, Hughes.

Tries: Daly, Robson. Cons: Gopperth 2. Pen: Gopperth.

Yellow cards: Wade 53, Cipriani 71.

Toulouse: Médard; Kunatani, David, Fickou, Huget; Doussain, Bézy; Baille 
(Kakovin 67), Tolofua (Ghiraldini 67), Johnston (Aldegheri 56), R Gray, Tekori 
(Maestri 52), Dusautoir (capt; Fa’asalele 67), T Gray (Galan 56), Cros.

Tries: Huget, Cons: Doussain 2.

Referee: John Lacey

Attendance: 17,248

Match rating: 9
 