
The former Newcastle player Jimmy Gopperth emerged from the replacements’ 
bench at Kingston Park to plunder the try bonus score in a 34-30 win that 
ensured Wasps would go into the new year on top of thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> table.

In a pulsating see-saw contest played out in front of Newcastle’s biggest home 
gate of the season, 8,730, Wasps needed only a single point to overtake 
Saracens, who are away to Leicester on New Year’s Day, and Gopperth’s 
46th-minute try guaranteed Dai Young’s side would at least achieve that. 
Ultimately, though,Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> 
managed to bag a maximum five points – no mean achievement considering they 
leaked two tries in the opening four minutes and trailed 12-0.

Semesa Rokoduguni: ‘I like working with Eddie. When he’s not happy, he tells 
you’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/semesa-rokoduguni-bath-england-exeter>
Danny Cipriani led the fightback with a superb opportunist try before 
Gopperth, his half-time replacement, helped to finish the job – at the expense 
of the club with whom he twice won the Premiership’s Golden Boot.

There was just a minute on the stadium clock when the Newcastle full-back, 
Alex Tait, sliced through the Wasps defence before shipping a pass inside to 
Sonatane Takulua, who touched down to the right of the posts. Joel Hodgson was 
off target with his conversion attempt but from the botched kick-off Marcus 
Watson scooped up the loose ball and hared up the left wing, outstripping the 
formerNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> full-back 
Rob Miller on a 70-metre scoring run. This time Hodgson added the extras, 
leaving a stunned Wasps 12-0 down and in a state of some disarray.

Young’s side quickly got their act together but it took them until the 20th 
minute to get a score on the board. A piece of glorious simplicity from 
Cipriani did the trick, the outside-half gathering his own chip over the 
Newcastle defence to score under the posts. Cipriani damaged his left leg in 
the process and had to have treatment before taking the conversion, which he 
duly slotted, reducing the deficit to five points.

Two minutes later Wasps were in front. Cipriani’s former Wasps midfield 
partner Dom Waldouck, a replacement for the injured Watson, made a hash of 
fielding a kick from Dan Robson and Christian Wade beat Belisario Agulla in a 
race to touch the ball down over the try line – by a fingertip, after lengthy 
examination by the TMO.

Cipriani’s conversion put Wasps 14-12 up with 22 minutes on the clock but 
their lead lasted only four minutes.

The Newcastle prop Rob Vickers barged over from close range in the 26th minute 
and Hodgson’s conversion put Newcastle back in front, 19-14.

Wasps were fortunate not to lose Kyle Eastmond to a yellow card for a 
dangerously high tackle on Tait, though Hodgson kicked the resultant penalty. 
That stretched the home side’s lead to 22-14 but in first-half overtime Wasps 
had a third try.

After patiently pounding away with a wave of attacking phases, Thomas Young 
cut through the Newcastle defence from 10 metres out for a try that Cipriani 
converted to cut the deficit to one point at 22-21.

Anthony Watson back for Bath and eyeing return to England squad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/george-start-north-northampton-concussion-gloucester-bath-exeter-premiership-rugby-union>
Cipriani had been struggling since his try and at the interval he was replaced 
by Gopperth, who wasted little time in making himself at home in his old 
surroundings. Six minutes into the second half the Kiwi fly-half took a feed 
from Robson and cut inside Opeti Fonua to claim Wasps’ try bonus. He also 
converted to give the visitors a 28-22 cushion.

There followed an exchange of penalties between Hodgson and Gopperth before 
Elliot Daly – back in action after thered card he received on England duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 against Argentina last month – stepped up to bang over a 51-metre penalty that 
extended Wasps’ lead to 34-25.

The visitors lost two men to the sin bin in the second half – the wing Josh 
Bassett for a deliberate knock-on and then the flanker Guy Thompson for some 
deliberate spoiling. The Falcons’ late pressure brought some reward, with Mark 
Wilson scoring the 78th-minute try that ensured they finished with both a try 
bonus and a losing bonus point.
 