
The recent deaths of several transgender prisoners underline the need for 
jails to be more flexible and proactive in managing such inmates, a watchdog 
has said.

Nigel Newcomen, the prisons and probation ombudsman, said his office had 
historically received few complaints from prisoners identifying themselves as 
transgender and has investigated relatively few deaths in custody.

However, the numbers have been climbing more recently, he said. “These events 
made the need to address this issue all the more pressing,” he added.

He published a bulletin on lessons that could be learned from investigations 
into five deaths and 33 complaints between 2008 and August 2016. There have 
been other cases since. An investigation has been launched afterJenny Swift, an 
inmate at HMP Doncaster, an all-male prison, was found dead in her cell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/transgender-woman-jenny-swift-found-dead-at-doncaster-prison>
 on 30 December.

About 80 transgender individuals are believed to be in jails in England and 
Wales.

Prisons house male and female prisoners separately and, under prison 
instructions in place during the period covered by the report, inmates would 
ordinarily be housed according to their legally recognised gender.

They were allowed to request a switch if they were “sufficiently advanced in 
the gender reassignment process”.

According to the guidance, prisons should consider moving a prisoner to the 
estate of the gender with which they identify. The report said: “Our 
investigations have found that this did not always happen in a proactive, 
timely, or consistent way.”

In a number of cases concerning claims of discrimination, bullying and 
harassment, the watchdog found that, while steps were taken to protect the 
prisoner, officials did not properly investigate the allegations raised.

Several complaints have also been received from transgender female prisoners 
about restrictions to gender expression that were based on security 
considerations, with most concerning clothing or makeup. In one case cited in 
the report, a prisoner complained that she had not been permitted to wear 
makeup for her security photo.

Regulations that guide the care and management of transgender prisoners in 
England and Wales are covered in a new Prison Service Instruction (PSI) issued 
in November.

Newcomen said the PSI “reflects the appropriately heightened awareness of 
transgender issues in prison – and in society as a whole”.
 