
17 June 1972: The break-in

Five men are arrested in the Democratic party's offices at the Watergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/watergate> complex in Washington, DC. They 
have thousands of dollars in cash and a notebook containing a White House phone 
number.

1 August: Deep Throat

Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein claim Nixon's 
re-election campaign gave one burglar $25,000. Thanks mainly to "Deep Throat" 
(exposed in 2005 as FBI official Mark Felt, who died last month), they go on to 
expose a Republican campaign of "dirty tricks" to disrupt the Democrats.

7 November: Nixon re-elected

Despite the scandal, Nixon wins a second term by a huge majority.

16 July 1973: The president's tapes 

At a hearing of the Senate's special Watergate Committee, a presidential 
assistant says "everything was taped" at the Oval Office, but Nixon rejects 
calls to release the recordings.

20 October: 'Saturday Night Massacre'

Throughout the summer, Nixon refused to hand over the tapes. A subpoena is 
issued but Nixon still refuses to hand over the tapes, and demands the sacking 
of Archibald Cox, the prosecutor responsible. The attorney-general resigns, as 
do other officials, but Cox is still dismissed. Reactions to this "Saturday 
Night Massacre" lead Nixon to declare on 17 November: "I'm not a crook!"

2 August 1974: Tapes released

In response to a Supreme Court order, Nixon finally releases the Oval Office 
tapes (edited transcripts, "expletives deleted", had been made public in late 
April) minus 18 and a half minutes "accidentally erased" by his secretary. On 
27 July, the House of Representatives had voted to begin formal moves to 
impeach him.

4 August: The smoking gun

One tape reveals Nixon apparently agreeing to a cover-up just six days after 
the break-in.

8 August: Nixon announces resignation

Nixon announces live on television that, for the good of the nation, he is 
stepping down. He resigns the following day. A month later, his successor, 
Gerald Ford, grants him a full pardon for any federal crimes he may have 
committed in office.
 