
"If you'd asked me 30 years ago whether I'd still be making parody albums, I'd 
have laughed,"Weird Al Yankovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/weird-al-yankovic> chortles. "And if you 
said the records would be selling more than ever, I'd have thought you were 
crazy."

The past few weeks, however, have been the busiest of Yankovic's platinum 
record-studded career. His latest album, Mandatory Fun, entered the US charts 
at No 1, his first ever, and the first comedy album to reach such heights for 
over half a century. When hefound out on an American talkshow 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/rachelzarrell/weird-al-gets-emotional-at-billboard-chart>
, his eyes welled up with joy.

How did he celebrate?

"I had a burrito."

It feels apt that Yankovic marked the event by eating, considering he 
originally made his name with food-based parody songs. There was My Bologna, 
his take on The Knack's My Sharona, and then his breakthrough song and video in 
1984, Eat It, a shot-for-shot parody of Michael Jackson's Beat It.

"People talk about overnight fame and usually that's an exaggeration, but in 
this case it really wasn't. MTV put the video on eight times a day, and it got 
very odd: as a person who was fairly anonymous his whole life, I'd suddenly be 
walking down the street and having people stare at me." To this day, one of the 
most thrilling-slash-weird moments of his thrilling-slash-weird career is from 
that era, when he was invited to a party in Beverly Hills for Paul McCartney, 
one of his great musical heroes. The publicist warned him beforehand that there 
was no chance he could meet McCartney. But, with the wiliness that would 
characterise his career, Yankovic squeezed his way through the crowd and tapped 
McCartney's shoulder.

"Oh, Weird Al!" cried McCartney, before turning to his wife Linda. "Look, 
honey, it's Weird Al!"

"I basically exploded on the spot," Yankovic happily recalls.

Yankovic, 54, writes original songs, as well as films and books, but he is 
best known for his parodies. His career raises two questions: first, how can a 
man who mocks others' songs be adored by fans and artists alike? And, second, 
how can he possibly stay relevant after three decades in the business? After 
all, many of the artists Yankovic first riffed off in the 80s have long ago 
slipped into irrelevancy, while he is bigger than ever.
 Yankovic performs White & Nerdy. Photograph: Chris Polk/FilmMagic 
The second question can be answered by looking at his strategy for Mandatory 
Fun. Earlier this month, Yankovic released one song and video a day for eight 
days across a range of what he calls "internet portals" (Yankovic is as 
comfortable talking web jargon as he is sharing celebrity anecdotes), including 
Vevo, Yahoo and YouTube. It was a move born out of necessity. After the release 
of his last album, Alpocalypse, his record label told him it couldn't afford to 
help him make videos for his next project. Any other artist would have raged at 
corporate stupidity and painted "slave" on his face. Yankovic, however, is 
famously one of the nicest men in the business, even if the description makes 
him hoot with laughter. "I hope I'm a decent guy," he objects, "but I think 
fame amplifies your personality and people's responses to it, so people are 
like, 'Wow, Al is the nicest guy in the world!'"

Instead of griping, he went to various internet sites and offered to give them 
the video exclusives if they would fund them. "It worked out well for 
everybody," he says, with some understatement. He has since been praised as "a 
savvy internet machine", although some have been baffled by his tactics (in a 
hilariously awkward interview, Yankovic patientlyhad to teach a Fox Business 
anchor how the internet works 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/07/17/weird-al-fox-business-stuart-varney_n_5595388.html>
.) "I'm just interested in following along with the zeitgeist and not getting 
left behind because I'm using some antiquated business model," he says. "I 
don't know why other people wouldn't do that as well."

The web could easily have killed Yankovic's career, rather than boosting it. 
When he started, he was pretty much the only musical parodist around, and 
certainly the only one with radio and MTV exposure. Now, he has to compete for 
attention with the thousands of amateurs who upload videos to YouTube every 
day. But Yankovic has nothing but praise for his imitators and says they make 
him better and force him to "not do the obvious thing". His parody of Blurred 
Lines, for example, Word Crimes, completely ignores the controversy of the 
song's original lyrics and instead mocks bad grammar – "and I think [Robin 
Thicke] was glad I went in that direction as well."

Yankovic always asks permission from the artists before parodying their songs, 
just out of courtesy. Because his versions, while always sharp and funny, are 
never mean, nearly everyone says yes (Prince is a notable exception). This time 
around both Pharrell and Iggy Azalea (whose songs Happy and Fancy have become, 
respectively, Tacky, mocking bad taste, and Handy, about the joys of DIY) both 
pronounced themselves "honoured" to be parodied – "which is extremely 
flattering", says Yankovic. Madonna was so keen to be parodied by Yankovic in 
the 80s that she came up with the title Like a Surgeon for Like a Virgin ("Like 
a surgeon, hey / Cuttin' for the very first time / Like a surgeon / Here's a 
waiver for you to sign"). Dave Grohl said Nirvana knew they had made it when 
Yankovic turned Smells Like Teen Spirit into Smells Like Nirvana, about how 
impossible it is to understand what the hell Cobain is singing.

Chamillionaire rightly said people knew he'd made it big when his song, 
Ridin', about police profiling black drivers, was brilliantly sent up as White 
and Nerdy, about black people correctly profiling white nerds ("Happy Days is 
my favourite theme song / I could sure kick your butt in a game of ping pong / 
I'll ace any trivia quiz you bring on / I'm fluent in JavaScript as well as 
Klingon!").

Michael Jackson was such a fan that he allowed Yankovic to use the original 
set from Bad for his version, Fat. And after Coolio saw Yankovic's take on 
Gangsta's Paradise, renamed Amish Paradise ("I've been milking and ploughing so 
long / That even Ezekiel thinks that my mind has gone"), he admitted that he'd 
been "stupid" to refuse permission initially.
 Yankovic as a Rambo knock-off in 1989’s UHF. Photograph: Moviestore 
Collection/REX 
Alfred Yankovic was born and raised in California, a "straight-A nerdy kid". 
He grew up reading and listening to as much "weird comedy" as he could, 
including Monty Python, Tom Lehrer, Shel Silverstein and Mad magazine, as well 
as learning the accordion (White and Nerdy could justly be described as pretty 
autobiographical).

"I was always fairly adult-minded and while I was passionate about music and 
comedy, it was such a fantasy to think I could make a living at that, I didn't 
even bother pursuing it," he says. Instead, he went to college to study 
architecture, only to realise in his third year he "wasn't particularly 
passionate about designing positive and negative space". So instead he started 
making parody songs – Another One Rides the Bus for Another One Bites the Dust, 
for example – that got radio play and, eventually, a record deal.

How did his parents react to their son's change of career direction?

"They were pretty much OK with it. They knew I was a bright kid – I wasn't 
going to do anything stupid, and somehow I'd land on my feet. But, you know, I 
certainly never anticipated that this would be" – and he makes a faux dramatic 
pause – "my life's path."

In 2001, Yankovic married Suzanne Krajewski; together they have an 11-year-old 
daughter, Nina. Ever since his album hit No 1, the family phone has been 
ringing almost round the clock. How has his daughter coped with all the fuss 
and early mornings?

"We're all kind of walking round like zombies. But my daughter is very excited 
about what's going on. She's always a supporter, and it's not like she's 
rolling her eyes saying, 'My dad's Weird Al.' It's just part of her reality: 
'That's my dad and that's what he does.'"

Yankovic never makes plans for the future – "but if I retire, it won't be of 
my own free will". And while he is happy about reaching No 1, for him the 
validation comes from the work itself: "I've come up with the job that is 
perfect for me and I can make a nickel out of it. To me, that's the true sign 
of success."

• Mandatory Fun is out now on RCA.
 