
Scotland's forwards, playing with the conviction and skill and backed up by 
the eccentric goalkicking of Peter Brown, forced Wales to display the full 
range of their talents at Murrayfield on Saturday before the Welsh finally 
triumphed by a point with a score of two goal, two tries and a penalty goal to 
two tries and four penalty goals, the lead having changed hands five times.

Against England an in the first half on Saturday Wales managed to afford to 
keep some of their most precious gifts in reserve. The forwards battled away 
impressively, the half-backs licked with great accuracy, and the whole side was 
alert for chances to run from second phase possession. But in the second half 
at Murrayfield, and especially in the last 20 minutes, the Welsh were compelled 
to throw away all restraint and to let Gareth Edwards and Barry John abandon 
themselves to every whim of their incomparable flair as natural runners. They 
are a wonderfully versatile pair adapting themselves to a kicking or running 
game with equal facility.

There was one episode in particular in the second half which showed them as 
great players. Barry John went away, stealthily weaving from a tapped penalty 
just as he had in the Lions' first Test in Pretoria in 1968. This time he 
received not a broken collarbone, but such close support at the check that 
Edwards saw a half-chance on the blind side. Edwards now showed his own 
particular ability to shrug off attempted tackles with sheer strength and 
vitality as he wrenched his way over for the try which took Wales ahead 11-6.

It was when the Scots, showing immense courage fought back from this position 
and took the lead that the Welsh had not only to unleash all the natural 
instincts of the backs but also to prove that their forwards had the stamina 
which some doubted at the time of the England match.

Though the Scottish front row won four heels to none against the put-in, and 
though Mike Roberts could not assert himself as he had against England, the 
Welsh forwards were going strongly at the last, and it was largely due to the 
grand line-out leaping of Delme Thomas, sometimes near the front of the line, 
that Wales were given the opportunities to win the match even after the Scots 
led 18-14.

The Scots too made use of their heads as well as their hearts. Against 
expectation they surrendered little ground in the tight scrums, and a widely 
spaced line-out discouraged interference with their jumpers. Towards the end 
they also had some success with four-man miniline-outs, and they had a 
well-rehearsed drill at tap penalties. Paterson kicked well from scrum-half and 
though Turner tended to kick at John Williams he was quick to see openings for 
his running.

Rea ran fast in scoring a try after a clearance kick by Bevan had been charged 
down but sometimes seemed unaware of supporters outside him, and Frame several 
times showed his powerful stride.

Smith, in trouble in dealing with some of the Welsh kicks, was seldom in a 
position to counter-attack or to come into the line. The Scottish backs, in 
fact, did not look an especially skilful lot. What kept Scotland in the game 
with a real chance of winning right up to the end was the uncompromising 
outlook of the side, together with Peter Brown's kicking.

Two low-trajectory, swerving penalty kicks by Brown, against one penalty goal 
by Barry John meant that Scotland were in the lead 6-3 as the end of a rather 
barren first half approached. It was only in the last minute of the half that 
the Welsh won a line-out on the right, John Williams came into the line, John 
Taylor scored a try by lending support on the inside, and John made the simple 
conversion, giving Wales a lead of 8-6.

After Edwards's try had made it 11-6 Peter Brown moved to near the front of a 
line-out for a Welsh throw-in near the Welsh line, and Carmichael forced his 
way over for a try round the front. Brown's third penalty goal put the Scots 
ahead at 12-11, and after Barry John had made it 14-12 with clever support of a 
full three-quarter movement from right to left, Brown's fourth penalty goal 
took Scotland to 15-14. Rea's try made it 18-14before another leap by Delme 
Thomas on the left gave the Welsh backs the chance to send Gerald Davies 
scampering over for a try on the right - 18-17to the Scots. With less than five 
minutes to go, John Taylor's nerveless left-footed conversion from well out on 
the right won the game for Wales.
 