
With stately poise, rock's first couple ascend the oak-panelled staircase, 
looking like no one else on earth. Meg White sports an elegant bus-red 
overcoat, matching high heels and A-line skirt and a bright, confident smile. 
Her hair is long, dark and bouffed up like a Fifties' beauty queen's.

Jack has also grown out his inky black hair to a wavy shoulder-length, his 
starkly contrasting facial pallor accentuated by Per sil-white make-up. 
Otherwise he is all red and black - red shirt, black strides, black jacket with 
rhinestone trim, and an astonishing pair of lace-ups in red crocodile skin.

There is an air of Addams Family-type American gothic about them, wonderfully 
complemented by their chosen surroundings - the top floor of the Whitney, a 
19th-century mansion in pink granite, which today houses the most opulent and 
stylish restaurant in Detroit.

The Whitney's ground-floor dining rooms resound with monied laughter and the 
clink of silver on bone china. Taking the stairs to the upper bar is like 
taking a journey yet further back in time, which even the local business 
tycoons can't afford. It's deserted up here, a little creepily so. The 
chandeliers spread a murky pseudo-candlelight, and, adding to the Hammer Horror 
vibe, everywhere is cobwebbed-up for Halloween.

Ever hyperactive, Jack shakes hands, hugs and quickly leads the way into one 
of several empty ante-chambers. He takes an armchair, orders a gin and tonic, 
leans back and laughs nervously. This is to be the White Stripes' first proper 
interview of 2004, and his first since he quit smoking in the summer. Through 
much of our two-hour conversation, he expends that surplus energy which he 
would previously channel into lighting up and flicking ash by wringing and 
twisting one of the restaurant's linen serviettes.

'I didn't want to stop,' he states, rather balefully, 'but my voice was 
getting really, really bad.' He explains how he first noticed his inability to 
hit the top notes in his vocal range while recording with Loretta Lynn, the 
69-year-old country and western siren, whose album, Van Lear Rose, White 
produced in the spring.

Unusually for a new act, such diversionary side-projects have littered the 
Stripes' path since their global breakthrough in April 2003 with their fourth 
album, Elephant. Propelled by one riff - that furious, descending sequence of 
chords at the core of 'Seven Nation Army' - Elephant has sold 3.5 million 
copies worldwide - which feels unthinkable even to those like John Peel who 
recognised Jack's extravagant talents on their early LPs for the independent 
label Sympathy for the Record Industry.

Like Nirvana and Radiohead before them, the White Stripes are the key band of 
their time, and have brought about an aesthetic sea change in rock. On TV, in 
their wake, there are adverts soundtracked by Luddites past and present such as 
the Sonics and Detroit Cobras. Even U2 have turned into a garage band. In a 
nutshell, after disappearing down a virtual cul-de-sac of computerisation, 
ProTools and stultifying post-production for 10 years or so, rock has 
rediscovered its humanity and started living for the moment again.

To have sparked all this is remarkable enough, until you consider that the 
White Stripes have been far from ubiquitous. When R.E.M. unveiled their latest 
album campaign last month, an itinerary was issued whereby you can pretty much 
say where they'll be every day and night well into 2006. Jack and Meg, by 
contrast, have moved in very mysterious ways. In support of Elephant, they have 
done but a handful of press interviews per territory, and toured mainly, and 
sparingly, in the States and Britain.

This rare audience coincides with the release of a live concert DVD, Under 
Blackpool Lights, which was shot over two nights at the Empress Ballroom during 
their last UK tour, in January. It was filmed - extremely unusually in the 
digital age - using six hand-held Super-8 cameras. Operatives had to change 
reels every three minutes, with no live feedback to the director. The film 
mirrors perfectly the wire-walking energy of the White Stripes live experience 
- and on that particular tour, they were truly ablaze.

The last time I ran into Jack and Meg was that icy weekend on Blackpool 
seafront. They said a hearty hello, and were quickly bundled off by their 
security. They'd evidently hit a certain pain threshold. Jack had a court case 
hanging over him after a much-publicised fist-fight with Jason Stollsteimer, 
his one-time friend from fellow Detroit rockers the Von Bondies. After those 
dates, they more or less disappeared.

The couple sipping drinks at the Whitney seem much refreshed. Meg talks with 
far less reluctance than ever before, enthusing about their appearance in Jim 
Jarmusch's recent film, Coffee and Cigarettes. 'There's nothing I'm doing these 
days,' she sunnily confides, 'that I ever thought I was going to do.'

As ever, though, Jack dominates. Increasingly prone to pessimism and darkness, 
he seldom dresses in candy-coloured red and white, which, he always maintained, 
symbolised anger and innocence. Instead, red and black - anger and death. Never 
a man to sit around whittling when there's work to be done, his conversation 
frequently spills over into edgy laughter - usually expressing disbelief rather 
than amusement. It's been that kind of year for the White Stripes.

 Andrew Perry: You said in a recent webchat that the past 12 months have been 
the best of your life. Really?

 Jack White: There's been no warning for anything that's happened. Certain 
things just popped up. It's all been, like, all of a sudden I'm producing 
Loretta Lynn's album. There was no big board meeting, it just happened. You 
assume something like that would be a bigger deal. But then, when there's no 
planning, you know it's gonna be good.

 AP: Did you know, as soon as you'd written and recorded it, that 'Seven 
Nation Army' was going to be the big one for you?

 JW: No, it didn't feel that way at all. Nobody even wanted to put it out as 
the single. Everyone wanted 'There's no Home For you Here'. I kept saying, 
[reasonably] 'I really think it should be 'Seven Nation Army'.' Dave Swanson 
[from Detroit band, Whirlwind Heat] actually came down and filmed us while we 
were recording it. He filmed 20 seconds of us recording that song, and then 
stopped, and the next thing he filmed was hours later - like, it wasn't that 
important!

 AP: How does the writer come to feel about 'their song'? 

 JW: It feels good. If people wanna come to our show and hear their jam - 
that's fine! At one of the festivals, we went on for an encore, and the crowd 
was chanting it. Ben Blackwell [Dirtbombs drummer, Jack's cousin] said, 'That's 
the only time I ever heard a crowd chant a riff!'

If it connects with people, then we're succeeding, I guess. It's hard to 
connect with people in a conversation, never mind write a song that they enjoy, 
or tell a joke that they think is funny. People don't make up their own jokes. 
They tell jokes that other people tell them, once the joke has proven itself, 
because other people laughed at it. It's different for me to make one up that 
you'll laugh at. I thought of a joke about that today, What's black and white 
and red all over?

 AP: A newspaper? 

 JW [barely able to control his laughter]: My brain! I thought it was funny! 
Ha ha ha!

 AP: Is the point of Elephant that you've proved you can make a world-beating 
record in two weeks flat, without recourse to hi-tech equipment?

 JW: The whole point is not for us to brag about it, but to say, 'Look, you 
can still do it. No one ever said you couldn't'. Think about it: every time 
there's a list of the 100 greatest records of all time, all those albums were 
recorded in two days. Hardly any of them took a year, I'll tell you. In this 
day and age, I think it's important that people know that. It's pathetic in 
America. Everyone thinks they can have whatever they want. They're really 
spoiled and gluttonous; they always want more and bigger and better and all 
that jazz, and the fastest and the newest toy - and it's not necessary. People 
in America, especially, don't want anyone to tell them that there's any sort of 
rules, or limitations. They don't want, 'You can't do that', or, 'You can only 
have this'. Everyone wants to eat their dessert first.

 AP: You've often explained that Meg's basic drumming and your red/white/black 
uniform provide you with artistic license to play the blues - 'We're just kids, 
we don't know any better', you said. Are you surprised that you've managed to 
sell what is really an art concept to such a massive audience?

 JW: I'm always surprised when anything about the band connects. But I love 
the fact that it's hard for people to understand. We've said before that it's 
always been a great thing to get certain people to go away thinking, 'Oh dear, 
she can't play the drums!' 'Fine, if you think it's all a gimmick, go away!' It 
weeds out people who wouldn't care anyway.

 AP: Has it been hard to defend the position that you're 'just kids' when a 
lot of the stuff that's happened to you recently has been 'adult': the fight 
with Jason Stollsteimer; now engineer Jim Diamond is suing you... On paper, 
perhaps, not the happiest year after all?

 JW: It's the year that we found out who and who weren't our friends. It's 
like growing up and realising that the kid you go to high school with really 
isn't your friend, but your next door neighbour who's twice as old as you - you 
can learn a lot from them. Like the difference between me and Loretta Lynn 
laughing on a front porch, drinking a beer together, and Jim Diamond suing us 
saying that he produced De Stijl [second Stripes LP] - an album I recorded in 
our living room by myself! [laughs for five seconds] Some people, you realise 
that they're looking at it differently than you're looking at it. Fame and 
money, that is. That can only fall on their own heads in the end, not us. 
Because we love everybody, and if you're not out to hurt anybody, then you 
won't get hurt in the end. The truth is the truth. Meg is true. Meg has never 
done anything to anybody. Ha ha ha! How can someone like Jim Diamond sue Meg?

 AP: You must regret the way your disagreement with Jason Stollsteimer 
unfolded.

 JW: He did all that to promote his new album. That's what it was all about. 
What happens to someone who uses people in the end? His album sells two 
thousand copies or whatever, and nobody's going to care next year. He's forever 
gonna be known by his own exploitation. All I can do is defend my own honour. 
He pulled a contact lens out of his eye that he'd left in for a year, and he's 
trying to blame me for it. Such a manipulator! I really feel sorry for the 
people in that band. You don't know what it's like being on tour with a band, 
and they're all complaining and crying. That guy is a provoker, a really bad 
person, but the way I see it, the more I talk about it, the more he gets what 
he wants.

WHEN I LAST VISITED JACK AND MEG IN  Detroit 18 months ago, Jack drove me 
around in the seven-seater white Dodge van which still bore the grime of its 
many years' service as the White Stripes' tour bus. We dropped in on Brian 
Muldoon, the fortysomething upholsterer with whom, in the mid-Nineties, Jack 
had served his apprenticeship in both furniture-making and rock music. We 
visited the workshop where, with Muldoon on drums, the two of them would 
rehearse after hours. Muldoon soon opted for domesticity and children over an 
itinerant life in rock'n'roll. He quietly told me that his successor at the 
drumkit, Meg, had made a far tougher decision in 1999 by sticking with the 
White Stripes, even though her marriage to Jack - 'which I guess nobody's 
really denying anymore', he said- was on the rocks. (Although Jack still refers 
to Meg as his 'big sister' at every show they play, an old wedding certificate 
has been produced which reveals they were once married.)

In subsequent months, life seems to have become immeasurably more complicated 
for the pair of them. Their publicist warned me that Jack would almost 
certainly terminate the interview at any mention of his relationship with 
Hollywood actress Renée Zellweger, which is ongoing and steady, by all accounts 
bar tabloid ones. Media distortion infuriates him. In an effort to move on to a 
happy topic, I mention his recent appearance onstage with Bob Dylan - surely it 
was the apex of his career to perform one of his own songs, 'Ball and Biscuit', 
on home turf, with his all-time hero? He seizes up. 'I don't really know what 
to say about it,' he says, 'maybe some other day.' Meg intervenes with her own 
critical appraisal of Dylan's recent autobiography.

'I liked it a lot,' she gushes, before continuing, pointedly, 'he manages to 
maintain his personal life, and not talk about what he doesn't want to, but at 
the same time you get a lot of insight into where he was coming from, and how 
he was thinking about things. People were prying into his stuff all of the 
time, trying to make him into something he didn't think he was. He just wanted 
to do his thing, not to be considered the voice of a generation - like they 
owned him, you know? They wouldn't leave him alone, he got no privacy.'

 AP: Dylan has fought the cult of celebrity from the outset. Is that what 
makes him such a hero for you?

 JW: I guess I like that about him. It seems like everybody today is so 
available - ready, willing and available for anything, to be part of a reality 
show at the drop of a hat. It seems like nobody has any dignity any more. In 
maybe the last 40 or 50 years, something's really been lost worldwide. They 
just don't want you to have dignity. It pisses them off. It's like what I was 
saying before: they don't wanna be told that there's rules. Like, there's no 
possible way that you could be so dignified, they have to find out something 
about you that makes you undignified. I mean, you tell me, who's got dignity 
nowadays who's a celebrity? It's rare, very rare.

 AP: Dignity and celebrity are two words that don't really belong in the same 
sentence.

 JW:  Yeah, but they used to. Frank Sinatra was dignified. We don't have a 
Frank Sinatra, or a Patti Page nowadays. What do we have? Ashlee Simpson 
instead of Patti Page! I mean, look at those people - like Paris Hilton! Who 
are all these skanks, man? Little girls are looking up to these girls, and it's 
so gross. Those girls have no dignity at all, and parents are letting their 
kids dress up like those skanks. But what else have they got? What are the 
other choices? Oh well, ha ha ha [laughing angrily at the folly]! Somebody had 
the nerve to ask me if I wanted to play guitar on Lindsay Lyons's album! Ha ha 
ha! She's another one of those 16-year-old actresses, and she's making an 
album! Like, 'NO!' Ha ha ha!

 AP: Your acceptance speech at last year's MTV Europe Awards was simply a 
dedication to Lonnie Donegan. You do seem to be saying, very often, that things 
were done better in the good old days...

 JW: Well, it's hard to like anything these days. It's hard to look forward. 
Everybody assumes, when they wake up in the morning, if they have a question, 
it will get answered - they have the internet. Everyone's cellphone is also a 
camera and a computer and blah blah blah. It's all in one thing. So, what do we 
have to look forward to?

When it all comes down to it, what I really want is folk music to still be 
around. It's a shame because the culture worldwide is becoming so affluent and 
so computerised, that all of that's really gonna go away. A skiffle group is 
never gonna happen ever again. At times, we [the White Stripes] almost ignore 
our own music. If we have the stage, we've gotta play Son House's music, 
because there's nobody to keep it alive. We don't wanna be known as the band 
that's conducting music instruction class. But that's all everyone talks about 
- why MTV's not good, why radio's not good. And the answer is really because 
whatever you want to call it - blues, country, folk - isn't around any more. 
That's why everyone's so mad, and I'm tired of it being my job to bring it back.

 AP: You suggested earlier that it's not a good time to be American. Has it 
been tempting to put your voice to anti-war/anti-Bush sentiments?

 JW: It's gross, really gross, because it feels like, all the politics put 
aside, it's gross that people could be so easily persuaded.

 MW: It's a rough time. I haven't seen people be so obsessed and upset in my 
lifetime - you know, about everything. My dad always told me, they should 
always have a third choice on the ballot, like 'none of the above', then if 
enough people picked that, they'd have to get new candidates.

 JW: I guess it's the same way in England too. When you belong to a political 
party, it doesn't matter if it's a monkey or Albert Einstein running, you vote 
for him because he's a part of that party. It doesn't matter what the truth is. 
It goes across the board. I mean, don't people want the truth? Why wouldn't you 
want the truth? About anything?

 MW: Because you can be lazy if you don't know the truth. 

 AP: You used to fly the flag for Detroit as a place where the downtrodden 
gathered together and provided an alternative. Has that all turned sour for you 
now?

 JW: I don't yearn for this town any more. It's so decrepit, and the 
government's so corrupt, and it's getting in my way more than helping me. It's 
hard to be comfortable any more. What I used to love about it was, we could 
play drums on the front lawn and the cops wouldn't even show up, but now I 
don't care any more about that. I don't wanna play on the front lawn any more.

 AP: Have you thought of moving? 

 JW: I might, actually. There are plenty of places prettier than this place, 
maybe down south. That's the real America, I think. That's the last bastion of 
culture in the country, where people really have American culture. There's 
parts of Appalachia that still maintain those mountain songs, those feelings 
that convey Americana. I don't think you can get that in any major city ever 
again. It's gone forever. I read old books about Detroit from the Twenties and 
Thirties, and it was such a beautiful city, but it's been destroyed. You think 
how wonderful it could've been if it had just stayed that way.

 MW: I discovered the other day what the problem is. 

 JW: What? 

 MW: It's in this book I was reading. Apparently, there's a little red demon 
dwarf that haunts the city, and before every major bad thing that's happened, 
it's appeared to somebody. Last time, he appeared in a Cadillac.

 JW: Really? The little red demon of Detroit? Perfect... 

WITNESSED FROM WITHIN THEIR OWN childlike prism, perhaps all the White 
Stripes' problems melt away into fairytales. The band itself - this duo who, 
amid all the talk of punch-ups, lawsuits and cultural decay, remain the world's 
most exciting, intriguing and delicate rock'n'roll band - are seemingly in rude 
health.

When I first interviewed him in November 2001, Jack put the band's lifespan at 
'another one or two albums'. It seemed, at that point, that his mind was 
beginning to wander beyond the confines of the two-piece garage band at hand. 
Reminded of that statement for the umpteenth time, he animatedly reveals how he 
and Meg played through some new songs together the other day. 'It felt 
different to me,' he says, 'and good, and moving forward. We were trucking 
along, you know?'

He says that one possible plan is to record them at singer-songwriter Brendan 
Benson's house in Detroit, once he gets off tour in December. 'We'll go in 
there for a week or something, and then I guess it'll probably come out next 
year.

'I'm not bored with it yet at all,' he continues. 'I'm excited by the band. It 
really excites me. But it wouldn't excite me if there weren't those 
limitations, if we weren't living in that box, if we weren't trapped. Once that 
goes away, then I'll know that it's not worth doing it any more.'

In their curious state of bondage, Jack escorts Meg back down the stairs, 
picks up his car from the valet, lets her in the passenger side and - equal 
parts gentleman and boy racer - speeds off into the night.

The life and times

· Jack White was born John Anthony Gillis in 1975, one of 10 brothers and 
sisters.

· Jack first met Meg in a Detroit café bar in 1994. Jack was a trainee 
upholsterer at the time, Meg worked as a shop assistant and barmaid. They 
reportedly married two years later, in front of a small gathering of family and 
friends at a Detroit farm. Jack took Meg's surname.

· The White Stripes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thewhitestripes> played 
their first gig in Detroit in 1997, only two months after Meg started playing 
the drums. Their first single, 'Let's Shake Hands', was released on Italy 
Records later that year.

· They recorded their self-titled debut in the attic of Jack's parents house 
in 1999.

· Jack and Meg were divorced in 2000. When they first rose to fame, they were 
rumoured to be brother and sister, until the marriage and divorce certificates 
were circulated on the web in 2002.

· John Peel bought a copy of White Blood Cells in Groningen, Holland in 2001. 
He raved about the band on his radio show.

· In 2002, Jack met Renée Zellweger on the set of Cold Mountain, and the two 
embarked on an on-off relationship.

· Jack was charged with aggravated assault after punching Von Bondies frontman 
Jason Stollsteimer (whose debut album Jack produced) in a Detroit club in 2002.

Read the full transcript of the White Stripes exclusive article here 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/omm/story/0,13887,1349947,00.html>.
 