
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> shopping with 
my mother as a teenager in the 1980s: a fraught affair, both of us in our 
default roles. Me, disabled, a wheelchair user and mum, my primary carer. 
There’s no social care, no support. My mum, a cheerful, seldom sulky woman, 
always did her best for me but we got stuck. Me feeling the angst of 
obligation, seamed with guilt, and my mum gritty in her duty to my needs.

Our shopping relationship attained new levels of mutual frustration at 
Christmas. Especially when, bitten by the punk revolution, I took to presenting 
myself in a defiance of multicoloured hair extensions, goth makeup and a 
preponderance of black. At one point, long-suffering mummy insisted on walking 
behind me rather than with me, as I cruised forward in my mobility scooter.

A concert featuring my brother was a true Christmas gift | Rhiannon Lucy 
Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/17/concert-brother-love-christmas>
Christmas at home in the council estate ghetto of the otherwise well-heeled 
Chalfonts in Buckinghamshire was not exactly one of shiny baubles and carols 
round the gas fire. As I grew older I retained a sense of missing out on 
something even though, post-punk, I espoused a hatred of Christmas and all its 
consumerist horror. Yet, always contrary, this was the time of my love affair 
with the mail order catalogue – Marshall Ward, Littlewoods, Ace. I indulged my 
urge to buy and not worry about paying immediately.

At a time when I had no life and lived in a downstairs bedroom, with the 
mother/daughter; carer/cared-for roles unchanging, the rebel within me was 
fighting to find a way out. Meanwhile, I assuaged my conscience, buying 
Christmas gifts from activist groups – CND, Greenpeace, International Fund for 
Animal Welfare. The latter had an endless range of baby seal offerings – cute 
festive pressies for my only two friends. Not so cute when my cheques bounced. 
And mum going into a righteous silence all through the removal of the 
decorations.

When I managed to move to east London I had a stab at living independently. In 
those days, this meant literally attempting to do everything for yourself. An 
approach that broke down rather quickly when you consider I couldn’t wrap 
myself in warm clothes, let alone wrap any presents. My first serious boyfriend 
was no real help to the conundrum of Christmas shopping. He avoided it at all 
costs.

I took to buying the odd gift surreptitiously when we ventured out for food, 
although the game was up the year I tried to buy five sets of Snoopy stationery 
along with the cheese and baked beans.

Then a revelation. A change so fundamental to my Christmas shopping that I can 
never overestimate its impact. The arrival of Independent Living (IL), as an 
ideology and a new way of receiving “care” support. Started in the US, at 
Berkeley, University of California, by disabled students, once it crossed the 
Atlantic disabled activists in the UK realised it was revolutionary – that 
independence is about choice, control and facilitation, primarily through 
giving instructions to another person.

Debbie was funny, a similar age to me and took it for granted I would want to 
have choice in shopping

IL brought the development of the Independent Living Fund 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independent_Living_Fund> and the concept of 
direct payments, which enabled disabled people to manage their own needs: “What 
I want, when I want it.” An effort towards an equality in daily living that 
non-disabled people can take for granted.

Don’t get me wrong – it’s great having a personal assistant you have chosen to 
wash your bottom, make you a cuppa, get you out of bed. But in 1995, in my 30s, 
here was the ultimate. Christmas shopping in Walthamstow market with Debbie, my 
first true PA, recruited once my direct payment funding came through.

There are men yelling “pound-a-bowl” and “reeeeeeal Christmas trees, only a 
fiver!”, amid the East End hustle and bustle. And there I was, in a place where 
I could indulge my too-long frustrated, inner Christmas shopper – the big kid 
who has never browsed 100 Christmas fairies or flicked through the Christmas 
jumpers on 10 different stalls; choosing the very best one for mum.

Debbie came from Nottinghamshire. She was funny, immensely competent, a 
similar age to me and took it for granted that I would want to have choice in 
shopping, festive or otherwise.

On shopping trips she was my arms and legs, doing the flicking and packing the 
goodies into bags. That the only boundaries were ones set by myself – and my 
bank balance – ignited a lifelong excitement about Christmas shopping. It 
connected me to a sense of free adulthood, to the simple joy of choosing. When 
you’ve never had this for most of your developing years, it’s sweet and always 
will be.
 