
There is a new tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/20/brighton-tower-tickets-on-sale-british-airways-i360>
 in Brighton. The architects and backers are very pleased and have called it a 
“monument to British engineering”. I-sore360, Brighton’s kebab, doughnut on a 
stick, cock and ring… It opened last Thursday to a selection of nicknames and 
mixed reviews.

The official name is the British Airways i360 Tower. “The ‘i’ stands for 
intelligence, innovation and integrity,” says David Marks, of Marks Barfield, 
architects behind the London Eye and this new seaside stick.

At a time when a “hard-working” Sussex commuter cannot get a train between the 
county and London without upheaval, delay, overcrowding and cancellations (and 
now face afive-day strike <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-36987055>) 
while paying ticket costs that are rising faster than a spring tide, a boast 
that £46m of government loan can buy you a 162-metre metal chimney seems a 
little inappropriate.

A more fitting tribute to British engineering from Sussex commuters might be a 
Southern Rail train carriage with a pole up its fenders and a £4,108 season 
ticket receipt artfully dangling from one static wheel. Because while it is 
great that people in the i360 pod will be able to see for 26 miles, sadly 
they’ll struggle to travel by a well-run railway. Coastal towns in the UK, with 
their crumbling infrastructure and social ills, need more to transform their 
futures than sparkly new vanity projects.

Like it, love it or happily push it off a cliff, the i360 is undeniably the 
world’s tallest moving observation tower – a flagpole with a glass pod that 
goes up and down while people look at the scenery. People like a bit of scenery 
and it’s hoped that will translate into profits.

To be fair, it’s leaving the majority of Brighton and Hove’s supercool 
citizens unbothered. Fewer than 1,500 signed a petition against it. Some like 
it. Haters, many of whom frequent local paper theArgus’s 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk> comment pages, are not known as a positive bunch at 
the best of times. ‘“Bold, new architecture?” wrote one. “It’s a pole with a 
doughnut that crawls up and down it with the speed of an arthritic OAP stripper 
and is about as attractive to look at.” But then last year they hated a new 
footbridge in nearby Shoreham with the kind of ferocity others keep for 
paedophiles.

Brighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton> was made by the railway, it 
depends on the railway. If that doesn’t work, no amount of tourist attractions 
will help, any more than the floral clocks that town councils went wild for in 
the 70s stopped people going to Spain.

When the first trains drew in from London in the 1840s, journey times were one 
hour 45 minutes. Many a parent missing yet another bedtime or office worker 
getting yet another bollocking for lateness envies that today. With Southern 
Rail’s dispute with its own workers meaning constant cancellations, revised 
timetables and slow-running trains on decrepit tracks, commuters face nightmare 
journeys with standing room only and have been for months now.

The tower’s £46m would not otherwise go to build a hospital or help the kids 
on Brighton’s deprived estates. The money is from a government pot for projects 
expected to bring in revenue or regeneration. But regeneration has to start 
with lives. Railways, childcare costs, housing. These make up the real slippery 
pole troubling ordinary people. Not schemes to pick their pockets in their 
leisure time.
 