
Whole-life sentences can still be imposed on serious and serial offenders 
despite objections from theEuropean court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights>, the court of 
appeal has been told.

Existing provisions for considering inmates for release on compassionate 
grounds are sufficient to meet Strasbourg's demand for intermittent reviews of 
whole-life sentences, James Eadie QC said.

His comments came in applications before the court of appeal concerning the 
prison terms of two murderers, which have been seen as a test of whether 
parliament or the ECHR constitutes the ultimate legal authority. A judgment by 
the Strasbourg court last yearruled that whole-life terms were a breach of 
human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/jul/09/whole-life-jail-sentences-without-review-breach-human-rights>
 because they did not allow for any prospect of release or of the sentence 
being reviewed.

Eadie, appearing on behalf of the attorney general, Dominic Grieve QC, told 
the court there was already provision for release under domestic law.

"Any prisoner can approach the secretary of state for release on compassionate 
grounds," he explained. "The secretary of state is bound to give it careful 
consideration."

Whole-life sentences themselves were not said by the ECHR to be incompatible 
with human rights law, Eadie added. The decision in Strasbourg "does not render 
the imposition of a whole-life order manifestly excessive or wrong in 
principle".

UK courts only had to "take into account" Strasbourg rulings and if it was 
thought those judges were mistaken they could be asked to reconsider their 
decision, he said.

Because of the sensitivity of the case five judges sat on the court of appeal 
to consider the applications. The lord chief justice, Lord Thomas, sat 
alongside Lord Justice Leveson, president of Queen's Bench Division; Lady 
Justice Hallett; Lord Justice Treacy, who heads the sentencing council; and Mr 
Justice Burnett.

The appeal relates to two cases. Ian McLoughlin, 55, a convicted double killer,
murdered again last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/21/convicted-killer-admits-graham-buck-murder>
 when a person went to the aid of a neighbour. Lee Newell, 45, also has two 
convictions for murder. In 1989, he strangled a woman after tricking his way 
into her house. Last year heasphyxiated a fellow inmate in a prison cell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/sep/23/prisoners-life-murdering-child-killer>
.

Newell is appealing against a whole-life sentence imposed on him last year. 
Lawyers for the attorney general are arguing that McLoughlin's sentence of 40 
years was too lenient and should have been a whole-life sentence.

On behalf of Newell, Joe Stone QC, said a whole-life term was "manifestly 
excessive". If he was given a 40-year minimum it would give him hope and the 
"flickering possibility that one day, when he is 85, he will be released from 
prison". Stone added: "This defendant must maintain the right to hope that one 
day he will have the right to atone."

McLoughlin was not given a whole-life sentence at his trial last year because 
the judge took into account the ruling by Strasbourg that such sentences in 
their current form in England and Wales, without a dedicated review mechanism, 
violated article 3 of the European convention on human rights, which outlaws 
torture, inhuman or degrading treatment.

McLoughlin, the judges heard, was aware of the proceedings but did not want 
any argument or representations to be made on his behalf. Barrister Kevin 
McCartney told the court McLoughlin did not want to "act in any way that would 
cause any further distress to the deceased's family". He was not present in 
court or via videolink.

The appeal had been due to hear another application from Matthew Thomas, 53, 
who murdered a woman he met at a night shelter in 2003. Thomas had previous 
convictions for rape and robbery. During the hearing, however, it emerged that 
he had not been given a whole-life sentence but a minimum term of 16 years.

Judgment was reserved. Speaking after the hearing, Grieve said: "This hearing 
was about preserving the principle that whole-life orders can be imposed for 
particularly heinous and serious crimes. I asked the court of appeal to look 
again at the sentence handed down to Ian McLoughlin as I believed the 
sentencing judge mistakenly took into account a decision of the European court 
of human rights which is inconsistent with the domestic legislation and case 
law by which he was bound.

"I believed the seriousness of this case required a whole-life order because 
McLoughlin had a previous conviction for manslaughter in 1984, a conviction for 
murder in 1992, and because the murder for which he was being sentenced was 
committed in the course of robbery."
 