
Murderers and those convicted of serious offences should still be given 
whole-life sentences in British courts, the government has told theEuropean 
court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights>.

In its latest act of defiance against the Strasbourg court's rulings, UK 
ministers have said the government will not grant inmates the right to a review 
of lifetime terms of imprisonment imposed on them.

The formal note sent to the Council of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/council-of-europe>, which oversees enforcement 
of ECHR judgments, suggests that the issue could become as protracted and 
entangled with Eurosceptic, political sentiment as the long-running row over 
prisoner voting.

The next move is likely to involve British ministers trying to persuade their 
European counterparts on the Council ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that the Strasbourg court is 
exceeding its jurisdiction by becoming too prescriptive about reshaping the 
fine detail of every country's criminal justice system.

The government was under an obligation to respond within six months to a 
decision made last July by the upper chamber of the ECHR that whole-life 
tariffs given to three convicted killers – Jermy Bamber, Douglas Vintner and 
Peter Moore – breached their human rights. The court concluded that whole-life 
terms without any prospect of release or review amount to inhuman and degrading 
treatment.

The key section of the UK note sent to Strasbourg merely states that: 
"Consideration as to what steps may be necessary as a result of the judgment is 
currently under way. No final decisions on those issues have yet been taken."

But it also alludes to the fact that later this month the UK's court of appeal 
will consider sentences imposed on four others in which lawyers for the 
government will argue that those convicted of serious offences can still be 
given whole-life terms without the prospect of release.

In a separate statement, a Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: "The 
government has responded to the Council of Europe, noting the court's judgment. 
We are clear that this raises important issues, on which parliament and the 
public has strong views, and that our response should not be rushed.

"The government remains firmly of the view that whole-life tariffs are wholly 
justified in the most heinous cases, and that they should continue to be 
available to the courts. We will be strenuously arguing in the court of appeal 
[in other related cases] that a judge can and must impose a whole life order in 
cases such as these."

This stance is at odds with comments made last week by David Cameron in which 
he endorsed US-style prison terms of a hundred years or more. His intervention 
implied that the government would defy the spirit of the proposed reforms while 
accepting the ECHR's precise legal requirements.

One of the whole-life cases to be heard at the court of appeal later this 
month involves Mark Bridger, 47, who was sentenced in May last year for the 
murder of five-year-old April Jones. His lawyers maintain that following the 
ECHR ruling his prison term is illegal.

Another case has been brought by the attorney general, Dominic Grieve QC, who 
is due to appeal against a 40-year sentence imposed at the Old Bailey last 
October on Ian McLoughlin, 55 – who admitted killing a man in Hertfordshire 
while on day release from prison – on the grounds that it is unduly lenient. It 
will be argued that a whole-life tariff would have been more appropriate.

The Conservative party is due to publish a pre-election manifesto on its 
policy towards the ECHR in the coming weeks. It is expected to say that a 
future Tory administration after 2015 would remove Strasbourg's ability to 
overrule the UK's supreme court.
 