
Australian house prices rose at a solid pace in 2016, defying many 
expectations for moderate price falls –including mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/economists-predicted-house-prices-would-stabilise-in-2016-but-the-opposite-happened>
.

It seems the error of my forecast was to misread the policy approach to 
regulatory restrictions on investor lending which, as it turned out, was limp 
and ineffectual.

For years, smart people have been arguing for a tightening in prudential 
controls on lending to cool the housing market. The people who regulate the 
mortgage market have, however, taken only baby steps to address the issue and 
have failed to cool it. Investor loans have been roaring along since the middle 
of 2016.

Economists predicted house prices would stabilise in 2016, but the opposite 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/economists-predicted-house-prices-would-stabilise-in-2016-but-the-opposite-happened>
Another important factor behind the resilience in house price growth was the 
shock interest rate cuts from theReserve Bank of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reserve-bank-of-australia> during 
2016 as it reacted to the surprising slump in inflation and wages growth. These 
low interest rates fuelled extra borrowing capacity, some of which fed into 
house prices.

Oversupply from the apartment construction boom, which I also thought would 
start to bite in 2016, looks to be more of an issue for 2017 even though 
apartment prices fell in most major cities in the latter part of 2016. Prices 
for freestanding houses were particularly strong.

No sensible observer of the Australian housing market believes the regulators 
have it “right” when it comes to conditions attached to investor lending. Just 
about anyone with a few assets and a half decent income can get a loan for 
investment purposes despite the pretence of “tighter” lending conditions. The 
negative gearing rules only add to such demand.

While that remains the case and while there is strong demand relative to the 
growth in housing supply, price pressures will be skewed to the upside.

With 2016 behind us, there are grounds to think that 2017 could be the year of 
the great house price moderation. While the Reserve Bank appears to have 
official interest rates on hold, the sharp jump in bond yields over the past 
few months is feeding into bank funding costs. This higher cost of funds has 
already filtered through to higher fixed-mortgage interest rates which, 
unchecked, will erode housing demand.

Also acting as a likely dampener for demand is the sponginess in the labour 
market, with wages growth hovering at record lows, full-time employment 
sluggish and the unemployment rate high. Potential purchasers of dwellings, 
already constrained by high levels of debt, have only limited ability to add to 
their leverage, at least in the near term.

And then there is dwelling supply. Building approvals reached record levels in 
2016 and, once those approvals turn into finished dwellings ready for 
owner-occupiers or renters to move into, there is likely to be excess supply in 
several major cities. This will, at least in the short to medium term, 
undermine prices.

Coalition policy has gone badly wrong and the RBA needs to cut interest rates 
| Stephen Koukoulas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/coalition-policy-has-gone-badly-wrong-and-the-rba-needs-to-cut-interest-rates>
While supply and demand remain the dominant long-run drivers of house prices, 
interest rate changes, macroeconomic conditions and prudential changes can all 
have a short-term impact.

The supply and demand dynamics are pointing to a moderation in house prices, 
as are changes to interest rates and what looks to be a soft economy with a 
weak labour market. 2017 is set to be the year of weaker house price growth, 
perhaps even price falls.

If the moderation is orderly, without much in the way of forced selling, it 
will actually be good news for the economy. Some prudential risks will ease, 
affordability will further improve and the housing market will move towards 
balance.

The government and regulators could help to lock this in if they are bold 
enough to tighten lending and tax rules to reduce some of the investor demand 
which has, in recent times at least, distorted the market.
 