
The noise cascaded down from the west end of Madison Square Garden. It started 
in low. Then it started to grow.Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> had just emerged from a 
tunnel on to the arena floor during the undercard of the middleweight title 
fight between Gennady Golovkin and David Lemieux, prompting a crescendo of boos 
from the crowd of more than 20,000 spectators that stuffed the midtown 
Manhattan arena to capacity. It was October 2015, four months after the 
real-estate mogul and reality TV star had announced his presidential bid with a 
speech that established his nativist bona fides by branding Mexicans as rapists 
and criminals. Now he had turned up to watch a sport largely populated and 
supported by the minorities his candidacy would seem to marginalise.

Trump made a half-circuit of the arena floor as the din grew to earsplitting 
volumes and turned into another tunnel almost immediately. As he made his way 
to the locker room of Golovkin, a Kazakh whose career has soared to new heights 
since coming to America and settling in Los Angeles, an aide straight-facedly 
reassured him the reaction from the crowd was “50-50”.

Sport has always served as a mirror of American society, from the way Jackie 
Robinson’s penetration of Major League Baseball’s colour barrier pushed forward 
integration to how Muhammad Ali’s conscientious objection swayed national 
perceptions of the Vietnam war. That’s no different today as the reactions 
within US sport to Trump’s ascent to the presidency, with his inauguration on 
Friday, reflect the deep political and cultural divides of the nation itself.

What it means for the games we watch remains as uncertain as what a Trump 
presidency will mean for the nation at large, but it has become clear that 
athletes on either side of the aisle are less inclined to “stick to sports” 
than any time in the past few decades.

As the money flowing into professional sports has ballooned to stupefying 
heights in recent decades, athletes have been drilled into eschewing political 
discourse. Michael Jordan’s infamous assertion that “Republicans buy sneakers, 
too” – a quote of dubious authenticity but undeniable influence – prompted a 
generation of athletes to keep their heads down when it came to thorny issues 
lest they alienate the consumerbase.

But a contentious election and the proliferation of social media have led 
athletes to speak out on politics with a frequency and ardour not seen since 
the high water mark of athlete activism of the 1960s, when champions such as 
Ali, Jim Brown and Kareem Abdul‑Jabbar risked it all to stand on the front line 
of the civil rights movement.

LeBron James, who stumped for Hillary Clinton on the campaign trail, has said 
he would not stay at the Trump SoHo when the Cleveland Cavaliers made road 
trips to New York. When asked whether he would make the traditional visit to 
the White House were his team to repeat asNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> champions this summer, James was 
noncommittal: “We’ll have to cross that road, I guess.”

But for every sportsperson that’s spoken out against Trump, there have been 
just as many celebrating his victory: the Chicago Cubs pitcher Jake Arrieta, 
the Buffalo Bills lineman Richie Incognito, the Cleveland Indians pitcher 
Trevor Bauer and the LPGA golfer Natalie Gulbis. Perhaps more revealing are 
those in sports who have shown a silent allegiance to the president-elect while 
stopping short of outspoken support, a trend that serves to illustrate the 
disconnect between the polls that spelled Trump’s doom and election results 
that sealed his coronation.

‘NBA teams should honour White House tradition and visit Donald Trump’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/nba-basketball-commissioner-adam-silver-president-donald-trump-white-house>
Consider Trump’s fascinatingly opaque relationship with the New England 
Patriots, the most successfulNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> team 
of their generation. The four-times Super Bowl champions hail from the only 
state in the union where every county went for Clinton, yet the three figures 
most responsible for the Patriots’ runaway dominance – the owner, Robert Kraft; 
the head coach, Bill Belichick; and the quarterback Tom Brady – have all shown 
a quiet allegiance to Trump while stopping short of public endorsement.

Kraft held a meeting with the president‑elect in New York shortly after his 
victory, while Trump made no secret of the “most beautiful letter” he received 
from Belichick. When Brady was spotted with a “Make America Great Again” hat in 
his locker at Gillette Stadium shortly after Trump announced his candidacy, the 
two-times NFL most valuable player said “it would be great” if his friend and 
golfing buddy won the presidency. “I support all my friends in everything they 
do,” said Brady. “I think it’s pretty remarkable what he’s achieved in his 
life.”

Trump has always valued sports as an inextricable stripe of American life. He 
owned a team in the upstart United States Football League in the early 1980s 
and hosted a series of major fights at his casino in Atlantic City before it 
went bankrupt, most notably the 1988 blockbuster between Mike Tyson and Michael 
Spinks, for which he paid a then-record $11m site fee.

He has actively courted athlete endorsements throughout his political rise, 
keenly aware of the power of sportsperson as influencer. It’s only fitting his 
election has awakened that potential in ways not seen for years.

It’s too soon to say whether the Trump presidency will usher in a renaissance 
of athlete activism. That may be unwelcome news for those who turn to sports as 
escapist entertainment. But if it can promote engagement in a democracy that’s 
seen voter turnout fall to perilously low levels, then surely it’s a small 
price to pay.
 