
More than 200,000 people are expected to participate in a mass demonstration 
the day after Donald Trump’s inauguration, the Women’s March on Washington. 
Since the idea first emerged with a vision to take over the Lincoln Memorial in 
the days after the election results, plans have shifted, developed and expanded 
worldwide.

Will Trump cause progressives to forget about women's rights? | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/womens-rights-list-of-progressive-priorities-feminism>
Here’s what you need to know about protest plans on 21 January.

Where is the Women’s March on Washington?

Many locations on the National Mall in Washington are off-limits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/womens-march-on-washington-lincoln-memorial>
 to protesters, including the Lincoln Memorial. This is in large part because 
inauguration equipment including bleachers won’t have been cleared from these 
areas yet. But march organizers say they have now secured a permit, and the 
event will start at 10am at the intersection of Independence Avenue and Third 
Street SW, near the US Capitol. Organizers say they haven’t publicized the 
route for security reasons.

Do I have to go to Washington?

No. Although the largest march is expected to take place in Washington, at 
least 30 cities nationwide are alsoholding their own 
<https://www.womensmarch.com/sister-marches/> women’s march rallies on 21 
January. The best way to find information is to locate the state chapter for 
each group on themain event’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/2169332969958991/>. Protests will also be held 
around the world in cities including Sydney, Zurich and Mexico City.

Who is organizing the women’s march?

The march emerged as a grassroots effort in the days after election, but after 
the Facebook event went viral, traditional political organizers and groups 
became involved. The four co-chairs are now Linda Sarsour (executive director 
of the Arab American Association of New York), Tamika D Mallory (political 
organizer and former executive director of the National Action Network), Carmen 
Perez (executive director of political action group The Gathering for Justice) 
and Bob Bland (a fashion designer who focuses on ethical manufacturing).

Planned Parenthood has just become an official partner of the march and will 
assist leaders in providing staff and large-scale event planning knowledge.

“It takes more than I ever imagined to organize a mass mobilization,” said 
Sarsour. “Negotiating with the six federal agencies on the route, insurance, 
fundraising, vendors, private security.”

What is the message of the march?

The Women’s March on Washington is quick to say it is not an anti-Trump 
protest. “We’re not targeting Trump specifically. It’s much more about being 
proactive about women’s rights,” said Cassady Fendlay, spokeswoman for the 
march.

The march is a very broad church, with Sarsour explaining it as a “stand on 
social justice and human rights issues ranging from race, ethnicity, gender, 
religion, immigration and healthcare”.

Planned Parenthood got involved specifically because it thinks the march will 
“send a strong message to the incoming administration that millions of people 
across this country are prepared to fight attacks on reproductive healthcare, 
abortion services and access to Planned Parenthood,” said Cecile Richards, 
president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America.

Throughout his election campaign, Trump promised to defund the reproductive 
health organization because it performs abortions.

Planned Parenthood has helped shape the march’s policy agenda, and in return, 
it hopes that many of the protesters will mobilize in its defense when Trump 
and congressional Republicans make their attempt to strip the organization of 
millions in federal funding.

“It’s no secret Planned Parenthood is expecting the fight of our lives,” said 
Kelley Robinson, deputy national organizing director for Planned Parenthood. 
“This is a movement where people are inspired to take action at numbers we’ve 
never seen before. We want to make sure they have a great time at this march, 
but also plug into local efforts. We want to make sure people are taking action 
not just on 21 January, but stay engaged for months and years into the future.”

Is the march only for women?

No, people of all genders are welcome.

Who will be there?

Feminist leader Gloria Steinem and Harry Belafonte are both serving as 
honorary co-chairs of the march.

“Our constitution does not begin with ‘I, the President.’ It begins with, ‘We, 
the People.’ I am proud to be one of thousands who have come to Washington to 
make clear that we will keep working for a democracy in which we are linked as 
human beings, not ranked by race or gender or class or any other label,” said 
Steinem in a statement.

Celebrities including comedians Amy Schumer and Samantha Bee and actor Olivia 
Wilde have all posted on social media about their intentions to attend. Other 
well-known stars and march speakers are expected to be announced by the march 
organizers in the new year.

How can you get there?

Nearly all trains travelling from New York City and Philadelphia on Friday 
night or Saturday morning have been booked up. But that doesn’t mean you’re out 
of luck if you haven’t booked transportation yet. Greyhound has plenty of buses 
available from major cities including New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Charlotte 
and Nashville. Many grassroots groups have organized their own buses, such as 
theNYC chapter of the women’s march announcing a charter bus system for $62 
return <https://www.womensmarchnyc.com/findabus>. The national march says it 
will be announcing transportation options on its website.

Is accommodation available?

Most of the charter buses from New York to Washington are leaving in the 
morning and returning in the evening of the Saturday in order to avoid the 
problem of accommodation.

But those wishing to stay overnight will find a tight market, given both the 
protesters and inauguration attendees in town. According to booking.com’s hotel 
listings, 80% of DC’s hotels are booked on the Friday night. On Airbnb, 
availability is low and prices are high, with apartments advertised for 
thousands of dollars per night, anda bunk bed in a shared room on that Friday 
night in DC going for $250 a night 
<https://www.airbnb.com/rooms/9936262?checkin=01%2F20%2F2017&checkout=01%2F21%2F2017&guests=1&s=vlOuAV85>
.

A closed Facebook group <http://facebook.com/groups/inaugrationweekend> (which 
you can request to join) shows DC residents offering couches or spare beds in 
their apartments, and visitors offering to share their booked hotel with other 
protest attendees. Another site,MarchMatch <http://marchmatch.org/>, is a forum 
for people either offering accommodation and transport option or those in need 
of assistance. 

With reporting by Molly Redden
 