
The United States survived a pair of Hope Solo errors to secure top spot in 
Olympic Group G following an unexpected 2-2 draw with Colombia in Manaus.

Needing only a point to earn first place after wins against New Zealand and 
France, the tournament favorites surprisingly fell behind as Catalina Usme’s 
dipping, 25-yard free kick squirmed between an unsighted Solo’s legs in the 25th
 minute.

A Crystal Dunn equalizer five minutes before the break and a fine finish from 
teenage substitute Mallory Pugh on the hour mark gave the US the lead before, 
Usme smashed home a 90th minute set-piece with Solo missing an attempt to punch 
clear.

Depending on results elsewhere, the defending champions will now play 
Australia (who thumped Zimbabwe 6-1 earlier on Tuesday), China or Sweden in the 
knockout stages in Brasilia on Friday.

Despite the late disappointment, the US will be buoyed by the return of Megan 
Rapinoe, making her first appearance since tearing an ACL in December. Rapinoe, 
who hadn’t played in 249 days, was lively during 32-minute run-out, before she 
was replaced Pugh in a scheduled switch.

Coach Jill Ellis, who made four changes from the side that sealed a last eight 
spot against the French, will be delighted Rapinoe emerged unscathed. The 
veteran’s ability from set-pieces is sure to add another dimension to the 
attack with tougher challenges ahead.

The skillful playmaker, who had also been struggling with a calf injury since 
returning to training, almost made an instant impact, whipping in a delightful 
cross for Carli Lloyd to head against the post, albeit from an offside position.

Rapinoe curled over a free kick on nine minutes, before laying on a decent 
chance for Christen Press, who blazed over from a good position. Her teasing 
cross on 15 minutes almost fell for Lloyd, who moments later was denied a 
possible spot-kick after going down on the edge of the box.

Perhaps a little rusty after the long layoff, Rapinoe’s last action of the 
night was a mistimed lunge to concede the set-piece converted by Usme, as Solo 
struggled to see past the wall. The error only served to encourage the 
Brazilian crowd, gradually more populous ahead of the home nation’s tie against 
South Africa, who once again continually taunted Solo with chants of “Zika!”. 
The US No1, who turned in a fine display with five crucial saves against France 
had been a mere onlooker until that point.

Amazingly, this was Colombia’s first ever goal against the USA, having entered 
Tuesday’s game with a 0-18 aggregate score in five previous fixtures between 
the two sides, including 7-0 and 3-0 hammerings in April friendlies.

The unscheduled set-back seemed to briefly rattle the defending champions, who 
should have levelled on 39 minutes when Press failed to nudge the ball past the 
onrushing Sandra Sepulveda after latching onto a long clearance. However, 
parity was restored four minutes before the break. Dunn pounced to slot home 
the rebound after the busy Colombian keeper pushed a powerful Lloyd drive onto 
the crossbar.

Lloyd was replaced by regular strike-partner Alex Morgan at half time as the 
States began the second half in dominant fashion. Morgan forced another fine 
save from Sepulveda with a curling effort, moments before 18-year-old 
substitute Pugh buried the ball from 10-yards after cutting inside the 
Colombian rear guard.

The World Cup winners should have made the game safe soon after, when Press 
attempted to lay on a tap-in for Pugh who was clearly offside. However, with 
the US team seemingly tiring in the 90F heat, Usme once again beat Solo with a 
free-kick, this time her 30-yard effort smashed against the top of the crossbar 
with 15 minutes left.

It was a warning. Ellis’ side looked sure to see out time until Usme struck 
again in the 90th minute smashing a powerful, curling free-kick into the top 
corner, ensuring a nervous three minutes of stoppage time.

A further set-back would have seen the French, who saw off New Zealand 3-0 in 
their final group game, supplant the US as group winners. However, they held on 
and, barring an unexpected set-back on Friday, look destined for a semi-final 
showdown against hosts Brazil at the famous Maracanã Stadium. 


 “I’m choosing to have short-term memory and put this behind us,” Solo said 
after the final whistle. “Every tournament I’ve ever played in, nothing has 
gone perfectly.

“We’re ready [for the knockout stages], I guarantee it,” she added.

The US will hope Solo, seemingly unaffected by the taunts of the crowd and 
flawless against France, has the errors out of her system without serious 
consequence.
 