
With only a handful of rounds of domestic rugby to play, qualification for 
next season’s European Champions Cup is into focus and what catches the eye 
more than anything else is that this could be a significant year for thePro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12>.

In a World Cup season certain teams were always going to have a slow start but 
the unexpected thing was that teams with a lot of England players were not too 
badly affected owing to the national side’s pool-stage exit. But the Pro12, in 
the first year when qualifying has succeeded a World Cup, has a different look 
about it. Not one of its teams in this season’s Champions Cup reached the 
knockout rounds, and now some of its traditional powerhouses are struggling to 
qualify for next season.

Rugby union’s rewards have never been higher but risks have never been greater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/31/rugby-union-rewards-risks-injuries>
It is perfectly possible that one of Munster and Ulster will be absent while 
the Ospreys’ hopes look forlorn already. These teams, or the club sides they 
grew out of in the case ofOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, 
have played in every single Heineken or Champions Cup since a European club 
championship began in 1995-96. For one of them to miss out would be the 
clearest possible indication the new qualification system has teeth.

Depending on how the remaining Pro12 fixtures go both its Scottish teams, 
Edinburgh and Glasgow, could yet qualify at the expense of Munster or Ulster. 
Munster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> have Leinster, Connacht, 
Edinburgh and Scarlets still to play and Ulster have Connacht, Zebre, Leinster 
and Ospreys. Not easy in either case – except Zebre. On the other hand, if the 
Irish provinces do hang on to their current places, then one of the Scottish 
teams will not make it and European rugby will look a little distorted, with 
four Irish teams, and one each from Scotland, Wales and Italy.

The Pro12 gets seven spots but there has to be a side from each nation, which 
means one of the two Italian sides propping up the league will still qualify. 
To fit them in, the bottom side of those countries with more than one in the 
top seven misses out. This is currently Edinburgh, who are seventh, behind 
Glasgow in sixth.

You have to question the continued commitment to Italian sides in the top 
European competition. Forcing one of them, likely to be Zebre, into it can no 
longer be justified from a development point of view as there is plenty of 
opportunity for that in the Challenge Cup with decent sides such as 
Montpellier, Connacht, Sale, Harlequins and Gloucester involved.

England’s top six qualify for the Champions Cup and we see largely the usual 
suspects in the top four or five, along with Exeter whose progress over recent 
seasons has been consistent. This pattern is similar in France, which also has 
six qualifying slots currently dominated by the usual suspects.

I think England’s top five of Saracens, Exeter, Wasps, Northampton and 
Leicester will finish in those places – in whatever order – come the end of the 
season. However, the four teams occupying sixth to ninth places – Harlequins, 
Sale, Gloucester and Bath – will all reckon they have a chance of sneaking into 
the final slot.

Sale could potentially get into the top four and their fixtures look kind, 
with home matches against Bath and Gloucester and trips to London Irish, Bath 
and Newcastle to come, but they struggle to win away and they have a Challenge 
Cup quarter-final against Montpellier to throw into the mix.

At eight points behind Quins, Bath may look out of the running but they and 
Sale have a game in hand as their 8 January fixturewas postponed to accommodate 
Bath’s Champions Cup game against Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/27/toulon-bath-rearranged-january-2016>
, delayed because of the Paris bombings in November. Should Bath get anything 
out of the visit of Saracens to the Rec on Friday, unlikely though it may 
appear, a great deal will be riding on the result when they host Sale in their 
postponed fixture on Wednesday 13 April. To add to the intrigue, the sides face 
each other again four days later. Whichever comes out of these two fixtures on 
top will be in the fight for that sixth place.

Clouding the picture somewhat is the continuing presence of three of those 
teams in the Challenge Cup. Quins, Sale and Gloucester could all yet find a 
route into the Champions Cup through success in its less prestigious companion.

The 20th and final place in last season’s Champions Cups was decided by a 
play-off, won by Bordeaux last year after an arcane three-team affair also 
involving Gloucester and Connacht, but to avoid post-World Cup fixture 
congestion the 20th place will simply go to the winner of the Challenge Cup 
this year.

The Dragons will be hoping they can take this back-door route to give the 
Pro12 an extra place. The oddest thing, though, would be if the poor relations 
of Irish rugby, Connacht, won it and, having already qualified for the 
Champions Cup through their Pro12 league position, Munster or Ulster snuck in. 
It would be quite a role reversal, but I wouldn’t rule it out.
 