
Whenever a fresh study on the dangers of concussion in sport hits the 
headlines it reminds me of the ominous prophecy from Malcolm Gladwell: that 
playing American football will one day become akin to joining the army. “We 
will disclose the risks and dare people to play,” he warned in 2013. “That’s 
what the army does. That’s what football is going to become.” In this future 
mushrooming evidence of traumatic brain injuries will turn the National 
Football League into a “ghettoised sport” – Gladwell’s words – avoided by the 
middle classes but still grimly embraced by the poor and desperate.

Northampton’s Jim Mallinder demands more consistent use of TV officials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/northampton-jim-mallinder-tv-officials>
That logic could easily extend to other sports, including both codes of rugby, 
boxing, mixed martial arts and, yes, even football. Increasingly we are aware 
that it is not only crushing hits that scramble the brain but repetitive 
sub-concussive blows, too. Then there are the dangers of playing on with 
concussion. One study in the academic journal Pediatrics, published last month, 
followed 69 high-school athletes who sustained head injuries in football, ice 
hockey, soccer and volleyball and found that those who stayed on the field took 
twice as long to recover (44 days compared with 22 days).

Yet the conference of the World Rugby Science Network – a global body of 
researchers interested in both codes – in Bath this month suggested that in 
rugby union’s case significant steps are being made in tackling concussion and 
more could be on their way.

The starting point was acceptance. As the Rugby Football Union’s Matthew Cross 
pointed out, since the 2009-10 season there has been a year‑on‑year rise in the 
reported incidents of concussion in the Premiership and head injuries are now 
the most common injury in the league. Given players have not got taller or 
heavier in the past six or seven years, that is probably down to improved 
reporting rather than the game getting more dangerous.

Cross then outlined the RFU’s strategy to identify better and then to manage 
concussions when they happen. As anyone who has watched the Premiership this 
season will know, all teams now have a designated person to watch matches on an 
iPad to look out for potential head injuries. The 10-minute window for a player 
to have a Head Impact Assessment (HIA) is now 13 minutes so doctors can also 
carry out the King‑Devick Test, where players are asked to read a series of 
numbers as accurately as possible and their score is compared with their 
baseline.

However, potentially the most interesting findings have come from a research 
project looking at a database of 1,516 professional matches between 2013 and 
2015, which involved 611 HIAs. As the sports scientist Ross Tucker explained at 
the conference, this allowed World Rugby to code where each head injury 
occurred – whether it was in a tackle, scrum, maul and so on – and how it had 
come about. Tackles, unsurprisingly, topped the list, so they started diving 
deeper. How many players were involved in tackles where head injuries occurred? 
What direction or angles did the tackle come from? What were the speed of the 
players and their body positions? And how did all this change the risk of 
serious injury?

Among the interesting findings were that 76% of head injuries happen in the 
tackle and about three quarters of those happen to the tackler. Smother 
tackles, which are often thought to be particularly dangerous, turn out not to 
be. A tackler bent at the waist, or diving, has a lower risk of picking up a 
head injury than one who is upright. And the most dangerous tackle of all – by 
far – is when both players are upright because it increases the risk of one 
head hitting another or smashing into a shoulder pad.

College players join in raising fists for anthem as Kaepernick's protest speads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/national-anthem-protest-college-football-kaepernick>
But it was what Tucker said next that was most interesting. These findings had 
been presented to senior figures in World Rugby, as well as elite coaches and 
referees, and they all agreed that there needed to be “zero tolerance” on head 
injuries in the sport and ways found to get the tackler lower. The research had 
led to a range of proposals, which are expected to be discussed shortly.

Tucker also revealed that he wanted to make this head injury database 
open-sourced and be as open and collaborative as possible. Meanwhile Cross 
highlighted another forthcoming brain study investigating the potential effects 
of playing rugby union and concussion on the long-term health of elite players, 
which will involve physical and cognitive assessments as well as blood and 
urine testing to look at potential biomarkers.

Of course rugby will remain a dangerous game. The Wales captain, Sam Warbuton, 
illustrated that particularly vividly when I spoke to him about the breakdown a 
couple of years ago. As he put it, it is “a pretty ugly place when you’ve got 
three 18-stoners flying in, trying to take your head off. Sometimes I’m 
struggling to shampoo my head the next day because my head is hurting so bad.”

Rugby remains a tough game with obvious risks. But when it comes to concussion 
significant progress has been made in the five years since the 2011 Rugby World 
Cup, when 56% of players who were concussed stayed on the field and were 
diagnosed only afterwards. As Tucker points out, the use of data has built a 
compelling case for further change – and, who knows, may help rugby union avoid 
Gladwell’s grim vision of the future.
 