
George Long was arrested in January 1979 for the murder of 14-year-old Gary 
Wilson, whose body had been found dumped two months earlier in a back yard in 
Deptford High Street, south London.

The boy had been sexually attacked. There were a number of stab wounds and 
severe compression to the neck. He had been wearing, as was to become relevant, 
an Elvis Presley belt.

There was an understandable public revulsion about the murder and enormous 
pressure on the police to make an arrest.

Mr Long, a former soldier, was living at the time with his parents, his twin 
sister and her three children, not far from where the murder took place. He had 
suffered from depression, had problems with drinks and drugs, and had attempted 
suicide more than once.

To compensate, perhaps, he made up stories about himself in which he emerged 
in a heroic light. On the night after he had heard about the murder of Gary 
Wilson, Mr Long, at that time a porter at Dulwich Hospital, was with his then 
girlfriend Sonya Butcher at home.

He showed Sonya a knife and told her how he had taken it off a man who had 
tried to attack him. The implication was that he had fought off the man who had 
killed Gary Wilson. He repeated the claim to his sister.

By chance, his sister was stopped by police doing random checks near the scene 
of the murder and she told them of her brother's claim. George Long was 
interviewed, handed the knife over to police, and told them that before the 
'attack' he had been waiting for a nurse who had stood him up. He also told 
them, when they asked, that he liked Elvis Presley.

With no arrest by the end of January, police re-examined the people who had 
been approached and requested that Mr Long attend an interview. This he did, 
arriving 2 1/2 hours late because he had been drinking with a friend.
He was taken into a cell and interviewed. It soon emerged that there were 
inconsistencies with his original story. The times he had given to police when 
they first saw him did not tally with his version of events.

They pressed him, suggesting that he had indeed killed the boy. He said later 
that he did not want to have to admit to the police that he had lied about the 
story of fighting the attacker and taking the knife off him. His liking for 
Elvis Presley was put to him as further evidence. Panic, he says now, began to 
set in. He confessed to the killing.

When his sister visited him in custody, she refused to believe he had 
confessed and said to him that on the night he had been with her and Sonya and 
other friends at the Brown Bear pub. He put this to the police but it turned 
out that his sister had remembered the wrong night to the police it must have 
looked as though he was involving himself in more lies. He was charged with 
murder, tried, and sentenced to life imprisonment.

George Long's time inside has not been easy. People who have been convicted of 
killing children are regarded by other prisoners as 'nonces', the lowest of the 
low, deserving of any punishment.

But he did meet Chris Palmer, a prison vistor, who lives in Evesham, Hereford 
and Worcester, and who has become his friend and has sought to reopen the case. 
Mrs Palmer sees him regularly in Long Lartin jail.
She has passed evidence of Mr Long's case to Brian Raymond of the solicitors, 
Bindmans, and he in turn has engaged the services of psychiatric experts to 
examine Mr Long's susceptibility to confession with a view to seeking an appeal.

Joan Ruddock, the Labour MP for Lewisham, Deptford, wrote to the Home 
Secretary on his behalf last October, suggesting that Gary Wilson could have 
been the victim of one of the paedophiles now being discovered as a result of 
the police's Operation Orchid, which is investigating the disappearances and 
deaths of young boys in the London area.

In the meantime, Mr Long's insistence that he is innocent is seen by the 
parole board as his inability to come to terms with his crime. He could not be 
considered for parole until he had finally accepted his guilt. This he refuses 
to do.

Mr Long points out that in his statement, he said that Gary Wilson was stabbed 
with a knife, whereas a pathologist concluded that he was stabbed with broken 
glass. He says that the police claimed to have witnesses to an incident in 
which a boy was seen struggling with a man but no witnesses were called at the 
trial.

Liberty (formerly the National Council for Civil Liberties) has taken up Mr 
Long's case as part of its campaign for criminal justice reform.
 