 I am surprised that no one has spotted the true conspiracy behind the 
Mandelson affair. It's got nothing to do with Browns and Blairs and spinning 
and loans: the answer is much simpler. Ask yourself, who took over Mandelson's 
department ? Stephen Byers. And what was he in previous life? A law lecturer. 
And who was earmarked - indeed, informally announced - for the job of Paymaster 
General following Geoffrey Robinson's resignation? None other than the legal 
affairs minister, Geoff Hoon; yup, he's a former law lecturer. And the new 
solicitor-general, appointed last summer: he's one too. As is the boss himself, 
Lord Irvine, the Lord Chancellor. It's quite clearly a plot by the law 
lecturers of England to take over first the government, and then... who knows 
where they'll stop? They're intelligent, committed and ruthless. Getting rid of 
Mandelson and Robinson was just a practice run. Watch carefully next time 
there's a high-up resignation or sacking and see who gets promoted.
 The Bar immediately went into gaffe mode when it seemed, for a couple of 
days, that Geoff Hoon had got the paymaster job. A 'very senior figure at the 
Bar' made this good riddance remark to the Daily Mail: "We don't talk to Geoff 
Hoon any more. All we get are new Labour slogans. They come rolling off his 
tongue. We deal with his officials instead. At least they've got an idea what's 
going on." Not the most tactful thing to have said now that Hoon will be around 
for a few months more, piloting legal reforms through parliament. Still, at 
least it wasn't the Bar Council's new chairman, Dan Brennan QC, who made those 
silly comments; he's too sensible for that. He takes over at a time when the 
Bar's traditions and practices (some good, some bad) are under attack as never 
before; and he'll need every ounce of tact and political nous to argue his 
profession's case. And what of his predecessor Heather Hallett QC, first woman 
chairperson of the Bar? A judge of the High Court, soon, is what I predict.

 Impeachment, as in Clinton, is a British constitutional invention (including 
the controversial words 'high crimes and misdemeanours'), and I find it curious 
that while we traditionalists have effectively abolished it, modern America 
still sticks to the process. The last impeachment in this country was in 1805, 
when the Scot Lord Melville was tried for 'gross malversion and breach of duty' 
as Treasurer of the Navy. He was acquitted. Before that, it was Warren 
Hastings, impeached for misgovernment in India. He too was acquitted after a 
seven-year trial, which ended in 1795. I just thought you ought to know.

 For most of you, the biggest disappointment of 1998 was surely the failure of 
this column to provide you with sufficient racehorses with legal names to 
enable you to become rich. As you know, the statistics prove (well, prove-ish) 
that horses called, for example, Law Lords' Confusion or Hoffmann Speaks (not 
their real names) have a greater chance of winning races than horses whose 
names have no legal or judicial connotations. Recently there's been a dearth of 
such nomenclatures, but on Boxing Day at racecourses around the country I 
spotted My Legal Eagle, Lawahik, Silk Vestments and Major's Law. Pausing only 
to regret my inability to inform you of our stroke of fortune, I invested, 
judiciously, in their speed and stamina. It's true that technically none of 
them actually won their races in the sense of beating their opposition; to use 
the appropriate racing jargon, I lost the lot. But the principle is still 
valid. Legal horses win. I'll just have to work a little more on the details.
 