
TRACK OF THE WEEK

Zayn & Taylor Swift 
I Don’t Wanna Live Forever

Looking set to continue the current trend of “soundtracks that are better than 
the actual film” that was kicked off by last year’s Suicide Squad, I Don’t 
Wanna Live Forever is Zayn Malik and Taylor Swift’s single for Fifty Shades 
Darker. A breathy, sexy slow jam, Zayn seems like a version of the Weeknd you 
could take home to your mum, while Taylor sounds incredible, hitting notes she 
hardly ever attempts. The track also contains a finger snap so pleasingly sharp 
it sounds like the crack of a whip, which, considering this is for the 
soundtrack to a basic-bitch BDSM movie, is the most on-brand thing ever.

Machine Gun Kelly & Camila Cabello 
Bad Things

Bad Things is like the, er, bad version of I Don’t Wanna Live Forever. Machine 
Gun Kelly literally talks us through sex, step by step (we’ve all done it, 
mate!) and former Fifth Harmony singer Camila Cabello’s interpretation of 
“breathy” sounds like she’s straining to reach the high notes. Uncomfortable.

The xx 
On Hold

Everyone’s favourite dancey misery-goths are back with On Hold, their first 
new music since 2013’s Together. A back-and-forth about a relationship-status 
miscommunication, it’s like Oliver Sim and Romy Madley Croft are singing an 
urgent WhatsApp breakup conversation, and it’s both mournful and beautiful. “I 
thought that I had you on hold?” asks Sim, painfully unaware that women and 
phones are totally different things.

Fickle Friends 
Brooklyn

Warning: Fickle Friends’ cheerfully electropoppy Brooklyn changes pace several 
times during the track – sometimes bouncing along, sometimes slowing down – 
making it ideal for both Zumba teachers and anyone wanting to confuse a party 
full of nervous dancers.

Afrojack & Jay Karama 
Diamonds

If you’ve ever lived near a pub, you’ll know the worst sound in the world: 
when the staff tip the empty bottles into the glass bin out the back first 
thing on a Sunday morning, and the loud, inescapable crashing and smashing and 
scraping sounds cut through your brain and somehow physically hurt everything 
inside your head. Afrojack has taken that torture and made it into a dance 
track by adding someone shouting the words “Illuminati!” and “fucking!” over 
the top. Truly, a rare talent.
 