
There was a banner fluttering at one end of the ground – “26 Years and 
Counting” – to remindLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
about how long it had been since they could call themselves league champions. 
There used to be a similar one here in honour of Manchester City but it went a 
few years ago and, for a while, this had looked like being another day when the 
team from Anfield could also imagine removing those kind of indignities.

Their frustration at not being able to hold on to their half-time lead could 
be gauged by the exchange late on when Jürgen Klopp, looking close to the point 
of spontaneous combustion, argued with José Mourinho by the pitch and did not 
seem too enthusiastic about the prospect of making friends.

All the great championship-winning sides from Anfield knew how to hang on to 
1-0 leads, and if the modern version had managed it here they would have been 
the first Liverpool team in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> era to take 47 points from 
21 games. To surrender that chance with only six minutes of normal time to go 
must have stung.

Manchester United v Liverpool: Premier League - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-live>
Instead the opportunity to move directly behind Chelsea at the top of the 
table was lost – courtesy of Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s 19th goal of the season – on 
another of those days when Marouane Fellaini was summoned from theManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> substitutes’ 
bench in the hope that a gangly six-footer with sharp elbows and a peculiar 
relationship with the club’s supporters might be able to save them.

Fellaini flicked a header against the post to create the panic from which 
Ibrahimovic scored, and Mourinho talked afterwards about having a “problem in 
my neck” because he had spent so long in the second half looking in one 
direction – namely the way United were attacking.

To be fair, that was the summit of Mourinho’s exaggeration and he also made it 
clear he was dissatisfied with his team’s general carelessness.

It was a strangely erratic display from the home team and Paul Pogba chose a 
bad day to have one of his least distinguished performances, most notable for 
the first-half incident when he tried to clear a corner from his own penalty 
area in the manner of a basketball player going for a slam-dunk. A simple 
header would have sufficed and when James Milner converted the penalty 
Liverpool defended with great togetherness while frequently looking dangerous 
on the break.

Klopp felt Liverpool had been the better side for 70 minutes “until they came 
with the long ball”, noting the way Fellaini’s introduction changed the 
complexion of the game and blowing out his cheeks about “all the balls bouncing 
around the 18-yard box”.

His mood was not helped when he was informed that Antonio Valencia was offside 
in the buildup before the decisive cross for Ibrahimovic. Though the Liverpool 
manager did not say as much, he might also reflect that his side can make 
better use of the ball, too. Mourinho felt both sides were conspicuously below 
their best – even if the two teams did give absolutely everything.

Pogba was the case in point bearing in mind his collection of individual 
errors was not merely restricted to the moment he lost his bearings inside the 
penalty area, realised he might have lost his opponent, Dejan Lovren, and threw 
out his arms to try to rectify the situation.

That was not the only time Pogba seemed disorientated at Liverpool’s set 
pieces and he will not feel any better that, with the game goalless, he wasted 
his team’s first clear opportunity, running on to Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s through 
ball before aiming a hesitant left-foot shot wide.

Pogba might also have cost United another goal in the second half, losing the 
ball and spared only because Georginio Wijanldum headed over a right-wing cross 
from Emre Can, the game’s outstanding performer. These are not the moments 
expected of a player signed for a world-record fee but, if nothing else, Pogba 
kept going. The same applied to United as a whole – they could have passed the 
ball with much greater authority but nobody could ever doubt their commitment.

Liverpool had Trent Alexander-Arnold, an 18-year-old, starting his first 
Premier League fixture in place of the injured Nathaniel Clyne, and it cannot 
have been an easy adjustment when for long spells the game seemed to be played 
at ice-hockey speed.

Liverpool forced to withdraw Joël Matip from Manchester United fixture by Fifa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/liverpool-joel-matip-manchester-united-fifa>
It was breathless stuff and perhaps it was just inevitable that a game played 
with this kind of intensity would have error-strewn periods. However much Pogba 
is criticised, it will not have escaped Mourinho’s attention that Phil Jones 
was dispossessed by Roberto Firmino to give away the corner that led to 
the penalty.

Ibrahimovic tested Simon Mignolet with a cannonball of a free-kick before 
half-time and Liverpool’s goalkeeper also denied Mkhitaryan after Ander Herrera 
had given the Armenian a chance to equalise.

There was no doubting United’s endeavour but they lacked finesse and Klopp 
could think back to Wijnaldum’s header and another chance, at 1-0, for Firmino 
as he reflected on a draw that means Liverpool have not won any of their 
opening four matches in a calendar year for the first time since 1993.
 