
Fourteen of the 31 athletes found to have doped at the 2008 Olympics in 
Beijing are Russian, according to the country’s state media.

A report by Tass suggests that the majority of those 14 individuals compete in 
track and field events, putting Russia’s athletics participation at Rio 2016 in 
further doubt. An International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations taskforce has already 
been set up to decide whether Russia’s athletes will be allowed to compete in 
Brazil following revelations of state-sponsored doping in the country, with a 
decision to be made on 17 June.

Russians expected to be among failed doping tests from 2008 Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/17/thirty-one-athletes-face-possible-olympic-games-ban-after-positive-doping-tests-drugs-in-sport-ioc>
If confirmed, the latest spate of positive tests would mean Russia’s current 
suspension from international athletics competition would be unlikely to be 
lifted before Rio.

The International Olympic Committee announced last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/17/thirty-one-athletes-face-possible-olympic-games-ban-after-positive-doping-tests-drugs-in-sport-ioc>
 that 31 individuals had tested positive for banned substances after 454 
retrospective urine samples from the Beijing Games were examined. The IOC 
targeted athletes who were due to compete at Rio, using more advanced testing 
techniques than were available in 2008.

Those who failed the retrospective tests are not expected to be named until 
they have had the opportunity to request their “B” sample be examined, although 
the IOC disclosed that Olympians from 12 countries were implicated, spanning 
six sports. The British Olympic Association said last Tuesday that it had not 
been contacted by the IOC and was not aware of any British athletes involved.

Pressure to bar Russia from the Olympics has already grown after UK 
Anti-Doping recently revealed its testing operation in the country had been 
hampered by a number of obstacles. Of 247 tests overseen from November last 
year to early this month, 99 were unable to be carried out because of an 
inability to locate an athlete and one test was refused.

The IOC and the World Anti-Doping Agency are also undergoing an investigation 
into the laboratory used for testing at the Sochi Winter Olympics in 2014, amid 
serious allegations that Russian samples were switched to a shadow lab in order 
to avoid banned substances being discovered.

The New York Times reported last week that the US Department of Justice had 
opened an investigation into the Russian doping scandal. Officials in Russia 
have said that the country is undergoing reform of its anti-doping system and 
that its athletes should be allowed to compete at Rio.
 