
The 25th National Reconciliation Week – an event seeded with admirable 
optimism that relations between Australia’s first peoples and non-Indigenous 
Australia can one day be bridged – ends on Friday.

This year reconciliation week <http://www.reconciliation.org.au/nrw/> is 
freighted with heavy symbolism, coinciding as it does with the silver 
anniversary of the foundation of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation in 
1991.

Next year, reconciliation week will align with two more milestones for 
Indigenous Australia. It will be the 25th anniversary of the high courtMabo 
judgment <http://aiatsis.gov.au/explore/articles/mabo-case> that acknowledged 
the unique relationship between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people 
and the continent. And it will be half a century on 27 May 2017 since Australia 
voted at referendum to give the commonwealth power to legislate for the 
Indigenous and to count them formally among the citizenry on the census.

Australian election 2016: Turnbull visits South Australia as Coalition faces 
tough fight in state – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/03/australian-election-2016-turnbull-visits-south-australia-as-coalition-faces-tough-fight-in-state-politics-live>
Critical events to be sure – moments of national hope that offered potential 
opportunity to build conciliation between Indigenous and other Australia.

Twenty-five years. 50 years. How many wars have begun and ended in that time? 
How many cities have been built or destroyed? How many generations of 
Australian leaders, black and non-Indigenous, have arrived and passed?

And, after 25, after 50 – after 100 – years, how far, really, have we 
travelled when it comes to improving the lot of Indigenous people, on moving 
forward with the business that is central to reconciliation, honestly reckoning 
with the shameful inequity – rooted in colonial history – that mars Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander Australia today?

Not much, if at all.

In some areas we are going backwards.

Here’s another anniversary, albeit one that non-Indigenous Australia does not 
refer to all that often. Last 15 April it was 26 years since the handing down 
of the royal commissionreport into Aboriginal deaths in custody 
<http://theconversation.com/deaths-in-custody-25-years-after-the-royal-commission-weve-gone-backwards-57109>
. The report made 339 recommendations aimed at keeping Indigenous Australians 
out of jail and, therefore, away from the possibility of dying behind bars.

In 1991, when the report was handed down, Indigenous people comprised 14% of 
prisoners (a shameful figure given Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders 
constitute about 3% of the population). Quarter of a century after the royal 
commission, Indigenous people comprised 27% of the prison population.

There have been more than 150 Indigenous deaths in custody since the royal 
commission reported. The most recent was25-year-old Steven Freeman 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/man-dies-in-custody-at-alexander-maconochie-centre-20160527-gp5m5s.html>
, found dead a week ago at Canberra’s prison, the Alexander Maconochie Centre. 
The prison is just a few kilometres, as the sulphur crested cockatoo flies, 
from this nation’s Parliament House.

Of course it is inside that building, embedded into what was an Aboriginal 
sacred site on Kurrajong Hill, that, every year our legislators participate in 
a highly performative event. “Closing the Gap” has, in my view, become 
something of a bipartisan charade aimed at appeasing the international 
community that Australian legislators are still watching what anthropologist 
Jon Altman calls the “Indigenous socio-economic disaster space”.Closing The Gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/feb/09/well-never-close-the-gap-until-we-start-again-with-indigenous-policy>
 measures the appalling disparities between the quality and duration of 
Indigenous lives and those of other Australians.

But most of the gaps are widening. It has led to pitifully few outcomes for 
Indigenous people. Meanwhile, genuine involvement in the conception, 
formulation, negotiation and implementation of Indigenous policy largely 
by-passes Aboriginal and Torres strait Islander people. It is passed down from 
the whitefella government, after “consultation” with a handpicked few 
Indigenous sages.

Twenty-five years after Mabo, Indigenous sovereignty remains unacknowledged by 
the commonwealth. There have been no treaties. Indigenous land rights remain 
heavily qualified in favour of the commonwealth. Mining companies, many of them 
foreign and which pay no – or little – Australian tax, continue to dispossess 
and marginalise Indigenous people, destroy their lands and disconnect them from 
culture.

And who’d’ve thought that just 40 years after that landmark referendum, a 
federal government – with bipartisan support – would effectively suspend the 
Racial Discrimination Act and send troops (replete with all that resonance of 
1788 invasion) into remote communities as part of the so-called “intervention”?

Great Barrier Reef: marine science program boosts Indigenous numbers at 
university
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/great-barrier-reef-marine-science-program-boosts-indigenous-numbers-at-university>
All the while mainstream Australian media shows little interest in tracing the 
line between Indigenous inequity and European invasion and colonial history. 
With a few notable exceptions, it largely pays lip service to Indigenous 
issues, treating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander issues as politically, 
socially, economically and culturally marginal.

They, like so many whitefella politicians, view Indigenous culture as 
something that is best exists in museum, rather than lived in urban or rural 
communities.

National Reconciliation Week and its theme – Our History, Our Story, Our 
Future – is testimony to the hope and aspiration (in the face of some glaring, 
ugly realties) of many good Australians that Indigenous lives and cultures 
should be raised and celebrated in our national consciousness.

The symbiosis between past and present, the continuum of time, is never more 
pronounced than in Indigenous Australia.

But after the 25th reconciliation week, I’m left with an empty sense that too 
much time is passing with far too few positive outcomes for Indigenous 
Australia.
 