
A sensational new message has emerged from the disgraced former head of 
Russian athletics in which he alleges theIAAF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> covered up potential doping violations 
by British athletes.

In a documentary alleging a welter of new claims about corruption and “mafia 
style practices” at the International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations under its former 
president Lamine Diack, which is due to be broadcast on Sunday night as part of 
a joint investigation with the French newspaper Le Monde, the German 
investigative journalist Hajo Seppelt has uncovered evidence that senior 
figures at athletics’ world governing body deliberately ignored suspicious 
blood tests for at least six top Russian athletes since 2011. The programme 
makers are also publishing a message from Valentin Balakhnichev – the former 
head of the Russian federation banned for life by the IAAF ethics commission – 
dating from July 2014, in which he threatens unnamed IAAF officials with 
blowing the whistle on the conspiracy.

“As we understand, after three-year conspiracy game, you decided to play 
‘fair’ and in accordance with IAAF rules. It is your choice but we are 
confident this is not a wise step,” warned Balakhnichev.

Sebastian Coe: ‘We are the envy of the world, nobody does it better’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/sebastian-coe-we-are-the-envy-of-world>
In a coded threat to the IAAF officials concerned he added: “We will not 
remain silent. It was not us who started this game. It was the IAAF project and 
the IAAF shall be the key victim of future scandal.” So it would prove, with 
the World Anti-Doping Agency’s independent commission report of December 2015 
outlining the scale of the corruption and cover-up organised by a so-called 
alternative governance system that included Diack’s son, Papa Massata. The IAAF 
ethics commission later banned Balakhnichev, the Russian distance coach Alexei 
Melnikov and Papa Massata Diack from athletics for life. Last week the court of 
arbitration for sport heard appeals from all three men.

In the message published by Le Monde and the German broadcaster ARD, which the 
Guardian has independently established as genuine, the Russian claims to have 
been shown a list by “IAAF Ambassadors” that included non-Russian athletes.

“Surprisingly we found there some prominent British athletes including Olympic 
champion and icon of the GB sports [sic]. Our question is why did not the IAAF 
to require from GB Athletics to sanction these athletes,” it said.

“Be sure that this question will be asked in our explanations and the names of 
the athletes who were under Athlete Biological Passport investigation will also 
be disclosed. We demand fair and transparent public procedure in regard of all 
athletes with the alleged ABP violations.”

There is no suggestion that the inclusion of British athletes on the list is 
an indication of wrongdoing or that they are responsible for their names being 
on it.

In response the UK’s athletics governing body said: “British Athletics has no 
knowledge of any of the allegations made by Valentin Balakhnichev in his email 
of July 2014 published today. We will of course co-operate fully with any 
inquiry we might receive from the anti-doping authorities on the matter.”

The programme claims that in addition to Lilya Shubukhova, the marathon runner 
whose case brought down the house of cards at the top of the IAAF when it 
emerged she had been blackmailed in return for covering up a positive test, 
five more names are revealed for the first time. The Wada independent 
commission report mentioned the existence of more athletes but did not name 
them.

According to the IAAF ethics report, the blackmail operation foundered only 
when Shubukhova asked for a refund on part of the €450,000 bribe she and her 
agent had paid the IAAF cabal after she was ultimately sanctioned regardless.

The five who are also alleged by ARD to have had positive tests covered up for 
money were the walkers Valeriy Borchin, Olga Kaniskina, Vladimir Kanaikin, 
Sergey Kirdyapkin and the steeplechase runner Yuliya Zaripova.

According to ARD, the six individuals are part of a list of 23 athletes – 
believed to be Russian – whose names appear in a document in connection with 
doping cover-ups.

The programme alleges that Balakhnichev wired €1.5m to Lamine Diack. It quotes 
Diack responding to the French prosecutors: “At no point was there any talk of 
payments by Russian athletes. I would never have asked an athlete for money or 
taken money from one – and the same goes for Valentin. If I had to ask a 
Russian for money, I would go to Putin.”

The ARD and Le Monde investigation is based on documents that are now in the 
possession of the French prosecutors pursuing cases against Diack, his lawyer 
Habib Cissé, his son Papa Massata Diack and others.

This week Diack Sr appeared in court in France, facing the threat of prison 
because he had not posted his entire €500,000 bail. However, it is understood 
the full amount has now been paid.

Both Diacks and Cissé have denied any wrongdoing.

The IAAF said it was unable to comment while the French investigation was in 
progress. A spokeswoman said: “We cannot comment on the specifics of the 
article whilst the criminal investigation is under way. It is clear we all need 
to get to the bottom of what has happened, which is what the French criminal 
investigation is doing, and we continue to assist them as required. We are 
taking bold steps to safeguard the sport in the future with the reforms we are 
introducing including setting up the integrity unit and disciplinary tribunal.”

An ethics committee investigation into Nick Davies, the former right-hand man 
of Sebastian Coe – the IAAF vice president during Diack Sr’s tenure – over 
whether Davies took payments from Diack Jr is also continuing. Coe, now the 
IAAF president, has insisted he had no knowledge of any corruption during the 
period in question. Next month, he will present his reform programme to the 
IAAF council as he attempts to move on from the scandal.

Britain’s women’s 4x400m team at the 2008 Beijing Olympics look set to be 
upgraded to a belated bronze medal after the Belarusian athlete Sviatlana 
Usovich was given a retrospective ban after her urine samples from the Games 
were retested. Usovich, who was in the quartet that came fourth in the 4x400m 
and also ran the 800m, was one of seven athletes from Beijing and London 2012 
to be banned following re-analysis by the International Olympic Committee.

Her disqualification means that Britain’s team of Christine Ohuruogu, Kelly 
Sotherton, Marilyn Okoro and Nicola Sanders should be moved up to third, having 
initially finished fifth, because Russia – who came second – were previously 
banned for doping offenses.
 