
The 20 top-flight clubs have tasked the Premier League with scoping out the 
issues surrounding safe standing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/safe-standing-hillsborough-rail-seating-bundesliga-celtic>
 to inform a debate about whether it could be introduced in England. The move 
was described as “probably the first step” towards safe standing by David Gold, 
a co-owner of West Ham and one of the more enthusiastic proponents of the plan.

After discussing the subject formally for the first time on Thursday, amid 
signs of a shifting mood among the majority ofPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> clubs, league executives 
were mandated to conduct a fact-finding exercise.

“Premier League clubs today held initial discussions on safe standing. Given 
that fan safety is of paramount concern clubs are understandably cautious and 
there was no overall consensus on the matter,” said a spokesman.

“This is a complex and emotive topic with a number of issues, varying from 
club to club, which need to be considered carefully before clubs can decide if 
they wish to pursue any changes, including legislative, that are required to 
allow them the option of safe standing areas in their grounds.”

A number of potential hurdles remain before the sort of rail seating 
commonplace in Germany andintroduced at Celtic Park for the first time this 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/safe-seating-return-premier-league-meeting>
 could be considered in the Premier League and Championship. Among them are the 
sensitivities around the Hillsborough disaster, with the Hillsborough Family 
Support Group remaining implacably opposed to any move that would allow 
standing in major English grounds.

However, the Liverpool supporters’ group Spirit of Shankly has launched a 
consultation on the matter and the Hillsborough Justice Campaign has also said 
it supports a full debate of the issues.

Those who support safe standing argue that it would not mean a return to the 
unsafe terraces of old but in fact should be safer than the current situation, 
where many fans stand in front of their seats in defiance of the rules.

It is understood that the government believes the introduction of safe 
standing would require a change in the law but that it would involve relatively 
straightforward secondary legislation. At present, however, the sports 
minister, Tracey Crouch, is not minded to recommend any change.

“The government currently has no plans to change its position and introduce 
standing accommodation at grounds covered by the all-seater requirement,” said 
a spokesman for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.

A majority of Premier League clubs are now believed to be in favour of trials, 
however, while Chelsea andTottenham Hotspur have designed their new stadiums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/spurs-planning-permission-stadium-haringey>
 to be able to accommodate rail seating if it is allowed.

The Premier League will investigate the full range of issues around the topic 
before reporting back to the clubs. “The clubs have tasked the Premier League 
with scoping out the safety, supporter, technical and legislative issues 
surrounding safe standing before any further discussions, based on the facts, 
can take place,” said a spokesman.

Any review is also likely to examine how the experience of introducing rail 
seating for almost 3,000 fans has played out north of the border, where Celtic 
introduced it this season.

Delegations from a number of clubs, including Manchester City and Manchester 
United, are due to travel to Scotland to see it in action this season.
 