
This might be one time that Tiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> doesn’t measure success on the 
golf course by the score on his card.

Tiger Woods says ‘I’m not dead, I’m ready to go’ before Bahamas comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/tiger-woods-ready-to-go-comeback-bahamas-safeway-open-golf>
He measured it with three words Tuesday: “I’m playing again.”

There were times during his 15 months away from golf that Woods wasn’t 
entirely sure that would be the case. He said that when he was at the Hero 
World Challenge last year, he needed help just to climb out of bed. At an 
outdoor party at Albany golf club, he would mingle for a few minutes and then 
sit on a stone bench.

He spent more time looking back than looking forward, saying at one point that 
anything else he achieved in golf would be “gravy.”

And now he can’t wait to get started on Thursday.

The 15-month break to heal following back surgeries is the longest he has been 
away from golf. Woods was a mixture of optimism and reality about his return. 
He talked about having all the shots he needs to compete against a field that 
includes 17 players from the top 40 and Woods, the tournament host who is at a 
career-low No898. He is playing, so he said he wants to win. The outlook is no 
different.

He also noted that Bubba Watson won last year at 25 under par, and it probably 
will take something around that to win.

“I know that’s a tall order since I’ve been away from the game for so long and 
I’ve made a lot of different changes in my game,” he said. “Physically and also 
equipment, practice schedules, training, all that has evolved. The mindset of 
competing hasn’t. That is to go out there and try to beat these guys.”

He still is working with swing coach Chris Como, whom he brought on two years 
ago. Now that Nike is out of the equipment business, Woods is using a 
TaylorMade driver and fairway metals, a Bridgestone golf ball and his old 
Scotty Cameron putter that he used to win all but one of his 14 majors.

But it starts with playing.

“Put it this way: it’s a lot better situation this year than last,” Woods 
said. “I just couldn’t get out of bed. I needed help. It was a tough, tough 
time. You asked me then: ‘Could I play?’ No. I can’t even get out of bed. How 
am I supposed to swing a club at 120 miles an hour? That’s just two different 
worlds.”

The Hero World Challenge, which he started in 1999 to benefit the Tiger Woods 
foundation, is effectively a holiday tournament for golf’s elite that has no 
cut and pays $1m to the winner. It feels so much bigger this year because of 
Woods.

Over the last year, he played five holes to open his new golf course, Bluejack 
National, outside Houston. And he took three swings with a wedge on the 
par-three 10th hole at Congressional during a day to promote the Quicken Loans 
National. All three went in the water.

Everyone is curious to see how he plays. That includes Woods.

His biggest concern is how far his shots will go because he hasn’t played with 
any adrenaline since the final round of the Wyndham Championship on 23 August 
last year. He doesn’t know how his game will stack up against players he 
watched at Hazeltine when he was an assistant captain at the Ryder Cup.

His previous long break from golf was eight months when he had reconstructive 
surgery on his left knee after winning the 2008 US Open at Torrey Pines, the 
last of his 14 major titles. He won his opening match in the Match Play 
Championship and won two tournaments later at Bay Hill.

That was a knee. This is a back.

He was 33, not a month away from turning 41. And that was long before any 
chaos in his personal life.

Asked what he would expect to feel on Thursday, Woods said: “I’ll let you know 
then, because I don’t know right now.”

“Yeah, there’s nerves, of course, because I care. I care about what I do out 
there,” he said. “I want to win, and I want to place the ball in the correct 
spots, give myself the best angles and bury these putts. Trying to figure that 
out, yeah, there’s nerves.”

Woods often talks about the “process” when he’s changing his swing. This was a 
different kind of process. It starts with hitting golf balls at home, then 
playing a practice round at home, and then bringing that game out to a 
tournament, competing and eventually getting into contention.

“Right now, I haven’t even competed yet, so I’m at the beginning stages of 
that,” he said.

Jack Nicklaus spoke Tuesday morning at the HSBC Business Forum in Florida and 
talked about how golf wasn’t nearly as important to him as competing. That’s 
something to which Woods can relate. What he said he missed was the 
competition, whether on tour or at home with friends.

“But the bigger the stage,” Woods said, “the more fun for me.”
 