
As a well-adjusted middle-aged man, I like to define myself by the things I 
don’t have. I don’t have a scarlet Lamborghini or a conspicuous tattoo or a 
22-year-old girlfriend to jumpstart my libido. Nor do I possess a penchant for 
extreme sports or expensive psychotherapy. Midway through my fifth decade, I’ve 
avoided the obvious pitfalls and reckon I’m coping quite well, which is why I 
am on my way to discuss the male midlife crisis with the therapistAndrew G 
Marshall <http://andrewgmarshall.com/>, who has written a book on the subject 
<http://andrewgmarshall.com/book/its-not-a-midlife-crisis-its-an-opportunity-how-to-be-forty-or-fifty-something-without-going-off-the-rails/>
. It’s a task that requires a cool and dispassionate eye. We will be like two 
doctors, I decide, objectively diagnosing the problems of others.

Inside his therapy room, Marshall directs me to an armchair and stoops to pour 
out some water. First impressions could hardly be more reassuring: Marshall is 
a soothing, sober man in colourful clothes. He asks about my background and my 
health, moving from my childhood to my present circumstances. I respond as 
honestly as I can, still confident I’ll be given the all-clear. I tell him I 
sailed past my 40th birthday with no problem at all. After that, admittedly, 
there was a difficult spell, one that lasted perhaps four years. I list all the 
things that happened. I tell him that my relationship broke down and I moved 
out of my home. I tell him my best friend died suddenly, which threw me for a 
loop. I mention that my father fell ill. Oh, and that I also got married. I 
tell him that I then had a second child to set alongside my 11-year-old 
daughter from the previous relationship. I tell him I quit my job and quit 
London, and that we now live out west. I tell him I think that’s about it, 
although there might be some stuff I’ve forgotten. But by now I’m out of 
breath, shaken. Recited as a list, those past four years sound positively 
existential.

Marshall jots notes in his pad. He asks who I turned to for help during this 
difficult period. I tell him I didn’t really turn to anybody: I went through 
the worst parts alone. Why would I want to have people seeing me as a mess?

“It’s quite interesting,” he says. “You belonging to what we nowadays call the 
metropolitan elite. Most of my clients, by your age, have had at least three 
therapists. Whereas you went through this incredible period and not only did 
you not seek professional help, you actually detached yourself from your 
friends.”

Lots of people flunk the test. They anaesthetise themselves – with drink, 
generally. Or computer games, or porn. Or work

I nod dutifully, and yet something he said has already stuck in my craw. I 
don’t consider myself part of the metropolitan elite, and I’m annoyed that he 
would blithely stick me in that box. Nor, for that matter, am I convinced I’ve 
had a midlife crisis, despite the bald evidence of those torrid four years. But 
that’s the nature of cliche. We may see ourself as one thing, unique and 
specific; the world sees us as another – as a social demographic or a cluster 
of symptoms.

Marshall’s own interest is based on both personal and professional experience. 
His partner died when he was in his late 30s and this pitched him into what he 
describes as “the bleakest period of my life”. Meanwhile, all around, his 
patients were navigating a similar set of hurdles. The Office for National 
Statistics reports that40- to 59-year-olds are the most anxious age group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/02/middle-aged-people-least-happy-most-anxious-ons-wellbeing-report>
. Marshall believes this anxiety is sparked by a sudden awareness of mortality 
and a fear of failure; the nagging, nightmarish sense that we will never fulfil 
our true potential.

No one wants to own up to a midlife crisis: the condition is redolent of too 
many bad jokes. On setting out to write his new book, Marshall even deliberated 
before putting the term in the title, concerned that the mere mention might 
scare readers away. Finally, he opted for a cunning disguise, referencing the 
condition while denying its existence. The book is calledIt’s Not A Midlife 
Crisis, It’s An Opportunity 
<http://andrewgmarshall.com/book/its-not-a-midlife-crisis-its-an-opportunity-how-to-be-forty-or-fifty-something-without-going-off-the-rails/>
, subhead: “How To Be Forty- Or Fifty-Something Without Going Off The Rails”.

Marshall has seen many casualties in his time – people who, when faced with 
the challenges of middle age, promptly crash and burn. “A lot of people flunk 
the test,” he says. “They anaesthetise themselves – with drink, generally. Or 
with computer games, or pornography. Or with work. And if you don’t answer the 
questions, you become bitter, closed off and cynical.”

Fail and you suffer an L-shaped life, you plummet and flatline. Pass, and win 
the U-shaped life: a brilliant late bloom

I start to wonder whether I flunked the test. Marshall certainly seems to 
think I was guilty of closing myself off. He says, “I’m getting a very strong 
message that you’re not allowed to be vulnerable. That you need to be loved, 
yet, when things get difficult, you withdraw from everybody. It’s a strange 
dichotomy. Because on the one hand you’re an open book in a rather controlled 
way, in that you’re a journalist and therefore in charge of the words. But the 
rest of you is completely closed.”

“I don’t think I was completely closed,” I say. “I just didn’t want people to 
see me in disarray.”

“I’m sorry,” he says firmly, “but that’s completely closed. You only wanted 
people to see the mask.”

“OK,” I say. “Fine.”

And yet, actually, it’s not fine: his whole premise is bullshit. Look at us 
here. Look at what we are doing. Almost shouting, I say, “It’s a ridiculous 
thing, you saying I’m closed. I’m going to write this bloody session up for 
everybody to read.”

Marshall smiles, unperturbed. “Yes, well,” he says. “Often in the second half 
of our lives, we have to do all of the things we didn’t do in the first.”

***

The term “midlife crisis” was coined in 1965 by the Canadian psychologist 
Elliott Jaques <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliott_Jaques>. Marshall 
believes the label has now outlived its usefulness. He prefers to call it “the 
midlife passage”. Approached in the right spirit, he says, this is a chance to 
engage with the big questions: who am I? What are my values? What gives my life 
meaning? You can meet your true self. You can become your own person.

Marshall has devised exercises to smooth our progress. He describes a simple 
counting meditation to reduce anxiety, explains how to “record your feelings”, 
and the events that trigger them. He also invites us to chart the highs and 
lows of our lives on a graph, moving from infancy through to middle age. I try 
this last one myself. The line leaps and dips with abandon. It makes my life 
look like a series of cardiac arrests.

The way Marshall tells it, there are three obvious routes through the midlife 
passage. Fail the challenge, and you suffer what he describes as an L-shaped 
life, where you plummet to Earth and then essentially flatline until death. 
Pass the test, and you win the U-shaped life: a glorious upswing, a brilliant 
late bloom. Then there is the third option, the joker in the pack, the 
switchback ride of the W-shaped life. This occurs when you reach for the 
quick-fix solution (the thrilling affair, the scarlet Lamborghini), or what 
Marshall calls “the myth of the great other”. The effect can be instant, 
galvanic. But it’s an artificial high, a dead cat bounce that leads only to 
more heartache.

Naturally, this makes me wonder about my own circumstances. The storm has 
passed; I have a new life in a new city. My days are a whirl of nappy changes 
and country rambles, augmented with odds and sods of semi-regular work. I’m 
pretty sure it’s not an L-shaped life. But is it a W or is it a U?

Is the midlife crisis a first-world problem? Marshall disagrees: ‘It’s 
intrinsic in mankind. It hits you over the head’

Out of the blue, I find myself telling Marshall about a man named Miroslav 
Novotny. I think he’s originally from the Czech Republic; he speaks rudimentary 
English. I picture Miroslav Novotny as something out of anEdward Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hopper> painting, a study in urban 
loneliness. He wears his trousers too high on his waist. He uses too much hair 
tonic, smokes discount cigarettes. I explain that my wife and I devised a game 
we would play when driving the outskirts of south London, in which we work out 
where Novotny would most like to live. So we place him in that impersonal block 
of flats out by the A20, or eating egg and chips inside some sad greasy spoon. 
Novotny, of course, does not exist – we made him up – yet the uncomfortable 
truth is that he’s the alternative me. He asks nothing of anyone and gives 
nothing in return.

All at once, I can see it clearly. “If I had taken a different route out of 
all this, I’d be Miroslav Novotny,” I say. “And I’m glad I’m not. But there’s a 
certain comfort in being Miroslav Novotny.”

Marshall nods. He says, “Life is small but it’s safe.” And I nod back in 
relief, because that’s it exactly.

Did I have a midlife crisis, I ask Marshall.

“Yes, you did.” He adds that it is not always advisable to throw absolutely 
everything in the air, as I seem to have done. But that’s by the by. Stable 
door, horse bolted. “You have been through it and navigated it and have had a 
reasonably soft landing.”

He asks if I have any further questions. So I ask whether he sees the midlife 
crisis as a peculiarly first-world problem, a kind of luxury accessory afforded 
to those with too much time on their hands. I’m not sure you have one if you’re 
under siege in Aleppo.

Marshall has his doubts. “It’s not a case of having too much time on your 
hands,” he insists. “It comes with a great mallet and hits you over the head. 
So I think it’s something intrinsic in mankind. The first world-third world 
distinction is the wrong idea.”

My second question is more personal: I ask if he believes it’s possible to be 
both horribly anxious and basically happy, because that’s how I’ve been feeling 
for the past year or so.

“Yes, I think you can,” he answers. “But if we were to continue working 
together, the anxiety is something we would be looking at. I think that anxiety 
and anger could be the keynotes for you.”

If you’ve done the work of the middle passage, then you’re in a very good 
place, the sunny uplands of life

He is keen to accentuate the positive, though. “It sounds to me like you have 
completely transformed your life. You’ve gone from closed to open. From work 
focused to family focused. From self-sufficient to more connected. From the 
small world of…

“Miroslav Novotny.”

“From the small world of Miroslav Novotny to the larger world of family and 
children and a new city. But the anxiety is something I would be working on. 
Anxiety and depression are like brother and sister.”

I walk back to the tube in something of a daze. I feel as though I’ve spent 
the past 90 minutes being dangled upside down by the ankles, watching all the 
detritus falling from my pockets. Some of this clutter was harmless ephemera, 
but other bits were jagged and rusted. Some were foul-smelling, some smeared 
with dried blood. With them gone, I feel lighter.

***

One month later, I meet Marshall again, this time in a bookshop above a cafe. 
It’s late August, and the therapist is on holiday. He’s bare-kneed in tan 
shorts, with a natty straw hat perched on his pink scalp, a copy of Graham 
Swift’s Waterland parked in the crook of one arm. Seeing him here is slightly 
disconcerting, like bumping into a teacher away from school.

He asks how I’ve been and I assure him I’m fine. I tell him, in fact, that 
I’ve been suspiciously fine. I’ve started to wonder whether the session itself 
was a kind of quick fix. I worry I painted myself in too positive a light; I 
worry he moved too quickly to endorse my depiction. This would normally be 
about a six-month process. We went through it in about 90 minutes flat.

“Well, yes,” Marshall agrees. “It’s not the best way of doing it, so you have 
to be careful. I mean, if I had been aware of some really horrible stuff, I 
would have skated over it, because I don’t want to open up that can of worms. 
If we saw there was a total car crash in the wings, I might well have 
acknowledged it – but I wouldn’t go up and peer through the window.

“But, happily, there wasn’t. And even if there was, I had the sense you’d come 
through it relatively unscathed.”

I feel I’ve made peace with my crisis, but what comes next? I want to know 
what other hurdles I’m going to face in my 50s, to steer clear of more trouble, 
if I can.

But the therapist grins. He’s in holiday mode. “What comes next? Well, 
wonderful times. If you’ve done the work of the middle passage, then you’re in 
a very good place, the sunny uplands of life. The next question is not what 
gives your life meaning, but what gives meaning to everyone’s life. It’s a more 
spiritual inquiry: the self versus the infinite.” Another grin. “I’m not even 
sure whether therapy is the right place to answer those questions. You may need 
to roll up your sleeves and go and do it yourself.”

The house where I now live is perched high on a hill, a steep 15-minute climb 
from the nearest train station. I try to make this journey on foot as often as 
I can (if I’m losing my hair, I figure I can at least shed some weight along 
with it). Sometimes I wonder how I must look to the motorists driving by. A 
sweaty, middle-aged man with a red face and bad posture, sometimes pushing hard 
at a buggy for added comedy value. The man is a wreck. Every step’s an ordeal. 
But near the top of the hill, the road swings out from the shadows. The city 
drops away and the horizon is endless. And this, I decide, is my favourite part 
of the journey. One might almost be entering the sunny uplands of life, 
approaching a house that feels very nearly like home.

 * It’s Not A Midlife Crisis, It’s An Opportunity 
<http://andrewgmarshall.com/book/its-not-a-midlife-crisis-its-an-opportunity-how-to-be-forty-or-fifty-something-without-going-off-the-rails/>
 is published by Marshall Method Publishing at £12.99.  