
The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
government is investigating “disturbing” reports of people in the state’s far 
north trying to catch crocodiles with baited fishing lines, including one who 
advertised their efforts on Facebook.

The Department of Environment and Heritage Protection is examining three 
alleged cases of illegal fishing for the protected reptiles over the past two 
months in Douglas, Hinchinbrook and Whitsunday shires.

The state environment minister, Steven Miles, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/great-barrier-reef-progress-report-we-have-to-do-better-on-water-quality-says-australia>
 said one of the alleged cases involved someone seemingly trying to “bolster 
their social media presence”.

“They achieved this objective, their Facebook posts leading us to investigate 
their actions,” Miles said. “It’s frankly unbelievable that members of the 
public would contemplate doing this. It shows a complete disregard for personal 
and public safety.

Crocodile escapes from Darwin wildlife park as another allegedly stolen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/crocodile-escapes-from-darwin-wildlife-park-as-another-allegedly-stolen>
“In each instance, the size of the baits used and the places they were found 
clearly suggests that crocodiles are being targeted.”

The state’s first fatal attack for seven years in May prompted renewed calls 
from some including federal MP Bob Katter to allow culling of a crocodile 
population <http://The Queensland government is investigating “disturbing” 
reports of people in the state’s far north trying to catch crocodiles with 
baited fishing lines, including one who advertised their efforts on Facebook. 
The department of environment and heritage protection is examining three 
alleged cases of illegal fishing for the protected reptiles over the past two 
months in Douglas, Hinchinbrook and Whitsunday shires. Environment minister 
Steven Miles said one of the alleged cases involved someone seemingly trying to 
“bolster their social media presence”. “They achieved this objective, their 
Facebook posts leading us to investigate their actions,” he said. “It’s frankly 
unbelievable that members of the public would contemplate doing this, it shows 
a complete disregard for personal and public safety. “In each instance, the 
size of the baits used and the places they were found clearly suggests that 
crocodiles are being targeted.” The state’s first fatal attack for seven years 
in May prompted renewed calls from some including federal MP Bob Katter to 
allow culling of a crocodile population that has recovered after being hunted 
to near extinction. But both the state Labor government and Liberal National 
opposition have ruled out culling, which according to a departmental survey 
enjoys little community support in “croc country”. Miles said in the present 
mating season, the potentially lethal wild animals “can become very territorial 
and aggressive, particularly if they feel threatened”. “To attempt to attract 
them and to – heaven forbid – try to capture them is both illegal and seriously 
life-risking behaviour,” he said. “Other members of the public can also be 
placed at greater risk if crocodiles begin to associate a particular place with 
food.” People who feed wild crocodiles can be fined up to $4876, and up to 
$27,427 for capturing them under the Nature Conservation Act. 
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/31/fatal-crocodile-attack-on-woman-in-queensland-revives-calls-to-allow-hunt>
 that has recovered after being hunted to near extinction.

But both the state Labor government and Liberal National opposition have ruled 
out culling, which, according to a departmental survey, has little community 
support in “croc country”.

Miles said that, in the present mating season, the potentially lethal wild 
animals “can become very territorial and aggressive, particularly if they feel 
threatened”.

“To attempt to attract them and to – heaven forbid – try to capture them is 
both illegal and seriously life-risking behaviour,” he said. “Other members of 
the public can also be placed at greater risk if crocodiles begin to associate 
a particular place with food.”

People who feed wild crocodiles can be fined up to $4,876 and up to $27,427 
for capturing them under the Nature Conservation Act.
 