
If you’re a Sydney real estate agent you might want to stop reading here.

Even though I’d really like you to finish it.

Oh yeah, if you think you recognise yourself here ... well, you probably do.

Let’s begin by saying there is a special place in real estate heaven (which, 
for most of the rest of us, is actually hell) for the people who write (in a 
manner) advertising material – “media”, as they call it in the game – to sell 
residential property. Even by the hyperbolic standards of the worst advertising 
industry quackery, real estate media in Sydney inhabits a parallel universe fit 
to challenge Ray Bradbury.

A design-led property boom could help solve Australia's housing affordability 
crisis | Tim Ross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/07/a-design-led-property-boom-could-help-solve-australias-housing-affordability-crisis>
You know, the agents who’ll describe a sooty terrace with a price tag of $2.4m 
and wedged between a paint stripper factory and a chicken processing plant as 
“enviably situated in a tightly held enclave”?

To them, every house is a “haven”, a crack den under the flight path “a 
tranquil family oasis” and a vermin-infested weatherboard on for a “modest” 
$1.82m and next to the bus depot, an “uncut gem”.

Every address is, naturally, “premier”, not to mention “rare” (oh yes – like 
the one with the “second bathroom” that was, in fact, an exposed tub on a 
rickety verandah) and “possessed of irresistible potential”.

Gardens are invariably “lush” and “al fresco ready” (al fresco, by the way, is 
often a noun – as in “and there’s your al fresco” or “irresistible al fresco 
for perfect family togetherness”).

Once, of course, it was that old euphemism, the “renovator’s delight”. 
Nowadays it is possessed of “irresistible potential … lying in wait for your 
next chapter”.

Chapter 2: It was a dark and stormy night. He doused the joint in petrol 
before digging in his pocket for a lighter and …

I did inspect one that was described by Brad or Clint or Wes or some other 
agent channelling the inner bard as “a blank canvas upon which to paint your 
future fantasies and dreams”. It turned out to be a reductive take on a 
complete house; I fantasised about sealing him in the “inexpensive future, 
potential loft conversion”, and dreamt of how it might look if it actually had 
complete walls and doors.

Real estate <https://www.theguardian.com/business/realestate> photographers, 
meanwhile, are masters of a particularly dark art in the property game. Rarely 
does anything look nearly as good (or as big) in the bricks and mortar and 
weatherboard as it does in the brochures or online – which is why, of course, 
vendors will invest tens of thousands of dollars in the media.

And can anyone explain to me what it is about San Pellegrino and artichokes 
that renders them requisite for the brochures and online pictures – even if the 
house might be falling down around them? Perhaps it’s a talisman, a warning, 
that once you’ve bought and paid the stamp duty (thanks for nothing) and 
factored in the cost of a small renovation so your kids have an actual bedroom 
(the one online turned out to be what they call a “nook” – meaning a kind of 
doorless, windowless cupboard) you’ll never afford to eat anything but raw 
vegetables again.

Of course, you know what you’re buying when the media features just the back 
shed and says “roll up your sleeves for this one” and when, from every angle, 
the apartment looks like a scene from CSI complete with suspiciously 
person-shaped brown stain in the middle of the living room.

When you’re waiting with dozens of others for an open house to open, there’s 
an unspoken yet highly competitive game where the winner is first to declare, 
“There’s the agent!” – while pointing to the latest model Merc, BMW or Rover 
that’s turned into the street.

Ah, but they earn it with all those phone calls.

“I have a unique offering for you maaaate,” one of them promised me during one 
of his many calls.

So I went and looked. I told him in a follow-up call I wasn’t interested 
because there was no green space for my dogs. He rang back two weeks later to 
say the property was actually over-priced (smelling salts please!) and would I 
think again now that $10,000 had been cut from the price.

“Would you consider getting a sledgehammer and smashing up some concrete and 
planting grass?” he asked.

I replied: “Only if you come and help me.”

“No … we don’t do that.”

Or irony.

Interest rates and housing: how the national ​picture​ hides uneven growth | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/nov/03/interest-rates-and-housing-how-the-national-picture-hides-uneven-growth>
Then there was the house with the staircase that belonged in Andy Griffiths 
78-storey tree house (now that’s a house).

No, I explained – my elderly father-in-law would never be able to get to the 
upstairs bedroom when he comes to stay.

“How about you get him to sleep on the downstairs sofa?” the agent suggested.

“How about I just send him ‘round to crash at your joint,” I countered.

Not so much as a smile from her.

Yes, encountering Sydney’s residential real estate hell is undeniably a first 
world problem.

If you stop a while and really think about it, there’s an obvious dilemma – 
and for many, no doubt, a rather delicious irony – associated with that. Well, 
there is for me anyway. And that is that property in Australia is none too 
elaborate theft because it stands on Indigenous land.

And now the original theft of the land around Sydney stands beneath new layers 
of thievery and connivance.
 