
In the debate about London’s skyline there are certain points on which most of 
the protagonists – developers, architects, planners, mayors, campaigners – 
agree. There’s nothing wrong with towers in principle, they say, but they 
should be well-designed and in the right place. The various policies regarding 
tall buildings say much the same thing.

Londoners back limit on skyscrapers as fears for capital’s skyline grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/27/londoners-back-skyscraper-limit-skyline>
Now it seems that ordinary citizens agree, too. Ipsos Mori’s poll finds large 
chunks of opinion on both sides of most of its questions, but in general it 
suggests that most Londoners are tolerant of tall buildings, or at least not 
outraged by them.

But there is widespread concern about their impact on the city as a whole and 
on individual neighbourhoods. A clear six out of 10 respondents want some kind 
of limit on skyscrapers, and more than half (56%) want them limited to specific 
areas, which presumably means they should be “in the right place”.

They also like towers more if they help meet housing need, which is often used 
as an argument for giving them planning permission. On the face of it, towers 
should do this: it seems common sense that a tall building should create more 
living units than a short one.

The snag is that the terms “well-designed” and “in the right place” have 
proved so vague as to be largely ignorable by the developers of towers, and by 
the planners who approve them.

What is lost below by building above | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/29/what-is-lost-below-by-building-above>
The clusters that will dominate the Thames at Vauxhall and Blackfriars are not 
by any reasonable definition in the right place. The meretricious junk 
appearing in outer suburbs is not well-designed. Nor have towers so far done 
much to address the most pressing housing needs – rather, their planning 
applications come with ingenious arguments as to why they should be excused 
from requirements for providing affordable housing.

There are some glimmers of hope that the skyscraper free-for-all promoted 
during the mayoralty of Boris Johnson might be calming down. The proposed 
Paddington Pole, a Shard-sized tower in west London, has been significantly 
reduced in height. And the palisade of towers planned for Bishopsgate Goodsyard 
in eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has been knocked back.

It’s also certain that many of the 400-plus plans for tall buildings will 
never be realised, especially if there is a Brexit-induced property slump. But 
it will only take a few ill-considered proposals to inflict severe damage on 
the city’s fabric and views.

The case is as strong as ever for a coherent and considered strategy for 
building tall in London, one that defines where towers are and are not 
acceptable and sets out basic principles – about their impact at street level, 
for example, and their relationships to each other and to existing buildings. 
Not only is it basic common sense – it’s also what most of the public would 
like.
 