 After months of pressure from both sides of the political divide in Washington 
DC, the Bush administration on Wednesday announced that it would join Europe in 
negotiations with Iran over its nuclear programme. The secretary of state, 
Condoleezza Rice, presented the decision as proof that the United States is 
serious about pursuing all avenues of diplomacy before resorting to a military 
option. But if this week's announcement indicates anything, it is that the 
White House has finally begun to recognise what its own policy advisers and 
military analysts have been privately saying for some time: there is no 
military option with regard to Iran.
That's because the invasion of Iraq has completely reshaped the dynamics of 
the region, making Iran the new political power in the Middle East. With its 
two nearest enemies - Saddam Hussein and the Taliban - gone, Iran has firmly 
secured its interests in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Through its ties with 
Hizbullah, Iran has managed to fill the power vacuum left by Syria's abrupt 
withdrawal from Lebanon. At the same time, Iran has taken advantage of the cut 
in international funding to the Hamas-dominated Palestinian authority to make 
up its economic shortfall, thus gaining an even firmer foothold in the 
Palestinian territories. Meanwhile, record oil prices and booming trade with 
Russia, China and India have allowedIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> to shrug off any economic pressure to 
give up its nuclear program.

Not since the takeover of the American embassy in 1979-80 has Iran been in a 
more favourable bargaining position vis-a-vis the United States. In fact, one 
could argue that when it comes to the nuclear issue, Iran is holding all the 
cards. After all, while it is clear that for years Iran has been hiding the 
size and scope of its nuclear programme so as not to attract unwelcome 
attention, technically it has yet to violate the nuclear non-proliferation 
treaty (a testament to the inherent weakness of the treaty).

That partly explains why the International Atomic Energy Association has been 
loath to issue anything more than a few tepid appeals for Iran to voluntarily 
suspend its nuclear programme and return to the negotiating table. It is also 
why there has been so much hesitation from the international community to refer 
Iran to the UN security council. Russia and China are not the only countries 
resisting calls to punish Iran. Brazil, South Korea, Japan, and other 
signatories of the non-proliferation treaty are rightly concerned about what 
effect sanctioning Iran would have on their own burgeoning nuclear programmes.

Given the relative weakness of the US bargaining position, it is no wonder 
that there are some in the Bush administration - notably the vice-president, 
Dick Cheney - who continue to insist that a military solution to America's Iran 
problem is not just a viable option, but the best option available to the US. 
(Last month, presumably as the administration was mulling over the decision to 
hold direct talks with Iran, a number of reports surfaced claiming that the 
Pentagon, under specific instructions from the vice-president's office, has 
been using an Iranian terrorist organisation called the Mujahedin-e Khalq (MEK) 
to conduct stealth military and intelligence operations in Iran in anticipation 
of a possible military attack).

As Seymour Hersh reported in the New Yorker, there are even those in the US 
government who are convinced that a sustained bombing campaign would not only 
halt Iran's nuclear programme; it would, apparently, so weaken the clerical 
regime that Iranians would be compelled to rise up and overthrow it. Putting 
aside the fact that the US has neither the military resources nor the domestic 
support to fight a second pre-emptive war in the region (much less one directly 
on Iraq's borders), and ignoring, for a moment, the almost unanimous conviction 
among American security analysts that military strikes would delay Iran's 
nuclear programme by a few years at most, what Dick Cheney and other proponents 
of an American invasion generally fail to address in their drumbeat for war is 
Iran's unprecedented ability to retaliate against US interests by using its 
proxies in the Middle East.

Iran's military reach in the region has never extended so far. In Lebanon, 
Hizbullah has vowed to respond to any attack on its benefactor by launching its 
own missiles into Israel. (Such an attack would undoubtedly prompt a fierce 
Israeli response, which would destabilise Lebanon's fragile government and lead 
to another decades-long civil war.) In the Palestinian territories, Iran has 
long had a ready-made militia in the form of Islamic Jihad. Now, thanks to the 
tens of millions of dollars Iran is pouring into the new Palestinian Authority, 
Iran can also rely on Hamas to act as an extension of its military forces.

But Iran can do the most harm in Iraq, where Iran's infiltration of Shia 
militias, especially the ruthless and well-equipped Mahdi army of Moqtada 
al-Sadr, gives it the ability to attack not just American interests, but 
American soldiers. Indeed, Iran's influence over its neighbour is such that any 
hope of salvaging a stable, viable government in Iraq would vanish with the 
first bomb to fall upon Tehran.

Furthermore, those who imagine that bombing Iran would somehow lead to regime 
change are merely confirming the almost wilful ignorance displayed by the Bush 
administration when it comes to the Middle East. Unlike the people of Iraq, who 
were forced together by artificial borders and fabricated nationalities, 
Iranians are united by an almost exaggerated sense of nationalism that 
transcends all boundaries of politics or piety. Perhaps the only way to rally 
the Iranian people around a regime that the vast majority of them despise is to 
rain bombs on the country. That is precisely what happened in 1980, when 
Hussein, spurred by the United States, launched a surprise invasion of Iran.

At the time, Iran was in the midst of profound political and social turmoil as 
a host of competing factions - from the Marxists to the Social Democrats to the 
clerical establishment - vied with one another for control over the new 
government. Hussein believed that this post-revolutionary chaos would allow him 
a quick victory over his enemy. Instead, Iranians immediately put aside their 
differences and united behind their charismatic spiritual leader, the Ayatollah 
Khomeini, who then used the emergency powers he had been granted to push aside 
the democratically inclined transitional government and transform what began as 
a vibrant experiment in indigenous Islamic democracy into a fascist clerical 
oligarchy.

Despite its new found position as a potent regional power, however, Iran is 
even more fragmented today than it was three decades ago. The clerical regime 
likes to proclaim that all Iranians are unanimous in insisting on their 
inalienable right to pursue nuclear technology, whatever the costs. But 
underneath the facade of a unified Iran is a raucous debate over how best to 
proceed with the country's nuclear ambitions. A great many Iranians, including 
some powerful conservatives, are incensed with the way negotiations with Europe 
have broken down under the leadership of Iran's bellicose president, Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad. The merchant class is up in arms at the prospect of suffering even 
greater international isolation. And Ahmadinejad's main opponent in the last 
presidential elections, the pragmatic cleric and wily politician Akbar Hashemi 
Rafsanjani, has even gone so far as to publicly denounce the president 
(something unheard of in Iranian politics) for essentially destroying any hope 
Iran may have had to pursue its nuclear research in peace. In the meantime, the 
chorus of voices in Iran calling for a negotiated settlement is growing louder 
by the day.

But the moment the bombs start to fall on Iran, this debate would come to a 
halt. As happens in times of national security, political dissent would be 
stifled and the regime given unchecked wartime authority to do whatever it 
thought best to "protect" the country. Already those activists, like the Nobel 
peace prize winner Shirin Ebadi, who call for an end to the nuclear showdown 
with the west, have been labelled American stooges and possible threats to 
Iran's national security.

Fortunately, despite the machinations of the vice president, the Bush 
administration seems to be slowly coming to terms with the fact that it may 
have no choice but to fully engage Iran in diplomacy. And while Ahmadinejad 
continues to scoff at any conditions placed upon Iran by the US for direct 
dialogue, the truth is he has no say in the matter. It is one of the peculiar 
hallmarks of the Iranian government that the country's democratically elected 
president is responsible for virtually no foreign or domestic policy decisions. 
All such determinations are made solely by the country's supreme leader, Ali 
Khamene'i, who, on more than one occasion, has indicated his willingness to 
pursue dialogue with the US.

Direct negotiations between the US and Iran have the potential not only to put 
an end to the nuclear impasse, but also to open the door for further dialogue 
on other issues of mutual concern, including the security situation in Iraq. No 
one can doubt that the last three decades of US policy toward Iran have failed 
to either bring down the clerical regime or make Iran more democratic. Indeed, 
it has done the exact opposite, so that the regime is now stronger than ever 
and the democratic opposition on the verge of collapse.

It's time for a new approach to Iran, one that replaces America's failed 
sanctions policy with a package of security guarantees and economic incentives 
in exchange for international cooperation with its civilian nuclear programme. 
In other words, the same package being offered to North Korea. Of course, 
unlike North Korea, Iran is a sophisticated and technology-savvy country that 
boasts adult literacy rates approaching 90%. The vast majority of Iranians - 
nearly 70% of whom are under 30 years old - are fiercely pro-American and would 
like nothing more than an end to the clerical regime. But in a country in which 
nearly a third of the population is unemployed and the average annual rate of 
inflation is 24%, most Iranians are far too concerned with eking out a living 
to consider rising en masse against their government.

Neo-conservative fantasies notwithstanding, Iran is no longer a rogue state 
teetering on the brink of a popular revolt. For better or worse, Iran is now a 
sturdy and stable political powerhouse in an increasingly volatile region. It 
is long past time for the Bush administration to begin treating it as such. If 
the US can put aside its ideological reservations and confront Iran the way it 
confronted the Soviet Union and China - with an aggressive policy of 
interdependent trade relations in the hope that economic growth will foster 
democratic change - it could do so much more than reign in Iran's nuclear 
ambitions. By forcing the country out of its isolation and giving Iranians 
access to the global market, the US could achieve the very regime change it has 
been striving for all these years.

· Reza Aslan is the Iranian-born author of No god but God
 