
We are still Europeans, liar-in-chief Boris Johnson intoned after the event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/boris-johnson-no-need-haste-eu-exit-negotiations>
. Other Brexiteers joined the refrain: Britain should take time to work out 
exactly what deal and what relationship we now wanted with Europe before 
launching the article 50 process towards the exit.

No such caution was expressed by the leader of the Labour party, Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. There was no anger, 
sadness or disbelief, and no recognition of the profundity of the plight in 
which the country now finds itself. Rather, he said, Britain must trigger 
article 50 “immediately”. He did not say what relationship Britain might now 
have with Europe as a result. Sixteen million British had voted to remain. 
Nobody spoke for us that desolate morning – or offered a grain of hope.

It was the culmination of a wretched Labour campaign lacking coherence, 
passion and conviction: eloquent testimony to the marginalisation of the Labour 
party under Corbyn’s leadership. How could it be that Labour’s leader could say 
and think something so crass? One inadequate man has come to personify all the 
perennially unresolved contradictions in left politics that cripples it 
politically. Is theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party a 
social movement or a political party? Is its job to transform capitalism or 
reform it so it works better for ordinary people? What constitution should 
shape its own democracy or that of the country more widely? How is it to allay 
the fears and apprehensions of working-class Britain in era of mass immigration?

Corbyn has very particular answers. The Labour party’s role is to be the 
political expression of popular left social movements – like the ones that 
provoked his own 500 acts of rebellion against the Labour whip. Democracy is 
simply the expression of mass majorities built by social protest. Constitutions 
are bourgeois obstacles to such popular social movements. Indeed the notion of 
a public interest, created by a constitutional architecture of checks and 
balances to permit democratic representatives to develop and articulate such an 
interest, is anathema. In a capitalist society there can only be class 
interests. The object of a left party is not the creation of a capitalism that 
better serves the public interest and ordinary people: rather its aim must be 
the overthrow of capitalism.

Thus Corbyn could not campaign wholeheartedly for the EU as a noble idea that 
represents the best effort the world has seen to build international 
co-operation. Too many in the boss class were in favour for him to throw his 
weight unambiguously behind the EU. Nor could he share a platform with the 
class enemy, the leader of the Tory party, even in an existential fight for 
Britain’s place in the world. He focused more narrowly on the EU’s role in 
helping class gains – workers’ rights and freedom of movement of labour, even 
if the latter is actively hated by many working people.

When the result came, he interpreted it as the voice of a social movement to 
which a politician had to respond “immediately”. He could not say what needed 
to be said: that this was a devastating vote to which the whole of Europe had 
to respond if it was to hold together. Other countries were threatened by the 
same cocktail of squeezed wages, mass immigration and growth of left-behind 
communities who were disillusioned with both globalisation and the EU. And 
while the vote had to be respected in the short term, the country in its own 
best interests had to proceed cautiously. The triggering of article 50 could 
only happen when it was clear it would not be a leap in dark, shredding trade 
relationships, investment and jobs. He would work to refashion both European 
and British capitalism so that ordinary people could see it worked for them. 
Who knows? There could yet be an offer from the EU – say on free movement – 
that would allow Britain, one day, to take back its proper place as a leader of 
the EU.

Labour, as 172 Labour MPs concluded last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
, along with a growing number of constituency associations, can never win a 
general election with such a leader. Yet despite the pressure – depicted by him 
and his coterie as from the Blairite establishment – he is refusing to resign. 
John McDonnell, shadow chancellor, saysif there is a formal challenge from say 
Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/tom-watson-calls-on-labour-mps-to-prevent-leadership-contest>
, the Corbynites will simply flood the electorate for a new leader with 
Momentum members – a process already under way. Anticipating a general election 
this October, McDonnell told private meetings this week that Labour will win. 
It is a world of fantasy.

If Corbyn stays as a leader, many Labour MPs are resigned to the party 
splitting. There will be a minority of MPs and constituency associations loyal 
to his vision, but the overwhelming majority are in politics to make a 
difference – not to go down in a sinking ship. They feel a particular 
obligation at this time, above any other, to keep the liberal social democratic 
tradition alive – and with it a conception of being part of Europe.

Who is to know whether the new Tory leader will even try to give Britain 
access to the single European market via the European Economic Area? If not, 
bending to Ukip and the Brexit-ultras – who are borne on the noxious rising 
tide of racism, and place immigration control as the overriding purpose of 
state policy – the amount of disinvestment, the disruption of trade flows and 
relocation of factories and offices to the EU will become overwhelming. The real
charge against both the governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/15/brexit-minister-bank-of-england-dangerous-intervention-andrea-leadsom-financial-markets-eu>
and chancellor is not that they were scaremongering: rather it is they 
downplayed the economic costs and risks.

More than that hundreds of thousands – maybe millions – of people are 
discovering that politics matters. They want to fight for a liberal, tolerant, 
internationalist and fair Britain. They abhor Ukip, the Brexit Tory party and 
their ferocious propagandists in the rightwing media. They are founding 
citizens groups, pressure groups and signing petitions. They want hope and 
leadership. More support will be garnered as the extent of this self-inflicted 
catastrophe becomes evident in the months ahead.

A well-led Labour party with a crafted cluster of policies to secure a better 
capitalism, good jobs and careers, reinvent social housing, embrace new 
technologies, find new ways of representing workers and above all to stand by 
the best of British values could put itself at the centre of this emerging 
coalition. Its constitution would put the election of its leader in the hands 
of the parliamentary party, with a run-off of the two frontrunners elected 
through a reconstituted electoral college . Such a party would be a real threat 
to the Brexit Tories. It could win a general election by 2020 when the carnage 
will be there for all to see.

But this will never be done by Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. The Labour party must be 
reclaimed – for the sake of British values, for British democracy and for the 
very future of our country. Nothing less will do.
 