
The ABC’s Catalyst program is to lose its weekly slot and its 11 staff – 
including the suspended presenter Maryanne Demasi – will be made redundant 
under a radical plan approved by the ABC board.

Under the plan the in-house magazine-style program will be replaced by 17 
one-hour science specials, mainly from the independent production sector.

But senior ABC program makers have warned that ditching the weekly half-hour 
program and disbanding the science unit would lead to a dumbing down of science 
programming and effectively kill off Australian science on television.


Demasi has been on leave since a review of her Wi-Fried? program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/abc-catalyst-under-review-episode-linking-wifi-cancer>
 – which linked Wi-Fi and mobile phones with health risks including brain 
cancer – was found to have breached the ABC’s impartiality guidelines.


The discredited program was the second Catalyst story by Demasi to be found in 
breach of the ABC’s editorial policies and to be removed from the website. In 
2013 Demasi kept her job despite an editorial breach for a program about statins
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/12/abc-takes-down-catalyst-heart-disease-episodes-after-review-criticism>
.


An internal management review, commissioned in the wake of the Demasi 
breaches, has now recommended that the entire weekly program be axed along with 
its presenters, producers and researchers.


Criticism of Catalyst misses the point. No journalist should be in thrall to 
mainstream opinion | Michael Slezak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/criticism-of-catalyst-misses-the-point-no-journalist-should-be-in-thrall-to-mainstream-opinion>
Senior program makers and independent producers claim that middle management 
has “absolved itself” of any responsibility for the the lack of editorial 
control at Catalyst that led to the two programs being cleared for broadcast.

 Of the plan to air hour-long documentaries under the Catalyst name, ABC 
program makers say science lends itself to short-form content that can bounce 
off the news. Under the longer format, they say, the Australian element would 
be severely watered down.

“By doing this you are saying the ABC TV stops covering science effectively,” 
one senior ABC program maker told Guardian Australia. “Seventeen in-depth 
stories a year wouldn’t cover Australia science. If you stop doing short-form 
journalistic science then you’re not covering science any more.

“There are very, very few science stories that survive an hour of television. 
There are only a few topics like that. A lot of them to do them well require an 
overseas focus rather than an Australian focus.


The Catalyst staff include the experienced presenter Graham Phillips, who has 
been a reporter on the ABC science programs Catalyst, Quantum and Hot Chips, 
and Jonica Newby, who has twice won Australia’s premier science journalism 
prize, the Australian Museum Eureka prize for science journalism.


The plan to shake up the ABC’s science coverage, based on the BBC’s Horizon 
model, was approved by the board after a recommendation from television 
management including the director of television, Richard Finlayson, and the 
head of factual, Steve Bibb.


The report into Catalyst was written by the departing ABC executive Brendan 
Dahill before he left to be the chief executive of Keogh Films, which produces 
Struggle Street.

An independent producer told Guardian Australia the plan was unworkable on the 
relatively small budget the ABC was offering the private sector. She said 
commissioning 17 one-hour science specials had not been properly costed and 
would never work.

 “They have specifically decided not to do any ‘investigative’ films and want 
lightweight stuff,” she said.

 The independent report on Wi-Fried? concluded 
<http://about.abc.net.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/FINAL-REPORT-Catalyst-WiFried-Investigation.pdf>
: “The cumulative effect of the inadequate signposting for the audience; the 
selection and lack of context in the scientific papers referenced in or 
underpinning the program; the prominence given to views challenging the 
scientific consensus; and the findings for accuracy all unduly favour the 
unorthodox perspective that wireless devices and Wi-Fi pose significant health 
risks.”

A spokesman for the ABC confirmed that Catalyst was under review. “The ABC can 
confirm Catalyst will be part of the ABC schedule in 2017 and acknowledges the 
importance of the program for the scientific community and audiences in 
general,” he said.

Disability commissioner criticises ABC over cuts to transcription service
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/disability-commissioner-criticises-abc-over-cuts-to-transcription-service>
 “The ABC consistently reviews programs at the end of each year to ensure it 
maintains its commitment to audience needs and expectations. After more than 15 
years ABC Television is reviewing Catalyst’s format and production model. ABC 
management will respond to that review in due course.”

The ABC staff union, the Community and Public Sector Union, said it was 
imperative the ABC maintained its specialist Australian science content.

“The CPSU has written to the ABC seeking an urgent confirmation of whether the 
reported scrapping of Catalyst in its current form is true,” said the ABC 
section secretary, Sinddy Ealy. “If so, it’s an appalling way for staff to find 
out they may lose their jobs.

“Catalyst fills a unique and important place in Australian science journalism 
and we share concerns that a longer-format replacement would mean important and 
exciting scientific work was ignored. It would be a huge disservice to the 
Australian public if the ABC’s strategy is to intentionally dumb down 
specialist content in favour of ratings.

“The changing media landscape means the importance of ABC’s specialist content 
has never been greater. We recognise that ABC should review its programs 
regularly, but they also need to ensure that quality specialist content and the 
staff behind that content are retained.”
 