
Staff on the ABC’s Catalyst program staff have been told by the ABC’s director 
of television Richard Finlayson that their positions will be made redundant.

In a meeting at Ultimo attended by TV management and human resources the 
presenters and producers were told the magazine style program was ending.

A last-minute bid by senior ABC staff on Wednesday to overturn the board’s 
decision to axe Catalyst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/31/catalyst-staff-to-be-sacked-and-weekly-tv-show-format-scrapped>
 failed, sources told Guardian Australia.

An ABC spokesman said not all Catalyst staff would be made redundant because 
“as many as possible would be redeployed to the new format or to other 
productions”.

“The ABC is now in consultation with staff to discuss alternate positions,” he 
said.


The CPSU told Guardian Australia nine full-time staff are potentially 
redundant, and eight contract staff will not have their contracts renewed.

Earlier, the board had been presented with reasons why the ABC should continue 
to cover science properly with an in-house science unit.

An internal review after Catalyst presenter Maryanne Demasi’s Wi-Fried? program
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/abc-catalyst-under-review-episode-linking-wifi-cancer>
was found to have breached the ABC’s impartiality guidelines recommended the 
program be axed and Demasi and all the other staff be made redundant.

Finlayson told staff that nine people’s roles will be made redundant and that 
the changes to Catalyst were not driven by the Demasi incident alone.

“For 2017, Catalyst will move from the current half-hour, magazine-style 
program structure to a one-hour documentary format, focused on high-impact, 
single-issue programs or series,” he said.

“It will be presented by leading science experts, chosen for the various 
programs. This shift will align Catalyst with world’s best practice for science 
programming. An embedded digital capability will deliver short-form content 
around each program and throughout the year to increase the ABC’s digital 
science offering on ABC and third party social platforms.

“Finally, we must recognise that Catalyst and its team have served our 
audiences and the science community well for many years. However, we need to do 
what we believe is best for audiences, and that means adjusting our approach to 
best meet their needs and the realities of a changing market. We will work 
closely with those staff impacted by these changes to ensure they are treated 
respectfully throughout this transition.”

Under the board’s plan the award-winning program will be replaced by 17 
one-hour science specials, mainly from the independent production sector, 
commissioned by new staff the ABC is going to hire.

ABC Catalyst's future under review after episode linking Wi-Fi and cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/abc-catalyst-under-review-episode-linking-wifi-cancer>
The ABC staff union, the Community and Public Sector Union, was holding 
meetings with management and staff on Thursday morning.

A letter from the ABC section secretary, Sinddy Ealy, to management fell on 
deaf ears.

“Catalyst fills a unique and important place in Australian science journalism 
and we share concerns that a longer-format replacement would mean important and 
exciting scientific work was ignored,” Ealy said.

“It would be a huge disservice to the Australian public if the ABC’s strategy 
is to intentionally dumb down specialist content in favour of ratings.

“The changing media landscape means the importance of ABC’s specialist content 
has never been greater. We recognise that ABC should review its programs 
regularly, but they also need to ensure that quality specialist content and the 
staff behind that content are retained.”

Senior ABC program makers warned that ditching the weekly half-hour program 
and disbanding the science unit would lead to a dumbing down of science 
programming and in effect kill off Australian science on television.

Demasi has been on leave since a review of her Wi-Fried? program – which 
linked Wi-Fi and mobile phones with health risks including brain cancer – was 
found to have breached the ABC’s impartiality guidelines.

The discredited program was the second Catalyst story by Demasi to be found in 
breach of the ABC’s editorial policies and to be removed from the website. In 
2013 Demasi kept her job despite an editorial breach for a program about 
statins.
 