
Three thousand refugees now arrive in Europe every day, mainly heading for 
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. It’s hard not to feel 
uneasy – even fearful – about how German and European politics are going to 
evolve in reaction, and how this might affect the very future of the EU.

Paris might still be reeling from the 130 deaths in November’s terrorist 
attack, but now Germany is recoiling from themultiple attacks on women on New 
Year’s Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/germany-crisis-cologne-new-years-eve-sex-attacks>
 from apparently young Arab men, many new immigrants or asylum seekers.

Terrorism can be dealt with by aggressive police, detection and surveillance 
work. The European public may not like the impact on their liberties, but they 
can recognise a feasible response is nonetheless possible. However, managing 
unreconstructed attitudes towards women by newly arrived young Arab men is far 
harder and much more menacing. It poses the question that a liberal society 
does not want to confront. Is cultural coexistence possible – and if not, what 
is to be done?

'I’ve never experienced anything like that': Cologne in deep shock over attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/ive-never-experienced-anything-like-that-cologne-in-deep-shock-over-attacks>
The German media, police and criminal justice system have been agonisingly 
slow to respond, perhaps hoping that silence would make the problem go away. 
But a week later, it is now becoming clear that there were ugly incidents on 
New Year’s Eve in many German cities. In Cologne up to 1,000 men, many 
described as of North African or Arab appearance, and aged between 18 and 35, 
gathered in the huge square between Cologne cathedral and the main railway 
station. They let off fireworks and robbed passers-by. Of the complaints, 117 
involved sexual assault, including two allegations of rape.

Wolfgang Albers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/cologne-violence-suspects-include-asylum-seekers>
, Cologne’s police chief, who did not accept offers of aid from a nearby police 
force and issued a press statement on New Year’s Day saying that NYE had passed 
off peacefully, has been suspended by the state interior minister. The local 
public TV station, which did not broadcast any news for two days after the 
events, has publicly apologised. Only now are German newspapers and politicians 
beginning to engage with the profound issues.

Some of what is surfacing is pure poison. Police found a crib sheet on one of 
the detained men with phrases such as “great breasts” and “I want to f*** you” 
translated into German. Another is alleged to have told police that they 
couldn’t touch him because: “I’m Syrian, you have to treat me nicely. Frau 
Merkel invited me.” Fireworks were allegedly hurled at the cathedral as a 
symbol of Christianity.

No surprise that Julia Klöckner, the leader of Mrs Merkel’s CDU in 
Rhineland-Palatinate, said the attacks had been a wake-up call: “We really need 
to take off the blinkers.” No surprise either that the mayor of Cologne should 
be derided foradvising women to keep men at arm’s length 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/cologne-attacks-mayor-women-keep-men-arms-length-germany>
. Who is to blame for women being at risk? Women for simply being women?

The German chancellor is trying to steer a course. Recorded before the events 
in Cologne, her new year’s message to both her fellow German citizens and the 
refugees was to see the crisis as an opportunity. Germany needs millions of 
young qualified workers (more than half the refugees are highly skilled, it’s 
been said), allowing refugees to give to the society of which they wanted to be 
part. But, post-Cologne, she has begun to strike a different note.

“Women’s feelings of being at people’s mercy without any protection, is 
intolerable for me personally,” she declared. Her government is to review its 
refugee policy, with one likely initiative being immediate deportation for 
those convicted of any criminal activity. At the same time, Merkel is aware of 
the danger of surrendering to fear. “We must also keep talking about the basis 
of our cultural coexistence in Germany: people rightly expect that actions 
follow words.”

Meanwhile the extreme right has seized on events as proof positive that 
Germany must stop accepting refugees immediately or otherwise face an 
“impending cultural and civilisational collapse”, as the populist Eurosceptic 
Alternative für Deutschland puts it.

The initial slowness of response from both police and media was nothing to be 
proud of; equally feeding a political tradition whose antecedents Germans know 
and fear must be avoided.

Merkel will work for burden sharing and solutions to stop the refugees at 
source

So far what the Germans call the “Willkommenskultur” is still alive. Merkel 
and her SPD coalition partners will insist on the rule of law, getting tougher 
on deportation. There will be no talk of noxious multiculturalism, but instead 
of cultural coexistence in which the host society’s values are paramount. The 
German media will be more vigilant about honest-to-God reporting.

Abroad, Merkel will work for burden sharing, tougher measures to patrol 
Europe’s borders and seek solutions to stop the refugees at source – ending the 
war in Syria and persuading Turkey to host more people. Above all, she will 
look to the refugees themselves to do all they can to castigate and marginalise 
the minority who are inducing such a toxic reaction.

The British interest is unambiguous: Merkel must succeed, or a liberal 
Germany, and with it a benign European Union, will be lost. Already the 
venomous Hungarian leader Viktor Orbán is calling for tougher border controls, 
and the need to defend Europe’s values – code for an excuse for mass expulsion 
of refugees. He will have a new hearing in parts of Germany.

Amid this growing turmoil, the assumptions on both sides of the referendum 
debate are complacent and rest on Britain needing to do nothing to shape its 
continent. The pros insist that Europe offers us a great deal, while sceptics 
claim we can leave and still trade with an open, free-tradeEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Britain, in or out of the EU, 
can use it as a milch cow. Good old liberal Germany will continue to anchor 
everyone.

It may not. What is being asked of Germany is enormous: it is to their credit 
that Germany’s leaders accept it – and to the public’s credit that so far it 
has stood behind them. But the latest poll in Germany for the first time 
reports a majority in favour of closing Germany’s borders. More Colognes, and 
that figure will grow further.

Yet this is a common European problem. It would be magnificent if a leading 
British politician would make the case for sharing Merkel’s objectives, and 
give her and her people a sense that we are with them – working to the same 
ends with the same mixture of realism and idealism. I bay at the moon.
 