
1. Picnic knife, Turkey

My mum bought this one in a Turkish hardware shop because we were going to 
have a picnic. It is so basic and has no place among my professional tools, yet 
I love it because when I hold it, it takes me back to that lunch in the biggest 
pine forest I had ever seen.

2. Artisan knives, New York

The chap responsible for these beauties is a blacksmith (and ex-farrier), with 
a suitably grizzly beard for a bloke whose best friend is an anvil. Michael 
Moses Lishinsky operates under the name Wildfire Cutlery (he actually works out 
of Oregon). His knives are full tang, which means the metal from the blade 
extends all the way through to the heel, making them stronger. These are made 
of heat-treated carbon steel, as opposed to stainless steel, so you have to dry 
them after use (I oil mine too), but they stay sharper longer.

3. Suction-free, San Francisco

I was sitting at a bus stop between restaurant shifts when I noticed my knife 
roll had gone. Like the scars on my arms, my knives represented my professional 
culinary journey. Next payday I went down to Japantown to get my first 
replacement. I had never seen a knife with holes in it before. The idea is that 
as you are chopping veg super-fast, the holes help to break any suction, so the 
slices don't stick to the blade (although I have never noticed them make much 
difference). I was feeling nervy about knife theft, so I went straight to an 
engraver's and carved my initials on it.

4. Pig-leg boner, Brazil

As I walked past a hardware shop in Salvador, I was attracted to this by its 
weird shape. When I got home I took it to my butcher but none of us could see 
how having the handle so high above the blade helped. When I return to Brazil 
I'm taking it with me and getting a demo – until then it remains my strangest 
and least-used knife.

5. Pastry slicer, Morocco

The knife man in the main souk in Marrakech sat on a carpet, surrounded by 
wood shavings. He carved this one to tackle pastry (especially filo) and cakes 
and I have found it most useful. Shaped from lemonwood, it is the most pleasing 
thing to hold.

6. Butcher's Chopper, Hong Kong

As I wandered around a vast indoor market in Kowloon, with about 100 butcher's 
stalls, I noticed that all of them had this knife. It's a serious butcher's 
knife, made of wood and stainless steel, with well-balanced weight for one so 
large.

7. Lorenzi's ceramic knife, Italy

G Lorenzi's in Milan is one of the finest names in sharp implements. Ceramic 
knives keep their edge much better than steel knives, and with that comes an 
almost surgical precision (mine is the only straight-edged – as opposed to 
serrated – knife that I use to slice tomatoes). And they are easier to keep 
clean as the ceramic doesn't absorb odours as much: I've done the garlic test 
on that.

8. Unagi-Saki, Japan

In Japanese cuisine, almost every job has a specific knife for it. This one is 
for cleaning eels.

9. Cleaver, Mexico

I like the mid-size of this cleaver: not as daunting as my enormous Chinese 
chopper, which I use only for the occasional precision strike. This is in my 
regular armoury for the way it goes through chicken bones, pork ribs, racks of 
lamb, even fish steak.

10. Fisherman's Friend, Norway

This is a Scandinavian design classic. It has a Japanese steel blade and is 
extremely efficient at filleting fish.

11. El Jamonero, Spain

No prizes for guessing what my jamonero is for: all 25cm of it are designed to 
slice ham. Factory-made by Arcos (a well-known Spanish knife producer), its 
handle is cool to hold and there is a reassuring weight to it. Slicing this 
dense meat is suprisingly difficult, but the dimples down both sides of the 
blade help by letting air in, so less pressure is needed and you can keep your 
strokes smooth. I like the fact that the Spanish still carve ham by hand.

• This is an extract from Bought, Borrowed & Stolen – Recipes & Knives from a 
Travelling Chef by Allegra McEvedy, published by Conran Octopus, £25.Order a 
copy for £20 with free UK p&p from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840915778>
 