
Ambulance services are facing serious shortages of paramedics just as 999 
calls hit new peaks and hospitals gear up for apotential winter crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/nhs-hospitals-facing-toughest-winter-yet-say-health-experts>
, new official NHS figures reveal.

The 10 regional ambulance services in England are short of 873 paramedics, 
data shows, and some are recruiting paramedics from Poland, Finland and 
Australia to plug gaps in winter services.

The figures emerged as NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England 
said 36 A&E units had to temporarily divert new arrivals to other hospitals 
last week because they could not cope with demand. It was also revealed that 
1,061 beds had to be taken out of supply due to the risk of spreading 
norovirus, the diarrhoea and vomiting bug.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> unions said the high 
number of unfilled posts showed paramedics were quitting because of 
“intolerable” pressures, including working long shifts that can overrun by two 
hours.

Ambulance services in the UK: share your stories and experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/ambulance-services-in-the-uk-share-your-stories-and-experiences>
Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary who obtained the data, said: 
“These new figures showing there is a national shortage of paramedics will make 
worrying reading for patients this Christmas. This news comes at a time when 
ambulance trusts are missing key targets to respond to serious calls, and A&E 
departments are bursting at the seams.”

The North-West ambulance service has 204 vacancies, the largest number of 
empty posts, though that is fewer than the 250 it had last year. It told 
Ashworth that paramedic recruitment is “currently an issue nationally as there 
aren’t enough trained paramedics available to fill all of the vacancies”. It is 
“recruiting trained paramedics from European countries including Poland and 
Finland”.

South Central ambulance service is short of 184 paramedics, a slight 
improvement on last year’s 217. In recent board papers, the service admitted 
that finding enough paramedics “is a significant challenge and is diverging 
from plan in frontline staff”. It said it was “forecasting that the end-of-year 
vacancy position for clinical staff [paramedics] will be at 18%”. However, 
growing numbers of Australians are applying to join the service.

South-East Coast ambulance service has more empty posts than last year, with 
138 vacancies compared with 105 in 2015. “Unfilled posts are filled by a 
combination of overtime and the provision of third-party resources,” it said.

Vacancies are also increasing at the London ambulance service. It currently 
has 135, up from last year’s 112. Overall, vacancies have fallen from 917 last 
year to 873.

Sarah Carpenter, head of health at the union Unite, said a new pay deal for 
paramedics announced recently would help mitigate staff shortages.

“However, it’s not just about the money. Older paramedics, who have protected 
pensions, are voting with their feet because they simply had enough,” she said. 
“In some ambulance services, we have reports of long, busy shifts, late or 
non-existent meal breaks, an ever increasing punitive management approach to 
sickness and conduct and, of course, the continuing levels of sickness due to 
anxiety and stress.”

Christina McAnea, Unison’s head of health, said only a major NHS cash boost 
would improve paramedic recruitment which is “at crisis levels”. She said: 
“With crews stretched far too thinly, the pressures on staff are intolerable. 
Many experienced paramedics are leaving in search of less stressful jobs, which 
don’t take such a toll on their health and home lives.

“The end result means delays, with many ambulances taking too long to reach 
patients with life-threatening conditions.”

Hospitals in England told to put operations on hold to free up beds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/16/hospitals-in-england-told-to-put-operations-on-hold-to-free-up-beds>
The shortage of paramedics is contributing to ambulances often failing to turn 
up at the scene of medical emergencies within the eight-minute maximum response 
time, Ashworth added. Just 67.3% of Red 1 999 calls – the most serious sort – 
received an ambulance within eight minutes in October, when it should be 75%, 
NHS England data shows.

Delays are also occurring because ambulances are spending record amounts of 
time outside A&E units with a patient who cannot be discharged because staff 
inside are so busy.

The East of England, West Midlands and Yorkshire ambulance services all 
claimed to have no vacancies. East Midlands ambulance service said it had some 
but could not say how many.

The Department of Health said it had recruited 2,200 more paramedics since 
2010 and increased the number of training places by 60% this year.

“In recognition of their increased responsibilities, we recently announced a 
better pay deal for paramedics as part of our wider commitment to recruiting 
and retaining paramedics in the future to ensure patients continue to get the 
very best care,” added a DH spokesman.
 