
Andrew Dodt faced challenges from Adam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> and Ashley Hall, but he held 
them off to retain the lead of the Australian PGA Championship at the end of 
the third round.

Dodt is 14-under par for the tournament, two shots ahead of Hall and the USA’s 
fast finishing Harold Varner III, who are in a tie for second at Royal Pines.

Scott faded to be in a tie for fourth, four shots off the pace.

Related: Adam Scott has Australian PGA Championship rivals wary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/adam-scott-has-australian-pga-championship-rivals-wary>

But Saturday afternoon was all about the other Queenslander – Dodt.

He struck three bogeys and five birdies in his two-under round, but he was no 
less consistent than those around him as heavy winds threaten to bring with 
them a late afternoon storm.

Playing partner Hall faced the same struggles. He was faultless on the front 
nine, but bogied his last two holes to also be two under for the round.

Varner then began to handle the conditions best. He hit eagles on the 15th and 
17th, but bogeyed the 18th for a five-under round.

For a moment too, Scott threatened to launch an all-out assault.

After sinking a 10-metre putt to eagle the ninth, Scott went outright second 
and was just one shot off the lead.

Then it all went pear-shaped for the world No7.

Dodt birdied the ninth to extend his lead and Hall eagled to retake second.

In response Scott found the water on the 10th, the trees on the 11th, the 
bunker on the 12th and then the water again on the 13th.

Somehow he escaped with just two bogeys from the horror run, but it was enough 
to blunt his charge before a late birdie helped him finish two under for the 
day.

He’s now joined by the Australian veteran John Senden, perhaps the last of 
those still in contention after a consistent error-free round of four under.

The same can’t be said about New Zealander Ryan Fox’s third round.

After starting tied for third with Scott, he finished one over for the day 
after bogeying three of his first five holes.

He remains sixth, but now seven shots off the lead.

Englishman Steve Webster and Australian Sam Brazel earlier equalled the best 
round of the tournament with seven-under 65s.

It shot them to equal sixth and 12th respectively, telling given Brazel was 
forced to watch the live scores of the last group on Friday evening from his 
hotel to see if he would made the cut at two over.

“I’m stoked,” Brazel said.

“I just let it go. Making the cut was nice and then freewheeled it today.”
 