
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> supporters are unlikely 
to have fond memories of André Santos. The Brazilian’s two-year spell at the 
club, between 2011 and 2013 included 13 Premier League starts, one attempted 
high-speed getaway on the M25 and one ill-advised half-time shirt swap with 
Robin van Persie. All in all, not a great return for the £6m Arsène Wenger paid 
to secure the defender’s services from Fenerbahce.

Since leaving Arsenal, however, life has got worse for Santos. A lot worse. 
Now plying his trade back inBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>
, the left-back was last week at the centre of a series of events that will 
surely cause the harshest of his critics to side with him. Upon leaving the 
Estádio Beira-Rio in Porto Alegre on 20 July, he was beaten up by a group of 
Flamengo fans furious that their team, which he had represented for almost 
exactly a year, had just been trounced 4-0 by hosts Internacional – a result 
that left the Rio side entrenched at the bottom of the Campeonato Brasileiro.

“I am absolutely saddened and shaken by what happened. It [the aggression] was 
the work of a minority of supporters but as a professional footballer and a 
father I never expected to experience a situation like that. I didn’t see the 
supporters coming and when they started hitting me the only thing I could think 
of was to try to protect my head,” said Santos.

That was far from the end of Santos’ misfortune. Only two days after the 
incident outside Beira Rio, one of the arenas used in the 2014 World Cup, 
Flamengo released the 31 year-old, a decision announced by the player in an 
interview with a daytime TV Globo programme that can only be described as a bad 
Brazilian version of Loose Women. The fact that the club’s directors quickly 
denied the contract termination in public while briefing the journalists off 
the record that they wanted to send the player packing only makes the story 
sadder.

From being hailed as a possible successor to Roberto Carlos in the Seleção and 
actually replacing the former Real Madrid star at Fenerbahce in 2009, Santos 
now finds himself surplus to requirements even at a club in Flamengo’s grim 
position. Santos was given the first of his 24 caps for Brazil in 2009 by 
Dunga, during the new Brazil coach’s first spell in charge, but his 
international hopes were all but killed in 2011 after he missed one of the four 
penalties in a Copa América shootout defeat to Paraguay and followed that with 
a poor display in a friendly against Germany that somehow did not end with the 
cricket scoreline that Thomas Müller and company imposed in Belo Horizonte.

Santos is hardly a veteran, but it would be an immense surprise if his career 
did not simply fade away – even if he has surprised a few people before. After 
failing to establish himself at the Emirates despite an interesting first 
season, he shot himself in the foot with a metaphorical bazooka with that 
ill-judged decision to swap shirts with Van Persie during the Dutchman’s bitter 
reunion with Arsenal just months after his move to Old Trafford.

His intended gesture of sportsmanship was followed, three months later, by a 
loan move to Grêmio. But Santos actually threatened to rekindle his career in 
Brazil: after spending only five months with Grêmio he moved to Flamengo and 
helped the club to a heroic Brazilian Cup title last year. But then things 
turned sour: after only 28 games and a poor run for Flamengo this season, he 
became an object of hatred for the club’s fans.

Poor form or not, nothing can justify the despicable behaviour towards the 
full-back in Porto Alegre. Santos’ plight exposes a problem that Brazilian 
authorities underestimated in the buildup to the World Cup. The brand new 
arenas were built according to standards applicable to situations where crowd 
control is pristine. Last year, a fight between Corinthians and Vasco 
supporters at the Mané Garrincha in Brasília highlighted the challenges faced 
by the domestic game at times when crowd violence still erupts.

Santos was not attacked inside the Beira-Rio itself – after eschewing a lift 
to the airport on the team bus, he was about to enter a private car that was 
waiting by the stadium’s media entrance. The fact that he was left so exposed 
raises serious questions that are independent from the fact that his career has 
never returned to the heights seen when he featured heavily in Brazil’s 2009 
Confederations Cup-winning campaign and was considered a certainty for the 2010 
World Cup squad.

Even if it could be argued that Santos has lacked the maturity, rather than 
merely the quality, to persevere in European football and fulfil what was 
expected of him in Brazil, the more pressing concern surely lies in how 
Brazil’s football authorities can protect the areas around the country’s stadia 
and curb supporter incursions that, in this instance, crossed a line in the 
most dangerous fashion.
 