
Australia has two Anzac days. One is solemn: the dawn service, the recitation 
of the ode, the poppy and the old soldiers’ berets and medals. The other is 
raucous: beers and two-up before midday, nationalism and pissed young soldiers 
sporting gym muscles and wraparound sunnies. But the foundation of both is the 
same: Australian soldiers obliterated at Gallipoli.

Our politicians talk about our defeat there in religious terms: as a so-called 
sacred sacrifice, a baptism of fire or a crucible for a newly federated nation. 
Perhaps religious language is the only way to properly express the scale of 
suffering experienced during the first world war; more cynically, to sacralise 
Gallipoli is to give it scale and moral significance it perhaps does not 
deserve, and to place it outside criticism. As the poet Les Murray says, when 
we glorify Gallipoli we find ourselves as the celebrants at a human sacrifice. 
In one of his war poems,The Muddy Trench 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/murray-les/the-muddy-trench-0560513>, he 
puts this whole theology in the mouth of a terrified soldier: “The true god 
gives his flesh and blood. Idols demand yours off you.”

Solemnity does not necessarily mean sacredness, of course. To the men and 
women at Gallipoli in 1915 it was likely neither. But the two do often go 
together. Rudolf Otto, a German theologian whose book The Idea of the Holy was 
published during the first world war, says sacred things evoke a sense of the
numinous: fear and trembling, fascination, compulsion and the experience of 
being in communion with somethingwholly other. 

Ken Inglis, in Sacred Places, his famous history of war memorials, says he 
felt this on his first visit to the Melbourne shrine, where the words “Let all 
men know that this is holy ground” are inscribed. Paul Keating, during his 
eulogy for the entombment of the unknown soldier, evoked the sacred when he 
asked whether “it is not too much to hope, therefore, that this Unknown 
Australian Soldier might continue to serve his country”. At the head of the 
soldier’s tomb is written “Known Unto God”, an inscription the war memorial 
considered removing in 2013. After an uproar, the anodyne words “He is one of 
them, and he is all of us” were added instead. The memorial was always 
conceived as a secular space, Brendan Nelson said.


Separating out the solemn from the raucous, the slaughter at Gallipoli from 
the cult that has grown around it, and deciding who gets to administer the 
rites of the Anzac faith, has become a national pastime. In recent years the 
Returned and Services League (RSL) has cast itself as the defender of Anzac 
solemnity, but it wasn’t always so. In the years following the firstAnzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> in 1916, returned and serving 
soldiers wanted to tie the day to recruitment. They also wanted to celebrate; 
in 1945, the Canberra Times reported calls from the president of the RSL to 
liven the holiday up a bit (at least in the afternoon) by opening the pubs. It 
should be marked by “toasts and song”, he said, in memory of the “storming of 
Gallipoli ... a matter of great national pride”.

The chief architect of the solemn service was actually an Anglican priest, 
Canon David John Garland, who pictured an “All Souls’ Day for Australia” in 
1916, to commemorate the losses suffered at Gallipoli. But the service had to be
carefully crafted <https://archive.org/details/AnzacCommemoration> to be 
acceptable to all faiths and denominations or it would not be observed. In 1916 
Australia was riven by Christian sectarianism: the Easter Rising took place in 
Ireland the same weekend as the commemoration of the first Anzac Day, against 
the backdrop of an Irish-Catholic led opposition to conscription.

Garland, a liberal Anglo-Catholic, achieved a remarkable feat with his 
“liturgy”. He included a march for the Protestants, drawing on the evangelical 
Orangemen tradition of Orange Walks; a solemn requiem to please Roman Catholics 
and high church Anglicans; and a minute’s silence, so that each person could 
pray (or not) to God in their own way. And the hymns sung didn’t include 
references to the Holy Trinity, so as not to exclude Jews. The various faiths 
held their own services in the morning; the evening was for public observance. 
And the pubs were kept closed to make sure that everyone would show up sober. 
The publicans and brewers won their battle long ago, as we well know.

Garland’s intention was never to glorify war, but to remember “the sin that 
gave rise to international conflict and the nations’ need to atone for that 
sin”, as his chief biographer, John Moses, put it. Importantly, the 
commemoration was inflected with the Catholic tendency to pray with the dead, 
to whom we remain accountable – not just for them. “At the going down of the 
sun, and in the morning, we will remember them. Lest we forget.” The ode 
burdens Anzac Day with the status of a sacred duty, something Bob Hawke 
accepted in his 1987 welcome home parade for Vietnam veterans, who had until 
then been excluded by the RSL from Anzac Day marches.

In what sense are we accountable to the Anzacs, though – if at all? On Anzac 
Day 2011 the Australian Christian Lobby’s Jim Wallace, a former commanding 
officer of the SAS, notoriously tweeted that the diggers didn’t fight for gay 
marriage or Islam. One theologianreplied 
<http://www.abc.net.au/religion/articles/2011/04/27/3201328.htm> that his error 
was only to express that opinion on the holy day itself. They didn’t fight for 
glory either, and certainly not for the political influence of the Australian 
Christian Lobby, others noted. Wallace himself graduated from Duntroon in 1973, 
in the Whitlam years when commemorations were diminished, and countered by 
anti-Vietnam demos. He was no doubt well aware of how bitter Anzac Day stoushes 
can be when there are real losses to be remembered.

By the 1988 Bicentenary, which Gary Foley called the “masturbation of the 
nation”, the flag-wearing mode of nationalism that now accompanies our public 
observances was inaugurated, reaching fever pitch during the Howard years, when 
“pilgrimages” to Gallipoli and the Kokoda Track increased in popularity.

Keeping a certain distance from Anzac Day became du jour for those who didn’t 
want to become contaminated by nationalism, especially in academic circles.
Bitter feuds 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2010/04/19/its-war-anzac-day-dissenters-create-bitter-split-between-historians/>
 raged over the correct interpretation of Anzac, the “new wave of patriotism” 
and whether the whole thing was really undergirded by a myth, rather than a 
legend. It had become a secular Australian religion in earnest – or in Don 
Watson’s estimation, a kitsch religion.

Worse still, it had become a species of idolatry, used to enchant our military 
ventures during the war on terror. And a way to exclude and forget the frontier 
wars, arguably much more formative to the national character. Or even more 
egregious, a “new opium” of the masses, a Christian baptism of the meat 
grinder, or a reflexive response to latent colonial inferiority.

Trench mateship was not unique to Australia or to the Anzac experience, 
historians like Nick Dyrenfurth point out; others argue that Anzac Day’s 
resurgent popularity relies on a contemporary fascination with trauma, or on 
racism, or the need to perpetuate militarism. Murray, in another poem, wonders 
whether Anzac Day is too weak to help us cope with our loss: “The Day of our 
peace will need a native herb that out-savours rosemary.”

Today criticism of Anzac has itself become part of the event. For some, who 
see the whole day as a kind of violence, iconoclasm is the only way they can 
participate. Around sacred things there will always be a swirl of opprobrium, 
and conservative writers, perhaps naturally, respond with indignation. Merv 
Bendle, the most vigorous of these, wrote in a 2009 Quadrant essay that critics 
in effect give up their claim to Anzac: “The Anzac legend is far too precious 
to be left to the mercy of these ideologues.”

But despite the wishes of Anzac’s defenders, there will never again be a 
return to commemoration free of criticism, just as there is no person who takes 
part in Anzac services without reflecting on their meaning. That’s what sacred 
things do: they compel us to consider their nature.

Increasingly though, the theology of Anzac Day has been set by the military, 
through the agency of the RSL and the Australian War Memorial. When we look 
deeper, we see more soldiering, and the minutiae of the commemorations today 
all have their own military-theological explanations: the dawn service mimics 
soldiers who rose for first-light attacks; two-up was played in the trenches; 
the reveille called the diggers to arms. This logic goes all the way, however. 
VB’s Raise a Glass advertising campaign claimed the same legitimacy: the 
diggers drank VB in Egypt, so why shouldn’t we drink it as part of our 
commemorations today? Perhaps without us even knowing it, Anzac Day is a 
celebration of a kind of ritualism.

You’re left to wonder whether there is any other way, though. The loss of 
public religion has robbed us of the language and ritual we once used to give 
purpose to death. In its absence, the military has sold us its own vocabulary 
and view of history wholesale, along with the nasty stuff that comes with the 
uniforms. Thedogged pursuit 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/weekend-australian-magazine/tin-soldiers/story-e6frg8h6-1226706643141>
 and public shaming of “military imposters” year after year is the 
heartbreaking low water mark of Anzac – like the casting out of false prophets. 
Worse even than the re-enlistment of the dead soldiers of Gallipoli to fight in 
the culture wars by proxy.

Paul Daley writes that it’s the politicians who need quarantining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/23/anzac-day-should-be-quarantined-from-politicians-a-solemn-moment-to-reflect-on-the-enduring-agony-of-war>
 (I doubt anyone would disagree) so we can “reflect on the pain of men, women 
and children most of us never knew”. In 2012 Don Watson excoriated the 
“meddling priest”, Cardinal Archbishop George Pell, and wanted religion 
quarantined from the “earnest commemoration of the dead in secular memorials”. 
And you’re often left wondering whether some defenders of Anzac would rather 
the people be quarantined too, so they can’t leave muddy footprints on the 
soldiers’ spotless sepulchres. Hopefully, after the end of the centenary of the 
first world war, the hundreds of millions we’ve spent on commemoration might be 
quarantined too – and the ubiquity of the military in Australian public life 
with it. All these are probably pipe dreams.

At its best though, Anzac really does perform the functions of a “default 
state religion”, as Watson derisively called it in 2012. It’s big enough to 
accommodate its own sects and denominations. Robust enough to soak up the 
fiercest attacks of its critics. Generous enough to grow to include even its 
enemies, and I hope to acknowledge openly and honestly those Indigenous 
Australians who died fighting in the frontier wars. Popular enough to avoid 
becoming the preserve of detached and aloof clerics. Interesting enough to be 
accompanied by an industry of historians and writers and artists, many of them 
amateurs. And solemn enough to give people that sense of the numinous that is 
so rare in the drained secular space of Australian public life.

Importantly, it does the thing a religion should do: burden its adherents with 
the view that violence and evil have their origins in alienation and ignorance. 
Even if Anzac Day keeps growing to swallow Australia whole, it will at least 
still say that. And while the raucous and cruel face of Anzac expresses the 
sins no society has been able to stamp out entirely, and perhaps never will, 
its solemn face will always remain the same: that of the war memorials’ “pallid 
delicate fawn-coloured soldier, standing forever, stiff and pathetic”.

 