
The Hand of God is alive and well and was spotted at Leicester on Sunday 
waving Argentina through to a World Cup quarter-final in Cardiff, most likely 
against Ireland.

High in the West stand of Leicester City FC’s stadium, not the rugby ground 
across the way, Diego Maradona, slightly fuller of face than when clubs twice 
paid world-record transfer fees for his services, enjoyed himself immensely, 
jumping up and down as the Pumas ran in five tries.

Maradona, wearing a blue cap and a pale-blue-and-white scarf, was seated 
dangerously close to a knot of large and vocal Tongans. But as he had done in 
the past, the 54-year-old rose above the bigger men around him.

The downside was that, although Argentina got their bonus point, they never 
really shook off a Tonga side who need to finish at least third in the group to 
qualify directly for Japan in 2019.

Argentina v Tonga: Rugby World Cup – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/04/argentina-v-tonga-rugby-world-cup-live>
Maradona was in Paris when Argentina reached the semi-finals in 2007. On 
Sunday he watched another player who wears the No10 shirt, Nicolas Sánchez, lay 
the foundations for the victory with his passing and tactical kicking before 
finally putting the game beyond Tonga with the third try of the afternoon, 
dummying and fending his way to the line.

The captain, Agustín Creevy, said Maradona visited the Pumas’ dressing room 
after the game and danced with the squad to Rodrigo Bueno’s song The Hand of 
God, written in the former footballer’s honour.

“He said the whole of Argentina was dreaming with us and everyone was behind 
us and supporting us. He was here because he wanted to be a part of this. We 
sung and danced and it was lots of fun,” Creevy said. “For me Maradona was 
always the best player in history and it was a very nice surprise to have him 
visit us. There were videos, he took two shirts, he gave us one of his shirts 
as well and gave us a speech.

“He said if we reach the semi-final he will be there. He has set us a very 
high goal and we hope he will be there again.”

With four conversions and four penalties on top of his try Sánchez contributed 
25 points and confirmed there is more to this Argentina side than those teams 
that have depended on a big pack, a mighty scrum and route-one rugby. After 
seven tries against Georgia five against dogged Tonga is not to be sniffed at 
but, with a little more precision, it could have been many more.

The Tongans were left smarting from the penalties their veteran fly-half, Kurt 
Morath, missed. “We missed five kicks,” said their captain, Nili Latu, refusing 
to spare his kicker’s blushes.

“We came into this game believing we coould win. At half-time we were in the 
game, but our composure let us down. We scored early points and them gave them 
away.”

Ahead lies the Tongan’s final game, against the All Blacks, still favourites 
to retain their title. “We are a really tight group and that’s the positive for 
us and our country as well,” said Latu. “It’s still an exciting time for Tonga 
Rugby. There’s hope, there’s life.” Maybe.

For Argentina, who ran the All Blacks close for 60 minutes, the immediate 
future looks brighter.

Ahead lie Namibia, a game when their coach, Daniel Hourcade, can rest the 
bumps and bruises picked up in a game which was always going to be 
extra-physical, if only because the two teams had never previously met.

Somehow these two sides had played close on 200 years of rugby between them 
and – collectively – been to 13 World Cups without their packs locking horns. 
After four minutes a positive frisson ran round Leicester City’s ground when 
Creevy fumbled the pass from Sánchez and Jaco Peyper signalled it was time to 
engage.

Nothing proved conclusive, Elvis Taione hooking the ball back before he and 
the rest of the Tonga front row followed it. But Tonga were on the front foot 
and about to score.

The lock Lua Lokotui, centre Siale Piutau and full back, Vunga Lilo, got as 
far as the left corner and when the ball came back across the face of the 
Argentinian posts a little dummy from Morath created enough space for the 
veteran of four World Cups to dive in.

Needless to say he missed the conversion and, bit by bit, reality started to 
kick in with Argentina scoring 14 points in two minutes, which so animated 
Maradona that a posse of photographers turned their lenses away from the 
on-field action.

First the big second-row Guido Petti pounded a path to within 10 yards of the 
line, paving the way for Joaquín Tuculet to make the score while the Racing 
wing Juan Imhoff sent the whole of Tonga the wrong way with a side step, 
dotting down beneath the post to make Sánchez’s conversion as easy as the 
previous one had been touch-line difficult.

It could have been worse had Marcos Ayerza’s floated pass to wing to the right 
wing, Santiago Cordero, not drifted forward; but when Sánchez added a penalty 
to his two conversions the lead began to look ominous. Not that Tonga were 
deterred.

Morath at last landed a penalty which inspired another bout of frenetic 
attacking and the best move of the half produced the best try of the game with 
the fly-half and his inside centre, Sione Piukala, doing the spadework before 
the wing Telusa Veainu, flicked the ball inside on the point of being bundled 
into touch. And who should be rumbling along inside to score the try – none 
other than the former Northampton prop Soane Tonga’uiha.

 Argentina Tuculet; Cordero, Moroni (Fosita, 70) De La Fuente , Imhoff 
(Agulla, 58); Sánchez, Landajo; Ayerza (Paz, 65), Creevy (capt; Montoya, 65), 
Herrera (Orlandi, 65), Petti (Alemanno, 65), Lavanini, Matera, Lobbe, Senatore 
(Isa, 51).

Tries Ticulet, Imhoff, Sánchez, Montoya, Cordero. Cons Sánchez 4. Pens Sánchez 
4 .

Tonga Lilo (Halaifonua, 71); Veainu, Piutau, Piukala (Fosita, 50), Vainikolo; 
Morath, Takulua (Fisilau, 71); Tonga’uiha (Taumalolo, 61) Taione (Lutui, 61), 
Aulika (Puafisi, 71), Lokotui, Tuineau (Mafi, 67), Kalamafoni, Latu (capt), 
Ma’afu (Fonua, 61).

Tries Morath, Tonga’uiha. Pens Morath 2.

Referee J Peyper (SA). Att 29,124.
 