
Argentina and Ireland have not always seen eye to eye, other than when they 
are glaring at each other. Gus Pichot, now their man on the board of World 
Rugby, once had the temerity to accuse the saintly Brian O’Driscoll of trying 
to get Argentinians sent to the sin-bin, while Eddie O’Sullivan, then the Irish 
coach, accused the Pumas of gouging.

It was against Ireland in Lens, in 1999, that Argentina announced themselves 
as a world power and went on to confirm it eight years later, ending Ireland’s 
lacklustre campaign in the pool stages, while going on to reach the semi-final, 
something their opponents have yet to manage.

Sunday will be their 15th meeting in 16 years, but it will be the first time 
Ireland have met this kind of Argentina because as Devin Toner, the 6ft 10in 
Irish lock pointed out, this Puma team scores tries. Hatfuls of them: 22 in the 
pool stages – one fewer than South Africa and in a group that included the All 
Blacks, who top the table with 25 tries, and Tonga.

“I played against Argentina a couple of years ago and went off with concussion 
after a few minutes because everyone was hitting so hard,” said Toner. “This is 
going to be a massive test. They are a hugely difficult team and hugely 
talented as well.”

Toner put the improvement in Argentina’s game down to their experience of four 
seasons in the Rugby Championship and regular meetings with New Zealand, who 
they are yet to beat, Australia and South Africa. It was this season’s win in 
Durban that gave a clue to how Argentina, under their coach, Daniel Hourcade, 
are trying to play. They still have a big pack and an efficient kicking game 
and while the scrum is still something of beauty in Argentinian eyes, large 
doses of adventure have been grafted on to the pragmatic.

The pool game against Georgia was a perfect example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/argentina-georgia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. For 40 minutes the pack arm-wrestled its way to a slim half-time lead and 
then the backs had their say, running in five tries to make seven in all.

Joe Schmidt, Ireland’s coach, is a big fan of the Argentina back three – the 
full-back Joaquin Tuculet and the wings Santiago Cordero and Juan Imhoff – and 
while Juan Martín Hernández and Nicolás Sánchez elegantly pull the strings in 
midfield, Ireland ignore the big men and their traditions at their peril. Dean 
Ryan, now coaching Worcester in the Premiership and anObserver columnist, once 
went with England to Argentina and at a social event in Buenos Aires was 
lectured on the art of scrummaging for close on half an hour, only to discover 
that his mentor was a fly-half.

This week Marcos Ayerza, Leicester’s Argentinian prop reckoned by many to be 
the best loosehead at the tournament, had his audience in thrall explaining the
Bajada– the Argentinian system of scrummaging developed by the San Isidro club 
and adopted by the Pumas.

It is a mix of the old and the new – the attacking game said to have been 
inspired by Graham Henry during his two years helping out and traditional Puma 
strengths – that Ireland face.
 