
There was a good moment at the final whistle here. Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> and José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> shook hands brusquely on 
the Old Trafford touchline, turned to walk off, then realised with a shared 
prickle of awkwardness they were heading the same way, the world’s most awkward 
shared hundred metre stroll ahead of them. Wenger did the decent thing, taking 
a couple of paces then stopping and pretending to fiddle with his coat. It was 
deftly done and no doubt a sensible move, the thick black cloud above 
Mourinho’s head almost visible as he stalked off at the end ofa 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 from which Manchester United really should have taken three points.

Arsenal were lucky here. There is no disgrace in being outplayed for periods 
at Old Trafford, not least when United click, as they did here, with Paul Pogba 
all indolent craft, Juan Mata buzzing and Marcus Rashford providing speed up 
front. The more positive spin is thatArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> got a point while playing 
poorly. It was, though, hard to avoid the impression this was a point snatched 
in part out of their own muddle, a performance that never thrummed up through 
the gears, and a chance to go out and actually beat one of their major rivals 
was once again passed up.

Olivier Giroud denies Manchester United and rescues point for Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
Right up until the late shift that rejigged a flat, lateral midfield Arsenal 
looked to have blinked here. Useful points aside, their record this year 
against Liverpool, Chelsea, Tottenham and the two Manchester clubs reads played 
nine, won one, lost four, drawn five. A wise man once wrote that for an entity 
to be genuinely happy and functional it must first truly want to exist. 
Discuss, using no more than five sides of A4, in relation to Arsenal and 
genuine, full-blooded, white-knuckled title chases.

By the end here Wenger had dismantled the oddly flat, samey Mohamed 
Elneny-Francis Coquelin central fulcrum, and replaced it with Aaron Ramsey and 
Granit Xhaka, a midfield that does at least look like it genuinely wants to go 
out and win a football match at Old Trafford. To select one workaday, lateral, 
do-a-job central midfielder seems sensible enough. To pick two looks like 
self‑defeating caution.

In Wenger’s defence, a lack of muscle in the middle has been exposed by 
Mourinho teams before, most glaringly inthe 6-0 defeat by Chelsea at Stamford 
Bridge in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/22/chelsea-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, which quietly euthanased Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain’s central midfield career. 
But at some point, not least when this is your team’s strength, you do have to 
play a little, too. Elneny is a good, neat player, but he is essentially a VW 
Polo of a footballer, matched here against Pogba’s high spec, quiveringly 
cantilevered four wheel-drive-mobile. At one stage late in the first half 
Elneny and Coquelin tried to oversee a rapier counter-attack, an odd spectacle 
as the ball pinged back and forth between them, like watching a particularly 
stodgy rugby line trying to lumber forwards, only backwards passes allowed.

Clearly Wenger does not entirely trust Xhaka, his £30m midfield summer 
signing, who is on the face of it a superior all-round player, able to pass and 
run and shoot as well as tackle and cover, not to mention a more imposing 
athlete with a greater reach and mobility.

Manchester United 1-1 Arsenal: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-v-arsenal-premier-league-live>
Here Coquelin and Elneny struggled to hold their ground against the power of 
Pogba and the progressive passing angles of Ander Herrera. With half an hour 
gone United began to dominate in midfield, not so much storming through 
Arsenal’s centre as leaning on it like a plasterboard wall and feeling the 
screws start to bend. They should probably have had a penalty for a slight but 
significant tug by Nacho Monreal on Antonio Valencia.

Ahead of that flat midfield the ploy of using Alexis Sánchez as a mobile 
centre‑forward did not stick on this occasion. Sánchez’s energy and movement 
has been key to Arsenal’s altered sense of menace in recent weeks. Wenger, the 
alleged tactical Eeyore, has adopted elements of the Klopp-Pochettino forward 
blitz to good effect.

At the start Sánchez appeared furiously game as ever, right leg bandaged, huge 
flapping black gloves paddling the air. This was not really his game though, or 
indeed the best way to test a Phil Jones-Marcos Rojo central defence, the 
equivalent of unleashing a series of cunningly angled body punches when your 
opponent has come out with the point of his glass jaw raised in your direction. 
Here Arsenal at no stage roughed up or got an arm around that makeshift-looking 
defence right up until Oliver Giroud leapt prodigiously to power a fine late 
equaliser, their first and only attempt on goal.

Until then this was a game Arsenal looked like losing. For much of the second 
half United’s panzer tanks rolled through those scurrying yellow shirts. Theo 
Walcott was simply Theo Walcott, a player who, to borrow a phrase from cricket, 
has not so much played 400 matches as a professional footballer, as played the 
same match 400 times.

And yet for all that, they took a point. Mata’s fine second-half goal might 
have killed the game. Instead Arsenal surged and scored late as they had 
against Paris Saint-Germain in similar circumstances. Laurent Koscielny was as 
ever quietly excellent. Oxlade-Chamberlain crossed well for Giroud’s goal. And 
for all the slight sense of having bottled up his own team’s strengths, Wenger 
will have made that touchline walk with a little more spring in his step.
 