
On Thursday night the US presidential election sparked two remarkable 
political speeches that in different ways illuminate our times.Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> turned up the ampage on the 
conspiracy of a “totally corrupt political establishment” . False, 
unsubstantiated accusations about his sexual misdemeanours, he said, were being 
hurled at him by a corporate media “they” controlled. He was at his most 
extravagant yet.

There was “no lie that they won’t tell, to hold their prestige and power at 
your expense”. Crooked Hillary, who should be locked up, was at the centre of 
it. “The claims are preposterous, ludicrous, and defy truth, common sense and 
logic.” Yes, these untruths hurt. But he was going to take it and rebut the 
lies “at an appropriate time” for the “great movement” he represented, which 
was going to take America back from the elite.

For all its energy and hyperbole, it was unconvincing. It was a speech whose 
premise you could only buy if belonging to the same Trump bubble. It was 
sounding off – a raging in public that may offer the person raging some relief 
but does not persuade anybody not in the same bubble. If he found the 
accusations hurtful, so what? For anybody outside the “movement”, he has amply 
deserved the opprobrium.

A little later, Michelle Obama spoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/michelle-obama-speech-transcript-donald-trump>
. She too was energetic, passionate and partisan – but she got beyond her 
bubble in a way that eludes Trump. Against his litany of accusations she chose 
to counter his rage by couching hers within a marshalled argument. Her 
propositions were as value laden, certainly, as Trump’s and intended to be as 
lethal as anything he has said. But she framed her attack in a way no one could 
gainsay.

There are values, in particular the way women expect to be spoken about by 
men, that are foundational in a civilised society, she said. What Trump had 
said about women, and chosen to defend as “locker room” talk, had crossed a 
line. “This is not normal. This is not politics as usual. This is disgraceful. 
It is intolerable.”

It had hit her more than she expected, she said. In explaining why, she set 
out a series of feminist propositions about how the psychic wrong of being 
objectified as no more than a body gets under a woman’s skin even as she tries 
to shrug it off. But she did so in language that was measured. Trump had put 
attitudes that should be stone-dead back at the heart of the national 
conversation. Her audience was spellbound. And when she said she found it 
personally hurtful, exposing her vulnerability, she achieved an empathy that 
Trump’s same admission could never do. She was pained by the betrayal of 
universal values and hard-won gains; his “hurt” was because his past words were 
catching up with him. Different leagues.

American conservatism’s morphing from the language of rationality – presenting 
traditional conservative concerns about the size of government and its impact 
on economic incentives and morality – into a language of rage and conspiracy is 
one of the defining realities of our age. I profoundly disagree with 
conservative thinkers such asAyn Rand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/05/new-right-ayn-rand-marx>,
Milton Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/17/guardianobituaries.politics>, 
Robert Nozick and Leo Strauss, but at least they mounted reasoned arguments 
based on first principles.

You respect them even as you argue back. The issues are never going to be 
settled conclusively: it is impossible to found a society entirely on 
libertarian individualism; but equally to overstress the role of the public 
realm in securing the common good has parallel hazards. You respect your 
intellectual or political adversary because you know you don’t hold a monopoly 
on truth – and if they are any good, they feel the same way. Battle is joined, 
and if common ground emerges you are ready to acknowledge it .

Most politicians of left and right in advanced democracies feel similarly. 
Conviction and personal life stories have led to a series of decisions that 
have got them elected as liberals or conservatives. But if they have any 
self-knowledge they know that their opponents have their own integrity and want 
outcomes that promote human betterment and merit respect. There may even be 
issues on which common cause can be made.

Truth no longer matters. What counts is whether a statement feels true

The right’s collapse into rage makes these ground rules of democratic politics 
and political argument impossible. What isDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> doing demanding that Hillary 
Clinton go to jail? Or conniving in his supporters wearing “Trump that bitch” 
T-shirts at his rallies? Or wildly insisting he is the object of an elite 
conspiracy that is intent on gerrymandering votes to produce the result it 
wants? It goes beyond wild disproportionality into fantasy and delusion. It 
makes the mutual respect on which democratic politics is founded impossible.

Rage is absolutist. It wants to eliminate opponents, not argue with them. It 
justifies the gridlock and close down of government. It refuses to look for 
democratic compromises. It is narcissistic and wholly self-regarding, fuelled 
by being part of a closed belief system. It cannot accept any evidence that 
challenges the view that it is surrounded by conspiracy. Truth no longer 
matters. What counts is whether a statementfeels true.

What fuels the rage is in part the stagnation of blue-collar and lower 
middle-class male earnings. But a politician such as Trump did not have to 
debase the US’s political coinage by choosing to represent this constituency in 
the way that he has. His “movement” does need not to betray American values to 
the extent he has. The legacy of lashing out at every American institution 
won’t disappear even if Trump loses – it will continue to poison the well.

There are echoes of this in Britain. The hard Brexiters live in the same 
delusional hard right bubble as Trump, treating criticism in the same way – an 
elite conspiracy to obstruct the popular will. There is no rationality about 
the EU, just rage. The consequence is analogous to civil war in both countries 
– a public realm where evidence-based debate becomes ever harder. The Americans 
are lucky to have aMichelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> to remind them of a 
different kind of politics where anger is channelled into argument.

We need to show in both countries that rage is a political, economic and 
cultural dead end. Hard Brexit will do that, but it may take years for the 
calamity to become obvious to all. Americans have a chance to do it more 
quickly next month. Here is hoping they seize the opportunity.
 