
To say it has not been an easy start to life in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> for Aston Villa would be 
something of an understatement, but Aaron Tshibola’s late goal rescued a point 
from what threatened to be another bleak afternoon for Roberto Di Matteo’s side.

Problems with Jack Grealish, who was left out here and has been fined by the 
club after reports of excessive partying in the wake of last weekend’s draw at 
Ipswich Town – “He needs to learn,” said Di Matteo – have added to the general 
miasma when this campaign was supposed to be a blast of fresh air. Villa remain 
without a win in seven, and with just one all season, but their revival here at 
least offers hope for the future. “It was great to see the spirit of the team,” 
said Di Matteo.

Before that rousing finale Villa were dismal in the main, though they could 
have been ahead inside the first five minutes. Albert Adomah’s pass put 
Jonathan Kodjia in the clear but the striker – signed from Bristol City in the 
summer for a Championship record – cut inside and saw his shot blocked by 
Ciaran Clark. For a player whose fee could rise to £15m, it was a 
disconcertingly timed finish.

The same description could have applied to the Villa side as a whole for the 
first hour. There is always a little extra needle in games between these sides 
– the result of an oddball rivalry that dates back to 2009 and Villa Park’s 
unabashed schadenfreude at condemningNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> to relegation on the 
final day of the Premier League season – but only the visitors appeared up for 
the fight. And it was not only in their appetite for the scrap that Newcastle 
outdid their hosts.

While Villa were too often slack in possession, Rafa Benítez’s side were crisp 
and creative, and deservedly broke through midway through the first half. 
DeAndre Yedlin surged forward from right-back and his low cross was skewed into 
his own net by Tommy Elphick. The Villa captain’s afternoon nearly got even 
worse seven minutes later, when he was robbed on the edge of his own area by 
Dwight Gayle, but the striker shot straight into the shins of Pierluigi 
Gollini, the Villa goalkeeper.

The chuntering from the home terraces – an all-too-familiar, if entirely 
understandable, matchday soundtrack in these parts of late – broke into boos at 
the half-time whistle and the response from Di Matteo was to scrap the 
wing-back formation that had rendered his side so impotent. It brought an 
improvement in tempo, though not in quality, and Newcastle initially maintained 
the upper hand, with Mohamed Diamé missing the best of several chances, 
sidefooting wide from eight yards out after Jonjo Shelvey’s pull-.

But Villa, roused by a cranking up in volume from the Holte End, stirred and 
began to threaten to make Newcastle pay for their profligacy.

Mile Jedinak’s looping header on 68 minutes sent Villa Park into a frenzy that 
was curtailed by the assistant referee’s flag. Four minutes later, Jordan 
Ayew’s superb effort from distance pinged away off the post.

With the visitors discomfited by Rudy Gestede’s introduction from the bench, 
an equaliser was coming with the same inevitability as Newcastle’s opener and 
it finally arrived with two minutes to go. Tshibola, whose most notable 
contribution since his half-time introduction had been a dive, for which he was 
booked, nodded home from close range after a corner to the back post.

“We had so many clear chances to finish the game,” said Benítez, whose side 
host the new league leaders, Norwich, on Wednesday. “But after we have to 
defend better.”

Jacob Murphy strike helps send Norwich City top against Burton Albion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/norwich-city-burton-albion-championship-match-report> 