
Shyness was obviously most to blame, but the subdued tones adopted by João 
Miranda Filho were still striking. His Atlético Madrid had just completed the 
execution of Lionel Messi'sBarcelona in the Champions League quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/09/atletico-madrid-v-barcelona-live-champions-league-report>
, playing the Catalans off the park in a highly emotional match at the Vicente 
Calderón to win 1-0 and therefore 2-1 on aggregate, and you would expect 
Miranda to still be buzzing. Instead, the defender felt almost uncomfortable in 
reliving the emotions.

"Of course we have to be proud of what happened at the Calderón, but some 
people seemed too surprised that we overcame Barcelona, as if Atlético had 
suddenly crept up from nowhere this season. I find that a bit odd. Also, 
there's hard work to be done. We've Campeonato Brasileiro won nothing yet," the 
29-year old Brazilian says.

That could still change. On Tuesday they host Chelsea for a game where a wall 
of noise will be an extra distraction for the Premier League side and for José 
Mourinho, who last season left his job at Real Madrid empty-handed afterlosing 
the Copa del Rey final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/17/copa-del-rey-atletico-real-madrid>
 to Diego Simeone's side, a game in which Mourinho was sent off. While the 
Portuguese by no means created as much animosity with the city neighbours in 
comparison to his psychological warfare against Barcelona, his scalp is still 
prized among Atlético fans and players.

"With all due respect to the great manager Mourinho is, we need to make him 
feel as uncomfortable as possible. I don't see why we have to be afraid of
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> if we didn't fear Real 
Madrid," Miranda says. "They are a great team but so were Barcelona. They are 
going to have to want the place in the final more than we do."

His stance could not reflect better the current effectiveness of Simeone's 
coaching. Under the Argentinian, the defender has flourished in a way they did 
not see coming back home. While he built a solid club career at São Paulo, 
winning three Campeonato Brasileiro titles between 2006-08, memories of an 
ill-fated 20-game spell in Ligue 1 with Sochaux in the 2005‑06 season suggested 
his European career was all but over.

When the Spaniards came knocking in 2011, there was hardly any hint of what 
was to come – in fact, Miranda left São Paulo on a free transfer. Simeone's 
arrival in December that year was the tipping point for a club then more 
worried with avoiding the drop than actually dreaming of European football. For 
Miranda especially, the Argentinian has been instrumental. He is part of a back 
four that currently stands as the best on the continent in terms of goals 
conceded.

"Simeone has a simple philosophy. We have to keep shape and harass the 
opposition from start to finish. He doesn't mind if you actually get [tired] 
enough to ask to leave the pitch, but nothing infuriates him more than seeing 
the players not giving everything. In my case, he was quite clear that as the 
oldest guy in the back four I had to keep everyone calm."

And that includes the player he calls "the kid", Thibaut Courtois, the 
goalkeeper Atlético signed on loan from Chelsea in 2011 and who is crucial to 
the push for what could still be aLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> and European Cup double. 
"Thibaut is having a fantastic season and his immense quality has not made him 
cocky," Miranda adds. "He's humble enough to take advice and work his socks 
off. Better for us defenders, we know the opposition will still have to deal 
with Thibaut if they escape our marking."

Atlético's operation is based on a combination of austerity and wheeling and 
dealing, so players and supporters are aware that holding on to their star 
players will be hard. Their goalscorer Diego Costa, for example, is more than 
likely to leave in the summer transfer window – possibly to join the Chelsea 
side he could help defeat in the next few days. "The group knows we could lose 
players for next season so there is this feeling that we have a pretty special 
chance in our careers that might not come again," Miranda says. "Which is why 
we play every match as if our lives depended upon it. We owe that to the 
supporters and to Simeone."

Further motivation is provided by the proximity of Luiz Felipe Scolari naming 
of his squad for the World Cup. Capped only once since the former Chelsea 
manager returned to theSeleção, Miranda knows that finishing the season on a 
high could score him some vital points for the still undecided fourth 
defender's spot in the team. "Simeone taught me to fight till the end and I 
will do exactly that to try to get into the Brazil squad," he adds.
 