
By any measure, apart from Melbourne’s capricious weather, the 58th World Cup 
ofGolf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> was a raging success – and yet 
no-one knows when and where the next edition of this international teams event 
will be held.


Once an annual feature on the global golf calendar, the World Cup has recently 
spluttered and staggered from host venue to host venue; sometimes played every 
three years, sometimes every two.

Søren Kjeldsen and Thorbjørn Olesen post maiden golf World Cup win for Denmark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/sren-kjeldsen-and-thorbjrn-olesen-post-maiden-golf-world-cup-win-for-denmark>
It was supposed to be held at Mission Hills in China until 2025, but the 
tournament’s main sponsor, Omega, pulled the pin after 2011 saying the Chinese 
golf market was “too immature” and the strength of the fields had been 
unsatisfactory.

So it seems no-one knows quite what do with this event, even though it was 
described this week by PGA Tour commissioner Tim Finchem as one of golf’s 
“substantial properties”.

Finchem came into the media tent at Kingston Heath on Wednesday to deliver his 
state-of-the-nation address and he spoke a lot about the Cup’s future without 
actually saying much of substance.

“As we look forward, we look at the World Cup as a vehicle that can help 
expedite the internationalisation of the game,” Finchem said. “This event 
brings together a good group of players from all over the planet, two per 
country, and we look at it as something that can be built into a very 
substantial property.

“So I think as we look forward to the vehicles that can really expedite the 
growth of the game internationally, we would certainly look at the World Cup as 
part of that mix.”

Which was a warm and fuzzy endorsement of the Cup but not one that was really 
heavy on detail. But here’s an idea that should appeal to all “stakeholders”, 
and guarantee the tournament’s future: leave it in Melbourne, or Australia, for 
at least the next three editions.

The PGA Tour and International Federation of PGA Tours are clearly looking for 
a host city, and preferably one with a strong golf pedigree, to take ownership 
of the event and give it an identity. Certainly, no-one else is clamouring to 
hold it.

Finchem on Wednesday said the US Tour was about to open a permanent office in 
Australia to help with the staging of tournaments in this country and “be of 
assistance in growing the game generally”.

Melbourne, through its major events arm, has been chasing a PGA Tour event for 
some time, and even been in talks about hosting the year’s fourth major, the 
PGA Championship, should that ever move outside the US. The chance to stage the 
Cup on a regular basis would appeal as an option.

Melbourne’s sandbelt courses are a renowned drawcard for players; the crowds 
would turn up in droves. And this is a city that loves big-time sport.

Finchem spoke this week about the healthy relationship between the PGA Tour 
and the state of Victoria, a relationship that began with the successful 
staging of the 1998 Presidents Cup at Royal Melbourne.

“We really developed a wonderful working relationship here in Victoria over 
the past 20 years,” he said. “The reception that we’ve got here has always been 
very, very positive.”

So all the ducks are lined up beautifully: it seems such a no-brainer. 

For the moment, though, we should savour Denmark’s first win in the Cup, an 
event which was first played in 1953. In beating a strong field by four 
strokes, Sören Kjeldsen and Thorbjörn Olesen delivered perhaps their country’s 
finest moment in golf.

“Golf doesn’t get a whole lot of media attention in Denmark because football 
and handball gets most of it,” Kjeldsen said. “So hopefully this will be a big 
thing. We’re certainly very proud.”

The way they embraced the tournament, and often each other, showed just how 
much this meant to them. The same could be said of all the teams on the 
leaderboard on the final day: there was a real sense of teamwork, passion and 
camaraderie.

 That should be enough evidence for the powers-that-be that this tournament 
has a bright future; it just needs Finchem and co, hunkered down in Ponte Vedra 
Beach, Florida, to stick their necks out and make an unambiguous commitment to 
it.
 