
Sayed Abdellatif’s horizons are low already, and narrowing still.

 Where once he could wave to his family through a wire fence, he has been told 
by guards – without explanation – that the behaviour was a security risk and 
prohibited.

 Now the only time he has with his wife and six children are the crowded hours 
spent in the overfull and noisy visitors’ area of Villawood detention centre in 
Sydney; a cavernous and impersonal room where guards wearing black vests and 
body cameras with listening devices quietly loiter to electronically eavesdrop 
on conversations. His children must wear brightly coloured wristbands to see 
him. The wristbands mean they can leave. His wrists are bare.

 Abdellatif has watched hundreds of asylum seekers pass through and out of 
detention: granted bridging visas, protection visas, some deported. He has seen 
people set themselves on fire in detention, hang themselves and stab each 
other. Sniffer dogs invade rooms without notice seeking out drugs.

 Abdellatif doesn’t count the days – 1,643 – he has been in held immigration 
detention. He knows broadly it is four-and-a-half years and he knows he remains 
no closer to a resolution of his case than the day he arrived in Australia.
Sayed Abdellatif investigation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=a72ef6b2-2030-4639-a504-ddf5f1f319ef>
 In that time, he has seen four Australian prime ministers come and go. He 
follows politics closely and jokes darkly he may see many more. He has not been 
charged, nor accused of any crime in Australia.

 His detention has been condemned by the UN human rights council as illegal, a 
“clearly disproportionate... deprivation of liberty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/07/detained-asylum-seeker-sayed-abdellatif-losing-lives-no-one-cares>
” from which he should be released and for which he should be compensated; 
excoriated by the Australian Human Rights Commission as “arbitrary ... and 
unjustified”; and criticised by the Australian government’s own inspector 
general of intelligence and security for its “lack of coordination and … 
urgency”.

Sayed Abdellatif’s daughters realise HSC dream but have university hopes dashed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/09/sayed-abdellatif-daughters-realise-hsc-dream-university-hopes-dashed>
 The Department of Immigration and Border Protection has assessed that 
Abdellatif and his family have a prima facie case for protection on the basis 
of a “well-founded fear of persecution” in their homeland.

 Four times the department has recommended to successive ministers that he be 
allowed apply for a protection visa. He remains in detention.

 Now, new documents obtained under freedom of information legislation reveal 
the government has known for nearly 18 months that the evidence used to convict 
Abdellatif in absentia in a mass show trial in Egypt in 1999 – the basis for 
his detention in Australia – was obtained “under severe torture” and is 
discredited.

 A briefing paper read and signed by the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, 
in April 2015,two months after a Guardian story,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/16/indefinite-detention-of-asylum-seeker-is-based-on-conviction-secured-by-torture>
states documents in possession of the department “raise concerns about the 
legitimacy of the trial”.

 “Translations of supreme military court documents and signed statements from 
witnesses indicate that the evidence used against Mr Abdellatif in the Egyptian 
trial was obtained under torture.”

But the same document also shows the immigration department seeking to assure 
the immigration minister that Abdellatif can still be kept in detention without 
charge or trial, regardless of the legitimacy of his claim for protection.

 Department officials recommended that Abdellatif be allowed to apply for a 
visa, so that it could then be denied to him and the process used to force him 
out of Australia.

 “If Mr Abdellatif was permitted to lodge a valid TPV [temporary protection 
visa] application, it would be refused as he would not meet the criterion in 
the new subsection 36(1B) of the [migration] act (which refuses a visa to 
anyone judged by Asio to be directly or indirectly a risk to security).”

Officials recommended that Abdellatif be allowed to apply for a visa, so that 
it could then be denied to him

 An asylum seeker cannot legally be removed from Australia before their claim 
for protection is assessed. Therefore, bureaucrats argue to the minister in the 
briefing, allowing Abdellatif to apply for a visa, only to then reject it, 
“provides the strongest basis for effecting removal as it reduces the risk of 
successful litigation and, therefore, is the proposed mechanism to assess Mr 
Abdellatif’s claims”.

 The briefing contemplates approaching Egypt – the only country of which 
Abdellatif is a citizen or has a right to enter but also the country from which 
he seeks protection from persecution – to ask that country to request his 
extradition.

Egypt has made no effort to reclaim its citizen and the briefing notes 
“securing adequate diplomatic assurances cannot be guaranteed ... until 
thorough consideration has been given to Mr Abdellatif’s security concerns and 
his specific claims including the risk of harm on return to Egypt”.

 On 19 May 2015, the immigration minister granted the Abdellatif family leave 
to apply for temporary protection visas in Australia.

 Abdellatif undertook 22 hours of interviews over four days with department 
officials in February and March 2016 but nearly a year later is no closer to 
finding out the outcome of his application.

 Abdellatif has no recourse to any appeal while he is detained and while his 
case remains before the department. It has barely progressed, save for the 
growing mountain of paperwork that only serves to confirm the Kafka-esque 
stalemate he is in.

 A spokesman for Asio – the agency that gave Abdellatif an “adverse security 
assessment” on the basis of the flawed Egyptian trial – told the Guardian: 
“Consistent with long standing practice, Asio does not comment on individuals.”

A spokeswoman said the department “does not comment on individual cases”.

 Exile and detention

 Abdellatif fled Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> in 1992, 
having been tortured under the regime of Hosni Mubarak. In that year, he was 
arrested from a mosque by the state security investigations service as part of 
a crackdown on Islamic political opposition to Mubarak’s rule. Since fleeing 
his homeland, he has remained in exile from his country, living as a refugee in 
Albania, the UK, Iran, Malaysia, Indonesia and – finally – Australia. All of 
his six children were born during that exile.

 Abdellatif and his family arrived in Australia by boat in May 2012. The 
Australian government assessed his claim for protection and found that he and 
his family had a prima facie claim to refugee status.

Sayed Abdellatif: human rights groups press government to end detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/sayed-abdellatif-human-rights-groups-press-government-end-detention>
 But while the family was in immigration detention in 2013, Australian 
authorities were alerted to an Interpol red notice that wrongly said that in 
1999 Abdellatif was convicted in absentia – in a mass show trial in Cairo of 
107 men – of premeditated murder, destruction of property and possession of 
firearms and explosives.

The Egyptian supreme military court had sentenced him to 15 years in prison, 
for “membership of a terrorist group” and “providing forged travel documents”,
relying on evidence obtained under “severe torture” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/16/indefinite-detention-of-asylum-seeker-is-based-on-conviction-secured-by-torture>
 including electric shocks.

 The trial, criticised by rights groups at the time, was later found to have 
been fraudulent. A three-year Guardian investigation has shown multiple flaws 
in the case against him and Australia’s handling of that case.

 But, beyond the arcane legal machinations, Abdellatif’s case had the 
misfortune to become a political firestorm at the height of 2013 pre-election 
debate over boat arrivals. The then opposition leader and later prime minister, 
Tony Abbott, labelled Abdellatif a “convicted jihadist” and a “pool-fence 
terrorist”, in reference to the low-security perimeter at the Inverbrackie 
detention centre in South Australia. George Brandis, now the attorney general 
but then the shadow attorney general, said he was “plainly a convicted 
terrorist”.

The Abdellatifs were moved to Villawood. There, Sayed Abdellatif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sayed-abdellatif> remains. His case has 
hardly progressed and the systemic flaws in his detention have never been 
addressed by the department.

Separated

In a narrow booth in the visitors’ area of the detention centre, Abdellatif’s 
two eldest daughters fuss about him, spreading out cake and ma’amoul – a Middle 
Eastern date pastry – as he sips distractedly at a weak, milky tea served in a 
polystyrene cup.


 His eldest son, now 13, bears a striking resemblance to his father. A child 
when he came to Australia, he is a young man now, sporting a stubble on his 
chin and quiet, defiant eyes. A younger brother, now six, can barely remember 
what it is like to live with his father.

 The children are “doing very well, I am very proud”, Abdellatif says of their 
lives on the outside. But they carry the burden of their father’s incarceration 
too. School graduations, speech nights, Abdellatif has applied – and been 
rejected – to attend them all.

If I was sentenced, if I made a mistake, I’d pay the price. But I have done 
nothing wrong
Sayed Abdellatif 
 A life of exile – all of his children know only displacement – has bound the 
Abdellatif family tightly together: throughout their incarceration in 
Australia, members of the Abdellatif family have resolutely insisted they not 
be forcibly separated. But a bureaucratic sleight of hand saw the family’s 
situation transmogrify yet again.

 Earlier this year, Villawood detention centre’s family compound – where 
Abdellatif’s wife and six children were housed – was overnight redefined as 
“community detention housing”.

 While the security cameras that had watched them were disabled, and gates 
unlocked, the Abdellatif family remained in the same house but the change to 
their detention regime allowed the immigration minister to declare there were 
no longer any children in immigration detention in Australia.
Timeline 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2015/dec/map-stepper/index.html?key=1pSA-Qax4EI2qOZXAZ9ZEIohjR-7tzqsXU0QA4w925J0>
 Now ostensibly free, the change has, perversely, forced Abdellatif’s family 
further from him. The 10-minute internal route within Villawood that joined the 
family and the high-security compound is now sealed, forcing the family to 
thread their way through Villawood’s suburban streets on foot to see their 
husband and father, now a few hundred metres but an hour’s walk away.

 Even in their brief moments of communion, there is a weariness about the 
Abdellatif family, a resignation that, even as they try to enjoy the few hours 
they have together as a family, they can never wholly forget their cloistered, 
confining surrounds.

 Abdellatif’s is life spent in limbo, at the mercy of a bureaucratic caprice 
he can neither question nor predict. Still, after four-and-a-half years, he 
holds hope.

 “I came to Australia not to fight with Australia but seeking protection,” he 
says. “I am a friend, not an animal.”

Australia's shameful treatment of Sayed Abdellatif | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/australias-shameful-treatment-of-sayed-abdellatif>
 The indefinite nature of his detention wears on him, he explains, grinding 
down his spirit and triggering crushing bouts of depression that he must fight 
to pull himself from. Abdellatif’s treating psychologist and psychiatrist have 
both recommended to the government he be reunited with his family in the 
community “given the significant impact separation from his family in a held 
detention environment is having on his mental health”.

 “I’m wasting my life in this place,” he says of his incarceration. “If I was 
sentenced, if I made a mistake, I’d pay the price. But I have done nothing 
wrong, I have nothing to hide.

 “Even in jail they have a time, they know how long ... but this system is 
killing hope.”

 Abdellatif spends most of his days alone, in his room, a tight, airless cell 
with a toilet, a single bed and a chest of drawers, and from which, if he 
stands on a stool, he can see the outside world through a high sealed window. 
But the view is only of the detention centre’s water tank and the steel fences 
that hold him in.

 Abdellatif speaks haltingly these days. His English, once strong, is getting 
worse with the isolation of his existence.

 Now, he can barely be heard above the din of the visitors’ room. He leans in 
to speak, first glancing over his shoulder to see who – the guards wearing 
cameras can appear at any time – might be listening.

 Here, we are nowhere, he says. And there are no rules.

 “We are out of Australia. We are out of the world.”
 