
Australia Day – known in more than 150 countries as Monday – is the perfect 
opportunity to dress like the lesser-known reject from The Avengers, Captain 
Australia. His superhero uniform is several Southern Cross sarongs he picked up 
on the beach, his special power the ability to manipulate by his own will 
literally anything made out of lamb, and his kryptonite the second verse of the 
Australian anthem (you know, the one that mentions how nice we should be to 
“boat people”).

To someone who abandoned their arbitrary loyalty to borders some seven years 
ago, the notion of national pride seems rather an odd one. Stand up at midday 
and sing an anthem to an abstract concept? Utterly baffling. Next you’ll be 
telling me to balance on one leg at exactly 3.47pm and perform a mime about the 
economy.

Nevertheless, if sport’s your thing, then I imagine you’ll be feeling pretty 
good on Australia Day. In the Asian Cup (ABC1), there wasCahill’s overhead kick 
goal 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-01-23/watch-tim-cahills-amazing-first-goal-in-the-asian/6041134>
, an excellent highlight in a tournament that otherwise seemed an attempt to 
keep a giant lawn constantly watered by people repeatedly falling over and 
crying on it.

Over on Channel 7 on Sunday, Nick Kyrgios gave the nation another reason to be 
proud, getting through to the quarter finals of the Australian Open by clawing 
his way back from two sets down. And all that despite an allergy to his own 
tennis racket and having his hair attacked by Zorro. Much of the appeal wasn’t 
so much his tennis but waiting to hear what nightmarish sounds the teen could 
summon up in his deepest moments of frustration. It’s quite a sight: watching 
someone attack an entire planet with a piece of custom-made graphite.

Seven’s coverage has become easier to follow as the number of matches being 
played simultaneously inevitably decreases. I don’t remember tennis coverage 
always being like this – earlier in the week it seemed like every minute we 
were jumping between matches, creating coverage so broken up it was hard to get 
truly involved.

The screen wizardry was nauseating as well. Games would swipe on for a few 
seconds and then vanish as if the coverage were being controlled by a Tinder 
user who found none of the matches sexy enough to watch. If this was an attempt 
to engage viewers watching TV on their tablets, it wasn’t for me. I’m happy 
with my old-skool television set, thank you very much. I don’t need a giant 
iPad with ADHD.

And as someone who watches most of the action in the evening, the lack of 
women’s games was also frustrating. I realise this is not so much Seven’s fault 
as society’s, but seriously, next time can we schedule some later in the day? 
Or is Australia home to Pitch Black bats that feed on female tennis players 
after dark?

It doesn’t get more Australian than …

The Australian of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/25/domestic-violence-campaigner-rosie-batty-named-australian-of-the-year>
, now available on ABC’siView 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/australian-of-the-year-2015/FA1459C001S00>. 
Despite looking like a derelict Oscars filmed in a wind tunnel, it’s certainly 
worth watching to find out more about the winners, each of them representing 
something about Australia a little more inspiring than a flag and a tepid meat 
pie. Oh, and did I mention that women took top honours in all four major 
categories?
 