
Melbourne’s infamous weather again played the starring role in another 
frustrating day of the second Test in Melbourne, after which Pakistan sit 310-6 
from the 101.2 overs so far possible between frequent and lengthy delays.

Rain came for the final time at 5.15pm local time and two of the great heroes 
of the day were the MCG ground staff – whose backs will ache from the constant 
placement and removal of the covers – and those manning bars around the MCG, 
where thousands of Melburnians happily drank well into the afternoon despite 
the limited prospects of play.

In a cricket sense, what remained of the day was dominated by the monastic 
batting performance of Azhar Ali, who athletically tucked into the odd long hop 
from Nathan Lyon but otherwise eschewed anything close to extravagance. His 
patient, unconquered and potentially game-shaping innings of 139 from 287 
deliveries has stretched across every minute of play so far.

WBBL star Deandra Dottin taken to hospital after sickening headclash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/wbbl-star-dottin-taken-to-hospital-after-headclash>
Azhar’s secondary brilliance is how indelibly he dispels the tired cliches of 
Pakistani batsmen as zany innovators and impetuous stylists, though you 
wouldn’t call the results effortless. Across two days now he has batted with 
something close to total command of both the Australian bowlers and local 
conditions. The key is rarely deviating from what works; a wide, bobbing stance 
that allows him to quickly swivel away from the short stuff typically served up 
in Australia and an expert eye for spotting runs, which came freely today off 
all bar the miserly Josh Hazlewood.

The Melbourne chapter of the Nathan Lyon fan club came back to earth with a 
thud as the elements prevented much in the way of meaningful spells of spin 
bowling, though Lyon received far rougher treatment than part-timers Steve 
Smith and Nic Maddinson when they had a whirl before the arrival of the second 
new ball.

Azhar’s somewhat predictable co-conspirator here was Brisbane Test centurion 
Asad Shafiq, whose even 50 came in a partnership of 115 runs and was broken 
only by some wicked away movement from Jackson Bird, with Steve Smith accepting 
an edge at second slip for the first wicket of the day. In the aftermath Shafiq 
looked back down the pitch as though he’d been betrayed by a lifelong friend.

His ascendency poses an awkward question for Pakistan if captain Misbah and 
his veteran colleague Younus continue to wane at their present rate. As it 
stands Shafiq – by far the youngest of the trio at 30 – is the most prolific 
Test centurion of all time from his No. 6 slot and it seems a pity to mess with 
something so effective, but there is surely a temptation now to bump him 
further up to maximise his talents.

Compared to the calm partnership that preceded his own union with Azhar, 
Sarfraz Ahmed was skittish, arriving and departing in a flurry of blasé strokes 
and muddle-headed charges down the wicket. He injudiciously nicked to slip and 
gave Hazlewood overdue reward for his unstinting accuracy from both ends; his 
bowling vigil started a touch after 10am but didn’t pay off until 4.39pm.

Hazlewood’s 11 overs on Tuesday contained six maidens, leaving him with 2-33 
from 26 overs of priceless fast bowling. An event more typical of his luck in 
this Test came in the over following Sarfaz’s departure, when a thick edge from 
Mohammad Amir sailed barely six inches over Usman Khawaja’s head at third slip. 
It was the only way Pakistan looked like scoring boundaries off the New South 
Welshman, whose gigantic boots must have to be declared as excess baggage when 
he travels the world.

Khawaja protested he had lost sight of that chance among the crowd but did so 
knowing replays would reveal his late reaction to the edge, perhaps 
understandable in a day of such yawning gaps in the collective attention span. 
Bird’s 3-91 from 29 overs further consolidated his canny work on day one.

In the end it was the unlikely Amir who provided the breeziest moments of 
action in his undefeated 28 from 23 deliveries, a cameo that contained six 
boundaries and briefly lifted spirits on a grey and dismal day in Melbourne. 
Day three, you would hope, will shine on someone other than Azhar.
 