
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has promised work on a rail connection to Sydney’s second airport would begin 
when the Badgerys Creek airport opens or soon afterwards as he prepared to sign 
off on the plans.

Turnbull said as an “enthusiastic devotee of rail infrastructure in western 
Sydney”, he would be looking at the rail options carefully but a train 
connection would not open at the same time as the airport. The airport is is 
expected to open by the mid-2020s.

“We are looking at the options for rail very, very carefully with the aim of 
ensuring that rail connectivity for the airport will ideally commence when the 
airport opens and, if not, as soon thereafter as possible,” Turnbull said.

The urban infrastructure minister Paul Fletcher said the airport would be 
“rail ready”. Plans include a box for a future station, a corridor for the rail 
designed across the airport location and space for a future terminal and 
facilities.

He said the Turnbull government was working with the NSW Baird government on a 
scoping study for rail across Western Sydney, including a WesternSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> airport.

But Labor’s Anthony Albanese said the plan for the airport - discussed for 
almost 40 years - needed public transport from day one.

He said the Badgerys Creek Airport had the potential to be an economic 
gamechanger for Western Sydney and the national economy.

“We need...to make sure that we get it right,” Albanese said. “We need to have 
public transport access from day one that the airport opens.”

Albanese called on the government to ensure that the economic benefits were 
maximised and the environmental impact is minimised.

“We can do that, for example, by making sure that no communities are flown 
over at night and that’s possible because of the protections that were put in 
place around Badgerys Creek Airport by the Hawke Government way back in the 
1980s,” Albanese said.

The 1,800ha site at Badgerys Creek in western Sydney will initially service 
about 10 million passengers a year, making it the size of Adelaide airport, 
from the mid-2020s.


Qantas confirms non-stop Perth to London flights from March 2018
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/qantas-confirms-non-stop-perth-to-london-flights-from-march-2018>
A sitemap for “stage one” includes a 3,700m east-west runway, a domestic, 
international and cargo terminal, and a tunnel earmarked for a future 
underground rail link. It would take eight years to build and take 10 million 
passengers annually at a cost of $4bn.

By 2050 a second 3,700m runway would be complete, with the airport forecast to 
take 80 million passengers annually – about twice the number who now pass 
through Sydney airport.

The federal minister for infrastructure, Paul Fletcher, said: “The new airport 
will be a major generator of jobs and economic activity for western Sydney, 
both during construction but also once it is operational.”

The Qantas chief executive, Alan Joyce, said Sydney needed the second airport 
at Badgerys Creek because Kingsford Smith airport was already operating at 
capacity.

“We are hopeful the airport will be open and running by the mid-2020s, and we 
are very keen on having that expansion,” he told Network Seven on Monday. 
“Sydney is already full, Kingsford Smith is full, we have called for this 
capacity for sometime. With operations taking place hopefully from the mid-20s, 
which will be great for Sydney, NSW and Australia,” he said.

But Mark Greenhill, mayor of the Blue Mountains Council, said the federal 
government’s plan had been released without flight paths and that the Badgerys 
Creek site had been a bad idea since the 1970s when it was first proposed.

“If this is Malcolm Turnbull’s idea of a Christmas present, I want to take it 
back on Boxing Day,” he told the ABC.

“At the end of the day, what they’ve announced is an airport but no flight 
paths. We still don’t know where the planes will be flying. That’s how 
incomplete this job is.”

Previous government estimates claimed the initial construction phase would 
generate about 4,000 jobs, while the airport development will create 35,000 
jobs by 2035, increasing to 60,000 jobs over time.


Sydney’s second airport has been stuck in a mire of politics for 40 years. 
Successive governments have refused to make a decision because of political 
sensitivities about noise, infrastructure and amenity.


Badgerys Creek was first recommended in 1979 but it was not until the mid-80s 
that the Hawke government began acquiring land at the site. But the political 
appetite waned and both parties ruled it out.


Dead zeppelins: Brazilian gravesite is airships' stairway to heaven
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/brazil-zeppelin-hangar-nazis> 
A second site at Wilton was considered but was ruled out because it was 
further from the Sydney central business district and required greater 
development.

A joint federal-state report released in 2012 found the result of doing 
nothing about a second airport was lost jobs, lost economic growth, traffic 
gridlock, nationwide aviation delays and increased aircraft noise.


The report concluded: “If action is not taken quickly the chance to secure the 
future of aviation for the Sydney region may be lost altogether … the option of 
doing nothing is no longer available and the costs of deferring action are 
unacceptable.”


The report found Kingsford Smith airport would run out of space by 2027, with 
peak times in the morning and late afternoon filled by 2020. The authors said 
by 2060 the lack of capacity would result in almost $60bn in forgone 
expenditure and 57,000 jobs forgone in that year alone.
 