
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has ordered US 
intelligence to review evidence of Russian interference in the 2016 
presidential election after coming under sustained pressure from congressional 
Democrats.

The review will be one of Obama’s final instructions to the intelligence 
agencies, which will soon report toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, whom congressional Democrats 
consider the beneficiary of a hack targeting the Democratic National Committee.

Lisa Monaco, the White House counterterrorism director, announced what she 
called a “full review” at a breakfast briefing sponsored by the Christian 
Science Monitor on Friday.

At the White House press briefing later on Friday, Eric Schultz, the deputy 
White House press secretary, denied the review was “an effort to challenge the 
outcome of the election”.

“We have acknowledged who won the election,” he said. “It wasn’t the candidate 
the president campaigned for. He has gone out of his way to ensure a smooth 
transition of power.”

The review will span the last three presidential election cycles, Schultz told 
reporters. “These agencies will have to take a look at what we saw in 2008, 
2012 and 2016. This is going to be a deep dive. This is a review that will be 
broad and deep at the same time. They’re going to look at where the activity 
leads them to look at.”

There were intrusions into both the Obama and John McCain campaigns in 2008, 
publicly attributed to the Chinese, he continued, and although there were no 
notable incidents in 2012, “knowing what we know now”, that election will also 
be scrutinised.

In 2016, he said, the government did not detect any increased cyber activity 
on election day itself but the FBI made public specific acts in the summer and 
fall, tied to the highest levels of the Russian government. “This is going to 
put that activity in a greater context ... dating all the way back to 2008.”

Asked if the review would investigate Russia’s motives, Schultz replied: 
“Malicious cyber activity, specifically malicious cyber activity tied to our 
elections, has no place in the international community. Unfortunately this 
activity is not new to Moscow. We’ve seen them do this for years ... The 
president has made it clear to President Putin that this is unacceptable.”

Obama expected the review to be completed before he leaves office, Schultz 
said. “This is a huge priority ... I think the president wanted this done under 
his watch because he takes it very seriously. This is something the president 
has been watching closely for eight years now.”

Schultz also told the briefing: “We’re going to make public as much as we can. 
As you can imagine, something like this might include sensitive and even 
classified information. When that report is submitted we’re going to take a 
look. We want to brief Congress and the relevant stakeholders, possible state 
directors.”

“This is good news. Declassifying and releasing information about the Russian 
government and the US election, and doing so quickly, must be a priority,” said 
Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat on the Senate intelligence committee.

In October, the director of national intelligence and the secretary of 
homeland security publicly accused the “senior-most” levels of the Russian 
government of directing those digital breaches. Trump, who has treated Russian 
president Vladimir Putin with a warmth unequalled by most US politicians, has 
repeatedly dismissed the accusation as politically motivated.

US intelligence laid the blame for the DNC hack at Russia’s feet but has not 
provided evidence supporting the accusation, although several private 
cybersecurity firms reaching the same conclusionhave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/russia-hackers-democratic-national-committee-email-leak>
. Earlier this month, all the Democratic members of the Senate intelligence 
committeepublicly intimated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/senators-hint-russian-interference-us-presidential-election>
 the administration knows significantly more about Russian culpability than the 
October statement revealed, and implored Obama for a public disclosure he has 
thus far resisted.

Yet the White House was more sympathetic to a request earlier this week from 
several senior Democrats in the House of Representatives, who wrote to Obama
requesting a classified briefing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/obama-democrats-russia-role-elections>
 on the role the Russians played in the election.

While Democrats, stung by a rout in an election many expected to win, have 
spearheaded the calls for disclosure of Russian interference, they also have 
some Republican support. Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina hawk who savaged 
Trump on the campaign trail,told CNN 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/309234-lindsey-graham-calls-for-investigation-of-russia-role-in-us-election>
 this week he will use his Senate perch to pursue an investigation of Russian 
involvement in the DNC hack.

According to Monaco, the review will be classified and delivered to lawmakers 
before Obama leaves office on 20 January.

Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> immediately pounced 
on the announced review and pressed the White House to declassify it before 
Trump takes office.

Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House intelligence committee, said Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> had “succeeded” in “sow[ing] 
discord” in the election, and urged as much public disclosure as is possible.

“More than that, the administration must begin to take steps to respond 
forcefully to this blatant cyber meddling, and work with our allies in Europe 
who have been targets of similar attacks to impose costs on the Kremlin; if we 
do not, we can expect to see a lot more of this in the near future,” Schiff 
said Friday.

A spokesman for the director of national intelligence declined to comment. 
 