
Hermann Hesse was born in Baden-Württemberg, the future ground zero for German 
football hipsters, and even though he didn’t leave behind any explicit musings 
on the game, he 110% understood the pressing need of setting your stall out 
early doors. “A magic dwells in each beginning, protecting us, telling us how 
to live,” he wrote in Steps, his most famous poem, in 1941.

After much anguished ruminating about the threat from the Premier League 
moneybags, the suffocating dominance ofBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> and proliferation of 
no-name-no-fans teams, the Bundesliga was firmly banking on the enchantment of 
the new (season), too, at the weekend.

Arkadiusz Milik and Dries Mertens help Napoli fans forget the heartache
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/29/napoli-milan-milik-mertens-serie-a>
Tim Bendzko, a world-famous singer/songwriter in one of the 210 countries 
broadcasting the opening game at the Allianz Arena live on Friday night, was 
singing the national anthem for novelty effect. Instead of hapless former 
northern powerhouse Hamburger SV (5-0 losers in Fröttmaning a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/14/bayern-munich-hamburg-bundesliga-match-report>
), the league had cleverly cast hapless former northern powerhouse Werder 
Bremen to provide much more resistance against the champions this time around.

And Bayern Munich, perhaps themselves bored with constantly winning the league 
under the freakishly brilliant Pep Guardiola, have kindly installed the 
much-more-easy-going Carlo Ancelotti, to give the opposition a bit of a chance. 
Carletto’s way, history books have shown, tends to lead to the Champions League 
but relatively rarely to league titles.

The illusion of the new soon revealed itself as such, however, as Viktor 
Skripnik’s Green and Whites were destroyed 6-0 with frightening ease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/bayern-munich-werder-bremen-match-report>
. As an advertisement for the competition, the result did not exactly send the 
desired message, even if Werder Bremen was briefly trending in the US on 
Twitter. The league president, Reinhard Rauball, professed himself “shocked” by 
the docility of the visitors in the non-contest, and Skripnik admitted that his 
team had made him feel like “the arse of the world”. Him and his coaches had 
been “embarrassed” on the bench, the Ukrainian admitted.

Two competitive defeats (in the cup and the league) into the season, the 
46-year-old has already been forced to employ some hefty endgame rhetoric. The 
home game against Augsburg after the international break will be “a final” he 
claimed. For him personally, it might well be.

Aubameyang double gives Borussia Dortmund winning start against Mainz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/borussia-dortmund-mainz-bundesliga-match-report>
The distinct lack of originality scoreline-wise aside, Bayern’s stroll to the 
top of the table at least fed into the media narrative in Bavaria. Relieved 
from the “shackles of Guardiola”, TV pundit/frustrated coach Mehmet Scholl 
explained, Bayern’s players have rediscovered the joy of attacking football, 
without all those pesky, minute instructions.

There is an element of truth in that, of course, but a less self-serving, less 
reactionary analysis would probably uncover that the much-vaunted freedom in 
Bayern’s game is largely the function of more space ahead of them, which is 
being found at the expense of ceding possession in spells. Werder in any case 
were not in the slightest bit able to put the tweaked system to the test.

The next day at Frankfurt, it was business as usual for Schalke too. The Royal 
Blues have a new coach in Markus Weinzierl, a new sporting director in 
Christian Heidel and a bunch of interesting new signings. But on the whole, it 
was a startling case of deja vu, all over again.

Süddeutsche Zeitung’s long-suffering S04 correspondent Philipp Selldorf had 
flashbacks to a litany of mishaps and accidents past as “the familiar 
weirdness” of the visitors’ passivity in the opening 20 minutes allowed 
Eintracht’s Alex Meier to give his side the lead. Schalke did wake up to create 
some decent chances towards the end of the match, when the Chelsea-loanee 
Michael Hector was sent off for the second time in as many games, but the hopes 
of a fresh start dissipated into the hot August air and left Schalke in a 
sticky patch. They will host Bayern next.

The new and possibly improved Borussia Dortmund, meanwhile, showed that the 
pre-season hype has some justification,a slight wobble against Mainz 05 
notwithstanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/borussia-dortmund-mainz-bundesliga-match-report>
. Two goals from Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang saw the Gabon international (almost) 
keep pace with the hat-trick hero Robert Lewandowski, and by and large Thomas 
Tuchel was pleased with the progress shown.

Narrow-minded fears of a “loss of identity”, as expressed by some ultras, seem 
as unfounded as concerns about the time it might take for the team to gel in 
the wake of all the changes. With players such Ousmane Dembélé and André 
Schürrle up front, Dortmund are certainly fast enough to catch Bayern at the 
top. Only their endurance (and solidity at the back) is still in question.

So far so fairly expected, you might say, but matchday one did offer some 
shiny, genuine newness in other quarters. At the Borussia Park, for example, 
Gladbach v Leverkusen didn’t just live up to its 
fourth-v-third-from-last-season billing but exceeded expectations with a 
surprising punchline: the Foals’ superb counterattacking and impressive depth 
suggested that they might be better placed than Roger Schmidt’s hard-pressing 
Werkself to make an assault on the duopoly at the top.

Goals from André Hahn and Lars Stindl helped to overcome the visitors in a 
high-quality game that showcased just how far German club football has come in 
recent years.

Can anything stop Bayern making it five Bundesligas in a row? Only complacency 
| Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/bayern-munich-bundesliga-season-dortmund>
Similarly enjoyable, albeit on a slightly lower plane technically, was 
Hoffenheim’s 2-2 draw with RB Leipzig on Sunday. Few people would have watched 
it live on German TV – a self-deprecating fan banner greeting “the four viewers 
on Sky” might not have been too far off the truth – but the game between the 
billionaire-sponsored village club and the Red Bull-owned newcomers was 
entertaining enough despite being rather deficient in terms of historical 
resonance or, if you will, authenticity. “We showed that we can enrich the 
league,” the RB coach Ralph Hasenhüttl said after the successful debut in the 
top flight. No pun intended, to be sure.

The Bundesliga’s most disliked club did not just win a point yesterday, they 
also struck a small blow for the league as a whole by signing the Nottingham 
Forest winger Oliver Burke from underneath the noses of a host of Premier 
League clubs, some of whom had frantically upped their wage offers as news of 
the 19-year-old’s medical broke, according to Kicker. Late transfer-window 
raids were supposed to go the other way this summer.

Leipzig’s arrival as a super-charged force in waiting cannot possibly mark the 
beginning of the Bundesliga’s financial fightback against the all powerful 
English, not even the beginning of the beginning. But maybe the envy/horror 
their inevitable ascent to the top is bound to generate can at least 
temporarily end overblown worries that the league has lost its capacity to 
surprise and excite in middle-age. Matchday one already showed there will be 
enough going on here, both familiar and new, to keep the attention.

Results: Bayern 6-0 Bremen; Frankfurt 1-0 Schalke; Augsburg 0-2 Wolfsburg; HSV 
1-1 Ingolstadt; Dortmund 2-1 Mainz; Gladbach 2-1 Leverkusen; Hertha 2-1 
Freiburg; Hoffenheim 2-2 Leipzig.
 