
The broadcast of a BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> documentary 
exploring the controversial tactics of Prince Charles’s former spin doctor Mark 
Bolland has been postponed after intervention from lawyers representing the 
royal family.

The BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> documentary, titled 
Reinventing the Royals, promised an in-depth examination of the shrewd PR 
tactics used by Bolland to boost Charles’s public appeal after the death of 
Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997.

Written and presented by the former editor of Panorama Steve Hewlett, who has 
also contributed articles to the Guardian, the two-part series was made without 
the involvement or co-operation of Clarence House or Buckingham Palace. The 
first episode was due to air on Sunday 4 January.

The documentary is understood to have been cleared by BBC lawyers, the 
corporation’s editorial policy team and at the highest level of management. 
However, it is understood the transmission was put on hold after a the BBC 
received a letter from representatives of Charles and his wife, the Duchess of 
Cornwall.

According to the Radio Times, which is due to publish a piece by Hewlett about 
the documentary, the last-minute decision to postpone the broadcast was made by 
the head of BBC news and current affairs, James Harding.

Separately, it is understood that issues remain in getting clearance for some 
archive footage featuring members of the royal family.

There is said to be an ongoing dialogue between the BBC and representatives of 
the royal family, with the corporation still intending to broadcast the series 
at a later date.

The documentary explores how Bolland, once described as “the real power behind 
the future king of England”, was the cause of much animosity among fellow staff 
members and other royals until he severed links with the palace in early 2003.

It will feature a series of interviews with figures such as journalists Tom 
Bradby and Richard Kay and the press secretary toPrince Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> at the time of Diana’s death, 
Sandy Henney.

Writing in the Radio Times, Hewlett quotes one royal commentator who described 
Bolland as a genius at pulling strings and manipulating the press, but said he 
was called “Blackadder” by Princes William and Harry.

The documentary will explore how William and Harry were part of Bolland’s 
agenda to win back public favour for Charles and Camilla.

This is not the first time issues have arisen between the BBC and the palace 
over a documentary relating to the royal family. Footage of the Queen edited in 
non-chronological order caused theCrowngate controversy in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/06/themonarchy.bbc>.

A trailer shown to journalists for the BBC fly-on-the-wall documentary 
Monarchy: The Royal Family at Work created the false impression that the Queen 
had walked out of a photo shoot with Annie Liebovitz after being asked to 
remove her crown. The ensuing row led to a formal apology from the BBC to the 
Queen and the resignation of the BBC One controller Peter Fincham.

A royal communications spokesman said of Reinventing the Royals: “Scheduling 
is a matter for the BBC.”

The BBC said it was delaying broadcast “until later in the new year while a 
number of issues including the use of archive footage are resolved”.
 