
Trends can be confusing, especially when tradition is eroded in the pursuit of 
apparent hipness. I ordered a hamburger the other day only to have it arrive on 
a cutting board, which is normally a tool used in the preparatory – not serving 
– phase of a culinary experience. Suddenly adrift in a realm of baffling cool, 
I did what anyone else would do: walked into the cafe’s kitchen and took a piss 
in a frying pan. “Sorry,” I muttered. “I thought it was some kind of hipster 
toilet.”


Fortunately, host Samuel Johnson is here to make sense of a culture steeped in 
irony for SBS’s documentary series Hipsters. If you’re like me and aren’t even 
sure what the term “hipster” refers to any more, thefirst episode 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/409124931941/Hipsters-What-Is-A-Hipster> 
seems to point at street fashion and trinkets from the 1980s and 90s, blended 
into a bizarre fashion smoothie.

Can hipsters save the world?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/08/can-hipsters-save-the-world> 
In episode three, Johnson is off to explore “hipsterpreneurs”, those business 
savvy types that have benefited from an entire market of people looking to set 
themselves apart from the rest on social media by embracing novelty. His first 
stop is LA, where he examines the booming food truck industry. Here, flocks of 
hipsters (what is the collective noun for them? I’m tempted to suggest 
“quince”) gather around, in the style of Alfred Hitchcock’s The Birds, to enjoy 
odd fusions like Korean barbecue tacos and bacon ice cream.

It’s all rather inconsequential fluff and the interviews don’t go too much in 
depth, but Johnson is wise in keeping things light and trying a bit of 
everything. Hipsters feels more like a travel adventure show than any kind of 
mocking takedown (which, considering the material, was surely tempting). If 
hipsters are supporting small businesses for the mere purpose of instagram 
decoration, what of it? Johnson’s attitude seems to involve enjoying the 
variety, rather than mocking its cause.

With beer, things get a bit more complicated as irony allows (or demands) the 
appreciation of the objectively naff, while the pursuit of apparent 
sophistication and appreciation of artisanal items makes for more “snobbish” 
drinkers. It’s an odd conflict of influences that sees hipsters drinking 
imported PBR (“a shit beer” as an American kindly warns us), while 
simultaneously embracing craft beer that’s been lovingly brewed rather than 
mass-produced. Perhaps in both cases they’re just drinking image, so let’s hope 
these bearded lumberjacks never find themselves parched in a desert where the 
water isn’t bottled and labelled with an anchor and a harpsichord.

Finally, it’s off to Melbourne to examine coffee culture. Again, whatever has 
motivated the take-up of artisan coffee, the winner seems to be variety; 
admittedly, on occasion this will leave you stranded behind someone ordering a 
hand-crafted thimble of white caffeinated mist, but doesn’t this still remain 
preferable to a boundless sea of Starbucks stores?

Johnson throws himself into the experience, and ends up enjoying a “public 
cupping” that involves making a weird whistling noise when sucking up an 
entirely insufficient amount of coffee from a spoon, said to enhance the 
flavour. Not necessarily what you’d care about when hungover and wishing death 
to the sun, but it’s nice to know that the option is there.

While not massively academic, the show is nonetheless enjoyable and benefits 
from its judgment-free brand of humour. Whatever mild hint of disapproval it 
gives off, doesn’t stop Johnson from enjoying the benefits of a culture that, 
as one bar owner describes it, is merely “groups of young people trying to find 
their identity by out-wanking each other”.

The Odd Couple: Matthew Perry's vanity project falls flat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/18/the-odd-couple-matthew-perry-vanity-project-falls-flat>
But true lovers of irony should head to Channel Ten: three minutes and a few 
sexist gags intoThe Odd Couple 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/the-odd-couple>, and I found myself 
wondering if the only people who watch the show are some sort of televisual 
hipsters that ironically hark for a simpler time, when women were nothing but 
secondary characters who occasionally popped up to be shagged or make coffee.

Here, Matthew Perry plays a Joey from Friends-type character: a slobbish, 
sex-obsessed oaf. Thomas Lennon plays Felix Unger, a Chandler-esque prim and 
proper type who people occasionally suspect of being gay. So yes, the kind of 
outmoded humour only those watching courtesy of a 1990s wormhole might find 
funny.

Avoid entirely, or watch it only while drinking PBR and make it some kind of 
evening themed around terrible US imports.

• Hipsters 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/417561667979/hipsters-s1-ep3-here-come-the-hipsterpreneurs>
 can be seen on SBS OnDemand,The Odd Couple 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/the-odd-couple> airs on Channel Ten every 
Monday at 7.30pm
 