
More than 100 academics have called on the New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> government to take 
abortion off the criminal code as Greens upper house member Mehreen Faruqi 
prepares to introduce the legislation.

Law and criminology academics from across the state have signed a letter 
<https://decriminaliseabortionnsw.squarespace.com/> saying it is time to 
decriminalise abortion and calling for privacy zones to be introduced around 
abortion service providers and clinics.

Luke McNamara, the University of New South Wales law professor who organised 
the letter, said criminal law should be kept in line with community 
expectations.

“In this context social values have changed, this is widely recognised, maybe 
not universally recognised, it’s appropriate for a woman to have the right to 
choose an abortion, and criminal law should not be inconsistent with that basic 
principle,” he said.

McNamara said the mere fact of abortion technically being defined as a 
criminal offence could be enough to stop some doctors performing the procedure.

Victoria abortion protest laws take effect after being fast-tracked by 
government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/victoria-abortion-protest-laws-take-effect-after-being-fast-tracked-by-government>
“The symbolic effect [of taking abortion out of the criminal code] should not 
be underestimated. It is too easy to say as a matter of practice, ‘what does it 
matter?’. Well, it does matter, an inconsistent message is being conveyed to 
women, their friends, the broader community. We need to make sure it is not 
sending a contrary message with the criminal code.”

Faruqi is planning to introduce a bill decriminalising abortion in the coming 
months.

McNamara said it was important the distinction was made between people’s 
feelings and values and the laws.

“I fully appreciate, as all right-thinking people do, that indivduals are 
entitled to their own moral and religious views, but it doesn’t necessarily 
follow that those views be reflected in the criminal law ... this is an example 
where we are still being too cautious and we need to emphasise the separation 
between church and state,” he said.

Faruqi, a former engineering professor, said the support from the law and 
criminology academics was heartening.


“It’s very encouraging to see the legal academic community join the community 
at large, who overwhelmingly support what my bill will do,” she said.

 “With an appreciation of the broader legal context as well as the fundamental 
absurdity of continuing to treat abortion as a crime, law and criminology 
academics are uniquely positioned to critically consider abortion law reform.”
 