
It was just gone 7pm on Boxing Day and a small group of reporters were walking 
away from the Liberty Stadium when aSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> supporter approached. “Has he 
gone yet, boys?” asked the fan, smiling in a way that made it clear it would be 
viewed as good news if there was confirmation that Bob Bradley was clearing his 
desk.

That moment arrived 24 hours later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
, when Swansea announced that the first American to manage in the Premier 
League had been sacked after less than three months in charge. Bradley won only 
two out of 11 games, picked up just eight points, conceded 29 goals, shipped 
three or more on eight occasions, made a total of 33 team changes after 
starting hisreign with a 3-2 defeat at Arsenal and 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/arsenal-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
 fielded six different back-four combinations.

Bob Bradley sacked as Swansea City manager after only 11 games in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
Quite a set of numbers, all in all, and it is fair to say that by the end of 
the drubbing at the hands of West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
 on Boxing Day, during which a significant number of Swansea supporters chanted 
“we want Bradley out”, the former USA coach was none the wiser as to what was 
the best starting XI to select from the woefully ill-equipped squad that he 
inherited.

Swansea’s American owners, Stephen Kaplan and Jason Levien, had been 
determined to stand by their man and give Bradley a chance to bring in a few 
players of his own in January. Yet the West Ham match shredded those plans. The 
performance was abject and the atmosphere inside the Liberty Stadium poisonous. 
Swansea had been well beaten for the third successive game and Bradley had 
reached the point of no return.

His position was untenable and there is no escaping the fact that results were 
awful under his watch, yet anybody conducting a wider inquest into where 
everything has gone wrong at Swansea, in particular the question as to how a 
model club have turned into such a mess in the space of a season and a half, 
would not spend too long going through Bradley’s 85 days as manager.

Instead the spotlight is likely to shine an unfavourable light on the people 
running the club, especially the chairman, Huw Jenkins, who was as influential 
as anybody in the rags-to-riches story behind Swansea’s rise from the depths of 
the Football League to the top flight. Once the man who could do no wrong, 
Jenkins has presided over a number of desperately poor decisions in recent 
times, both managerially and in the transfer market, and the result is that 
Swansea have lurched from one crisis to another.

Perhaps the most alarming aspect of the club’s decline is the speed with which 
everything has unravelled. In May last year Swansea finished eighth in the 
Premier League with a club-record points total. Their attractive and 
distinctive playing style – “The Swansea Way” – was deeply ingrained and 
integral to their success. Garry Monk, a bright, young, homegrown manager was 
in charge of the team, supporter representation on the board won admirers, and 
the club operated in the black. Swansea, in short, provided a blueprint for 
many to follow. Fast-forward 19 months and they have become just another 
Premier League club.

Monk lost his job  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/garry-monk-sacked-swansea>
last December after a bad run of results and it will not have escaped the 
attention of many Swansea supporters that while they were being thumped 4-1 by 
West Ham this Boxing Day, their former manager was overseeing a victory at 
Preston by the same scoreline for his promotion-chasing Leeds United side.

Whatever the rights and wrongs of the decision to sack Monk, the bottom line 
is that so much of what Swansea have done since has made little sense, arguably 
no more so than when Jenkins announced in May that he was giving Francesco 
Guidolin a permanent contract to continue as manager. It was a decision that 
stunned people within the club, never mind outside, and meant that Swansea 
missed a crucial opportunity to rebuild.

Guidolin had been appointed in January on a short-term basis after a 
protracted search for Monk’s replacement initially ended with Alan Curtis, the 
highly respected and long-serving first-team coach, being given the job until 
the end of the season. Curtis, however, was asked to stand aside 11 days after 
being handed the reins to make way for the Italian. Swansea ended up finishing 
12th, on the face of it vindicating the decision to bring in Guidolin, yet 
there was little appetite among staff and players for him – a likeable man but 
uninspiring coach – to stay on as manager.

Jenkins would have known that was the case – the chairman has his ear to the 
ground and canvasses opinion from time to time to gauge the mood – yet he still 
opted to give Guidolin the job. Five months later came the predictable news 
that Guidolinhad become the first Premier League managerial casualty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/03/swansea-sack-francesco-guidolin-and-replace-him-with-bob-bradley>
 of the season.

By that point, though, it was clear that Swansea’s problems ran much deeper 
than their flawed choice of manager. Some poor dealings in the transfer market 
over the course of the past three windows left the squad looking painfully 
short of quality, with the ins and outs in the summer compounding the errors 
that had been made before and raising serious questions about the recruitment 
strategy headed up by David Leadbeater and ultimately overseen by Jenkins.

If there was one key error of judgment, though, it was the failure to re-sign 
Joe Allen from Liverpool

One of the more bizarre issues that has come to light in recent years and 
prompted a level of bemusement among some working at the club, including 
managers, is the frequency with which Swansea scouts turn up for Swansea 
matches. It is a curious practice to say the least.

Kaplan and Levien soon realised that the process of identifying players needed 
to drastically change and take on a much more analytical approach, yet in terms 
of what happened in the summer, the damage was done. Ashley Williams, the 
captain, and André Ayew, last season’s top scorer, were sold without being 
adequately replaced, so much so that players such as Jordi Amat, who would have 
been on the fringe under previous regimes, were thrust into the role of being 
regular starters.

A club-record £15.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/11/swansea-city-complete-deal-atletico-madrid-borja-baston>
 was spent on Borja Bastón, who has scored only once since joining from 
Atlético Madrid and looks set to follow in the footsteps of Éder and Alberto 
Paloschi, two strikers who were brought in from overseas in the last 18 months 
and failed to make any sort of impact.

Other decisions have been odd. Nathan Dyer was farmed out on loan to Leicester 
at the start of last season because he was deemed surplus to requirements, 
returned after failing to make one Premier League start for the champions and 
was rewarded with a new four-year contract.

If there was one key error of judgment, though, it was the failure to re-sign 
Joe Allen from Liverpool. Allen was available and everything seemed to be set 
up for the Welshman to return to the club, yet Swansea dragged their heels over 
the finances and Stoke jumped in to take a midfielder whose ability and 
character would have been invaluable at the Liberty Stadium this season.

During that period Swansea were undergoing a change of ownership that earned 
Jenkins and several other board members millions from selling shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/swansea-city-owners-sale-takeover-us-investors>
 and at the same time, prompted accusations from some supporters that those 
directors had taken their eye off the ball and put their own interests before 
those of the club.

West Ham’s Andy Carroll twists knife into Bob Bradley and Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
Jenkins, who has supported Swansea for more than 50 years and continues to run 
the club on a day-to-day basis, would no doubt deny that was the case. He did, 
however, concede prior tothe win over Crystal Palace last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 that mistakes were made in the close season. “I will be the first to admit 
that there are a number of things I personally could have dealt with 
differently in the summer which may have helped us to start the season in a far 
more upbeat and positive way,” Jenkins wrote in his programme column.

Either way, the focus for Swansea now has to be forward rather than back. All 
eyes are on the managerial search and the long list of candidates, including 
Ryan Giggs, Roy Hodgson, Chris Coleman, Gary Rowett, Paul Clement and Alan 
Pardew. Yet anybody who has watched Swansea on a regular basis this season will 
know that the players need to be changed as much as the manager if the club are 
to have any hope of avoiding relegation, and therein lies the huge challenge 
facing Jenkins and Swansea’s American owners.
 