
Bob Bradley listened to the statistic confirming that the odds are already 
stacked againstSwansea City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> and 
wasted no time in working out the maths. Only 12 clubs have collected six 
points or fewer by this stage of a Premier League season and only four of them 
survived. “It’s like a twist on: ‘Is the glass half empty or half full?’ It’s 
like: ‘Is it a third full or two-thirds empty?’ the Swansea manager said, 
smiling. “My glass is a third full, for sure.”

It needs to be. This is crunch time for Swansea if they are to follow in the 
footsteps of Everton (1995), Derby (2001), Wigan (2012) and Sunderland (2016) 
by pulling off their own act of escapology. On Saturday they hostCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>, who are in freefall and 
have the worst record across all four divisions in the calendar year. For 
Swansea, who are without a victory since the opening day of the season and 
anchored to the bottom of the table on six points, it feels like “must win” 
territory. “Yes,” Bradley said, agreeing. “Must win, will win – we just have to 
have a way now to be strong and positive, take things that are going in a good 
direction and make it count.”

Alan Pardew backs Crystal Palace to turn form round during crucial spell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/alan-pardew-crystal-palace-swansea-city>
On the face of it, not much is going in a good direction for Swansea. Bradley, 
however, made the point that he was able to take plenty of encouragement from 
the performanceat Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/everton-swansea-premier-league>
 last Saturday, even if Séamus Coleman’s 89th-minute equaliser knocked the 
stuffing out of everyone at Swansea. “I went out of my way this week with the 
players to make sure that they see the positives,” Bradley said.

Appointed as Francesco Guidolin’s replacement at the start of October, Bradley 
has endured a tough baptism. As well as the failure to win any of his first 
five games as manager, the 58-year-old has had to contend with all sorts of 
issues off the field on the back of the takeover in the summer in which the 
Americans Steve Kaplan and Jason Levienbought a controlling stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/swansea-takeover-steve-kaplan-jason-levien>
.

Swansea’s supporters’ trust, which owns 21% of the club, felt it was 
“bypassed” during the takeover talks and the simmering anger about the millions 
of pounds that Huw Jenkins, the chairman, and other former shareholders made by 
selling to US investors boiled over during the last home game,against 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/swansea-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, when the mood was mutinous.

Bradley, wisely, is keeping out of the politics. His only request is that the 
club is unified for 90 minutes against Palace. “I think that with everything 
that goes on in football, that feeling when it’s game time has to still be 
different and special,” he said. “I know that if we were in a pub talking with 
our most loyal supporters, they would say the exact same thing.

“Whatever discussions need to take place off the field with some of the other 
issues, people can find the time and the place for that. But that’s got to be a 
separate fight and we’ve got to really pull together when we step into the 
Liberty. I’m counting on everybody to understand that and to realise: ‘Come on, 
this is a big challenge’, and it’s one everybody has got to accept together.”

One of Bradley’s biggest problems has been trying to work out his best team. 
He has made 20 changes across the last four matches, shuffling the pack in 
search of a good hand. He did indicate, though, that not much will change from 
the Everton game, which means that Swansea are likely to start without a 
striker against Palace. While that may seem strange in a match that the manager 
has described as “must win”, in many ways it is an understandable decision 
given Bradley’s woeful attacking options.

Borja Bastón, the £15m club-record signing from Atlético Madrid, and Fernando 
Llorente, who joined from Sevilla for £5m, have been hugely disappointing so 
far, scoring only one goal apiece and raising major questions about Swansea’s 
recruitment strategy in the summer.

All of which means that so much rests on the shoulders of Gylfi Sigurdsson, 
who looks set to continue in the false nine role that he occupied at Everton. 
“He works hard and does a great job there,” Bradley said. “He comes away from 
defenders and gives us another option and forces defenders to make decisions. 
It helps us string more passes together and you need your forward players to 
come away from the defence and find pockets of space. I was not satisfied with 
parts of the other games in that area.”

Sigurdsson’s deployment further forward is a short-term fix to a long-term 
problem that will be solved only with the signing of a proven goalscorer in 
January, by which stage Swansea will know if they have a realistic chance of 
getting out of this mess. Five of their next eight fixtures are against teams 
in the bottom six, starting and ending with games against Palace, which is why 
the next six weeks are so crucial.

Bradley is full of belief that they can defy the odds. “The spot we’re in 
creates a big challenge and now the response to that situation, the 
determination, the part that says: ’We’re not done yet’…” the Swansea manager 
said, his voice trailing off as he pondered that statistic again. “Four out of 
12 [have stayed up], that means it’s been done four times. Now we’ve got to 
find a way to be the fifth.”
 