
Bob Bradley accepts it is inevitable there will be discussions at boardroom 
level about his position afterSwansea City slipped to a third successive defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
 and a seventh in his 11 games as manager on a day when the mood inside the 
Liberty Stadium became poisonous.

Swansea fans turned on Bradley by calling for him to be sacked during the 4-1 
home defeat against West Ham that left them second from bottom of the Premier 
League and four points adrift of safety. Supporters also vented their anger at 
the board members who sold their shares to American investors in the summer.

West Ham’s Andy Carroll twists knife into Bob Bradley and Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
Bradley acknowledged the level of unrest and also said he would take the 
blame. Yet the American, who wasappointed at the start of October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/03/swansea-sack-francesco-guidolin-and-replace-him-with-bob-bradley>
, said he continues to believe he can turn the club’s fortunes around. Asked 
what he would say to those fans who directly called for him to be dismissed, 
Bradley replied: “I’d say when I came here I understood it was a difficult 
situation, I committed myself to the club, said I would work and fight every 
day to do the job and I continue to be fully committed to that.”

On the subject of whether the board still have confidence, Bradley said: “I 
don’t have regular dealings with the board. As a manager, when the results go 
bad you understand that there will be discussion – and that’s not anything you 
control. So you continue to prepare your team, try to pick the best team, make 
changes throughout a game to try and affect it in a positive way, and keep 
going.

“I don’t make excuses. After a game like today I take responsibility that it’s 
not good enough. Inside the dressing room we have to look at each other and 
accept that especially in the second half we had the chance to fight back and 
we weren’t able to do it in a strong enough way. At the moment we’re our own 
worst enemy, no matter what we do we seem to put ourselves in terrible spots.”

There were indications before the West Ham match that the Swansea board were 
strongly behind Bradley but a large number of the club’s supporters made it 
clear they do not share that view. “We want Bradley out” was chanted several 
times during the second half.

“There was absolutely a mood in the stadium today,” Bradley said. “After 18 
games we’re in a very difficult position, that also leaves 20 games to fight 
for staying up, to fight for winning back supporters. We all heard the response 
in the stadium, it doesn’t feel good. But in football sometimes you have to 
fight when everything’s going against you.”
 