
Swansea City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> are looking for 
their third manager of the season after Bob Bradley was dismissed only 85 days 
after taking over from Francesco Guidolin.

Bradley’s position became untenable after the crushing 4-1 home defeat against 
West Ham United on Boxing Day, with the woeful performance and toxic atmosphere 
inside the Liberty Stadium convincing the club’s American owners that they had 
to make a change to have any chance of avoiding relegation.

Swansea had been determined not to go down that path and wanted to give 
Bradley the January transfer window to strengthen the squad he inherited when 
he was appointed at the start of October.

Yet the West Ham defeat was viewed as a gamechanger within the club and the 
feeling afterwards was that Bradley’s relationship with the supporters was 
damaged to such an extent that he had reached the point of no return.

The American won only two of his 11 games in charge and suffered seven 
defeats, conceding 29 goals in the process, leaving Swansea second from bottom 
in the Premier League and four points adrift of safety. The sight of West Ham 
running riot on Boxing Day led to an outpouring of anger in the stands and 
prompted chants of “We want Bradley out”.

Swansea have no replacement lined up, unlike when Guidolin was dismissed as 
manager in October and Bradley was brought in on the same day. This time the 
club have decided to place Alan Curtis, the first-team coach, and Paul 
Williams, the assistant manager, in charge for the home game against 
Bournemouth on New Year’s Eve while they weigh up their next options.

Where exactly that managerial search will take Swansea remains unclear at the 
moment and it could well be that the club look to make a short-term appointment 
until the end of the season.

Alan Pardew, who was only recently sacked by Crystal Palace, may come under 
consideration, along with names like Frank de Boer, Gary Rowett, Roy Hodgson 
and Chris Coleman. Ryan Giggs was in the running when Bradley got the job, but 
it would be a surprise if Swansea revived their interest in the Welshman.

In a club statement, Huw Jenkins, the Swansea chairman, said: “We are sorry to 
lose Bob after such a short period of time. Unfortunately things haven’t worked 
out as planned and we felt we had to make the change with half the Premier 
League season remaining.

West Ham’s Andy Carroll twists knife into Bob Bradley and Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
“With the club going through such a tough time, we have to try and find the 
answers to get ourselves out of trouble. Personally, I have nothing but praise 
for Bob. He is a good man; a good person who gave everything to the job. His 
work-rate is phenomenal and we wish him well for the future.”

Brought in from Le Havre, in the French second division, Bradley knew from day 
one that he had a battle on his hands to convince many Swansea fans that he was 
the right man for the job. Rightly or wrongly, the fact that Bradley was the 
first American to manage in the Premier League raised doubts among some as to 
whether he was equipped to steer the club clear of the relegation zone – they 
were 17th when he supplanted Guidolin at the start of October.

Bradley constantly chopped and changed the team in search of a winning formula 
and there was hope that a corner may have been turned when Swansea defeated 
Sunderland 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/swansea-city-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 earlier in the month to briefly escape the bottom three. Yet three successive 
defeats, against West Brom, Middlesbrough and West Ham, left Swansea looking 
like a club sliding towards the Championship and Bradley was relieved of his 
duties as a result.
 