
Pesky scientists! They’re always causing trouble. Last Tuesday, they were in 
the newspapers with a report that “brain-training games” do not make the brain 
better at anything except playing the games themselves. There’s no evidence of 
real-world benefits, sharpened memory or improved cognitive function.

Is this news? In my experience, scientists never say anything else. I can 
remember several previous reports that scientists have found brain-training 
games to be useless.

Seven years ago, they were already telling us that such games were of “no 
practical use to the elderly”; I remember that story because it was illustrated 
by a photograph of Nicole Kidman. I thought at the time: she must be wondering 
who to sue to first, the newspaper or her dermatologist.

(Kidman had been selected, of course, because she advertised “brain-training 
machines” <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jun/25/advertising1> on TV.)

Non-Kidman adverts that got into worse trouble were those for Lumosity, a game 
that (according to the American Federal Trade Commission’s Bureau of Consumer 
Protection) “preyed on consumers’ fears about age-related cognitive decline” by 
suggesting it could help combat this. According to those busybody scientists, 
it cannot. In January, makers Lumos Labs wereordered to pay $2m in redress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/06/lumosity-fined-false-claims-brain-training-online-games-mental-health>
.

So, you know. We hear a lot about these games being useless. Researching a 
little deeper behind the eye-catching headlines of last week, I find that yes: 
this latest report is actually astudy into previous studies. The findings were 
not just that brain-training games are useless, but that scientists who have 
already said brain-training games are useless were right! They are useless!

I imagine the latest batch of scientists making this announcement with their 
thumbs on their noses, waggling their fingers at the rest of us: morons, 
non-scientists, who sit lamely playing our “brain-training” games in the hope 
of greater intellectual rigour. Useless! Useless! Can you hear me at the back? 
You dunce!

This week, perhaps we can enjoy another report saying that last week’s study 
into studies was itself correct. And then maybe they’d like to have a big 
party, all these bloody scientists, clinking glasses as they make announcement 
after announcement about how pointless it is for the masses to try to sharpen 
up our old, soggy, ailing, failing brains. We might just as well sit playing 
with an old car tyre on a rope.

There is a group of affected people here that nobody is thinking about. Not 
those who are especially worried by cognitive decline (or not that alone), but 
those who can’t enjoy themselves unless they feel they’re doing something 
useful.

Does that ring a bell? You either are such a person or you’re not. If not, 
chances are you know someone who is and you find them slightly stressful. It 
could be your wife. Or your father. (Or, if you’re my husband, both.)

I am terrible at doing nothing. I’m not brilliant at doing one thing at a 
time, either. Ideally, I would fill out my tax return while watching a film; 
peel potatoes while reading the post; send emails in the bath. You can always 
recognise my restless peers and me; we are the people whose feet you hear 
tramping along the pavement at the other end of the phone line because we can 
only make calls while moving. Ideally, moving towards somewhere gruelling like 
the dentist’s, the MOT testing station or a cocktail party.

They say multitasking is a female trait but it’s not about gender, it’s about 
personality type. Some of us find “relaxing” to be, in itself, nerve-racking. 
If we aren’t doing something useful, or at least that seems useful, we feel 
guilty, impatient and mortal.

“Can’t just sit about here, enjoying the sunset!” we think. “Not when I 
haven’t cleaned the fridge, answered those emails, started a pension, learned 
Japanese, got a haircut, bought loo paperor written a novel. I can do at least 
three of those things while appreciating the orange glow at the same time.’

People like us need to have tasks as hobbies or at least think of our hobbies 
as tasks. My husband always used to reflect admiringly on the loving way his 
mother allows his father to speak of the gardening as a terrible chore.

“That lawn won’t mow itself, Kathy!” sighs my father-in-law, shaking his head 
as he abandons the sofa. “And I supposesomeone had better dead-head that 
cosmos.”

There’s been less talk of that from my husband since he realised that he too 
would be required to cluck sympathetically throughout married life, as I scurry 
about saying: “Well, if somebody doesn’t make an apple pie then I think we’re 
going to go hungry! No no, you stay there and enjoy yourMaigret. I’ve got to 
bleed the radiators anyway.”

And this conversation will be happening at two o’clock in the morning.

That’s how I came to play poker professionally, rather than as an occasional 
social game: after a year or so, I couldn’t allow myself to play it unless it 
was a source of income.

That’s how younger people turn “catching up with friends” into “getting my 
social media updated”. (A study published last week found that some 
nine-year-olds are checking their smartphones up to 10 times during the night 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/children-young-nine-check-mobile-8987171>
. I understand those nine-year-olds. I am those nine-year-olds.)

And that is why it’s cruel to tell people that brain-training games do not 
train the brain. If they don’t stave off cognitive decay, sharpen the memory or 
improve intellectual ability, then we’re just… why, we’re just sitting here 
playing sudoku! Fiddling while Rome burns! It’s pure enjoyment with no extra 
function and, since for us thereis no pure enjoyment without extra function, it 
has to stop. The fun’s been killed.

Bloody scientists. Why can’t they just switch off, kick back and watch some 
telly?
 