
When it was announced that Boris Johnson, David Davis and Liam Fox are to 
share use of Chevening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/boris-johnson-forced-to-share-mansion-with-liam-fox-and-david-davis>
, a lavish grace-and-favour country house, Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, 
described the scenario as “a bit like Brexit Towers”.

Delighted by the comparison, the Daily Mail ran news of the house share under 
the headline: “Brexit Towers!”

I find this odd. The story is that some people are going to share a house. 
British culture is not short of great sitcoms about people sharing a house. Off 
the top of my head, I think ofRising Damp, Father Ted, Man About the House, 
Spaced, Game On, The Young Ones, The Liver Birds, Not Going Out, Men Behaving 
Badlyand Peep Show. Those are just the ones I can do without googling.

And that’s not counting the family ones. You might think of Bless This House, 
My Family, Only Fools and Horses, Steptoe and Son, Till Death Us Do Part, 
Butterflies or Bread.

But no, Tim Farron chose to base his joke on Fawlty Towers, which might 
actually be the only sitcom in history that isn’t about people sharing a house. 
Wait, I tell a lie, he could have made itBrexitadder.

I don’t mean to give Tim Farron a hard time. God knows, by the next election, 
he could be leading the only party one could conceivably vote for; I’d love to 
believe he’s the intelligent captain of a kindly, stable crew of like-minded 
fellows. So, best not to look too closely at how his brain works – just like 
it’s best, aged seven, not to ask too many questions about the tooth fairy’s 
modus operandi. Better to just hope and hum, I find.

Besides, he was on the right track. You can see why his mind went to sitcom. 
Amid all the depressing, bleak and scary news stories of recent weeks, the idea 
of those three warhorses sharing a stable is hilarious.

It’s amusing to think of Liam Fox sharing a house with anyone. As political 
scandals go, his history with young lodgerAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liam-fox-and-adam-werritty-links> is 
arguably the funniest. I’m not sure why; perhaps because it was so essentially 
harmless. Perhaps because it seemed so human and vulnerable. Perhaps just 
because of the name “Werrity”.

Anyway, it was funny and forever after there is something comical about the 
idea ofLiam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> sharing a house.

And he’s sharing with Boris Johnson. It’s funny to think of Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> doing anything. Particularly being 
foreign secretary. He onlyis foreign secretary because that’s what Theresa May 
calculated would most annoy Michael Gove. That’s very funny.

David Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>, I sense, is an 
angry fellow. He voted against the repeal of Section 28. He likes the death 
penalty. These are the instincts of a really angry man. The idea of a really 
angry man being forced to live with colleagues is funny. And one of those 
colleagues is Boris Johnson.Brexitadder indeed.

But joking aside (insofar as one can put joking aside in this deeply comic 
scenario), I am hugely in favour of this house share. I hope it’s the first of 
many brilliant moves from the new PM. No doubt this is a deliberate plan to 
help her cabinet understand the emotional pressures of the housing crisis.

It is quite normal, now, to find oneself lumbered with flatmates at the age of 
54. Few can afford not to be.

The referendum vote has shown that the electorate is sick of a gilded elite 
living unrecognisable lives; these three men were quick to play on that rage. 
Mrs May is merely helping them get even closer to the level playing field they 
proffered. “Count yourselves lucky,” she probably told the trembling trio. “I 
should have made you move back in with your parents.”

You might say that sharing a 115-room mansion will not accurately recreate the 
problems of overcrowded housing. I say: you underestimate the size of Boris 
Johnson’s personality. It could fill eight bathrooms by itself. Other people’s 
stuff everywhere? Don’t worry: the place could have 4,000 rooms and Boris 
Johnson’s pants could still be strewn on the floor of all of them.

Is there anything more that Mrs May could do to help these men experience the 
problems of living in modern Britain? Why, sure!

She could take their jobs away, put them at the bottom of a waiting list to 
see a doctor, fill the upper floors of the house with knife-wielding Romanians 
who don’t speak a word of English yet always seem able to jump the queue for 
anything, then explain how this is actually terribly good for the health of the 
economy.

Alternatively, she could oblige them to take Romanian citizenship themselves, 
then invite them to pour their blood and sweat into doing the best job they can 
on a zero-hours contract while being sworn and spat at by racists on their way 
there.

Something Chevening has always lacked, as far as I’m aware, is an Isis flag in 
an upstairs window, a drunkard shouting rape threats on the doorstep and a 
skinhead breeding pit bulls in the basement. All these things could be 
introduced, in the name of narrowing the inexcusable gap between normality and 
a gilded elite. The Brexiteers do hate that gap! I’m sure they’d welcome the 
developments with open arms.

■ Speaking of housing problems, I’d like to thank Thomas Jennings and London 
Zoo for the generosity they recently showed toDoorstep, a homeless charity 
<http://www.doorsteplondon.com/> near where I live in London. The worse the 
housing crisis gets, the less time there is to think about anything except 
immediate emergencies of food and safety. But children need treats as well. 
Hurray for the zoo, and thanks.
 