
The Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> football legend Pelé was 
yesterday moved to a special care unit of São Paulo hostpital where he being 
treated for a urinary infection.

The Brazilian website globo.com quoted a Pelé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pele> adviser, Jose Fornos Rodrigues, as 
saying that the 74-year-old was “doing fine” and could be discharged as early 
as Friday.

“The problem was that he was receiving too many visitors and that wasn’t 
helping, so they transferred him to a calmer area to continue receiving the 
proper treatment,” Rodrigues told the Associated Press.

The hospital earlier sparked a scare by announcing that Pelé had been taken to 
a special care unit because of “medical instability”. That led to reported that 
the former striker’s condition had worsened but the hospital stated that he was 
not in intensive care.

Pelé was admitted to Albert Einstein hospital on Tuesday with a urinary 
infection, two weeks after undergoing kidney surgery there for the removal of 
stones.

The Brazilian website UOL quoted medical sources stating that the urinary 
infection was a normal development following the kidney surgery.

News of Pelé’s medical troubles have worried fans in Brazil and abroad. In 
recent months the former player has reduced his number of personal appearances, 
although his absence from the World Cup was more related to his difficult 
relationship with the Brazilian FA.

Pelé previously underwent surgery in November 2012, having a hip replacement 
at a time when he was struggling to cope with life on the road.

Journalists doorstepping Pelé in January, when he attended the Ballon D’Or 
ceremony, were taken aback by how frail he looked. It was particularly striking 
given that Pelé has always looked far younger than his age.

Pelé won three World Cups as a player – in 1958, 1962 and 1970 – over a 
14-year international career and was a joint winner, with Argentina’s Diego 
Maradona, of Fifa’s award for the player of the 20th century.


He is not, though, universally loved in Brazil. His outspokenness often landed 
him in trouble and open criticism of fellow footballers irked colleagues enough 
for the 1994 World Cup winner Romário to say that “Pelé is a poet when he is 
quiet”.

There was little sympathy either for his perceived drive for business deals 
and commercial endorsements that reached the peak of ludicrousness when he 
advertised erectile dysfunction medicine.

More recently Pelé’s perceived dismissal of the anti-World Cup protests that 
shook Brazil in 2013 also generated outrage.

Nonetheless the honorary Ballon D’Or received by “the King” this year in 
Zurich was celebrated by the Brazilian media.

 