
Brazilian fans are being asked to behave themselves after the French pole 
vaulter Renaud Lavillenie reacted furiously to the partisan treatment he 
received during Monday night’s tussle with Thiago Braz da Silva.

The 22-year-old Brazilian beat the defending champion in a thrilling contest 
but it was marred by large sections of the Olympic Stadium crowd booing 
Lavillenie’s attempts.

The hostile atmosphere clearly unsettled the Frenchman, who gave fans the 
thumbs-down sign between attempts and in his first interview after the event 
likened his treatment to the reception America’s black sprinter Jesse Owens 
received at the notorious 1936 Olympics in Nazi Germany.

Brazil's Thiago Braz da Silva elevated to national hero status after pole 
vault gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/brazilthiago-braz-da-silva-elevated-to-national-hero-status-after-pole-vault-gold>
He apologised for that comment in the press conference later on but repeated 
his belief that booing rivals was unacceptable at the Olympics.

“If you get no respect in the Olympics, where can you get respect?” he said.

The behaviour of the crowds in the venues – when there are crowds in the 
venues – has been a recurring theme during the Games, with athletes, coaches 
and officials frequently having to ask for quiet at key times.

But the Brazilian fans’ football-style bonhomie has also created a great 
atmosphere in some venues, particularly when a home athlete or team were in 
action, or Argentina were playing.

But Mario Andrada, a spokesman for Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016>, “As an organising committee and 
as a citizen of Brazil and a sports fan, we don’t think booing is the right 
attitude, even when you’re in one-to-one competition with a young Brazilian who 
has a chance to be the champion.”

“We plan to intensify our dialogue with the Brazilian fans through social 
networks to make sure that they behave as fans in the proper and elegant manner 
without losing the passion for sport.

“Booing is not the right thing to do when you are competing at Olympic level.”

He did not elaborate on how this dialogue would take place and as of early 
afternoon in Rio there had been no message about booing on Rio 2016’s Facebook 
or Twitter feeds.

The International Olympic Committee has largely avoided saying anything 
critical about Rio, Rio 2016’s organisers or Brazilians fans, but its 
spokesman, Mark Adams, did say Olympic chiefs would prefer it if “the passion 
is channelled in a good way”.

But on the continuing problem of Rio’s half-empty venues, which was glaringly 
obvious during Monday’s memorable night of athletics, neither Adams nor Andrada 
had any new answers.

The latter repeated his mantra that ticket sales have improved as the Games 
have gone on, with the apparent gaps in the crowd being a product of fans not 
showing up for the actual sport, only staying for some part of the long 
sessions and leaving venues to look for refreshments.

Andrada admitted that 400,000 tickets were still available but said they were 
giving away an extra 25,000 to local schoolchildren.

However, he said the organising committee would not cut the cost of the 
remaining tickets as it was a private company determined to deliver the Games 
without public subsidy and therefore needed the ticket revenues.

This claim prompted giggles from the local media as Rio 2016 is currently in a 
legal dispute over the release of more public funding from the city of Rio to 
top up the money it has used from the Paralympics budget to keep the Olympics 
afloat.

Andrada refused to comment on this issue, or any other associated with the 
Paralympics, as Rio 2016’s lawyers are currently fighting an injunction that 
has stopped the release of those funds until the organising committee opens up 
its accounts for public scrutiny.
RioRun <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/marathon-promo-full/>  