
This is one of the oldest, tastiest and most famous dishes in Brazil, coming 
from the age before refrigeration so ingeniously relying on three ways of 
preserving meat (curing, air-drying and smoking) as well as dried beans.

The snout, tail and trotter (which, you buy salted, not fresh) aren't 
essential, and you don't have to eat them – they're mainly flavour-adders. They 
are, however, very good at that job, as well as being fun to track down if you 
get a kick out of that kind of thing.

It improves it massively if left to sit for a day or three … even a week.

Serves eight-plus, and requires some overnight soaking, then takes about 1 
hour more of prep, followed by around four hours' cooking time.

1kg/2lb black beans, soaked overnight
2 bay leaves
1 tbsp lard or extra virgin olive oil
2 onions, diced large
6 cloves of garlic, peeled and roughly chopped with a big pinch of salt
6 pieces of rind plus juice of 1 orange
3 shots (125ml/4fl oz) cachaça (a fierce Brazilian spirit) or clear rum like 
Wray & Nephew

Meat (essential)
300g/10oz pork ribs (smoked or fresh), cut into 8cm/3 inch chunks
100g/3½oz beef jerky, or 200g/7oz carne seca if you can find it
300g/10oz pancetta, cut into cubes
200g/7oz cured sausage (Portuguese smoked is best, or use chorizo sausages 
thickly sliced)

Meat (not essential)
Salted pig snout and tail
1 pig's trotter, split in half – ideally salted, but fresh is fine, too

If you are using salted snout, tail and trotter, wash them in water twice and 
then soak them for two days, changing the water occasionally. Drain and rinse 
them, put them into a pan of fresh water, and simmer completely covered for 
about 1 hour 30 minutes.

Drain the soaked beans, put them into a pan and cover them with cold water. 
Add the bay leaves and fresh pork ribs (if using). Bring to the boil, then 
reduce the heat and simmer for about one hour until the beans are starting to 
soften, topping up with water as necessary to keep everything nicely covered 
before adding the beef jerky/carne seca and smoked ribs (if using). Simmer for 
another 30 minutes, until the beans are just about cooked.

Once the jerky is in, heat the oil or lard in a medium-sized pan and fry the 
pancetta, onions, garlic and sausage/chorizo for about 15 minutes, until well 
softened and beginning to caramelise. Use a slotted spoon to scoop out all the 
meat and most of the onions, leaving just a few in the pan with the fat, and 
add the meat to the pot of beans which should now be pretty much there.

Lift out about a coffee mug-full of beans, tip into the remaining onions, mash 
them together and mix this back into the beans.

If you did the snout, tail and trotter, tip the entire contents (ie bits plus 
stock) into the beans now too. If you didn't, pour in 1 litre or so of water - 
enough to keep it from sticking through the final leg. Cook over a low to 
medium heat for another hour and 30 minutes, adding the orange peel, juice and 
cachaça after an hour.

By now the whole dish should have come together and not have much liquid left 
– it should be a thick, creamy, rich dish of pig and bean-ness.

Taste for seasoning and serve with rice, kale, oranges, hot sauce (all pretty 
key) and to be truly authentic, farofa (toasted cassava flour) too.

• This is an extract from Bought, Borrowed & Stolen – Recipes & Knives from a 
Travelling Chef by Allegra McEvedy, published by Conran Octopus, £25.
 