
With Diego Costa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa> set to 
make his debut for Spain against Italy on Wednesday, Luiz Felipe Scolari must 
sometimes wonder how differently things might have turned out.

After reportedly giving as little attention as possible to Costa when the 
player joined theBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> squad for 
last year's friendlies against Italy and Russia, the manager had to reach out 
for the Atlético Madrid striker months later. By then, the 25-year-old had 
pretty much made up his mind about accepting an offer to switch allegiances to 
Spain – and the public criticism Big Phil threw at the Brazilian-born player, 
patriotic card included, reeked of desperation and sour grapes.

Scolari was not only watching one of the Seleçao's more dangerous rivals at the
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> gaining 
reinforcements; he was also losing the only Brazilian forward in top form. Less 
than 100 days before their opening game against Croatia in São Paulo on 12 
June, the tournament hosts are desperately seeking a reliable No9 to fire them 
to their sixth title and the first on home soil.

It could not be more ironic for a country known for its prolific goalscorers. 
Ever since the great Ronaldo retired andAdriano succumbed to a routine of 
parties and excuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/dec/31/snap-kaka-pop-brazil-resolutions>
, the Seleçao have struggled to find alternatives. Luís Fabiano scored three 
goals at South Africa 2010 but has faded since his return to Brazilian 
football. The once promising Alexandre Pato, also a returnee, hasn't fared any 
better.

A sign of the paucity is how rarely Brazilian strikers make headlines in 
Europe theses days, either in terms of transfers or by doing what they 
supposedly do best. The departures of Lucas Moura andNeymar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar> to PSG and Barcelona respectively 
were sweet exceptions for fans more used to reading about moves involving 
defenders such as Thiago Silva, David Luiz and Dante. And the last Brazilian to 
finish as top scorer in one of the continent's big leagues was actually an 
attacking midfielder, Nene, who shared the Ligue 1 honours with Olivier Giroud 
while playing for PSG two seasons ago. You need to go back to the 2008-9 season 
to find the last No9 to do it, when Grafite topped the Bundesliga charts as 
part of Wolfsburg's title campaign.

On Wednesday, Brazil face South Africa in Johannesburg and Scolari might field 
the former Lyon striker Fred, a player who hasn't featured for the team since 
August and can count on two hands the number of games he has played in the last 
six months thanks to niggling injuries. Although he has been talismanic since 
rehabilitated by Big Phil's return to the job, the Fluminense striker is 
injury-prone to the point of having a special training regime for club and 
country. Even more problematic is the choice of deputy: Jo, once of Manchester 
City and Everton, had some encouraging moments during Brazil's 2013 
Confederations Cup triumph on home soil and in some friendlies last year, but 
his club form with Atlético Mineiro has not been consistent.

That helps to explain why sections of the Brazilian media have been debating 
whether Walter, a player who joined Fluminense in January after almost 
qualifying the minnows Goiás for the Libertadores Cup (South America's most 
prestigious club tournament), deserves a call-up. That Walter is known for an 
expanding waistline and a Body Mass Index that classifies him as obese also 
serves as a measure of how worried Brazilians are. The scarcity of strikers 
even led Scolari to tinker with a false nine formation last year using another 
City flop, Robinho. And that from the same Big Phil who had come back to the 
job rubbishing any suggestions his Seleçao would ever play in what Brazilian 
media called a "Catalan system" in deference to Pep Guardiola's Barcelona 
("Give me Messi and I can do it", joked the former Chelsea commander).

Finding the reason for the drought is another talking point in Brazil. While 
some commentators and players blame coincidences, there are voices pointing to 
a failure to keep up with general trends in world football, where more mobile 
players have been prevailing over poachers. A third view is that Brazilians are 
paying the price for changes in the philosophy of youth academies, where 
tactical discipline and competitiveness are taught at earlier stages. 
"Creativity and instinct are being undermined by a focus on results when kids 
should actually be worried about developing their fundamentals," complains the 
legendary Zico. "Worse, in my opinion, is that youth academies seem to be 
picking players with focus on size instead of talent."

Zico himself was an example of how the Seleçao has sometimes dealt with this 
kind of situation before. Although not a classic striker, the "Little Rooster" 
is Brazil's fourth all-time top scorer, with 52 goals in 72 games. The World 
Cup-winning 1970 squad did not have a No9, with Tostão deployed in the role to 
open up spaces for Pele and co. One could also point out that Neymar seems to 
be compensating for the current woes in that position. Since joining the 
Seleçao in 2010, he is the team's top scorer, with 27 goals in 44 games.

But some might say this is exactly the problem: already under immense pressure 
to shine at this summer's World Cup, the 22-year-old could use some help from 
his attacking team-mates, especially when opponents are sure to single him out 
for special attention during the tournament. In the next 98 days, Brazil need 
to find somebody that can chip in. Desperately.
 