
The sun was shining and Copacabana was heaving more than usual for a Monday. 
You could always still kid yourself. But then the vision of a shrinking Fifa 
Fan Fest, which from the top of a building resembled an ant colony being 
dismantled by its own inhabitants, brought it all back home: the 2014World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> was over and the 
biggest Brazilian comedown was officially on – no matter that Rio de Janeiro’s 
most famous promenade, its bars, restaurants and car rental agencies still had 
a cacophony of foreign accents as a soundtrack.

Technically, the hangover started last Tuesday, when the dreams of a triumph 
on the pitch were shattered more coldly and professionally than any Germanic 
stereotypeduring the Seleção’s 7-1 semi-final defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in Belo Horizonte. The result triggered a hubristic atmosphere that last 
Sunday felt even more painful asGermany and Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
 walked onto the pitch at the mythical Maracanã.

That was the moment it dawned on Brazilians that the tournament was coming to 
an end without theSeleção playing a single match on their most sacred 
footballing temple thanks to the brilliant plan to parade them across the 
country in a mixture of populism and fear of what an already heavy 
psychological weight could have become.

The night before, Luiz Felipe Scolari’s men had ended their campaign by 
offering little resistance to Louis van Gaal’s Holland.The 3-0 scoreline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/12/brazilholland-world-cup-2014-third-place-play-off-match-report>
 was nowhere as bad as their capitulation a few days earlier but the sense of 
melancholy was enhanced by the eerie indifferent atmosphere in Brasília – the 
booing and the ironic bullfighting-like chants to salute the Dutch passing 
proficiency never really threatened to reach the levels heard in Belo 
Horizonte, a city that unlike the Brazilian capital actually has a football 
culture. While many fans did not buy too much into the patriotic hype around 
their team’s chances in the tournament the ending just seemed sadistic.

At least Brazilians escaped what could have felt like an eternal defeat in the 
banter game. Germany, not neighbours and über-rivals Argentina, won. That and 
the fact this tournament defied all the apocalyptic predictions by actually 
being pretty good on and off the pitch lifted spirits at the last minute. At 
least for a while. In the next few days we can expect the return of stories 
quoting all sorts of psychologists discussing feelgood factors or assorted 
post-tournament blues. The same professionals that were at hand when Brazilians 
were interested in knowing why their players couldn’t stop crying on the pitch. 
The party is over andBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> have 
a lot of reckoning to do.

First, of course, the disarray in the Seleção. As Monday came to a close, 
everybody in the country knew Big Phil had departed the job he had taken 18 
months ago with great hopes of steering Brazil to their sixth trophy and the 
first on home soil, but the news had barely been confirmed by the Brazilian 
Football Confederation (CBF) and still took over 12 hours to ratify the news 
broken the night before by TV Globo, CBF’s ever-so privileged media partner. 
The noise coming from the footballing authorities has been confusing and 
guessing the name of the person who will inherit this poisoned chalice from 
Scolari has never been this difficult – especially because Scolari used to be 
the name everybody would throw into the ring ever since he won the World Cup 
with Brazil in 2002.

Brazilian football ended their big party as the host who had a few too many 
drinks and passed out just before everybody else had a good time. While in 
other countries a semi-final finish would hardly be deemed a failure, this is 
the country where a generation of footballers turned into pariahs after losing 
the 1950 tournament final in the same Maracanã theSeleção avoided at all costs 
in 2014.

With their reputation obliterated, the Brazilians cannot even hide behind 
Neymar’s martyrdom after beingkneed in the back by Colombia’s Juan Zúñiga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/11/world-cup-tearful-neymar-recalls-foul-wheelchair-brazil>
 in the quarter-final. They were looking pretty pedestrian even when their 
biggest pin-up could still try to bail them out. The shambolic campaign will 
take a long time to be erased from supporters’ minds; the humiliation at the 
hands of Germany perhaps never will.

Brazil, nonetheless, were good hosts and that helped soften the blow a little. 
The fact the country did not burn up in flames after the Belo Horizonte debacle 
is a positive point – in fact, the amount of internet memes shared around by 
Brazilians on Facebook shows a promising maturity and a feeling that we are not 
simply just hypnotised by rolling balls. Still, it has created an identity 
crisis and now comes the tough part of recovering from the loss of their shine 
and the mission of delivering some legacy from this World Cup.

There are 12 brand new arenas that are will take a lot of creativity to be 
filled on a regular basis with something else than merely a league with average 
attendances of less than 15,000 spectators per game. Heartbreak on the pitch 
needs to be addressed with changes in the youth system and even in the way 
Brazilians think and play the game.

In two years’ time the Olympics will land in South America for the first time 
and the scrutiny should resume as soon as the international media 
representatives indeed go home. The feeling, though, is that Brazil and 
Brazilian football shall never be looked at the same away again after this 
tournament. For better or worse.
 