
Energy experts are warning that household energy prices could be about to rise 
for the first time in two years, driven partly by higher import costs following 
the Brexit vote.

The Co-op <https://www.cooperativeenergy.coop> started the ball rolling when 
it told some of its 500,000 energy customers that, from 1 October, it would be 
raising bills by between 3% and 6% – the latter equating to a potential rise of 
almost £70.

The price of wholesale gas has steadily risen over the last three months but 
Britain is facing a double hit because gas imports from the continent are about 
10% higher still, due to a fall in the value of sterling against the euro.

The Co-op is raising the average bill for dual-fuel customers on a standard 
plan from £1,152 to £1,184 a year. People with pre-payment meters could find 
their bills rising from £1,115 to £1,184, according to theprice comparison site 
uSwitch <https://www.uswitch.com/gas-electricity/>.

“This is a worrying warning bell that the wholesale price honeymoon may be 
drawing to a close. Wholesale prices are now climbing at the fastest rate in 
years, driven by upward pressure on the cost of energy imports from the falling 
value of sterling following the EU referendum, future supply concerns and 
higher transmission costs,” said Claire Osborne, energy expert at uSwitch. 
“Unfortunately, it’s the smaller suppliers who are less able to cope as they 
cannot buy their energy as far ahead as the big six [companies]. The danger is 
that other small suppliers could now follow suit and raise their prices – just 
in time for winter.”

Osborne claimed the Co-op service was now more expensive than British Gas, SSE 
or any other of the big six suppliers. She urged consumers “to fight back” by 
transferring their business to cheaper firms. But there could be still cheaper 
deals available from a raft of new independent companies.

Cornwall Energy, an independent energy consultant, confirmed that changes in 
the exchange rate since Brexit had made power more expensive in Britain. Gas 
imported from other European countries was used in the home directly and for 
burning in power stations to produce electricity, it pointed out.

Co-op Energy was unable to immediately comment on its price rises. But critics 
pointed out that the energy trading group of Midcounties Co-op had also been 
put at thetop of a complaints league by the energy ombudsman 
<https://uk.news.yahoo.com/energy-supplier-tops-complaints-league-002349346.html>
 last November.

SSE attracted the least complaints, while uSwitch said it now believed that 
British Gas offered one of the cheapest standard rate tariffs, at £1,102 a 
year. None of the big six firms have increased their prices in the last two 
years but they have also being losing market share.

Figures from the industry lobby group Energy UK, indicate that 1.3 million 
customers moved from a large supplier to a small one during the past 12 months, 
partly persuaded by bad publicity.

The Competition and Markets Authority at one stage concluded that customers 
using standard tariffs were wasting collectively as much as £1.7bn a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/competition-regulator-energy-market-plan-junk-mail-overcharging-customers>
.

It is still possible to find rates from an independent supplier, such as Avro, 
of £770 a year, but experts say that the smaller firms are less able to 
withstand rises in wholesale costs as they do not have the cash to hedge their 
investments.

A reduction in the market share of the big six, from over 99% to less than 
87%, over the last seven years, has also forced those companies to cut prices 
and improve customer service.
 