
There is a quiet crisis in British business. The number of quoted British 
public companies has halved over the past 15 years. Too many famous names among 
those that are left – from oil to retailing – have been embroiled in scandals 
or have profound problems with their business model. There are only two hi-tech 
companies – ARM and Sage – represented in the FTSE 100. Fifty years ago there 
were dozens.

Yet great companies are precious economic and social organisations. At their 
best, they are agencies for human betterment. If Britain is going to improve 
its economic and social performance, it needs more such companies, especially 
in the knowhow-driven economy of today. Their lack is an important reason for 
the decline in productivity growth.

The chief explanation is that it has become too hard for British companies to 
pursue purposed, rounded business strategies. That is the proposition at the 
core of tomorrow’s Big Innovation Centre Purposeful Company interim report, 
supported by more than a dozen companies (such as Kingfisher, GlaxoSmithKline, 
EY, Barclays, the Guardian Media Group and Infosys) as well as by other 
organisations including the Bank of England and Innovate UK.

Successful companies are defined by their capacity to deliver and pursue 
clearly defined visionary corporate purposes – to be the best, to do business 
that is sustainable, to serve humanity, to stretch every muscle to innovate. 
Those purposes are not just rhetoric: they are binding commitments on the whole 
of an enterprise, from the board of directors to the shop floor, that generate 
trust. It is trust on which so much good business depends.

The industry that manages Britain’s long-term savings is hardly structured to 
make good deficiencies

No company attempting to be purposed pulls it off completely; the key is to 
try, and build the systems to make it happen – and it is this commitment that 
contributes to improved performance. Thus Ikea, Kingfisher and Uniqlo declare 
that their purpose is to make sure everyone can have what only a few can have – 
from improving their home to cheap clothes that are nonetheless high-fashion. 
As their purpose, Apple and the BBC strive for perfection in what they do; 
GlaxoSmithKline and Unilever declare their purpose is to do business that is 
sustainable and ethical. Unilever creates a “materiality” map to ensure it is 
focused on what materially will deliver its declared purpose.

Innovation is another compelling clarion call; the company’s purpose is to go 
where no company has gone before – as ARM or Tesla declare. Other purposes 
range from treating stakeholders, including one’s workforce and customers with 
integrity – John Lewis and more recently Barclays – or taking on the big boys 
and challenging the complacency of incumbents, like Uber or Ovo Energy.

The evidence marshalled in the report suggests that purposed companies 
measurably – and here the report breaks new ground – innovate, invest and are 
more customer-centric than their non-purposed peers. Put another way, being 
non-purposed is costing the British economy up to £130bn a year of lost value 
generation. The precondition for rebalancing the economy or launching the march 
of the makers – preoccupations that stretch across the political spectrum – is 
to have a large and growing population of purposed firms.

Yet too much in the British ownership, financial and innovation ecosystem 
militates against the delivery of purpose. The evidence is that British public 
companies have the most fragmented, diversified shareholder base – and fewer 
so-called external independent block shareholders – of any advanced industrial 
economy, including the US. There is thus a paucity of engaged owners.

All advanced economies over the last 20 years, including China and Germany, 
have enlarged the rights of shareholders. But they have done so within 
financial frameworks that give company managements an array of devices to 
cement shareholder commitment – from making takeovers difficult to privileging 
founder shareholders with more voting rights, or allowing directors to have 
responsibilities to a wider range of stakeholders. They also have more sizeable 
block shareholders, which can act as engaged owners. Britain neither encourages 
block shareholding nor gives companies the freedom to protect purposed 
behaviour if they choose. Visionary purpose gets marginalised.

The industry that manages Britain’s long-term savings is hardly structured to 
make good the deficiencies. Long-term insurance companies and pension funds 
hardly invest in British companies any more; there are too many small pension 
funds, and too few have the incentive or resource to be in the business of 
stewarding companies. Stewardship, for all the warm words, codes and 
exhortation, is too often honoured in the breach rather than the observance.

To make matters worse, the stock market is not very good at valuing investment 
in intangible “knowhow” assets like R&D, patents, copyrights, or just straight 
investment in employees’ skills. Yet intangibles, with their long-term returns, 
are already the bedrock of the 21st century economy, with investment running at 
twice the level of “tangibles” in factories and machines.

British business investment in R&D, even allowing for the shrunken size of 
manufacturing, is running below the international average and shrinking. Small 
wonder so many companies are retreating from the public markets – and that 
matters not only because, if public markets work well, they provide money at 
scale, but because they are the principal way in which the average person can 
share in wealth generation.

What to do? There is no magic bullet, just a range of ideas – some big, some 
small – that cumulatively could make a difference. The interim report groups 20 
policy options for change on which the Purposeful Company taskforce will be 
consulting over the next seven weeks.

The first ideas cluster is to encourage companies, via their constitutions, 
practice and reporting, to take purpose more seriously. Executive pay should be 
geared to the results that engaged owners want over time, rather than just 
rewarding this year’s profits. Secondly, Britain should consider introducing 
the tools that other countries permit to encourage shareholders to commit to 
companies – such as shares with differential voting rights. Thirdly, we need 
more blockholding and long-term shareholders.

Next, the asset management industry needs a makeover itself; there are too 
many small pension funds and the stewardship code could be made tougher. 
Lastly, the decline in UK equity ownership needs to be reversed: the tax system 
favours debt, not equity, and there is a case for a British sovereign wealth 
fund to make good the equity shortfall.

Too many of these propositions for too long have been regarded as the preserve 
of corporate governance nerds. Wrong. These issues are central not just to 
reviving the legitimacy of business by putting purpose at its heart – they are 
the key to creating long-term value for business and society. There is now a 
critical mass of companies and opinion emerging that could make real change 
happen. The task is to ensure that it does.

The Big Innovation Centre Purposeful Company taskforce’s interim report is 
released on Monday onwww.biginnovationcentre.com 
<http://www.biginnovationcentre.com/>
 