
It isn’t hard to say goodbye to Chris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>. It’s just that, with so 
many members of the Republican field vanishing like teens partying overnight in 
an abandoned asylum on the anniversary of several unsolved murders, it’s 
becoming difficult to say goodbyeuniquely. There isn’t time, and anyway there 
are only so many ways you can point out how they themselves were the monsters 
in the crazy house while you wait for the dawn.

That Chris Christie was not much different from every other horror lurking in 
the dark of the Republican party ultimately says everything about his campaign 
that a bridge outage can’t tell you. With a roster of Republican candidates 
that started out large enough to nearly hold a full baseball scrimmage against 
itself, there was nothing he sold that you couldn’t buy somewhere else.

If you wanted an amorphously false appearance of centrism and the ability to 
intimately work a room, there was John Kasich – who just beat Christie at his 
own game in the only state (New Hampshire) at which Christie threw the works.

If you wanted a personal story of loss to drug addiction (one that Christie 
told remarkably effectively), you had Ted Cruz and his sister or Carly Fiorina 
and her stepdaughter. If you wanted someone who could ad-lib a speech at the 
drop of a hat, there was Cruz again.

If you wanted someone who talked big about running a state like a business and 
pretending his destination hadn’t been “into the ground”, you had Scott Walker 
and Bobby Jindal (to whom we deservingly already bade farewell).

If you wanted someone spouting economic policies that made no economic sense 
and advocating for a war without aim or end, well, then you had everyone else 
in the field from which to choose.

Christie’s signature bullying might have taken him far in another year: he 
understands in a visceral way the suck-up, kick-down, validation-by-humiliation 
relationship that conservative voters have with their leaders. They not only 
enjoy seeing their enemies – that anxiety closet of commies and Muslims and 
minorities and women who are sexually active with someone who is Not You – 
attacked, but they enjoy seeing the punishment of failure. Chris Christie could 
stomp on the lowly with the best of them.

We as a culture already use government workers as shorthand for losers, people 
who couldn’t hack it in the “true competition” of the private sector and 
suckers who took a lower-paying job to do less work than the rest of us. So, if 
a voter needed someone to humiliate a teacher – already underpaid because of 
that “psychic compensation” they get from serving others – there was nobody 
better to scratch that itch than Christie.

That is, nobody was better at bullying other people than Christie until Trump 
came on the scene, and then suddenly he was no longer unique. Christie was just 
a predator in a closed system that suddenly gained a new apex predator – a 
piranha in a river into which a mutated lungfish was deposited by bilge water 
from an unregulated Chinese freighter.

And that’s not even to get into Bridgegate: not only was shutting down the 
busiest bridge in the world for local political vengeance an act of spectacular 
pettiness that forever recast the wisdom and efficacy of Christie’s bullying 
tendency in the dimmest light, it also cast a shadow on whatever future he 
could have had. For all the Republican party’s failed attempts to suggest 
Hillary Clinton is a recidivist felon miraculously evading her captors, there 
was no way of obscuring that, at any moment on the trail, a Christie rally 
might have been interrupted by a hard rain of funfetti made out of federal 
indictments.

Still, there was one bullying highlight: Christie going in on Marco Rubio on 
Saturday night’s New Hampshire debate like an elementary school kid who 
simultaneously developed early puberty and x-ray vision for exactly which 
wedgie-primed nerds’ moms had written their names in feminine script on the 
bands of their underwear.

It had been a long time coming because Rubio, more so than the other 
mainstream candidates, had long been subsisting on memorized statements and 
pre-written comebacks, honed on the stump and adapted for the debates with one 
or two lines of prefatory transitioning. Rubio most seemed terrified of the 
moments that came between the paragraphs he already knew. Rubio, both in the 
sense of hydration and the modern definition of rank desire, showed the most 
desperate kind ofthirst. 

So, Christie backed him into the corner on the stage, calling out Rubio’s 
memorized 25-second speech, hitting him again with it, then a third time: 
“There it is. There it is: the memorized 25-second speech. There it is, 
everybody.” Flustered, Rubio returned to the same canned line four times during 
the debate. It was the most devastatingWhy are you hitting yourself moment in 
recent politics.

It was as good a closing moment as Christie could’ve hope for, since 
everything else he contributed to the 2016 campaign will be forgotten within 
weeks, if not days. Sharing the stage with the Republican frontrunner, Donald 
Trump – a bully every bit his equal on the most languorous of days – Christie 
declined to even try to close the gap between himself and Trump. Instead, he 
turned to his right and beat the hell out of a kid who pissed him off. If he 
has any permanent impact on the race, it will be disappearing the kid along 
with him, into the indeterminate media darkness that awaits them both.
 