
You don't tend to see egg curries much on menus in the UK, but all over Asia 
they are common and pleasingly easy on the tum. Over the course of our trip we 
encouraged the chef on our boat to give us a lesson in Burmese cuisine, and 
when this appeared everyone declared it damn tasty.

Recreating it back home, I discovered there's an unusual and particular 
pleasure to be had in frying hard-boiled eggs! Serve with rice and salad.

Serves 4, in under 45 minutes

6 duck eggs
125ml / 4fl oz light oil (such as peanut/grapeseed)
2 banana shallots (or 4 regular), peeled and sliced into thin rings
2 onions, peeled and chopped
½ teaspoon turmeric
2–3 bird's-eye chillies, sliced very small
4 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
½ a thumb of ginger, washed, gnarly bits trimmed (but not peeled), finely 
chopped
1½ tbps tomato purée
1 tbps curry powder
250g/8oz okra, trimmed and cut into thirds/halved, or little ones left whole
3 medium tomatoes, chopped large
½ tsp shrimp paste (optional but authentic, though if you want to keep it 
vegetarian just add a bit more salt)
A handful of chopped coriander
Salt

Bring a pan of water to the boil and carefully lower in the duck eggs. Cook 
them for 4–6 minutes, depending on size, then drop them into the sink to crack 
the shells and run them under cold water.

Heat the oil in a wide saucepan. When it's hot, drop in the shallots, breaking 
them up into rings. Once they are a deep golden brown (5–8 minutes), use a 
slotted spoon to transfer them on to kitchen paper and sprinkle immediately 
with salt.

Put the duck eggs into the hot oil and lower the heat. Fry them for 3–4 
minutes, turning them to brown on all sides, then take them out of the pan and 
sit them on kitchen paper, too.

Keeping the pan on a medium heat, add the onions, turmeric, chillies, garlic 
and ginger and fry for a few minutes, until it all starts to soften, then stir 
in the tomato purée so that the onion is well covered in it. Cook for a minute 
or two before adding the curry powder and then stir that in well, too.

Add the okra with a big pinch of salt, followed by the tomatoes, and give it 
all a good stir. Dissolve the shrimp paste in 500ml of hot water, pour it into 
the pan and bring to a fast simmer. Let it bubble away busily for around 10 
minutes without a lid to reduce, then lower the eggs back into the pan giving 
them a prod so they are mostly submerged in the liquid. Put the lid on and 
simmer for just another couple of minutes so that the eggs warm through, then 
turn the heat off and give it a 3 minute rest.

Finish by sprinkling a little salt on each egg and scattering on the shallots, 
with roughly chopped coriander on hand to top off each serving.

• This is an extract from Bought, Borrowed & Stolen – Recipes & Knives from a 
Travelling Chef by Allegra McEvedy (Conran Octopus, £25).Order a copy for 
£18.75 from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840915778>
 