
Let me make absolutely clear: I do not think Michael Portillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-portillo> should donate all his 
clothes to charity. What Michael Portillo does with his trousers is no business 
of mine.

Why should you imagine I do think Michael Portillo should donate all his 
clothes to charity? We’ll come to that. First, let’s talk about the general 
weirdness of modern news.

There were always two sorts of news: the serious news (which is currently very 
dark and bleak) and a light, trivial, supporting news that relieves the dark 
bleakness of everything else.

That latter sort still exists, in much the same form as ever. Brad and 
Angelina are getting divorced. Ataxidermist has made a handbag out of a dead cat
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/cat-flap-taxidermist-defends-selling-handbag-made-from-dead-ginger-tomcat>
. A boa constrictor has been found in Yeovil. These things all happened last 
week and were reported; we don’t need to know about them but they’re 
interesting, they give us something to talk about and we simply couldn’t cope, 
psychologically, if the news gave us nothing but drowning migrants and starving 
children.

But there is a third sort of news, the peculiar modern sort, in which 
something hasn’t so much happened as hasbeen interpreted as having happened. 
There is a hall of mirrors in which someone says something on television, 
someone else says something about that on the internet and the internet 
person’s opinion of the TV person’s opinion passes through journalists’ opinion 
into news. There is no central thing. There is just noise around a thing.

Last week, I heard that Lorraine Kelly had called the actress Gemma Arterton 
fat in a TV interview 
<http://www.look.co.uk/news/lorraine-gemma-arterton-556406>, to which Arterton 
had responded with an uncomfortable stony silence.

I watched the episode. Lorraine Kelly talked about how Gemma Arterton looked 
“normal” rather than “tiny”, and Arterton replied in a perfectly polite and 
cheery tone. But the conversation was reported by people with rolling gossip 
sites to fill; readers were irritated by the printed comments and expressed 
their annoyance on social media; newspapers picked up on the energy and thus 
Lorraine Kelly’s “fat-shaming” passed into lore.

Roughly in tandem with The Arterton Controversy ran another news story: that 
the presenter Victoria Coren Mitchell has condemned the sexism of viewers who 
ask about the clothes she wears on BBC Two quizOnly Connect.

As a protest against this sexism, it was revealed, Coren Mitchell called for 
another TV presenter, the former Tory MP Michael Portillo, to donate his own 
clothes to charity.

Now, I have to hope that 90% of the people who saw these stories noticed that 
they read like something fromViz. But that still leaves 10% genuinely believing 
that I, as an act of feminist principle, called for Michael Portillo to give 
his trousers to Oxfam. THIS IS INSANE.

It all began with my closing remarks at the end of last week’s Only Connect. I 
referred to people who ask me about my clothes on Twitter. I do struggle with 
that. I don’t find it sexist, exactly; the questions are invariably from women 
and they mean very well. But, although I try to look nice for TV, I’m not 
terribly interested in clothes, I never remember where they’re from and I feel 
embarrassed discussing it. It’s not what I want the conversation to be about. 
After a juicy quiz I want to talk about old kings, Billie Holiday songs and 
relative sizes of weasel.

That was the problem with Lorraine Kelly’s remarks to Gemma Arterton: not that 
they were rude (which they weren’t), nor that Arterton is fat (which she isn’t) 
or even “normal” (which she isn’t), but that, ideally, the conversation would 
not be about weight at all. Ideally, two women in a public place could justtalk 
about something else.

I wasn’t having a rant, though. It was mainly an excuse to mention Michael 
Portillo. MyOnly Connect persona – who is very like me, but just different 
enough to maintain sanity – is always talking about Michael Portillo. He’s 
perfect for her. Dark, enigmatic, faintly Spanish… Knowledgeable, quirky, with 
hints of a sexually adventurous past… I once ended a show by saying: “I’m going 
to hurry back to my dressing room where I hope to find Michael Portillo, 
sitting naked atop a crate of rioja, challenging me to wrestle him off.” (I was 
quite proud to get that past the censors.)

In this recent case, I said: “Would you write to Michael Portillo and ask what 
he’s wearing? I know I have. In fact, I’ve written and offered to collect 
anything that Michael Portillo has worn… ‘for charity’…”

Only Connect viewers knew that I was just being silly and slightly filthy. I 
always say something weird at the end of the show. But it was reported as a 
serious, angry call for Michael Portillo to give his clothes away.

“Lighten up, you stroppy cow!” said a commenter on the Daily Mail website. 
“Why is she so precious and humourless?” asked another. A third said: “Typical 
north London leftie, offended by everything.”

Others went a more predictable route: “Who cares what she wears when she’s so 
fat?”; “You’re just lucky the clothes come in plus sizes, love” and the 
delightful: “I used to think David Mitchell was punching above his weight but 
Victoria has really settled into an overweight middle-aged frump.”

I genuinely don’t care about the second lot. They typed this under photos of 
me six months after having a baby, when I aspired to thinness even less than 
usual. But Ido care that they think I’m angry and humourless. If anything is 
sexist, it’s that: reading something so patently ridiculous and failing even to 
consider the possibility that I might have been joking. Because women don’t 
make jokes, do they?

Then again, you know me. I see sexism everywhere.
 