
Business, academic and civic leaders in Cambridge have warned that one of 
Britain’s major economic growth cities is under threat unless the government 
acts quickly to restore trust post-Brexit.

Company executives and educationalists report some highly skilled foreign 
nationals quitting or refusing to commit to new jobs in Britain because of 
uncertainty over their future legal status here. It has in the past boasted of 
creating employment faster than China, amid a boom in the technology and 
bioscience sectors, which led to the city being labelled “Silicon fen”, but now 
there are fears of a big slowdown.

“This is a unique economic asset for Europe,” said Lord Lansley, the former 
Conservative MP for South Cambridgeshire, after a specially convened meeting to 
discuss the problems with local politicians and others. “There is a [political] 
vacuum out there and there does not seem to be a [post Brexit] plan. There are 
things we need and if we get them we can continue to prosper and be more 
successful”, Lansley added.

He has drawn up a Cambridge declaration with his colleagues meant to reassure 
existing academic and business staff from abroad that their presence will be 
protected. “We are committed to international collaboration in research, 
science and the exploitation of innovative, knowledge-intensive enterprises,” 
says the document.

First legal attempt to prevent Brexit set for preliminary hearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/08/legal-attempt-prevent-brexit-preliminary-hearing-article-50>
Lansley says he will be pushing the British government to give acquired rights 
to the 9,000 European citizens living in the East Anglian city out of a total 
population of 124,000. He also wants to see a continuation of free labour 
movement to allow Europeans to come to work and study in Cambridge and says “we 
need free movement for them to come to work and to study here”.

Companies are coy about publicly revealing the names that have already seen 
resignations but at least one business, Encocam, has said that any future 
growth might have to come outside of the UK.

Mike Ashmead, the managing director, which makes high-spec crash test dummies, 
said it would be easier to have everyone working together in Cambridgeshire 
“but unless the government can assure us that we will keep the door open to EU 
labour so that we can expand the team in the UK with the people and skills we 
need easily and without bureaucracy and additional costs we will be forced to 
expand overseas”.

Antony Mattessich, managing director of Mundipharma International, which 
develops but also makes new drugs, said he would like to see the UK government 
make a distinction between low and high-tech job in any future migration 
strategy. “I can see the arguments for restricting migration of unskilled 
labour but if the government prevents the life science sector from bringing in 
very skilled scientists it could kill the goose that laid the golden egg.”

Cambridge is often talked about as being part of a “golden triangle” of 
expanding cities alongside London and Oxford. Cambridge residents voted three 
to one to remain inside theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>
. But the tremendous growth in Cambridge has also produced rocketing house 
prices, serious traffic congestion and concern about rising inequality.

A Greater Cambridgeshire city deal has been established that could bring up to 
£1bn for new infrastructure developments but its early bus and road initiatives 
have faced some local opposition.
 